The Gospel Way Of escaping The doleful State of the Damned: With a
Representation Of their more Aggravated Misery, who go to Hell from under the
Gospel. Being the Substance of several SERMONS, preached at York, in the
Province of Main.

By Samuel Moody, A. M. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST there.

The Second EDITION.

1 These. ii. 16. Wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.

BOSTON: NE. Reprinted and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queen Street
over against the Prison. 1739.

TO THE READER.
ALthough Preaching be more profitable to the Christian World than Writing; yet
both Hearing and Reading are Means of divine Appointment, for the Conversion of
GOD's Elect, and building up the Church of CHRIST in Knowledge, Faith and
Holiness.

The Principal does not exclude Coadjuvant Means of Grace. We hear Ministers
Speaking in the Name of the eternal KING, (whose Ambassadors they are) with
Life and Power; and their feeling Affections and flaming Zeal, are apt to
kindle a Fire in our Breast by the Spirits in-breathing, without which the most
charming Voice, is but as a lovely Song, making Melody in the Ear, never
Penetrating the Heart.

On the other Hand; written Sermons vanish not in the Air; but abide in our
View; are of more frequent, extensive, lasting Use; and may, by deliberate
Perusal, be more fully understood, which is a necessary, and the first Step to
profiting: For, if in hearing the Word, we understand it not, the Devil is
ready to catch away the precious Seed, lest we should believe and be saved;
Mat. 13.19. Luke 8.12, compared. Certain it is, the Lord must teach us to
profit, if ever Good come of our Hearing, or Reading; from him alone is our
Fruit found: And indeed its alike easy with the Almighty to do us good by his
Word preached or written; singly or both together.

The Ethiophan Eunuch was reading the Things concerning Christ, out of the
evangelical Prophet Isaiah, Capt. 53. ver. 7. when the Spirit of GOD sent
Philip to preach unto him JESUS; so his Faith came by hearing the Word
preached; according to that of the Apostle, Romans 10.14 -- 17. This is GOD's
ordinary and standing Method of converting SOULS: Such therefore as would
excuse their Neglect of Assembling themselves together, to hear the joyful
Sound, by their giving Attendance to Reading on the Sabbath, at Home, are
quite: out of the Way of GOD's Blessing: But when the LORD is sought
seasonably, and Diligently in all Means, he will be found in some of them; yea,
in all of them will GOD be found, by such as diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6
Reading the Holy Scriptures, and good Books, that are according to the
Prophets, and Apostles, and the Doctrine preached by JESUS CHRIST himself,
shall prepare us for Hearing; and the Word preached shall excite us to, and
teach us how to profit by Reading: Prove 8.33, 34 Blessed is the Man that
hears me, watching daily at my Gates, waiting at the Posts of my Doors. Rev.
1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the Words of this Prophesy,
and keep those things that are written therein. Not only are the sacred
Scriptures an incomparable Treasure; but the Writings of the meanest of
Christ's Ministers are a precious Talent. To be much in Reading is a very
profitable Way of improving our Time. It Is true, we may read much, and profit
little; while we have no Faith, or none in exercise, to mix the Word with, Heb.
4.2 While, instead of laying apart all Filthiness, and Superfluity of
Naughtiness, that we may receive with Meekness, the engraffed Word, which is
able to save our Souls, James 1.21. We are prone to be captious and
quarrelsome; and Writers as well as Preachers are a Savor of Death unto Death
unto some, 2 Cor. 2.16. Instead of serious Deliberation, and solemn
Self-application; deep, fixed Meditation, and fervent Prayer, before, in, and
after Reading, we run over a whole Book, perhaps, without lifting the Soul up
to Heaven in so much as one single Ejaculation for a Blessing. Yea, its well if
our Bottom Design, in taking the Book in Hand, and glancing on here and there a
Page, be not to judge the Author: at least, if we buy or borrow a good Book, at
any Time, with a purpose to read it ^ut; our extravagant Thoughts are too much
taken up, from the Title Page to the Conclusion, in exalting or debasing the
Writer, commending or dispraising the spiritual Food; not so much according to
its real Suitableness for our Nourishment and Growth in Grace, as according to
the relish of our nice, vitiated, sickly Appetites. But suppose we tolerably
shun these grosser Defects, in improving the Talent of good Books; yet, we
content our selves in once reading them; which if we were only to judge them,
is not sufficient; and in a review, we may find good Reason to reverse our
first Sentence, in this, as well as in many other Cases. In a Word, the main
Thing is to receive the Truth in the Love of it, and bring forth Fruit with
Patience. Unless we be Doers of the Word, and not Readers only, though it should
be with Tears of affection, it is self-deceiving; James 1.22.

All that I shall persume to say concerning the following SERMONS is, that
designing to Publish even while I was studying them, I was the more solicitous,
(not knowing what nor how to write as I ought) that the allwise and good SPIRIT
would please to help my Infirmities, and provide an Offering that might please
himself, (who ever were displeased;) and he fit for his Use, in edifying the
spiritual Building of the Church; at least, that part of it over which the Holy
Ghost had made me Overseer. And if there be any Worth at all in the ensuing
Pages, its wholly owing to CHRIST. Not by Fleshly Wisdom; but by the Grace of
GOD they are what they are. If you Reap any spiritual Benefit by the Price now
in your Hands, let GOD have all the Praise; I desire but your Prayers for

Your Servant In the Work of the Gospel, S. Moody.
York, August 24th. 1710.
The Gospel Way of escaping the Doleful State of the Damned.
Luke XIII. 28. There shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth, when ye shall see
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and
you your selves thrust out.


THESE Words are some Part of our Savior's Answer to a Question, that was
propounded by one of his hearers; ver. 23 Then (i. e. while he was, or when he
had been Teaching, v. 22) said one unto him, Lord, are they few that be saved?
Christ's Answer follows in the seven subsequent Verses; in which our Lord
exhorts, or commands that they strive to enter in at the strait Gate, ver. 24
which duty of highest Importance, our Savior presses by most weighty Reasons,
or Motives: The first of which is taken from the Difficulty of getting to
Heaven, and the Fewness of those that shall be saved.

Conversion, Repentance, Faith and Holiness, Self-denial and Cross-bearing, the
Yoke of Obedience, and Burden of Afflictions are all hard to Flesh and Blood!
Many may run, few will win the Prize, many more will scuffle and beat the Air,
than will overcome. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate; for many I say unto
you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able, ver. 24. Many secure Sinners
are awakened and stirred up by the Fear of Hell or Hope of Heaven, to take some
Pains, forsake diverse Lusts, and do many Things; but for want of striving more
earnestly, and holding out to the End, they lose all their Labor: For the
Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the Violent take it by Force: Then
only shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord, We must strive against,
and beat our Way through many and mighty Oppositions; strive, even unto an Agony!
Not that our own Endeavors can bring us to Heaven: Grace and Glory are God's
free Gift: yet this is the Way to the Kingdom. And 'twere as good sitting still
as to rise up and fall.

It Is our own Salvation; we must therefore work it out: It Is hard and hazardous;
we must therefore work it out with Fear and Trembling. Many shall seek to enter
in, and not be able; few then obtain what they seek for: the more Reason have
we to strive. This is more expressly laid down, Mat. 7.13, 14. Enter ye in at
the strait Gate, for wide is the Gate, and broad is the Way that leads to
Destruction; and many there be that go in thereat. Because strait is the Gate,
and narrow is the Way which leads unto Life; and few there be that find it.
We would not perish with an everlasting Destruction, which is the End of the
broad Way; in which many walk because the Way is easy: Let us then even crowd
and wedge in at the strait Gate; and while Satan would improve it to discourage
us from seeking, that there be so few Finders; we should strive so much the
more earnestly to be of that small Number. Indeed, Whether few or many shall be
saved, is not of so much Concernment unto us, as that we be of the happy
Number. This is the first Reason or Motive, with which Christ does back and
enforce his Exhortation: The second is taken from the Danger of neglecting to
seek in a finding Time, ver. 25. When once the Master of the House is risen up,
and has shut to the Door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the
Door, saying, Lord, Lord, Open unto us; and be shall answer and say unto you, I
know you not whence you are. This Argument seems to be built on such a
Supposition as this; An Householder invites many Strangers to eat and drink at
his Table, or lodge in his House; warning them to be sure that they come in
Season; assuring them that if they do so, his Door shall be open to them; they
shall have a kind Welcome, and be entertained after the best Sort; The Guests
come in one after another, and are received; but at length Meal-time, or
Bedtime comes; the Master of the House and Feast goes himself, shuts fast the
Door, and keeps out all who came not in Season: they shall be forced to stand
without; if they knock there is no opening; whatever Pleas they make all is in
vain: they should have been admitted had they come sooner; but now it is too
late; the Door is shut. Then shall they call on me, but I will not answer; they
shall seek me early (i. e. earnestly) but shall not find me. O that thou had
known, at least in this thy Day, the Things of thy Peace; but now they are
hidden from thine Eyes. The foolish Virgins came to the Wedding-chamber Door;
but out of Season; they knocked, and called, and begged for Entrance, but 'twas
too late. This brings us to the third and last Argument, which our blessed
Savior uses, in this Place, to persuade his Hearers unto the forementioned
indispensible Duty of striving, and necessary Means of obtaining Life and
Happiness; this is taken from the dreadful Aggravations of their Exclusion, who
shall neglect to seek and strive, in Season and in Earnest. Now these
aggravating Circumstances of being shut out, are reduceable to three or four
Heads.

First, They shall be willing then to enter into Life on any Terms; Lord, Lord,
Open to us; yet no Answer but what Bars the Door already shut against them: I
know you not whence you are. Less Importunity would have obtained before; but
it is utterly in vain now: How dreadful, how intolerable is this!

As I have read of a covetous Man who, laboring of a dangerous Malady, sent
for a Surgeon, and would know for how much Money, he would undertake his Cure;
but not liking his Demands, lets him go: at length, his Distemper prevailing,
he sends again, and offers the full Sum; now double Money is demanded; the
wretched Miser is loath to go to the Cost; neglects till Extremity force him to
open all his Treasures; but then it is too late; his Sore is incurable. The
Application is easy.

You Have read the Example of Esau, and know how that (having despised his
Birthright) afterward, when he would have inherited the Blessing, he was
rejected; and found no Place of Repentance, though he sought it carefully with
Tears.

Again, They shall plead their Admission to Church Fellowship, Enjoyment of
Gospel Privileges, attending on the Means of Grace, performing the Duties of
Religions, ver. 26 We have eaten and drunk in thy Presence; and thou have
taught in our Streets. In such a Plea is plainly implied their confident Hopes
of Acceptance with God, and a Place among the Blessed: But now to have their
Suit rejected, their Pleas all invalidated, and their raised Expectations
eternally disappointed, (ver. 27. But he shall say, I tell you, I know you not
whence you are; Depart from me all ye Workers of Iniquity.) How intolerable is
this! To live among the Saints, and pass for one, not only in our own, but in
the charitable Opinion of many others, while we live, and when we come to die,
-- yet at last, and after all to be led forth with the Workers of Iniquity!
This is another Aggravation of the Gospel-Sinners Condemnation.

Moreover, The Extremity of their Torment, who perish under the Gospel, is set
forth in the Words of our Text; There shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth.
-- These same Expressions are used no less than six or seven Times over by one
Evangelist, Mat. 8.12. and 13.42, 50. and 22.13, 24, 51. and 25.30. Now these
Actions are Effects of extreme Pain and Anguish, Madness and Rage, Psalm.
112.10. Est. 4.3. Mark 9.8. Act. 7.54. It Is true, the Torment of the Damned does
consist essentially, in their Separation from infinite Goodness; and the
immediate Impressions of the Almighty's Wrath: but there shall be certain
biting Ingredients in their Cup, that will make the Wormwood and Gall thereof
yet more bitter; among which this in the Text is not the least; Ye shall see
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you
your selves thrust out.

These Words were spoken by Christ to his own Nation the Seed of Abraham; and
they built much on their Relation to him: We have Abraham to our Father. --
Christ knew their inward Thoughts and Dependence; Luke 3.8. Begin not to say
within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father; for I say unto you that God
is able, of these Stones, to raise up Children unto Abraham. The believing
Gentiles are now the spiritual Children of Abraham: the natural Branches were
broken off, that we, who are by Nature of the wild Olive, might be graffed into
the Stock of Abraham's Covenant. But we are fallen into the fourth and last
Aggravation of their Condemnation, who were Unbelievers of the Jews, viz. that
Sinners of the Gentiles should be received in their Room! v. 29, 30. And they
shall come from the East, and from the West, and from the North, and from the
South, and shall sit down in the Kingdom of God: And behold there are last that
shall be first; and there are first that shall be last. How will it vex the
Children of the Kingdom to be shut out of Doors, when Dogs (in their Esteem)
shall be received into the House? But to return; These Words (as was said) were
uttered by our Lord to the Seed of Abraham, by natural Generation; and he tells
them what their carnal Confidence in external Privileges was like to come to;
You shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets; -- It Is true,
Their Father Abraham was Dead, and the Prophets were Dead, as to Men, but not
as to God; foor thus our Savior argues for the Resurrection against the
Sadducees, Mat. 22.32. I am the God of Abraham, etc. God is not the God of the
Dead, but of the Living. As sure as Christ died and rose again, so sure all
that Sleep in Jusus, will God bring with him, 1 These. 4.14. And the Elect shall
be with Christ on his right Hand, and Reprobates shall be raised also and stand
at his left Hand; they shall be brought Face to Face, as it were, and see one
another: Ye shall see Abraham, etc. in the Kingdom of God. As the Dead in
Christ shall rise first, so they shall be first judged, absolved and sentenced
to the prepared Kingdom, that the Wicked may see it and gnash their Teeth.
First, the King shall say to them on on his right Hand, Come ye Blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom, etc. And then (afterward) he shall say unto them
on his left Hand, Depart from me, ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.34, 41. There shall be Weeping and
Gnashing of Teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your selves thurst out. You that have
sought to enter in, shall be thrust out: You that have eat and drunk in my
Presence, and heard me Teach in your Streets, notwithstanding your Privileges
now, on which you build such aspiring Hopes: and notwithstanding your Cries
then, you your selves shall be thrust out. It Is said indeed, Mat 25.46. These
shall go away; but it is as a Malefactor goes to Execution; he is forced along.
Now, what a cutting Thing must this be, for such as have been every Way
advantaged, much every Way, for the securing of Salvation; and yet to come
short, when others, enjoying but the same Means, shall receive the End of their
Faith, the Salvation of their Souls. This is the Matter that now falls under
our Consideration, from this solemn Text! This is the Work before us! The
Foundation of which I would lay in these two Doctrines.

[1.] Many that enjoy the Means of Grace, with the People of God here, shall be
thurst out of their Company, and out of Heaven into Hell hereafter. [II.] The
Damned in Hell will have such Apprehensions of the Saints Happiness in Heaven,
as shall dreadfully aggravate their own eternal Misery.
DOCTRINE I. Many that enjoy the Means of Grace, with the People of God, here;
shall be thrust out of their Company, and out of Heaven into Hell, hereafter.
In this Doctrine there are contained, or implied these four Propositions.

[I.] The Elect and Reprobates, Saints and Hypocrites, do now sit together
under the Means of Grace. [II.] They shall be Separated in the other World.
[III.] Their Distance shall be as great, as it is between Heaven and Hell.
[IV.] This dreadful Separation shall be forced on the Wicked, sore against
their Wills.
PROP. I. The Elect and Reprobates, Saints and Hypocrites, do now sit together
under the Means of Grace. Ezekiel. 33.31. They sit before thee as my People, and
they hear thy Words. Mat. 13.30. Let both grow together till the Harvest. When
we behold a Congregation of professed Christians, though we dare not ordinarily
look on any Person in it, and say, We know that Man or Woman to be unconverted;
nor may we be infallibly certain that any Number of them have experienced a
saving Change: Yet we may conclude that such as attend the Means of Grace
together, are of these two sorts, Mat. 25.1, 2. Then shall the Kingdom of
Heaven be likened unto ten Virgins, which took their Lamps, and went forth to
meet the Bridegroom: And five of them were wise, and five were Foolish.

If you enquire, Whence is it, that the same Means prove effectual to the
Conversion and Salvation of some; and ineffectual to others?

I answer;

1. It Is through the Faith of some, and the Unbelief of others. Act. 28.23, 24.
And when they had appointed him a Day, there came many into his Lodging, to
whom he expounded and testified the Kingdom of God; persuading them concerning
Jesus, both out of the Law of Moses, and out of the Prophets, from Morning to
Evening; And some believed the Things that were spoken, and some believed not.
Joh. 1.11, 12. He came to his own, and his own received him not: But as many as
received him, to them gave he Power to become the Sons of GOD, even to the
Believers on his Name. Mark 16.16. He that Believes and is Baptized shall be
saved; but he that Believes not shall be Damned. Heb. 3.18, 19 And to whom
swear he that they should not enter into his Rest, but to them that believed
not? So we see they could not enter in because of Unbelief. Heb. 4.2. For unto
us was the Gospel preached as well as unto them; but the Word preached did not
profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that heard it. 1 These. 2.13
When ye received the Word of God, which ye heard of us; ye received it not as
the Word of Man; but as it is in Truth the Word of God; which effectually
works also in you that believe. If Men did humbly and diligently wait on God
under the precious Means of Grace, and faithfully receive the Truth they hear,
in the Love of it; the Truth would sanctify and save them: but God has resolved
that all shall be Damned, who believe not the Truth; but have Pleasure in
Unrighteousness. And how justly are Unbelievers made to take their Part with
all Liars, in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone; seeing they have
made God a Liar, because they have not believed the Record God has given of his
Son. Thus Israel destroys himself doubly, by refusing the Help of him who is
mighty to Save

2. Satan, (when and where he is permitted so to do) can and does hinder the
Efficacy of the Means. This wicked One is still present with us while we hear
the Word of the Kingdom; and has a thousand Ways to hinder our profiting
thereby; when he cannot divert us from attending thereon. He has Power to work
internally on our Fancies, as well as to steal away our Thoughts and Affections
by every external Object. He can recall into our Mind Things past, and engage
the Invention and Affections about the Employments and Enjoyments that are
future. This subtle Crafts-master knows how to insinuate Prejudices against the
Preacher; or if we admire him, and highly commend the Sermon; that shall pass
for doing the Word; especially if we can remember a considerable Part of the
Sermon, though we never practice any of it. Satan has, no doubt, a great Hand in
it at least, when by any of these, or the like Ways we deceive our own Souls.
Jam. 1.21, 22. Wherefore lay apart all Filthiness, and Superfluity of
Naughtiness; and receive with Meekness, the engraffed Word, which is able to
save your Souls: But be ye Doers of the Word and not Hearers only, deceiving
your own selves. He joins also with our deceitful Hearts, while our Thoughts
are busy in making Application of what we hear, to others; This is for such an
one; and it may be that very Person thinks we should do well to take it to our
selves; and so both the one and the other loses the Benefit of a seasonable
Truth, for want of Self-application. Again, Our watchful Adversary takes the
Advantage of our Heedlessness and Ignorance: Mat. 13.19. When any one hears
the Word of the Kingdom, and understands it not, then comes the wicked One,
and catches away that which was sown in his Heart. How great soever our
natural Darkness is in spiritual Things; yet this Prince of Darkness has Power
to increase it; 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
lost: In whom the God of this World has blinds the Minds of them that
believe not, lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image
of God, should shine unto them.

Thus, the Destroyer of Souls will, if possible, keep out Conviction, and
prevent the new Birth, by hindering Conception: But if once the secure Soul be
alarmed by Conviction, then Satan bestirs himself to put out this Fire: and has
as many Devices in carrying on this Part of his hellish Trade as the other:
he will persuade the sad Soul to make use of merry Company, as an happy Expedient
to drive away Melancholy; while he fills the Head and Heart with a thousand
Cares and Fears about the Body, and Things of the present Life. He could put it
into Cain's Head to build a City; and bribe Felix's Conscience with the Hopes
of a more convenient Season: And when he can no longer make poor Sinners
believe that there is Time enough before them, he will then tell them that
their Season is past, or they are not elected, or have committed the
unpardonable Sin: But before it comes to this, he will, if possible, beget and
maintain in them a vain Hope that they are already Converted; at least quiet
them with this, that they shall do as well as Others; if such as they are
Perish, then woe to Multitudes; as if the most should not be damned. If they
rest not here, as being loath to go to Hell for Company, he knows how to pervert
the Doctrine of Man's Impotency: It is not of him that wills, nor of him that
runs, but of God that sh^weth Mercy. If God has a mind to convert you (says
the Tempter) he will do it without asking your Leave; or needing your Help; if
not, all your Endeavors will nothing avail; wickedly separating what God has
joined together, Phil. 2.12, 13. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and
Trembling; for it is God that works in you both to will and to do, of his own
good Pleasure. 2 These. 2.13. God has from the Beginning chosen you to
Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth. God's
electing Love and unchangeable Purpose will be no City of Refuge for him that
(by going on presumptuously in Sin) destroys his own Soul: not is the
irresistible Efficacy of sovereign Grace laid down in the Scripture for a
Pillow of Sloth: The Means, and the End are inseperably conjoined. Yet it is
ture,

3. That God does freely bless the Means to some, and righteously withold a
Blessing from others, who sit under the same Means. We find, when our Lord had
been just speaking ( Mat. 11.24.) of the intolerable Aggravation of the Gospel
Sinners eternal Punishment; at that Time (ver. 25, 26.) Jesus answered and
said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid
these Things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes: Even
so Father; for so it seemed good in thy Sight. So Chap. 13.10. Christ having
mentioned three Sorts of Hearers to whom the Means of Grace were ineffectual,
when but one Part of four brought forth any Fruit to Perfection; His Disciples
ask the Reason of his judicial Proceeding with the Multitude; he answers them,
ver. 11. Because it is given unto you to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven; but to them it is not given. And ver. 13. Therefore speak I to them in
Parables, because they seeing see not, and hearing they hear not, nor do they
understand. And in them is fulfilled the Prophecy of Isaiah, which says, By
hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and
not preceive: For this People's Heart is waxed gross, and their Ears are dull
of hearing, and their Eyes they (Mark it, they themselves) have closed, lest at
any Time they should see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and should
understand with their Hearts, and I should heal them. They will not, therefore
they shall not hear and see: They have closed their Eyes, and stopped their
Ears, and hardened their own Hearts wickedly, wilfully, persumptuously;
therefore God will judicially blind and harden them. And are not God's Ways
equal? And are not ours unequal? Is he bound to bestow his Grace on obstinate
Sinners that will not stoop to Christ's Terms? Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come to
me, that ye might have Life. How could Grace be (...), if GOD were not at
Liberty to bestow it on whom he pleases? Mat. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to
do what I will with my own? Have we not all signed and come short of the Glory
of God? Suppose the whole Race of Fallen Adam had Perished together with the
whole Number of apostate Spirits: where had been the Wrong? Or, if it had
pleased God to have pardoned and restored some few of the Fallen Angels; had
that been any Wrong to the rest? If he makes some of the rebellious Children of
Men willing in the Day of his Power, can others challenge any such Favor at
his Hands? Especially considering they are not willing to be made willing in
God's Way. Why may he not deny a Blessing to some that enjoy the Means of
Grace, as well as deny those Means to the most; especially after Sinners have
long slighted and neglected, at least, if not opposed the same? How many fair
Seasons have trifling Sinners already lost? And how long is the Lord of Angels
obliged to wait that he may be gracious to such as have full often and sorely
grieved and vexed his holy Spirit? If he be resolved to glorify the Riches of
his free Grace abundantly to and upon some, and so will overcome their
Resistance; is he bound to do it for all? Proud ignorant Worm! Thou might as
well demand an earthly Kingdom, because Saul and David were raised from seeking
Asses and following Sheep, to feed and rule God's People: Or find Fault with
the holy One of Israel, that he does not give thee the Spirit of Prophesy;
because he took Amos from among the Herdmen of Tekoa. Why do not thou quarrel
with the Lord of Hosts, that he does not make the Sun to stand still, and give
thee more Daylight to finish thy Work; or cause it to go backward to confirm
the Truth of his Word to thee; seeing he has done so much at the Word of
Joshua, and to help the Unbelief of Hezekiah? If God make us wise to Salvation,
he does a million times more for us than if he should give us the Wisdom of
Solomon: And the least Dram of saving Grace is more worth than all his Riches:
Wisdom is more precious than Rubies; and all the Things that thou can desire,
are not to be compared to her, Prove. 3.15 And shall the Devil's Children, who
could wish in their Hearts, that there were no God to take Vengeance on their
cursed Abominations; and were it not for mere Self-love and slavish Fear of
Hell, without the least Regard to God's Honor, could be glad with all their
Hearts to wallow in Sin remorseless till Doomsday, or to the Age of
Methuselah; yea, for ever to be let alone, that they might enjoy the Lusts of
the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, and Pride of Life, rather than to glorify God
on Earth, or enjoy him in Heaven: Shall I say, these Heirs of Hell, who have
cause to stand and wonder that they have a Crumb of Bread to eat, or a Drop of
Water to drink, or one single Breath of Air, and a Minutes Respite from going
down to the Pit; shall they think much of it, that God does not take them into
his Arms, wash them in his Son's Blood, and presently assure them that they
shall be equal to Angels, and live happily to Eternity: Yea that he should do
all this, and more than ever entered into the Heart of Man to conceive,
because, after their unmannerly Fashion, forsooth, they have asked it of him;
and they can do no more; if God will not convert them, and bless the Means to
them, they cannot help it; all Things were decreed before they were born, or the
World made. It Is for the Sake of such contradicting Blasphemers I have thus
enlarged, that if it may be, their Mouths may now be stopped, (for every Mouth
shall be stopped at last) now I say, while there is Hope of Mercy on their
Submission to divine Sovereignty; yielding themselves up into his Hands as
Prisoners, Rebels, Traitors to be disposed of at his Pleasure; heartily
subscribing this unquestionable Truth, that if God damn them eternally he does
them no Wrong; but if infinite Mercy save them, free Grace shall have the Glory
for ever, and for ever. Come Sinner, its better to submit, than to be found a
Fighter against God; for did ever any harden himself against GOD and Prosper?

If any should be bold further to ask, why seeing God does know to whom the
Means will prove ineffectual, and every Tree that will remain barren, he will
notwithstanding plant and continue them so long in his Vineyard?

This one Text of Scripture might be thought enough to silence them; Nay, but O
Man, who art thou that reply against God? Shall the Thing formed say unto
him that formed it, Way have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter Power over
the Clay, of the same Lump to make one Vessel to Honor, and another to
Dishonor? What if God willing to show his Wrath and make his Power known,
endured with much Long. suffering the Vessels of Wrath, fitted to Destruction,
Romans 9.20, 21, 22. The apostate Spirits might as well ask why God would create
them, seeing he knew they would fall! i. e. by their own wilful Folly: And
these Potsherds might as well strive with their Maker about his giving them
their Being, and bestowing any temporal good Thing upon them; and quarrel with
infinite Goodness, because he makes his Sun to shine, and Rain to fall on the
Unjust; and is in a thousand Instances kind to the Unthankful and to the Evil;
giving them fruitful Seasons, filling their Hearts with Food and Gladness; all
which, he foreknows, they will, many of them, abuse to the Aggravation of their
Guiltiness, inflaming their Reckoning, and increasing the eternal Weight of
their Punishment in the coming World.

Come Sinner, Consider the Matter calmly; should thou do well to be angry
with thy best Friend, for his giving thee Sense and Reason, Beauty and
Strength, Riches and Houour, thy necessary Food and Sleep, because thou (being
a Lover of Pleasure more than God) do consume all upon thy Lusts, and art
like therefore to be judged by that Word, Rev. 18.7. How much she has
glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much Sorrow and Torment give her.
This is to find Fault that rational Creatures have Good and Evil set before
them, and are left to their own Choice; yet not without solemn Advice, a strict
Charge, and most loving and earnest Entreaties that we choose the Good, and
refuse the Evil; that we prefer the most suitable, satisfying, lasting Good,
before that which will neither fill the Soul nor so much as continue, beyond an
inch of Time, to beguile it with it is deceitful, empty Pleasingness.

Indeed we have lost all Power and Will to spiritual Good; and for that very
Reason, God may justly require what we are not able to perform; because he once
gave us a Sufficiency of Strength to do his whole Will; and though we had not
this Stock in our own Hands, yet 'twas in the Hands of our own natural Father,
whose Interest was greater in securing it, than ours could be: And you know, if
a wealthy Parent should, in a mad Fit, throw his Treasures into the Sea, set
Fire to his Houses, alienate his Lands, and dye deeply in Debt, his Children
must be poor and miserable. If a Nobleman commit Treason, his Heir can inherit
nothing but his Father's Dishonor; especially if, growing up, he discover a
like-Disposition to Rebellion.

Besides, Sinners are not willing to do what they can; there is no external Duty
but what they might perform before they have, and in order to their obtaining
sanctifying Grace. They might pray oftener and more earnestly, if they would;
from the External Acts of Sin, they might in great measure abstain, unless by
long Custom they have wilfully made Sin, as it were necessary, so that they
cannot now cease from Sin; and yet they would abstain from the outward Act of
their darling and dearest Lust to escape temporal Death, if that were to be the
certain and immediate Punishment of the next. Act of Drunkenness, Whoredom, or
so much as being found in evil Company. Men would speak the Truth, and bite in
their Oaths and Curses, if for every Lie and profane Speech they were to be
burnt through the Tongue with a red hot Iron.

In a Word, It cannot be said that, ever since the World began, any one of
God's covenant People, Jew or Gentile, enjoying the Means of Grace, having a
long standing in God's Vineyard, did all that was in his Power to do, and yet
perished because God denied him Grace.

Moreover, The new and living Way of Salvation, by Faith in Christ; the Way
that infinite Wisdom has laid out; requires that the Tenders of Life be made
indefinitely to Nations, Places, Congregations and Families of Elect and
Reprobates together; there would be else no ground of Faith in the conditional
Promise, Mark 16.15, 16. Preach the Gospel to every Creature. He that believes
and is baptized shall be saved; but be that believes not shall be damned. If a
whole Congregation were known to be Reprobates, there could be no Hope: if they
were all Elect, and known to be so, there could be no such Hazard run, no
Venture made, which is the Case of a poor self-condemned Sinner, first
receiving the Gospel, and casting himself on the undeserved Mercy of God, in
Christ in the Way of Faith; not knowing what may be the Issue; but knowing
this, that God can do a vile Worm and guilty Rebel no Wrong.

But the awakened, trembling Sinner, that is afraid of nothing so much as God's
just Revenges, will say, Destruction from God is a Terror to me! You have
vindicated the Judge of all the Barth: I know he will do right: But have you no
Word of Comfort or Encouragement for the Malefactor at the Bar?

I Answer, in a Word, and so conclude this first Proposition, You have the very
same Bible to read, and the same Gospel to hear, that has encouraged Thousands
and Millions, that are now either Saints in Heaven, or Converts on Earth: The
Elect are Children of Wrath by Nature, as well as others, Ephesians. II. read from
ver. 1. to 5. There is no Difference (says the same Apostle,) for all have
sinned, and come short of the Glory of God: Being justified freely by his
Grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus: Whom God has set forth to
be a Propitiation, through Faith in his Blood, -- that be might be just, and the
justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3.21. to 26. And by him all that
believe are justified from all Things, Act. 13.39. It may be you are a
firstrate Sinner, that have committed all Uncleanness with Greediness: then
pray with David, Psalm. 25.11. For thy Name's sake, O Lord, Pardon my Sin, for
it is great. Thou complainest that thy Heart is hard as a Rock; then lay hold
on that Promise, Ezekiel. 36.26. I will take away the stony Heart, etc. Thou can
not repent nor believe the Gospel, if thou dyest for it; Christ is exalted to
give Repentance first, and then Pardon, Act. 5.31. He is the Author and
Finisher of Faith, Heb. 12.2. Look to him and thou shall be saved. And the more
vile and forlorn and desperate thy Case, as to Man, may be; though thy Soul is
bleeding to Death at ten Thousand mortal Wounds, thou art but the fitter Object
for the great Physician to glorisy his Skill upon, 1 Timothy 1.^5. This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the
World to save Sinners, of whom I am chief. Only abuse not this Grace of God,
which brings Salvation no otherwise than as it teaches to deny Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godlily in the World: Not
in our own Strength; but by his Power, who works in us to will and to do of
his own good Pleasure. You may be bold with Christ; but not with Sin.

PROP. II. The Elect and Reprobates, Saints and Hypocrites, (though they now
enjoy g spel Privileges, and fit under the Means of Grace together, as we have
heard; yet they) shall be separated in the other World.

1. Their immortal Souls shall be separated at Death. As they live together, so
they may die together; the Time, the Place, the Manner, and all external
Circumstances of their Death may be the same: and not only so; but the internal
Concomitants thereof may be, in some Respects the same also; for, as they have
lived and civilly conversed together in the World, so they have maintained
religious Communion with one another: They have prayed and fasted together,
heard Sermons and received the Sacrament together; (though with different Frames,
and quite contrary Ends) and when they come to die, the Hypocrite's Hope, such
as it is, may hold out as well as the sound Christian's: He may have inward
Peace, and die like a Lamb, as they say: Yea, he may seem to have the Advantage
of the assaulted Christian; against whom Satan comes with great Wrath, knowing
he has but a short Time: And GOD for holy Ends may hide his Face, or look with
a frowning Countenance on his dear Child, the very Hour that he receives his
departing Spirit into everlasting Arms of Mercy; whenas the Wicked have no
Bands in their Death: when a strong Man armed keeps his Palace, his Goods are
in Peace: A deceived Heart turned him aside from the strait Gate of Conversion
at his first setting out, and led him out of the way of true Peace all his Life
long; and now at last conspires with Satan, and carnal or over-charitable
Relations and Visitants, to send him out of the World in a false Dream: God is
Merciful; Christ died for Sinners; Thou have lived well, and done Good in thy
Generation; All have their Failings! Thus a false Title to an eternal Kingdom
is easily proved, in a blind Court; when the right Heir of Salvation may have
all called in Question; many false Allegations, by the Accuser of of the
Brethren brought in against him; Thou have done just nothing for God, but much
against him; in all thy fair outside Shows and Formalities, Self was at the
bottom; thou did never make God's Glory thy pure single Aim in any one Duty
of Piety, Righteousness, or Charity; much less in the Course of thy Life; and
do not thou know, besides all this, (says Satan) the Wickedness that thine
own Heart is privy to; what thou have been, and done; both before, and since
thy hypocritical Profession? Thus, I say, the Child of Light though passing
safely to eternal Day, may, have his Sun even setting in a Cloud; his Evidences
so blotted, that he is even forced to quit Claim to the Inheritance of the
Saints; or at least may die between Hope and Despair.

In a Word; both the thorough Christian and the Formalist may be either willing
or afraid to die; and when the living Soul is departed, the dead Corpse of the
one and the other lie together in the same Burying-Place; but their Souls shall
be separated: they don't ascend to Heaven together; nor sink down to the
bottomless Pit together; nor continue wandering in the lower Region of the Air
together: but are dispatched to distant Places, and far more different States:
(of which in the next Proposition;) Thus their Souls are separated at Death.
And,

2. Their whole Persons shall be separated at the Day of Judgment. When, and
where, and howsoever the Godly and the Wicked have ended their Days on Earth;
how ever their dead Bodies have been disposed of; whether burned to Ashes, or
devoured by wild Beasts, Fishes, or Worms: when Christ shall come to his last
Judgment, all shall rise again, both the Just and Unjust; and though the dead in
Christ shall rise first, yet we shall all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, to give an Account of our Works, and to receive a Reward according to
them: In order to which, the Omniscient, Impartial Judge will make an exact
Separation between the Righteous and the Wicked, the Upright and Unsound. They
may grow together till the Harvest, but no longer; though one Field may hold the
Tares, and the Wheat, yet not one Garner: The Chaff is of use to preserve the
good Grain in the Field and Mow; and after Threshing they lie together for a
small space; but when winnowing Day comes, the Chaff shall be driven away: he
who has his Fan in his Hand, will thoroughly purge his Floor: there shall not be
left so much as one Hull of Chaff among the Wheat; or one Grain of Wheat
carried away with the Chaff. A Scheme of this great Days Work we have, Rev.
20.11, 12, 13. Mat 25.31, -- When the Son of Man shall come in his Glory and
all the Holy Angels with him, then shall be sit on the Throne of his Glory; and
before him shall be gathered all Nations; and he shall separate them one from
another, as a Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats. And he shall set the
Sheep on his right Hand; but the Goats on the left.

The Wicked (though they had little Cause for it) hated the Godly, and thrust
them out while on Earth; and now, when they would fain creep in among them,
they shall be thrust out; they shall be offended at their Company no more.

The Godly, on the other Hand, while they were in their militant State, could
not wholly refrain the unpleasant infecting Society of the Wicked, unless they
would go out of the World: but now their righteous Souls shall be no more vexed
with the filthy Conversation of the Wicked: nor shall they have so much as one
seeming Saint in their heavenly Fellowship, to lose their Love upon: They shall
doubtless miss many whom they expected to have seen at Christ's Right Hand; but
they shall suspect none that are there. There is not a single Guest at the
Lord's Table now without the Wedding Garment, but the Master of the Feast can
single him out, Mat. 22.12. Christ knows perfectly now, and then the World
shall perfectly know who are his, and who are not; for an exact and visible
Separation shall be made between them. That Is the second Proposition.

PROP. III. Their distance of Place, and difference of State, will be as great
as is between Heaven and Hell.

Luke 16.22, 23. And it came to pass that the Beggar died, and was carried by
the Angels into Abraham's Bosom: the Rich Man also died and was buried: And in
Hell he lift up his Eyes, being in Torment; and sees Abraham afar off, and
Lazarus in his Bosom. Ver. 26. And besides all this, between us and you there
is a great Gulf fixed, etc. They are separated one from another, by Christ, as
a Shepherd divides his Sheep from the Goats; but the local Distance between
Christ's right and left Hand is but small, during the Judgment-Day; in the
Conclusion of which, having now met for the last Time, they shall be parted at
the greatest Distance for ever; Mat. 25.46. These shall go away into
everlasting Punishment: but the Righteous into Life eternal.

It would be beside my Purpose, to speak largely here of the inconceiveable
Glory of Heaven, or of Hell's intolerable Torment; the two Places and double
State of the Godly and Wicked, Saved and Damned: It Is mainly, the peculiar
Aggravation that impenitent Unbelievers will find and feel of their eternal
Misery, Anguish and Vexation of Soul, from the large and deep Sense and
Apprehension they shall have of the everlasting Happiness, Glory and Joy
unspeakable of such as obeyed the Gospel, while themselves despised and
rejected it; that the Subject before us offers to our Consideration; of which
in the other Doctrine. Only by the way,

1. We may consider the Kingdom of God mentioned in the Text, as a Place and
State of perfect Rest and Peace, Light and Love, Joy, Honor and Glory. A
Kingdom prepared by the King, eternal, immortal, invisible, (who is infinite in
Power and Love) to entertain Millions of his Subjects, that are all Kings and
Priests; his adopted Children, his only Son's Wise; yea, his own spiritual
Children by Regeneration; Renewed after the Image of their Heavenly Father, and
Partakers of the divine Nature. A Kingdom that cannot be moved; an everlasting
Kingdom, in which as was said, every Subject is a King; not like earthly
Monarchs, but as far above them in Honor, Glory and Delight, as they are above
their meanest Subjects; and ten thousand times more: for they shall wear
Crowns, not of Gold that perishes, but a Crown incorruptible, 1 Cor. 9.25. A
Crown of Righteousness, 1 Timothy 1.8. A Crown of Life, Jam. 1.12. A Crown of
Glory, that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4. And if it be called a Crown of Gold,
Rev. 4.4. there is a vast diference between the Gold here on Earth, and the Gold
of Heaven, Rev. 21.21. And the Street of the City was pure Gold, as it were
Transparent Glass; (and if this be the Pavement for their Feet, that shall be
the Crown for their Heads!) The brightest and richest Things on Earth are but a
poor and dark Resemblance of the Riches and Glory of Heaven. Heaven is a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. In a Word; the Glory of Heaven is
summarily comprehended in these two Things.

(1.) The everlasting Enjoyment of all desirable Good, even to full
Satisfaction. One infinite Good is all Good, and cannot but fill the Soul that
enjoys it. In thy Presence is fullness of Joy, and at thy right Hand there are
Pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. So that if God should say to any, the
least Saint, as to Solomon; Ask what I shall give thee; he would answer, I have
enough, I have all, I can desine no more; I can hold no more nor wish to hold
more ravishing Joy and transporting Glory than I am filled with, unto
overflowing. Their Bodies shall be as Strong, Healthy, Agile and Beautiful as
can we wished; their Souls as knowing and holy, wise and good as the Angels.
Their Society and familiar Companions shall be such as are perfect in Knowledge
and Love; Angels and Saints like themselves: Their Employment shall be most
horoarable and delightsome; to behold the Face of God, and lie in the Bosom of
Christ; and drink of that new Wine with him in his Father's Kingdom; and join
in Consort with the whole heavenly Host, that shall sing the Song of Moses and
the Lamb for ever and ever. But after all that can be said, it does not yet
appear what we shall be; It is enough that we shall be like our heavenly
Father, for we shall see him as he is; 1 Job. 3.2. (2) As no Good in Kind or
Degree shall be wanting in Heaven; so not the least shadow of any kind of Evil
is felt or feared there. [1.] No Moral Evil: Not so much as one vain Thought to
all Eternity. The Children of the Resurrection shall never more displease their
heavenly Father, offend their elder Brother, or any of their Brethren; nor have
their Consciences ever pricked with the least Briar of Sin; yea, they shall be
far above all Temptations unto Sin. There is no Serpent in the second Adam's
Paradise. [2.] No Penal Evil: Not so much as the remission of one Degree of
Glory: the abatement of one Ray of Light, from his blessed Face, who is the
Light of that glorious City, for ever: No bodily Pain, or uneasy Thought in the
Mind; not the least disrespect, or failure of the most perfect Love, from any
Fellow-Citizen of Heaven, for ever and for ever. And as there shall be no room
to Desire that it might be better; so there is no possibility that ever any fear
of its being worse, should once enter into their Hearts through Eternity: Perfect
Love casts out Fear, 1 John 4.18

2. We might also transiently consiler Hell, as a Place and State of the
blackest Darkness, the most exquisite Torment and extremest Horror, Despair
and Raging Blasphemy. A Place of Howling, Roaring, Yelling, Shrieking, -- But
Words utterly and infinitely fail of expressing to the Life, the Heart-rending
Pangs of the Second Death. It is Metaphorically, and in Scripture Language a
Prison; a Lake of Fire and Brimstone; a Bottomless Pit; a Furnace of Fire;
Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; a Place where the Worm
dies not, and the Fire is not quenched: The Vengeance of Eternal Fire, 1 Pet.
3.19. Mat. 13.50. and 25.41. Rev. 19.20. and 20.3. Mark 9.47, 48. Jude ver. 7.
Now, if the Bodies of the Damned shall be tormented with material Fire and
Brimstone, it must needs be dreadful! As, if we should see a great Copper
containing the quantity of many Tuns, filled with Brimstone; then melted over a
mighty Fire; then set on a Flame, as you have seen a Kettle of boiling Tarr in
the Ship-wrights Yard; and Men, Women and Children thrown into it alive; this
would be terrible to the Beholders; much more to the Persons thus executed;
though the Pain and Horror would in this case, be over in a few Minutes: how
intolerably dreadful will it be then for Sinners to be cast alive (as it is said
they shall be) into a Lake of Fire, burning with Brimstone, Rev 19.20. So Mat.
13.40, 42, 43. As therefore the Tares are gathered and burnt in the Fire; so
shall it be in the End of the World: The Son of Man shall send sorth bis
Angels, and they shall gather out of bis Kingdom all things that offend, and
them which do iniquity: and shall cast them into a Furnace of Fire. Rev. 20.15.
And wohsoevet was not found written in the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake
of Fire.

Suppose the Water of some large and deep Pond were turned into boiling,
flaming Brimstone; and the Devils, in visible Shapes should be suffered to drag
our Neighbors and Friends, one after another, according as the Measure of
their Sins should be silled up, and cast them away alive into that boiling
Pond; Oh! How terrible would this be to the poor Wretches, and to the
Beholders? How doleful their Shrieks, and fearful Lamentations! How would it
Pierce even an Heart of Stone, to see this acted before their Eyes, in the open
Day; or to hear the dismal Cries of our Neighbors, dragged along the Streets
before our Doors by Night; and dearest Relations hawl'd out of their Beds, and
carried away by main Strength, to that supposed Hell on Earth: And suppose
further, that God should keep them alive in that fiery Pond, from one Year and
Age to another; and we could walk safely by the Sides of, it and round it, and
see the poor, undone Creatures swimming about in the midst of the Flames; and
hear their fruitless Cries for one drop of Water; as the rich Man, Luke 16.23,
24. And in Hell he lift up his Eyes being in Torment; and sees Abraham afar
off, and Lazarus in his Bosom: And he criedand said, Father Abraham, have mercy
on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his Finger in Water and
cool my Tongue, for I am tormented in this Flame. What Adamantine Heart would
not bleed at such a Sight and Sound! Now what is acted invisibly every Day is
indeed more amazingly dreadful, if we could realize it: For, what ever the Body
could suffer in these material Flames, the suffering of immortal Souls must
needs be greater; and Souls are dragged to Hell by Multitudes, of all Nations
every Day: As the Soul (we know by Experience) can taste much higher Delight in
God, than the Body can enjoy in the sweetest Pleasures of Sense; so why should
not the Soul be capable of suffering more bitter Torments than can be inflicted
on the Body? The Spirit of a Man (says the sacred Text) will sustain his
Infirmities; ( i. e. bodily Infirmities; as holy Martyrs have sung for Joy at
the Stake) but a wounded Spirit who can bear? Who knows the Power of thy Anger?
According to thy Fear, so is thy Wrath. The Heart of Man is not capable of
apprehending such Terrors as God can inflict: While I suffer thy Terrors, I am
distracted, said a holy Man under Apprehensions of divine Wrath. What would the
Damned then say, if they could speak out all they feel under the immediate
Impressions of Fury incensed to the uttermost, without the least allay of so
much as sparing Mercy? -- And, as for the Body if there shall be no material
Fire in Hell to burn it; if those inexpressible Torments are only shadowed out
by flaming Brimstone because this is most dreadful to Sense; as the Glory of
Heaven is metaphorically set forth by eating Bread and Drinking Wine, Feasting,
Singing, and Nuptial Joys; then it will follow, that the Torments of the Damned
will be unspeakably greater than it could be to lie frying in the hottest Fire,
World without End, -- As the Joys of Heaven are above the Joys of Marriage,
Victory, Feasting and Harvest; and that glorious City of God above more
beautiful, rich and magnificent than such an one as John saw, Rev. 21. A City
of pure Gold, like clear Glass; the Walls of Jasper; the Foundations garnished
with all manner of precious Stones; the twelve Gates of entire Pearls: having a
pure River running through the City clear as Crystal; and in the midst of the
Street of it, (which also was paved with Gold as it were transparent Glass) and
on either side the River was there the Tree of Lise, which bare twelve manner
of Fruits, and yielded her Fruit every Month; and the Leaves of the Tree were
for the healing of the Nations: So, why may not the Torments of Hell as far
exceed those of a material Lake of Fire, as Heaven shall transcend the Beauty
and Glory of such a City? Especially if we consider how God will set himself to
glorify his Power as well as Justice on the Damned for ever, Rom 9.22.2 These.
1.9. Now if we cannot bear the Top of a Finger, for a few Minutes, in the Flame
of a Candle, much less an Hand or Foot in a fiery Oven; what will it be to be
swallowed up in a flaming Lake of the most terrible, raging Fire? Sure they can
have no Rest, Day nor Night, the Smoke of whose Torment ascends for ever and
ever. But, as I said, it is the Suffering of the Soul, the immortal Soul of the
Damned Sinner, that is (as one expresses it) the very Soul of his Sufferings:
God's Fury shall be poured out like Fire on the naked Soul, lying open to the
heavy Strokes of his mighty Arm; that almighty Arm that made the World,
stretched forth the Heavens as a Curtain, and weighs the Mountains in Scales;
what heavy Blows can such an Arm strike! Oh! it must needs be a fearful Thing
to fall into the Hand of the living God! It Is dreadful, to fall into the Paws of
tearing Lions and Bears robbed of their Whelps; the Hands of wicked Men and
cursed Devils; but all is nothing to the Wrath of the Almighty; when his abused
Mercy shall all turn into Fury and fiery Indignation: So that the Generation of
his Wrath must endure intolerable Pains, without the least Intermission or
Mitigation: It will be impossible for them to divert their Tho'ts for so much
as one poor Moment, for Millions of Millions of Ages, from the most dolorous
Subject of their Woe and Misery. If they could slumber a few Minutes, or sleep
one wink in all that eternal Night, so as but to Dream of present Ease or a
future End of their Torments, it might seem to yield some shadow of Relief: but
neither can that be; nor shall they ever have a Friend in Heaven or Hell, to
speak half a Word of Comfort in their Ears: If the Rich Man had not had his
good Things to the very last Dropped, in this World, he had not been denied the
cold Comfort of a little Water to cool the tip of his Tongue, in Hell's Flame.

Moreover, The Damned shall then know assuredly (though they now reason to the
contrary) that their Destruction is of themselves: it shall be evident to them,
that all this intolerable, remediless interminable Misery is the Fruit of their
own wilful Folly: Could they but think and be preswaded in themselves, that the
Decree of God had forced them to Sin, they might fancy some Relief in such a
blasphemous Thought; but the whole weight of Guilt will lie and bear on their
own Consciences; (of which more in the Second Doctrine) Indeed they shall be
forced to bear the just Demerit of their Sins; which is the last Proposition
under this First Doctrine.

PROP. IV. This dreadful Separation shall be forced on the Wicked, sore against
their Wills. They shall be thrust out! When Persons voluntarily forsake, or
fairly take leave of their Company, and walk out of Doors, they are not said to
be thrust out: But these shall be turned out by Force and driven away. Not that
they shall now begin to love the Lord Jesus Christ, and such as he is not
ashamed to call his Brethren: It Is not from any spiritual Affection to holy
Persons or Employments, that they shall be averse to this Separation and
Exclusion; but altogether from Self-Love and the dread of Hellfire, enkindled
by divine Anger, which who knows the Power of? According to his Fear so is his
Wrath. This will force the foolish Virgins to cry, Lord, Lord, open to us, Mat.
25.11. And the Guests that come too late, Luke 13.25. to make the same
exceeding bitter and fruitless Cry. And if they turn to the Rocks and
Mountains, ( Rev. 6.15, 16, 17.) They will also be deaf to their Request. Their
Sentence is dreadful, ( Mat 25.41. Go ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels;) but hear it they must: and Execution must be
done, as sure as ever the Sentence is pronounced: These shall go away into
Everlasting Punishment, ver. 46. The Wicked shall be turned into Hell; and all
the Nations that forget God, Psalm. 9.17. They shall be bound Hand and Foot, and
cast into Outer Darkness, Mat. 22.13. They loved the Company of the Saints on
Earth only with a carnal Affection or Liking, and for Self Ends; and now at
last, they can no more delight in perfect Holiness then they could in their
imperfect Sanctification on Earth, not being renewed and made holy themselves:
So that Heaven it self would be an uneasy Place to them, if such defiled ones
could be admitted into the holy City: and to keep an eternal Sabbath in nothing
but holy Exercises (for carnal Professors, who seem to rejoice in Hopes of
going to Heaven, have very gross and wrong Conceptions of the Nature of its
Glory and Happiness) must needs be tiresome to such as say of the short
Intervals of holy Time, When will they be over and gone, that we may be in (our
Element) the Employments and Enjoyments of the World again? Amos 8.5. And of
every holy Service, Behold, what a Weariness is it? Mal 1.13. Yet for an unholy
Heart (that hates God, and can never love any that have the Image of Christ, as
such) to be confined with an holy Society, and to heavenly Exercises, though it
be far less desirable to such an one, than an earthly Paradise; yet is it more
tolerable than to lie down in Sorrow, and dwell with everlasting Burnings. Thus
the Separation that shallbe made another Day between Saints and Hypocrites,
shall be forced on the Reprobates, sore against their Will. And thus we have
finished the Doctrinal Part of the First Point.

DOCTRINE II. That the Damned in Hell shall have such Apprehensions of the
Saints Happiness in Heaven, as will dreadfully Aggravate their own eternal
Misery.
It Is true, the revelation of Heaven's Glory does little affect christless
Sinners now, because of their great Darkness and Infidelity. As the
ungospellized World know nothing of the holy City; so all unconverted
Christians are great Strangers to that future, glorious State. Carnal
Professors may speak much about Heaven; and Men of Learning write whole Volumns
concerning the State of the Blessed in the other World; but they know nothing
experimentally of the matter as holy Souls do. A Day in God's Courts, or one
Hour's Communion with Christ at his Table; Yea, a quarter of an Hour's
Fellowship of the Spirit, in Closet Prayer, or Evening Meditation, does give
the most illiterate true Believer to understand more of Heaven, than many Years
study of the acutest Doctor, from whose carnal Wisdom these Things are hid.

Holy Mr. Flavel professed, that he knew more of the Life of Heaven, by the
ravishing Foretastes he had of Glory, in one solitary Journey in the way of
divine Meditation, than ever he learned by all the Books he had read, and
Discourses he had entertained about it.

Heaven consists mainly in the satisfaction of holy Desires and Longings, which
the unsanctified know nothing of. They may think it a good Thing, and great, to
be equal to Angels, in Honors and Delights; To be free from Pain, Want,
Labor, Care and Fear; and to be filled with Joy; but what that Joy is, they
apprehend not; and the Nature and Taste of the Water of Life, they are wholly
Strangers to: 1 Cor. 2.14. But the natural Man receives not the Things of the
Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him; neither can be know them,
because they are spiritually discerned. Yea, even gracious Souls (the best of
them all) see now but through a Glass darkly; and the most have but small Sips:
-- If so be ye have Tasted, -- 1 Pet. 2.3. It does not yet appear, to the high
raised Apprehension of the most heavenly Christian, what he shall be. 1 John
3.2 Beloved, now are we the Sons of God; and it does not yet appear what we
shall be. How inseriour then must the Apprehensions of Reprobates (whose Eyes
the God of this World has blinded) needs be, of the Happiness of glorified
Saints; if they would allow themselves Time to think on such a Subject: But no
sooner shall their bodily Eyes be closed, than those of their Mind shall be
fully opened, to take a clear View of their own Misery, and to apprehend very
much of the Saints Felicity.

More Particularly: First, The Damned in Hell have the fullest. Knowledge that
can be, by Sense and Experience, of that Evil which the Saints are delivered
from. Now herein consists a great Part of the Saints Happiness in Heaven: for
if there be Pain of Loss as well as Sense in the Damned, there must be a
proportionable Joy of Deliverance, as well as Fruition, in the Saved. A very
great Part, no doubt, of the ravishing Joy and Ecstasies of Love, that, the
glorified are transported with, arises from the Consideration of what they are
perfectly and for ever saved from; even the Pains of Hell, and the Blasphemies
of the Damned; some Taste of which they had under the Spirit of Bondage, and
from Satan's fiery Darts; (yea, and out of their own Hearts also have proceeded
Blasphemies;) and more is understood of the Power of God's Anger, in the State
of perfect Knowledge; yet there can be no humane Knowledge like that of
Experience: The Damned have reason to know what a Felicity it would be to be
saved from Wrath; and are now convinced, by most cogent Arguments, that Heaven,
considered only as it is described, Rev. 21.4. And God shall wipe away all
Tears from their Eyes; and there shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor
Crying; neither shall there be any more Pain; it was well worth the seeking.
Thus the Damned must needs have most large and quick Apprehensions of one Part
of the Saints Happiness in Heaven. As the saved best know, what lost Souls have
lost with their Souls; so, on the contrary, as was said.

Secondly, The Damned will for ever remember what they shall have seen and
heard, of the beginning of the Saints Happiness, after the Resurrection, before
their final Separation. With what beautiful, shining, glorious Bodies they are
raised: what Joy appears in their Countenance: how congratulated by Angels and
Fellow Saints: what dear Love Christ expresses to them; and what Honor he does
visibly and openly put upon them; while they are caught up in the Clouds, to
meet the Lord in the Air, and to sit at his right Hand, as Assessors in
Judgment 1 These. 4.17. 2 Cor. 6.2, 3. And they shall hear all their Graces and
Duties, of active and passive Obedience, especially their Alms-Deeds,
honorably and particularly mentioned, to a Cup of cold Water, given to any out
of christian, brotherly Love: all their Care and Diligence to please GOD, and
honor Christ in the World, and do Good in their Generatian; every Prayer that
they have made in secret Corners; all their hearty Sighs and Groans under the
Burden of Sin; and inward Desires and Longings after, and Delight in Christ,
Sabbaths, Ordinances, and Christian Conference, shall be mentioned before the
World: And then shall the King say to them on his right Hand, Come ye blessed
of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before the Foundation of the
World: and all in the hearing of wretched Cast-aways, that their Judgment may
be the more clear, and their Condemnation the more aggravated: For the perfect
remembrance of so much of the happy, glorious State and Case of the Saints, at
the last Day, as they have been made to see and know, before their entrance
into Blackness of Darkness, shall remain with them for ever, to help keep alive
a Sense of what they have lost, by their Folly and Unbelief.

And then, Thirdly; Their Understandings will be greatly enlarged to take in,
who can tell what Ideas of Heaven's Glory, and the Saints Felicity, for their
own endless Vexation. If the Unsanctified may, by common Illumination, know
something of the Powers of the World to come, here, Heb. 6.5. Hereafter (though
they shall taste nothing of the Goodness of God's Word past, yet) they shall
know more of the World then come, unspeakably more than now can enter into
their Hears to conceive. As their Bodies shall be strengthened to endure the
hottest Fire of God's burning Wrath, without consuming a jot; so their
Apprehensions may be proportionably enlarged, above what they now can reach
unto; and their Memories may be strengthened to recall and retain every
aggravating Circumstance of all their Sin on Earth, Luke 16.25. Son Remember,
--

We know that Thought and Consideration is essential to the humane Nature; and
it is known, by universal Experience, that by this natural Power of the Soul,
we are able to bring Things out of Sight, and at the greatest Distance; yea,
Things past or future, and purely spiritual too (as well, though not so easily
as the Objects of Sense) into plain View as it were before our Eyes; or as if
such Things were sounding in our Ears. Thus, when a Man is on a desolate Island
at Sea, or close Prisoner in a strange Land; how sensibly does he represent to
himself the happy Freedom of others, in their own beloved Country, commodious
Habitations, with Meat and Drink to the full, and change of Raiment; warm Beds;
their Wives with them, and Children about them; while himself is destitute of
all these Comforts; and this makes his Iron Fetters to eat into his very Soul:
how much more in the Case before us, in which not only is the disproportion a
million Times greater, but the Capacity also of apprehending, comparing, etc.
shall be inconceiveably enlarged; and the Damned, as was said, have nothing to
divert them from a constant, deep and fixed Meditation on this very Subject.

It remains yet to be considered, more distinctly, how these Apprehensions of
the Damned in Hell, concerning the Saints Happiness in Heaven, shall aggravate
their own eternal Misery. That their Misery shall be Eternal is evident from
many plain Scriptures, that have been already mentioned; and it must of
necessity be so, for in Hell God will not punish them less than their
Iniquities deserve, which are infinite, in regard of the Object against whom
they are committed: Now it being impossible that a finite Creature should, in
the longest space of Time, make full Satisfaction to an infinite GOD, (as
Christ, who was an infinite Person, did for the Elect) therefore their
Punishment must be infinite in Duration: besides, the earnest Wish, and hearty
Desire of every Bond-slave of Satan is, that he might live for ever on Earth,
in Health, Honor and Prosperity, that so he might fulfill the Desires of the
Flesh and the Mind, ( i. e. that he might Sin) for ever. So that there is a
Sort of Infiniteness in the Evil of Sin: Nothing indeed, if we speak
absolutely, can be infinitely Evil: there is but one Infinite, and he is
infinitely Good: Yet, Reprobates are as it were guilty of an infinite Evil;
both as Sin is contrary to the Nature, Will and Honor of a Being, infinite in
Greatness and Goodness, Equity and Holiness; and also, in that there is a
Disposition to Sin, in such as are not changed, that will never cease; but if
the Sinner were under a I aw to Eternity, he would be a Transgressor to
Eternity; if God should heap Mercies on him to Eternity, he would abuse them to
Eternity. Now the least Degree of Torment, to last for ever, is horrible to
think of! Such as never had sufficient Means of Salvation; that never once
rebelled against the Light of the Gospel, though (dying Christless) their
Punishment will be more tolerable than ours if we die in Unbelief; yet to lie
in the softest Fire for ever, how Dismal! Yea, if it were but to undergo the
grievous Pain of a Tooth, for ever and for ever, it would tire out the longest
Patience! But now, when all the bitter, biting, stinging Ingredients
imaginable, and far beyond conceit, shall be com-mixed in the Cup of divine
Wrath, for the Gospel-Sinner to drink off: what Tongue can express, or Heart
conceive one thousand millionth Part of their painful Anguish! If we could
suppose that all the Angels had fallen, and all the Race of Adam had perished
remedilesly; so that there had been no Abraham's Bosom, nor Lazarus to have
lien in it; no glorified Saint or Angel, with whose Happiness to have compared
our Misery; yet eternal Damnation would have made every Fugitive from God to
cry out, My Punishment is greater than I can bear! But they are not
Suppositions, they are Realities that we have to do with: and the Aggravation
of the Misery of some, arising from their Apprehension of the Happiness of
others, their Fellow Creatures, and once Fellow-Sinners, may be considered,
first, more Generally, as it concerns all the Damned; and then more
Particularly, as it concerns such as perish from under the Gospel.

I. More Generally.

The Gentile Nations that perished (by Thousands and Millions) for lack of
Vision, for so many Ages, while God (in a way of New Covenant Mercy) knew only
the Jewish Nation, the Seed of Abraham; giving his Word to Jacob, his Statutes
and Judgments to Israel: All these Nations (I say) whom God suffered to walk in
their own Ways, will be enraged with self-tormenting Madness, that the Lord
should send all his Servants the Prophets unto Jacob whom he loved, and make
his Word in their Mouth, effectual to the Conversion and Salvation of so many
Thousands of them; while these Sinners of the Gentiles could not hear for want
of a Preacher, Romans 10.14. And the Ungospellized Nations, now since Christ came
and brake down the Partition Wall between Jews and Gentiles, will have the same
bitter Pill to chew, while they consider how that some in all Ages, of one
Nation or other, and some of all Nations, in one Age or other, are redeemed and
saved; this will make them lament and blaspheme, that the Gospel was not sent
to their Nation, and in their Day on Earth. Now to take the whole World of
Reprobates together, in what ever Age or Nation they lived, that perish either
for lack of Vision, or for rebelling against the Light of Nature and Scripture
both; we may a little consider, in a more general Way, how it will vex and
torment all the Damned, while they view and survey in their Heaven-piercing
Thoughts, the Place and State of the Glorified; and consider,

1. That there was a possibility of their having been all happy, as well as
they that are so, or instead of them; there being nothing in the Nature of God
or Man against it. Indeed, the Purposes of God are unalterable; it being
impossible that he should see any manner of Cause or Reason, in Time, to change
his Mind, which he saw not perfectly from Eternity to have hindered his
purposing any Thing but what he should resolvedly bring to pass, in its Season:
and in this respect, its impossible that any one Thing in the World should be
any otherwise than it is, has been, and shall be: and on the other Hand, it is,
in it self, a Thing possible with God to turn the Devils into holy Angels
again; and doubtless the eternal remembrance of what they once were, and what
their then Fellow Servants now unchangeably are, does double their own Torment
and Vexation; as well as Christ's taking on him, not the angelical but human
Nature. But now the Case is different with Men; they were all alike ruined in
the first Adam; and alike capable of recovery by the second: so that Thousands
of Millions will say, in Hell (and vex themselves for ever with such fruitless
Wishes) Oh! That the Gospel of Salvation had been sent to us: Oh! That we had
but heard the joyful Sound: Oh! That we had lived in such Times and Places as
were blessed with Sabbaths, Ministers and Bibles. And ten thousand Times ten
Thousand, Oh! That the Gospel had been made effectual to us: But more of this
afterward.

2. There are the same natural and vehement Desires, and Thirstings of Soul
after Happiness in them that are saved and in them that perish. By Nature they
are both alike capable of, and the one as well as the other eager in pursuing
after Happiness: Only this is the Happiness of the Elect; when God is
effectually calling such as he had Fore-known and Predestined, he opens their
Eyes and causes them to see and know that Happiness does not lie in the
Pleasures, Profits and Honors of the World that now is, where they have been
climbing high, digging deep, and turning every Stone, in search of this
Treasure; till the Spirit of Grace and Truth conducts them into the Field where
it lies hid from all natural Men, who are yet solicitously inquisitive after
the chiefest Good of the rational Creature; Psalm. 4, 6, 7. Many there be that
say, Who will show us any Good? Lord, life thou up the Light of thy Countenance
upon us: Thou have put, gladness in my Heart, more than in the time that their
Corn and their Wine increased. Corn is our natural Life and Strength; Wine is
the joy of Man's Heart: The former one of the most necessary, the latter one of
the most excellent Products of the Earth; yet both, together with all
overflowing abundance of Milk and Honey, Silver and Gold, make up but an empty
and transient Felicity for an immortal Spirit. Where is the Blessedness you
spoke of? May the deceived Worldling say to himself, on his Bed on Sorrow, when
the Night of Death has overtaken him: (for when his Sparks of worldly Wisdom
and Wealth, or legal Righteousness are gone out, he must lie down in Sorrow;
the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it; this shall ye have of mine Hand, Isa.
50.11) Had thou not an Understanding to distinguish between Light and
Darkness; a Will to choose the Good and refuse the Evil; Affections to embrace a
suitable, satisfying, immortal Good; an hungry Soul panting after some living
Spring, and boundless Ocean, to fill its immense Desires? And could thou
find nothing but Husks and Dust of the Earth, the Swine and Serpents Meat, to
feed upon? Who knows the Power that these Self-reflections will have, to
Torment undone Reprobates of all Times and Places, Nations and Generations,
from first to last? They were naturally alike capable of eternal Felicity with
others; and had the same vehement, incessant Desires to be Happy: Yea, this
Capacity, and these Desires too will remain with them for ever, to increase
their Torment: For though we cannot Hope for a Good we know unattainable, yet we
may Desire it.

3. The Truth in Hand, thus generally considered, is further evident from our
own Experience, in the trifles of this vain World and momentany Life. The
Trouble and Vexation of proud, discontented Folks under their Afflictions and
Crosses; Poverty, and low, despicable Circunstances is more than doubled by the
consideration of the Riches and Prosperity, Ease and Preferment of others, whom
they envy. If none were above them they would not think themselves low, though
on the same level they now are. Rachel's want of Children had been a tolerable
Evil, if Leah also and the Handmaids had been Barren. The Principle from which
we are most strongly inclined, thus to rub our Sores with Salt and Vinegar, is
rooted in our very Nature: We see the Fruits of it in our Children, when they
are very little, and as they grow up: How discontented is one little One in the
Family with his old Coat, when his Brother first puts on a new one; though he
made no complaint before: if we give but an Apple to one he rejoices, but then
give two unto another and the first will think he has less than none, unless he
may be made equal with his Mate. The elder brother in the Parable nurmurs,
because the younger is so joyfully received and entertained. The Case of Josepb
and his Brethren serves further to illustrate and comfirm the Matter: You know
how to apply it.

II. We come now, more particularly to consider the inexpressible Vexation and
Anguish of Gospel-Sinners in Hell; unconceivably aggravated from the clear and
large Apprehensions they shall have of the Saints Happiness in Heaven. We know
that the Essence of Damnation, of the Torments of Hell, does consist in the
Sinners Separation from the infinitely glorious JEHOVAH, the only satisfying
Portion of the immortal, heaven-born Soul; and the immediate Impressions of his
Wrath, who is a consuming Fire: The loss of the Society both of Saints and
Angels is small to this, if we consider them as separable. And on the other
Hand, All that the Legions of Devils could do against us were, in comparison of
falling into the Hands of the living GOD, less than the trouble of a few
Moschetto's, to being cast into a Den of hungry Lions: However, to think of
sitting down with Abraham, etc. in the Kingdom of God is a comfortable Thought,
to his natural or spiritual Children; and to be separated from godly Friends
and Neighbors, and for ever excluded the Place of their eternal Abode, will be
tormenting. Ah! to left up their Eyes being in Torment and see so many
Thousands of all Nations, Kindreds, People and Tongues, standing before the
Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with Robes, made White in his Blood, with
Palms in their Hands, Crowns on their Heads, and fullness of Joy in their
Hearts; serving God Day and Night (where indeed there is no Night) in his
Temple, where he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them; and the Lamb,
who is in the midst of the Throne shall feed them, and lead them to living
Fountains of Water; where God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes; this
Sight of the Eye will affect and afflict, pierce and rend the Hearts of the
Damned; especially such as perish from under the Gospel: For, Consider;

1. They were not only as capable of enjoying etc but all this was offered to
them, as well and as much as unto them who accepted the Offer; Mark. 16.15, 16.
Go Preach the Gospel, to every Creature: He that believes and is baptized
shall be Saved. Heb. 4.2. For unto us was the Gospel preached as well as unto
them; but the Word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in
them that heard it. Luke 14.16, 17. A certain Man made a great Supper, and bade
many; and sent his Servants at Supper time to say unto them who were bidden,
Come, for all things are ready. Isa. 55.1, 2. Ho, every one that thirsts,
come to the Waters; and he that has no Money, come, buy Wine and Milk, without
Money and without Price. Joh. 7.37. In the last Day, that great Day of the
Feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any Man Thirst, let him come to me and
Drink. Joh. 6.37. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Rev. 3.20.
Behold, I stand at the Door and knock; if any Man hear my Voice and open the
Door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me.

To set down all the Offers and Tenders of Grace and Mercy, that God is freely
making to all Sorts of Sinners under the Gospel (one only excepted) would be to
transcribe a great Part of the Bible: That most liberal Offer, Rev. 22.17.
deserves a peculiar Remark; And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come: And let him
that hears, say, Come: And let him that is athirst, come: and whosoever WILL,
let him take the Water of Life freely. In this, almost the last and sweetest
Invitation in the holy Book, we may observe several Things.

[1.] The Thing offered is Grace and Glory: The Water of Life is used in both
Senses, Joh. 4.10 Rev. 7.17. And they are inseparably linked together, Psalm.
84.11. Romans 8.30. All that God effectually calls by his Grace, he will bring
infallibly to Glory. [2] This Offer is made to all that hear the Gospel,
without Exception: It Is not made to young Sinners in their Prime, excluding the
ancient and gray headed: not to the Wise and Learned, excluding the Weak and
Ignorant; nor to the well educated Children of godly Parents, who are outwardly
Sober and Honest, excluding the Profane and abominably Wicked: Not only to such
as have never yet quenched the Spirit; but to them also who have always
resisted the Holy Ghost: (Forty Years long was I grieved, etc.) Not to these
and those only; but to one and all universally: Whosoever will let him come.
And then; [3.] The Condition is only a willingness to accept the Offer;
Whosoever will; which is not an antecedent willingness to our actual coming; as
if none were concerned in this Offer, but such as the Tenders of Grace do find
ready bent to accept of Life; but the Offer is made to such as have a Will not
to come to Christ for Life: Life is set and held before our Eyes; and if, at
any time, we like the free offer of Grace and Glory, on no other Condition but
our acceptance, it is freely ours; if we desire to have it without buying, we may
have it for asking; yea, we may have it for taking. When Christ says, If any
Man thirst; let him come, Joh. 7.37. The slothful, or desponding Sinner says
within himself, That is not for me; for I do not Thirst: but this Clause added
to the former in the text under Consideration, Let him that is athirst come;
and whosoever will let him take the Water of Lise freely, leaves the
Unbeliever speechless: for what will the Sinner say, I am not willing to be
converted and saved, made holy and happy, in God's Way? What Pity then can you
expect, while you thus wilfully perish?
As if a Malefactor at the Foot of the Ladder, should refuse such an offer as
this from the Mouth, or under the Hand and Seal of his gracious Prince and
Judge; Condemned and hopeless Rebel! If thou will fall down on thy Knees and
accept this free and full Pardon, thy Sentence is revoked, thy Treason
forgiven, and thy Estate and Honor with thy Life shall be restored; nor must
this Clause of necessity come in, if thou can give Security for thy good
Behavior and (...) Loyalty: For Christ says, If you are but willing to take me
for your Lord and King as well as Priest and Prophet, I will give you a loyal
Heart; I shall stand bound for your good Behavior, Jer. 32.40. I will make an
everlasting Covenant with you, that I will not turn away from you to do you
Good; but I will put my Fear into their Hearts, that they shall not depart from
me. Of them that thou gave me, have I lost none, Joh. 18.9.

Gospel Sinners in Hell do know to their Cost, even to Killing Vexation and
raging Madness with themselves, that what I have now laid down from the
Scripture is true; and that they are Damned for ever because they were not
willing to be eternally Happy; and purged and sanctified in order there unto:
Jer. 13.27. O Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? When shall it once he?
Luke 13.34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest
them that were sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy Children
together, as a Hen does gather her brood under her Wings; and ye would not?

Ohject. But will it be no extenuation of their eternal Vexation (the fruit of
their wilful Folly) for the Damned to remember that they have read and heard
such Texis as these, Joh. 6.37.44. All that the Father gives me shall come to
me. No Man can come to me, except the Father, which has sent me, draw him. So,
ver. 64, 65. Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that believed not, and
who should betray him. And be said, therefore said I unto you, that no Man can
come unto me, except it were given unto him of my Father. Act. 13.48. As many
as were ordained to eternal Life believed. Joh. 10.26. Ye believe not, because
ye are not of my Sheep. Romans 11.7. The Election has obtained it, and the rest
were blinded. Inferring from these, and such like Scriptures, that because God
never exerted his Almighty Power, to draw them to Christ, it was impossible
they should, by any Power of their own believe unto the saving of their Souls,
Ephesians. 1.19, 20. And because they were not of the Number given to Jesus Christ,
therefore (may they say) Christ had no Warrant to save them; Joh. 17.2. As thou
have given him Power over all Flesh, that he should give eternal Life to as
many as thou have given him. Joh. 12.39.40 Therefore they could not belive,
because that Esaias said again, He has blinded their Eyes, and hardened their
Hearts, that they should not see with their Eyes, nor understand with their
Heart, and be converted, and 1 should heal them.

Answ. Such Thoughts as these will afford them no relief at all: As it did not
excuse their Sin in not believing, so it will not extenuate their Punishment.
This will be evident if we consider a few things.

(1.) That the Heathen, who never had any Gospel Offers, are left without
Excuse; Romans 1.18, -- For the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven, against all
ungod^^ (...) unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness:
Because that which may be known of God is manifest in them; for God has showed
it unto them: For the invisible Things of him from the creation of the World,
are clearly seen, being understood by the Things that are made; even his
eternal Power and Godhead; so that they are without excuse: because that when
they knew God, they glorified him not, etc. Their not knowing God-Man, the
Mediator, (who was the Hope of Israel, and the Savior thereof) did no ways
excuse them for their (so vilely) dishonouring God the Creator, ver. 22, 23.
And worshipping and serving the Creature, in his stead, ver 25. Now if they
concerning whom it is said, how shall they believe in Him of whom they have not
heard, are yet without excuse; and must bear the Wrath of God for ever, because
they did not the Good they knew, and did Evil against the Light of Nature; how
speechless then will Jerusalem Sinners be; such as have lived in Chorazin and
Bethsaida; and with Capernaum, have been lifted up to Heaven? Mat. 11.20 -- Woe
unto thee Chorazin, etc. Surely the Heathen may speak it after Christ, and say,
If we had had your Sabbaths, Ministers, Bibles, and Ordinances; we would never
have slighted such precious Privileges; Ezekiel 3.5, 6, -- Surely, had I sent
thee to them, they would have hearkened unto thee. But,

(2.) We find no relief in like Cases, of a temporal Nature, by this way of
arguing. As now, Suppose a Man should first drown his Conscience and Reason in
Strong Liquor; and then, coming home at midnight, should in his drunken Fit,
set Fire to his House, where his Wife and Children are in Bed and asleep, and
burn them all alive; would it afford such a mad Fool any relief, when laid in
Irons, or bound to the Stake, to think that he had only done (as'tis said of
Herod, and Pontius Pilate; the Jews and Gentiles) what God's Hand and Counsel
determined before to be done, Act. 4.27, 28. Or, Suppose a Number of Men to run
themselves deeply in Debt, and having nothing to pay, they are to be fold for
Slaves; but before the Time comes for their being Shipped off, the Creditor has
compassion on them, and sends to the Prison, a faithful Servant or beloved Son,
to make them all this gracious offer, That if they will own the Debt, and but
say they would gladly discharge it if they were able, his Father or Master will
frankly for give all that they owe, and give it under his Hand and Seal for
present Security, till, in a short Time, they shall not only be delivered out
of Prison, but put in a sure way to live at Ease and to the Full, in Wealth and
Honor, more than Heart could wish: Now, if one and another should thankfully
embrace the offer; but the biggest Part are of another Mind; they either deny
or lessen the Debt, discredit or slight this good News; and even scorn to be
beholding to the Compassionate Creditor; till his abused Clemency turn into
pitiless Fury; the Proud ungrateful Debtors are sold, that Payment may be made:
How would it vex them, now, in the House of Bondage to consider, how faitly
they were offered, and how foolishly they refused offered Mercy;
notwithstanding the Decrees of God are every whit as much concerned in
determining, and his Providence in bringing about all these temporal Thing,
which concern the Children of Men in this World, as in Things relating to our
Souls, and the future, everlasting State: And if Men have no relief here in
temporal Distresses, and bodily Miseries, which they wilfully bring upon
themselves, by their own foolish madness, from the consideration of God's
unalterable Decrees; how should the Damned then mitigate their Sorrows by any
such Reflections? It can never be; as will further appear if we consider, (3.)
That the Decrees of God do not force Men to Sin; nor by any forcible restraint
keep them back from their Duty. Hence'tis said in the forementioned Case of our
Lord's Crucifixion, Act. 2.23. Him being delivered, by the determinate Counsel
and Foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and with wicked Hands have crucified
the Lord of Life and Glory They put Christ to Death just according to the
Purpose of him who works all Things after the counsel of his own Will; and
exactly according to the Scriptures, that could not be broken; yet they did it
with wicked Hands. And even Judas, the most wicked of them all (Joh. 19.11. He
that delivered me to thee has the greater Sin) that were conerned in Christ's
Death, does fulfill the Scripture and God's Decree, Act. 11.16. Men and
Brethren; This Scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the holy Ghost,
by the Mouth of David, spoke before, concerning Judas, which was Guide to them
that took Jesus; compared with Act. 4.27, 28. Yet, if you consider the Account
that the same Spirit of Truth gives of the Matter, by Matthew, in Chap. 26.14,
15, 16. Then one of the Twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief
Priests, and said unto them, What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto
you? And they convenanted with him for thirty Pieces of Silver; and from that
time be sought Opportunity to betray him. Behold, and see if there be any force
put on Judas, by the Decree of God! Behold, how voluntary and deliberate he is
in this cursed Action! He was not sent for, but went to the high Priests: They
put him not at all upon the hellish Treason, before he begs the Office of a
Traitor; What will you give me, and I will deliver him unto you? And having
made his self-undoing Bargain, it is said, he sought Opportunity to betray him.
Neither do the Decrees of God, his determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge
hinder any Man from doing his Duty; Jer. 7.27. Thoushalt speak, etc. but they
will not hearken unto thee, And why? Because they walk in the Counsel and
Imagination of their own evil Heart: As ver. 24. So Ezekiel. 34, -- Son of Man,
Go, get thee to the House of Israel; and speak, with my Words unto them. But
the House of Israel will not hearken unto thee; for they will not hearken unto
me: (And why) Because all the House of Israel are Impudent and hard hearted,
ver. 7. God indeed knows that many will die in their Sins, for want of Faith in
Christ; but he knows also that it is not so much because they cannot believe,
as because they will not come to Christ that they might have Life. How evident
then is it to all, but such as wilfully shut their own Eyes, how little relief
it can be to the Damned for them to think in the Flames of Tophet, That God did
from all Eternity Decree to leave them to their own Choice; and then to punish
them for their wilful Unbelief and Impenitency.

Thus much for the first Confideration, viz. That Gospel, Impenitent Sinners,
not only have a Capacity of being Happy; but Grace and Glory were freely
offered them, as well and as much as to others; but they wilfully rejected the
Offer; yea though they were frequently and earnestly entreated to accept the
same; and had all manner of Arguments used with them, to persuade them to turn
and live: which may be distincty considered, as another Evidence of the
doctrinal Truth, now under Consideration.

2. The Damned in Hell shall have their Hellfire inflamed and enraged, while
they will for ever remember, how perfectly Happy the glorified Saints are, in
accepting those very Offers they themselves refused; yea after very frequent
and most importunate Entreaties that they would accept of Life and Immortality,
brought to Light by the Gospel. It will ever be fresh in their Minds, how the
Ambassadors of Christ have pleaded with them: begging, as if it had been a
Starving Beggar, pleading for an Alms; or a condemned Man, begging for his
Life, that they would think on their Ways; consider their latter End; prize and
improve all Seasons of Grace; seek the Lord, in Season and in Earnest; Make
much of Time, even the Minutes of precious, fleeting Time; giving all Diligence
to make their Calling and Election sure; working out their own Salvation, with
Fear and Trembling; striving to enter in at the strait Gate; and taking the
Kingdom of Heaven by Force; 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then, we are Ambassadors for
Christ; a though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in Christ's Stead be ye
reconciled to God.

They will remember how often such Scriptures as these were repeated in their
Ears; O that my People were Wise, that they understood this; that they would
consider their latter End. Will thou not be made clean; when shall it once be?
Be instructed, O Jerusalem; lest my Soul depart from thee, How shall I give
thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Judah? Turn ye, Turn ye; why will
ye die, O House of Israel? As I Live, says the Lord, I have no Pleasure in the
Death of him that dies: Turn you therefore from all your evil Ways; so
Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. Wash you; make you clean; put away the Evil of
your Doings, from before mine Eyes; cease to do Evil; learn to do Well: Come
now, let us reason together says the Lord: Though your Sins are as Scarlet,
they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be
as Wool. Seek ye the Lord, while he may be found; call ye upon him while he is
near: Let the Wicked forsake his Way, and the unrighteous Man his Tho'ts, and
let him return unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him, and to our God,
for he will abundantly pardon: For my Tho'ts are not your Tho'ts, neither are
your Ways my Ways, says the Lord: For as the Heavens are higher than the
Earth, so are my Ways higher than your Ways, and my Tho'ts than your Tho'ts.
Ask and ye shall receive; Seek and ye shall find; Knock and it shall be opened
unto you. Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
you Rest. Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am Meek and lowly in
Heart; and ye shall find Rest to your Souls: For my Yoke is easy, and my Burden
is light. O do not that abominable Thing which my Soul hates, says the Lord.

These and a thousand more like Passages, which they have read and heard in
Time, will a million million Times over pass through their thoughtful Minds in
Hell: And they will be forced to call to Mind all the strong Reasons and
powerful Arguments that Christ's Ministers have used with them; if possible to
have gained their Consent to their own eternal Happiness, on Gospel Terms; and
to have kept them back from this Place of Torment. How they have been warned
with many compassionate Tears of Grief and Love, to fly from the Wrath to
come; and pleaded with by all the Regards they owed to the creating Mercy and
redeeming Love; God's Glory, and their own Safety and Comfort; present Peace
and everlasting Rest: arguing from the necessity and utility of a found
Conversion and Gospel Conversation; and from the incomparable, superlative
Delights of Communion with God: entreating them to have some pity on their
poor, perishing Souls; and not to destroy themselves, and sell eternal Joys for
an empty Song, a Bladder full of Wind, a dry Leaf, a momentany Bubble, Vapor
and Smoke, the Dream of a Shadow, less than nothing, and Vanity of Vanities:
(Such is all sinful Delight.)

It will be impossible for the Prisoners of eternal Darkness, who once had the
Light, to forget how they were told of this bottomless Pit and burning Lake, to
fright them from Sin; and how the Glory of Heaven was displayed, to allure them
to Christ. All that ever they heard or read, concerning his transcendent
Beauty, and unsearchable Riches; what he had done for them, would be to them,
and bring them to, if they would but have given the Consent of their Hearts to
an Espousal with the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, the Heir of all Things.
Moreover, all Counsels and Directions how they should seek God so as to find
him; and infallibly secure an Interest in Christ; that were plainly laid down
before them, in public or private; but they had no Heart to any Thing but Sin;
they could find no leisure to think on these Things in Time; and now they cannot
but vex their Souls to Death with the Thoughts of them to Eternity.

3. Gospel Sinners, in the Place of Torment, will remember what variety of
Means God used with them, in their life Time, as well as with others that are
saved: Not only by his written Word, (unfolded, applied and enforced, in many
excellent Books put into their Hands) and the public Ministry; (Either in a
more stated Course, or Sermons that they have occasionally heard, from one
Minister and another, both abroad and at home) but by Mercies and Afflictions
also, has the Lord been seeking to reclaim and reform them, Isa. 1.2 Hear, O
Heavens, and give Ear, O Earth, for the Lord has spoken; I have nourished and
brought up Chilaren, and they have rebesled against me. Jer 5.23, 24 But this
People has a revolting and rebellious Heart, they are revolted and gine:
Neither say they in their Heart, let us now fear the Lord our God, who gives
Rain; both the former and the latter, in his Season: He reserveth unto us the
appointed Weeks of the Harvest. Did they not know how they ought to have feared
the Lord and his Goodness; of which not only the Earth was full; but God filled
their Hearts with Food and Gladness: Their Life, and Health, and Limbs were
precious in God's Sight: Their Houses he filled with all good Things: Their
Fields and Flocks he made fruitful; and often spoke to them in their
Prosperity; drawing them with the Cords of a Man, with the Bands of Love: Rem.
12.1. I beseech you therefore Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that you present
your Bodies a living Pacrifice, holy, acceptable to God; which is your
reasonable Service: but they would not hear: Thus they despised the Riches of
divine Goodness, Forbearance and Long suffering, so kindly taking them by the
Hand, to lead them to Repentance; while the Sunbeams of Love and Bounty,
instead of melting, did harden their impenitent Hearts: and now they must pay
for all in Hell I indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, are but the
Treasures that they had been hoarding up, all their Life long, against this Day
of Wrath. If these ungrateful Wretches had never heard the Gospel; yet
common-Mercy, thus shamefully abused, would have been an authentic Witness for
God, against the Sinner: Act 14.17. Nevertheless, be left not himself without
Witness, in that he did Good, and gave us Rain from Heaven, and fruitful
Seasons, silling our Hearis with Food and Gladness.

And then every worldly Cross and Trouble in the Flesh; all Vexations and
Afflictions, whereby an Hedge of Thorns was made in all their sinful Ways;
which yet their insatiable Lusts, and Head strong Passions brake through; will
come in as so many Items against them: And because the Lord thus purged them,
and they were not purged: but in their Affliction trespassed yet more against
the Lord, therefore his Fury shall rest on them for ever! They would neither
hearken to the Voice of his Word nor Rod, Ministers, Parents, godly Neighbors,
Death of Friends, narrow Escapes, recovery from Sickness, deliverance out of
Captivity: and a thousand thousand more of particular Intimations concerning
their Duty and Interest; Warnings of their Sin and Danger, will dwell in their
Thoughts, and fret their galled Consciences in Hell, World without End!
Especially while they consider, how that Thousands of glorified Saints, never
had such a great variety of long continued Means and Methods used with them, as
themselves have had, Ezekiel 24.13. This is the third Aggravation of the Gospel
Sinner's Damnation.

4. They will also remember, as what variety of Means the Lord used with them,
so how, by his good Spirit, he was wont to strive with them in and by the Means
of Grace. How they were convinced of this and that Sin, together with the Evil
and Danger of it: The Spirit of God has stood in their way of Disobedience,
either with the drawn Sword of some dreadful Threatening, or else with jealous
Indignation, mixed with loving Compassion, beseeching the tempted Soul to
forbear its darling Lust, Jer. 44.4. O do not this abominable Thing that I
hate. Convicted also they have been of their neglect of that and the other
Duty, which they ought to have attended and performed: And when the Wrath of
God, revealed from Heaven, shall be poured out upon them, for their profaning
or not calling on the Name of the Lord; then they will remember how they
stifled Convictions, and held the Truth in Unrighteousness, Jer 10.25. Rom
1.18. And Oh! they will never, never forget, how the good Spirit of God has
taken them by the Hand, and led them into a Corner, to confess and bewail their
Sins; to cry and lament after the Lord; but they have soon quenched all these
good Motions, and turned again to Folly; hardened their Hearts still more and
more, through the deceitfulness of Sin; and then more obstinately resisting the
Holy Ghost, till there was no Remedy. Genesis 6.3. 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Or else
delaying to put their good Purposes in Execution till Death and Darkness made
it too late, Joh. 9.4. The Night comes wherein no Man can Work: And now they
find and feel Blackness of Darkness, reserved for them for ever; because while
they had the Light (not only of Scripture Revelation, but of spiritual
Illumination, and Conviction) they walked not in the Light, but despised and
rebelled against it, Prove. 1.23, -- Turn you at my Reproof; behold, I will pour
out my Spirit, etc. Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out
my Hand, and no Man regarded: But ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and
would none of my Reproof; I also will laugh at your Calamity, and mick when
your Fear comes: When your Fear comes as Desolation, and your Destruction as
a Whirlwind: When Distress and Angussh comes upon you. Oh! This is a fearful
Aggravation of Sin and Punishment, that they should (not only shut their Ears
against the Word, but ( make their Heart as an Adamant, lest they should bear
the Law; and the Words which the Lord of Hosts has sent in his Spirit, Zech.
7.12. Therefore (as it follows there) came great Wrath from the Lord. Nothing
can more incense the burning Wrath of God, than for Men to kick against his
tender Bowels of Compassion and Pity. Oh! To have his loving Kindness abused;
this goes to the Heart of God! Yea, it was this that alienated the Heart of God
from his Covenant People of old; whom he sometimes calls the dearly beloved of
his Soul. Isai. 63.7, -- I will mention the Loving Kindnesses of the Lord, and
the Praises of the Lord, according to all that the Lord has bestowed on us,
and the great Goodness toward the House of Israel, which he has bestowed on
them, according to his Mercies, and according to the Multitude of his Loving
Kindnesses: For he said, Surely they are my People, Children that will not Lie;
so be was their Savior. In all their Afflictions he was afflicted, and the
Angel of his Presence saved them: In his Love and in his Pity he redeemed them;
and he bare them, and carried them all the Days of old: But they rebelled, and
vexed his holy Spirit; therefore he was turned to be their Enemy, and fought
against them. And be sure, whatever the Lord mentions in his Word, as an
Aggravation of the Gospel Sinner's inexcusable Transgression and Disobedience
here, shall come into his Mind, as an Aggravation of the just Recompense of his
intolerable Reward hereafter.

But here lies the Force of the Argument, we are upon; That as those who die in
their Unbelief, had the same precious Means of Grace, that, in the Almighty
Spirit's Hand, proved effectual to the Salvation of others; so they had the
same blessed Spirit of Grace to strive with them; but their Neck being as an
Iron Sinew, and their Brow Brass, they did wickedly and wilfully oppose him.
Act. 7.51. Ye stiff necked, and uncircumcised in Heart and Ears; ye do always
resist the Holy Ghost And hence, what bitter weeping, doleful wailing, and
outragous gnashing of Teeth will there be, among you Christ-despising Sinners,
when you shall see your Friends and Neighbors, of the same Town and Church, in
the Kingdom of God, and you your selves thrust out; for neglecting the same
Means of Grace, rejecting the same Offers of Grace, and for resisting the same
Spirit of Grace, that they wisely improved, thankfully accepted, and did not
always resist; but sooner or later, cherish and comply with.

Object. It Is true, we do always resst the Holy Ghost; and always shall, unless
Omnipotency take away this Resistance and Enmity?

Answ. Supposing the objector to be convinced of Sin, and in some Measure
humbled out of Self; a more tender Answer must be given here, than to the
blasphemous Quareller, under the first Doctrine.

And,

(1) It Is true, that the corrupt Hearts of Men do as naturally oppose and
resist the Spirit of Grace, when he comes to convince of Sin and Righteousness,
etc. as Water does quench Fire. Those that are now converted Saints upon Earth,
and such as are glorified Saints in Heaven, did once resist, even as others,
for a Time, yea, always did they continue resisting the Holy Ghost, till
irresistible Power and Grace did take away this natural Resistance, and slay
this rooted Enmity of their carnal Minds against God and Christ. And even
still, in the Hearts of True Converts, who have Flesh as well as Spirit, there
is too much Resistance remaining. It Is to such as are sanctified, as well as
others, that the Apostle speaks, when he says, 1 These. 5.19. Quench not the
Spirit. Yet, this cursed Enmity of our Hearts against God, is altogether
unreasonable and inexcusable: We must not plead for it; nor by any Means seek
to excuse our not submitting to God, by our Enmity against Him. This would be,
as if a Traitor should plead his Hatred of his gracious Prince, as an Excuse
for his Treason and Rebellion! Joh. 15.25. They hated me (says Christ) without
a Cause.

(2) It Is both a great Mercy and good Sign, (at least of our being in a hopeful
Way for a well grounded Peace) thus far to be convinced of Sin. When we come to
know the Plague of our own Hearts, and come to see the need we have of an
all-wise and omnipotent Physician, this is a good Step. We have been tampering,
and trying many Ways to heal our selves; and sometimes the Wound has seemed to
be skinned over; but it breaks out again: Prayers and Tears, Reformation and
Resolution will not do; we utterly despair of Relief in this Old Covenant,
Self-righteous Way: And now, if it please God also to humble us at his Foot,
under a Sense of our utter Unworthiness that ever sovereign Grace should lend
an helping Hand, or so much as cast an Eye of Pity toward us, the preparatory
Work is then wrought: The Self-condemned Sinner has nothing else to do, but to
believe in him, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption.

It Is true, Faith also is the Gift of God; and the Effect of his Power; even
the exceeding Greatness of his mighty Power, Ephesians. 1.19. But when the convinced
Sinner is once brought to yield himself up into the Hands of divine
Sovereignty; to be disposed of at God's own, meet good Will and Pleasure; then
the Work of Conversion is as good as wrought: never did any such Soul miscarry.
Jam. 4.6, 7 God resists the Proud; but gives Grace to the Humble: Submit
your selves therefore to God. Humble your selves in his Sight, and he shall
lift you up, ver. 10.

But,

(3.) Although sinful, apostate Man cannot overcome this contrariety of his
Heart to the holy Nature and Will of God, nor of himself cease to oppose him,
when he comes by his Spirit to destroy natural and righteous Self; and to
create the Man a new in Christ Jesus to good Works; yet the poor Rebel has
Power to cry unto Him that is able to subdue all Things to himself, that he
would be pleased, for his own Name's sake, to pull down all the strong Holds of
proud Self-love, carnal Reason, and worldly Wisdom: Casting down Imaginations,
and every high Thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God; and
bringing into Captivity every Thought, to the Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor.
10.4.5.

In short, This is the important Case thou want to be resolved in; What
shall I do that I may wark the Works of God? Take the Resolution thereof in
Christ's own Words, Joh. 6.29. This is the Work of God, that ye believe in Him
whom he has sent. Christ is the Author of eternal Salvation to all, and only
to such as thus obey him. This Obedience of Faith is a Fruit of the Spirit, now
striving with thee: But, My Spirit shall not always strive with Man, (says the
Lord, Genesis 6.3) If you continue to rebel, and vex the Holy Spirit there will be
no Remedy: And in Hell thou will remember how that Life and Death was set
before thee; how thou wast entreated to chose Life; how the Matter was urged
upon thee, by the ministry of the Word, and Motions of the Spirit: And will not
this be a fearful Aggravation of thy eternal Misery, to think, how that by
quenching the Spirit, thou have kindled a Fire in God's Anger, that burns to
the lowest Hell; where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched?

5. Such as perish from under the Gospel, shall find themselves lost and damned
for ever, not because they had sinned; but because they did not repent of their
Sins: not so much for that they had broken the Law of God, as for their
rejecting the Offers of Grace by Jesus Christ. It Is true, they were conceived
and born under a twofold Guilt, and so doubly cursed by the just Imputation of
Adam's Sin, and a depraved Nature, the necessary consequent: But thus the whole
Race of Adam died in him; and these as well as others should have been made
alive in Christ, had they come unto him; or be willing that he should come into
them. Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have Life. Rev. 3.20
Behold, I stand at the Door, and knock: If any Man hear my Voice, and open the
Door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me. Their Childhood
and Youth was Vanity: Many also of those who are saved, forgot their Creator in
the Days of their Youth: But they remembered their Redeemer before it was too
late, which these never did; and this neglect proved their Ruin.

In short, Gospel Sinners, lifting up their Eves in Torment, will see, not only
Abraham. Isaac and Jacob but Manasseh, Magdalen and Paul, in the Kingdom of
God, and themselves thrust out; not because they had been greater Sinners, but
because they were impenitent Unbelievers: and how will it tear the damned
Wretch in Pieces, to consider that his Companions in Sin, yea, some of the
Ringleaders in Sin, did consider and turn from all their Abominations, and were
washed and made white in the Blood of the Lamb; which was every way sufficient
to have cleansed him also from all his Sin, 1 John 1.7. Here Is the Extremity of
Folly, and Height of Madness! To follow a Multitude in sinning, but never to
follow any in repenting and believing: Mat. 21.31, 32 Jesus says unto them,
Verily, I say unto you, that the Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom of
God before you. For John came unto you in the way of Righteousness, and ye
believed him not: but the Publicans and the Harlots believed him. And ye, when
ye had seen it, repented not afterward that ye might believe.

6. From all the foregoing Particulars laid together, it follows, That when
the Gospel Sinner comes to the Place of Torment, he shall plainly see, that his
Destruction is of himself: Hos. 13.9. O Israel, Thou have destroyed thy self.
Life and Death have been set before them; they have their own Choice. Deuteronomy.
30.15, and 19. I call Heaven and Earth to Record this Day against you, that I
have set before you Life and Death; Blessing and Cursing. They had what best
liked them; Carnal Delights while they lived, and Hell Torment afterward;
rather than godly Sorrow with eternal Joy. 2 Timothy 3.4. Lovers of Pleasures more
than Lovers of God. Luke 6.21, 25. Blessed are ye that Weep now, for ye shall
Laugh: Woe unto you that Laugh now, for ye shall Mourn and Weep. They loved the
mortal Poison of Sin (because it was sweet in the Mouth, Job 20.12. and
therefore loved Death (in it is Seed;) yea, (which is worse) they hated the
Prince of Life; even JESUS, who would have delivered them from the Wrath now
come upon them. Prove. 8.36 He that sins against me, wrongeth his own Soul:
all they that bate me, love Death. Alas! If damned Sinners could possibly be so
deceived as to persuade themselves, that they were, by the irresistible
Temptations of Satan, necessitated to commit Sin; or forcibly kept back from
repenting and believing the Gospel, by God's unalterable Decree, Hell would be
no Hell to them, in comparison of what the Guilt of Self and Soul-murther will
make it. They shall know assuredly, That the very Reason why they missed of
Christ, and Grace, and Heaven, was because they loved Sin, Self and the World
better. Thus the Thing is in it self, and it will appear so to you, Gospel
impenitent Sinners, when Enoch's Prophesy shall be fulfilled, Jude ver. 14, 15,
16. Behold, the Lord comes with ten Thousand of his Saints, to convince all
that are Ungodly, of all their hard Speeches, which ungodly Sinners have spoken
against him. These are Murmurers, Complainers, walking after their own Lusts;
and their Mouth speaks great swelling Words. If I had not come, and spoken to
them, they had not had Sin: but now they have no Cloak for their Sin, Joh.
15.22.

Object. How shall the Damned see it to be through their own Default that they
perish, seeing they had no Power to believe unto the saving of their Souls. It
was as possible for the Heathen to believe in him of whom they had not heard,
as for these who had Preachers to believe, without the exceeding greatness of
the Almighty's Power, irresistibly enabling them: and not being chosen to
Salvation by the Father, nor of Christ's Sheep, for whom he laid down his Life;
the Spirit was not sent to sanctify them; and without Faith and Holiness (which
are both above their Power) it being impossible to please God here, or see him
with Comfort hereafter: How is it the Reprobates own Fault, that he misses of
Heaven?

Answ. This Objection, as to the Substance of it, has been answered before; and
such as replied against God were silenced; or at least, had sufficient
Conviction offered, from the Word of God, to stop their Mouth: But I would now
further satisfy some upright, but weak Christians, who are sometimes, by
Satan's Temptations, the carnal Reasonings of the Truth's bitter Enemies, and
their own remaining Enmity as well as Darkness, stumbled and perplexed, not a
little about this Matter.

And,

[1] It must be granted, that no Sinner can come to Christ for Salvation, till
drawn by Almighty Power, by all conquering Grace. Joh. 6.44, 65. No Man can
come to me, except the Father, which has sent me, draw him. No Man can come to
me, except it were given to him of my Father. And it must also be acknowledged,
that whatever Means God uses with them that were not chosen to Salvation, yet
he does not secretly and irresistibly draw them to Christ, Romans 11.7. The
Election obtained it; the rest were blinded.

But,

[2] It is, nevertheless, the Reprobates own Fault that he goes on in Sin,
rejecting Christ, till he die impenitently in Unbelief: For,

(1.) He knew nothing but he might be elected. It is a Thing that cannot be
known in this World; unless to such as have committed the unpardonable Sin; or
to others who know infallibly that such an one has blasphemed against the Holy
Ghost, and done despite to the Spirit of Grace. The Elect are Children of Wrath
by Nature, as well as others, Ephesians. 2.3. And the very same gracious Offers, and
conditional Promises were made to the one and the other. Christ did not
dissemble when he dropped those compassionate Tears on obstinate Jerusalem, and
weeping, said, How often would I have gathered thy Children together, as an Hen
gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not. If such as shall be
rejected by Christ the Judge, had been willing to come to Jesus the Savior; or
but willing to open the Door and let him come into them, and had been denied
any Part in him, merely because they were not elected, it were then another
Case; but they had no Mind to come to Christ for Justification; nor that he
should come to sanctify them, Job. 5.40. Jer. 13.27. The Fault is therefore
their own; and they are without Excuse.

(2) Had they been persuaded that they were elected; yet, their blind, proud,
and base Hearts would have opposed an holy JESUS, a crucified Savior; and
rejected him with Contempt. Many of the Jews called Abraham their Father; yea,
they boasted that God was their Father; and doubted not but he had chosen them,
and had set his Love upon them; yet could they not by any Means, no not by
Miracles be persuaded to believe on Christ, Job. 8.39, 41, 47, 59, and 9 13, to
34, and 10.42 to 53. and 12 37. So that it was no conceived impossibility of
believing, because they were not elected, that hindered these from coming to
Christ; but their Ignorance of him, and Enmity against him; for which they must
blame themselves, because they rejected Knowledge, and cherished their
malicious Envy: And both Jews and Gentiles are alike in this; they both
conspired to crucify their common Savior, Act. 4.25, 26, 27. And both continue
to oppose his Doctrine, 1 Cor. 1.23. We preach Christ crucified, to the Jews a
stumbling Block, and to the Grecks foolishness. And even they that are saved,
before their effectual Calling, have still Hearts as wicked as were the elect
Israelites Hands, who were converted by Peter's Sermon, Act. 2.22, -- So that
as, neither Election it self, nor the Knowledge of it (if we could be sure of
it before our Calling) is sufficient to draw us to Christ; so, neither can
Reprobates plead their Non-Election, as any Excuse for their not believing; as
well on these two Accounts already mentioned, as in some other Respects, that
may be added.

(3.) Many of them that perish, are such as always denied and hated the
Doctrine of personal Election from Eternity; and were for the Doctrine of
Free Will, as it stands in opposition to that of Free Grace; holding that God
desires the Salvation of all that have the Gospel alike; that Christ died for
them all, one as much as another; and that the Spirit strives no less with such
as finally resist him, than with them that comply with his Motions, so as to
Repent and Believe the Gospel. That some of my Hearers are (or at least have
been) of this Persuasion, I must believe, because they have plainly told me as
much; and their uneasiness, discovered in Words and Actions, when the contrary
Doctrines are asserted, is a further Demonstration of it.

It is not now my Business so much to confute the erroneous, as to satisfy the
Weak, how the Doctrine of Election, etc. (which passes by the greatest Part,
even of such as live under the Gospel) can stand with their perishing through
their own Default: And I have gained one Point further toward their
Satisfaction, when they shall see, how that such as are for universal
Redemption, and profess to believe that God has given to them (and all) Power
sufficient, in the use of Means, to obtain Salvation; if yet they miss of their
Expectation, and be found Enemies to Christ at last, they must needs be
speechless, and bear the Blame of their Self-Destruction for ever. For what can
they say, when the final Sentence is passed, why it should not be executed upon
them? Why did they not turn and live; since they boasted of a Power to do it?
Or rather, Why did they not acknowledge they had none, and go to Christ for it,
who never rejected any that, lamenting their Ignorance, Impotence, Enmity and
utter Unworthiness, came a begging to him for Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption.

(4.) It is true, such as perish were not given to Christ to be redeemed and
saved; and so, not irresistibly drawn to him. Joh. 6.37. All that the Father
gives me, shall come to me. But who, and what was it that drove them away from
Christ? Was it not their causeless Hatred of him? Job. 15.25. And what was it
that drew them the quite contrary Way? Was it not their love to Sin, Self and
the World? Mat 22.5, 6. Luke 14.16, to 20. 2 Timothy 3.4. And what will they say
for themselves, when Christ shall ask them another Day, Why they did not come
to him at the call of the Gospel? Why, if they speak the Truth, they must needs
say, We did not Love thee: We saw no Form nor Comeliness in thee, why we should
desire thee. It is true, we heard, by the Report of the Gospel, that thou were
fairer than the Children of Men, Psalm. 45.2. yea, altogether lovely, Cant.
5.16. But we could not think it was true. Isai. 53.1, 2, 3 Who has believed
our Report? -- He has no Form nor Comeliness: and when we shall see him, there
is no Beauty that we should desire him. He is despised and rejected of Men; --
We hid, as it were our Faces from him; He was despised, and we esteemed him
not. Why did they hate God and Christ? Was it because they were not loved by
God, and chosen in Christ, before the Foundation of the World? No; for the
Elect hated the Lord before Conversion. Was it because most of them had never
seen Christ? No; Joh. 15.24. But now, have they both seen and hated, both me
and my Father. 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen, ye love. Had they any Reason
to hate one that bled and died for his Enemies, and mourned and wept over such
as were implacably so? No; Joh. 15.25. They hated me without a Cause. And now,
judge I pray you, betwixt Christ, and such as despised, rejected and hated him;
and preferred every Trifle, yea, their cussed Lusts, that were Soul Murderers,
before him; whither they are not justly condemned for loving the World as their
God, and hating Christ worse than they did the Devil; or Sin, which is the only
Thing that makes the Devil hateful: Such then as love Sin more than Christ,
cannot be said to hate him less than they do the Devil. Sure none will pity
them, or plead for them in that Day, when they see what a CHRIST it was that
they hated, and what hatred it was they bare him; and for what, even the holy
Image of his Father, and that too it may be under a fair outside show of Love
to him. Luke 22.47, -- Judas, one of the Twelve, went before them, and drew
near unto Jesus to kiss him.

(5) What, though Sinners have no Power to Repent and Believe the Gospel, with
such a Faith as works by Love; yet they that perish are without Excuse, in that
it was not only through Man's wilful Apostasy from God, that he came to need a
Savior (Eccl. 7.29. God made Man upright: but he has sought out many
Inventions) which he could never oblige God to provide for him: but it is also
the Reprobate's own Fault that he heaps up actual Transgressions of his own,
for which he needs Repentance; and when he has done, he is so far from
repenting heartily of his Sins, that he either hates to be reformed, or
traitorously sets up his external, partial Reformation in the Savior's Throne.
Whose Fault was it that Adam finned? And whence came the Sinner's corrupt
Nature: that Ignorance and Enmity, which is the Root of all the Unbelief,
Disobedience and Impenitency therein, for which they are deservedly punished?
Was any Violence offered to the pure Will of Man at first? And does not his
corrupt Will act freely still? Did the Creator, or any Creature force the Hands
of our first Parents to the Tree of Knowledge; or that forbidden Fruit into
their Mouths? And having lost their original Rectitude, they could not convey
it to their Posterity. Or, is the universal Law of Nature unjust; that every
sort of Creature should propagate it is Kind, in it is own Likeness? Genesis 1.12,
21, to 28. compared with Chap. 5.3. Adam begat a Son in his own Likeness, after
his Image: i. e. as he was a Man, and as he was a Sinner. Now, if God made Man
in his own Image, after his own Likeness; and when he comes to judge him, he
finds him in Satan's Likeness, with the very Image of the Devil upon him, Go,
ye cursed, into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, will
be no unrighteous Sentence; for Israel has destroyed himself first; and then
refused Help through Christ. Reader, If thou art not found thus guilty at last,
thou shall not be condemned.

(6) I might appeal to your own Experience, whom the Spirit has convinced of
Sin; whether you did not see and know it to be your own Fault that you had
finned against God; and doubly so, that you had rejected Christ's Authority, as
your rightful Lord and King, and his Mercy, as your only Savior from Sin and
Wrath. Suppose, you that are effectually Called had only heard the external
Sound of the Gospel, and experienced only a common Work of the Spirit; (thus
many are called, who are not chosen, Mat. 22.14) had you not perished through
your own Default? What Thoughts had you of your selves, when you were under the
humbling, preparatory Work of the Spirit of Bondage? Did you not plainly see it
to be your own Fault that you had finned, and not repented? Were you not
brought (though it may be, it was long first) to justify God if he should cast
you off for ever, because you had forsaken Him? Did you not acknowledge, from
the bottom of your Hearts, that if God should deny you his Grace, and leave you
to your selves, he could do you no Wrong? Now, either you did wrong in thus
judging your selves, or God does right in condemning others, that neither can
nor will believe and repent; but are condemned to die, not because they cannot,
but because they will not turn and live. Is it not just, that the Soul which
Sins should die and perish, except he repent? And just it cannot be, unless his
finning and not repenting be his own Fault: Hos. 9.15, 17, and 10 2. I hated
them for the wickedness of their Doings. My God will cast them away, because
they did not hearken unto him: Now shall they be found faulty.

(7.) Finally. If nothing else will satisfy us, let the uncontrollable,
indisputable Supremacy; the absolute, unlimitted Sovereignty; the essential,
spotless Righteousness, and infinite Holiness of that GOD who takes Vengeance,
silence all our carnal Reasonings; and set us down satisfied with what the
Scriptures of Truth inform us concerning this Matter. Now, it is evident by the
Word of God, that all impenient Unbelievers shall be damned, Mark 16.16. Luke
13.3. It is also clear, that no Sinner can believe to the saving of his Soul,
except almighty Power draw him to Christ, Joh. 6.44. Ephesians. 1.19, 20. Nor does
the Spirit of God thus irresistibly work Faith in any, but such as were given
to Christ, and ordained to eternal Life, through him, Joh. 10.16, 26. Act. 13.48.
Yet, that the Unbeliever, obstinately refusing the only Remedy; and God being
no ways obliged to overcome this obstinacy, is guilty of his own Death; and
must blame himself that he perishes in his Sins, is what the Scriptures also
do abundantly assert; either more directly, or by necessary Consequence: Joh.
3.19. This is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men love
Darkness rather than Light. Prove. 8.36. He that sins against me, wrongeth
his own Soul; all they that hate me, love Death. Joh. 15.22. If I had not come
and spoken unto them, they had not had Sin, but now they have no Cloak for
their Sin. Mat. 22.11, 12, to 15. And when the King came in to see the Guests,
he saw there a Man which had not on a wedding Garment: And he says unto him,
Friend, How came thou in hither, not having a wedding Garment? And he was
speechless. Them said the King to the Servants, Bind him Hand and Foot, and
take him away; and cast him into outer Darkness; there shall be weeping and
gnashing of Teeth: For many are called; but few are chosen. The whole World of
Reprobates shall be like this Man: their Mouths shall be stopped: Romans 3.19.
That every Mouth may be stopped; and all the World become guilty before God: If
God has said it, though Man may contradict it; Let God be true; but every Man a
Liar; as it is written, That thou might be justified in thy sayings; and
overcome when thou art judged, Romans 3.4.

There be many hard Speeches, uttered against Christ's Ambassadors, while they
shun not to declare the whole Counsel of God, which will at last be found to
have been spoken, by ungodly Sinners against CHRIST; who will, very shortly,
make good Enoch's Prophesy, Jude ver. 10.14, 15. But these speak Evil of those
Things which they know not, -- And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam,
prophesied of these, saying; Behold, the Lord comes with ten Thousands of his
Saints, to execute Judgment upon all; and to convince all that are ungodly
among them, of all their ungodly Deeds, which they have ungodly committed; and
of all their hard Speeches, which ungodly Sinners have spoken against him.
What, though we cannot answer Objections so as to stop others Mouths; nor to the
silencing of our own carnal Reasonings, and vanquishing Temptations, for the
present; let us leave that Work to Christ; in whom are hid all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge; and in the mean time, hold we close to this, and be sure
we keep our hold-fast, that the Word of God is true, the Judge of all the Earth
will do right; the foolishness of God is wiser than Men: His Judgments are a
great Deep! which the short Line of humane Reason can never sound: What then
can be more reasonable, than that our Reason should be brought into Captivity
under the Dominion of Faith; 'till Faith shall be swallowed up in Vision? And
then we shall know as much of these Things as we can desire to know; even to
full and everlasting Satisfaction. Indeed, if we could now or then comprehend
fully the eternal Counsels of him whose Understanding is infinite, they would
not be worthy of GOD, only Wise: Nor are the Doctrines of God's Sovereignty,
and Man's Impotency; Eternal Election, and Free Grace, to be at all suspected,
because many wise Men after the Flesh, and most wicked Men, not having the
Spirit, do oppose them: On the other Hand; It is an Effect of Election (says
Mr. Norton) to be affected with the Decree of Election. As God opens himself
in no Truth more than this; so they that love to see the shining Face of God in
Christ, delight in no Truth more than this. In this Way, the Riches of Free
Grace are glorified to the uttermost; and the poor trembling Believer's
Salvation is secured infallibly, abundantly! Whereas, even Adam in Paradise,
(with all his large Stock of Grace, though he had no inward Lust to entice and
draw him away) being left to himself soon fell; and Millions of Angels in
Heaven, not being elected (as those that stood are said to be, 1 Timothy 1.21.)
left their own Habitation, even without a Tempter. And yet the poor self
conceited Wretch, that knows nothing of the Breadth and Rigor of the Law, or
the Riches of Free Grace in the Gospel; nothing of God, or himself, or any
Thing else as he ought to know; when he hears the Doctrine of Election
preached, either quarrels at it, or is discouraged if he gives any Credit to
it. It seems to stand in the Way of his Salvation: Oh! If it were not for this
Doctrine, (thinks the proud self Justiciary) I should do well enough: Whereas,
all the grounded Hope thou can it have, is from this Doctrine. Were there not a
Remnant according to the Election of Grace, God's Israel, all New England, yea,
and the whole Gospel World would have been like Sodom, and like unto Gomorrah;
not one Soul would have been saved, any more than the fallen Angels. So that
not only the Believer, but the unconverted Sinner has cause to bless God for
Election, which refuses not any on the Account of Weakness or Vileness. If then
thou see thy self as unable to believe as a dead Man to rise and walk; and as
unworthy that Christ should give thee Life, as are the very Devils; venture all
on this Bottom; Christ has not excepted me, in the general Invitations of the
Gospel; Whosoever will, let him take of the Water of Life freely, Rev. 22.17.
Nor may I excuse my self from obeying the Command of God, 1 John 3.23. This is
his Commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ:
And though I have a natural, strong, rooted Averseness and Enmity, as well as
Impotency, that keeps me from osing the only Remedy; yet, GOD can make me
willing in the Day of his Power, Psalm. 110.3. And, if the Eye of electing Love
shall pity me, and the Hand of irresistible Power shall draw me, I shall be an
eternal Monument of free Grace: Nor will I dare to sit still and cry, God help
me, any more than to rise up in my own Strength; but wait in the Use of all
Means of Grace, avoiding all the Occasions of Sin; and if I perish, I perish
justly; if I am saved, 'twill be a wonderful, wonderful, wonderful Salvation!

Let the Enemies of this Doctrine themselves be Judges, whether this be not a
more likely Way to obtain the Favor of God, than their Way of contradicting,
quarrelling, objecting; or abusing the Doctrine unto a slothful Neglect of the
Means; a profane Course of Life, and desperate Way of Sinning; if they are
elected they shall be saved, do what they will; if not, they shall be damned,
do what they can. They might: as well say, when they are grievously wounded in
their Bodies, have their Bones broken, or are dangerously sick; we will use no
Means; if it be appointed we shall live, we shall live, do what we will; if our
Time be come to die, we shall die, do what we can.

But, to return from this Digression (which may possibly, meet with some lost
Sheep, that must be bro't in:) The Objection I am answering (which fell in our
Way, as we were arguing the Truth of the second Doctrine, from a sixth
Consideration, viz. That when the Gospel-Sinner comes to the Place of Torment,
he shall see and know that his Destruction is of himself; and consequently the
Apprehensions he shall have of the Saints Happiness in Heaven, will the more
dreadfully aggravate his own eternal Misery:) I say, the Objection pleads that
the Reprobate is not guilty of Self-Destruction, because not elected, redeemed
and sanctified by the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: but having found him guilty
before God, by clear Scripture Evidence; notwithstanding all that may be
pleaded in his Behalf; we reassume our former Argument, and close the sixth
Consideration, that we may pass to the Seventh: And do Gospel Sinners indeed
pull down everlasting Destruction upon their own Heads? What Tongue then can
express, or Heart conceive, the least Part of that Soul-killing Rage against
themselves, that self-tormenting Fury, that must needs eternally possess their
Souls in Hell; while they shall behold all those, who took a wiser Course, in
the Kingdom of God, and themselves thrust out, because they refused to enter
in: Here I am, (and shall be, for as many Millions of Ages as there were
Minutes from the Creation to the Resurrection; and when that is past, ten
Hundred Thousand Million Times more will remain behind;) Here I am, tormented
in this Flame; seventy Times seven fold hotter than Nebuchadnezzar's fiery
Furnace; and I wilfully threw my self into this boiling Lake of Fire and
Brimstone; O cruelly wounding Though It! Reader, think not any Pains too much by
which thou may escape these cruel Lashes of a selftormenting Conscience!

7. And lastly, Such as have once had the Price of the Gospel in their Hands;
but had no Heart to improve it, shall for ever remember in Hell, how they sold
their immortal Souls, and eternal Joys, for vanishing Trifles; empty Nothings!

How did it vex Esau, when he had swallowed down and digested a few Spoonfuls
of Pottage, to think that his Birthright was gone, (and the Blessing must go
after it) Heb. 12.16. Lest there be any Fornicator, or profane Person, as Esau,
who for one Morsel of Meat sold his Birthright; For, ye know, how that
afterward, when he would have inherited the Blessing, he was rejected, and
found us Place for Repentance, though be sought it carefully with Tears. Genesis
27.34. And Esau cried with a great and exceeding bitter Cry, and said unto his
Father; bless me, even me also, O my Father. And Esau lift up his Voice and
wept, ver. 38.

So will the damned Gospel-Despisers weep and wail, and gnash their Teeth,
while they consider what they had in Exchange for those Rivers of Pleasure,
that flow at God's right Hand for evermore; even a little bitter sweet
Pleasure; for an Inch of Time; a thin Bubble of worldly Honor; small,
inconsiderable, unsatisfying, unprofitable Gains: As that Prince, who, in his
Extremity sold a Kingdom for one Draught of Water; lamenting, sighing, and too
late repenting, said, For how short a Pleasure have I sold a Kingdom! Men will
say, I have been fooled out of so much Land, Money, Goods, etc. and never so
much as drank for it. And what have poor lost Souls now to show for a fair
Inheritance above the Stars; which they sold for a Song? How inconsiderable a
Part of this inconsiderable World had they; and for how small a Moment did they
enjoy this Dream of a Shadow, at the Price of their Souls? Whereas, if they
could have grasped and held Possession of the whole World, from the Beginning
to the End of Time, on such Terms; it had been a losing Bargain; an undoing
Bargain! Mat. 16.26. For what is a Man profited, if he shall gain the whole
World, and lose his own Soul? Or, what shall a Man give in Exchange for his
Soul?

If a Man parts with a rich Commodity, or a large Inheritance, for a valuable
Consideration; though he should something under sell, it does not much trouble
him: Or if he loses a good Bargain, he keeps his Money, and that comforts him:
But if he should in a mad Fit, sell first his House and Land, and then his Wife
and Children into perpetual Slavery; and all for a Whistle and a Rattle, a
gilded Box and a gay Picture; would it not vex his Soul to Death, when he
should come to himself, and solemnly reflect on what he had done? Yet this were
a tolerable good Bargain, in Comparison of what is made by many Gospel Sinners
among us: And whether you believe it or not, sure we are that damned Souls in
Hell do know, that the Height of their extreme Folly has been above all
Comparison; and their eternal Vexation of Soul shall be proportionable. Such a
Time I was tempted by the Pleasure of Sin, and at another Time the Hook was
baited with Gain; but my Conscience told me it was Sin, the Wages of which is
Death; and the Word of God informed me, that they which do such Things shall
anot inherit the Kingdom of God; yet, I did not forbear; and now Heaven is
gone, and I die like a Fool! -- These will be intolerable Thoughts! And yet
such as perish from under the Gospel must dwell with such Thoughts, for ever
and ever. Oh! that Men were wise, to prevent this in Time. Thus much for the
Second General Head of our Discourse, under the Second Doctrine.

III. We might in the third and last Place, yet more particularly make mention
of several Sorts of Gospel Sinners, whose eternal Misery shall be peculiarly
aggravated; not only above that of the Heathen, but above the Punishment of
many of their Fellow-Gospel Sinners; As,

1. Such as have lived in Times and Places when and where many have been
converted; Churches greatly enlarged; Multitudes flocking after Christ; Sinners
of all sorts and sizes repenting and believing the Gospel, Mat. 21.32. John
came unto you in the Way of Righteousness, and ye believed him not; but the
Publicans and Harlots believed him: and ye, when ye had seen it, repented not
afterward, that ye might believe him. Many of their Acquaintance, of the same
Town, in the near Neighborhood; some of the same Knot of Good-Fellowship, (as
they say) their Companions in Sin, it may be out of the same Family, have
turned to the Lord; yea, out of the same Bed one has been taken and the other
left: A Yoke Fellow, a Brother or Sister, a Parent or Child has been persuaded
to enter in at the strait Gate; and then by earnest Entreaties and good
Instructions, or at least a convincing, winning Example, they have sought to
draw you with them, in the Way Everlasting; but you would not hearken;
therefore an infinite Evil must come upon you. And when you shall hear many
Gospel Sinners pleading, that though Religion was professed where they lived, yet
it was little practiced; and if something of the Form was kept up, yet the
Power of Godliness was derided by the most; and what Hazzards they must have
run if they had followed the Lord fully! You shall then remember, that though
you might have advantaged your Reputation with your Neighbors, by denying all
Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and by living Soberly, Righteously and Godly;
and though you were often ashamed to be found in bad Company, and it was a
Discredit to you to turn your Back on the Lord's-Table; and more so to be loose
and vain in your Conversations, and hard in your Dealings, notwithstanding your
Profession; yet, neither Duty nor Interest, no, not the temporal, spiritual and
eternal Advantages that were on Religion's Side, could prevail with you to
profess and practice as holy Souls did: It therefore remains, that you chew
everlastingly on this bitter Pill; which, if it were possible for your own
Consciences to forget, we may suppose Millious of Gospel Sinners to cast in
your Teeth, and say, If we had had half the Encouragements to an holy Life,
that others were surrounded with, we would never have been so fond of
Damnation, as to have crossed even our worldly Interest in pursuing it.

2. Such as have had singular Advantages above others, and that many Ways: by
their Education in the Days of their Youth: they have been trained up in the
Way they should go; many Thousands of Prayers made with them and for them, in
the Family; besides ten Thousand Petitions put up for them by a pious Father, a
gracious Mother, in secret Places; who have also, all the Time of their
Childhood and Youth, been dropping sweet and solemn Words of Council and
Warning into their Ears; as holy David and Bathsheha did by young Solomon, as
himself tells us, Prove. 4.1, 2. -- Hear, ye Children, the Instruction of a
Father; and attend to know Understanding: For I give you good Doctrine, forsake
you not my Law. For, I was my Father's Son; tender and only beloved in the
sight of my Mother. He taught me also, and said unto me, Let thy Heart retain
my Words: Keep my Commandments and live. Get Wisdom, get Understanding; forget
it not; neither decline from the Words of my Mouth. Wisdom is the principal
Thing; therefore get Wisdom; and with all thy gettings get Understanding. And
ver. 13, 14, 15. Take fast hold of Instruction, let her not go; keep her, for
she is thy Life. Enter not into the Path of the Wicked; and go not in the Way
of evil Men-Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away. Put away
from thee a froward Mouth, and perverse Lips put far from thee, ver. 24. Oh!
It Is an unspeakable Advantage to have a pious Education, holy Examples, good
Books, all imaginable Helps, in our tender Years, and after we are grown up:
And yet these privileged Souls, who have had all manner of Helps and precious
Means, in public and private, shall see some, who have been under all Kinds of
Disadvantages and Hindrances, in the Kingdom of God, and themselves thrust out;
but it will kill their Hearts. So much for the second Sort.

3. Such as have had many Convictions, strong Terrors, good Purposes, promising
Beginnings; but their Goodness has quickly vanished and disappeared, like the
Morning Cloud and early Dew, Hos. 6.4. These shall come to a fearful End;
unless it please the Lord to move again upon their Hearts, and give them an
Heart to comply with those Motions, 2 Pet 2.20, 21, 22. For of after they have
escaped the Pollutions of the World, through the Knowledge of the Lord and
Savicur, Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome; the
latter End is worse with them than the Beginning. For it bad been better fir
them not to have known the Way of Righteousness, than after they have known it
to turn from the holy Commandment, delivered unto them. But it is happened unto
them according to the true Proverb; The Dog is turned to his own V mit again;
and the Sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the Mire. And as this Relapse
aggravates their Sin, so their Punishment will be doubly aggravated; That they
should begin well, and be almost peswaded, and yet fall off and fall back, --
and then that they should sin worse than ever before; at least in this Respect
worse, because greater Mercy is abused; more Light sinned against; Job 24.13.
They are of those that rebel against the Light: But they shall never forget how
near they once were to the Kingdom of God, Mark 12.34. From whence they are,
notwithstanding, fallen into the Bottomless Pit; and, how great is their Fall!
How much deeper are they fallen than others, who were never listed up so high!
How much better had it been for them not to have had this internal Knowledge,
by the Spirit's Conviction and Illumination, added to their more common
Knowledge by Reading, Hearing, etc. unless they had better improved it? It Is a
dreadful Thing to increase Knowledge only to the increasing of eternal Sorrow.

4. Such as have made an high Profession, laid themselves under the strictest
Covenant Engagements, and frequently renewed their Baptismal Vows at the Lord's
Table. That many such shall go to Hell, is a no less certain than sad and awful
Truth, Mat. 7.21, 22. and 8.11, 12. and 25.10, 11, 12. But we needed to have
looked no further than the Verses immediately preceding our Text, for the
Confirmation of this solemn Truth, Luke 13.26, 27. Then shall ye (and others
like them, in after Times) begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy
Presence, and thou bast taught in our Streets. But be shall say, I tell you, I
know you not whence ye are: Depart from me all ye Workers of Iniquity. That the
professed Followers of an holy JESUS and Pretenders to the strictest Piety
should be found the Devil's Children, and Workers of Iniquity, is not more
absurd and impious, than their Condemnation will be just, and their Punishment
intolerably aggravated: Not because they made so high a Profession; but that
they aimed no higher than Self in it. They abuse the richest Favors that are
capable of being abased to the Subject's Ruin. They have violated the strongest
Engagements that such unsanctified Wretches could be brought under. And perhaps
too, they have cloaked their selfish, worldly, hellish Designs with religious
Pretenses: As if one should stop an Oven with a King's Robes. And shall not
their Shame before the World, and Suffering in the Place of Torment, bear a
just Proportion to their Iniquity and Hypocrisy? This is the Man (it will be
known to all) that made not GOD his Hope and Strength; but boasted in the
Height of his Privileges, and trusted in the abundance of his Sacrifices: The
Righteous shall laugh at him, Psalm 52.6. And the very Devils will reproach him.
Yea, such of his Acquaintance in the World as never pertended to such high
Things in Religion (though they must be damned, not only because they did not
believe with their Hearts, but because they did not confess with their Mouths
too; both being our indispensible Duty, Romans 10.10.) yet may taunt at these
Hypocrites. But the worst is, GOD has allotted them one of the hottest Rooms in
Hell, Mat. 24. ult. Where their own Consciences will for ever sting their Souls
with the Remembrance of how much they promised, and how little they performed.
How publicly and solemnly they renounced the Flesh, the World and the Devil;
and yet, at least more hiddenly, either in Words and Actions, or, be sure, in
Heart and Affection, did follow what they had called Heaven to witness of their
abandoning. What, for such as have full often drunk of the Cup of the Lord; the
Cup of Blessing; the Cup which Christ calls the New Testament in his Blood;
instead of going to drink of the new Wine with Christ in his Father's Kingdom,
to have the Cup of Fury and Indignation, Trembling and Astonishment forced into
their Hands; full of the Wine of divine Wrath, even the fierceness of his
Wrath, without any Mixture of Mercy; and to be made to drink it up, Dregs and
all; (for the very Dregs of God's Fury are wrung into this Cup) though it be
Eternity to the Bottom, they must drink it off! But they had better have
professed less; or rather more truly, and have practiced accordingly.

5. Such as have contemned, maligned and most uncharitably censured the
precious Saints of GOD, and meek Followers of JESUS, on account of their
natural and moral Infirmities, real or supposed; or else because of the outward
Meanness of their Condition in the World; yea, very likely, for their real
Piety, Integrity and conscientious Walking; but always under Pretense of
something else. Now these are of three Sorts; (1) Profligate Wretches, who,
like Cain, bear a deadly Hatred against the Faithful in Christ Jesus, even
because their own Works are evil, and the Believer's righteous; 1 John 3.12,
13. Not as Cain, who was of that Wicked-One, and slew his Brother; and
wherefore slew be him? Because his own Works were evil, and his Brother 's
righteous. Marvel not, my Brethren, if the World hate you. And the Apostle, in
these last Words, does but declare what he heard from Christ's own Mouth: That
which we have seen and heard, (says he, Chap. 1. ver. 3.) declare we unto you,
Thus spoke our blessed Lord to his Disciples, John 15.18, 19, 20. If the World
hate you, ye know it bated me before it bated you. If ye were of the World, the
World would love his own: But because you are not of the World, but I have
chosen you out of the World, therefore the World hates you. Remember the World
that I said unto you; The Servant is not greater than the Lord: If they have
persecuted me, they will also persecute you. There is Persecution with Fire and
Swore; and there is Persecution with the Tongue, which is as a sharp Sword,
drawn and whet; set on Fire of Hell, Psalm. 57.4 My Soul is among Lions; and I
lie even among them that are set on Fire; even the Sons of Men, whose Teeth are
Spears and Arrows, and their Tongue a sharp Sword. Psalm. 64.3 Who whet their
Tongue like a Sword; and bend their Bows to shoot their Arrows, even bitter
Words. Isa 57.4. Against whom do ye sport yourselves? Against whom make ye a
wide Mouth, and draw out the Tongue? Jam. 3.6 The Tongue is a Fire, a World of
Iniquity: -- It is set on Fire of Hell. Yea, such as profess Love and
Friendship to God's Chosen and called Ones, being unsanctified themselves, have
bitter Enmity against them; and may prove the worst of Persecutors; Psalm.
55.12, 13, 14. For it was not an Enemy that reproached me, then I could have
born it; neither was it he that bated me (i. e. with a manifest Hatred) that
did magnify himself against me; then I would have bid myself from him. But it
was thou, a Man mine Equal, my Guide, and mine Acquaintance. We took sweet
Counsel together, and walked unto the House of God in Company. And ver. 21.
it is added, The Words of his Mouth were smoother than Butter; but War was in
his Heart; his Words were sifter than Oil, yet were they drawn Swords. And the
very same malicious, persecuting Spirit discovers it self in these Gospel Time:
Gal. 4.28, 29. Now we, Brethren, as Isacc was, are the Children of Promise. But
as then, he that was born after the Flesh, persecuted him that was born after
the Spirit, even so it is now. Profane Sinners hate the Godly: and carnal
Professors, who have but the Form of Godliness, cannot affect such as have and
show forth the Power of it; for though it pleases them in some Respects, yet
it crosses them many Ways. The Flesh and Spirit are Contraries. (2) The strict
Legalist, who trusts in himself that he is righteous, and despises others. If
he be in Church Fellowship, he thinks scarce any good enough for his Communion,
Isa. 65.5. Which say stand by thy self, come not near me, for I am holier than
thou. If a Non-Communicant, he thinks the Church so corrupt that he must not
hold Communion with them. Are they Men expert in the Letter of the Scriptures?
Then they think as the Pharisees spoke, (John. 7.49.) of poor, weak, though true
Believers; This People who knows not the Law, are cursed. Are their Heads
barren even of common Knowledge in religious Matters? Yet their Hearts (they
profess and verily think) are as good as the best Professor of them all. (3.)
Proud and haughty Spirits, if they make some figure in the World, and are Men
of Reason: (in their own Account at least) these scorn God's Chosen and
precious Ones, because, for the most part, they are poor in the World; James
2.5. Hearken, my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the Poor of this World?
But we unto you that are rich; for ye have received your Consolation, Luke
6.24. And not many of God's Elect, but are poor also in Gifts and Endowments of
the Mind, whether natural or acquired. Not many wise Men after the Flesh are
called: But God has chosen the foolish, weak, yea and base Things of the
World, and such as are despised has God chosen, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28. But woe to
such as despise, and offend, and censure, and persecute so much as one of these
little Ones that believes in Christ; it were better for him that a Millstone
were hanged about his Neck, and he were cast into the Sea. Be it on one Account
or another, that these and those have despised, disaffected, judged and wronged
the Saints of God; when they shall see at last, how that they were the only
Excellent of the Earth; precious in the Sight of God as the Apple of his Eye;
and even Kings in disguise: When they shall see them in their royal Apparel,
and a Crown royal set upon their Heads, (for thus shall it be done to the Men
whom the King of Saints delights to honor) how will it cut them to the
Heart, and make them gnash their Teeth! How will it ashame and confound them!
How will they for ever vex and torment themselves with what they shall have
seen and heard, in that Day of Judgment and Recompense! How will GOD repay into
their Bosoms, with a Vengeance, all the Indignities they have offered his dear
Children! And indeed, there needs no more to make them miserable, with a
Witness, than for them to be given up into the Hands of their own
self-tormenting Thoughts, and cruel Reflections: And must these Objects of our
Envy, Malice and (...), be embraced in the Bosom of divine Love; exalted to an
eternal Throne, and triumph over us, who had thought them as bad as we were, or
our selves much better than they were? Are these the Persons, whose Infirmities
we derided, whose Company we scorned, and whose very Devotion we mocked? Oh!
that we had rather loved them, honored them, done like them, though we had
fared like them, and like Christ in the World; so should we now have been like
them, whom we see (to our inexpressible Vexation and Confusion) to be like Him,
in Beauty and Glory: These Reflections, these bitter, cruel Self-Reflections,
are the never-dying-Worm.


6. Such as have had confident Hopes, and high raised Expectations of going to
Heaven, their Fall will be the greater. Some there are among the Children of
Men who are far from being the Sons of God; yet they lot upon it that they
shall go to Heaven when they die, as much as they expect an Harvest after
Seed-Time. I spoke before of grosser Hypocrites, who deceive others with their
outside Shows; but now I aim at close, formal Hypocrites, who deceive
themselves. Are we blind also? If any Man seem to be religious, (so many do in
open View of the Church and World, deceiving Men by their outward Appearance,
on which only Man can look; but the Apostle adds) deceiving his own Heart.
These are either more grossly ignorant, such as think that being baptized, if
they carry soberly before Men, especially if they make a Profession too, and
perform Duties of Religion in public and private, they shall undoubtedly be
saved. Or else they are such as go far beyond these, not only in historical
Knowledge and outward Practice; (in which they may exceed even true Christians)
but in real Experience of common Illumination, strong Convictions, and much
Comfort in Duty and after Trouble. They often try themselves and are as often
acquitted by false Signs, or true ones misapplyed. They are well thought of by
others like themselves, and even admired by some true Christians; yea, approved
possibly, by such as are discerning Christians, and by Ministers; and they know
it, and this s;eals their Delusion, and raises their Expectation to a great
Height: So that they may be wonderfully consident of being owned by CHRIST
himself, whose flaming Eye will discover them to themselves and the World, to
their unspeakable Shame, and more dreadful Disappointment. The higher they were
raised by GOD, in common Gifts of the Spirit; by Men, in charitable
Expressions, and real Affection, through mistake; and by themselves, through
Satan's strong Delusions, in glorious Expectations, the deeper will they fall.
Stand still, Reader, pause a little, -- and think (what Words cannot express) of
the Dreadfulness of such a Disappointment!

7. Such as heave had the Unsoundness of their Hopes for Heaven, again and
again, plainly discovered; insomuch that their false Peace has been greatly
disturbed; and at Times, they have been even convinced that their State and
Condition was bad; that they were yet in the Gall of Bitterness and in the
Bonds of Iniquity; that another Manner of Work must pass on them, or they
perish for ever. Yet, for all this, like foolhardy Wretches, they have shut
their Eyes against this Light of Conviction, (that might have proved the
Dawning of sound Conversion, and eternal Salvation to them;) and ventured on
over the Precipice, choosing the Terrors of the Second-Death, rather than the
Pangs of the New Birth; and to be at the Cost of laying a new Foundation.
Sometimes they have thought they would let go their false Hold; but then,
finding themselves destitute of any Footing, falling and sinking, and fearing
they should be dashed in Pices or drowned, they must catch hold of something;
some where they must fasten; Despair is dreadful! And being ignorant of the Way
of Salvation, by believing in him that justifies the Ungodly, Romans 4.5. (which
indeed is a Mystery, hidden from the greatest Part of Professors) they must (I
say) catch hold some where, as drowning Men; and the rotten Stick of
selfrighteous Performances is what comes next to Hand, and they can reach no
further: If they think, now they will come off from Self and Duties, and lean
on CHRIST only, it is with a Faith of their own forging; they do but repair the
old House, which must be pulled down to the Ground, and removed, every Stick of
it, and the Foundation ripped up, that they may be created a new, in Christ
Jess to good Works: founded on him, and built up in him: But, Oh! how averse
are our old Covenant Hearts from this new and living Way, when opened in the
Gospel! Salvation by Works, a Disposition to work for Wages and earn Heaven,
was the first Liquor that was put into the Vessel of humane Nature and it
strongly savours of it to this Day; according to the true Proverb, That which
is bred in the Bone, will never out of the Flesh.

Thus, I have diverted a little, to show you one main Cause of that extreme
Difficulty Ministers find, in removing Men from their old, false Foundations:
And when they have done all, Multitudes will hold fast their own
Self-Deceivings. They will put new Patches on the old, ragged Garment; they
will seem to mend their Pace; but it is in the old, broad, beaten Path. Yea (to
retun) they will shut their Eyes (as was said) against the plainest Conviction;
and venture on in a Way, they are so often and faithfully told, will end in their
shameful and intolerable Disappointment.

Thus the Damned in Hell, especially such as perish from under the Gospel, and
peculiarly some Sorts of Gospel Sinners that have been mentioned, shall have
such Apprehensions of the Saints Happiness in Heaven, as will dreadfully
aggravate their own eternal Misery.

So much may serve for the Doctrinal Part of the second Point.

The APPLICATION of the Whole remains.

USE I. For INFORMATION and INSTRUCTION, in several Lessons.
1. Shall many, that now enjoy the Means of Grace with the People of God here,
be Castaways hereafter? Then in must needs be a great Mistake, to think that
all or most Church Members shall be saved: Yet, some there are so grossly
ignorant and lavishly charitable, as to think and speak as if it were so: But
the holy Scriptures are the Rule of our Charity; and they assure us that many
are called but few chosen: That many shall say, We have eat and drunk in thy
Presence, etc. Besides, Experience tells us, that all Church Members are not
like Zecharias and Elisabeth, who were both righteous before God, walking in
all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameless. And do not the
Consciences of some Professors tell them, that, how smoothly soever they carry
it before Men, yet, they live in the Neglect of Closet Duty, and in the
Allowance of secret Sins; at least, some one Way and Trade of Sin, which is
inconsistent with Sincerity. Others there may be, who don't know that they
allow themselves any Sin, yet they never experienced a thorough Work of
Conversion: They were never Heart sick of Sin; nor bro't off from
self-Righteousness: What they do is not out of Love to Christ who died for
Sinners: Now, we know that nothing avails without Faith that works by Love,
Gal. 5.6.

2. Is it only now for the present Time of Life and State of Trial, that the
Elect and Reprobates, Saints and Hypocrites do join, visibly, together in the
Worship of God; must they be separated at Death and Judgment, as we have heard?
Well then may they both be content to bear the Trouble of each others Company
in this World. Thou false Heart! Does the more gracious Converse; or did the
more experimental Relation of thy Fellow-Communicant trouble thee, because is
condemns thee? Art thou thus silently, or more directly and expressly reproved
by him? Is there secret Enmity in thy Heart against him? Would thy envious
Heart be gland to have this Eyesore removed? Comfort thy self in this! 'Twill
be but a little while before you shall be parted far enough asunder. On the
other Hand, Is thy righteous Soul, upright-Hearted Nathaniel, not only vexed
with the silthy Conversation of the more openly Wicked; but grieved also with
the unsavory Spirit of the hypocritical Professor? Yet a little while and the
Wicked shall not be: Thou shall have no more of this, or any other Kind of
Trouble for ever. In the mean Time, consider him who endured such Contradiction
of Sinners against himself, lest you be wearied and faint in your Minds, Ye
have not yet resisted unto Blood, Heb. 12.3, 4.

3. Shall their Distance in the other Wolrld be as great as is between Heaven
and Hell? Then the Wicked have, be sure, no less Reason to dread, than the
Godly have to desire the Coming of the LORD, by Death or Judgment. It was one
of John's Visions, Rev. 6.8. I looked, and behold a pale Horse; and his Name
that sat on him was Death; and Hell followed. -- To die, and go to Hell; the
Resurrection of Damnation; the Coming of Christ in flaming Fire, to take
Vengeance on the Ignorant and Disobedient; what a dreadful Sound should these
Things make in the Ears of nominal Christians, lukewarm Laodiceans, and self
righteous Pharisees, (who are, at best, but ignorant Zealots, Rom 10. begin.)
as well as of the most profane and openly Scandalous!

But, is the Life thou now live in the Flesh by the Faith of the Son of God?
then to die will be Gain. Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord; for they
rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them. Thou have all the
Reason in the World for thy Desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is
best of all. Let this be the constant Language of thy Soul, Come LORD JESUS,
come quickly. The Day of they Death will be better than was the Day of thy
Birth, Eccl. 7.1. This being the Beginning of all thy evil Things; and that the
End thereof, and the Beginning of that infinite Good that shall never end.

4. Again. Shall this separation be forced on the Wicked, sore against their
Will? Why then should any be so unadvised, besotted, and (to use the Apostle's
Word) so bewitched as to choose the Ways of Sin, and refuse those of Holiness
now, seeing they shall be so contrarily affected toward the respective Ends
unto which these Ways lead, in the other World? Know thou not that it will
be Bitterness in the latte End? His Bones are full of the Sins of his Youth,
which shall lie down with him in th Dust, Though Wickedness be sweet in his
Mouth; though he bide it under his Tongue; though he spare it, and forsake it
not; but keep it still within his Mouth: Yet, his Meat in his Bowels is turned;
it is the Gall of Asps within him, Job 20.11, -- Who would not choose rather to
suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin
(were they ten thousand Times sweeter than they are) for a Moment? Did thou
but realized it now, that Death and Judgment will change thy Mind; thou would
certainly desire and endeavor, presently to change thy Way. Put Sin and Hell
together in one Scale, and Self-Denial with eternal Glory in the other; and if
thou have but hte Reason of a Man; one would think, that far more exceeding and
eternal Weight of Glory (with which neither the Sufferings nor Enjoyments of
this present Time are worthy to be compared) should soon determine thy Choice.
But alas! The Word preached (or written) does not profit, not being mixed with
Faith in them that hear (or read) it, Heb. 4.2.

5. Is it as we have heard in the second Doctrine, That the Damned in Hell
shall have such Apprehensions of the Saints Happiness in Heaven, as will
dreadfully aggravate their own eternal Misery? Hence, Places of Gospel Light
are dear Places to sin in. The Wages of Sin (even of all Kinds of Sin, of each
single Act in any Kind) is Death, Romans 6.23. The Soul that sins shall die,
Ezekiel. 18.4. So that none of the ungospellized World can sin at a cheap Rate:
The Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God, Psalm
17.9. Yet, Israel, the Seed of Jacob whom God loved, because they had his Word
and Ordinances, which other Nations had not; because they only, of all the
Families of the Earth, were thus highly privileged, thus nearly related to
God; their Sins were the more grievous; Amos 2.13. Behold, I am pressed under
you, as a Cart is pressed that is full of Sheaves, Isa. 1.2, 14. I have
nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me. I am
weary to bear them. Ezekiel. 6.9. I am broken with their whorish Heart. And their
Punishment must be more heavy; Amos 3.2. You only have I known of all the
Families of the Earth, therefore you I will punish, with a Winess; with a
Vengeance; in Jealousy and Fury. But we, in these Gospel Times; we in this Land
of Light! How dear must we pay for all our ungrateful Disobedience; our wilful
Barrenness? Unless we agree with our Adversary quickly, whiles we are in the
Way with him, Mat 5.25

6. What we have heard under the second Doctrine, does abundantly justify the
incessant, unwearied Care and Pains of the most circumspect, diligent Christian
in the World; and may equally serve to comfort such under all their Labors,
Sorrows and Sufferings, in the Way to Heaven: Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at
the strait Gait; for many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter in, and not be
able. Heb. 3.19. and 4.1. So we see that they could not enter in, because of
Unbelief. Therefore let us fear, lest a Promise being left us of entering into
his Rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. Prove. 28.14. Happy is the
Man that fears always. Heb. 12.15. Looking diligently, lest any Man fail of
the Grace of God. 2 Pet. 3.10, 14. But the Day of the Lord will come, as a
Thief in the Night Wherefore be diligent, that ye may be found of him in Peace.
And ver. 11. What Manner of Persons ought ye to be, in all holy Conversation
and Godliness? Be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might. Put on the
whole Armor of God: Praying always, with all Prayer, -- and watching thereunto
with all Perseverance, Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 18. Fight the good Fight of Faith: Lay
hold on eternal Life: So run that ye may obtain, 1 Timothy 6.12. 1 Cor. 9.24.

These are hard Lessons! But if we be steadfast, unmovable, always abounding
in the Work of the Lord; we know that our Labor shall not be in vain in the
Lord. If we suffer with him, we shall be glorified together. He that overcomes,
shall sit down with Christ, on his Throne; as he also overcame, and is set down
with his Father, on his Throne. Suppose the worst, that it should come to
Burning at the Stake; that is better than burning for ever in Hell. Should the
World that hates us, gnash on us with their Teeth, and stone us to Death; this
is not half so bad as what is expressed in our Text, There shall be weeping and
gnashing of Teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, etc. in the Kingdom of God, and
you your selves thrust out.

7. Shall the Damned in Hell have such Apprehensions of the Saints Happiness in
Heaven, as will dreadsully aggravate their own eternal Misery? No doubt then
but glorified Saints shall find their everlasting Joys proportionably
heightened, while they consider the Sorrows of the Tormented. Not that they
shall rejoice in that Misery of their Fellow Creatures which themselves have
deserved as well and as much, and many of them more than most of the Damned:
But this shall be their Rejoicing, that they are delivered from so great a
Death as the second Death is, Rev. 21.8. compared with I Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. But
the Fearful, and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and Murderers, and
Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their
Part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone; which is the second Death.
Know ye not that the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not
deceived: Neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate,
nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor
Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God:
And such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. And
shall we not for ever remember, when we come to the Region of Light and Bliss,
how far we ran in Sin; how long we played on the Brink of Heil; and how loath we
were at last to be saved in GOD's Way? Though he had sent his Son to endure his
burning Wrath for us; and did send his Spirit to pluck us as Brands out of the
Fire; while Multitudes were left to perish for lack of Vision: and most, who
had the Light, were left, in their Blindness, to love Darkness rather than
Light; and are therefore justly condemned to Blackness of Darkness for ever;
because they hated the Light of Truth and Grace, they shall never see the Light
of Glory; unless with such Apprehensions, Flashing in their Minds, as make Hell
the darker and hotter.

So, on the other Hand, (as we are arguing) the black Night of eternal Death
makes the perfect Day to shine the brighter. The Howling of the Dogs which are
without, (Rev. 22.15) makes the Hallelujahs of Saints, the Songs of Ston to be
the more Joyful and Melodious. If there were no Hell; or none but Devils in it;
or but few of the Children of Men, and those only such as had been the least of
Mortals, or greatest of Sinners; Heaven would be the less Glorious; and its
high Arches would not have rung so loud and sweetly of SALVATION! SALVATION!
Rev. 7.10 and 19.1. Neither would there have been room for that new Song, Rev.
5.9. At least the Tune of it must have been set lower; And they song a new
Song, saying, Thou art worthy, -- for thou wast slain; and bast redeemed us to
GOD, by the Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation.
And they shall rejoice also, unconceivably, and be glad with exceeding Joy, in
the Triumphs of divine Justice, when they shall see the Vengeance, Psalm 58.9,
10. Themselves are by a Miracle of Grace wonderfully delivered, which will be
fresh and new to Eternity; because the Smoke of Hell's Torment will ascend (as
it were in their Sight) for ever and ever: And GOD's Power, Justice and Truth
are glorified to the Height; and therefore they rejoice; Rev. 18.20 and 19 1, 2
-- Rejoice over her, thou Heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets; for GOD
has avengedy a on her. After these Things I heard a great Voice of much People
in Heaven, saying, Alleluia; Salvation, and Honor, and Glory, and Power to the
LORD our GOD: For true and righteous are his Judgments. And again they said
Halleluia; and her Smoke rose up for ever and ever. And a Voice came out of the
Throne, saying, Praise our GOD, all ye his Servants, and ye that fear him, both
Small and Great: Let us be glad and rejoice, and give Honor to him.

USE II. For EXAMINATION.
2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith: Prove your own
selves: Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye
be Reprobates?

And to excite you to this much neglected Work, consider a few Things;

1. You have to do, and must have further to do with an omniscient, impartial
Judge; Rev. 2.23 And all the Churches shall know, that I am be which searches
the Reins and the Hearts: And I will give unto every one of you according to
your Works. Romans 2.16. God shall judge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ,
according to my Gospel. Be not deceived; your great JUDGE cannot be blinded, or
bribed. 2 The final Determination of your eternal State may be much nearer than
you suspect or imagine. As it is appointed unto Men once to die, but after this
the Judgment: So are his Days determined; the Number of his Months are with the
Lord, who has appointed his Bounds that he cannot pass, Job. 14.5. And as the
Tree falls, so must it lie. If thy Soul should this Night be required of thee;
and thou discoverest not thy Condition before thou sleep; thou may be
undone for ever by thy present Delay. Where is the Hope of the Hypocrite, though
he has gained, when God takes away his Soul? Thou Fool, this Night shall thy
Soul be required of thee. 3. For want of a thorough Search, Multitudes are
mistaken, on one Hand or the other; and on both Hands Mistakes are sad, though
not alike dangerous, and of dreadful Consequence. There is that makes himself
rich, yet has Nothing: there is that makes himself poor, yet has great
Riches, Prove. 13.7. How sadly do many Christians walk, to their own Discomfort,
and the Discouragement of others, and the LORD's Dishonor, in whom they should
always rejoice; How are their Hands weakened in the Service of God; when the Joy
of the Lord would be their Strength? Neh. 8.10. And all for want of discovering
the Sincerity of their Hearts; which they might do, by divine Assistance, in
one Hour's diligent search into their Hearts; and how cheap a Remedy is this
for Months and whole Years of Darkness, and cruel Jealousy of the Love of
Christ; their's to him, or his to them? Cant. 8.6. On the other Hand, there is
a Way that seems right to a Man; but the End thereof are the Ways of Death: And
it is for want of impartial Examination that this Man is mistaken for the
present, and undone for ever. 4. It may be of unspeakable Advantage to know our
present State of Soul, whether it be good or bad. If, after the most laborious
and critical Search, we find a Grain of true Grace, we shall have more Cause of
Joy, than if we had found a Wedge of Gold; Prove. 3.13, 14, 15. Happy is the Man
that finds Wisdom, (i. e. true saving Grace) For the Merchandise of it is
better than the Merchandise of Silver, and the Gain thereof than fine Gold: It
is more precious than Rubies; and all the Things thou can desire cannot be
compared to it. And if, on Trial, our present State appear to be unsound, we
have then the most happy Season, perhaps, that ever we had in our Life Time, to
make our selves for ever: For, what is it that undoes a great Part of those who
perish from under the Gospel, but a false Hope? Job 27.8. What is the Hope of
the Hypocrite, though he has gained, when God takes away his Soul? You are
willing in temporal Cases to know the worst: When traveling, to be told if you
take a wrong Way, before you have utterly lost your self, and your Feet stumble
upon the dark Mountains: If going to Law, you entreat your Counselor not to
flatter you with vain Hopes; but to tell you the worst you may expect, if you
proceed. If going to Sea, you would not ship your self on a false Bottom; if
you hear but a Sound that the Passengers etc. are like to be cheated of their
Lives. And as a timely Discovery of Danger prevents Ruin in these and such like
temporal Cases; so may the Discovery of your spiritual State, if at present
bad, prevent your everlasting Destruction. 5. Your Unwillingness to know the
worst of your selves, and to come to the strictest Trial in order thereto, will
render any further Trial the less needful; and your Willingness to be searched
to the Bottom, will make such a Work the more easy. I say not that every one
who is backward to examine himself is therefore unsound: The Flesh draws back
from all spiritual Duties: And it may be the weak and tempted Soul has tried
and tried again, has been so long and often at the Work of Self-Examination,
and still unresolved, that it is quite disheartened; yet can pray with David,
Psalm. 139.23. Search me, O God, and know my Heart. If there were a Man a
thousand Miles off that could tell the doubting Christian his State,
infallibly, he would not think the Journey long, to be resolved in a Case that
lies nearest his Heart of any Thing in the World. Nor can we say that every one
who is willing to be tried is therefore upright of Heart; for many have a
strong Confidence of their good Estate, though groundless; now, these,
resolving what to judge before Hand, may boldly come to the Trial. And then,
the Spirit of Conviction can make an elect Soul (at present on a false
Foundation) willing to come to the Trial, in order to his Conversion and
Salvation. But ordinarily, such as are willing to be searched, especially when
they most suspect themselves, are honest hearted; and such as don't love the
most searching Books and Sermons are naught. If you saw the Merchant loath you
should view and try his Wares, would you not suspect them the more? Every one
that does Evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his Deeds
should be reproved. But he that does Truth, comes to the Light, that his
Deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God, John 3.20, 21.
Now, I will suppose thee, Reader, at a Loss about thy spiritual Condition;
and, at least in some Measure, willing to come to the strictest Trial, and
resolved to engage thy backward Heart in this Work; a Work which no Minister or
Fellow-Christian can do for thee; it is Self-Examination. What Man knows the
Things of a Man, save the Spirit of Man that is within him? But sure, a Man may
know himself, else it would be very strange: Know ye not your own selves? says
the Apostle. In the diligent Use of Means you may, if you are but willing: If
then you are willing to set about this Work, take two or three Directions for
your Help and Guidance herein, that you may not do the Work to the Halves, that
it may not miscarry under your Hand.

Direct. 1. Take Time and Pains; yea, take the best Time that may be; when your
Minds are most calm, and free of worldly Cares, and perplexing Temptations: Be
serious and solemn: Set your selves as at the Feet of Christ, and under the
Observance of his flaming Eve, who is the All-seeing and Heart-searching GOD:
And watch over your wandering, slothful and deceitful Hearts, from the Beginning
to the End of the Work. Look into the Scriptures, or searching Books; then look
into your own Heart, and compare diligently your former Experiences and present
Desires, Frame and Bent of Heart with those Marks and Signs: Bu first and last,
you must be sure to look up to GOD for Understanding in the Rule, and Skill to
apply it; and for the Co witnessing of his Spirit, according to that of the
Apostle, Tom. 8.16. The Spirit it self bears Witness with our Spirit, that we
are the Children of God. It Is true; The Testimony of a renewed Conscience is a
good Evidence for us, and solid Ground of Joy, 2 Cor. 1.12. Our Rejoicing is
this; the Testimony of our Consciences, etc. Because the Son of God has given
us (as another Apostle tells us 1 John 5.20.) an Understanding that we may
know, etc. Yet if we consider it as distinct from the Witness of the Spirit,
it is never without the gracious Assistance of the Spirit; and though it be very
comfortable, yet not fully satisfying without the Spirit's Testimony. Our
Gospel came to you in -- the Holy Ghost, and much Assistance, 1 These. 1.5.

Direct. 2. See to the Marks and Signs you try by, that they be sound and good:
This is of eternal Concernment; and so it is that you miss it not in the
Application. If the Mark be false, you may stand before it, and yet fall before
God; who will judge you by his infallible Word of Truth: From thence therefore
you must take your Signs; and when you have done so, you must be impartial in
the Trial; not prejudging the Cause, nor suffering your self to be by assed, by
carnal Self-Love to one Side, nor by jealous trembling Fears to the other; but
resolving to judge of your selves, as you shall now find upon Trial.

Direct. 3. Draw up no hasty Conclusion, for or against your self; nor let it
go in Haste, when deliberately and regularly drawn. Our first and sudden
Thoughts, in any difficult Matter, are very often wrong. He that answers a
Matter before be hears it, (says the wise Man) it shall be Shame and Folly
to him. It may be Death and Damnation in the Case now before us. We must hear
both Sides, and hear all, before we can judge in the trivial Matters of this
Life; how much more when the State of the Soul is to be judged, where a Mistake
may cost us as much more than our Lives are worth as our Life is more than a
Button of our Coat. Have we a Mark of a good State given in a Sermon? We must
keep it in Mind, recollect it in private, and diligently compare our selves
with it: Have we a Sign of Grace in a Book before our Eyes? Let us read it over
and over; pondering every Part of it in our Hearts; considering where the main
Strength of the Sign lies. As now, to give an Example for the Help of the Weak:
We have an infallible Mark of a good State in 1 John 3.14. We know that we are
passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren. When I try my State by
this Mark, it is none of my Business to enquire, How I shall infalllibly know
who are Christ's Disciples indeed: It Is enough that I know who I am bound in
Charity to look on as gracious Persons: The main Thing that I am to inquire
after is, Whither I do indeed love such as I regularly look on to be the
Children of GOD, because of the Image of the holy GOD, that I do, as it were,
see upon him? Whether the real Ground of my Love to Christ's Disciples be this;
That they love Christ, and Christ loves them; and whether the more Christ like
they are, the more dearly I affect them? and whither upon new, and further, and
clearer Discoveries of their experimental Knowledge of Jesus Christ, (for legal
Exactness is nothing without this) the more sensibly and sweetly is my very
Soul united and glewed to them: their Company is sweet; their very Countenance
seems pleasant; and I find my self willing to do or part with any Thing for
them, when called? How freely do Parents do for their Children, because they
are dear to them? So it is in this Case, in some Measure: 1 John 3.17, 18, 19.
Whosoever has this Worlds Goods, and sees his Brother has need, and shuts up
his Bowels of Compassion from him, how dwells the Love of God in him? My
Little Children, let us not love in Word, neither in Tongue; but in Deed and in
Truth. And hereby we know that we are of the Truth, and shall assure our Hearts
before him.

Now, on the other Hand; if I am but a legal Self-Justiciary, I shall find,
upon Examination, (if I am not so confident as to need no further Trial; at
least I may find, but that I am exceeding loath to see it) that I have no such
special Love and dear Affection to gracious Souls, to savoury, experienced
Christians. My Heart, it may be, tells me that I love good People, and always
did: My Parents were godly, and I was educated into the good Esteem of the
People of GOD. I loved my Parents, with a natural Affection; and so I love such
as they loved, and as loved them: And I love good Folks because they are sober
and honest, and do Good to my self and others: I cannot endure profane, and
wicked, and dishonest People: But as for that dear Affection to experienced
Christians, as they are called, I don't know what you mean by it. Their
Relations of strange Joys and Terrors, Light and Darkness, and Temptations, may
be melancholy Fancies, Dreams and Delusions, for ought I know: I fear, if they
are right, I should be found wrong, (says the self-righteous Man, whose Enmity
works strangely at the hearing so much of Experiences) and then how can I love
such as condemn me, Gal. 4.28, 29. Now, we Brethren, as Isaac was, are the
Children of Promise. But as then, he that was born after the Flesh, persecuted
him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now.

Still I would gladly be further helpful to you in this necessary, but
difficult and very important Work; by laying down variety of Marks and Signs of
Grace: such as will not deceive you, if you do not deceive your selves by
misapplying them, either for or against your selves: For they shall all be
taken out of the infallible Word of Truth. But first let me premise two Things;
(1) That a sincere Christian may much sooner and more easily discover his
Sincerity, than a Formalist can his Hypocrisy. It must needs be so, ordinarily;
for the Convert knows what it is to be an Hypocrite: He can tell how his Heart
stood affected in his natural State; and now he can compare former with present
Experiences. Moreover, It is of the Nature of Light to make manifest; Once were
ye Darkness, (says the Apostle) but now ye are Light in the Lord. And then,
the Spirit of Truth and Revelation dwells in them, and that partly for this
End, 1 Cor. 2.12. Now we have received, not the Spirit of the World, but the
Spirit which is of God, that we might know the Things that are freely given us
of God. Whereas supernatural Things are incomprehensible by the natural Man;
what ever common Light and Knowledge he may have: So that when he comes to
examine his State, he knows not what he is to look for: if he be told never so
plainly, he may easily mistake: If he looks into his Heart, it is like a dark
Dungeon, where you may look long enough, and grope in vain for the brightest
Object, if it be very small; though it would be very plain by the least
Candlelight: Not that there is any Grace, by the Light of the Noonday Sun, to
be discovered in his Heart; yet there is prevailing Enmity against Christ, and
the Way of Salvation by a Self-denying Faith in him; and yet he cannot see it
by reason of Darkness. He hates his Brother, because of the Image of Christ
that he bears; yet he neither will see it, nor can he, so as the gracious Soul
may see and feel his Love to the precious Image of Christ, wherever he sees
it; though it were in the meanest Negro-Slave; or in one that, through mistake,
may misjudge and disaffect him. The Children of this World are, ordinarily,
wiser than the Children of Light, in earthly Matters; but set them on such a
Work, as I am now speaking of, and they are all in Confusion. Besides, they
cannot endure Searching; whereas it is the very Thing the true Convert's Heart
is set upon: What shall I do to be saved? And how shall I know whether my Heart
be right with God? And herein he had a great Advantage for the Discovery of his
Sincerity; whiles the false Heart is under all Manner of Disadvantages; yet GOD
can discover him. (2) In this Use, we are not trying the Quantity of Grace,
with Scales and Weights or Measures; but the Quality of it, as with a
Touchstone. One single Grain of Gold is as truly Gold as a Talent. Indeed,
it is no good Sign, when we are always enquiring after the sinallest Measure of
true Grace: And if we desire no more Grace than just to save us from Hell, and
for no higher End, we shall never ge to Heaven: Nevertheless, we must first
bring our Grace to the Touchstone, to try of what Kind it is; and then, after
we have found it true; and that we are new born; and in the narrow Way; we
must, from Time to Time, weigh and measure our Increase, Stature and Progress.


But the Question now to be decided is, Whether we have saving Faith as a Grain
of Mustard Seed? Whether we be in the Faith, according to the forementioned 2
Cor. 13.5. Not whether we be strong in the Faith: To be so is our Duty; but
that is our Life.

Now I come to lay down the Marks and Signs, by which the doubting Soul may
judge his spiritual State according to the Scriptures.

[ Mark 1.] A sensible, working Affection to such as we apprehend to be the
Children of God by Faith in Christ, because of their Relation to God in Christ,
and for his holy Image which they bear; how be it they may differ from us in
their Opinion, and it may be disaffect us too, on one Account or another; 1 John 3.14. We know that we are passed from Death to Life, because we love the
Brethren. Psalm. 16.3. The Saints that are in the Earth, (are) the Excellent, in
whom is all my Delight. Mark. 9.41. Whosoever shall give you a Cup of Water to
drink in my Name, because you belong to me, (mark that, because you belong to
me) he shall not loose his Reward. Jam. 1.17. The Wisdom from above is pure,
peaceable, -- without Partiality.

[ Mark 2.] To love our personal Enemies, such as hate, reproach, or any, yea
it may be many Ways wrong us, so as to forgive them from our Hearts, pray for
them, and return Good for Evil; and that in Obedience to the Command of God,
and from a Sense of his pardoning Mercy to us through Christ, who while we were
yet Enemies died that we might live, and has freely forgiven us ten thousand
Talents: When, by these Considerations, we are moved to forgive, and wish all
Good to the worst of our private Enemies, it is an infallible Sign of Grace;
according to Mat. 5.43. and onward. Chap. 6.12, 14, 15. Chap. 18.35. Mark
11.25, 26. Luke 6.37. Ephesians. 4.32 Romans 12.17, 19, 20, 21. Col. 3.13. Acts 7.59,
60. Which the solicitous Reader will take the Pains to turn to.

( Mark 3.) A Care to maintain good Works (whereby we are conformed to Christ's
Example, do show our Thankfulness for our free Justification, and are meet for
the Inheritance of the Saints in Light,) as if we were to merit Heaven by our
Works: And, at the same Time, depending on what Christ has done and suffered
for our Justification before God, as if no good Works were required of us; Romans
4.5, 6. Phil. Works were required of us; Rom 4.5, 6. Phil. 3.3, 3, 9. Tit. 3,
8. Luke I. 74, 75.

( Mark 4) A new, sweet and sensible Disposition of Soul to approve our selves
to God, in of Soul to approve our selves to God, in singleness of Heart, rather
than to Men, in what we do, is a sure Sign of Grace; according to 3.22, 23, 24.
1 These. 2.4. Jam. 4.8.

( Mark 5.) An Heart sweetly disposed to fetch Strength from Christ to perform
Duties; and to deny ourselves and acknowledge him in all we do as well as
receive, is another sweet Sign of a supernatural Principle and new Nature; Heb.
12.2. Gal. 2.20. Mat. 5.3.1 Chron. 29.13, 14. Psalm. 116.1, 2.

( Mark 6.) Divine Breathings and Thristings after Communion with God in Duty,
and the sensible Manifestations of his Love in Christ Jesus to our souls, is
another Property of one that is born again, created a new, and redeemed from
the Earth; and is found in no Hypocrite in the World; Psalm. 42.1, 2. Cant. 8.6
Psalm. 73. as. and 27.4, 8.

( Mark 7.) Earnest Desires after the Conversion of Souls; even of all that we
know and converse with; especially of our natural Relations, and intimate
Friends and Acquaintance; yea of our public as well as personal Enemies, much
rather (if it may be the Will of God) than their Destruction; and of those too
that are most nemote from us, such as we neve saw, Jews and Gentiles; not only
customary praying for, but inwardly defiring their Conversion; according to
Romans 10.1. Genesis 17.18. Psalm. 122.6, -- 9. And a proportionable Joy when Sinners
are converted, and lost Sheep found; 2 John 4 and 3 John 3.

( Mark 8.) An hearty Rejoicing when the Interest of Christ and Religion, and
the public Good in Church or Common Wealth, is promoted any Way, though we
have had no Hand in Phil. 1.18. Numb. 11.29.

( Mark 9.) When our Souls hate Sin as Sin, and so all Sin, in Heart and Life,
whether open or sencret, in ourselves or others; but most in ourselves, and
most of all our Bosom Sin, the Sin that does so easily beset us; grieving for
God's Dishonor by others Sins; but loathing ourselves for the working of Sin
in our own Hearts, though it break not our to our Discredit; Psalm. 119.113,
128, 158. and 18 23 Genesis 39.9. Ezekiel. 36.31, 32. Job 42. begin. Heb. 12.1. Gal
5.17 Romans 7.15, 24.

( Mark 10.) In a Word, The true Convert has an abiding Sense of his own
Vileness; and to find Christ, and be found in him, is all his Desire.

I would a little enlarge on this last Sign of Grace, as I endeavored to
explain the first; though I could but barely mention the rest.

It is certainly (if not impossible) one of the most difficult Things in the
World, when we have laid down a Sign of Grace, to invalidate the Clain of
Self-Deceivers, without overthrowing the Comfort of some weak, doubting,
tempted Christian: Or to answer the Scruples of these, and not imbolden those
Pretenders. The gracious Soul has an abiding Sense of his own Vileness; The
unsound Heart may be ready also, at all Times, to consess that he is a vile
Sinner. Where now lies the Difference? It may be disicovered by this Effect in
the Upright, which the Unconverted never reach to; even to justisy God, though
he should shut out all Prayers, reject all Services; and out of our own Mouths
condemn us to the Pit of Hell, when we consess ourselves to be guilty of Death;
Genesis 32.10. Lev. 26.41, 42.2 Sam. 15.26. compared with Isa. 58.3. And then with
respect to the latter Part of the Mark: Many a Gospel-Sinner, after great, but
common Convictions of his many and great Sins, and aster he has made Trial, and
finds that he cannot work himself out of his present wretched State, nor into
God's Favor, may, from the doctrinal Knowledge he has of the only Way of
Salvation by Christ, and the Spirit's Operation on his Affections as well as
Understanding, really desire Christ to be his Savior, not only from Hell but
Sin; the Guilt of all, and the Dominion of most Sins: But he does not desire
Christ as a suitable and satisfying Portion for his Soul, both for Time and to
Eternity: He has no inward Principle of Love to Christ; never any Lovesick
Sighs for his Abesence, or amorous Descriptions of him, breathings after him,
delight in his Person, and solace in his Company; like those we find the Spouse
familiarly acquainted with, Cant. 1.2, 3, 4, 7, 13, 16. and 25, 6, and 3.1, --
4. and 4.16. and 5.4, -- 8, 10, to the end. and 8.6, 7. To such as believe (and
none else) Christ is precious, 1. Pet. 2.7. The sanctified Judgment does
deliberately and constantly esteem him above all Things; and the Affections of
the renewed Soul, when the Question is asked, What is the most desirable Thing
in the World? Do readily answer, None but Christ. Now, though many christless
Souls will endeavor to persuade themselves that they have this Sign of Grace,
yet surely they do not feel such workings of Heart toward Sweet Jesus as thou
that fear it is too good News, to be true: thou feel, -- but what shall I
say? it is much better felt than expressed.

USE III. For EXHORTATION, in several Branches.
Branch I. To such as, upon a fair Trial, are Cast and Self-Condemned: (And if
our own Heart condemn us, God is greater than our Heart, and knows all Things,
1 John 3.20.) Suffer a Word of Exhortation: And now, let it be your great Care
to lay a good Foundation; and see that you build firm and sure for the Time to
come. And to this End;

(1.) Cease not, Day and Night, to cry unto the Lord, that he would be pleased
to send the Spirit of Truth to convince you of Righteousness as well as Sin,
John 16.8. There can be no sound Conversion without a thorough Conviction: This
is the Work of the Spirit, in the Day of God's Power. Ephesians. 1.19, 20. What is
the exceeding Greatness of his Power to usward who believe; according to the
working of his mighty Power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him
from the Dead, and sat him at his own Right Hand, etc. Now in this powerful
Work, the Sinner is convinced of Righteousness in Christ for him, as well as of
Sin and Unbelief in himself. The Spirit of Illumination shows us, how that
Christ was made Sin for us, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in
him. He was delivered for our Offenses, and raised again for our Justification.
And being condemned as our Surety, he could never have risen and ascended to
the Father, had not the Law and first Covenant been fulfilled [by this Second
Adam, divine Justice satisfied, and infinite Wrath appeased: Therefore is the
Spirit said, by our Surety, to convince of Righteousness, because he went to
the Father; and was not sent back again, which he must have been if he had not
made an end of Sin, and brought in everlasting Righteousness. When a Surety
becomes Bound for the Principal Debtor, he cannot be discharged, till the Debt
is paid. Till the Self-condemned Sinner sees this, he cannot believe. Plead
then that Promise, Prove. 1.23. Turn you at my Reproof: behold I will pour out
my Spirit, and make known my Words unto you.

(2) You must know that you can do nothing acceptably, till you have believed
in Christ;t; and the Spirit does not work Faith, till he has first prepared the
Soul by a Work of Humilition. You were exhorted and directed in the first Place
to pray for the Spirit; and God has promised to give his Holy Spirit to his
Children, when they ask him: But now, an unconverted Man cannot pray in Faith,
and therefore cannot pray acceptably; for without Faith it is impossible to
please God: Yet, for them to neglect Prayer, will provoke him; and it is a
double Sin. The Unbeliever sins in praying, because he prays not aright; but he
that omits Prayer, is guilty of the same sinful Defect, in the want of a right
Frame of Heart to pray; and then he omits a commanded Duty, (even Simon Magus
was bid to pray) and so is doubly guilty. Pray you must, as well as you can;
till you have obtained an Heart to pray better: But you must see that your
every Prayers now, as well as your Omission of Prayer heretofore, afford Matter
of Shame and Humilitation; and so they are of great Use, as well as on account
of the Sinner's lying more in the Way of the Spirit while he is praying, than
while sleeping in Security, on the Bed of Sloth, or running away from God,
after Pleasures, Profits and Honors of the World; or else, through fearful
Despair. And thou shall find, if God Intends good to thy Soul, that Extremity
shall force thee to pray; or if it be sometimes so great, as to stop thy Mouth,
thou shall sight and groan for an Heart to pray. And, though it be sometimes long
first, yet thou shall be made willing to justify God, though he shut out thy
Prayers now, and thrust thee out for ever: (as in the Text) yea, and shut thee
up, where there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Thus, thou shall be
shut up to the Faith, Gal. 3.23. All other Refuge now fails; the convinced
Sinner has no their Way to take; he must come to Christ for Life, and believe in
him that justifies the Ungodly, or despair and die; and yet, believe, he finds,
he cannot, till he feel the irresistible, but sweet Drawings of the Father; and
then he cannot but believe, John 6.44, 45. NO Man can come to me, except the
Father draw him. Every Man that has heard and learned of the Father, comes
unto me. And these Things are needful to be known, in order to the laying a
sure Foundation at last; that the once deceived Soul stumble not again at the
same Stone, and fall irrecoverably, by self-righteous Performances, and false
Hopes built thereon, for want of the saving Knowledge of Jesus Christ,

(3) In a Word, YOu must deny your natural, civil, sinful and righteous Self;
and accept of Christ as your Prophet, Priest and King, on the Terms of the
Gospel. As your Prophet, to enlighten your dark Minds in the Knowledge of his
Father and himself; (No Man knows the Father but the Son, and he to whomsoever
the Son will reveal him;) whom to know is Life eternal. There is a notional,
historical Knowledge, which you may learn by Books and Study; by ministerial
and parental Instruction, Christian Conference and Discourse: But you must look
to him who was given for a Light to the Gentiles, to teach you the saving and
experimental Knowledge of the supernatural Mysteries of Faith and Regeneration:
John 3.8, 9. The Wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the Sound
thereof; but can not tell whence it comes, and whither it goes; so is every
one that is born of the Spirit. Nicodemus says unto him, how can these Things
be? Yea, thou must be willing to become a Fool, (though thou were a Master in
Israel) that thou may be wise unto Salvation, 1 Cor. 3.18. You must also
receive Christ as your Priest and King; that he may, of God, be made unto you,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, as well as Wisdom. He that is not
willing to be holy in Heart, Lip and Life, and all Manner of Conversation,
cannot be happy. Christ will save none, but such as are willing he shoul rule
over them. Yea, thou must deny thyself, and take up thy Cross and follow him;
or thou can not be his Disciple. Self-Denial is indeed, the hardest of all
Lessons; but it is a necessary one; it is an hard Lesson! but it is not impossible
to be learned, it may be larn'd, andit must be learned; and thou shall learn by
Experience, that it is both sweet and above all Things profitable, to be all thy
Life Time studying SelfDenial, and practicing Self-Denial; i.e. to live and act
from Day to Day, quite contrary to the strong Bent of thy corrupt Heart, Thus
much for the first Branch of the Exhortation.

Branch II. The second Branch of this Use, is to such as having impartially
examined themselves, by the ten forementioned marks of a good Estate, or by any
other infallible, Scripture Sign of Grace, do find ground of Confidence toward
God; according to that of the Apostle, 1 John 3.21. Beloved; If our Heart
condemn us not, then have we Confidence toward God. The Word of this
Exhortation is to you.

1. That you lift up your Hearts and humbly bless the Lord.

For,

(1.) It is he that has converted thee. Thou could never have changed thy own
Heart, any more than an Ethiopian can change his Skin, or a Leopard his Spots,
Jer. 13.23. Ministers are but poor weak Instruments in God's Hand: Who then is
Paul and who is Apollos; but Ministers by whom ye believed; even as the Lord
gave to every Man? I have planted, Apollos watered; but God gave the Increase.
So then, neither is be that planteth any Thing, nor be that waters; but GOD
that gives the Increase.

(2.) Conversion is not only a Mercy, a free Mercy, (all Mercies are so) but
it is a necessary Mercy; more necessary than Bread or Breath. If the Lord should
not have given thee this Mercy, other Mercies would but have sunk thee the
deeper into Hell. Moreover, it is a great, a rich, a comprehensive Merch:
There Is a free, full and final Pardon of all thySins contained in it; exceeding
great and precious Promises annexed to it; yea, eternal Glory infallibly
consequent upon it. And then, it is a distinguishing Mercy. Not one Quarter of
the World have any Means of Grace; and scarce a Quarter Part of them that hear
the Word, receive the Truth in the Love of it; and bring forth Fruit with
Patience. You know, that of four sorts of Ground, but one was good, Mat. 13.
Luke 8. Mark 4. Yet thou, (it may be one of the least of Mortals, or one of the
greatest of Sinners) have the Marks of the Converted upon thee!

I might add,

(3.) Thou art converted for no other End, but to praise God: Show forth then
the Praises of him who has called you out of Darkness into his mavelous
Light, 1 Pet. 2.9.

2 Pity and pray for others that are unconverted. You compassionate the Case of
the Sick and wounded; and pray, often and earnestly, for the Redemption of poor
Captives: But all these sad Circumstances, meet together in many of your
Neighbors; and some of the same Household, or Blood with you. They are carried
Captive by Satan, and bound with the Cords of Sin: They are mortally sick, and
bleeding to Death; their Souls are wounded, and they are bleeding to eternal
Death! O thou that know the Heart of such Strangers and Bondslaves, pity
and pray for them; and that, not only in general; but for one and another by
Name, as Occasion may be offered; and do it fervently, Jam. 5.16. And let
Endeavors, by lending Books, giving Counsel, etc. accompany thy Prayers, Jam.
5.19, 20.

3. As we must praise God, and pray for others; so let us watch and pray, lest
we enter into Temptation ourselves, and grieve the Spirit of God, by whom we
have, not only been converted, but assisted in discovering our happy State.
Aster that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of Promise, Ephesians.
1.13. O let us above all Things, beware of grieving the Spirit, by which we are
sealed unto the Day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30.

Branch III. The next Branch of this Use is to a third sort of Persons who are
utterly at a Loss what to judge of their spiritual State. Self-Examination is a
Work that requires Time and Pains, Care and Skill; now, partly through Weakness
and Darkness, partly through Negligence and Slothfulness, these Persons are at a
great Uncertainty, and know not what to think of their present Condition.
Sometimes they are perswarded all is well with them; otherwhile they are of a
quite contrary Opinion concerning themselves: And thus they live in an unsafe
as well as uncomfortable Life, between Hope and Fear. Now these are of two
Sorts.

1. Some are indeed unsound at Heart; built on a legal Foundation; formal
Hypocrites: (As for gross Hypocrites, they are not solicitous about the Matter;
if they can but pass for Saints, that is as much as they care for;) These
Legalists have pleased themselves with Hopes of escaping the Wrath to come; and
of going to Heaven when they die. Either they have never been grossly and
visibly bad; or else they have been awakned and reformed. They not only profess
but practice Religion, in Church, Family and Closet: Many take them for good
Christians; and none can charge them with gross Immorality; and they would sain
think themselves right and safe: but they cannot stand before close and home
Preaching. The Spirit of Truth sometimes in a searching Sermon, does even wrest
from them their false Hopes; and they are almost persuaded that all is not
right with them; that another Manner of Work must pass upon them, or they
perish for ever. Their Works seem to be good; but their Ends are not so: Now,
The Word of God is quick and powerful; sharper than any two-edged Sword;
piercing to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit; and of Joints and Marrow;
and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart, Heb. 4.12. Though
their Intent of Heart may not be to deceive Men, with fair, outside Shows; yet,
their inward Thought is, that they shall ingratiate themselves with God, by
their good Meanings and well Doing. Fatso Signs of Grace they truly have; and
true ones they sometimes, faisly conclude they have: But, by the Light of the
Word, and their own Consciences, they are often condemned; yet they bring not
the Matter to a Conclusion: Loath they are to raize all to the very Foundation;
and rip up that too; it is too much Cost and Pains for them to build all a new:
If they should go about it, they know not how nor where to lay the first Stone,
in this supernatural Building. This is the very Case of some.

2. Others are precious Saints of God, and humble Followers of the meek and
holy Jesus: They are poor in Spirit, and as low in Comforts, and full of
jealous Fears: Their Grace is weak, and their Temptations strong; they hardly
know how to go about the Work of Self-trying; (...) are always apt to suspect
the worst of themselves: They are as ready to admit every Thing that seems to
be against them, as the former Sort are to catch at any Shadow fo Comfort: Or
else they may probably be in a declining State; they have possibly been, for
some Time, diverted through the subtit Wiles of the Devil, the ensnaring
Temptations of the World, and the consederate Party of traitorous Lusts within,
from the Ways of Piety and Purity; Circumspection and tenderness of Conscience;
Integrity of Heart and Fervency of Spirit in serving the Lord: Perhaps they
have given too much Liberty to the Flesh, while Duties and Means of Communion
with God: And then, no wonder if they are at a Loss what to judge of their
State. The Foundation of God, indeed, stands sure, having this Seal, The Lord
knows who are his: But as for themselves, they cannot say, We know we are
passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren; or by any other
infallible Mark: For, though they sometimes sensibly feel the Workings of this or
other gracious Affections and Desires; yet, they are conscious of many Things,
in and by themselves, which seem inconsistent with the Truth of Grace. If they
have one Sign for them, they have two, as they think, against them; as the
other Sort, though they have many plain Signs against them, yet they have some,
that they mistake to be for them. The one hopes he may escape; the other fears
he shall miscarry. They both, as I said, live between Hope and Fear; and know
not, for the most Part, what to make of themselves: They have tried, and tried
again; looked into their Hearts, and then up to Heaven; while the Word and
Rules of Trial have been before their Eyes, sounding in their Ears, or in their
Tho'rs; but they can bring nothing to an Issue: Their present and eternal State
remains dubious: They are unresolved after all. If this be thy Case, Reader,
then this Branch of the Exhortation is to thee.
I suppose thee not only to have read over the fore going Use; but that thou
have compared thy Heart and Life with the Marks therein given, according to the
Directions preceding those Marks; or, after thou shall have so done, supposing
thee still to remain in the Dark about thy Estate; then, go to some able,
experienced Christian or Minister, and open thy Case to him: Give him the
Reasons of thy Hopes at sometimes, and tell him the Grounds of thy Fears, that
at other Times prevail over thy Hopes. Let him know how thou first came by
thy Hope; for this is a main Question that such an one as I am directing thee
unto will ask, according to that of the Apostle to the Galatians, Chap. 3. ver.
2. This only would I learn of you, Received ye the Spirit by the Works of the
Law, or by the Hearing of Faith? Above all, be sure to deal faithfully with
such a Messenger; an Interpreter, as he is called, ( Job 33.23.) One among a
Thousand, to show unto Man his Uprightness: Yea, beg of the Lord to help thee,
by his good Spirit, in opening thy Case; that thou may make it neither
better nor worse than it really is: If, after all, thou should continue as
much perplexed in thy Mind as before; and find Reason, as far as thou can
judge, to question whether ever thou did believe in Christ; then believe in
him now, either for the first Time, or renew thy Faith in him for
Justification. It Is not necessary that thou should know certainly whether
ever thou did receive Christ heretofore or no; if now thou art willing to
receive him, that thou may be sanctified as well as justified and saved, he
is thine: A Will to come to Christ, is coming to him; and him that comes unto
him, he will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6.37. By him all that believe are
justified from all Things, Act. 13.39. As many as receive him become the Sons
of God, Joh. 1.12. I know thou have not Power to believe in Christ; nor does
God require thee to do it in thy own Strength; any more than he expected Moses
should make a dry Path through the Red Sea, when he commands him expressly to
divide it, Exodus 14.16. Yet he could lift up his Rod, and stretch it out over
the Sea; and upon his doing so, we read, (ver. 21. last Clause) that the Waters
were divided. So, God commands thee to believe in Christ; and thou, under a
Sense, both of thy extreme Unworthiness and utter Weakness, depending on
Almighty Power, do, in the Strength of God, accept his offered Grace in
Christ: Does not thy whole Soul now, say, Lord, I accept. Then as thou have
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk thou in him, Col. 2.6

Branch IV. To conclude this Use; let me exhort one and all, in the Name and
Words of our Lord in the Context, ver. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait
Gait: For many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able.
There is a close Connection (if not in the Contexture of the Chapter, yet in
the Nature of the Things) between this earnest Exhortation, and the solemn
Words of the Text: There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, when ye shall
see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, and you yourselves thrust
out: Oh! therefore strive to enter in, etc. And to excite you to utmost
Diligence, even unto Violence, (for, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence,
and the Violent take it by Force;) Consider a few Things.

1. You have here a sufficient Warrant to strive. There be some Things that we
are naturally desirous to do and obtain, which are not lawful for us to do or
desire: But to get to Heaven, we may strive lawfully: Now this is a great
Thing! To aspire after an earthly Kingdom, would be Sin and Folly in our
Thoughts; but it would be Treason to do it in Words and Actions. Yet may we
very warrantably, desire to wear a Crown of Glory, that fades not away: Yea,
it is a damning Sin, not to desire to glorify God, and enjoy him in his Kingdom
for ever. And what a Wonder of Mercy; what a Miracle of condescending Love is
this, to the Children of Disobedience and Wrath; that he who sits at the right
Hand of the Majesty on high, should bid us strive to enter in! etc. Yet, such
is our natural Infidelity, and Ill Will toward this sweet, compassionate
Savior; and such the slanderous Insinuations of the Devil, to discourage all
Endeavors, that we are ready to suspect him, whose Name is faithful and true,
of Hypocrisy; as if he stood and held the Door against us to keep us out, while
he calls and cries, and entreats as well as commands that we enter in. But it is
a most unreasonable and blasphemous Jealousy. 2. And probable ground of Hope,
will induce and engage Men to strive for the Things that are seen and temporal:
Yea, a bare Possibility of obtaining, in case of Life and Death will do it. And
shall not the Hope of obtaining the Things that are not seen and are eternal,
excite utmost Endeavors, in the use of appointed Means? The Husbandman labors
and sweats in Hope and has long Patience, Jam. 5.7. The Merchant lays out a
considerable Estare in Building, and then ventures, perhaps, more than he is
worth, between the unstable Waters and inconstant Winds, in the midst of Rocks,
and Shoals, and Robbers, in Hope of a rich Return. The hardy, valiant Soldier
rushes into the midst of a thousand Deaths, to win a little fading Honor; and
it may be loses his End, and ends his Life in the Attempt. And shall we not
strive to enter in at the strait Gate? 3. This is the very Road Way to Heaven,
in which Sion's Pilgrims have, in all Ages, traveled to that celestial City;
though it be rough, and sometimes dark; over Mountains, and through a Wilderness.
(Read the eleventh to the Hebrews, and see if it be not so) Wherefore seeing we
also are compassed about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses, let us lay aside
every Weight and the Sin which does so easily beset us, and les us run with
Patience the Race that is set before us, Chap. 12 1. Are we better than Enoch
and Elijah; Moses and Samuel; Noah, Daniel and Joh; Ahraham, Isaac and Jacob;
Paul and the beloved Desciple; and all the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles,
and Armies of Believers? That we should not be willing to work out our own
Salvation with laborious Diligence and Solicitude; that we should once think to
get the Victory, and win the Prize, without running, wrestling, fighting and
striving! Yea, CHRIST himself worked hard all Day, Joh. 9.4. He first suffered,
and then entered into his Glory, Luke 24.26. And must we have a new and easy Way
laid out for us? No, never dream of going to Heaven on a Feather-Bed; Heb.
6.12. That ye be not slothful; but Followers of them, who through Faith and
Patience inherit the Promises. 4. It may be you have taken a great deal of
Pains already, and suffered much: Now, will you lose all for want of taking a
little more; and lose your Hopes and lose your Souls into the Bargain? Gal. 3.4
Have ye suffered so much in vain? It may be you have forsaken every false Way,
save one only secret Lust, that you hide as a sweet Morsel under your Tongue.
And, will you incur the World's Frowns because you go so far; and yet lose the
Favor of God because you go no further? Gal. 3.3, 4. Are ye so foolish? Having
begun in the Spirit, are ye now made perfect in the Flesh? Ye did run well, who
did hinder you? Mat. 10.22. He that endures to the End shall be saved. 5. When
you are just ready to give out, then alsufficient Supplies of Strength may be
near, even just at the Door. You have been laboring and striving, watching and
praying, till you are wearied out and ready to faint: God seems to shut out
your Prayer, when you cry and shout, Lam 3.8. And you are strongly tempted to
say, with Saul, Why should I wait any longer on one who answers me not; either
by Reading, or by Hearing, or by Prayer? The Tempter presses sore upon thee, to
cast off Duty; to give Way to Sin: Now, if thou can hold out a little longer,
Satan's Hour (for he is limited to a certain Time in all his Temptations) will
be run out; and God, who is trying of thee, will help speedily: Deuteronomy. 32.36.
For the Lord shall judge his People, and repent himself for his Servants, when
there is none shut up or left, and he sees that their Power is gone.
Oject. We are indeed bid to strive to enter in: But are we not told, in the
same Breath, that the Gate is strait, and many shall seek to enter in, and not
be able: This discourageth us from striving: It Is impossible we should obtain.

Answ. (1.) Such as do much in Religion miss of obtaining, not because
Salvation is unattainable by them; but for want of doing more, and going
further, and holding out: Jer. 29.13, 14. And ye shall seek me and find me,
when ye shall search for me with all your Heart: And I will be found of you,
says the Lord. Then shall ye know if we follow on to know the Lord, Hos. 6.3.
He that endures to the End shall be saved. When Agrippa said to Paul, Almost
thou perswadest me to be a Christian, you know what the Apostle's Reply was,
Act. 26.28, 29. I would to God, that not only thou, but all that hear me this
Day, were both almost, and altogether such as I am, except these Bonds.

(2) Conversion and Salvation, Grace and Glory, our entering in at the strait
Gate, and walking in the narrow Way; as it is possible, so is it of absolute
Necessity. We may all say with respect to the working out our Salvation, and
making our Calling and Election sure, as Paul says concerning the Work of his
Office; Necessity is laid upon us; woe unto us if we do it not. So that there is
no room to enquire, whether it be hard or easy, before we determine to set
about it, seeing it must be done; unless you are resolved to try whether there
be any dwelling with devouring Fire; whether the torrid Zone of everlasting
Burnings be habitable?

(3) That far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory, is as well worth the
most that can possibly be done as the least. All the Labors and Sorrow,
Self-denial and Sufferings, of the present Life, are not worthy to be compared
with the Glory that shall be revealed. One that had been in the third Heavens,
and suffered more than most on Earth, did reckon so. Enoch walked with God,
some Hundreds of Years: And what says Heman? I am afflicted and ready to die,
from my Youth up: while I suffer thy Terrors, I am distracted, Psalm. 88.15. Yet
they had both a good Bargain; though it was after long Waiting, and through
much Tribulation, that they entered into the Kingdom of God. Yea, the more
industrious a Christian is in well-Doing, and the more he suffers for it, the
greater will be his Reward in Heaven, Mat. 5.11, 12.

(4.) It is Discouragement and faint-Hearted-ness, that in all Cases, make easy
Things hand, and Difficulties insuperable; whereas, Boldness and fixed
Resolution of Mind, will make hard Things easy: And indeed all Things are
possible to him, that in Hope, believes against Hope. If all the Israelites had
been of Caleb's Spirit; Numb. 13.30. who said, Let us go up at once and possess
it; for we are well able to overcome it: Six hundred thousand Lives, besides
forty Years sore Travel had been spared: Whereas the discouraging Report of the
faint hearted Spies, of tall Men and high Walls, kept that numerous
Congregation from entering Canaan, a Type of Heaven, when they were just at its
Borders.

(5.) In a Word, our blessed Savior does out of real good Will toward Men,
and in very Faithfulness let us know, that the Gate of Life and Way to Heaven
is strait and narrow, and few there be that find it; many shall seek to enter
in and not be able, that we might strive the more earnestly, and not be
diverted and beaten back by the Oppositions we shall be sure to meet in the
Way; but remember how plainly Christ dealt with us; Joh. 16.1, 4. These Things
have I spoken unto you, that you should not be offended. But these Things I
have told you, that when the time shall come, you may remember that I told you
of them. It Is no Matter through how much Tribulation it be, since if we are
willing, we shall enter into the the Kingdom of God; Act. 14.22. 2. Cor. 8.12.
Rev. 7.14. compared.

I will just hint at some Things, for our Direction and further Help in this
great and difficult Work; and so pass on to another Use.

First, We must know that Conversion is taken either actively or passively.
Sometimes we are commanded to convert ourselves, and turn from Sin to God; to
repent and be converted, that our Sins may be blotted out; to make us a new
Heart and a new Spirit, casting away all our Transgressions, lest we die; and
it is our unquestionable Duty to cease to do Evil, and learn to do well; yet,
these Injunctions do not suppose that it is in our Power to change our own
Hearts: the Ethiopian may as soon change his Skin: They express our Duty, and
convict us of Guilt in our Nonperformance, and bring us to our Knees, as
Ephraim, Jer. 31.18, 19. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, etc.
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned. Surely, after that I was turned I
repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my Thigh; I was
ashamed, yea even confounded, etc. We are wholly passive, when the Spirit of
God takes away the Heart of Stone, and gives us an Heart of Flesh; as you may
see more at large, Ezekiel. 36.25, to 33. If Christ were not exalted to give
Repentance as well as Pardon, how great a Prince soever he might be esteemed,
he would be but an imperfect Savior, Act. 5.31. You has be quickened (says
the Apostle) who were dead in Trespasses and Sins: Yea, he doubles it over
again; Even when we were dead in Sins, has be quickened us Ephesians. 2.1, 5. It Is
certain you must turn or die; be converted or damned: It Is no less true, that
you cannot convert yourselves: Cry to Heaven then, as Ephraim above mentioned,
Jer. 31.18, 19.

Secondly, Keep we our Eye on the Things that are not seen and are eternal; 2
Cor. 4.16, 18. We faint not, -- while we look not at the Things which are seen;
but at the Things which are not seen: for the Things which are seen are
temporal, but the Things which are not seen, are eternal. This Respect to the
Recompense of Reward, will make us choose rather to suffer Affliction with the
People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season, Heb. 11.25. and
then to suffer the Vengeance of eternal Fire, Jude 7.

Thirdly, Minding still our present Work from Day to Day; not perplexing
ourselves with what is future, so as to bring the Burden of many Days Work into
one; yea it may be of a Life of Labor and Suffering, in a long Course of
active and passive Obedience, on our weak Shoulders all at once: This is the
Way to do nothing: Sufficient to the Day is the (Labor and) Evil thereof.
Tomorrow will bring new Strength as well as Work: For God is able to make all
Grace abound toward you; that ye always having All Sufficiency, in all Things,
may abound to every good Work, 2 Cor. 9.8. Mind we then our present Work and
Duty.

Fourthly, Yet we must sit down and count the Cost; Luke 14.28, 33. Lest we
prove like the Stony-Ground Hearers, Who, when they hear the Word, immediately
receive it with Joy, and having no Root in themselves, endure but for a Time:
Afterward when Affliction or Persecution criseth for the Word's sake,
immediately they are ossended.

Fifthly, Above all look we to Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith; (
Heb. 12.2.) as our great Prophet and Teacher; our High Priest, that has died to
appease God's Anger, and lives to proeure his Favor for us; as our royal
Master, to rule our Hearts entirely, and our whole Lives. And look we thus to
him; (1) When we engage in any Duty; through whose Strength we can do all
Things, Phil. 4.13. But without him we can do no nothing, Joh. 15.5. (2) When
we come off from Duty; for we are accepted only in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. And
may well say, the Sin of this Duty would damn me, if it were not for Christ.
(3) To manage the whole Business of our Salvation, when we are not, as well as
when we are actually engaged in religious Duties: He is able to save to the
uttermost, -- seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for us, Heb. 7.25.


USE IV. For CAUTION.
1. To Church Members, (as we commonly distinguish) Communicants, or such as
are in full Communion; not to rest in a liteless Name, or the highest visible
Relation, and external Covenant-Priviledges. It is indeed a great Thing to be
visibly espoused to CHRIST; who is the Brightness of his Father's Glory; the
Prince of the Kings of the Earth; the Lord of Angels: And to bear his Name
before the World, how great the Honor! What are we, poor Dunghil-Worms, the
best of us all, that we should be related to the Crown of Heaven, and brought
into the Banquet of Wine, prepared for the Bride and the Lamb's Wife; where the
King himself, (whose Reign extends further than from India to Ethiopia; even to
both Hemispheres, and all Creatures, visible and invisible: This glorious King)
fits at the Table with his Guests; and walks in the midst of the Golden
Candlesticks: But, let him that has an Ear to hear, hear what the Spirit says
unto the Churches: Rev. 2.4 Thou bast left thy first Love. Ver. 23. All the
Churches shall know that I am be which searches the Reins and Hearts: And I
will give unto every one of you according to your Works. Chap. 3.1. I know thy
Works; that thou have a Name that thou live, and art dead. Ver. 4. Thou have
a few Names, even in Sardis. Ver. 4. Thou have a few Names, even in Sardis.
Ver. 15, 16, 17. I know thy Works; that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would
thou were cold or hot: So then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold
nor hot, I will spue thee out of my Mouth: Because thou say, I am rich and
increased with Goods, and have need of nothing; and know not that thou art
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked: He that has an Ear to
hear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches, ver. 22. Unto what
is the Kingdom of Heaven (on Earth) likened? Mat. 25.1.2. It is likened unto
ten Virgins, which took their Lamps, and went forth to meet the Bridegroom: And
five of them were wise, and five were foolish. They are not a few that shall in
that Day plead their Admission to, and Attendance on special Ordinances, to
whom Christ will yet professing say, I never know you, (never had any spiritual
A quaintance and Communion with you;) Depart from me, etc. It is not the the
Profession of Religion that will stand us in any Stead, if we practice
Wickedness; nor the external Practice of seeming Piety, without an inward
Principle of Holiness. We pass for Saints with our Brethren: (And yet some of
us scarce do that with discerning Christians; for I speak not of the envious
World, their malicious Censures, which the best may not expect to escape;) But
there is one that knows our Hearts, our Frames, our Aims, and secret
Dependances; and yet a little while, and the World shall know what we are. We
don't love to be cheated of our Money or Goods: And shall we deceive ourselves;
and suffer the grand Deceiver to cheat us of tried Gold, and that more enduring
Substance; and shall we be content with Dross and Rubbish instead thereof?

Quest. Some may be ready to say, Why are we received into your Communion;
seeing we are like to be thrust out at last? You threaten us if we don't
remember Christ and his dying Love, and show forth his Death in the Lord's
Supper; -- and we can have no Quiet when all is done.

Answ. 1. We invite you to the marriage Feast; but we advise you, withal, to
put on the Wedding Garment. We never told you that Praying, Hearing, Receiving
would save you, without repeating and believing the Gospel; and mortifying your
darling Lusts; and denying your idolized Self-Righteousness; and living upon
Christ.

2. We multiply Cautions, because we have Reason to fear you are not all right
and sound; though we dare not judge any in particular; for, though Love causes
Jealousy toward some; yet Charity hopes all Things. Some that we little
suspect, may deceive themselves and us; and in others there may be found some
good Grains of Wheat among the Chaff, when the Church-Floor shall be thoroughly
purged, (not only from Hypocrites; but from the great Remains of Hypocrisy in
some that are sincere) although we cannot but fear the worst.

3. If we have been deceived in you, and you have been so in yourselves,
hitherto, yet your Case is not desperate. To eat unworthily at the Lord's-Table
is not the Sin against the Holy Ghost. The Blood of Christ, which we are, in
this Case, guilty of profaning, can cleanse us from this heinous Sin, as well
as it did some of those who spilt it, John 1.7. That which we are cautioned
against is leaning on Means, Duties and Privileges, instead of leaning upon
the Lord; and leaning upon the Lord, while we hate to be reformed; or spare
some BosomSin; because we love it more than Christ.

2. To Non-Communicants; such as come to hear the Word, and have generally
received one Seal of the Covenant, either in their Infancy, or else have
solemnly covenanted with God, and received the Seal of Baptism at adult Age;
and many also of the Seed of the Faithful, that have renewed their Baptismal
Covenant, and publicly avouched the Lord to be their God, in order to the
Sealing of their Offspring; but yet turn their Backs on the Table of our Lord
and theirs: The other Branch of this Use of Caution is to you: Think not, do
not dream, let it never enter into your Hearts that you shall come off the
better because you make not so high a Profession as others do. I might appeal
to your own Consciences, whether you are not sometimes drawn away by such
Temptations as these, -- We are no Church Members; nor so strictly tied up, but
that we may take a little Liberty in our Communication, Way and Walk: We shall
not be so narrowly watched over: If we come not under the Lash of the Law we
shall do well enough: Neither does the Lord require so much of us as of others:
We hear and pray, and neither lie nor swear, steal or cheat; and, for ought we
can see, we are as good as many of them; who are as hard in their Dealings as
any; they will be in a Passion, talk vainly, and frequent Taverns some of them:
(Woe to the World because of Offenses!) And such as are more demure and precise
(it is like) are as bad as the rest; though they don't yet discover themselves.
And what, do they think to engross all the Riches of Grace and Glory to
themselves; as if none should go to Heaven but Church Members? Such carnal
Reasonings as these, are the inward Thoughts of very many natural Men; whereby
Satan lulls their Consciences asleep in Security; and they dream of escaping
Vengeance, when Christ shall come in flaming Fire; though they live in
Disobedience to his Gospel, 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9.

But, Oh! Be not deceived; beware, beware, lest your Adversary the Devil, and
(a worse Enemy) your own Heart flatter you to your own Undoing.

For, Consider,

(1.) If you made no Profession at all, and had not so much as the Name of
Christ called upon you in Baptism; yet, coming to the House of God, and hearing
of your Sin and Danger, of your Duty and Interest, from Time to Time; and
having the Things of your everlasting Peace pressed on you, in the Name and
Authority of him who will shortly judge us and you; How can you hope to escape
aggravated Condemnation, if you neglect so great Salvation? Heb. 2.1, 2, 3.
Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the Things that we have
heard, -- If you had but once, in all your Life, had Christ made known to you,
and the Way of Salvation through him, your rejecting Gospel Grace, freely
offered, would have made your Case, in the Day of Judgment, worse than that of
the Heathen, who perish for lack of Vision, Prove. 28.18. But,

(2.) You profess enough to leave you worse than without Excuse; (for so the
Light of Nature, and Works of Creation will leave the Pagan World, Romans 1.20.)
enough to condemn all your Omissions and Commissions, with a Condemnation
sorely aggravated. Besides the Knowledge of God's Will, (which on that Score,
if you obey it not, you shall be beaten with many Stripes, Luke 12.47.) you
were bound out, from your Infancy, to Service with the same Master that
Church Members are bound to: And from these Bonds of the Covenant you cannot
disengage yourselves: If you break them, you forfeit all the Blessings of the
same Covenant: As an Heir, come to Age, may forfeit a great Estate, by refusing
or neglecting to perform the small Conditions of a Deed, to which he was bound
by his Father, without his own Consent. But by your own Consent, you are, the
most of you, under the Bond of the Covenant; the Vows of God are upon you, to
perform sincere, universal, and constant Obedience: Mat. 28.19, 20. Baptizing
them in the Name of the Father, etc. Teaching them to observe all Things,
whatsoever I have commanded you. What can Church Members be bound to more? Yea,
yourselves are Church Members; and there is no Duty of the Moral Law, or of the
Gospel, but what you are bound to, as well, if not so strongly and so many Ways
as they are. You are bound to forsake all Sin, as well as any other
Church Members; and on the same Penalty. If ye live after the Flesh ye shall
die. And ye have bound yourselves to all this; so that I may say to you as
Joshua to them, Josh. 24.21, -- 26. And the People said unto Joshua, Nay, but
we will serve the Lord. And Joshua said to the People, Ye are Witnesses against
yourselves, that you have chosen you the Lord to serve him. And they said, We
are Witnesses. So Joshua made a Covenant with the People that Day; -- and wrote
these Words in the Book of the Law of God. In a waske Leave, at the End of this
Book of God, we have a written Covenant; in which you stand obliged, and firmly
bound, by your own solemn Act and Deed, before God, Angels and Men, to walk in
all manner of Conversation, as becomes the Gospel of Christ; as you hope to
find Mercy in that Day. In which Baptismal and Church Covenant, you will find
no such starting Hole as you pretend, that you make not such an high Profession
as others; especially considering,

(3.) That it is your Sin you profess no more, as well as that you practice so
little according to what you do profess: With the Heart Man believes unto
Righteousness, and with the Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation, Romans
10.10. Christ will be ashamed to own you, in the Day of Judgment, before
Angels, if you are ashamed to own him now (in all his Ordinances) before Men.
Have you once renewed Covenant? You should do it as often as any of your
Neighbors do show forth Christ's Death in the Lord's Supper. Do any of them
profess better than they practice? However, they do well to profess; you should
profess as well as they, and practice better. Whatever Excuses the invited
Guests had for their not coming to the great Supper, the Lord of the Feast was
angry, and pronounced a dieadful Sentence on them all. Luke 14.17, -- 24.

USE V. For CONSOLATION.
To all the spiritual Children of faithful Abraham; in and with whom all
Nations (even the Nations of them which are saved) are said to be blessed. If
others shall see you in the Kingdom of God, and gnash their Teeth because
themselves are excluded; then you shall find yourselves there, and have
infinite Reason, on the contrary, to clap your Hands, to leap and shout for
Joy: For you shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets,
etc. in the Kingdom of God, and you yourselves received with them. Now, the
Grounds of your present Comfort and Rejoicing, in Hope of entering into and
possessing that glorious Kingdom of God, are such as these.

1. The first (and that without which all the rest would be but uncertain
Grounds of Consolation) is the inseparable Connection that there is between
Faith and Salvation, Grace and Glory, Regeneration and Admission into the
Kingdom of God: Now this Connection is twofold, Negative and Affirmative; and so
has a double Aspect.

(1.) If we consider it Negatively, it is most certain, that without Faith and
Holiness, or the New Birth, none can enter into the Kingdom of God, and be
saved; Mark 16.16. Heb. 11.6 and 12.14. Joh. 3.3. Jesus answered and said unto
him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a Man he born again, he cannot see
the Kingdom of God. And thus considered, it has a dreadful Aspect, not only on
all the openly Profane, and secretly Wicked, and grossly Hypocritical; but on
Self-righteous Formalists, and foolish Virgins; who live, and may die too,
expecting to be received: But they shall be thrust out. No Plea, on the Account
of what they have been, and done, and suffered, and parted with, will any Thing
avail in that Day, if they have not let go their own Righteousness, and come
naked to Christ to be clothed with his. If this be thy Case, Reader, thou have
no Part nor Lot in this Use of Consolation; turn back to the foregoing Uses;
examine, repent, believe; for there is but one Law for all: If thou art found
out of CHRIST, at the Judgment Seat, Omnipotency itself and infinite Mercy
cannot save thee: Not through any Dificiency in these Attributes; but the
Inconsistency of your Salvation, in any other Way, with the Holiness, Justice,
and Truth of GOD. (2) Now consider we the inseparable Connection between
Conversion and Salvation, Affirmatively; and it is as certain that he who now
has the least Degree of justifying Faith shall be saved, Mark 16.16. If God has
given thee true sanctifying Grace, he will give thee Glory, Psalm. 84.11.
This is evident,

[1.] From Election, 1 These. 2.13. He has from the Beginning chosen you to
Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth. The
End you are chosen to is Salvation; the Way in which you shall infallibly come
to that End is Faith and Holiness.

Object. 1. But what if I should turn back from the Lord, and turn again to Sin
and die therein? Except I endure to the End I cannot be saved.

Answ. Then the Promises of God would fail: Jer. 32.40 I will put my Fear in
their Hearts that they shall not depart from me. 1 Cor. 1.7, 8, 9. Our Lord
Jesus Christ shall also confirm you to the End, that ye may be blameless in the
Day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God is faithful by whom ye are called. Phil. 1.6.
Being confident of this very Thing, that he which bath begun a good Work in you
will perform it until the Day of Jesus Christ. Joh. 4.14. The Water that I
shall give him, shall be in him a Well of Water, springing up into everlasting
Life.

Object. 2. But don't we road of some that were turned away from the Faith? 1 Timothy 4.1. Some shall depart from the Faith.

Answ. We know they had not the Faith of God's Elect, as true Faith is called,
Tit. 1.1. Because it is impossible that the Elect should be finally deceived;
Mat. 24.24. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, insomuch
that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect.

[2.] The Intercession of CHRIST is another Evidence of the true Convert's
certain Perseverance in Faith to Salvation; Luke 22.32. I have prayed for thee,
that thy Faith fail not. Joh. 17.15. I pray not that thou should take them
out of the World, but that thou should keep them from the Evil. Ver. 20.
Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe. Joh.
11.42 I know that thou hear me always. Heb. 7.25. He is able to save to the
uttermost, all that come to God by him; seeing he ever lives to make
Intercession for them. And because he (thus) lives, you shall live also, Joh
14.19.

[3] In a Word; Some of the strongest Objections that are made against this
Doctrine of the Saints Perseverance, are good Arguments for it. As now, what
need of Cautions (say the Truth's Enemies) to prevent Apostasy, if there were
no Possibility of falling away? Yea, rather, why should we doubt of the Saints
Perseverance; seeing God has not only promised it, but has provided all Means
(among which these Cautions are not the least) to bring it about. Take heed of
Unbelief: Ye are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet.
1.5. I have given but brief Hints at some of the Scripture Grounds on which
this first Ground of the Believer's Comfort is built: There is no Ground of
Fear but God will bring him to Heaven; Luke 12.32. Fear not little Flock; for
it is your Father's good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom.

2 It is the Kingdom of GOD. The very Name by which Heaven is here called,
imports its transcendent Excellency. We read of the Kingdom of Men, Dan. 4.17.
An earthly Crown of perishing Gold is the Top of worldly Excellency; but what
is this to a Crown of Glory, that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you?
The Weakness of God is stronger than Men: The Wisdom of Men is Foolishness with
GOD: The Kingdom of GOD is proportionably above all terrestial Kingdoms, in
Riches, Honors and Pleasures; even durable Riches, manifold, abundant Honors,
and Pleasures for evermore: Psalm. 16. ult. In thy Presence is fullness of Joy,
and at thy right Hand there are Pleasures for evermore. The Kingdom of God on
Earth is Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. The Comforter does
sometimes fill us with all Joy and Peace in believing: Believing ye rejoice
with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory: What then will the Kingdom of God in
Heaven be! If we rejoice thus in Hope of the Glory of God; what shall the Joy
of Fruition be? Something beyond what is unspeakable! He that can tell what
infinite Power, Wisdom and Love can do; and what the Blood of God can purchase,
may tell what Heaven is: that purchased Possession; that City, whose Builder
and Maker is God.

3. Is it not Matter of sweet Consolation, to think what Company we shall have
in Heaven? And that, whether we consider the Number and Quality, or the Manner
of mutual Enjoyment.

Mount Sion, the City of the living God, the new and holy Jerusalem which is
above, shall be full of excellent Inhabitants: We shall have Fellow-Citizens
enough. An innumerable Company of Angels; and the whole General Assembly, and
Church of the First born, that are written in Heaven; all being equal to
Angels. We read of an Hundred and forty and four Thousand of all the Tribes of
the Children of Israel, with the Mark of God's Servants in their Foreheads: And
afterward of a great Multitude, which no Man could number, of all Nations, and
Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, standing before the Throne, and before the
Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and having Palms in their Hands; worshipping
God with all the Angels, who also surround the same Throne, Rev 7.3, -- 11. Our
Lord (in the Text) makes mention to the Jews only of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and the Prophets that were of their own Nation; yet, not excluding any of the
Elect in that and all other Nations. Christ shall send his Angels, with a great
Sound of a Trumpet; and they shall gather together his Elect, from the four
Winds. Europeans, Affricans, and those of Asia shall be joined with us of
America, in that great Congregation: And the Ethiopean shall then have a
changed Skin; it shall be white and ruddy, surpasing the Beauty of Queen Esther
and fair Absalom: Yea, all our vile Bodies shall be changed, and fashionned
like unto the glorious Body of Christ. But the Heart and Mind shall be adorned,
enriched, and beautified (that is the shining, sparkling Beauty) with Wisdom and
Grace. A Man's (imperfect) Wisdom makes his Face to shine: And the Holy are the
Excellent of the Earth, in whom, notwithstanding their Spots, we have much
Delight: How inconceivably delightsome, then, will the Society of Saints in
Heaven be; who are without Spot, Wrinkle, or any such Thing? We find, here
below, one (perhaps) amongst a Thousand, so excellently accomplished, well
tempered, and full of Sweetness, that he is the Delight of Mankind: Yet such a
Lilly among Thorns is but a Thorn in comparison of the Lillies of Paradise
above. The least in the Kingdom of GOD will, doubtless, in gracious Loveliness
of Disposition, and heavenly, charming Sweetness of Temper, imcomparably
surpass the most delightsome Companion that ever was born of a Woman. And then
for Dignity, they shall be all Kings and Priests, Rev. 1.6 And their Generosity
and Greatness of Mind shall answer their Dignity: And in Wisdom as well as
Honor, they shall be exalted as far above Solomon, as Heaven is higher than
the Earth.

Concerning the Manner of their mutual Enjoyment, we may say, it does not yet
appear what it shall be; but we know that when we shall be gathered together
unto Christ, at his Appearing and his Kingdom, it will be a joyful Meeting, 1
These. 2.19, 20. Chap. 4. from ver. 13. to the End of the Chapt. compared with 2
These. 2.1. And to have everlasting Fellowship with Millions, whose Fellowship
with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, begun on Earth, by dark Views, through
the Glass of Ordinances, shall be perfectly consummated by the beatifical
Vision in Heaven. How delightsome will it be to see, and know, and walk, and
talk, and with the greatest Freedom and Familiarity, to converse with Michael,
Gabriel, and all the heavenly Host of shining Angels: With Adam and Eve; Abel,
Enoch, and Elijah; Moses, and Samuel; Noah, Daniel, and Job; Joseph, and
Joshua; David and Solomon; Melchizedeck and Aaron; with all the rest of the
holy Patriarchs and Prophets; Kings, Priests, and other Old Testament
Believers; and the Apostles, Ministers and faithful Brethren of the New! There
we shall see John the Baptist, and John the beloved Desciple; Paul and Timothy;
Joseph and Mary; Zacharias and Elisabeth; devout Cornelius, charitable Dorcas,
and that dear Mary, that lovely Penitent, who washed her Savior's Feet with
her Tears, and wiped them with the Hair of her Head; with all the many
Thousands that were converted, and gathered into Churches by the Miracles and
Ministry of Christ and his Apostles. We shall have an intimate Acquaintance
with all that were beloved of God, faithful in Christ Jesus, and called to be
Saints, both in Rome, and of the Church of God at Corinth; together with as
many as were new Creatures in the Churches of Galatia; and enjoy sweet
Communion with the Saints, and faithful Brethren in Christ, which were at
Ephesus, Philippi, and Colosse; for we shall be caught up together with them,
and the elect Thessalonians, who were by the Power of the Gospel, turned from
dumb Idols, to serve the living God; whose Faith in Christ grew while they
lived, and, all dying in the Faith their Death was but a Sleep in Jesus. Now
whether we live, and remain to the first Resurrection, or fall asleep in
Christ, as they did, we shall (as I said) be caught up together with all the
Elect that have gone before, and shall follow after us, to meet the Lord in the
Air; and so shall we ever be with the Lord, and consequently with one another.
And though it be the ineffable Vision and Fruition of GOD and the LAMB, in the
Presence Chamber of Glory, that makes Heaven to be Heaven, John 3.2. Yet, as
the Blessedness of the Spirits of just Men made perfect is not consummate in
their State of Separation, though they see and enjoy the blessed God, as it will
be after the Resurrection, because the Soul was created with an Inclination to
the Body; so, Man being made of sociable Creature, enjoys God in and with his
Fellow-Saints, unto complete Satisfaction. But still, it is GOD in Himself, GOD
in CHRIST, and GOD in the Saints that shall be All in All to us eternally. To
return; When that which is perfect is come, as we shall know such as we have
not known in the Flesh, (though not after the Flesh) so shall we know our dear,
Christian Friends, that have been of our Acquaintance here in the World; but
after another, more pure, and perfectly refined Manner of Acquaintance;
according to that new and heavenly State of Jerusalem that is above. Now, let
the godly Reader think of this or that faithful Minister of Christ, whose
Preaching or Writings God has blessed to his Conversion and Edification; and
removing from him all natural and moral Infirmities, (for they are Men subject
to like Passions as others are, Jam. 5.17.) and enrich him, in thy Thoughts,
with all Kinds and Degrees of Grace that thou could wish to thy self;
supposing thy self in the mean Time, but in such a heavenly Frame as thou have,
at some Time experienced: Would not a few Hours free Liberty with such a
spiritual Father in his Study, to ask Questions, entertain Discourses
concerning Christ and Heaven, be better to thee than a whole Age of carnal
Delights could be to any sensual Epicure? Know then for thy Comfort, that holy
Ministers and all their spiritual Children, their holy Brethren shall, a very
little while hence, meet in Heaven; where we shall enjoy one another, converse
together; and sing Praises to God and the Lamb, without a Moment's Interruption
or Cessation, World without End. But Oh! The Joys and Delights, the ravishing
Delights and overflowing Joys, that every Moment of that endless Duration will
give us fresh and new experience of! No Tongue of Man or Angel can express
them: They will be a thousand, thousand fold higher and sweeter than we can now
imagine; 1 These. 2.19.20. For what is our Hope, or Joy, or Crown of Rejoicing?
Are not even ye, in the Presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, at his Coming? For
ye are our Glory and Joy. And this Rejoicing will be mutual, 2 Cor. 1.14, -- We
are your Rejoicing, even as ye also are ours in the Day of the Lord Jesus: 1
Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart
of Man, the Things which God has prepared for them that love him. The perfect
Love which we shall hear to all the Saints, will make us to rejoice in the
happy, glorious State of every one, as in our own. It may seem indeed to the
fond Conceptions of our present, Childhood State; to the carnal Apprehensions
of what is natural in us, it may now seem as if we should have only certain,
select Familiars in Heaven, and those such as we have heard and read, great and
good Things concerning, or been related to and conversant with on Earth: But
Experience will soon convince us of our Mis-Conceit. We shall know the Saved of
unheard of Nations, as well as those of the same Church or Family with
ourselves; and the penitent Thief will be honorable in our Eyes, even as
righteous Noah: (I make not the Comparison as to exact Degrees:) The Harlot
Rahab dear to us as the Virgin Mary: Elect Negroes shall walk abreast with
Kings and Governor, in the Golden Streets of Heaven; while they see themselves
united, as Brethren, both in the first and second Adam. And truly, if we come
to Degrees of Glory, Magistrates and Ministers, the rich, honorable and
useful, that are also gracious, may not expect to be dignified in Heaven
according to their Superiority on Earth, unless their Places has been filled
with Duties, and those Duties with Grace: Nor is it only Much-Doing and
Well-Doing, but patient Suffering too, that must come into the Account: So that
one whom God has placed in a lower Station, and his Grace has made such an one
more faithful; -- One that has had less Advantage for growing in Grace, and
abounding in good Works; yet, by more than ordinary Diligence, has improved his
smaller Stock to greater. Increase; -- and has had an Heart enlarged abundantly
toward God, and for the public Good; -- One that has not had the Opportunity
of doing much for Church and Commonwealth; yet has been all his Days
afflicted, and born all with holy Submission and singular Patience; -- Such
ones shall doubtless be rewarded above many, their Equals, and Superiors in
other Respects. But this is a Digression: However it may serve to quicken Men
of great Gifts, high Place, and many Talents, to see that their Improvement be
proportionable; lest they suffer a Sort of Degradation, even in Heaven it self:
And it may equally serve to encourage the least and meanest of Christ's
Servants; they may be great in the Kingdom of God. As all Servants will be free
from their Masters there; so some may be advanced above them: But there will be
no Envy.

I shall conclude this Use with the Words of an eminently pious and learned
Divine, in a Discourse concerning the Joys of Heaven.

'Quest. Shall the Saints know one another in Heaven? (The Question is
supposed, and he answers it in the Affirmative thus --)

Answ. We shall know one another: For;

1. All comfortable Knowledge shall be so far from being abolished, that it will
be enlarged, increased, and perfected.

But to know one another is a comfortable Knowledge: Therefore we shall know
one another.

Our knowledge shall be perfected; for we shall know as we are known, 1 Cor.
13.12. Which is set out by Comparison of the less. That our Knowledge then,
shall differ from that now, as the Knowledge of a Child from that of a perfect
Man: By a Glass from that of seeing the Thing itself: That of a plain Speech
from a Riddle. Why then should we doubt of knowing one another? Especially,
since our Savior Christ sets forth the State of the Blessed, by the
Knowledge one of another, Mat. 17. And as the Knowledge is perfect, so the
Memory. In nothing must our Knowledge be impaired, but bettered.

2. We shall then enjoy every good Thing, and comfortable Gift, which may any
Way increase and enlarge our Joy and Felicity.

But meeting there, knowing then, and conversing for ever with our old dear
Christian Friends, and all the glorious Inhabitants of those sacred Palaces,
will mightily please and refresh us with sweetest Delight: Therefore we shall
know one another.

Society is not comfortable, without familiar Acquaintance: Be assured then, it
shall not be wanting in the Height and Perfection of all Glory, Bliss and Joy.
Nay, our Minds being abundantly and beatificially illuminated with all Wisdom
and Knowledge, we shall be enabled to know, not only those of former holy
Acquaintance; but also Strangers, and such as we never knew before; even all
the Faithful, which ever were, are, or shall be. We shall be able to say; This
was Father Abraham, this King David, this Saint Paul: This was Luther, Calvin,
Bradford, and. This my Father, this my Son, this my Wife, this my Pastor, this
the Occasioner of my Conversion, etc. As may be gathered by proportion out of
God's Book.

(1) If Adam before the Fall had that measure of Illumination that he knew Eve,
and from whence she came, at the first Sight: much more shall our Knowledge in
Heaven, and highest Happiness be enlarged in this Kind.

(2) If the Apostles accompanying Christ in his Transfiguration, and vouchsafed
but a Taste and Glimpse (as it were) of Glorification, were able thereby to
know Moses and Elias, whom they had never seen: How much more shall we, being
fully illuminated, and perfectly glorified in Heaven, know exactly all the
blessed ones, though never acquainted with them upon Earth?

(3) Christ tells the Jews, Luke 13.28. That they shall see Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God; and therefore know them: And
Dives is said to know Abraham and Lazarus in so great a Distance, Luke 16.
Whence Largue thus; If the Damned know those who are saved, though they have
never seen them; much more shall the glorified Saints now plentifully endowed
with all Knowledge, and supernaturally enlightened by the HOLY GHOST.

Many of the ancient Fathers (says he) are of the same Mind; -- The first he
mentions is Austin, who comforting a godly Widow, while, she was mourning
bitterly for the Loss of her pious Yoke Fellow, has these Words, This thy
Husband, by whose Decease thou art called a Widow, shall be most known unto
thee. And tells her further, That there shall be no Stranger in Heaven. But,
having offered some other Passages, of one and another of the Ancients, showing
their Concurrence in the same Opinion, he adds; Yet let me tell you, before I
pass out of the Point; that this for the most Part is the curious Quere of
carnal People; who feeding falsely their presumptuous Conceits with Golden
Dreams, and vain Hopes of many future, imaginary Felicities in the World to
come, whereas in the mean Time they have no Care at all, use no Means, take no
Pains to enter into the holy Path, which leads unto the blessed Place: -- To
cool and confront such lazy, idle, and vain Curiosities, take Notice; That we
shall not know our old Acquaintance by former Stature, Feature, Favor: So vast
a Distance and Difference will there be, between a mortal and glorified Body;
neither in a worldly Manner; in which Respect says Paul, 2 Cor. 5.16.
Henceforth know we no Man after the Flesh: Yea, though we have known Christ after
the Flesh, yet now henceforth know we him to more. Our mutual Knowledge one of
another in Heaven, shall not be outward and worldly Respects, but divine and
spiritual; as we know them in Christ, by the Illumination of the Spirit.

Thus wrote one that could say of what he had written and preached, That it was
the Truth of God, as he should answer it at he Tribunal of Christ, before whom
he should shortly appear. This he spoke when the very Pangs of Death were upon
him, to certain of his Hearers, who came to pay him their last Visit. And to
his Wife he said, Make no Doubt thou shall meet me again in Heaven.

USE VI. By Way of EXPOSTULATION, With careless, secure Sinners; who put far
away the evil Day, and put off Repentance, delaying to make their Peace with
God. If my Reader be such an one, I would leave the following Questions, to be
answered by his own Conscience, as he will answer it at a dreadful Tribunal
another Day.
Quest. I. What is thy End in Hearing and Reading; and what did thou propose
to thy self in taking this little Book in Hand, and reading thus far? Pause a
little; -- and proceed not from one Question to another, 'till thou have
communed with thy self about drawing up an Answer, and settling it in thy Mind.

Quest. II. Is not the God that cannot lie, worthy to be believed before the
Father of Lies; and has he not said, If ye live after the Flesh ye shall die;
and who is it that says, Ye shall not surely die? Romans 8.13. Genesis 3.4.

Quest. III. Have thou not all the Reason in the World to fear the Wrath of the
Almighty, who is angry with the Wicked every Day; and will not this Fire, that
is kindled in his Anger, burn to the lowest Hell? Job 21.20. Psalm. 7.11. and
90.11. Deuteronomy. 32.22.

Quest. IV. Can any Thing be more unreasonable, than thy ungrateful, unnatural
Rebellion against him, who, having first given thee thy Being, has nourished
and brought thee up; after he had sent his Son, out of his Bosom to die for
thee? Hear O Heavens, and give Ear O Earth; for the Lord has spoken, I have
nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me! The Ox
knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib: but Israei does not know; my
People does not consider, Isa. 1.2, 3.

Quest. V. Who will be the Gainer, in the winding up, if thou winnest Christ;
and who the Loser if thou shall lise thy Soul? Prove. 9.12. Job. 22.2, 3. Mat.
16.26.

Quest. VI. Is it not most likely that thy Delays will prove thy Ruin at last;
thy Heart being hardened through the Deceitfulness if Sin; and God executing his
dreadful Threatenings against thee? Prove. 1.24, to 28. and 29.1. Heb. 3.13.

Quest. VII. Whence dust think to fetch Strength to hear, or what imaginable
Comfort or Relief can thou possibly find under the insupportable Weight of
the Loss of Heaven, and Hell's additional Torments; with all the inconceivable
Aggravations of both? Isa 10.3, 4.

Quest. VIII. What is Time (the good or evil Things of it) to Eternity? 2 Cor.
4.17, 18. Heb. 11.25.

Quest. IX. To have enjoyed all that is in the World, the Lust of the Flesh,
the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life; What Satisfaction, Content, or
Pleasure can it yield thee, when the parting Time shall come? Romans 6.21. Eccl.
2.4, to 11. 1 Timothy 6.7.

Quest. X. Is it not easy to foresee that Satan's Design in tempting thee to
delay a little longer, and a little longer, is to engross all thy Time and
Service, though be does not ask thee for all at once; and would not the Devil
himself tell thee, that thy wisest and safest Course would be to repent
speedily, if he would speak out what he believes to be true? 2 Cor. 2.11. Ephesians.
6.11.

Quest. XI. Is it not merciless Cruelty to thy Self, to thy own Soul, to
hearken to the cruel Tempter; when thou know, whatever he pretends, his
Design is thy eternal Ruin. 1 Pet. 5.8.

Quest. XII. Considering who and where Christ is, and what he has said, and
done, and suffered, and parted with, can there be any Room left, but what is
made by gross Ignorance, Infidelity and Prejudice, for thee to doubt of his
Sufficiency or Willingness to help and save thee? John 6.37.

But, will the Lord in very deed, (says the conquered Soul) accept of me, and
bid me welcome into his merciful Arms and Bosom of Love; into his honorable
Service, and glorious Kingdom; after I have given the Devil the first and best
Part of my Time and Strength? Will he accept the last and worst, and (it may
be) the least Half of my Age and Time! Thine am I then, O David, and on thy
Side, thou Son of God. Thus, when the Spirit of God comes upon us, are we made
willing in the Day of his Power? And whosoever will let him come and take of
the Water of Life freely, Rev. 22.17.

But, methinks I hear the secret Language of the most of my Readers, (O that
ever there should be such a Thought in the wicked Heart of any! Deuteronomy. 15.9.)
like that in Jer. 44.16. As for the Word that thou have spoken unto us in the
Name of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee: Therefore let the last Use,

USE VII. Be for TERROR.
To obstinate and resolved Sinners. I must now suppose that having read over
all the foregoing Pages, thou art as little moved from thy Purpose of following
thy old Trade of Sin, as those Pages, Lines, Words and Letters are moved from
the Place in which (the Hand of the Printer having fixed them) thy careless Eye
found and left them. However, the next that takes the Book in Hand may be such
an one. Hear the Word of the Lord, ye stout Hearted, that are far from
Righteousness, Isa. 46.12. I will only whisper (as it were) in thy Ear seven
Things more: God can make them sound in thy sleepy Conscience, like so many
Thunders.

1. Thy Case, that is worse than can be expressed already, is growing yet worse
and worse every Day. 2. Thy sinning Time will quiekly be over. 3. Thy Day of
Grace may be yet shorter. 4 If not the most, yet the best of thy Days may be
past and gone already: What remains may be an evil Time; Sickness, Pains, and
ten thousand Crosses may make it so, even before old Age. 5. The more Pleasure
thou have had in Sin, the greater Sorrow and Torment will Justice inflict on
thee in Hell. 6. Thy intolerable, remediless and eternal Misery is never the
further off for thy Insensibility of thy Danger. 7 and finally; Thou might
escape all this on easy Terms; and yet be happy, happy, thrice happy and
blessed for ever; and thou will not: But this thy Refusal will afford thee no
easy Reflection in the Bottom of Hell.
I conclude as I began, even with the Words of my Text; (Words more bitter than
ten thousand Deaths!) God help us all to mix them with Faith, lest we find too
late, and feel for ever the Truth of what the great Prophet has here foretold,
(than which I cannot think of a more solemn Conclusion of this Discourse) There
shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you your selves
thrust out.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queen Street,
over against the Prison in Boston, viz.
TWenty Sermons on various Subjects, By Henry Flynt, Fellow of Harvard College
in Cambridge.

Discourses on various important Subjects, nearly concerning the great Affair
of the Soul's eternal Salvation. I. Justification by Faith alone. II. Pressing
into the Kingdom of GOD. III. Ruth's Resolution. IV. The Justice of GOD in the
Damnation of Sinners. V. The Excellency of Jesus Christ.
Delivered at Northampton, chiefly at the Time of the late wonderful pouring
out of the Spirit of GOD there; By Jonathan Edwards, A. M. Pastor of the Church
of Christ in Northampton.

A faithful Narrative of the surprising Work of GOD in the Conversion of many
hundred Souls in Northampton, and the neighboring Towns and Villages of the
County of Hampshire in the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, in
a Letter to the Rev Dr. Benj Colman of Boston, written by the Rev. Mr. Edwards
Minister of Northampton, Nov 6. 1736. Published with a large Preface by the
Rev. Dr. Watts and Dr. Guyse of London: To which a shorter is added by some of
the Reverend Ministers of Boston; together with an Attestation from some of the
Reverend Ministers of Hampshire. The third Edition.

Several Sermons, etc By the Rev. Mr. George Whitefield, A. B. Of 'Pembrock
College, Oxford.

Directions to such as are concerned to obtain a true Conversion unto GOD, with
the Scripture Characters of it. In a Discourse on Jer 4.1. Preached at a Time
of extraordinary Awakenings. By William Williams, A. M. Pastor of the Church of
Christ in Hatfield.

Two Letters, one on the Change of the Sabbath, the other, on the Beginning of
the Sabbath. By the Rev. Mr. Joseph Lord of Chatham.

Where may also be had, Dr Watts's Divine Songs for Children; and Mr. Henry's
plain Catechism. To which is added another for the Instruction of those that
are to be admitted to the Lord's Table.

The Service of GOD recommended to the Choice of young People: A Sermon on the
Death of Mr. John Coney; a very hopeful and pious young Man. To which is added
an Appendix, containing a further Account of Mr. Coney, collected from his
private Writings

Pharmacopoela Londinensis; Or, the London Dispensatory further adorned by the
Studies and Collections of the Fellows now living, of the said College.

By Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology.

Bibles, Testaments, Psalters, Psalm-Books, Primers, Catechisms, etc Also
Paper, Account Books Blanks, Deeds, Bonds, Writs and Summons for Courts and
Justices, Indentures, Powers of Attorney, Probate Blanks, and other Blanks for
Courts, etc.


