A TREATISE Concerning MARRIAGE: WHEREIN The UNLAWFULNESS of Mixt-Marriages
laid open from the Scriptures of Truth: SHOWING That it is contrary to the Will
of God, and the Practice of His People in former Ages, and therefore of
Dangerous Consequence, for Persons of Different Judgments in Matters of
Religious Worship, to be Joined together in MARRIAGE.

Written for the Information and Benefit of Christian Professors in general;
and recommended more particularly to the Youth of either Sex amongst the People
called QUAKERS.

By MOSES WEST.

2 Kings 8, 17, 18. And Jehoram walked in the Ways of the Kings of Israel, as
did the House of Ahab; for the Daughter of Ahab was his Wife; and he did Evil
in the Sight of the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39 The Wife is bound by the Law, as long as
her Husband lives: but when he is dead, she is at Liberty to be Married to
whom she will? only in the Lord. 2 Cor 6.14 Be ye not unequally Yoaked, etc.
Philadelphia: Reprinted, and Sold by Andrew Bradford at the Bible in
Front-Street.

A TREATISE Concerning MARRIAGE.
MARRIAGE is an Ordinance of God, as old as since our first Parents, instituted
in Paradise, for their comfortable abiding here, and leaving Posterity after
them; and Men and Women have been the more happy therein, as they have had
Regard to the Counsel of God, and his Providential Hand, in chosing such as
feared the Lord, and were true Worshippers of him; and avoiding those who were
Idolaters, and such as feared not the true God.

And that in such their Caution, their Proceeding was agreeable to the Law of
God in the Heart, is very apparent: for when the Will and Mind of God was
committed to Writing, and promulgated to Israel, his peculiar People, Deuteronomy. 7.
speaking of the Nations who inhabited the promised Land, he said, Neither shall
thou make Marriages with them: Thy Daughter shall thou not give unto his Son;
nor his Daughter shall thou take unto thy Son. And why? Because, said the Lord,
They will turn away thy Son from following me.

Now if this be the Consequence still of such Mixt-Marriage, then such
Marriages are still unlawful, and the Law still in Force; that forbids them.
But that the Consequence of such Marriages is still the same, I appeal, not
only to the Witness of God in all; but also unto sound Reason, and true
Experience.

Moreover, the Prohibition aforesaid was not intended against these Seven
Nations only; but had a more general Extent: For the Isrealites were not
allowed to take them Wives of the Daughters of Ashdod of Ammon, or of Moab; and
for the same Reason, not of any other People that were not Circumcised, and
made Partakers of the true Worship of God.

This appears from the Words of Nehemiah, chap. 13.23. In those Days, said he,
saw I Jews that had married Wives of Ashdod, of Ammon, and of Moab, and their
Children spoke half in the Speech of Ashdod, and could not speak the Jews
Language, ver. 24. And I contended with them, and smote certain of them; and
made them renew their Covenant with the Lord, Saying, You shall not take their
Daughters unto your Sons; nor give your Daughters unto their Sons. Adding ver.
26. Did not Solomon, King of Israel, sin by these Things? Yet among many
Nations there was no King like Him, who was beloved of his God: Nevertheless,
even him did strange Women cause to sin: Shall we then, said he, hearken unto
you, to do all this great Evil, to transgress against our God, in marrying of
strange Wives.

Thus, in short, we see how such Marriages are against the written Law of God,
and the Practice of his faithful People.

But long before this Law was brought into Writing, the Holy Patriarchs, and
such as feared, and worshipped the true God, even from the Beginning of the
World, showed a Dislike of such Mixt-Marriages, from the Sense of the Law
written in their Hearts; and so long as they kept in the true Faith, and at a
lawful Distance from such as were not Partakers thereof with them (which for
some Time they did) the Lord was with them, and blessed them, and made them
Instrumental in his Hand, for the withholding his Wrath from being presently
poured out upon the old World. But when they had generally departed from his
Covenant, and from the Example of the Righteous, even in this particular Case,
mark what followed.

It came to pass, when Men began to multiply upon the Face of the Earth, and
Daughters were born unto them, the Sons of God saw that the Daughters of Men
were fair, and they took them Wives of all that they chose. That is, they made
no Distinction upon the Account of Faith and Religion, But to whomsoever their
fleshly Minds inclined, them they took to Wife; like the dishonorable and
unchristian Practice of some in our Day. And that sorely grieved the Spirit of
the the Lord; so that thereupon he said, I will destroy Man, whom I have
created; Genesis 6.5, 6, 7.

And when the Sons of God came in unto those Daughters of Men, and they bare
Children unto them, the same (it is said) became Mighty Men: But by whom they
were so accounted, and for what Cause, may be gathered from the Sequel. It was
not, surely, from their Faith, and Holiness toward God, that they were so
accounted: For if it had been so, he would not have repented that he had made
them, as in Genesis 6. it is said he did. But it seems rather to have been from
their Statuers and Bodily-Strength, whereby they could archive great Matters in
the World, which made them be reputed Mighty, by such as did bear the same
Fallen Image with themselves; who were known and distinguished from the
Children of God, by the name of the Children of Men, being, in the Main of
their Conversation, without a God-like, or Religious Mark: For, the Earth, it
is said, was full of Violence, and there were Giants in those Days, Genesis 6.4.

Now when Things were come to this pass the People of God having cast off his
Yoke, and fallen in with the World and its Spirit (which they openly declared
by their Entering into the nearest Affinity by Marriages with them) and had
their Hearts thereby drawn away more and more from following the Lord; (which
always was and is the natural Consequence of such Affinities by Marriages and
is therefore the more hanious and pernicious:) Then did the Lord call upon
Noah, and gave him Direction to build an Ark, for the Safety of himself and his
Family. For all Flesh had, by that Time, corrupted his Way upon the Earth;
which so provoked the Lord God that he determined to destroy all Flesh by a
Flood, except Noah only, and his Family. For Noah being a Just Man, and Perfect
in his Generation, and one that walked with God, found Grace in the Eyes of the
Lord, to be exempted from that General Destruction.

If nothing more could be alleged against these Mixt-Marriages, this
Consideration (one would think) were, of its self, enough, to manifest how
great a Sin it is, and to deter all considerate Men and Women from entering into
it, that it appears to have been a great Step, that led to the Destruction of
the old World, the Door that gave the inlet to those Corruptions, and Violence,
which filled the Earth, and provoked the Lord, not only to repent that he had
made Man, but to pour down his Wrath in a Flood, which destroyed both Man and
Beast.

We have seen the Mischief the Ungodly brought upon Mankind, by those
Mixt-Marriages before the Flood. Now let us see, and heedfully observe the
great Care the Godly took after the Flood, to prevent the like Evil and Danger.

After the general Overthrow of Ungodly Men by the Flood, from which only Noah,
with his Family (Eight Souls in all) were preserved in the Ark (which was a
Figure of Christ) was born Abraham; whom God called out of his own Country, and
from his Father's House, with Sarah his Wife, to make of them a distinct and
peculiar People to himself. And he established his Covenant with Abraham, (and
his Blessing upon his Seed) who saw Christ's Day, and was glad; and in the
Faith thereof walked before the Lord, with a Perfect Heart: In which Faith also
he offered up his Son Isaac, unto the Lord, as the Lord had commanded him. Such
was the Obedience he added unto his Faith: which was accounted unto him for
Righteousness, Genesis 3.6.

Now when Isaac the Child of Promise was grown up to a Marriageable Age, so
great was the Care of his Godly Father for him, that he might not be unequally
Yoaked, or joined in Marriage, calling his eldest Servant to him (who had the
Charge and Oversight of all that he had) he made him Swear by the Lord, the God
of Heaven; and the God of the Earth, that he should not take a Wife unto his
Son of the Daughters of the Canaanites, amongst whom he dwelt, But thou shall
go, said he, unto my Country and to my Kindred, and shall take a Wife unto my
Son from: hence, Genesis 24.

This so strict a Charge, so solemnly given, and so firmly bound, shows that
this Good Man did not look upon this Matter of Mixt-Marriages, with an easy
Eye as an indifferent Thing; but was earnestly and heartily concerned, that his
Son might not be joined with one of a different Religion: And as his honest
Care was thus exercised in sending his Servant to Abraham's Kindred, to the
Family of Bethuel; so the Providential Hand of God was apparently with him, in
the Choice of Rebecca, and the Consent they gave to it, saying, The Thing
proceeds of the Lord: Let her be thy Master's Son's Wife, as the Lord has
spoken. And in Conclusion, they blessed her and sent her away. And as Isaac was
walking, and meditating in the Fields at Evening-tide, he met Rebecca coming
with his Father's Servants, and took her to be his Wife: And she, after twenty
Years Barrenness, bare him two Sons, Esau and Jacob; whose different Practice
in the Case of Marriage let us now observe.

What Esau was; is well known, both by his selling of his Birthright, and
other Characters given him in the Holy Scriptures: When he was Forty Years of
Age, he took him Two Wives, and both of them Unbelievers, Daughters of the
Hittites, which Thing full sorely grieved his Godly Parents: And is left upon
Record, as a Mark of his Undutifulness and Disobedience, in not advising with,
and being ruled by them, in that so weighty Affair. And may it be a Caution
unto all such, as profess themselves to be Christians, and so of the Righteous
Line, That they follow not the Example of Profane Esau!

But when he saw, that what he had done had displeased his, Parents, he (to
mend, as he thought, the Matter) took him another Wife the Daughter of his
Uncle Ishmael the Scoffer; who, for mocking Isaac, the right Heir, had in his
Childhood, been cast out of the Family. Now if it had been external Kindred
only, that was aimed at by Abraham and Isaac in Marriage, surely Esau had now
hit it: For she was his Fathers Neice; yet that brought him not, in a right
Sense within the Family, nor Example of the Faithful.

But Esau's thus running out, from the Practice of the Godly, to take him such
Wives as his airy Mind led him to choose, without Regard had to true Religion,
so sensibly affected his Good Mother Rebecca, that complaining to her Husband
thereof, she said, I am weary of my Life, because of the Daughters of Heth! If
Jacob should take a Wife (as his Brother has done) of the Daughters of Heth,
such as are the Daughters of the Land, what good shall my Life do me? Gen 27.46.

Good Isaac thereupon, to prevent that Danger, calling his Son Jacob to him,
gave him his Blessing, and with it this strict Charge, Thou shall not take a
Wife of the Daughters of Canaan. Arise go to Padan-Aram, to the House of
Bethuel thy Mother's Father, and take thee a Wife from thence, Genesis 28.1, 2.

Jacob, as became a dutiful Child, was obedient to his Parents herein: And the
Lord was with him, and blessed him; and blessed his Family also until they gave
Way to a Liberty, not pleasing to the Lord.

Then was Dinah, Jacob's only Daughter, made an early Example of the Lord's
Displeasure, by his suffering her to fall into contempt, Genesis 34. Not only for
her gratifying a vain Mind, in going out, through curiosity to see the Daughters
of the Land; whereby she came to be ensnared and defiled by Shechem, Genesis 34.
but also, as it appears, the Isrealites were at that Time so far relapsed, that
they had strange Gods among them, and, as may be gathered from the Text,
strange Attire also; which was to be changed, and done away, before they might
go up to the House of God, to worship him acceptably there, Genesis 35.2, 3.

These Things might be likely to raise an Expectation in the Shechemites that
in time they might draw them to become one People with them. Whereupon, having
already got hold of one of Jacob's Family, they were desirous of a further
Converse, in order to enter into Affinity, with them; saying, make your
Marriages with us: Give your Daughters unto us, and take our Daughters unto
you; and you shall dwell with us, Genesis 34.9, 10. And to entice them thereunto,
they proffered the Isrealites what Worldly advantages soever they would ask,
ver. 12. Nay they went so far, as to yield to take on them the Badge (and a
sore one too) of Jacob's Religion, ver. 24. but it was but for carnal and
covetous ends, ver. 23. and succeeded to them accordingly. But the Truth of the
Matter was, and is, that Jacob, the True Seed, (the Peculiar People of God)
must live alone, and not be mixed, or numbered among the Nations Wherefore,
notwithstanding all the great Proffers, and Importunity of Shechem (and the
Condescension of the Shechemites) to have obtained Dinah for his Wife; Jacob
would not hearken unto him. And yet it is said, The Man was more Honorable,
than all the House of his Fathers. For Israel having an Eye to the Covenant of
God, wherein he and his Family were comprehended, he zealously withstood the
Temptation; and thereby gave a Demonstration of his Faith. And when, soon after
the Lord commanded him to go up to Bethel, he called first for a Reformation in
his Family. Whereupon it is said, They gave unto him all the strange Gods that
were in their Hands, and all their Earrings that were in their Ears; which he
hid under the Oak that was by Shechem. And then, having cleansed his Family
from those Heathenish Likenesses, both he and they were thenceforth at quiet,
from such like Attempts by their Unbelieving Neighbors.

But to proceed. Having a little touched upon Things, relating to the Faith and
Practice of the Holy Patriarchs about these unlawful Marriages; and briefly set
forth some of the pernicious Consequences that have always attended them, both
before and after the Flood: I shall now come nearer to the present State and
Dispensation we are under.

When the Apostles came to speak of this Ordinance of Marriage, they ran in the
same Channel, as all the Faithful had done before; saying. Be ye not unequally
Yoaked with Unbelievers, etc. 2 Cor. 6.14. And Peter's Exhortation and Care for
the Married was, that they might be Heirs together of the Grace of Life; that
their Prayers might not be hindered, 1 Pet. 3.7. Then such must be of the same
Faith, and agree in Spirit, or else they cannot pray together acceptably, Mat
18.19. Can two walk together except they be agreed said the Prophet Amos, Chap.
3.3. Therefore such as are obliged to live and walk together for Term of Life,
if they are not so agreed and united in Spirit, are like to have but little
Comfort, Help and Furtherance (if any) from each other in Spiritual Things;
which is the Way that leads to true and lasting Comfort for ever. For since
without Faith, and an answerable Conversation it is impossible to please God.
Such married Folks as differ in Faith, and disagree in their Religious
Conversations, are not like to please God nor one another; but may rather
expect the contrary, with much Confusion, which does naturally attend such
Mis-matchings in that Condition of Life.

Again, Paul to the Corinthians (1 Epist. 7.9.) faith, The Wife is bound by the
Law, as long as her Husband lives: But when he is dead, she is at Liberty to
be married to whom she will, only in the Lord. That is the ancient Limit.

But, by the Way, this gives no Liberty for such to marry as are near of Kin;
though otherwise duly qualified

But if any should object, that Abraham Isaac and Jacob married their near
Kins-Women? and thereupon should query, why it might not be as lawful for such
Kindred now to marry, as it was for them then.

I Answer, first, That what they did in that Case then was before the Law was
given, which does expressly forbid it, Levit. 18.

Secondly, It is a common Maxim, and in great Measure true, that Necessity has
no Law. And every Reasonable Man is capable of considering, that in those early
Ages of the World there was a Necessity for it. And for Abraham, and those
before mentioned of his Posterity, they lived not very long after the Flood,
which gaven Kind of new Beginning to the World with Respect to its being again
Replenished with People. For Abraham was born before the Death of Shem,
according to Scripture-Chronology, about One Hundred and Fifty Years: And yet
Shem was an Hundred Years old, when the World was drowned.

Thirdly, It is to be considered, that People lived very long in those Days; so
that Generations passed not away, nor did Kindred wear out so fast as
afterward: Which exposed those Patriarchs to it by a kind of unavoidable
Necessity; and that rendered it excusable in them: But there being no such
Necessity now, nor any Reason of that Nature, to induce any to marry their near
Kindred; they who do so, do plainly break the positive Law of God, which
expressly says, None of you shall approach to any that is near of Kin to him,
etc. Levit. 18. As also contrary to the Apostle's Advice, Phil 4.8. As not
being of Good Report, etc.

Besides, all that was done by those Good Men, without Reproof, in those early
Ages, is not to be drawn into Example now: For Abraham, we read, Genesis 16 took
Hagar, his Wife's Handmaid, to his Bed. And Jacob had not only two Wives
together, but those two Sisters? and at the same Time had Children by each of
their Handmaids; which Practice none, I hope, even of them which plead for
Marriage betwixt near Kindred, will attempt to defend as lawful now. But from
this necessary Digression, let us return to our former Subject.

That Marriage is an Ordinance of God, I have already asserted; and now add, by
Way of Explanation, that there by Two are made One, or insepa ably joined
together, for Term of their joint Lives, by lawful Means. As First, In Spirit;
Secondly, In Affection; and Thirdly, In a Solemn Covenant of Marriage, as well
External and Public, as otherwise. These are the Conditions, more or less, of
all those which the Lord joins together; whom no Man may put asunder. And
without these Conditions the Marriage Union is not perfectly enjoyed.

Now whereas I press for an Agreement, and Unity of Faith and Religious
Practices, in the Parties to be married, as Essential to the Marriage which God
makes: By Faith; there I mean that Faith which the Holy Patriarchs, Prophets
and Apostles held, which the True Church now holds, and which upholdeth the
True Church (for by Faith ye stand, said the Apostle to the Church of old, 2
Cor. 1.24.) which is the One True Faith, mentioned by the same Apostle, in
Ephesians. 4.5. And although there be in the World Faiths many, or at least distering
Apprehensions concerning Faith, and Pretenses to it: Yet, being inclined by the
Law of Charity, to conclude that all, who are serious, do think their own
particular Faith, Perswation, and Way to be the Right (else they would not
continue in it) what I have here written may serve indifferently to all that
profess Faith in Christ. And yet though I do not here give a more particular
Definition of Faith; it does not thence follow that I am indifferent therein,
or in Doubt about it: No, but it is to avoid Controversy, and because I aim at
Brevity, and choose rather to let the True Faith be manifested by it is Fruits,
which the Apostle James advises, Chap. 2 18 of which Fruits what I here
contend for is one, and not the least, viz. That they who profess Faith in
Christ Jesus, and are disposed to marry, are Religiously Obliged to take Care
that they be not unequally Yoaked, by joining themselves in Marriage with any
that are under different Persuasions and Practices, with Respect to Faith and
Religious Worship, as may tend to hinder their persevering in it.

The Author to the Hebrews, in Chap. 11 treats at large of Faith; and sets
forth the Noble Disposition of Mind, that was in such as believed in Almighty
God; how it distinguished them from the World, and preserved them out of the
Affections and Desires of being joined to and with the World. And in Ver.
24.25. He says By Faith Moses when he came to Years, refused to be called the
Son of Pharoah's Daughter; choosing rather to suffer Afflictions with the
People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin, which were but for a Season.
He would not it seems, be numbered with the Egyptians, who oppressed the
Righteous Seed, no, not for a Kingdom.

The Apostle also, in his Epistle to the Galatians, chap. 4. giving a Touch at
the Patriarchs Marriages, shows the Mystery of the Spiritual Kindred, which is
by Faith. And to the Ephesians, chap. 2.19. he says, Now therefore you are no
more Strangers and Foreigners; but Fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the
Household of Faith: And in Gal. 6.10. He calls Believers so; and in chap. 4.48
says, Now we Brethren, as Isaac was are the Children of Promise. For whom say
I, a Spiritual Canaan is ordained by God.

Hereupon I would query? Art thou, Reader, such an One? One of the Spiritual
Kindred, a Child of Promise, and of the Household of Faith? Or would thou be
so accounted, and art disposed to Marry,? whither then will thou go for a Wife,
but to thy kindred? Not in the Flesh, but in the Spirit. Have we not Power
says the Apostle Paul, to lead about a Sister a Wife, as well as other
Apostles, etc. 1 Cor. 9.5. Mark the words well, a Sister Wife, or (as a former
Translation has it) a Wife, being a Sister, which, in Marginal Note there, is
explained to be a faithful and Christian Wife. So that she should be a Sister,
before she be a Wife; a Sister, in the Spiritual, or Religious Relation and
Kindred, which Relation in the Faith, as it was to them, is still to us a
necessary Qualification preceding Marriage.

If it be objected, That the People of England, and of that Part of the World
called Christendom, and the Children of Israel, are not to be compared with
each other, in this Case of Marriage; for the Nations which Israel were
forbidden to Marry with, were downright Idolaters Worshipping Strange Gods of
their own devising: But the People of England, etc. generally own the True God,
and profess Faith in Jesus Christ; so that, although they differ among
themselves, about the Manner of Worshipping God, yet why may they not marry
promiscuously, one sort with the other, seeing they all profess Christianity,
and are therefore accounted and called Christians, both by themselves and other
Nations, and being of a sober Conversation, cannot properly be called
Unbelievers.

Answer, I am not about to Hethenize any, but am willing to own, and embrace
that which is good in all. And though I might turn off the Objection with a
short Answer, in its own Terms, That such should not inter-marry, because they
differ; since the Nature of Marriage bespeaks an Agreement, not Difference, an
Harmomous Unity, not a jarring Discord: Yet for the Sake of serious Enquirers,
I am willing to enlarge a little upon this Part. Wherefore to proceed; I allow
there is a Difference in some Degree, between outward Israel and the Nations
then, and Spiritual Israel and other People now, that are not of the same
Society and Communion. For then the Distinction was only of Jew and Gentile.
Believer and Unbeliever: But now (as the Objection has it) all that Part which
is called Christendom, professes Faith in one God, and in Christ Jesus, though
very differently, and some, no Doubt, in all Professions called Christian, are
of a Sober, Moral Conversation. But if General Profession were a sufficient
Qualification, for joining such in Marriage without Exception, then Papists,
and other unsound Worshippers, bearing the Christian Name, must not be excluded
or refused, if of a Sober Conversation. Which allowance would not a little
gratify Anti Christ, uphold the Apostate Church, called in the Revelations
Mystery, Babylon, etc. chap. 17.5. and tend to keep God's People there,
contrary to the express Command of God, Jer. 51.6 And of the Voice from Heaven,
which said, Come out of her my People, that ye be not partakers of her Sins,
and that ye receive not of her Plagues, Rev. 18.4. For has not she long made,
and does she not still make a large Profession of Faith in God and Christ,
after her manner?

When the Apostle exhorted the Believers of old not to be unequally Yoaked
together with unbelievers, 2 Cor. 6 14 may we suppose he intended to restrain
the Prohibition, only to those obsolete and notorious Unbelievers, who were
Pagans, or Heathens? Or did it extend to all, that did not believe the
Manifestation of Christ Outwardly in the Flesh? The Jews did believe in God,
and that Christ the Son of God should come: But they did not believe in him as
He was then come; and manifest in the Flesh among them. Might the Christian
Believers, notwithstanding that, have mingled in Marriages with the unbelieving
Jews, because of their General Belief in God, and in Christ to come, though
they rejected him in his then present Appearance? Would that have been an Equal
Yoaking? So likewise, if one that believes, not only the Outward Appearance of
Christ, with respect to his having come in the Flesh; but his inward Appearance
also, with Respect to his being come in the Spirit, by his Divine Light and
Grace, to Rule in the Hearts of his People, and thereby, to both direct and
enable them, as they attend thereunto, how to perform Divine Worship and
Service to God, should marry one that denies, and opposes that Inward and
Spiritual Coming and Appearance of Christ in the Heart, and sticks only to his
Belief of His Outward Coming and Appearance in the Hesh at Jerusalem: Would
such a Couple be equally Yoaked.

But not to press the Comparison too close, because I would both avoid Offense
and use what Brevity I can; I say, if two Persons of different Judgments about
Matters of Faith and Religious Exercises (as going to Meetings, Preaching,
Praying, Thanksgiving, and c) should incline to marry each other, presuming in
their fond Affections, that, notwithstanding that Disagreement, they may live
comfortably together, they will find too late that they were greatly mistaken.
For although, if it were only a Disagreement in their Tempers or natural
Dispositions, which concerned only their outward Conversation one toward the
other, or the Management of their Temporal Affairs, it might be hoped they
might live tolerably together: Yet where the Difference is of so high a Strain
and Nature, as concerns the Peace of Conscience, and Safety of the Soul on
either Side; that cannot be reconciled, without the Conversion of one of them,
which is out of Man's Power, of himself to effect. Wherefore, although such may
talk of, and promise to themselves Unity in such Contrariety: Yet by that Time
their Folly shall have corrected them; they will find Cause to be of another
Mind. And if their Love to God and Religion, be not quite consumed by those
Passionate Flames which engaged them into that unwarrantable Undertaking: they
will seel, after Marriage, their Spirits more plainly and warmly conflicting
one with another, and striving to bring each other into a Conformity unto that
Way of Worship, which he or she is in. And then, whichsoever of them prevails,
the other must lose Peace of Conscience (the greatest of all Losses) unless
such Compliance spring from a true and unfeigned Conviction that the Worship so
conformed to, is the Right: Which is more than may reasonably be expected by
any, who are guilty of Tempting the Lord with such Mixt-Marriages.

Besides when two of Disagreeing Persuasions in Religious Exercises, do join in
Marriage, no Man can reasonably think, that their Affection to each other is
grounded on, or governed by Religion; and if not, that it must be by some
Worldly end: And to cloak such a Marriage with a pretense of Hope, to convert
each other to what each believes is right, is in plain English no better then
a sinning that Grace may abound; a doing Evil, that good may come of it.

But now the Case is otherwise, where two, of one and the same Perswation in
Religion or of no Religion, are joined together in Marriage: And afterward one
of them is converted to the True Religion: The converted may expect the Lord's
Blessing; and abiding together, may be a Means of Sanctification and Good to
the other, according to the Apostle's Doctrine, 1 Cor. 7.14. And the Nature of
True Christianity.

Now as to the latter Part of the Objection, I readily grant that the Lord has
many, that in a Sense may be said to belong to him, who are not as yet
professed Members of the visible Church nor known unto it. This our Savior
plainly intimated, when in his Discourse to the Jews pointing at the Conversion
of the Gentiles, he said, Other Sheep I have, which are not of this Fold: Them
also I must bring, and they shall hear my Voice; and there shall be one Fold,
and one Shepherd, John 10.16. But until these other Sheep be gathered, and
brought, by the Great Shepherd into the Fold; although they are known to the
Lord, yet are they not so well known to his People, as to be capable of being
admitted into Church Communion, or Fellowship with them; much less into that
Marriage Union with them, of which we have been treating.

But to have done, at length, with this Objection, I shall now remind the
Reader, That when the Sons of God, in the Old World, had degenerated, and were
Apostatized, as has been before observed, their Motive to these Mixt-Marriages
was, They saw the Daughters of Men were fair and they took them Wives of all
that they chose, Genesis 6.2. So that to gratify the Lust of the Eye, was the
Inducement of their Marriages. And to such an Eye now (as also to those as have
a covetous Mind, reaching unduly after the Things of this World) this may seem
an unnecessary Scruple; especially when it stands in their Way, to hinder them
from the obtaining of their desired End, But the truly Conscientious will
always find themselves obliged, for the Sake of Religion and Duty to God, to do
nothing that may hinder their Perseverance and Progression therein: Which
Disagreement about Religion will naturally do, more or less, according to the
Proportion of the Disagreement.

Wherefore, though our Case be not the same as old Israel's was in every
Degree: Yet if it be so in any Degree, and have the same Tendency in any
Measure (which that it has, is undeniable;) then it brings our Times under the
Force of the same Prohibition and Law, and that for the same Reason (namely)
Because they will turn away, or hinder thy Sons from following me, says the
Lord.

And now my Dear Friends (for unto you who bear the Name of Quakers, whether ye
be such, as the Lord has been graciously pleased to call and gather out of any
other Religious Professions, or such as are the Offspring of Believing Parents;
in this Profession, do I now more particularly turn my Discourse) if ye would
not be overtaken in that extremely hurtful Case of such Mixt-Marriages, keep
out of the Way that leads to it. Shun, as much as may be, the too frequent and
familiar Converse with those of other Professions; such, especially, as may be
most likely to allure and draw your Minds out. Be not cold and indifferent
about Religion. Halt not between Two. If God be God (which, I hope, you are
fully persuaded of) follow him, and keep close with him, that you may know your
Minds staid, and established upon him: And then will ye see, for your
Encouragement, the Advantages and Comfort that such have and enjoy, who make it
their Business to please him. And whatever your Condition and Circumstances in
this World be, let your chiefest Treasure and Pleasure, be in Heaven and
heavenly Things; and then your Hearts will be there also, as our Savior
taught, Mat, 6.21. And then, above all Things, ye will desire to be Servants,
and Disciples of him, who said, Where I am, there shall my Servam be, John
12.26.

But all whose Minds are set upon Things below, whether Pleasure or Profits,
more than upon their Savior, Jesus Christ who died for them, are not worthy of
him, Mat. 10.37. And such whatever they may profess, do most frequently miss of
the Heavenly Blessing (which God reserves for his Peculiar People)
notwithstanding that they also may partake largely of Temporal Mercies and
Blessings, in common with other Men. For God, who is the Fountain of Goodness,
causes his Sun to shine, and sends Rain on the Just, and on the Unjust, Mat
5.45. But to be a Disciple of Christ, and Heir of the Heavenly Kingdom, is a
great and glorious Privilege. The Way to this Happiness is set forth, by him
who is the Truth it self, in Luke 14.17. (and in many other Places of Holy
Scripture, in which it is necessary we should be very conversant) Whosoever.
says Christ there, does not bear my Cross, and come after me, cannot be my
Disciple. And we read (1 John 4.10.) that he is not only our Propitiation for
our Sins; but also that he has left us an Example that we should follow his
Steps. 1 Pet. 2.21. who said, Learn of me for I am meek and low in Heart; and
ye shall find Rest unto your Souls, Mat. 11.29.

And now, my Friends, I would come near unto you, by Way of Enquiry: Have you
indeed been convinced of the Truth, and been made sensible of the Cross, that
attends the Profession of it? And have you been faithful to those Convictions,
and followed the Lord in the Way of Regeneration? Or have ye not? This is an
important Point, the Consequence of which may turn the Scale to either Hand:
Therefore, I pray, let it be duly considered. For to be found persevering in
the Way of Truth, which we make Profession of, and in all the Parts and
Branches of it, will be of a double Advantage to us. It will not only preserve
from adding Sin to Sin, (which, if not timely prevented, will lead such into
spiritual Adultery, a departing from God and withdrawing from him both their
Love and Subjection; which, more or less, precedes such mixed Unscriptural
Marriages:) But it will also bring us to understand the Difference which has
always been between the Two Seeds; and that will tend greatly to preserve us
from Apostatizing. And then, What the Consequence is of Persevering in
well-doing unto the End, ye will be truly sensible of, to your Everlasting Joy
and Comfort; according as it is promised, Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes will
I give to sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down
with my Father in his Throne, where all Fears and Temptations will be done away
for ever. But the Consequence of Disobedience will not be so: But will have a
contrary Event; which I pray God we all may be delivered from before it be too
late.

Think not (said Christ to the professing Jews, Mat. 3.9.) to say within your
selves, We have Abraham to our Father, etc. A Thing very incident to them, to
value themselves upon; and upon their professing the True Religion, as being
the Disciples of Moses. As if that could be any Advantage to them, while they
did not the Works of Abr ham, but lived in Disobedience: So that
notwithstanding the great Advantages they had, and the High Pretenses they
made, our Savior Christ told them plainly, They were of their Father the
Devil; and his Proof therefore was, because they did his Work. So that to be
the Children of faithful Parents, or to profess the True Religion now (as they
then did,) and yet not be faithful, as the Parents were, nor live and walk in
the True Religion they profess; will as little avail such now, as it did those
Jews then.

What did it avail Dives, or the Rich Man in the Parable, that he could call
Abraham Father, and that Ab aham vouchsafed to call him Son, while he mean
while was in Hell! Read the Parable throughout ( Luke 16.20. to the End) and
consider it well. The Rich Man there, after he had misspent his precious Time
in voluptuous Living (wearing Rich Apparel and faring sumptuously every Day) at
length died, and was buried too, and that probably, as he had lived, in Pomp
and State, as such commonly now adays are. The Poor Man Lazarus, died also,
but it is likely his Funeral was too mean and private, to be taken Notice of:
For we read nothing of it. But that which is better, we read, namely, That he
was carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom. But the next Account we have of
Dives, is, That he was in Hell, Begging; and that for a small Alms too, but a
Drop or two of cold Water: And yet ( O miserable Man!) even that was denied
him. He being in Hell, lifted up his Eyes, and saw Abraham afar off, and
Lazarus (poor despised Lazarus) in his Bosom. Whereupon he cried, and said,
Father Abraham, have Mercy on me; and send Lazarus that he may dip the Tip of
his Finger in Water, and cool my Tongue: For I am tormented in this Flame: A
Thing he might well have foreseen, had he but lifted up his Eyes in Time.
Abraham not disallowing his Claim of Kindred according to the Flesh, yet
vindicating the Justice of God upon him, answered, Son remember that thou in
thy Lifetime, received'st thy good Things, [Riches, Honors, Pleasures and
Worldly Delicacies, which thou did account thy Good-things] and likewise
Lazarus Evil, [Poverty, Pain, Contempt and Misery:] But now is he comforted,
and thou art tormented: Nor was that all: But, as an Agravation of his great
Unhappiness, from a Sense that his Torment are remediless, and that there would
be no End of his Misery, he tells him further; And besides all this, between us
and you there is a great Gulf fixed: So that they that would pass from hence to
you, cannot; neither can they pass to us that would come from thence. This put
Dives out of all Hopes of Relief for himself. Wherefore having now at length
some Pity for his own Family, though he had none for Lazarus; when he needed it,
addressing himself again to Ain aham, he said, I pray thee therefore, Father,
that thou would send him to my Father's House; for I have five Brethren that
he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this Place of Torment. What
need of That, said Abraham, They have Moses and the Prophets; let them hear
them. Nay Father Abraham, replied Dives, but if One went to them from the Dead
they will repent. No, no, said Abraham, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets
[which was the means they professed, as appointed by God, for the Instruction
of his People, under that Dispensation] neither will they be persuaded though
one rose from the Dead.

From this Parable, Two Things, most pertinent to my present Subject, are to be
observed. One, That the Highest Profession of Religion, the nearest Relation
outwardly to the Godly, though it were that of a Child to the most Godly
Parents, is not sufficient, without the Living Faith, and the Living Fruits
thereof, a Godly life and Conversation, to keep from coming into the Place of
Torment. The other is, That such as neglect to wait upon, and serve God in his
own way and Time, to be made by him Wise unto Salvation, through the Grace and
Understanding given them for that End in the Present Dispensation they are
under; will Naturally grow Blind and Hard: So that they cannot be wrought upon,
to be made sensible of the Danger they are in, by the most extraordinary Means;
No, not if one were sent to them from the Dead. And since there is no other
Name under Heaven given, whereby we must be saved, but by Jesus Christ ( Acts.
4.12.) And the Grace coming by Him, brings the Salvation that Christ, is the
Author of; how greatly does it concern every One, to attend Daily and
Diligently on Him, in the Gift of his Grace; and to hearken to and obey his
Teachings thereby! For God who at Sundry Times and in diverse Manners, spoke
unto the Fathers by the Prophets, (Heb. 1.1.) has in these last Days spoken
unto us by his Son: And that in Diverse Manners also; as immediately by his
Spirit, instrumentally by his Ministers, as also in the Holy Scriptures, and by
his many Providence. And if, (as the Apostle argues, Hebrews 12.25.) they
escaped not, who refused him that spoke on Earth: Much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven.

THE END.

