Mr. BECKWITH's Discourse On 2 King. 4.26.

Run now, I pray thee, to meet her, and say unto her, Is it well with thee? Is
it well with thy Husband? Is it well with the Child? And she answered, It is
well.

Whatsoever GOD does is Well done.

A Discourse Delivered at New-Salem, May 20th, 1739, Being the next Sabbath
after the Funeral OF Mrs. Anna Lovett, CONSORT of the Reverend Mr. Joseph
Lovett, Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in that Place. AND Now Published at the
Desire and Expense of that Parish.

By George Beckwith, M. A. Pastor of a Church in Lyme.

Psalm. xlvi. 10. Be still, and know that I am GOD --.

1 Samuel iii. 18. -- It is the LORD: Let him do what seems him good.

N. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T GREEN. 1739

Whatsoever GOD does is Well done.
2 KINGS IV. 26. Run now I pray thee, to meet her, and say unto her, Is it well
with thee? Is it well with thy Husband? Is it well with the Child: And she
answered, It is well.


WE have in this Chapter an account of Five Miracles wro't by the hand of
Elisha the Prophet. It is the Second of 'em only that will fall under our
present Consideration, namely, That of his obtaining the Blessing of a Son for
an Ancient Couple who had been long Childless. The History of which begins at
Ver 8. It fell on a day, that Elisha passed to Shunem, where was a great woman;
and she constrained him to eat bread. And so it was as often as he passed by, be
turned in thither to eat bread. In the Verses following, we have an account of
the Kindness of this great woman to the Prophet, who not only (with the leave
of her Husband) hid him Welcome to her House, and the Entertainment of it; but
she provides a Lodging room for him, whether he was wont frequently to turn in,
when in his Circuit he passed that way, Ver. 9, 10, 11.

The holy Man in gratitude for this Kindness, consults what Recompense he
should make her (for Religion and Grace teach men gratitude.) He offers to use
his Interest for her at the King's Court; but she needs not this Favor, ver
13. Well, he consulteth his Servant Gehazi, what shall be done for her, wherein
he may Oblige her? Who tells his Master, That she is Childless; has a great
Estate, but no Son to Heir it, ver. 14 The Prophet then sends for her, and
promises her she shall have a Son; which was a great surprise to her; but was
fulfilled at the exact appointed time, Ver. 15, -- 17. The woman conceived, and
bare a son at that season that Elisha had said unto her, according to the time
of life. This no doubt was great Joy to the Family when the Heir was born. And
after the Birth of this their Son, the Prophet no doubt was doubly welcome to
the Parents; and the Child, no doubt was dear to the Prophet, as being a Son of
his Prayers; and to the Parents, as being the Son of their Old Age, and an only
Son: But as dear as he was to them all, he was not too dear for Death. For now
being big eno' just to run abroad, he follows his Father into the Field; where
either the Coldness of the Earth, or Heat of the Sun in harvest-time overcame
the Child, that was tenderly bred; and he complains to his Father that his Head
aches; who sends him home to his Mother, not suspecting him to be dangerously
Ill; where he lay in his Mothers Arms till Noon and then died, ver 18, -- 20.

But she (instead of sending for her Neighbors to lay out her dead Child)
retires into the little Chamber and lays him on the Prophet's Bed; then goes
out, shutting the door after her, and runs into the Field to her Husband, not
to acquaint him with the sorrowful News, but to beg leave of him to go to the
Prophet: He (after some Objections) gives her Leave; which she having obtained
and a Servant to wait on her, makes all possible speed to the Prophet, with an
heart full eno' of grief, Though she behaved so excellently under it, and makes
no more discovery of it. The Prophet seeing her coming, for whom he had so
great a Respect, sends his Servant Gehazi to Enquire whether any thing was
amiss with her, or her Family? As in the Text, Run now, I pray thee, to meet
her, and say unto her, Is it well with thee? Is it well with thy Husband? Is it
well with the Child? And she answered, It is well.

Here we have, 1. The Question which the Prophet by his Servant put to her,
which is very particular, Is it well with thee with thy Husband and with the
Child? Is all well with thy Family? Thus it becomes the men of God, to Enquire
of the welfare of their People with a tender concern to know how it fares with
their Families, and with their Souls; how Religion flourishes among them, and
what is to be done for them. 2. The Reply that she makes to this Question. And
she answered, It is well. "Gebazi was not the man she came to complain to, and
therefore she turns him off with this general Answer, It is well. However, this
she speaks very seriously, as a pious and good Woman: And there is much in the
Answer; It manifests the excellent temper of her Mind, her quiet Resignation to
the Providence of God, and her Faith that all should be well in the Conclusion.
It is well with me: Though I am sorely bereaved and afflicted, Yet it is what God
has done, and what he does is well, and shall be well; and he can make it
well to me, and well to my Husband. It Is well with me, and well with my
Husband; yea, and it is well with the Child too. Though the Child now lay dead in
the House. This saying of hers, was not the Effect of her stupidity, as though
she was insensible of the Awfulness of the Providence, or didn't sufficiently
feel her Loss. No, It appears by the Verses following, that her Soul was full
eno' of Anguish; nor could a Mothers Bowels be more rent, than hers were; for
her Soul was vexed within her, Ver 27. But it was her Grace and Faith that made
her thus quiet and resigned, and caused her to carry it so excellent well under
so heavy and shocking a Dispensation, as the loss of her dear and only Son, and
the Son of her old Age, when she could not expect another: Yet she could (and
that very seriously and well consistent with her duty) say, It is well; it is
well with me, and well with my Husband, though our all be taken from us; and it
is well with the Child too, though it be dead.


The general Observation or Doctrinal Point may be this,

DOCTRINE.
That when God removes our dearest Relations out of the World by Death, it
becomes us in quiet Submission to the divine Providence, to say, It is well
both with us and with them. -- And she answered, It is well.
And it is just ground of Comfort when we can say this in Faith and Hope, as
she did.

The Doctrine may be spoken to under the Three following Propositions, Namely,
PROP. I. That our dearest Relations, and we too, are Mortal, and must be
Removed out of the World by Death. PROP. II. That when any are Removed out of
the World by Death, it is divine Providence that orders the Time, and all the
Circumstances of their Removal. Hence, PROP. III. When our dearest Relations
are so Removed, it becomes us in quiet Submission to the divine Providence, to
say it is well both with us and with them.


PROP. I. That our dearest Relations, and we too, are Mortal, and must be
Removed out of the World by Death.

This is a Truth no less certain, than it is awful; which though it cannot be too
much though it of by us, yet needs little to be said for the proof of it. All grant
this Truth. Every one knows that he must die, Eccl. ix. 5. For the living know
that they shall die. And there is a Statute Law of Heaven for it, Heb. ix. 27.
Is is appointed to man once to die. And the royal Preacher assures us, That
this is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his heart, Eccl. vii.
2 Our dear Relatives, in whom we enjoy the greatest Comfort, are Mortal and
must die. There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife, there they buried Isaac
and Rebecca his wife, and there I buried Leah, Genesis xlix. 31. Friends are
precious Comforts, yet they are fading Comforts too, that we cannot Enjoy
always. We and they must have our parting time. Children are pleasant Flowers
in our Eyes; but we must remember that they are but fading Flowers, that Death
may soon turn into a lump of cold Clay and make us willing to bury them out of
our fight. And we should remember that these dear Comforts may suddenly be
removed from us, as it was with the Child referred to in our Text: Well with
his Father in the Morning, yet dead with his Mother at Noon. And as sudden may
our own Deaths be. We know not at what Watch our Lord and Master may call for
us. How highly then does it concern us to make it our first and great care to
be also ready. Blessed is that servant whom when his Lord comes he shall find
so doing, Mat. xxiv. 46.

PROP. II. When any are Removed out of the World by Death, it is divine
Providence that orders the Time and all the Circumstances of their Removal.

Here it may briefly be observed.

1. That the precise Time of every persons Death, is Pre-determined in the
divine Counsel or Decree; is that whatever of Contingency may seem to attend
the Death of any, as to Time, Place, Instruments, Causes, etc. yet with respect
to the divine Decree, there can be no such thing. The exact time of every
persons Death being fore-known, appointed and fixed in the divine Fore knowledge
and Decree, to a very moment; and therefore shall come at the exact Time, but
cannot pass it. It there not an appointed time to man upon Earth? Are not his
days also like the days of an Hireling? Job vii 1. He that is hired, indents
for a certain determinate Time, the period of which is exactly fixed. So long
he can be held and no longer. So Job tells us it is with respect to the Date of
humane Life. Every one has his exact number of Years, Months, Days and Hours
appointed him to fulfill in the World. And thus far he must come, and no
further: Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with
thee: Thou have appointed his Bounds that he cannot pass, Chap. xiv. 5. Yea,
before the Child is born, it is appointed and determined just how long it shall
live, and its Bounds are fixed; which is equally Decreed in the divine Counsels
and Fore-knowlege with its Birth. Hence we read, That to every thing there is a
Season and a Time (That is, Predetermined, Appointed and Fixed in the divine
Decree) to every purpose under Heaven. A time to be Born, and a time to Die,
Eccl. iii. beg.

2. The Providence of God orders all the Second Causes and the Circumstances of
them, by which every one is bro't unto Death in his exact appointed time. For I
know that thou will bring me unto death, and to the house appointed for all
living, Job xxx 23. Thou will bring me unto death: For whatever be the
Instrument, whatever be the Means by what the Effect is bro't about, God's
Providence is the chief Efficient: At the Ordering and under the special
Direction of which, every thing is Effected. And God by his Providence performs
that, and that only which was appointed, and in the appointed time and method.
That those Effects which with respect to Second Causes were most contingent,
yet with respect to the First Cause of all, are no more than what were long
before determined on and appointed. So that as Job tells us, The thing that God
accomplisheth in his Providence, is the same and no other than what was before
fixed and determined on in the Decree. Chap. xxiii. 14. For He performs the
thing that is appointed for me, and many such things are with him. And if as
our blessed Savior tells, the very Hairs of our head are so numbered (in the
divine Decree or Counsel) as that not one of them can fall to the ground,
without the ordering of divine Providence; then much more our Deaths and all
the Circumstances attending them, are certainly at the Ordering and under the
Direction of divine Providence. It follows then, that when any are removed out
of the world by Death, divine Providence has Ordered the Time, and all the
Circumstances attending their Removal.

Hence,

PROP. III. When our dearest Relations are so Removed, it becomes us in quiet
Submission to the divine Providence, to say, It is well both with us and with
them.

This is the Language of that excellent, virtuous and pious Woman in our Text,
under a very sore and sudden Bereavement. Her only Son and only Child, a Child
of Promise and a Child of Prayer, and a Child of Old Age, and given her in
Love; and yet taken away by a sudden Death, Well in the Morning, and dead by
Noon; and died in her Arms: All her care, tenderness and Prayers cannot keep it
alive, See Henry in loc.
The stroke is very heavy. Yet how admirably does the pious Mother keep her
temper, and govern her spirit under this most surprising Affliction! Not one
peevish or indecent word comes out of her mouth; but her speech and behavior
manifests a humble Resignation to the divine Providence. And Excellent Pattern
for Christian Imitation! And when the Prophet by his Servant puts that Question
to her, Is it well with thee? Is it well with thy Husband? Is it well with the
Child? She answered, It is Well quoth It is well with me, It is well with my
Husband, and it is well with the Child. This is the Language of her quiet
Submission to the Providence of God, Acknowledging that all is well that He
does; and of her Faith, That all should be well in the Conclusion. And surely
she spoke right in this. And it is (no doubt) written for our Learning, and
does teach us a like Submission and humble Patience under the afflicting hand
of God, when in like for bereaved of dear Relatives. This should be the
Language of our humble Resignation, It is well with us, and it is well with
them. Thus he, 1 Samuel iii. 18 And be said, It is the Lord: let him do what
seems him good.

But here will arise Two important Enquiries, viz.

Quest, 1. In what sense may, and ought we to say, It is well with us, when our
dear Friends are Removed from us by Death? Quest 2. In what sense may we say,
It is well with our departed Friends when so Removed?
1. The first Enquiry then is, In what sense may, and ought we to say, It is
well with us, when our dear Friends are Removed from us by Death?

This Question must be answered, first Negatively, and then Positively.

Answ. 1. Negatively. We mustn't understand this Assertion in our Doctrine, as
though Religion and Grace removed the Bonds of Nature, or taught us less to value
the Lives of our Friends, or to make light of their Death; or taught us not to
Mourn their Removal. No, Nothing like Religion and Grace to make men
tenderhearted, compassionate, full of love and goodness to their Friends. So
that that Phrase, It is well with us when our dear Friends are removed from us,
must not be otherwise understood, but that,

(1) Such Afflictions are in themselves Evils, and as such are to be Resented.
No Evil in it self considered, is to be chosen; nor can we say of it, It is
well. Afflictions in themselves considered, are the fruits and effects of Sin,
and as such are not to be chosen, but deprecated. The Removal of dear Friends
is a great loss; the affliction is great. and as such cannot be chosen. Nor can
we say of it without sin, That it is well we have lost them: Which would be the
most monstrous Inhumanity. Religion don't teach us to cast off Natural
Affection; which to do is very sinful, and an horrid violation of the Law of
Nature; for which the Gentiles stand Indicted and Condemned by the Apostle, Rom
i. 31 Without Natural affection, Implacable, Unmerciful.

Hence,

(2) It cannot in'end but that we ought to Mourn our loss in their Removal.
Grief is Natural, and never more so, than on such sorrowful Occasions. And though
natural Affection is ever to be governed by Reason and Religion, and to be kept
within due Bounds, that we be not excessive in our Mourning (for Excess in any
thing is Sinful) Yet we are never to act contrary to Humanity, as those do who
Mourn not the death of their dear Friends. So the royal Teacher exhorts, My
son, despise not the chastning of the Lord, neither be weary of his correction,
Prove. iii. II. Not to be affected with such Afflictions, not to lay to heart
such Bereavements, nor to be awakened by them, is to despise the Chastning of
the Lord here forbidden. It Is with Ephraim to bear Afflictions as a Bullock
unaccuftom'd to the Yoke. We must not (says Mr. Henry) be Stocks and Stones
and Stoics under our Afflictions; insensible of them, without feeling under
them, or unmindful of the Errand on which they are sent. We must not thus
despise the Chastning of the Lord. Though on the other hand, We must take heed
that we don't faint under them; that we be not dispirited, nor run into Excess
and suffer our selves to be unfitted for duty by our Afflictions.

(3) It does not intend but that there may be the righteous Displeasure of God
in such Afflictions; which ought to be very humbling to us. On this account,
such frowns of Providence appear awful, as there may be the displeasure of God
discerned in them. Then surely, on this account we cannot say, It is well. It
is not well, but awful that we should offend our Maker, and expose our selves
to his Frowns and righteous Displeasure; making divine Chastisements needful
for us; on which account we have reason to walk softly under Afflictions and
greatly to humble our selves before God, making that humble Petition Job does,
Chap. X. ver. 2. I will say unto God, Do not condemn me; show me wherefore thou
contendest with me. And we ought to improve all for the promoting our
Repentance and future Amendment. So Elihu advises Job, Chap. xxxiv. 31, 32.
Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born Chastisement, I will not
offend any more.

But thus far in a Negative way, to keep us from mistakes is what follows. I
now pass on to say,

2. And Posuively. That we may and ought, in a quiet Submission to the divine
Providence, to say, It is well with us, when our dear Friends are removed from
us by Death; or when under the exercise of any Affliction. And that on the
following accounts especially, Namely, (I) As our Afflictions are no other than
what God has seen meet to Exercise us withal. So we may and outh quietly to
say, It is well. For what God does is well done. It Is done in infinite Wisdom
and Justice, and not without good Reason: Therefore it is well, as it is from
God, and ordered by his Wisdom; who knows all his own Works and the Reason of
them, from the beginning to the end, Act. xv. 18. Nor is this any way
inconsistent with what we above observed: For we may be truly sensible of our
Afflictions, and mourn our Loss, and yet at the same time may say with her in
the Text, It is well. It Is what infinite Wisdom has ordered, It Is what the
Great Governor of the World has done; and therefore it is what we ought to
acquiesce in as well done, and wisely done, though it be for a humbling to us and
fills us with pain and sorrow. And thus it seems to have been with her in the
text. Her Grief was great; her Soul was sore vexed; her Bowels were rent for
the loss of her only Son: Yet discerning by Faith the Hand of God in it; seeing
it was He that had done it who does every thing wisely and well, and has the
alone Right to dispose of his Creatures, as in his own Wisdom he sees best,
this silences her, calms her spirit; or at least keeps her from immoderate
Sorrow, and from all indecent Behavior. But this is still her humble Language,
It is well with me, etc. It is no otherwise than what an Alwise God, a
Righteous Sovereign and a Merciful Father has done, and that must needs be
well done. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. (2) As all our
Afflictions have Merey mixed with them, and are ever less than our Iniquities
do deserve, so we may say, It is well with us, be our Afflictions what they
will. Our Afflictions in this life, ever have a mixture of Mercy with them, and
ever less than our Iniquities do deserve. This the Church acknowleges, Ezra ix.
13. Have we our dear Friends removed from us by Death? We our selves are yet
spared, and have further time allowed us wherein to prepare for our own
Dissolutions; and an't this a Mercy? An't it well for us? Had we been taken and
they spared, where then had we been? Have we yet reason to complain or repine
at the Providence? Surely, no. Wherefore does the living man complain, a man
for the punishment of his sins? Lam. iii 39. It is of God's mere Mercy that we
are living Men, and living Women our selves. And shall a living man complain
under any Affliction or Bereavement? No, he has more reason to be thankful for
Life and the Blessings of it, than to complain of the Afflictions and
Calamities of humane Life. It better becomes us to say, It is well with us that
we are our selves alive, which is mare mercy than we deserve. Besides, we have
many Mercies to few Afflictions; and an't it great Mercy that it is so? And
would it not be very sinful in us, to suffer a few Afflictions, (though heavy and
grievous) to imbitter all our Mercies to us, and render us unthankful for them?
Yes. It surely better becomes us to say, It is well with us that we have so
many Mercies to so few Afflictions. We have had a dear Relation removed from
us, but how many have we left to comfort us? We have had, it may be, some part
of our Substance removed, yet we have more left us than was taken from us. We
have been crossed and disappointed in some of our Enterprises, but have we not
been blessed and prosper'd in other respects? You have, perhaps, met with much
Affliction in one Relation, Friend or Child; but then hav'nt you as much
Comfort in some others, in whom you enjoy a great Blessing? And is not this
Mercy? Thus the compare your Mercies with your Afflictions; weigh them in an
even Balance, and the say, whether your Language ought not to be the same with
hers in the Text, It is well with me, etc. (3) As the Dispensation it self that
we are exercised with (be it what it will) is under the Direction of an Alwise
God, who knows how to bring about his own Glory and our best good by it, so we
have reason on this account quietly to say, It is well. This Dispenfation, this
Affliction is not from a Creature: 'Tisn't ordered nor bro't about by a
Creature, but by the Alwise CREATOR. And it is under the Government, and at the
Direction of his Wisdom, who can bring about his own Glory and advance our best
good by it. Which Consideration affords just ground for Comfort, and should be
quieting to us. This Job in his Afflictions seems to take special notice of,
and (no doubt) was quieting to his spirit, Chap. xxiii. ver. 14. For he
performs the thing that is appointed for me, and many such things are with
him. We are ready to say, These things are against us; but that we don't know:
The Providence, indeed, may look dark and awful, but yet it is under the
direction of the divine Wisdom, which, it may be, is consulting our best good
in it; and if we are sincere Christains we have a sure Promise for it: For
says the Apostle, We know that all things work together for good to them that
love God, to them that are the called according to his Purpose, Romans viii. 28.
Then ought we not, considering this, quietly to say, It is well? We are, it may
be, under a Cloud; an heavy Burden it upon us: But yet, it is laid on us by God
himself, and is at the Ordering of His Providence, who is a God of tender
Mercy; who Considers our Frame, and can lighten our Burden and make it Easy to
us when he sees fit. Jacob complains when his Son Joseph was Sold into Egypt,
and Simeon lay Bound there, and Benjamin must needs go down. Now says he,
Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin away; all these
things are against me, Genesis xlii. 36. Henry in loc.
But that divine Wisdom that ordered the Dispensation, designed his good and
the good of his Family by it, as he himself saw afterward to his abundant
satisfaction. But at present he is full of melancholy tho'ts; too ready to
complain: He gives up Joseph and Simeon as lost; whereas Joseph was in honor,
and Simeon in the way to it. And then from his mistaken apprehension about the
Providence, he complains, That all these things were against him; when they
were for him and his Family Henry in loc.
. Thus through cur lgnorance of the wise designs of divine Providence, and through
the weakness of our Faith, we often apprehend that to be against us, which is
really for us. We are afflicted in Body, in Name, Estate, Relations, etc. and
we are ready to complain, That all these things are against us; whereas if we
are sincere Christians, these things are working out for us a far more
exceeding, and an eternal weight of glory, Cor.iv. 17. (4) As such Afflictive
Dispensations have in them an Awakening tendency, which we may improve to that
End, and may pray for a sanctified Improvement of, so we have reason to say, It
is well with us when we are Afflicted. We need frequently to be Awaked out of
that Security, which the World and Pleasure are lulling us into; and to be
stirred up and Quickened in the way of our Duty: And Afflictions may prove of
great Service to us, unto these Ends, Hos. v. 15. -- In their affliction they
will seek me early. And that our Afflictions may have this happy Effect, it is
our duty to be much in Prayer to God for a sanctified Improvement of them.
Times of Afflictions should especially be Praying times. Call upon me in the
day of trouble, Psalm. l. 15. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray, Jam. v.
13. Our afflictions, though we see them coming from the hand of God, must drive
us to him, and not drive us from him: And when they do so, surely we have
reason to say, It is well with us. Because this is what we greatly need, and by
this means, those very Afflictions that we are so ready to complain of, as
against us, may be turned into the greatest Mercies to us, and without which we
might have perished in our sinsul Security. Hence therefore, (5) and finally,
If our Afflictions be really Sanctified to us for our spiritual good; do prove
truly Humbling, Awakening and Quickening to us, that by them we are furthered in
our way to Heaven, have we not then abundant reason to say, It is well with us
when we are so afflicted? since that which makes most for our best Interest is
certainly the best for us. The Psalmist, who was much in affliction, tells us
from his own Experience, That it was well with him, and good for him that he
had been afflicted, and gives us the reason why, Psalm. cxix 67 Before I was
afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy word. And ver. 71. It is good
for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. While in
Prosperity, we are apt to be Secure, grow Worldly, indulge Pleasures, forget
God, and grow deaf to the Counsels of his Word: But sanctified Afflictions
humble and awake us, show us the Vanity of the world, the Emptiness of creature
comforts, soften the heart, and open the ears to discipline; on all which
accounts we have reason to say, It is well with us. Thus Afflictions many times
prove the greatest Mercies to good people We read, in Exodus i. 12 That the more
the children of Israel were afflicted, the more they grew Many times, days of
affliction are the most growing days with a Christian: And is it not we with
them when it is so? So that upon Consideration of the whole, this should still
be our humble Language under Afflictions, It is Well. All well that God does.


Thus much in way of Answer to the First Enquiry. The Second was,

Quest. 2. In what sense may we say, It is well with our departed Friends, when
removed by Death?

This Enquiry must in like manner, be Answered both Negatively and Positively.

1. Negatively, If they are taken away in their Sins, we know it is not well
with them. He that dies in an Unpardoned, Graceless, Christless Condition, dies
under the Efficacy of the Curse, and his very Death is in dreadful Judgment.
It Is to him the beginning of Sorrow. It cannot be well with him after Death;
but he is undone, for ever undone, and is gone to ly down in endless Sorrows.
Woe unto the wicked, it shall be Ill with him; for the reward of his hands shall
be given him, Isa. iii. 11. Woe unto them, for the day is come, the time of
their visitation. They must have it their Portion to dwell for ever in
devouring Fire and with everlasting Burnings; where there is Wailing and
gnashing of Teeth for ever. The very tho is of this is eno' to make the
stourest heart to tremble, and should be meditated on by us, to our Awakening
and timely Repentance, and to quicken us to a timely Preparation for Death,
that it surprise us not in such an unprepared Condition. Read Mat. 24.48 ad
sin. But who they are that die thus Unprepared, sinding no Mercy in their last
moments, is beyond us to determine, nor may we Judge the final State of any:
Though the Deaths of such, who have lived a sinful Life all their days must needs
look very Awful, and leave little ground of Hope and Comfort to Survivers.

But then,

2. And Positively, In these following respects we may say, relating to the
Deaths of our departed Friends, in a way of quiet Submission to the Providence
of God therein, It is well, viz.

(1) As God has taken them away in his own Time. They have lived their exact
appointed Time, as long as they were to live when they were born. They have
exactly sulfill'd their Years, Months, Days and Hours, so that in this sense we
ought to say, It is well. For God's time is the best time for us to die in. We
are indeed ready to say, Why were they taken away in the midst of their
Usefulness? Why was such and such a Person taken away when they were so Useful
in their Day and Places, and likely to have done so much good in the world, and
to have been so great Blessings to their Friends had they been spared? Or why
must the Infant be carried from the Mothers Arms to the Grave, and not live to
do any Service in the world, nor be any Comfort to us? Why might we not have
Enjoyed them a little longer? But this Consideration should silence all, They
are taken from us in God's time, and divine Wisdom has seen a Reason why it
should be so: And what God does is well and wisely done. And we ought without
demanding any Reason, quietly to say with her in the Text, It is well. It is
what God has done, It is what infinite Wisdom has Ordered, and that is well
done that God does.

(2) In their Removal, God has exerted his own Sovereignty, and done as it
pleased Him. Which Consideration should silence us, and teach us quietly to
say, It is well. We should Consider, God is an absolute Sovereign, and we are
the work of his Fingers, and he may do what he will with his own; who has a
just Right so to do, without giving any Account to us why he does this or that.
This Consideration should silence and quiet us. It Is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good, 1 Samuel iii. 18. It Is the Lord, whose Power cannot be
Resisted, his Justice Arraigned, nor his Sovereignty Contesled --. It Is the
Lord, with whom there is no Unrighteousness, who never did not ever will do any
Wrong to any of his Creatures, Henry in l. c.
It Is the Lord, who gives none account of his Matters unto us. But whose
Sovereignty demands our quiet Submission to whatsoever he does, and our
Acknowlegement of it as well done. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because
thou did it, Psalm xxxix. 9.

(3) If we have good reason charitably to conclude that they fell asleep in
Jesus, and so are gone to rest in Abraham's bosom, then have we abundant reason
to say, It is well with them indeed. Now they have got rid of all their
Sorrows; are stripped of all sinful Imperfections; shall never more be molested
with evil Men and evil Things; but are safe Arrived there, where all Tears are
wiped away, and where there is fullness of Joy and Pleasures for evermore; That
we may well say, It Is well with them. They have gotten safe through a world
full of Snares, Sorrows and Temptations, having received the End of their
Faith, even the salvation of their Souls.

Here particularly, [1] If they were the Infant Children of Pious Believing
Parents, so Born to God in Covenant, though they died in their Infancy, yet have
we reason to hope and charitably to say, It is well with them. This was the
case of the Child referred to in my Text. 'Twas descended of pious Parents,
'twas a Child of Prayer and the Covenant; and (doubtless) Early Dedicated to
the Lord. The Mother therefore doubts not but that it is well with the Child
now dead, as her answer fully implies. The like Faith we find David in the
Exercise of, upon the Death of his Child, Born an Heir of the Covenant, and
doubts not but it was well with its departed Soul; though it died on the Seventh
day, and so before it was bro't under the Seal of the Covenant: For the
Benefits of the Covenant do not depend upon the Seals. And David comforts
himself with the tho'ts, that he should go to it, where it was; which must be
understood of Heaven, 2 Samuel xii. 23. And all the Faithful under the Gospel,
have the like ground of Hope for their Children dying in their Infancy, that it
is well with them in the other World. For the Promise is to them and to their
Children, as it was to the Saints and to their Children under the Old Testament
dispensation, Act. ii. 29. Which Promise (says Mr. Henry,) shall be performed
to those who do not put a Bar in their own Door, as Infants do not. God calls
them His Children (says the same Author) that are Born unto him. And if they
be his, He will Save them. And our SAVIOR himself tells us, Of such is the
kingdom of Heaven, Mark x. 14. And we know it is Easy with the Most High, by
his Grace, to Sanctify the Soul of the Infant and prepare it for Glory. Yea, we
read of them who have been Sanctified from the Womb, Jor. i. 5. Luk, i, 15.
. And though it may be Objected, That the Children of believing Parents, do not
ordinarily partake of Converting Grace in their Infancy and Baptism, as appears
Evident from their Conduct when they arrive to Years of Discretion.

Yet it is easily Answered, That these being appointed to Live, are left to the
ordinary Means of grace and way of Conversion: But to those Infants who were
not to live to Enjoy those Means, why should we not think, That their
Conversion, or what is Equivalent, may be effected for them and wro't in them
in a more Extraordinary way, by an immediate work of the Holy Ghost on their
Souls Sanctifying them, and applying the Merits and Righteousness of Christ to
them; in the Justifying Virtue thereof, so preparing them for Glory. For it is
easy to distinguish between the Gift conveyed and the Manner of conveying it.
It is the Application of Christ's Righteousness and Merits that Justifies us,
and not our Apprehending it. And this Application may be made to Infants, by
the Holy Spirit, without their actual Believing. For though God tieth us to
Means, yet not himself. Though Faith is absolutely requird of all the Adult, to
whom God affords Means of Believing, yet God can supply the defect of Faith, by
his Sanctifying Spirit; which can do all things on our part, which Faith should
do.

[2] If being Born to God in Covenant, and Dedicated in Baptism, and growing up
to Years of Discretion they have Conducted well, becoming their solemn
Dedication, this will afford us some ground charitably to hope and say, it is
well with them when they are removed by Death. They were Born Fleirs of the
Covenant, and Early cast upon the divine Mercy in Baptism, which was a Sign, a
Symbol and Pledge of their being ingrasted into Christ and partaking in his
Benefits, 1 Cor. xii. 13. Gal, iii. 27. For as many of you as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. And though all that receive this Seal
do not actually partake in the saving Benefits signified and held forth in the
Ordinance, yet may we not hope that some do? And if any, surely we may conclude
those are the Persons who live vertuons and good Lives from their Youth up. As
many witness the Virtuous Person, whose Decease Mrs. ANNA LOVETT Died May 13,
1739, In the 25th, Year of her Age.
we now Mourn, did live singular for Virtue, Modesly, Sobriety and Innocence.
And who will say, this might not be the effect of Early grace bestowed? A life
of Virtue in Youth, as it is that which will afford us Comfort in them whilst
they live, so it will give us Hope that it is well with them when they are
gone. They have lived as becomes the Children of the Covenant to live; and may
we not hope they are gone to Enjoy the Blessings of the same? [3] If further,
we have seen them careful solemnly to Renew their Covenant with God, Join
themselves to his Church, and after living a life answerable to such a
Profession, this will give us just greund and hope to say, It as well with them
when they die. These are the Fruits, which in the judgment of Charity, make the
Tree good: And therefore give us to conclude that they are removed from the
Church Militant on Earth, to join with the Church Triumphant in Glory, Heb.
xii. 23.


It is a very great Fault, that so many of the Children of the Church, when
they come to Age, neglect Puulickly to own and personally to ratify what their
Parents have done for them in their Minority, by Renewing their Covenant and so
Joining themselves to the Lord and his Church; their neglect to do which, is
but too Evidential of their low esteem of Sacred things and want of love to the
Ordinances; and so, indeed, of their being in a blind, secure and graceless
Condition: Which it is tremendous to think should be the condition of such
Multitudes as live in the neglect of this great duty and the holy Ordinance of
the Supper, in these Churches, to the reproach and wounding of Religion amongst
us, as it is in direct Disobedience to that great Command, This do in
Remembrance of Me.

But has the conduct of our godly deceased Friends been otherwise? Have we
observed them to love the habitation of God's House, and to thirst after his
Ordinances? With caution and great seriousness, Joining themselves to his
Church and sitting with their Fellow-Disciples at God's Ordinance, and after
walking as became such a Profession, etc. Then surely we may, remembering this,
their Early Piety, be comforted concerning them, saying, It is well with them
now they are gone. Though we shall enjoy their Fellowship no more at the holy
Communion here, yet we may believe them joined in a most perfect and blessed
Communion with the general Assembly and Church of the Firstborn in Heaven;
where they see no more through a glass darkly, as here, through Ordinances and
Promises, but face to face, and know as also they are known; being filled with
the fullness of God's Eternal Love, and drinking continually of those perfect
Pleasures which flow at God's Right Hand for evermore, Psalm xvi. ult.

(4) If in the respective Places wherein Providence has set them in the world,
they have conducted well, so silling up their time with Duty as has made them
Blessings in the Families and Places where they have lived. Though this makes our
Loss in their removal the greater, yet it will make their Memory precious with
us, and give us reason charitably to say, It is well with them. They are
doubtless gone to rest from their Labors, and their good works do follow them.
Have we observed them, in whatever Relation guiding their affairs with a
Christian prudence and discretion, agreeable to the Character of the godly,
Psalm. cxii. 5. A good man shows favor and lends: he will guide his affairs
with discretion. Did we enjoy in them the best of Husbands, or of Wives? the
best of Parents, or Children? the best of Friends, or Relatives, whatever the
Relation was they stood in to us? Why, now we cannot but rise up and call them
blessed; and say surely their good works do follow them. Did they in any
respect sustain a more Public Relation amongst us, and therein behave wisely
and very discreetly toward every one? Were they Courteous and Free, Charitable
and Obliging to their Neighbors and Friends, Condeseending to those below
them, Humble and Modest in their whole deportment, that the Eyes that saw them
could not but bless them, and the Ears that heard them give witness to their
good Conversation? Our Reflection upon this, though it will make our Loss in
their removal the more distressing, when those that were such a blessing to us
and others, and on whom we had so great a dependence are removed from us, yet
it will give us to see that we are not to Mourn for them as without Hope that
it is well with them.

(5) finally, If from the most intimate Acquaintance with them, we had to our
satisfaction, well grounded Evidence of their Conversion and being in a state
of Grace, then we may with great Comfort say, It is well with them now they are
gone. Those that dwell together and have the opportunity of a free, constant
Converse, may well be supposed (if Religiously inclined) to make a better
Judgment on each others Hope, than any other Person can do, who has not had
the same opportunity. And there is nothing that will support and bear up our
spirits under the Loss of such a dear Companion, like this of a well-grounded
hope that they were prepared for such a Change: And therefore that what is our
Loss, is their unspeakable Gain. It is true, to part with such a dear Friend is
hard and will fill us with pain: Their Company and kind Offices, their sweet
and pious Conversation we shall greatly miss, and still having in our minds the
dear Remembrance of them, we shall be ready to breath out, our Sorrows in
mournful Reflections, like those in Psalm. 88.18. Lover and friend have thou put
far from me, and mine acquaintance into darkness. However, the consideration of
their Piety, of which we have had so good an Evidence from a long and intimate
Acquaintance, will teach us to mourn their Removal (not Loss) with a hope that
says, It is well with them.

IMPROVEMENT.
USE, I. From what has been offered under the Doctrine, see something of the
Excellency of our holy Religion, that gives us such hope in Death, and affords
us such Directions and Consolation in Mourning the Death of godly Friends. The
Philesopless and wife Sages of the Gentile world taught men to bear Losses and
Afflictions patiently, from the consideration of inevitable Fate; and that it
was unreasonable and unmanly to mourn or grieve at that which man could not
help. Poor foundation of Comfort! Yet as good as any of the Religions of the
Gentiles teaches. But our holy Religion teaches us to comfort our selves
under Afflictions, from the Consideration that our real Felicity does not
consist in the Favor and Smiles, nor our Misery in the Frowns and Crosses of
this World. It teaches, A man may be Poor in this world, yet exceeding Rich,
rich in Faith. Low and despised in this world, yet Heir of a Crown and Kingdom.
That a man may be himself just ground of Comfort and solid Joy. For these light
Afflictions that are but for a moment, if sanctified by Grace, will be working
for us a far more exceeding and an eternal weight of Glory. So that under the
heaviest Trials, good Christians may say, It is well with us still. For all
these things shall work together for good to such, and shall in the conclusion
turn to their account.

In a word, Our holy Religion opens to the Eye of Faith another World, an
Eternal Existence after this short Life; and teaches us that it is well with us
or with our Friends, or ill with us or them, as it is like to fare with us or
them in the next World; to which this world and the affairs of it bear no
proportion. If therefore we have good ground of hope for them that are gone,
this will teach us that it is infinitely better with them now than when they
were here? That they cannot wish themselves with us again. But were they to
speak to us, their Language surely would be, Mourn not for me, my Husband, or
my Wife, my Parents or my Children, but for your selves that are still in a
world full of Sin, Snares and Temptations: but I am arrived through all these
Dangers. And in such Language as that of our blessed Savior to his Disciples,
Joh. xiv. 28. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said I go unto the
Fathers.

Besides, Our holy Religion assures us of a glorious Resurrection to Life again
to all the godly, when their vile Bodies shall arise out of their Graves, shake
off Corruption and put on a glorious Immortality, ascend to Mansions of Light
and never-ceasing Joy, and so shall be for ever with the Lord. Therefore should
we learn to Comfort our selves and one another with these comfortable
Considerations. Read 1 These. iv. 14, 16, 17, 18.

USE, II. Learn we from what has been offered, That Christians should new
Mourn as others do who have no such Hope to support them under Losses,
Bereavements and afflictive Dispensations, as we have. Our Conduct therefore
and Behavior should be agreeable to our Christian Hopes. So the Apostle minds
us, That there is abundant reason why Christians shou'dn't sorrow and mourn
under Afflictions and Bereavements as others do, 1 These. iv. 13. But I would
not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that
ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope, i. e. Not like the Gentiles
who enjoy not the hopes of Christianity. We Christians must not be like them,
Excessive and Impatient in our Sorrowing.

For,

1. We are taught, That not Stoic Fate, or blind Chance, but an Alwise, Holy
and Sovereign Providence Orders all these things; and therefore such a frame of
spirit, such a behavior becomes as, as is agreeable to such a Belief. We know
that Afflictions come not forth of the dust, nor does Sorrow spring out of the
ground; but are of the Ordering of divine Providence and under the Direction of
divine Wisdom, that can make all turn to our account. We therefore should be
silent, and seek for a sanctified Improvement. Besides, Is it God that has
done it? Then not a word must be said, not a mouth opened in way of complaint
or finding fault; but all must be silent, because He has done it who has a
Sovereign Right to do as He has done. That is a silencing word, Psalm xlvi. 10.
Be still and know that I am God.

2. Because however dark the Aspects of Providence in any Affliction may appear
to us yet if we are good Christians, we may be sure none of these things are
really against us; but will be so over-ruld by a kind Providence, as in the
conclusion to be better for us than if we had not been so afflicted. For we know
says the Apostle, that all things work together for good to them that love
God, Romans viii. 28. It Is true, there are the frowns of a Father, to be seen in
the Chastisements of good Christians, that should humble them and put them upon
Considering what they have done to make Afflictions needful for them. For it
is, If need be, says the Apostle, that ye are in heaviness, I Pet. i 6. Yet
there is really the Pity and Love, the merciful and kind Intentions of a Father
too, in them; which is a most comforting Consideration for the support of good
Christians. Prove. iii. 12. For whom the Lord loves, he corrects, even as the
father the son in where he delights. For though God be displeased with his
Children when they walk Carelessly, grow Remiss and Froward, for which divine
Wisdom sees it needful to Correct them for the reducing them to their
Obedience, etc. Yet it is all in Fatherly Pity and Love, as the Apostle
teaches, Heb. xii 5, 6, 7. -- For whom the Lord loves he chastemeth, and
scourges every son whom he receives. If ye endure chastning, God deals with
you as with sons, --

3. Because Christianity teaches us, Never to look upon the Death of our godly
Friends as the Loss of them; but only as their Removal out of a world of
Trouble into a glorious Rest, and to Mourn for them accordingly. Prove. xiv. 32.
-- The righteous has hope in his death. I These iv. 14. For if we believe that
Jesus died, and rose again even so them also that sleep in Jesus, will God
bring with him. Hence then, our Mourning for them should be with reason and
moderation, quietly submitting to the Providence.

I would not be though it here to teach, That all Grief and Mourning for godly
deceased Friends (of whose good State we doubt not) is Unlawful. No. we may at
least weep for our selves, if not for them; weep for our loss, though that may be
their great gain. But yet, Christianity teaches us to be moderate and rational
in our Sorrows: Because to be Excessive on such awful occasions, looks as if we
had no hope. It is to act like the Gentiles, who have no hope of a better Life
after this to moderate their Sorrows for their Dead, whom they look upon as
quite lost. Whereas we Christians, that have a most sure hope of a glorious
State after this (which is infinitely better than to be here, and who believe
our godly Friends departed, to be gone to this glorious Rest reserved for the
People of God in another world, where is fullness of Joy and Pleasures evermore)
ought never to Mourn their removal as though they were lost, or as though we didn't
expect to see them again with more satisfaction than ever in this world, or as
though they were not now infinitely more happy than they could be with us here.
Which hope therefore should more than balance all our grief, and turn all our
care into a solicitons Endeavor to follow them in the same paths of Holiness
and Devotion, they have gone in before us, that by and by we may be with them
in the Joy of our Lord. And this is to Mourn as Christians that have Hope.

Here then, Reverend and dear Sir, Suffer me as a Brother and Partner with you
in your present Affliction, and mingling my Tears with yours on this solemn
Occasion, to say to you, That you must not Mourn the Departure (not Loss) of
your dear, virtuous and faithful Consort (nor yet your own Loss in her Removal)
as though you had not a good Hope in her Death, that it is well with her now, and
a good Hope in the grace and love of God, that in the Conclusion all shall be
well with you and well with your Family.

1. With respect to Her, We trust you have solid ground of Hope that she was
well Prepared for an happy Exit out of Time into a glorious Eternity, and
therefore that you have abundant reason to say, It is well with her. Of this,
you will suffer me, Sir, to remind you how comfortably you spoke to us on the
Day of her solemn Interment. And therefore that you have nothing to weep for on
her account; which is a happy Consideration, that should qualify and moderate
our Mourning. And indeed, if Early Virtue, if a spotless Lise in Youth and a
pious Walking in riper Years, if a good Profession and a Life agreeable
thereunto, be Evidential of the good State of a Christian, as indeed they are,
these things we agree you have to comfort you respecting the well-being of your
departed Consort. Besides the clearer Evidence you have had of her Experiences,
Self-denials, proficiency of Knowledge and growth in Grace, since the time she
became yours.

2. With respect to the great Loss you have sustained and the wide Breach her
Removal has made in your Family. That God in whom you trust, and whom you
serve, can make it up to you and yours, in temporal Comforts, but abundantly so
in spiritual Blessings and Consolations, which are far better. And for this, it
is the Will of God, that we look to and trust in Him. I know, Sir, you don't
need my Instructions in these things, being able your self to consider them
better and to more advantage than I can represent them. But here would I show
my willingness to strengthen you with my mouth and the moving of my lips should
(were it in my power) assuage your grief, Job xvi. 5. And when I can do no
more, would I stir up your pure Mind by way of remembrance, what Consolations
the Promises of God afford good Christians for their Support under all their
Troubles, which abide but for a season. Psalm. xxx. 5. His anger endures but a
moment; in his favor is life: weeping may endure for a night, but joy comes
in the morning. Once more,

3. Suffer me, dear Sir, to remind you, That it is expected that we who sustain
Places of public Trust in the Church, should be Examples of Patience and
Submission under trying Providence, as well as of Purity, Faith and Charity in
the whole Tenor of our Conversation. That those we Teach, may see we are able
to Comfort our selves with the same Consolations wherewith we are Endeavoring
to be Comforting them under the like Trials; and to Exercise the same Patience
and humble Submission when tried our selves, that we are earnestly Exhorting
them unto.

To conclude this head, May God of his free Grace, afford you that Support,
Direction and Comfort, whereby you may glorify him in this Trial; and may you
be animated and strengthened in your great Work: May you Experience that God is
doing of you good by the present Affliction, which for the present is not
joyous but grievous. And may God return in ways of Mercy to your Family, and
yet Build it up, delighting in the Prosperity of it.

USE, III. The Third and last Use may be of Exhortation, to all, To make a
right Improvement (...) of the Truths that have been delivered, and also of the
present Providence.

And, I. With respect to the present Providence. I shall, first, Address my
self to the other Mourners, and then, to this Church in general.

(1) To you, Brethren, that this Day Mourn the Loss of a (...) Child, a dear
Sister and Relative. I would (pitying your Grief for the Loss you have
sustained in her Removal) direct and exhort you in a few words, how you may
Improve this Affliction aright, and hopefully obtain a sanctified Improvement
of the same; and then in the End you shall find that all shall be well. Here
then, [1] Take heed that you Conduct well, and maintain good tho'ts of God
under the present Trial. It Is a very honorable Testimony the Holy Ghost gives
of Job's constancy and good carriage under his heavy Afflictions, That when all
was gone, not in the least reflecting on the Wisdom, Justice or Goodness of
God, in what He had done to him, says, Chap i. 21, 22. -- The Lord gave, and
the Lord has taken away; blessed be the Name of the Lord. In all this Job
sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. Oh! Imitate this excellent Example.
Whatever you do, keep up good thoughts of God under all. Submit to his Wisdom
and Sovereignty. Nay, Bless him for his Goodness. Give to God the glory due to
his great Name. It Is our duty and what will give us the comfortable Evidence of
a gracious Submission to the Will of God, if we find it in our hearts to Bless
God when he takes away, as well as when he gives. And if with holy Job, we can
keep up the same good and great Thoughts of God and his Goodness under
Adversity, that ever we had in Prosperity, and are as forward to bless him,
love and trust in him as ever; then may we hope our Afflictions are in Mercy
and not in Judgment. [2] Carefully guard against impatient Reflections in your
Mourning. Let your Meditations be serious, humble and guarded. Suffer not your
spirits to be overwhelmed. As we must not despise the Chastening of the Lord,
by indolence and inconsideration under Afflictions; so on the other hand, we
must not faint, be dispirited or overwhelmed when Rebuked and Chastened of the
Lord. If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small. Though
Mourning be natural and lawful, yea, and decent too, yet you must guard against
Extremes; sinful Impatience, or murmuring Reflections. [3] Be much in Prayer to
God for Support under, Direction in, and a Sanctified Improvement of your
Afflictions. By this means you may have them turned into the greatest Mercies
to you. Times of Affliction should be times of Consideration and Prayer. In the
day of adversity consider, Eccl. vii. 14. Call upon me in the day of trouble, I
will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. l. 15. Therefore Hope and
quietly Wait (but let it be with a diligent Application of your selves to Duty)
for the salvation of the Lord, Lam. iii. 6. [4] Improve all for the promoting a
thorough Repentance and disingaging your hearts from the world and creature
Enjoyments. See that it is Sin that does all the Mischief and that robs us of
our dearest Comforts. Behold the devastations it daily makes; and never be at
Peace with such an Enemy. Let us crucify it in us, and flee from the ways of
it. Let the bitterness of Afflictions make Sin bitter to us. That we come forth
from the Furnace as Gold purified.


Again, Improve the Providence to convince you how uncertain all creature
enjoyments are. Being of such uncertain continuance, that we cannot promise our
selves so much as for one Day. Prove. xxvii. 1. Boast not thy self of to morrow,
for thou know not what a day may bring forth. It Is our wisdom to set loose
our Affections to these things, and be always ready to part with them. See to
it then, That ye improve the present Providence to this End. And especially
that you improve it to Excite you to be in a Readiness your selves to follow
them, who are but just gone before to await your coming.

(2) I am to say something, in Address to the Church and People of this Place,
with respect to the present Providence.

Here then, Brethren, Suffer me to mind you of Two things, Namely, [1] That God
in the Removal of the Consort of your faithful Pastor, is seeming to Frown on
you in this Place; and now you are called upon to Consider it and suitably to
lay it to heart. In the day of Adversity Consider. She was the Consort and
Meet-help of your Pastor, to alleviate his Cares and make the burden of his
Labors among you lighter to him, that he might Serve you with more Freedom and
Agility; and so in this sense was publicly Serviceable among you. But now she
can Assist and Comfort him no more; nor shall you enjoy her Friendship and
Conversation, her good Wishes and Prayers any more. And is not this to be
looked upon as a Frown of divine Providence, and ought you not to Reflect upon
it as such? Besides, when such Fruitful Christians are taken away, the
Providence carries a warning Aspect in it, especially to the Careless and
Secure, who may well receive it as a Warning to them. 1 Pet. iv. 17. For the
time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God; and i it first begin
at us, what shall the End be of them that obey not the gospel of God? [2]
Suffer me to mind you of your Duty to your Reverend Pastor, under his present
melancholy Circumstances. That you do all that you can to Comfort him; and by
your kind Offices to Assist him under the present broken Circumstances of his
Family. To him that is afflicted pity should be showed from his friend, Job vi.
14. The afflicted state of your Pastor bespeaks your Compassions in the words
of Job, Chap xix 21 Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, Oh! ye my friends,
for the hand of God has touched me. And there is not a little of Religion in
this, Jam. i. 27 Consider, Brethren, His Work is great, his Burden heavy: The
care of his Family will now wholly devolve upon him. Therefore be not wanting
to ease his Burden as much as may be. Now confirm your Love to him when he most
needs it. And if you should afford him some farther assistance under the rising
Charges of his Family, it would doubtless be a sacrifice acceptable and well
pleasing to the Lord Though while I am Transcribing this, I cannot but in Justice
add, That since my Preaching this Sermon, I have with great satisfaction heard
the Reverend Mr. Lovett Relate how many kind Offices the People of New-Salem (
viz. the People of his Charge) have done for him; and how ready they were to
Oblige him with their Company and kind Assistance, in the Time of his sore
Affliction in his Family. May their Love and Kindness to him Abound more and
more. And may they find their Reward in it.
But this may suffice to be said with respect to the present Providence.


2. The second and last Branch of the Exhortation, is, To all, That you would
so improve these Truths and live such a life of Virtue and Piety, as that when
you shall go the way of all Flesh, you may leave behind you those comfortable
Evidences of your good State, which may give your surviving Friends occasion to
say, to their Comfort and the honor of your Name, It is well with them; as in
the Text. And in order to this,

(1) Consider, what your present State is, and how you Live. Is your State such
as would be safe for you to Die in? Had the late Summons of Death been for you,
had it found you prepared? Had you been at rest in Abram's bosom? Think now of
this matter seriously. Which of us must next follow, God only knows. We had
need give diligence to be Ready. Have you then made your Peace with God, and
obtained the comforts of a Pardon? Have you indeed been so convinced of Sin, of
Righteousness and of Judgment, as that it has bro't you to throw down your
weapons of Rebellion, and to come in and submit yourselves entirely to the
grace and authority of the Gospel? Have you indeed closed with a Savior, and
received the Atonement?

Again, Do you indeed live a Christian life, a life of Faith and Repentance, of
Devotion and Charity? Review your past conduct, What has your Conversation
been? Has it been in Simplicity and godly Sincerity? Or havn't you rather been
indulging your Appetires, Lusts and Passions in exorbitant and sinful
Practices? If you have indulged your selves in Ease and carnal Security, then
what is your State? Suffer me to deal plainly, If you have lived in the sinful
neglect of some Duties, and in the careless performance of others; if in the
neglect of Family or Secret Prayer, or both; or if you attend these but in a
formal, customary manner, without a heart, will not this Evidence you to be in
a graceless State? And then how can you think of Death and Judgment, without
amazement? Do any live in Intemperate Practices, in Pride, Wantonness and
Profaneness, in Revellings and Contentions; for which things sake, the wrath of
God comes on the children of Disobedience. And are not such Enemies to the
Cross of Christ? What then is your condition? Phil. iii. 18, 19. For many walk,
of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, That they are the
enemies of the cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose god is their
belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things.

(2) and to Conclude, Be advised to be thorough in the great business of your
Souls. Don't Trisle in business of the last moment. Your Souls and the
Redemption of them is precious. If the Soul be Lost, there is nothing can
Compensate for the Loss of it. For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain
the whole world and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for
his soul? Mark viii. 36, 37. Your turn also will come to Die, and who knows how
soon? For what is your life? It is even as a vapor that appears for a little
time, and then vanishes away, Jam. iv. 14. Give diligence then to be Ready.
And as you would be so, see to it that you be Converted; That a Saving Change
do pass upon you. Without this you vainly hope to enter into the Kingdom of
God. Then improve your Time with Diligence; Work whilst the Day lasts. Make
your Calling and Election sure, For so an Entrance shall be administered to you
abundanily into the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2
Pet. i. 11.

FINIS.

