SERMONS ON Several Subjects. Preached at the Presbyterian Church in the City
of New York.

By E. PEMBERTON.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for DANIEL HENCHMAN, over against the Brick
Meeting House in Cornhill. 1738.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. The wonderful Propagation of the Gospel. I TIM. 3. 16. -- Believed
on in the World. -- SERMON II. The certainly of a future Judgment. HEB. 6. 2.
-- And of eternal Judgment. SERMON III. The Lord Jesus Christ appointed to be
the Judge of the World. ACTS 10.42. And he commanded us to preach unto the
People, and to testify that it is he which was ordained of God to be the Judge
of quick and dead. SERMON IV. The Manner and Circumstances of Christ's
Appearance at the last Day. MATTHEW. 16.27. For the Son of Man shall come in the
Glory of his Father, with his Angels; and then he shall reward every Man
according to his Works. SERMON V. The Nature and Necessity of preparation for
the coming of Christ. II COR. 5.9. Wherefore we labor, that whether present or
absent, we may be accepted of him. SERMON VI. The Dissolution of the World a
Motive to universal Holiness. II PET. 3.11. Seeing then that all these Things
shall be dissolved, what manner of Persons ought ye to be, in all holy
Conversation and Godliness?
SERMON I. The wonderful Propagation of the Gospel.
1 TIMOTHY III. 16. -- Believed on in the World.


WHEN the Gospel of Christ was first published in the World, it had innumerable
prejudices to conquer, and the strongest opposition to break through. A
crucified Savior was to the Jews a stumbling, and to the Greeks foolishness.

The People of Israel were intoxicated with the dream of earthly grandeur, and
vainly expected that the promised Messiah would assume the ensigns of royalty
and power, subdue all Nations by the force of his victorious Arms, and exalt
them to the supreme Government of the World. When therefore our blessed Savior
appeared in the humble circumstances of poverty and disgrace, and they beheld
(instead of a Conquering Prince) a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief;
they despised his person, rejected his Doctrine, accused him as an Impostor,
and condemned him as a public Malefactor.

The People of Israel were intoxicated with the dream of earthly grandeur, and
vainly expected that the promised Messiah would assume the ensigns of royalty
and power, subdue all Nations by the force of his victorious Arms, and exalt
them to the supreme Government of the World. When therefore our blessed Savior
appeared in the humble circumstances of poverty and disgrace, and they beheld
(instead of a Conquering Prince) a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief;
they despised his person, rejected his Doctrine, accused him as an Impostor,
and condemned him as a public Malefactor.

The Gentiles were professed Admirers of Wisdom, and distasted every thing that
was not recommended with the beauties of Wit, and adorned with the flowers of
Rhetoric: the Gospel they therefore despised as a simple and ill-contriv'd
fable, destitute of Art and Eloquence, and treated its professors with scorn
and contempt. But notwithstanding the unhappy prejudices of the Jewish Doctors,
and the insolent Pride of the Gentile Philosophers, the Gospel was attended
with surprising success, and Multitudes of all Orders and Degrees flocked to
the standard of Christ. This is placed by St. Paul, in our Text, among the
Mysteries of Godliness. Great is the Mystery, etc.

In speaking unto these Words (by Divine Assistance) I shall.

First, Evidence the truth of the Fact, and show that Christ was believed on in
the World.

Secondly, I shall consider this as a Mystery of Godliness, beyond the power of
second Causes, and to be ascribed to the supernatural influences of the Spirit
of God.

First. I am to evidence that Fact mentioned by the Apostle, and show that
Christ was believed on in the World.

No sooner was the Gospel published by the first Ministers of his Kingdom, but
it was attended with astonishing success, and made a triumphant Progress
through the Earth.

When the Great Author of our Religion ascended into Heaven, the number of his
Disciples was inconsiderable: But no sooner was the Spirit poured out upon the
Apostles, but there was immediately a mighty Accession made to the Church, and
three thousand were added unto it in one Day Acts 2.41.
. The Word of God increased, and the Number of the Disciples multiplied greatly
in Jerusalem; and a great Company of the Priests were obedient unto the Faith
Acts 6.7
. From thence with incredible swiftness it passed through all Judea, Samaria,
etc. and by degrees penetrated to the more distant parts of the World; so that
within thirty Years after the Death of Christ, and before the great and final
destruction of Jerusalem, it was not only diffused throughout the whole Roman
Empire, the Seat of Learning and Politeness, but the dark corners of the Earth
were enlightened with the Doctrine of Salvation, and the most barbarous Nations
had the Gospel of the Kingdom conveyed unto them: and wherever it came, it
flourished exceedingly; multitudes of all Ages and Sexes embraced the faith of
Christ. So quick and surprising a progress it made in the World, that in a few
Years we find the Christian Apologists boasting of their mighty numbers, and
representing to the pagan Emperors, that their Cities and Provinces, their
Camps and their Courts, yea the Senate House and Palace, were filled with the
despised Sect of Christians, and that it would be impossible to destroy them
without exhausting the strength of the Empire, and leaving all places in a
state of dismal solitude and silence Tertull.
.

And though at first the Disciples of Jesus were destitute of wordly wisdom and
learning, without power and policy, of an humble and inferior character: yet in
a few Years Men of uncommon Sagacity and Learning, of superior Genius and
Figure, laid aside their ancient prejudices and cheerfully embraced a despised
Gospel. Thus the Word of God went on conquering and to conquer, until at last
the mighty Generals of the Earth were subdued by its victorious power, and
resigned their laurels at the foot of the Cross. The Sovereign Princes of the
Roman Empire were persuaded to submit to the Obedience of Faith, and zealously
to propagate that Faith which before they had inhumanly persecuted. Thus was
that Prophecy of Isaiah accomplished, In the last days the mountain of the
Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and be exalted
above the hills, and all nations shall flow unto it and be saved Isai. 2.2.
. But the swift progress of the Gospel being a Fact to fully known, and so
universally acknowledged, I need not enlarge any further in the proof of it.

Secondly. I am to show, That this is a Mystery, beyond the power of second
Causes, and to be ascribed to the supernatural influences of the Spirit of God.
And this will appear, if we consider.

1. The astonishing Change it produced in the Lives and Manners of its
Professors. They were at once transformed into new Men and became obedient to
the Faith, not in word but deed; they renounced their ancient Idolatries and
became cheerful Victims to the Cross of Christ. When they changed their
Profession they reformed their manners, and from the depths of iniquity were
recovered to the unfeigned practice of Piety. The proud Masters of Philosophy
forsook their beloved Sentiments and submitted to the dispensation of Grace,
the sensual and voluptuous were persuaded to mortify the Flesh, and renounced
the forbidden Pleasures of Sin, the ambitious despised their earthly honors,
and received the Crown of Martyrdom as their highest Glory, the covetous Miser
became beneficent and charitable, and consecrated his Wealth to the service of
the Saints; Persecutors were disarmed of their fury and grew ambitious of
appearing among the Martyrs of Jesus; the fiercest Natures were subdued into
Meekness, and insulting tyrants became patrons of oppressed Innocene and Virtue.

This mighty change was happily exemplified in the Corinthian Converts, who
were practiced in the vilest iniquities, but after their receiving the Gospel
were eminent for their temperance and sobriety, they were washed, sanctified,
and justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of our God 1 Cor.
6.10, 11.
.

Yea so exemplary were the lives of Christians in these first and purest Ages
of the Church that their very enemies represent them as a devout, innocent and
charitable sort of men, and the ancient defenders of the faith challenge their
adversaries to produce one of their Number that was condemned as a thief or a
murderer, or was guilty of any gross enormities for which the pagan world was
so infamous. Now certainly nothing but a divine power could produce such a
wonderful Change in the lives and manners of men; it is only the almighty
Spirit of grace, that can subdue the perverseness of human Nature, restrain the
tumultuous passions of mankind, and transform Monsters of Vice and Impiety into
patterns of Sobriety and Virtue.

2. Let us consider the Meanness and Simplicity of the Instruments, that were
employed in this Blessed Work. A Stranger to the sacred History will perhaps
imagine that the Gospel was propagated at first by Men of superior Genius,
intimately acquainted with the secrets of human Learning, well versed in the
Art of disputing, and assisted by the Charms of Persuasion and Eloquence; and
had this been the case, the success of the Gospel had not been so wonderful,
nor the divine power so clearly displayed: therefore God chose the foolish
things of the world to confound the wise, the weak things of the world to
confound the mighty, that no flesh should glory in his presence 1 Cor. 1.27, 29.
. The Apostles were Men of contemptible figure, inferior extract, and of plain
Understanding; they were not polished by Education, nor improved by study, but
brought up to the meanest employments; they had neither Art to insinuate
themselves into the affections of their hearers, nor power to compel them to
embrace their doctrines; they were not supported by authority, nor clothed with
pomp and splendour to awe the minds of men into subjection and reverence; but
they appeared with the utmost plainness and simplicity, and addressed their
hearers with humility and meekness. These were the first Heralds of the
Everlasting Gospel, and by these (in themselves contemptible Instruments) it
pleased God to humble the Pride of man, and subdue the world to the Cross of
Christ. This then declares the divine power that attended the Publication of
the Gospel: we have this treasure in earthen Vessels, that the excellency of
the Power may be of God and not of us 2 Cor. 4.7.
. And this divine Power will further appear, if we consider

3. The manner in which the Gospel was propagated in the world. The Instruments
employed were not only mean and contemptible, but the method they took to
accomplish their design was contrary to carnal Policy, and most unlikely to
prevail. Impostors have always endeavored to propagate their doctrines by
force, or insinuate them into the minds of men by policy and contrivance.

Thus the Prophet of Arabia introduced his religion by the Sword, and by his
victorious Arms obliged the Nations to receive the Alcoran. The Papal Empire
was at first established by force, and has been supported ever since by
continual Stratagem.

But the Apostles of Christ abhorred all methods of deceit, nor did they
propagate their doctrines by force and sword; they were not attended with
conquering Armies to prepare the way for their reception, nor did they make use
of torture and violence to support and enlarge their conquests. The Weapons of
their Warfare were not carnal but spiritual: They addressed their nearears not
with the enticing words of man's wisdom 2 Cor. 10.4.
, with studied Ornaments of Speech or engaging methods of persuasion, but in
the most plain and artless manner declared unto them the doctrine and miracles,
the death and resurrection of Christ; they proclaimed him whom the Jews had
slew and hanged upon a tree, the Savior of the World, and the Prince of the
Kings of the Earth. They promised an Immortality of Happiness and Glory to
those that believed in his Name and obeyed his Commandments: but on the
contrary they threatened destruction and misery to such as should impenitently
despise and reject him. And yet by these contemptible methods, in the midst of
innumerable difficulties, they gained proselytes to the faith and baffled the
Wisdom and Eloquence, the power and policy of the world: this certainly exceeds
the power of man and evidences that the almighty influences of the Spirit
attended them.

4. The Doctrines inculcated in the Gospel make it still more mysterious, that
Christ should be believed on in the world. Had the doctrine of Christ been
suited to the Pride of human Nature and calculated to flatter Men in their
Vices and Pleasures, we might justly have expected that it would be suddenly
and universally embraced: for men are fond of gratifying their sensual
inclinations, they easily receive a doctrine which indulges their Pride and
Passions, and affords them an unlimited enjoyment of their darling Pleasures.

By this means the religion of Mahomet, became palatable to a vicious World,
and quickly overspread the Nations of the East; for it encouraged an unbounded
indulgence of men's appetites and lusts upon Earth, and promised an eternal
paradise of brutish and sensual enjoyments in a future world. -- But the Gospel
of Christ had nothing of this nature to recommend it to the public reception;
the doctrines it taught were sublime and mysterious, contrary to the Pride and
passions of men; the duties it inculcated were harsh and ungrateful, against
the grain of our corrupt and defiled Natures; it obliged its professors to deny
all ungodliness and worldly lusts, to live soberly and righteously and godly in
this present world Tit. 2.12.
. It required them to renounce their darling iniquities and part with their
most desirable enjoyments when they became inconsistent with a good Conscience.
These were hard sayings indeed and difficult to be practiced by a degenerate
Age: and yet notwithstanding these difficulties and disadvantages it prevailed
exceedingly in the World, and triumphed over the vices and follies of men. And
this is still more wonderful, if we consider

5. The unhappy Prejudices, that prevailed against the Gospel Dispensation.
Prejudice is always an enemy to truth, and fixes the mind in an inveterate
opposition against it, and no prejudice is so strong as that which is received
from the birth and founded in Education, especially when it is strengthened by
Authority and recommended by the venerable claim of Antiquity. It is next to
impossible to erase the early impressions that men receive in their tender Age,
and persuade them to renounce that Religion, which from their infancy they have
been taught to revere and obey. And this was a mighty difficulty which the
Gospel had to encounter at its first appearance. Both Jews and Gentiles were
filled with the strongest prejudices against it.

The Jews, the peculiar People of God, had the highest reverence for the Law o
Moses, which was unquestionably of divine Authority, and delivered unto them
from Heaven, with the utmost pomp and solemnity. They had also a venerable
regard for the traditions of the Elders which they believed to be sacred and
binding upon the Conscience. But above all their minds were filled with a
flattering expectation of earthly dignities, and delighted with a groundless
hope that their Messiah would be a temporal Prince and appear with a prosperous
and conquering Army; this filled them with an invincible aversion to our humble
Redeemer, and they despised the afflicted State in which he appeared.

And the prejudices of the Gentiles were as strong as those of the Jews; they
were addicted to the most execrable Idolatries and sunk into the lowest State
of Ignorance and superstition; the Prince of darkness reigned in their Hearts
without control, and for many Ages maintained an undisturbed dominion over
them; the worship of their Idols was established by immemorial prescription,
and the method of it was stately and magnificent, their Priests were engaged by
Interest to maintain their ancient Customs, and persuaded the multitude that
their costly Sacrifices and superstitious modes of worship appeased the Anger
of the Gods and procured continual peace and prosperity.

The Philosophers were puffed up with a vain conceit of their knowledge, and
were too proud to submit to the humbling discoveries of the Gospel, they
despised the plainness and simplicity of its teachers, and distasted the
strictness and purity of its precepts. The Doctrine of the Cross they esteemed
a ridiculous Story, and the Resurrection from the dead the grossest absurdity;
thus St. Paul was styled a babbler by the Wits of Athens, and looked upon as a
setter forth of strange Gods, because he preached unto them Jesus and the
Resurrection Acts 17.18.
: and yet the Doctrine of Christ bore up against all opposition, and
triumphantly prevailed in spite of all partiality and prejudice.

6. These prejudices were increased by the bitter persecutions to which
Christianity was exposed. The Primitive believers had not only the Corruptions
of humane Nature to conquer, the propossessions of Education to surmount, but
the Rage and Malice of Earth and Hell to contend with. The Dominion of Satan
was disturbed by the preaching of the Gospel, and the prince of darkness was
unwilling to lose so many subjects of his Empire, he therefore engaged the
Powers of the World strongly to combine against it. The Kings of the Earth and
the Rulers took counsel together against the Lord and against his anointed
Psalm. 2, 2.
. The High Priests and Governors among the Jews used their utmost endeavors to
stifle Christianity in the birth, and suppress it in its infancy. And when it
began to increase in the World, the whole face of the Roman Empire the Mistress
of the Earth was engaged against it, and mighty persecutions were continually
raised to extirpate and destroy it.

How many forsook their most valuable enjoyments and were banished into the
most desolate Corners of the Earth for the testimony of Jesus? how many
submitted to the most barbarous Cruelties rather than make shipwreck of faith
and a good Conscience, and suffered the most affrighting Deaths for the honor
of our great Redeemer. They were exposed to hunger, thirst and nakedness, they
were destroyed by fire and sword, they were condemned to be devoured by Beasts
and forced to expire in the midst of torments. In fine, the King of terrors was
presented to their view in its most formidable appearance, to deter them from
the profession of the Gospel, or persuade them to renounce and forsake it.

And yet these ancient Heroes of the Christian Church, this noble Army of
Martyrs, persisted in their Faith in the midst of their bitterest sufferings,
they took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, and patiently submitted to the
most exquisite miseries, they gloried in the Cross in the presence of their
enraged persecutors, and rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer for
the Name of Christ; they encountered Death not only with patience and
resignation, but embraced it with extacy and triumph; they hugged their Chains
as the trophies of their honor, and received their Executioners as the
Messengers of Heaven; to convey them to the happy mansions of Paradise. They
entered into the fire with Joy, and breathed out their Souls in cheerful
Hallelujahs.

Nor was this peculiar to men of undaunted Courage and manly Resolution, but
the Number of Confessors was vast, and consisted of Persons of all Ages and
Sexes, of all Orders and Conditions. The hoary Heads despised the Weakness of
their declining Years, and joyfully devoted the remainder of their days to the
defense of the truth. Blooming Youths forgot the tenderness of their
Constitutions, and with undaunted Courage entered the fiery trial, and even
delicate Virgins renounced the softness of their Sex, and despised Death, though
attended with the most ghastly terrors.

Now what but a divine Power could preserve the Church in the midst of the
fiery furnace? Had this Work or Counsel been of men, it must certainly have
been overthrown, when all the Powers of Earth were united to oppose it: but
under all the discouragements that the Policy of men could invent, or the
Malice of tyrants inflict, the Gospel flourished, mighty additions were made to
the Church, all attempts to suppress it proved successful methods to advance
its Glory. The Contradiction of Sinners redounded to the Credit of its
Disciples. The Blood of the Martyrs was the seed of the Church, and like the
showers of Heaven upon the thirsty Earth, made it more fruitful and
flourishing. This must be acknowledged the work of the Lord, and it should be
mavelous in our Eves. It certainly deserves a place among the Mysteries of
Godliness, that Christ was believed on in the World.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. Let us all be persuaded to believe the Truth and Divinity of the Gospel,
which was so eminently confirmed from Heaven, and so miraculously prevailed in
the world. The Great Author of our Religion evidenced his Mission by the most
unquestionable Authority; the Father testified his approbation from Heaven, and
in a Voice of thunder, declared him his beloved Son in whom he was well
pleased. -- The Miracles which he wrought in the presence of Multitudes
declared him to be the Son of God, and the Savior of the World. -- The
wonderful descent of the holy Ghost upon the Apostles, and the astonishing Gift
of tongues with which they were at once inspired, was a visible confirmation of
his Doctrine, and a standing testimony that the Gospel was not a cunningly
devised fable, but of divine and heavenly extract.

But were all these forgotten, the incredible success that attended it at its
first promulgation against all humane probabilities, would be a sufficient
demonstration that it was of God and not of Man. -- Is it possible to conceive,
so unacceptable a Scheme could be imposed upon the world by men destitute of
Education and Learning, without art and address; and universally prevail in
spite of prepossession and prejudice, in opposition to perpetual force and
violence, without any advantages to recommend it, but the promise of an unseen
and future Reward? What but a standing Miracle could propagate a Doctrine so
severe and unungrateful, so repugnant to the Appetites and Passions of humane
Nature, so displeasing to flesh and blood, so contrary to the Wisdom of the
World; a Doctrine that was ridiculed by the great Philosophers of the Age, and
persecuted by the Princes of the Earth? Must not the happy Entertainment it met
with, be principally ascribed to the demonstration of the Spirit and power that
accompanied it? -- What but an almighty Arm could destroy the Kingdom of Satan,
and banish the Prince of darkness from his ancient dominions? -- Who but the
Spirit of Grace could subdue the obstinacy of rebellious Sinners, and set up
the Throne of Christ in the Hearts of Men? -- What but a divine power could
support the primitive Christians under their numberless hardships, and
influence the most soft and delicate Natures to despise the Cruelty of Tyrants,
and bravely encounter the most tormenting Deaths? This must be owned to have
been the Work of God, and a remarkable evidence of the divine Authority of the
Gospel.

2. How vast is the Guilt, how awful the danger of those, who reject the
Doctrine of Christ! The Jews persecuted Christ in his State of suffering and
weakness, and the Gentiles opposed the Progress of the Gospel through the
strength and prejudice of Education; but the Infidels of the present Age insult
him upon his Throne, and cast contempt upon him, to whom all power in Heaven
and Earth is committed; and that after the clearest discoveries of his divine
Authority, and the fullest evidence of the truth of his Mission. Their Sin
therefore is of a deeper Dye than the Iniquities of Sodom and Gomorrah, and
their punishment will be more severe than the destruction of ignorant Heathens.
Had the Princes of this World been acquainted with the dignity of his Person
and the excellence of his Doctrine, they would not have crucified the Lord of
Glory; this therefore was an abatement of their Guilt, and rendered them
capable of Pardon: but now the Sun of Righteousness has appeared in such
visible Glory, chased away the darkness of Heathenism, and established his
Kingdom upon the Ruins of Superstition and Idolatry, it is unaccountable
Obstinacy not to acknowledge his Authority, and submit to his just and
righteous Government. Such have no Cloak for their Sin, no excuse for their
Infidelity; but may justly expect that the Savior whom they despise, will
clothe himself with Vengeance as with a Garment, and execute an exemplary
punishment on his Enemies, in proportion to the degrees of Light they have
resisted, and the invaluable Mercies they have abused.

3. The Sanctity of manners, so remarkable in the first Days of the Gospel,
severely reproves the awful degeneracy of the present Age. The Primitive
Disciples of Christ were shining examples of Virtue, they cast a Glory upon
their Profession, and recommended it with advantage to the World. Their Piety
was fervent without Superstion and Idolatry, their Charity diffusive without
hypacrisy and reserve; they practiced an ascetic Virtue in the midst of
alluring temptations, and manifested a generous contempt of the World, when
surrounded with its most agreeable enjoyments; -- but where is that ancient
Piety and Virtue, by which the primitive Christians were so justly
distinguished? -- Where that Purity of faith and sanctity of manners, by which
they shone as Lights in the World, and inspired their very persecutors with awe
and reverence? Alas! in this degenerate Age, Religion is wounded in the House
of its Friends, the Professors of the Gospel are oftentimes Enemies to the
Cross of Christ, and the venerable Name by which we are called, is insulted and
blasphemed by reason of the scandalous miscarriages of those who enroll their
Names among the number of his followers: this is indeed a melancholy
reflection, and should inspire us with a pious Indignation against the Vices
and Impieties of the Age, and inkindle in our Breasts a fervent Zeal to advance
the honor of that holy Religion we prosess.

4. Let us sincerely endeavor after a saving acquaintance with this Mystery of
Godliness. Our blessed Savior is proposed unto us in the Gospel as the proper
Object of our Faith, and recommended to our Esteem and Regard by the most
powerful and persuasive Arguments. This is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ is come into the World to save Sinners; our
Necessity loudly demands his assistance, and his gracious Invitations should
encourage us to fly to him as our Savior. It is not enough that we yield a
naked assent unto the Gospel, but our Faith must purify the Heart, and produce
the works of sincere Obedience, if we would be entitled to the favor of
Christ, and owned as his faithful Servants; if we believe his Doctrines, we
must regulate our Lives by his excellent Precepts, and imitate his perfect and
shining Example: for a Christian in Name and profession only, having a form of
Godliness but denying the Power of it, is one of the worst of Infidels, and
will be disowned by Christ in the great Day, and herded among the number of his
Enemies.

To Conclude, therefore let us now be persuaded to accept of Christ as our
Savior, and adore him as our Lord and Master. Let us be imitators of their
Faith, Patience and Holiness, who through Grace inherit the Promises. Let us
earnestly long and pray for that happy time, when all the Enemies of Christ
shall be subdued under his Feet; when that promise to the Son of God shall
receive its fullest accomplishment, I will give thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy possession; when the
Kingdoms of this World shall in a more illustrious manner become the Kingdoms
of the Lord and of his Christ. To whom be Glory and Dominion for ever. Preached
Sept. 10, 1737.


AMEN.
SERMON II. The certainty of a future Judgment.
HEB. VI. 2. -- And of eternal Judgment.


IT is the distinguishing privilege of Man, the lord of this lower world, that
he was made a reasonable and accountable creature, and designed for a future
State of immortality; the noble powers with which he is endowed, and the vast
improvements he is capable of, were not intended to be confined to this dark
and imperfect Scene of action: Death that destroys our earthly frame, and puts
an End to our worldly business and enjoyments, does not put a final period to
our being, but translates us into a future state: when we pass off the stage of
time, we enter upon an unalterable eternity; for after death comes the
Judgment. Heb. 9.27.
.

This is an important Article of the christian faith, frequently inculcated in
the sacred Oracles, and almost universally received in the world. It is
mentioned in our text as one of the first principles of the doctrine of Christ,
and the foundation of practical Religion. It is therefore of the highest
consequence, to fix in our minds an unshaken persuasion of this awful truth,
that we may feel its happy influence, and be excited to prepare for the coming
of our Lord. To this end it is my design from the words now read,

First, To consider the Evidences of a future Judgment.

Secondly, To make some Improvement of this Important Doctrine.

First. I am to consider the Evidences of a future Judgment. And here I shall
observe,

1. The voice of conscience bears testimony unto it. There is implanted in the
breast of every man a conscience, on which is engraven with a pen of iron and
the point of a diamond, the necessary and immutable distinction between virtue
and vice, between good and evil: -- hence arises that happy serenity of mind,
that secret joy and satisfaction that attends the practice of virtue, and those
distressing fears and gloomy suspicions, which are the melancholy companions of
vice and impiety: So that the good man has an inward support and comfort, even
when he meets with nothing but frowns and discouragements from without, and is
often filled with joyful expectations of a reward in the midst of worldly
darkness and difficulty; on the other hand the wicked are haunted with
perpetual terrors in the most prosperous circumstances of life, and terrified
with the apprehensions of future vengeance, though their crimes are concealed
from the world, and committed in the darkest privacy. At the approach of death,
when all hopes and fears are at end with respect to this life, then these
apprehensions are the most lively and vigorous: in that melancholy hour the
wicked are in a more especial manner stung with remorse for their iniquities,
-- reflect with horror upon their past lives, and tremble at the apprehension
of impending vengeance; whereas the righteous are oftentimes supported with the
most sprightly hopes, and amidst the agonies and convulsions of nature, are
revived with the joyful prospect of immortality and glory.

Nor are these impressions of futurity peculiar to men of narrow minds, of
gloomy and suspicious tempers, but men of all orders and degrees, of all ages
and conditions have felt the force of them. Conscience exercises its power
without respect of persons, the greatest monarchs are equally liable to its
reproaches with the meanest of their subjects; -- insulting tyrants have
trembled at the remembrance of their guilt, though placed above the reach of any
human tribunal, and surrounded with a servile train of flatterers and
dependants. Conscience is neither awed by greatness, nor bribed by riches, nor
charmed into silence by gaieties and pleasure: it breaks through, the strongest
guards, insinuates into the palaces of the mighty, and is not afraid to say to
a King, thou art wicked, and to Princes, Ye are ungodly. It sets before them a
black catalogue of their crimes, cites them before the enlightened tribunal of
heaven, and fills them with fearful expectations of a judgment to come.

The Sinner may indeed filence the voice of conscience for a time, and suppress
these uneasy impressions while he is amused with company and engaged in
business or diversion, yet they are hardly ever quite effaced and obliterated;
but when the wicked are retired from the vanities of the world, when any
accident intervenes, that puts a stop to the gaiety of their thoughts, and
disposes them to seriousness and reflection, the mind awakes out of its
stupidity, and is harassed with continual Images of horror. Now to what shall
we ascribe these awful apprehensions of futurity, that so universally possess
the breasts of men, and attend us to the last period of Life? Must we not
suppose that they are impressions stamped upon our nature by the wise Author of
our beings, and designed to warn us of a future judgment? and consequently that
these Joys of the righteous are the dawnings of immortality and the earnest of
eternal happiness, and that the terrors of the wicked are the beginning of
Sorrows, and the first fruits of endless and intolerable misery.

2. The Perfections of God, the supreme Governor of the world, seem to require
a future judgment. The first notion we entertain of God is, that he is
infinitely perfect in all his attributes; and whatever implies the least
imperfection, strikes at the very existence of the Deity, and banishes him out
of the world.

The admirable beauty that appears on the face of Nature, the wife disposition
of its various parts, and their mutual subserviency to the good of the whole,
are standing evidences that this world was made at first by a wise and powerful
Being, and is continually preserved and governed by his gracious providence:
Nor can it be supposed that infinite Wisdom should be employed in ordering the
inferior creation with such surprising harmony and exactness, and cast off the
care of man, his favorite creature, and the most noble part of his workmanship.

Now if God is so infinitely perfect in himself, and human affairs are subject
to his wise and universal providence, we may justly conclude, that as he loves
righteousness and hates iniquity, so he will encourage the one and
discountenance the other, in a way agreeable to the undoubted perfections of his
nature, and consequently will make a visible distinction between the generation
of his faithful Servants, and the company of his implacable enemies. -- The
Purity of the divine Nature, and the justice of his Government assures us, that
he will not condemn the innocent, nor always suffer the guilty to escape with
impunity; this would be an unanswerable reflection upon an earthly Prince, and
soon bring his Government into universal confusion and contempt, and therefore
must not be attributed to the supreme Governor of the world, who is wiser than
the Kings of the earth. -- The only question then is, Whether in the present
dispensations of providence, there is this visible difference made between the
righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him
not? -- Is virtue always rewarded in this world, and vice remarkably punished?
-- This cannot be pretended, the contrary is evident to the most careless
observer.

We daily behold a great deal of darkness and difficulty appearing upon the
face of providence, and good and evil seem to be indifferently dispensed to the
righteons and to the wicked. There is one event to the just and to the unjust,
to him that swears, and to him that fears an oath Eccl. 9.2.
, without any frequent interposition to vindicate the cause of innocence, and
punish the violence of the oppressor. The virtuous man is not secured from the
common trials and afflictions of life, but oftentimes stands peculiarly exposed
to the blasts of adversity; his strength and beauty is consumed by wasting
diseases, his estate devoured by oppression and injustice, and his reputation
sullied by the breath of envy and malice. -- While the wicked are triumphing in
prosperity, Psalm. 73.5.
Neither are they plagued like other men; they live, they become old, they are
mighty in power, their seed is established in their sight, and their offspring
before their eyes; their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God
upon them; they spend their days in wealth, and in a moment (without any
remarkable judgment) they go down to the grave Job, 21.7.
-- Thus we see a just man to whom it happens according to the work of the
wicked, and a wicked man to whom it happens according to the work of the
righteous Eccl. 8.14.
: -- It is no uncommon sight, to behold men of distinguished vice advanced to
places of dignity and power, and enjoy the largest share of wealth and esteem,
-- while men of unblemished virtue are treated as the offscouring of all
things, and abandoned to poverty and contempt. Persecuted innocence stands
trembling at the bar, while wickedness is exalted to the throne. The most
eminent Saints are clothed in rags, and destitute of the conveniences of Life,
while the brutish epicure is clothed in purple and scarlet, and fares
sumptuously every day. -- Nay, the wicked often attain to their greatness and
power, by the most unjust and disgraceful methods; they ascend to the pinnacle
of honor upon the ruins of their oppressed neighbors; when at the same time
the righteous, for their steady adherence to the Laws of God, and zeal and
fidelity in his service, are persecuted in their names, robbed of their
estates, and exposed to the loss of all the valuable enjoyments of life. --
Thus the illustrious Saints of old, of whom the earth was not worthy, were
persecuted and abused, they wandered about in sheepskins and goat skins, they
inhabited the dens and caverns of the earth, they were destitute, afflicted and
tormented Heb. 11.37, 38.
, while their guilty persecutors were honored with the public esteem, and
enjoyed all the felicities that earth could afford them. -- Now how shall we
reconcile these events, with the wisdom and justice of divine Providence, if we
confine our thoughts to the present world, and do not look forward to a future
judgment? -- Will the sovereign Ruler of the universe make no just distinction
between those who insolently defy his power and profanely despise his
authority, and those who steadfastly obey his laws, and sacrifice their dearest
enjoyments in obedience to his commands? -- Shall persecuted virtue be always
hissed off the stage with disgrace, and be buried in eternal silence and
oblivion? -- Shall the triumphing of the wicked endure for ever, and the
ungodly always possess the fruits of their prosperous villainies? -- Where would
be the goodness of the divine nature, if there were no reward for those that
diligently seek him? Where the justice of his government, if impenitent
transgressors pass for ever unpunished? -- And since this is frequently the
case in this world, we may with the highest assurance expect and believe
another, when God will publicly reward the righteous, and signally punish the
workers of iniquity. This world is a state of trial, and this is the day of
God's patience and forbearance; bearance; the next will be a time of
retribution and vengeance: when the Mysteries of divine providence shall be
unriddled, the darkness and difficulties that have attended his dispensations
shall be removed, and the whole administration of his government shall appear
surprisingly beautiful and regular.

Though for a time he may seem to wink at the sins of men, and suffer them to
pass unpunished: Though he may permit his servants to be abused and insulted, for
the trial of their faith, and the brightning of their virtues: yet the
triumphing of the wicked is but short, and the joy of the hypocrite is but for
a moment. The God of justice will shortly appear in the defense of his
persecuted children, and evidence to the whole intelligent world, that he
loves righteousness and hates iniquity. Though clouds and darkness at present
encompass the throne of his Justice, and our shallow capacities are not able to
search into the reasons of his conduct; yet we may be assured, that he will
shortly vindicate the honor of his despised laws, and display the wisdom and
equity of his Government. He will bring forth his righteousness as the light,
and his judgment as the noonday. Every eye shall see, and every tongue shall
confess, that verily there is a reward for the righteous, there is a God that
judges in the earth. I proceed to say,

3. The sacred Scriptures expressly reveal a future Judgment. The light of
nature makes it probable, that God who made the world by his power, and governs
it by his providence, will also judge it hereafter; but the light of the Gospel
gives us the most convincing evidence of this important truth, and assures us,
that the day is appointed, and the time is prefixed in the unalterable decrees
of heaven. In all ages of the Church mankind have been warned of this awful
day. Before the destruction of the earth by the flood, Enoch the seventh from
Adam prophesied of a Judgment to come, saying, Behold, the Lord comes with ten
thousand of his Saints to execute judgment upon all Jude 14, 15.
. Solomon under the law inculcates the same doctrine, and assures us, that God
will bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good or whether it be evil Ecel. 12.14.
Our Lord himself informs us, that the Son of man shall come in the glory of
his Father, with the holy angels, and then shall he reward every man according
to his work Matthew. 16.27.
. This doctrine St. Paul preached to the Athenians. The times of this ignorance
God winked at, but now commands all men every where to repent, because he
has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that
man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance to all men, in that
he has raised him from the dead Act. 17.31.
. St. Peter speaks of this day in the most solemn and affecting language. But
the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in which the heavens
shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent
heat; the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up 2 Pet.
3.10
Finally, Our Savior shuts up the Canon of the New Testament with an express
promise of his coming. Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give
to every man according as his work shall be Rev. 22.12 and 20.


Thus we have not only the testimony of conscience, the infinite perfections of
God, and the goodness and justice of his Government, to assure us of this great
truth; but we have the express declarations of his will, which gives us the
highest and most satisfactory evidence, and by which all the other arguments
that support it are strengthened and confirmed; so that we are as certain that
there will be a future judgment, as if we saw the heavens opening, and the
almighty Judge descending, the tribunal erected, and the dead small and great
standing before it. I pass therefore,

Secondly, To make some Improvement of this awful doctrine. And here,

1. This manifests the justice of divine Providence, and answers the objections
that are so frequently brought against it. When we see the tabernacles of
robbers prosper, and the profane and ungodly flourish in ease and prosperity;
when the vilest men are exalted to the height of honor, and possess the
largest affluence of worldly enjoyments, while the children of God are bowed
down with an heavy weight of cares, and loaded with contempt and disgrace: --
When impenitent transgressors depart out of the world in peace, and the wicked
have no bands in their death; while the righteous are persecuted to their
graves with reproach, and take farewell of the world in darkness and distress;
-- Men are apt to draw the most dark and uncomfortable conclusions, and to
imagine that either there is no God, or that human affairs are not under his
wise and righteous administration. -- Yea, this has oftentimes been a
stumbling block to the most eminent Saints, and caused their faith to stagger
and fail, their feet have almost slipped, when they beheld the uninterrupted
prosperity of the wicked, and the distressing calamities of the righteous. They
have been ready to pour out that melancholy complaint of the Psalmist, Psalm.
73.13
Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence: and
to join in that pathetic expostulation of the Prophet: Wherefore do the wicked
prosper? wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously Jer. 12.1.
? -- And indeed these would be inextricable difficulties in the dispensations
of providence, that it would be impossible to account for, if this were the
only life of man, and there were none else to succeed it.

But the doctrine of an eternal Judgment scatters the clouds that encompass the
paths of divine Providence, clears up the mysteries that attend his Government;
and shows the justice and equity, the beauty and regularity of his proceedings.
For this assures us, that every secret iniquity shall be punished with an holy
severity, and every virtuous action shall meet with a just and suitable
recompense. The persecuted servants of Christ shall meet with a distinguishing
reward, while their proud and insolent oppressors shall be doomed to a state of
the most aggravated misery. -- Why then should the righteous complain of the
sufferings of this life, which are but for a moment, and shall be recompensed
with a superior and an eternal weight of Glory? -- Why should they repine at
the prosperity of the foolish, whose enjoyments will vanish as a dream, and
prepare them for more severe and intolerable torments? -- This surely may well
satisfy men of the Justice of divine Providence, even when the greatest
difficulties attend it, and his ways appear most intricate and mysterious.

2. This shows us the reason of God's patience, why he bears so long with the
provoking iniquities of men.

Every wilful transgression is an insolent defiance of the eternal Majesty of
heaven, and a daring contempt of his sacred authority; impenitent sinners
challenge almighty Justice, and provoke the Lord to jealousy as if they were
stronger than he. -- And yet he bears with astonishing patience their continual
affronts; he spares a guilty world that ungratefully despise his goodness, and
abuse his favors to wantonness and excess. Notwithstanding their innumerable
provocations, he showers down his favors upon them in daily abundance, and
fills their hearts with food and gladness:mdash; from hence they take
encouragement in their wickedness, and flatter themselves that they shall
escape with impunity. They vainly imagine that God does not observe their
actions, or at least that he will not severely punish them for their crimes.
Because sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed, therefore the
hearts of the sons of men are fully set in them to do evil Eceles. 8.2.
. -- But how vast is their madness! how unreasonable is their conclusion! It is
not because God is unacquainted with their ways, that he forbears to punish
their rebellions. For his Eyes run to and fro in the earth, beholding the evil
and the good. The most forlorn corner of the world cannot conceal them from his
view, nor the darkest privacy banish them from his presence; his Eyes are as a
flaming fire, and pierce through the thickest darkness; and his diffusive
influence extends to every part of the creation.

It is not any defect of his Power, that can secure the sinner from his
avenging wrath; for he made the world by the Authority of a Command, and can
destroy it in a moment by a frown of his countenance. Sinners are always in his
hand, and he can at once ease himself of his adversaries, and be avenged of his
enemies. He can strike dead the intemperate in the height of their jollity, and
fill them with the envenomed wine of his fury. He can seize the profane
swearer in the midst of his hellish rage, and dispatch him out of the world,
with his oaths and curses in his mouth.

It is not because divine Justice is asleep, that he does not make bare his
almighty arm, surprise the wicked in the very act of sin, and hang them up in
chains as standing monuments of his righteous severity. -- But he waits with
patience that he may lead them to repentance, and delays the execution of his
vengeance to the judgment of the great day. He now seems to wink at the sins of
men, to try their reverence for his authority, and obedience to his laws; and
has appointed a day for the public triumph of his Justice, in the destruction
of his implacable adversaries. He suffers them to remain undisturbed in their
enjoyments, and to wallow in wealth and plenty in this world; but they are
fatning for the day of slaughter, and are reserved for a more severe adn
dreadful execution.

He is now seated upon a throne of Grace, and endures with much long-suffering,
the vessels of wrath that are fitted for destruction, but amazing judgments are
denounced against them in his unalterable word, and will be executed upon them
in his appointed time. These things (says he) have thou done, and I kept
silence, thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an one as thy self, but I
will reprove thee, and set thy sins in order before thine eyes Psalm. 50.22.
. In the height of their security, when they flatter themselves with peace and
safety, sudden destruction will come upon them as travail upon a woman with
child, and they shall not escape.

3. This shows the madness of unthinking Sinners, who put the evil day far from
them, and neglect to prepare for a future judgment. Since the doctrine of
eternal judgment is so evident to the principles of Reason, and so clearly
revealed in the Gospel of Christ, it is just matter of surprise and
astonishment, to behold the children of men give a loose to their vicious
inclinations, and live in an allowed course of impiety and lewdness, as if they
were made for no higher end than to eat and drink, to laugh and to die, -- as
if they had no apprehensions of that great and terrible day of the Lord, in
which they must be called to an account for their actions, and must appear at
the bar of an impartial judge.

It exceeds all belief, did not melancholy experience make it too plain to be
denied, that multitudes of christians, who profess to expect a day of judgment,
should be so slothful and unactive in their preparations for it; that those who
are convinced, that the wicked shall be condemned in that day, and exposed to
the vengeance of eternal fire, should yet retain their beloved lusts, and
continue in as much ease and security as if these awful truths were the dreams
of enthusiasm, and the wrath of God were no more to be dreaded than an
insignificant scarecrow. -- To what shall we ascribe this general stupidity and
impiety of men? Whence arises, O Sinner! your inward peace and security, when
wrath from heaven is revealed against you, and hell from beneath opens its
mouth wide to receive you? Do you believe there is a just and powerful Being to
whom you are accountable, that a memorial is kept of your secret iniquities,
and that he will make a strict enquiry into your actions? And can you yet
persist in your sinful courses, and live in a careless neglect of God and your
duty? -- This is madness beyond a parallel; you are more insensible than the
brutal world, who will not rush into a destruction they are apprized of. -- But
alas! the unhappiness of mankind is, that they banish these solemn truths out
of their minds; otherwise they could not be so careless and secure, they would
not dare to spend their days in mirth, and their years in pleasure, without any
serious regard to God, their almighty Judge, or to their immortal souls, which
are upon the brink of eternal misery. -- Or if these melancholy thoughts
sometimes crowd into their minds, they shift them off as unwelcome guests, to a
more convenient opportunity, and join with the scoffers of old, saying, The
vision is for many days. They are so captivated with the vanities and
amusements of life, so immersed in its cares and employments, that they are
averse to exercise their thoughts upon such harsh and ungrateful subjects, and
flatter themselves that they shall have time enough hereafter, when they are
satiated with the pleasures of life. -- But what can be more stupid than to
leave your most important concerns at a desperate uncertainty, and spend your
days in unprositable trisles? -- Indeed, could you prevent the approach of that
day, by banishing the thoughts of it out of your minds; would the Judge wait
upon your unreasonable delays, and put off the time of his coming until you
were prepared to go forth to meet him, you would have some excuse for your
negligence. But since the day is swistly approaching, whether you regard it or
no, since the end of all things is at hand, and the Judge is even at the door,
it is the height of distraction to drive the thoughts of his coming out of your
minds, and put the evil day far from you; and especially if we consider, that
the frequent fore-thoughts of this important event is a likely means to
persuade us to a diligent preparation for it: and if this be the happy effect,
we shall escape the terrors of that day, and be able to hold up our heads with
joy, and stand with comfort before the Son of Man at the time of his
illustrious appearance; which brings me to say,

4. and finally, The doctrine of a future Judgment administers comfort to the
people of God, under all the trials and persicutions that they meet with in the
world. Though at present they seem doomed to a state of sufiering and disgrace,
and are made spectacles of misery to Angels and Men, yet this may support their
sinking spirits, and relieve their desponding thoughts; to consider that all
the hardships they meet with are recorded in the book of God's remembrance, and
shall be mentioned to their immortal honor in the great day of accounts. Though
they are made the laughing stock of fools, and reproached and condemned by an
abusive world, yet the inward testimony of their conscience, and the prospect
of the future applause of their Judge, may preserve their Souls in peace, and
enable them to despise the censures of their malicious adversaries. -- In fine,
to suppose the worst, though they may be called to pass through the fiery trial,
and be exposed to the extremest sufferings for the sake of Christ, yet they
may maintain their ground with invincible courage, when they consider, that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared to the glory that
shall be revealed in them. Their fidelity to God shall meet with a
distinguishing reward, and their patient sufferings shall be crowned with
immortal Glory.

Wherefore, my beloved Brethren, let us all be animated with a noble ambition
to become of the number of the righteous, and be excited to unblemished
fidelity in the service of our Master and Judge; and then we may with joy and
comfort look for the blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God
and our Savior Jesus Christ.

To whom, etc. Preached Nov. 20.1737.


AMEN.
SERMON III. The Lord Jusus Christ appointed to be the Judge of the World.
ACT. X. 42. And he commanded us to preach unto the People, and to testify,
that it is He which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead.


THAT God will judge the World in righteousness, is a truth agreeable to the
light of nature, that candle of the Lord, which inlightens every man that comes
into the world; and has obtained the consent of all ages, not only among the
nations who live in the valley of vision and enjoy the supernatural revelation
of the Gospel, but also among those who inhabit the regions of darkness, and
are strangers to the Covenant of promise.

Indeed the Gentile world had but dark and confused notions of a future
Judgment; they disguised this awful truth under the most absurd and ridiculous
fictions; yet the belief of it was almost universal: We have frequent
intimations of it in the fables of their Poets, the harangues of their Orators,
and the prescripts of their celebrated moralists. But though they expected a day
of future recompense, in which the righteous would be signally rewarded, and
the wicked remarkably punished, yet they were entirely ignorant of the Person
by whom this Judgment should be administered, and the surprising circumstances
that should attend his approach. This was one of the secrets of the divine
Counsel, which none of the Princes or Philosophers of the world were acquainted
with, and which we could never have discovered by our most painful and
laborious enquiries, had not God been pleased to reveal it unto us in his word;
and here we have not only the nature of a future judgment unfolded, but the
awful solemnities that will attend it described, and are assured that the Lord
Jesus Christ is ordained of God to be the Judge of the quick and the dead:
which words afford us this important doctrine for the subject of our present
meditation, That the Lord Jesus Christ is appointed the supreme and universal
Judge of the world.

In speaking to which (by divine assistance) I shall, First, Consider how
clearly this great truth is revealed in the word of God. Secondly, Show how
excellently Christ is qualified for this exalted office. Thirdly, Enquire into
the Reasons of this Divine appointment.


First. I am to consider how clearly it is revealed in the word of God, that
the Lord Jesus is appointed the great and universal Judge of the world.

The supreme power of Judgment belongs to the Blessed God, whose creatures we
are, by whose Laws we are governed, and to whom we are accountable for our
moral actions: the exercise of this power is committed to Christ, the only
mediator between God and man. This our Savior himself expressly declares, Job.
5.22. The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son. He
assures his Disciples, that the hour is coming, in which all that are in their
graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they that have done good, to
the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, to the resurrection of
damnation, verse. 28, 29. -- The Angels published the fame doctrine at our
Lord's ascension, and informed his astonished Disciples, that this same Jesus
whom they had seen taken up into heaven, should so come in like manner as they
had seen him go up into heaven. Act. 1.11. -- This truth the Apostles were
commanded to preach and testify to all People: therefore we find St. Paul
declaring to the Philosophers of Athens, that God would judge the world in
righteousness by that Man whom he had ordained, Act. 17.31. -- And our Lord
himself repeats the promise of his coming, in the Revelation of St. John, the
last of the inspired writings, Behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me.
Rev. 22.12. From these, and innumerable other Texts that might be mentioned, we
have the fullest evidence that our Lord Jesus Christ is appointed the supreme
Judge of the world.

He is now seated at the right hand of the Majesty on high, and dwells in
inaccessible Glory; the whole creation is subject to his authority, and he
governs the inhabitants of heaven and earth according to his sovereign
pleasure. He is indeed invisible to mortal eyes, and the curtains of heaven
conceal his glory from us. But these heavens shall shortly pass away as a
scroll, and flee from before his presence; then shall he appear in the majesty
of an incarnate God, and all nations shall be summoned before his awful
tribunal. I pass,

Secondly, To show how excellently he is qualified for this exalted office. All
human Judgments are subject to innumerable imperfections, and the cause of
Justice is often perverted through ignorance, partiality and prejudice. To
judge the world in righteousness, is a work too difficult to be performed by
the most excellent creature. The Blessed Jesus, who is in the Bosom of his
Father, and is intimately acquainted with the divine secrets, he alone is
capable of this important commission, and he has all those qualities which are
necessary to the just and impartial discharge of it.

1. His Knowledge is infinite. -- It is highly requisite, that the supreme
Judge of the world should have an exact and intimate acquaintance with all
persons that are brought before him, and a full knowledge of the nature and
circumstances of the actions for which they are to be judged.mdash; For want of
this, insuperable difficulties attend the administration of human justice: the
innocent are oftentimes exposed to an hard and unrighteous sentence, and the
guilty escape the punishment they have deserved.mdash; But the Judgment of the
great day will be perfectly free from any uncertainly or mistake; the knowledge
of Christ being universal and unerring. All things are naked and open to the
Eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. He knows the persons, and is
acquainted with all the actions of the children of men. His Eyes are as flames
of fire, and penetrate into the secret recesses of the soul; he discerns the
thoughts and intentions of the heart, the inward motives and designs of our
actions. Those abominations which are carefully concealed from the world, and
committed in the darkest privacy, are as open to his critical inspection, as if
they had been perpetrated in the blaze of day, and exposed to the public view
of the world: for the darkness hides not from him, but the night shines as.
the day, Psalm. 139.12. Though the wicked fly to uninhabited deserts, and shelter
themselves in the dens and caverns of the earth, these dismal solitudes will
not screen them from the presence of their Judge, nor conceal their crimes from
his accurate observation. For be compasses our paths, and is acquainted with
all our ways. He cannot be abused with doubtful evidence, deceived by any
artful insinuations, nor imposed upon by any flattering appearances; but has
all that knowledge that is necessary to form an impartial Judgment.

2. His Justice is inflexible. -- Earthly Judges are subject to corruption, and
a righteous cause oftentimes miscarries, through the partiality and prejudice
of those who are placed in the seat of Judgment. They are sometimes influenced
by favor and affection, to extenuate the crimes of their friends, or persuaded
by bribes to pronounce an unrighteous sentence. A slavish cowardice causes them
to connive at the faults of men of power and estate, and a servile fear
restrains them from an impartial execution of public Justice. Therefore Solomon
mentions it as one of the great evils he had seen under the Sun, That he beheld
the place of judgment, and behold wickedness was there, and the place of
righteousness, that iniquity was there, Eccl. 3.16. But those mean and carnal
considerations will have no influence upon the unerring judgment of Christ. The
supreme Governor of the world is infinitely above all suspicion of corruption
or prejudice, and he will weild the sword of justice with a steady and
impartial hand; he loves righteousness and hates iniquity, and will make a
suitable distinction between his faithful obedient servants, and his perverse
and implacable enemies: the perfection of his nature secures him from the least
imputation of injustice, and his infinite kindness and compassion assures us,
that he will consider our frame, and put the most favorable construction upon
our actions: he cannot be bribed by riches, nor awed by greatness and power;
for he is the great and only potentate of heaven and earth, the King of Kings
and the Lord of Lords, from whom the Princes of this world derive their Power,
and to whom they are accountable for their conduct. With him therefore there is
no respect of persons, but the meanest slave shall have as fair a trial as the
proudest monarch; Princes shall be divested of their imperial diadems, and
stand upon a level with their inferior subjects. Every one shall receive
according to the things done in the body, whether good or evil. He will pass an
unalterable doom, not only upon his open and avowed enemies, but also upon his
pretended friends and followers. Secret hypocrites shall be unmasked to the
view of the world, and be exposed in all their guilt and deformity; though they
call Christ Lord, and pretend that they are of the number of his disciples, yet
they will be rejected and condemned by their righteous Judge: with terror in
his looks and thunder in his voice, he will ssay unto them, Depart from me, for
I know you not, ye that work iniquity. Matthew. 7.23. Thus he will judge the
world in righteousness, and the people with equity; and therefore is admirably
fitted for the great work assigned him: especially if we consider.

3. His power is almighty, and none can resist the execution of his will.mdash;
How often do we find earthly criminals placed above the reach of any human
judicature, and defended by wealth and interest from the punishment of their
crimes? But the great Judge of the world is clothed with omnipotence, and able
to execute his vengeance upon the greatest offenders: for he has all power in
heaven and earth committed unto him, Matthew. 28.18. When he tabernacled in
flesh, and was clothed with the infirmities of mankind, universal nature owned
his dominion, and even Devils were subject to his authority; the dead were
raised by the word of his power, and the tempestuous elements submitted to his
rebuke: and the power of Christ will be still more illustriously displayed,
when all that are in their graves shall hear his voice, and at his command
shall start out of their dusty beds; when the righteous shall appear in the
shining robes of immortal glory, but those that despised him upon earth, be
condemned at his awful bar, and doomed to unalterable misery. In vain will
Sinners fly from his almighty arm, and endeavor to escape his avenging wrath:
Who can contend with offended omnipotence? or subsist under the terrors of his
indignation? The Anger of the most enraged Tyrant can only affect the body, and
is confined within the narrow limits of this Life; but the wrath of our
almighty Judge extends to the whole man, accompanies the sinner beyond the
grave, and endures through eternal Ages. And as he has power to punish the
wicked according to their deserts, so he is able to reward the righteous
according to their works: He has mansions of glory prepared for their
everlasting reception, and will bestow upon them an happiness, vast as their
capacities, and immortal as their souls.mdash; Thus you see how excellently the
Lord Jesus Christ is qualified to be the final Judge of the world: His
knowledge is infinite, and extends to the secret actions of men; his power is
almighty, and none can resist the execution of his will; his Justice is
inflexible, and will be seen in impartially dispensing Rewards and Punishments.
I proceed,

Thirdly, To Enquire into the Reasons of this Divine Appointment, why this
important Office is devolved upon the Lord Jesus Christ. And,

1. It is in compassion to the weakness and frailty of mankind. -- With GOD is
terrible Majesty; He dwells in unsufferable Glory, and the spotless Spirits
above vail their faces before his dazzling Throne; such is his unspotted purity,
that the heavens are not clean in his sight, and he charge his angels with
folly: The mountains tremble at his presence, and the pillars of heaven are
astonished at his reproof. How then could the children of men support the
majesty of his appearance, should he descend in the naked terrors of the Deity,
the unvailed Glories of the Divine Nature! God has therefore compassionately
ordained, that the last Judgment shall be adminstred by one in our nature, who
is bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh, made in all things like unto us,
only without sin. And what can be more desirable, than to appear before him
whose delight from eternity has been with the sons of men, and who shed his
invaluable blood to redeem us from eternal destruction; who is not only the
Judge of the world, but the Savior of men; who is acquainted with the weakness
of human nature, and the temptations to which we are exposed; who will make the
most favorable allowances for the frailties of his People! This may convince
us with what kindness, condescension and equity, this great transaction will be
managed, and assures us that he will condemn only those, who have obstinately
despised his Goodness, and defeated the endearing methods of his Grace.

2. The Son of Man is appointed to be the Judge of the world, as a suitable
reward for his obedience and sufferings. This Reason is expressly given by St.
Paul, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Who was in the form of God, and thought it
not robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation, and took
upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men; and being
found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient unto death,
even the death of the Cross: wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given
him a name, which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, and every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
Glory of God the Father. It was an amazing stoop, for the Son of God to be made
in the Likeness of sinful Flesh, to descend from a throne to a manger, from the
government of the world to the state of a servant, and to submit to such
humbling circumstances of poverty and disgrace, and at last to suffer the Death
of the Cross, that he might advance the Glory of God, and procure the Salvation
and Happiness of man. -- And what can be more reasonable, than that he should
once more appear, to display his glory as the only begotten of the Father, and
convince the world how great and illustrious a person he is, God manifested in
the Flesh? What more suitable than that he who was rejected and despised of
men, should have power to summon at his awful bar all those that insulted and
abused him, and punish them for the indignities they put upon him?

At his first coming, his dignity was veiled by the meanness of his condition,
and he appeared without form or comeliness: But is it just, that the Sun of
righreousness should always be covered with a cloud? Surely at his second
advent, every Reproach of Christ shall be wiped away, and he will shine in all
the glories of an incarnate God. He was falsely accused by his malicious
adversaries, and unjustly arraigned and condemned by the powers of the world:
But the scene will be astonishingly changed, when the Kings and Judges of the
Earth shall stand quivering before his tribunal, and receive an irreversible
sentence from his mouth. Then every eye shall see him, not surrounded with a
crowd of insulting scoffers, but attended with an innumerable host of adoring
Angels; not engaged in a bloody contest with the powers of darkness, but with
all his enemies subdued under his feet; not hanging upon a disgraceful Cross,
but seated upon a triumphant Throne, and encircled with a shining train of
heavenly courtiers. The thorns that pierced his sacred head, will be changed
into a sparkling crown of glory; the spear that wounded his side, into a
scepter of authority and government. Judas that betrayed him, Pilate that
condemned him, and all those who in all ages of the world have despised and
rejected him, shall be confounded at his presence, and call to the mountains to
cover them, and the rocks to hide them from his avenging justice.

3. This appointment is designed to inerease the visible pomp and splendor of
the future judgment. This great affair is to be transacted in a public and
visible manner, in the view of the whole world, for the display of the divine
glory, and the manifestation of his perfections, in the condemnation of a
guilty world, and the final reward of his People: God has therefore wisely
determined, that the last judgment shall be executed by a visible person, in
the sight and hearing of men. God the Father is invisible: and therefore
judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, because he is the
Son of man; that every eye may see him, when he appears on the Throne of
Judgment, and every ear may hear that righteous Sentence he will pronounce. --
And how will it increase the glory of that day, to see the Son of Man
descending in the clouds of heaven, attended by the innumerable company of
Angels, the noble army of martyrs, and the general assembly of the Church of
the first born? How vast will be the majesty and splendour of his appearance,
when he shall come in his own glory and the glory of his Father, and shall sit
upon a radiant Throne high above all, encircled with the heavenly hosts,
shouting forth perpetual Hallelujahs! When all the apostate Angels, and the
universal progeny of Adam, shall stand before his presence, and wait to receive
their unalterable doom! With what astonishment shall we behold the Heavens pass
away as a scroll, the elements melt with fervent heat, and the beautiful
fabric of the world consumed by devouring flames? Could we but paint the
glories of that day in their awful colors, and represent to our minds the pomp
and solemnity, in which our Judge will descend, it would disgrace all the
splendid vanities of the world, and show us how unworthy they are of our regard
and attention; it would inspire us with the highest reverence for the authority
of him who is now our rightful Sovereign, and will hereafter be our final
Judge; and would influence us to endeavor an exact and universal obedience to
his Laws. Which brings me to the IMPROVEMENT of my Subject, and

1. This evidences the Divinity of Christ, the great Judge of the world. To
judge the world, is the prerogative of the supreme God, a Right inseparable
from the Crown of Heaven. Who can challenge such a sovereign authority, but he
that made the world at first by his power, and preserves it by his gracious
providence? To whom shall we give an account of our behavior, but to him who
has given us these reasonable natures, and made us moral and accountable
creatures? Justly then does the Prophet say, The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is
our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, Isa. 33.22. -- From him is all inferior
authority derived; by him Kings rule, and Princes decree justice. -- And as He
is the supreme Judge of the world, so no creature is capable to discharge this
important office; for it requires infinite wisdom to know the nature and
circumstances of our actions, and almighty power to punish rebellious Sinners.
-- What but the voice of God can awaken the dead, bring them out of their
silent graves, and summon the whole world before his tremendous Judgment Seat?
-- Who but a divine Person can search the hearts of men, and unfold the secret
springs of their actions, from whence their malignity or goodness does
principally arise? -- Since then the Lord Jesus Christ is ordained to this
glorious work, we may justly conclude, that he must be the great God, as well
as the Savior of the world.

2. This takes away the scandal of the Cross, and shows that we have no Reason
to take offense at the meanness and sufferings of Christ. Among all the
prejudices that have been raised against the Gospel, none has had a more fatal
influence upon the bulk of mankind, than the mean and despicable appearance of
the great Author of our holy Religion, and the bitter and ignominious
sufferings that he underwent. A crucisied Christ was to the Jews a stumbling
block, and to the Greeks foolishness. They thought it the highest absurdity,
that the Son of God should be delivered into the hands of men, and expire upon
a shameful Cross. -- But the firm belief of this truth, that Christ is
appointed to be the Judge of the quick and the dead, takes away the reproach of
the Cross, and removes the darkness and contempt that attended his suffering
state. -- For this informs us, that his humility and sufferings made way for
his advancement and triumph, and that he who was so ungratefully abused, and so
unjustly condemned by the Princes of the earth, is now exalted to the
Government of the world, and will shortly appear in dignity and power, to the
Joy of his friends, and the terror and confusion of his adversaries. -- Let
then the Infidels of the Age despise his person, and deride his sufferings, we
are not ashamed to own, that we are the Disciples of a crucified Savior. God
forbid, that we should not glory in the Cross of Christ! For our Redeemer is
great, and greatly to be praised: God has raised him up from the dead, and
given him a name above every name. We now by faith behold him seated at the
right hand of power, and encompassed with the triumphant acclamations of
Heaven: but he will shortly rend the Heavens that now conceal his Glory, and
appear in flaming fire to take vengeance on those that know not God and obey
not the Gospel of Christ: then shall his enemies bow before him, and lick the
dust of his feet; and the dignity of his character and office shall be manifest
to the whole world of Angels and men.

3. Hence the destruction of Gospel-impenitents will be inevitable and
intolerable. Men are apt to shelter themselves from the terrors of the Law, by
the gracious and merciful promises of the Gospel: They imagine, though God is a
consuming fire, and wrath from heaven is declared against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, yet that the merits of Christ will screen them from the
flames of hell, and secure them a title to immortal glory. But these are wild
mistakes, and contradict the whole design of the Gospel. The blessed Jesus
indeed is a merciful and compassionate. Savior, but yet he has denounced the
severest damnation against incorrigible finners; his merits will be imputed
only to those that accept of his offers, and submit to his reasonable demands;
he will be the author of eternal Salvation only to those that obey him. Such as
bear the name and character of Christians, and yet by their wicked lives
consute their profession, and openly declare that they will not have this man
to reign over them, will be so far from receiving any advantage by the name of
Christ, that it will be an aggravation of their guilt, and an increase of their
suture condemnation. The blood of the covenant which they have trampled under
foot, will cry aloud for vengeance; and the condescending mercies of heaven
which they have profaned and despised, will be turned into resentment and
fury. They reject the only remedy which infinite grace has provided for their
recovery; and therefore will fall unpitied facrifices to his avenging justice.
He that now offers to be their compassionate Savior, will then appear their
inexorable Judge. The meek and innocent Lamb of God will then be armed with the
terrors of a devouring Lion: and those that would not bow to the scepter of his
Grace, shall be broke to pieces with the rod of his Anger. Their doom will be
pronounced by him who was once the messenger of divine Grace, and made them the
most friendly offers of mercy. This will doubtless give the bitterest accent to
their misery, and fill them with the utmost consternation and horror. How
highly therefore does it become us now to secure an Interest in his Favor,
that so he who will be our Judge, may also be our Friend! How reasonable is
that advice of the Psalmist, Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye
perish in the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are they
that put their trust in him. Which brings me to say,

4. Hence we see the certainty of the believer's complete and eternal
Salvation. -- When we confider the unspotted holiness of our Judge, before whom
the Angels stand chargeable with folly, and the heavens with impurity; when we
reflect upon the corruption of our natures, and the innumerable imperfections
that attend us; the best of men may tremble at the apprehension of a future
Judgment, and stand amazed at the thought of having their eternal state
determined by so righteous and impartial a Judge: For if he should be strict to
mark iniquity, who could stand before him! Verily every mouth must be stopped,
every tongue must confess their guilt, and own themselves worthy of eternal
damnation. -- But, blessed be God, the Gospel affords the true believer a solid
foundation of hope, under all these affrighting considerations; those that have
by faith secured an interest in Christ, and made it the sincere endeavor of
their lives to approve themselves to his all-seeing eye, shall escape that
dreadful Sentence that will be pronounced upon an impenitent world. For he whom
they accepted as their Savior, is appointed to be their Judge; they have
resigned themselves to his almighty and compassionate hands, and he has engaged
to be their complete and eternal deliverer. He will therefore save them from
the dark horrors of the grave, and the amazing terrors of the last day, and put
them in possession of that Kingdom he has prepared for them. He has bought them
out of the hands of Judge by his atoning blood, and purchased for them a title
to the mansions of Glory by his invaluable merits. Surely then he will not
suffer the ends of his death to be defeated, nor the sacred purchase of his
blood to miscarry. We may be assured he has not forgot the distressing sorrows
of his life, nor the dreadful agonies of his Cross. -- That Love that nailed
him to the cursed tree, and brought him down to the dust of death, for the
redemption of his People; will excite him to take care of their welfare, and
finish the work he has begun.

Let Infidels tremble at the approach of their Judge, who have out-fin'd his
infinite mercy, and denied their God and Savior: Let fearfulness seize the
hypocrite, and horror surprise the sinners in Zion, who are enemies to Christ,
under the disguise of a visible profession. -- But let the Saints in Christ
Jesus list up their heads with Joy, and long for the coming of their Lord. When
he says by the Spirit to his Churches, Behold I come quickly, let our Souls
echo back with the loudest transports of Joy, Even so come, Lord Jesus!

To Him, etc. Preached Dec. 4.1737.


AMEN.
SERMON IV. The Manner and Circumstances of Christ's Appearance at the last Day.
MATTHEW. XVI. 27. For the Son of Man shall come in the Glory of his Father, with
his Angels; and then he shall reward every Man according to his Works.


THE dispensation of the Gospel is admirably calculated to reclaim a sinful
world from the paths of error and delusion; and to persuade the children of men
to consult their duty and happiness: Its doctrines are sublime and excellent,
worthy of their heavenly descent, and come recommended to our faith by the
brightest evidences of a divine authority: Its precepts contain the noblest
rules for our moral conduct, and are happily designed to exalt and purify the
nature of man, and advance the universal prosperity of the world.

And since we are at present in a corrupt and degenerate state, disinclin'd to
our duty, and indeed filled with prejudices against it; therefore the wise
Author of our Beings has seen fit to enforce his laws by suitable sanctions,
and engage us to obedience by the most powerful and persuasive arguments. Hence
in the Gospel there every where appears the greatest severity to dissuade us
from sin, and the highest condescension and goodness to allure us to holiness.

The Eternal Majesty of heaven is sometimes revealed in the amazing terrors of
his wrath, as a consuming fire to the workers of iniquity; at other times he
appears in the bright displays of his mercy, as a tender and indulgent father
to those that serve and obey him: And the great Savior of Souls is represented
as one who died a sacrifice for the sins of the world, and compassionately
invites the children of men to come to him that they may have life; but will
shortly appear in flaming fire to take vengeance on those that know not God,
and obey not the Gospel of Christ.

These different representations are wonderfully suited to influence the hopes
and fears of men, the two great ruling passions of our nature, and the secret
springs of our actions; and have an happy tendency to deter us from all
ungodliness and unrighteousness, which lead to destruction and misery, and to
engage us to a steadfast adherence to our duty, which is the way to immortality
and glory. Our blessed Savior having therefore urged upon his disciples the
necessity of denying themselves, taking up their cross, and following Him,
their Lord and Master, in humility and suffering, enforces all with this awful
consideration, That the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, with
his Angels, and then be shall reward every man according to his works. In
speaking to which words (by divine assistance) I shall First, Consider the
Manner of Christ's second Appearance. Secondly, The Work that he will then
perform.


First, I am to consider the Manner of Christ's second Appearance. -- When he
first left the mansions of glory, and descended into this lower world, he came
in a state of humility and meanness, and stooped to numberless hardships and
difficulties, that he might answer the design of his manifestation in the
flesh, and accomplish the great work of redemption. But his second advent will
be with surprising majesty and glory, to execute vengeance upon the ungodly,
and vindicate the cause of his despised Gospel.

When God came down upon mount Sinai to proclaim the law to the children of
Israel, the glory of the Lord appeared like devouring fire, and the mountain
was covered with darkness and smoke. So terrible was the sight, that Moses the
friend of God exceedingly feared and quaked; the whole army of Israel were
struck with amazement, and cried out in distress, Let not God speak with us,
lest we die. -- If such surprising terrors attended the first promulgation of
the law, with what awful solemnity will the Lawgiver appear, when he comes to
avenge the quarrel of his covenant, and punish the profane contempt of his
anthority?

The Scriptures represent this awful event in the most lofty and magnificent
language. Amazing prodigies will usher in this illustrious day, and proclaim
the descent of our almighty Judge; continual tragedies will be acted on the
great stage of nature, and this lower world will be involved in universal
confusion and disorder; Joel 2.31. Matthew. 24.29. Psalm. 18.7.
the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood; the Stars of
heaven shall start from their exalted orbs, and the powers of the heavens shall
be shaken; perpetual thunders shall roar from the lower regions of the air, the
earth shall tremble and quake, and the foundations of the hills shall be
removed. -- Then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in the heavens Matthew.
24.30.
, and give the world a convincing evidence of the near approach of the great
and terrible day of the Lord. At which amazing sight, the inhabitants of the
earth shall mourn, and the sinners in Zion shall be horribly afraid.

In the midst of their perplexity and distress, the Son of Man shall descend in
the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. He will appear in the pomp and
solemnity of an incarnate God, and assume a glory and magnificence suitable to
the dignity of his office.

His personal glory will be inexpressibly great, his eyes will sparkle like
flames of fire, his countenance will shine with dazzling beams of majesty and
beauty, and his whole body be bright and luminous beyond the Sun in its
meridian splendour. Thus he is described in the Visions of St. John, In the
midst of the seven candlesticks was one like the Son of Man, his head and his
hair were white as wool, as white as snow, his eyes were as a flame of fire,
and his countenance was as the Sun shining in its strength Rev. 1.13, 14.
.

He will also come in the glory of his heavenly Father, and be clothed with the
authority of the universal Judge of the world. God has appointed him King upon
his holy Zion, and proclaimed an unalterable decree, that to him every knee
shall how; not in scorn and derision, as in the days of his infirmity and
suffering, but with the deepest humility and reverence; and every tongue shall
consess his royal dignity and power, not with an insulting scoff, but in
submissive postures of adoration.

But to increase the glory of his appearance, he will be attended with a
splendid and numerous equipage, becoming the dignity of his person, and the
exalted character he sustains. The innumerable host of Angels shall leave the
mansions of heaven, and attend their descending Lord, to obey his sovereign
orders, and adorn the triumphs of his justice. The general assenbly of the
Saints, whom he has redeemed by his invaluable blood, and sanctified by his
all-conquering grace, shall forsake the celestial paradise, and accompany the
great God our Savior, in his illustrious progress through the skies. Thus the
Patriarch Enoch prophesied of old; Jude 14.15.
Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment
on the ungodly. And the Prophet Daniel assures us, Dan. 7.10.
that thousand thousands shall minister unto him, and ten thousand times ten
thousand shall stand before him. And St. Paul tells us, 2 These. 1.7.
that he shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angles. Those spotless
Spirit shall be clothed in their brightest robes of glory, and appear in
visible splendour to the inhabitants of the earth. And how vast and surprising a
figure will they make? How awful and majestic will be the appearance of our
Judge, when he shall assume his own proper greatness, and be attended with the
shining inhabitants of heaven? Who may abide the day of his coming, or be able
to stand before his awful tribunal? How will all nations fall prostrate at his
footstool, and tremble at his presence, who can by a word of his mouth sentence
them to the depths of misery, or advance them to the height of glory and
happiness? Which brings me to the other thing proposed:

Secondly, To consider the Work that he will perform. Then shall he reward
every Man according to his works: And this includes three things.

1. All mankind shall be summoned before him. 2. They shall be called to a
strict account for their actions. 3. The righteous shall be adjudg'd to
unalterable glory, but the wicked condemned to eternal misery.
1. All mankind shall be summoned before him. No sooner shall the Judge descend
to this lower world, and erect his throne in the Air, but they that are in
their graves shall be awakned out of the sleep of death, and all the
inhabitants of the world be cited to appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ.
The voice of the Archangel, the chief of the heavenly host shall echo through
the wide creation, and penetrate into the secret caverns of the earth; at which
mighty found the dead shall start out of their dusty beds, and all the
descendants of Adam shall be compelled to obey the call; those that are alive
shall be immediately changed, and prepared to make their personal appearance at
the bar of their Judge. Thus the Scriptures assure us: We shall all stand
before the judgmentseat of Christ. Every one of us shall give an account of
himself unto God. The universal Father of men without respect of persons
judges every man according to his work. He accepts not the persons of
princes, nor regards the rich more than the poor, for they are all the work
of his hands. Romans 13.10. x Pet. 1.17. Job 34.18.19.


Civil distinctions make a mighty sound among men, and persons of superior
wealth and power are admired and applauded like so many Deities, by their
servile flatterers: hence they are apt to swell with pride, upon the account of
their elevated circumstances, and vainly hope that they shall be treated with
deference and respect at the future judgment; they flatter themselves that God
will not be strict to mark iniquity in men of their dignity and station, but
that he will make some favorable allowances for the excesses and follies which
are so common among men of figure and estate in the world. -- But alas! these
are vain imaginations: the sovereign Ruler of the world pays no regard to
earthly greatness, neither has he any value for those distinctions, which are
made by birth and estate. The great Potentates of the earth; who are cried up
as gods by deluded mortals, are in his sight but contemptible worms of the
dust. In that day they will be divested of all their stately ornaments,
deprived of the ensigns of their greatness and power, and stand upon a level
with the meanest slave. Death, the universal Conqueror, pays no complements to
their quality, but arrests them without ceremony or respect: and their
impartial Judge will irresistibly summon them to his tremendous bar. The mighty
Coesars and Alexander, who have depopulated the earth by their destructive
swords, and sacrificed nations to their unbounded lusts, shall tremble at his
appearance, and curse their ambition and madness. Thus this astonishing scene
is represented by St. John, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17.
And the Kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
captains, and the mighty men, hid themselves in the dens and rocks of the
mountains, and said to the mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from
the face of him that sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb;
for the great day of his wrath is come: and who shall be able to stand?

And as none are too great and mighty to be called to an account, so none are
too mean and contemptible to be taken notice of. They that have made no figure
among men, but have spent their days in want and obscurity, will not be
overlooked in this vast assembly, but strictly examined, whether they have
submitted to the wise disposals of providence, and improved the talents
committed to their trust. Those that are in the morning of their Youth and in
the strength and vigor of their age, shall be brought into judgment for their
unmindfulness of their great Creator, and their criminal indulgence of sensual
pleasures. Ignorant uninstructed heathens, who have inhabited the wild and
desolate corners of the earth, shall be called to an account, for their
transgression of the law of nature, and their abuse of the divine goodness. The
learned and civilized nations, who have been favored with the light of the
Gospel, and early instructed in the will of heaven, must answer for their
superior advantages, and their neglect of the means of grace and salvation.
Such as will not now approach the throne of divine mercy, must then appear at
the bar of inflexible Justice. Thus all mankind of every nation and language,
of every quality and condition, of every age and sex, must be judged in the
great day, What a grand and solemn sight will this be! To behold all the
successive generations of men stand together in their respective orders, and
wait for their decisive trial! Which leads to say.

2. In that day men shall be called to a strict account for all their actions.
-- So the royal Preacher informs us; Eccl. 12.14.
God will bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it
be good or whether it be evil. All the actions of men are recorded in the book
of God's remembrance, and shall be disclosed to the public view of the world in
the great day of the revelation of all things.

Unthinking sinner are apt to imagine themselves secure, if they can conceal
their crimes from the Cognizance of men, and commit their sins in darkness and
retirement: but alas! the ways of man are now before the eyes of the Lord, and
he pondereth all his goings. There is no darkness or shadow of death where the
workers of iniquity may hide themselves Prove. 5.21. Job 34.31.
No secret impurity can escape the knowledge of our Judge, nor any artful
hypocrisy deceive his piercing eyes: even the secret motions and inclinations
of our hearts are exposed to his critical observation; all proud and revengeful
thoughts, all uncharitable and malicious intentions, all the covetous and
unjust designs, that men have secretly harbored in their breasts, shall then
be unfolded before the grand consistory of Angles and Men. For there is nothing
covered, that shall not be revealed, nor hid that shall not be known. Luke 12.2.


Men frequently imagine, that their tongues are their own, that their words
vanish into air, and shall not be brought to any future account. But our
Savior tells us, Matthew. 12.36, 37.
that Men shall give an account for every idle word that they speak. You
therefore delude your selves to your eternal ruin, if you think that your vain
and filthy communication, your profane and irreligious discourse, your horrid
oaths and imprecations, your impious jests upon our holy Religion, your
malicious slanders of good men, shall pass unobserved in that day; for by thy
words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall he condemned. When
our Lord shall come to execute judgment upon all, he will convince the wicked
not only of their ungodly deeds, which they have impiously committed, but also
of all their hard and grievous speeches which they have spoken against him.
Jude. 15.


But sinners shall not only be called to an account for their transgressions of
the law of God, but also for their omissions of duty, and neglecting to improve
the various and happy advantages they have enjoyed: Their Power and estates,
their health of body and abilities of mind, their opportunities and capacities
of glorifying God and promoting the welfare of mankind; these Things shall then
be produced against them, and be a heavy article in their indictment. -- Thus
we find the slothful servant, who traded not with his Lord's talent, but buried
it in the earth, is sentenced into outer darkness, where there is perpetual
weeping and guashing of teeth Matthew. 25.32.


All the aggravations of men's sins shall then be enumerated, and their guilt
shall-appear in its crimson-colours. If the Gentile-world shall be condemned
for resisting the glimmering light of nature, and rebelling against the law of
God so obscurely written on their hearts; how inexcusable will be their guilt,
how vast their condemnation, who have shut their eyes against the mavelous
light of the Gospel, and stifled the powerful convictions of the Spirit of
Grace!

Finally, while the wicked shall be exposed in all their guilt and deformity,
and be publicly charged with their numberless transgressions; God will not be
regardless of the Saints, nor forget their labor of love. Their heavenly
Father knows their works, and with pleasure observes their zeal and fidelity in
his service: Their secret prayers and tears, their diffusive charity and
beneficence, are set down in the sacred records of heaven, and will be
mentioned to their immortal honor in the day of the Lord; their patient
sufferings in the ways of their duty will be carefully remembered, and their
smallest services to the Kingdom of Christ will meet with a vast and
unspeakable reward. -- Thus I am come to the last thing to be considered.

3. The Righteous shall be adjudg'd to unalterable glory, but the Wicked
condemned to eternal misery.

Those who have accepted the compassionate offers of a Savior, and complied
with the gracious demands of the Gospel; who have devoted themselves to God
without exception or reserve, and made it the great study of their lives to
approve themselves to their allseeing Judge; who have lamented their
innumerable defects and infirmities, and sincerely endeavored to mortify their
most beloved lusts; who have improved the means of Grace with fidelity and
diligence, and abounded in acts of charity and benevolence; these shall be
openly acknowledged by Christ in that day, and ranked among the number of his
servants and followers. Their Master and Judge, whose authority they have
reverenced, whose laws they have observed, and in whose merits they have
confided; the Lord Jesus Christ, with indulgent smiles in his countenance, and
the tenderest accents in his voice, will pronounce that happy sentence upon
them; Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom, prepared for you from
the foundation of the world Matthew. 25.34.
.

But the Wicked, who have despised his sacred authority, trampled under foot
his invaluable blood, and obstinately persisted in sin, in contempt of all the
condescending offers of his grace, shall receive that awful doom from the mouth
of their slighted and injured Savior, Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels Verse 41.
.

And according to these different sentences will the final state of the
children of men be unchangeably determined. The Wicked shall be immediately
seized upon by devils, and conveyed to the dark abodes of horror and despair;
the heavens from above shall shower down torrents of flaming fire upon their
guilty heads, and hell from below shall open its mouth to receive them, where
they shall be tormented day and night, without any possibility of escape, or
hope of deliverance. While the Righteous shall ascend to their enthroned Lord
and Savior, and with crowns upon their heads, and palms of victory in their
hands, make their triumphant entrance into the new Jerusalem, the city of the
living God; a place of unspeakable joy and refreshment, where all sorrow shall
be banished from their breasts, all tears shall be wiped from their eyes, their
hopes shall be satisfied, their desires accomplished, and their whole man
filled with those divine and transporting pleasures, that flow at the right
hand of God. Then shall they shine like the Sun in the kingdom of their Father,
and be immoveably fixed in the firmament of immortal glory. They shall no
longer complain, that they sojourn in Meshec, and are vexed with the filthy
conversation of the wicked: But shall be associated with the glorious company
of the Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the Prophets and Martyrs, and the
general assembly of the Church throughout the world; together with these they
shall encompass the throne of God with prostration and praise, and tune their
voices to the sacred anthems of heaven, saying, To him that has loved us, and
washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us Kings and Priests
unto God and his Father; to him be glory and dominion for ever. Amen.

I pass now to the IMPROVEMENT of my Subject.

1. What we have heard should be improved as a powerful restraint from the
practice of secret sins. For what can be an higher absurdity, than for men to
encourage themselves in sin when they have the advantage of privacy and
retirement, and to imagine that they are safe from punishment, if the curtains
of night, or any artful disguises hide their wicked actions from the view and
observation of men? Alas! what will it avail you to conceal your wickedness
from the eyes of men, when your most secret actions are visible to the God with
whom you have to do? What little advantage will you receive by avoiding worldly
shame and punishment, when your secret enormities will shortly be brought upon
the public stage, and displayed in their most odious colors, to your eternal
confusion? Though now you cover your transgressions as Adam, and hide your
iniquities in your bosom; yet there is nothing so secretly committed, but it
shall then be brought to light, and exposed before the vast and numerous
assembly of Angels and Men.

The firm belief of this awful truth would break the force of many temptations,
and be an happy preservation from defiling sins; it would make us reject with
abhorrence the insinuating charms of vice, and say with holy Joseph; How can I
do this great wickedness and sin against God!

2. This show us the vanity of bypocrisy. For the eyes of our Judge are as
flaming fire, and penetrate into the hidden corners of our souls. In the day of
Judgment every mask shall be pulled off, every flattering disguise shall be
removed, and the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed. Why then will you
put on a form of Godliness, and engage in external acts of devotion, only to be
seen of men, and gain the empty applause of your fellow creatures; when your
eternal state will be decided, not by the charitable opinion of short-sighted
mortals, but by the unerring Sentence of an all-seeing God! Be not deceived;
Christ is not to be mocked. He sees the pride and hypocrisy of the painted
pharisee, under the most amiable and goodly appearance. He beholds the sordid
flattery of false and noisy professors, who bow the knee before him with
seeming humility and devotion, while their affections are wedded to the world,
and their lives are stained with abominable impurities. This therefore should
excite us all to the greatest sincerity in our profession, to be faithful to
our solemn vows and engagements, that we may be found the disciples of Christ,
not only in outward appearance, but in the inward temper and disposition of our
minds: so we shall have this for our rejoicing, even the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity we have had our conversation
in the world.

3. How much does it concern us to hold fast the profession of our faith, in
the midst of the greatest difficulties and discouragements? We live in a dark
day of error and apostasy; in which the distinguishing glories of the Gospel
are publicly reviled and insulted, by men of corrupt principles and licentious
morals. Weak and unstable minds are in danger of being carried away, by the
prevailing torrent of infidelity. It is therefore our indispensable duty to
maintain our sacred profession, in this dangerous hour of temptation, and
vigorously to defend the faith once delivered to the Saints, even in the face
of its boldest opposers. For our blessed Savior has made those declarations;
Matthew. 10.32. Mark 8.38.
Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess before my Father
which is in heaven. But whosoever shall be ashamed of me, or of my words, of
him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his
Father, with his holy Angels.

If then we betray the sacred depositum committed to our trust, through
covetousness or cowardice; if we corrupt the purity of the Gospel, through a
sinful compliance with the humors of the age: What can we expect, but that our
Master and Judge will treat us with contempt and abhorrence, and herd us among
his abandoned enemies! This thought should inspire us with undaunted courage in
the cause of Christ, and arm us with a noble resolution to submit to the
greatest hardships and difficulties, rather than make shipwreck of our faith
and a good conscience.

4. We should constantly bear in mind the strictness of our future account, and
live as those that expect to be judged. If the actions of our lives were
transient, and there were no remembrance of them hereafter; if death put a
final period to our being, and we were never to be called to an account for the
things done in the body; we might then give a loose to our sensual
inclinations, and eat and drink without thought or concern, for to morrow we
die. But since we are candidates for immortality, and our final state will be
determined according to our present behavior, it infinitely concerns us, if we
have any true love to our selves, any regard to our great and everlasting
interest, to keep a future judgment perpetually in our view; to consider, that
every action of life will be scanned with an impartial severity, and an
unalterable sentence will pass, according to our works.

It is for want of this, that (...) children of men are emboldened in (...),
and live oftentimes in an allowed (...) and profaneness, of rioting and excess,
in (...) habitual neglect of the service of God, and the ^^^fare of their
immortal souls.

Did men seriously consider the important consequences of their actions, that
they are now sowing the seeds of endless and inconceivable joy, or laying the
foundation of unutterable horror and despair; it would powerfully excite them
to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and to be
perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord. This Argument is made use of by
the wise man; Fear God, and keep his commandments; for God shall bring every
work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good or whether it
be evil. Eccl. 12.14.

Let us therefore keep our thoughts fixed upon this great and important day,
when the Son of Man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his Angles, and
shall reward every man according to his works.

This indeed is an harsh and ungrateful subject, to the greatest part of
mankind; they are so involved in secular business, so solicitous to increase
their estates and raise their families, that they have no time to regard the
one thing needful, and prepare for an eternal judgment: therefore they banish
the thought of it out of their minds, lest it should give a check to their
ambitious views, and interrupt their worldly enjoyments. But consider, I
beseech you; those things which you now so passionately dote on, and for which
you sacrifice your eternal All, will not profit you in the day of wrath; they
will not appease a stormy conscience, nor bribe your impartial Judge. -- What
confort or satisfaction will it then afford you, to reflect, that you have had
a distinguished name among flattering mortals, that you have been ranked among
the great men of the earth, and have been honored with a splendid passage to
the grave? -- Will any of these serve to procure you a favorable sentence at
the tribunal of heaven, or screen you from the avenging wrath of an offended
God, or even abate your punishment and sorrow in the day of perdition of
ungodly men? -- No verily! nothing will then support and solace you, but the
testimony of an unreproaching conscience, and the smiles of your almighty
Savior, a title to his invaluable merits, and to the great and precious
promises of his everlasting Gospel.

Let us then be so wise as to foresee the evil, and flee from the wrath to
come: Let us now seek and secure the favor of Christ, our supreme Lord and
Judge, that when we come to stand at his awful bar, we may receive a gracious
sentence from his mouth; and may appear before him with Joy and Confidence in
the day, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all
them that believe.

To Him, etc. Preached Jan. 8.1737, 8.


AMEN.
SERMON V. The Nature and Necessity of Preparation for the Coming of Christ.
II COR. V. 9. Wherefore we labor, that whether present or absent we may be
accepted of Him.


OF all the affairs, that employ the time and captivate the affections of the
children of men, none so justly deserve our attention and concern, as a
preparation for that awful day, when we must stand before the impartial bar of
Christ, and give an account of the things done in the body. This should be the
work of our early Years, and engage the strength and vigor of our manly age;
but alas! it is commonly delayed to the dark evening of life, 'till the
melancholy decays of nature warn us of our approaching end.

The specious vanities and trisles of the world divert unthinking sinners from
a serious application to the one thing needful; they flatter themselves, that
the vision is for many days, and they shall have time enough hereafter to
secure the favor of their Judge.

The deluge of waters broke in upon the old world in the height of their
security, whilst they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
marriage, and dispatched them in a moment into irrecoverable misery: and this
present earth, which is reserved for the fire of the last day, shall be
destroyed in as sudden and irresistible a manner. As it was in the days of
Noah, so shall it be in the days of the Son of Man. When the world is drowned
in sin and security, and dream of nothing but peace and safety, then shall
sudden destruction come upon them, as travail upon a woman with child.

Therefore our blessed Savior exhorts his disciples to continual watchfulness
and diligence. Take heed, left at any time your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and so that day come
upon you unawares; for as a snare will it come on all them that dwell on the
face of the earth Luke 21.24, 25.
. And every wise considerate man will receive the solemn caution, and avoid the
danger of a sudden surprise: Now this can only be done by making it the great
business of Life to prepare for the coming of our Lord. This was the practice
of St. Paul, as we find in our text; and his example is worthy of our careful
and diligent imitation. The Point then to be insisted upon is this:

It should be the great study and endeavor of every christian, that he may be
accepted of the Lord in the day of Judgment.

In speaking to this Point, I shall First, Consider what is required of us,
that we may be accepted of the Lord in the day of Judgment. Secondly, Why every
Christian should make this his great study and endeavor.


First. I shall consider what is required of us, that we may be accepted of the
Lord in the day of Judgment. The case is practical, and deserves our close and
diligent attention. I shall only insist on a few general and comprehensive
articles.

1. We must by faith secure a title to the Merits and Righteousness of Christ.
We are all by nature involved in the guilt of sin, exposed to the condemning
sentence of the law, and in danger of suffering the vengeance of eternal fire;
the holiest of men are encompassed with innumerable imperfections, and their
best performances are defiled with so many blemishes, that should God be strict
to mark iniquity, who could stand the fiery trial, and appear with safety at
the enlightened tribunal of heaven? Hence the humble Psalmist vehemently
deprecates the strict inquiry of justice; Enter not into judgment with thy
servant, O Lord! for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. And the
great Doctor of the Gentiles, though among the chief of Saints, and an eminent
Apostle, renounces all confidence in himself, and counts all things but loss,
that he may be found in Christ, not having on his own righteousness which is of
the law, but that which is through faith in him Phil. 3.8, 9.
. -- Not one of the sons of men can perfectly obey the divine commands, nor by
any thing that he can do or suffer, appease the infinite displeasure of an holy
God: But the expiatory sacrifice of Christ completely answered the demands of
justice, and by his unspotted innocence he vindicated the honor of the law,
and purchased eternal redemption for his chosen People.

Now if ever we would be acquitted at the bar of God, and obtain the favor of
our impartial Judge, we must plead, not any works of righteousness that we have
done, but the meritorious obedience and sufferings of our blessed Savior.

And that we may have a title to his invaluable merits, we must by faith accept
of him as our only Savior, and acknowledge him as our sovereign Lord and
Owner, with an entire dependence on his allsufficient sacrifice, and an
unfeigned desire to obey his excellent precepts; for he is a Priest upon a
throne, a Prince as well as a Savior: And none will be saved by the merits of
his blood, but those that submit to the scepter of his government. -- And happy
are they who thus by faith receive him upon the terms of the Gospel; for they
are delivered from the condemning sentence of the law, and may approach the
sacred tribunal of Justice with an humble confidence of approbation and
acceptance.

2. Our natures must be sanctified by the almighty influences of the Spirit,
and renewed after the image of the blessed God. Man by nature is not only
involved in chains of guilt, but sunk into the most deplorable state of
deformity and pollution; his understanding is darkened by clouds of error and
ignorance, and filled with mighty prejudices against the divine and
supernatural mysteries of the Gospel: His will is stubborn and refractory,
impatient of the yoke of God's authority, and inclined to continual rebellion
against him: His affections are captivated to the dominion and tyranny of sin,
and placed upon the most degrading and inferior objects: In short, the whole
man is perversely alienated from the life and service of God, and strongly
disposed to the most abominable evils. -- This is the unhappy charcter of man
in a state of unregenerate Nature -- Hence arises the indispensale necessity of
an holy change, to qualify us for the acceptable sevice of God upon earth, and
prepare us for the ineffable glories of heaven. -- The undersstanding must be
illuminated by the Spirit of God, to believe the certainty and excellency of
things unseen and eternal, to perceive the beauty of holiness, and the equity
and reasonableness of the divine commandments. The native enmity of the
sinner's heart must be subdued, and every faculty of the soul brought under a
consection to the service of God. -- Till this mighty change is produced, the
sinner is dead in trespasses and sins, and his most perfect services are a
stench and abhorrence in the nostrils of an holy God; and therefore he has
nothing else to expect, but the awful frowns of his incensed judge, and the
distressing thunders of his avenging wrath.

The Lord Jesus Christ is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, the heavens
are not clean in his sight, and his angels he charge with folly. None will be
acknowledged and accepted by him, in the great day of Judgment, but such as
bear the impression of the divine image, who cleanse themselves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, and are perfecting holiness in the fear of the
Lord. Without this inward purification, the most bright and distinguished
profession among men will be disapproved and condemned by our all-seeing Judge.
Others indeed may have a name in the church upon earth, and pass for eminent
Saints in the sight of the world; but they will be excluded the Sanctuary
above, and ranked among the workers of iniquity, in the day of their decisive
trial.

3. A sincere and impartial regard to the law of God is necessary to final
acceptance with our judge. Many that boast of an high profession, and vainly
triumph in their Gospel-privileges, are hypocritical in their pretenses, and
partial in their obedience to the laws of Christ. -- With the ancient
Pharisees, they are strict in their attendance upon the divine worship, and
zealously attached to the outward formalities of Religion; but unjust and
oppressive in their dealings, carnal and covetous in their conversations. --
While others build their hopes upon a moral and inoffensive behavior toward
men, though they are sadly negligent of their obligations to God, and live in an
avowed contempt of his worship and ordinances. -- A third sort calculate their
Religion for the public view, and make a plausble appearance in the Temple, but
are strangers to the devotions of the Closet; they liberally dispense their
alms, when the found of a trumpet proclaims their charity, but are sordidly
sparing when there is no prospect of gratifying a vainglorious humor; they
are zealous for the Kingdom of Christ, when it will advance their honor and
interest, but are cold and indifferent when the great doctrines of Gospel are
fallen under reproach, and boidly assaulted by men of figure and estate.

By such hypocritical pretenses as these, multitudes lull themselves into
security, and vainly imagine to obtain the favor of God. But alas! his
all-seeing eye pierces through every disguise, and marks out the painted
formalist, how cautiously ssoever he may be concealed. A partial obedience to
the divine commands will not stand the trial of an enlightened conscience upon
earth, nor be approved by the unerring verdict of heaven. If our hearts condemn
us of any secret and indulged iniquity, God is greater than our hearts and
knows all things: but if our hearts condemn us not, then we have confidence
toward God, and may hope for the divine acceptance. 1 John 3.20, 21.

If therefore we would enjoy the testimony of an unreproaching conscience, and
receive the euge of our Judge, we must have a sacred respect to every duty,
without exception or reserve; and be the same in the secret closet, when no Eye
but that of God and conscience is upon us, as when we stand upon the open
theater of the world, and are encompassed with a thousand witnesses. We must
bear an universal hatred to sin, though dear unto us as a right hand and a right
eye; and particularly watch and strive against those darling iniquities, which
the constitution of our bodies, the disposition of our minds, and our company
and business most strongly incline us to the commission of. In fine, we must
not only pay a strict regard to the important duties of piety toward God, but
inviolably observe the sacred rules of justice and charity to men. This will
afford us a divine support in the darkest hours of distress, and enable us to
say with the inspired Apost;e, Our rehoicing is this, the testimony of our
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, by the grace of God, we
have had our conversation in the world. 2 Cor. 1.12.

4. A frequent Review of our lives and actions, and a judging our selves for
our sins, is an happy preparative for the great day of trial. It is the wisdom
of persons engaged in worldly business, frequently to survey their accounts,
and enquire into the state of their affairs: And it is equally incumbent on the
children of light, to examine into the state of their souls, that they may know
what duties they have omitted, what sins they have been guilty of, and what
progress they have made in the christian course. -- While we tabernacle in
flesh, and are surrounded with so many insnaring objects, the best of men will
be sometimes surprised into sin through the remaining corruption of their
natures, or overborn by the strength and violence of temptations. -- It is
therefore highly necessary that we frequently review our conduct, and compare
it with the law of God, the unerring rule of our duty; that so we may be
acquainted with our errors and miscarriages. -- This will awaken our repentance
for our daily offenses, and engage us to a fervent application to the blood of
Christ for pardon, that fountain which is set open for sin and for uncleanness.
-- This will inspire us with unfeigned resolutions of amendment, and excite our
care and vigilance to avoid those sins for which we have so severely judged and
condemned our selves. -- And this has a blessed tendency to deep our
consciences clear from indulged iniquities, and to prevent that awful surprise,
that must seize the impenitent sinner, when the midnightcry shall awaken him
out of his security, and summon him to the tremendous judgment seat of Christ.

What an unspeakable happiness will it then be, to have our conscience purisied
from defiling sins, and all breaches made up between God and our souls!mdash;
Such may hear the sound of the last trumpet with calmness and serenity of mind,
and stand secure amidst the shocks of a dissolving world.

5. Continual Meditation upon the certainty and solemnity of a future Judgment,
is an excellent means to engage us to a serious preparation for it. There Is
nothing more highly deserves our serious and attentive regards, and yet nothing
that unthinking sinners so industriously banish out of their minds. What
subject, of equal importance, can employ our thoughts and engage our attention,
as this great and illustrious event? Which will unfold the mysteries of divine
providence, clear up the difficulties of his government, and display the
perfections of the Deity in their brightest glories. -- What are all the
dazzling triumph of the mighty Princes and Generals of the Earth, but childish
and despicable trifles, in comparison with the pompous descent of our almighty
Savior, attended with the shining equipage of heaven! -- If now we are
affected with the appearance of an earthly Judge, attended with the ministers
of justice, to enforce the execution of the law, is it not infinitely more
reasonable to employ our thoughts upon that vast and most affecting scene, in
which all the posterity of Adam shall stand before the throne of God, and
receive an irrevocable sentence of happiness, or misery, according to their
works! -- Especially if we consider, that we are all deeply concerned in this
great transaction, and must bear a part in the joys and triumphs, or in the
fears and terrors of that awful day. The neglect of this great duty is one
cause of the general impiety and wickedness of the world, and makes them
presumptuous and secure in the midst of amazing dangers.

We should therefore call off our thoughts from the contemptible vanities of
time and sense, fix them upon a future Judgment, and consider its important
consequences, that so we may be quickened to prepare for that great and terrible
day of the Lord. -- I now proceed to consider,

Secondly, Why it should be the great Study and Endeavor of every Christian to
prepare for the day of Judgment, and that he may then be accepted of the Lord.

Now,

1. It is a work of the greatest difficulty, and requires the utmost
self-denial, resolution, and diligence. This our Master and Judge has warned
his followers of; that they might not please themselves with vain dreams of
carnal ease and pleasure in the way to the Kingdom, but might be prepared to
encounter the hardships that attend the christian life. He has assured us,
that the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force: He has commanded us to strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many
will seek to enter in and shall not be able Mattl. 11.22. Luke 13.24.
.

The Duties enjoined upon us, are contrary to the corrupt inclinations of flesh
and blood, and require the deepest mortification and self-denial. The carnal
mind is enmity to God, impatient of restraint, and madly bent upon those ways
that lead to destruction and ruin. -- And what can be a greater difficulty,
than to offer violence to our depraved natures, to subdue our darling luits,
and maintain a continual war against our selves?

And the difficulty is greatly increased, by the external impediments that
attend us. Satan, the grand adversary of souls, shoots his envenomed arrows, on
every side, to wound and destroy us, and uses a thousand unobserved and politic
stratagems to entice us from God and our Duty. The men of the world will revile
and persecute us for our fidelity and diligence in the discharge of our duty,
and practice the most destructive Methods to corrupt and defile us. And is it
not a laborious task to withstand the rage of earth and hell, to resist the
infection of evil examples, and stem the tide of a degenerate age? -- Is it not
difficult to oppose the soft enchantments of vice, and escape the corruption
that is in the world through lust? What manly courage and resolution is required,
to subdue the inveterate habits of vice, to conquer our native indisposition to
holiness, and to bear up against the subtle insinuations and violent assaults
of temptation? Now this must be done by every one that would be faithful to the
cause of Christ, and obtain the approbation of his Judge. Therefore we are
commanded, not to be siothful in business, but fervent in spirit, serving the
Lord Romans 12.11
: and are exhorted to give all diligence to make our calling and election sure
2 Pet. 1.10.
.

2. This Life is the only season allotted for this great work. The foundation
of our future happiness must be laid in this world, if ever we expect to
receive the reward of future glory. We must now sow the feeds of righteousness,
if we would rejoice in a plentiful harvest at the resurrection of the just. The
divine life must be begun upon earth, that so it may receive its last and
finishing stroke of beauty and perfection in heaven. Now we must arise from the
death of sin, and follow Christ in the regeneration: and then we shall
hereafter rise unto Glory, and be accounted worthy to stand before the Son of
Man, in the day of his appearance and kingdom. This is the time of trial, in
which we must engage in the christian warfare, fight the good fight, and
continue faithful unto death, that in the day of Judgment we may give up our
account with joy, and receive a crown of Life. For in that day the rewards and
punishments will be distributed according to our present spirit and behavior;
and the sentence that shall be passed, will be final and irreversible. No
appeal can be made from this high tribunal; no review can be obtained in the
court of heaven; the Judge will then be inexorable, and the state of all
mankind unalterable. Which leads me to say,

3. If death surprise us in an unprepared estate, the day of Judgment will be a
day of inconceivable terror and amazement. Unutterable anguish and distress
will seize upon impenitent sinners, when they shall see him whom they have
pierced, and remember the innumerable indignities they have thrown upon him.
They will no longer be able to drown the voice of conscience in floods of wine,
nor drive away their melancholy thoughts with music and dancing, with gaiety
and entertainment. The Principles of Infidelity, which are now so greedily
imbibed, against the repeated admonitions of conscience and to the reproach of
human nature, will then afford but a poor and feeble support. Unbelievers will
receive a terrible conviction, that the great doctrines of the Gospel are not
the dreams of enthusiasm,, nor the subtle inventions of the designing Priest
and the crafty Politician. They will find by sad experience, that God is not to
be mocked, that his wrath is not to be trifled with, nor the methods of his
grace to be insulted and blasphemed.

What excuse will they plead for their insolent defiance of Heaven, their
stupid neglect of the invaluable offers of a Savior, their obstinate
continuance in sin, in opposition to the convictions and strivings of the holy
Spirit? -- What defense will they make for their contempt of their baptisinal
vows, and their preferring the pomps and vanities of this world, to the favor
of God, and the ineffable joys of his prefence?

How will their countenances be appal'd, and their souls filled with terror,
when they shall see their almighty Judge, whose authority they have despised,
whose laws they have disobeyed, and whose merits they have blasphemed,
descending in the clouds of heaven, attended with the dreadful artillery of his
wrath, to vindicate the authority of his laws, and punish the contempt of his
government! -- What confusion and horror will surprise them, when they meet
with their sinful and defiled bodies, the ancient partners of their wickedness,
which have been the detestable instruments of their profaneness and impiety,
their oppression and cruelty, their riot and debauchery! -- With what weeping
eyes, astonished countenances, and trembling hearts, will they stand before the
tribunal of Christ, when their secret impurities, their hypocritical disguises,
their lewd and wicked intentions, shall be publicly detected and exposed, to
the contempt and abhorrence of the congregation of the righteous! -- What
distressing agonies and convulsions must seize them, when they shall be
condemned in the day of trial, and their incensed Lord shall pass that
unalterable sentence upon them, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels! -- If the sentence of an earthly
judge is so much to be dreaded, and excites in a condemned criminal such bitter
lamentations, how inconceivably more terrible will be the final determination
of our eternal Judge, which condemns the wicked to endless and intolerable
misery! -- With what vehemence and importunity will they lift up their cries
for that mercy, which now they affront and despise! But alas! their righteous
Judge will then be deaf to their loudest entreaties. Once he compassionately
called upon them to flee from the wrath to come, and sent his ambassadors to
invite them to accept of eternal happiness; but they insolently rejected his
invaluable offers, and ungratefully abused the methods of his grace, they
despised his wise counsels, and disregarded his awful reproofs: therefore he
will mock at their calamity, and laugh when their fear comes. -- Not all the
surprising miracles of his love, not all the bitter agonies and sorrows of his
death, not the sacred streams of his blood, which was shed for the redemption
of a guilty world, could persuade them to forsake their sins, and devote
themselves to his service; but they obstinately retained their beloved lusts,
and preferred their sins before their Savior: His abused goodness will
therefore be converted into fury, and the door of mercy be bolted against them
forever. -- But I turn to a bright scene, and proceed to say,

4. To those that are found in a state of favor and acceptance with Christ,
the day of Judgment will be a time of unspeakable joy and refreshment. With
what satisfaction and pleasure may they, who live soberly, righteously, and
godlily in the world, look for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearance
of the great God their Savior, who has loved them with an everlasting Love,
chosen them from among the degenerate mass of mankind, washed them from their
sins in the fountain of his blood, and is coming to receive them to his arms
and embraces for ever!

With what ecstasies of joy and triumph will they salute the happy day, when
their glorified Redeemer shall descend to this lower world, in the pomp and
character of an incarnate God, clothed with majesty and strength, and attended
with all the honors of his exalted state! -- How will they rejoice, with joy
unspeakable, to behold Him, that for their sakes made himself of no reputation,
became poor, and passed through an amazing scene of the most dismal sufferings,
even the Man Jesus Christ, seated upon a triumphant throne of glory, and
surrounded with a shining crowd of Angels, Archangels, and the spirits of just
men made perfect!

How agreeable a meeting will they have with their ancient Bodies; the
companions of their meekness, humility and self-denial, which have for so many
years been confined to the dark and silent grave, and covered with deformity
and corruption; but are now raised from the dust of death, clothed with
immortal youth and beauty, and fitted for a state of perfect innocence and
happiness! -- How transporting a sight will it be, to behold the goodly Company
of the Prophets, Patriarchs, and Apostles, and all those brave and generous
Souls, who in all ages of the church have sacrificed their lives for the
testimony of Jesus, and have followed their Lord and Master in suffering and
patience, in purity and heavenly-mindedness, all united in one vast assembly,
and shouting forth the praises of their exalted Redeemer! -- How will it
refresh them to have their injured innocence publicly vindicated, their secret
piety and charity applauded, and their holy thoughts and intentions proclaimed,
to their immortal honor! -- But what heart can conceive, what tongue can utter
the mighty transports that will possess the Saints, when their God and Savior
shall openly acknowledge them as his friends and favorites, and declare them
heirs of eternal Glory! -- With what raptures of Joy will they hear that happy
sentence pronounced upon them; Come, ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world! after which they
shall immediately enter into the heavenly paradise, and be for ever with the
Lord.

And now upon the whole, since preparation for a future Judgment is a work of
so much difficulty and pains, -- Since this life is the only time allotted for
this great work, -- Since the consequences of an unprepared state are so
infinitely terrible, and the advantages of the contrary so inconceivably
joyful; surely it behooves every Christian to make it his great study and
endeavor, that he may be accepted of the Lord in the day of Judgment.

EXHORTATION.
Wherefore (in the Apostle's words, 2 Pet. 3.14.) Beloved, be diligent that ye
may be found of your Judge in peace, without spot and blameless. This is the
natural and necessary Counsel, upon what has now been delivered unto you: and
what more important, than a speedy and unfeigned compliance with it? Especially
if we consider, that the time of this great event is reserved among the Secrets
of heaven, and wisely concealed from the most sagacious and inquisitive minds:
So that, for ought we know, the Judge may be now standing at the door; and
before the dawn of another day the last trumpet may sound, and summon us to the
bar of Christ. And considering the infidelity and profaneness, the corrupt
principles, and dissolute manners of the present age; we have uncommon reason
to believe, that day hastens upon us apace: for when the Son of Man comes,
shall he find faith upon the earth? Luke 18.8.

These things may now be received with scorn and banter, and the awful warnings
of heaven may be treated as the melancholy dreams of a gloomy and superstitious
mind; the Scoffers of the present day may break their impious jests upon
Religion, and triumph in their present peace and security: -- But we are
assured from the unerring oracles of God, that the day of the Lord will come as
a thief in the night, in which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise,
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also, and the works
that are therein, shall be burnt up. 2. Pet. 3.10. -- It is therefore our
wisdom and duty to attend to the advice of our Lord (with which I conclude)
Matthew. 24.42, -- 46. Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord does
come. Be ye ready; for in such an bour as ye think not, the Son of Man comes:
and Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord when he comes, shall find so doing.

AMEN.
Preached March 12, 1737, 8
SERMON VI. The Dissolution of the World, a Motive to universal Holiness.
II PET. III. II. Seeing then that all these Things shall be dissolved, what
manner of Persons ought ye to be, in all holy Conversation and Godliness?


THE doctrine of a future Judgment, though agreeable to the principles of reason,
and confirmed by the testimony of Jesus, the faithful and true witness; has
nevertheless been opposed and blasphemed, in all ages, by men abandoned to
their lusts, and given over to a reprobate and impenitent mind. Such there
arose in the christian Church, even in the first and purest days of the Gospel.
In opposition to whom, St. Peter asserts the doctrine of Christ's coming to
judge the world, and removes the objections that were made against it. The
Ground of their infidelity was the uninterrupted prosperity, that the world
enjoyed, notwithstanding its approaching ruin had been so frequently foretold.
Where (say they) is the promise of his coming? for since the Fathers fell
asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation. In
answer to this, the Apostle sharply reproves them for their wilful Ignorance;
and shows them that the world had already undergone such remarkable Changes, as
might justly. serve to strengthen our belief in those that were yet to come. He
tells them, that the delay of Christ's coming did not in the least impeach the
truth and faithfulness of God, but was an astonishing evidence of his Goodness
and forbearance. God is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count
slackness; but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance. Then he goes on to confirm our
faith in this important Article of Religion, and in the words of our text,
directs us a suitable Improvement of this solemn and affecting Subject.

Seeing then, that all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons
ought ye to be, in all holy Conversation and Godliness?

The words contain these two Propositions, which (by divine assistance) shall
be distinctly discoursed upon.

First, At the second coming of Christ, this world shall be dissolved.
Secondly, The Consideratation of this awful truth is a powerful motive to
universal Purity and Godliness.
PROP. 1. At the second coming of Christ this world shall be dissolved.

Though the world at present makes a beautiful and goodly appearance; and the
face of nature seems to wear no marks of a declining age, nor to discover any
melancholy symptoms of its approaching ruin: yet all things certainly are
hastening to their final period; when this earth shall be destroyed by fire, and
all its magnificent Glories expire in flame and smoke.

This has been the universal expectation of the wisest among the beathen world,
of all sects and opinions, in all ages and nations. Their ancient Philosophers
taught this doctrine in their public Schools; their celebrated Poets made it
the frequent theme of their harmonious songs; and scarce any notion has more
generally prevailed in the world. But we are not left to collect this important
truth from the dark hints of Antiquity, and the doubtful conjectures of the
ancient sages: We have a sure word of prophecy to build our faith upon, even
the infallible predictions of the word of God; where the general conflagration
of the world is frequently foretold, and described in the most sublime and
affecting language.

Under the Old Testament-dispensation we have clear intimations of this solemn
truth. -- Moses, the first of the inspired writers pathetically describes it in
his sacred song: Deuteronomy. 32.22. A Fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn
to the lowest bell, and shall consume the earth with her increase; and set on
fire the foundations of the mountains. -- David, the sweet Psalmist of Israel,
prophesies of this great event, Psalm. 50.3. Our God shall come, and shall not
keep silence: a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very tempestuous
round about him. So Psalm. 102.25, 26. Of old thou have laid the foundation of
the earth: and the heavens are the work of thy bands. They shall perish, but
thou shall endure: yea, all of them shall wax old like a Garment, as a Vesture
shall thou change them, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, and
thy years shall have no end.

The prophet Isaiah declares the same doctrine. Chap. 51.6. Lift up your Eyes
to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath, for the heavens shall vanish
away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a Garment, and they that
dwell therein shall die in like manner; but my salvation shall be for ever, and
my rightecusness shall not be abolished. -- And Daniel had a distinct view of
this amazing scene in his prophetic Visions. -- And I beheld (says he) till the
thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose Garment was
white as Snow, and the hair of his bead like pure wool: His throne was like the
fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire. A fiery stream issued and came
forth from before him: Thousand Thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand
times ten thousand stood before him. Dan. 7.9, 10. -- And Malachi, the last of
the old testament prophets, in the Conclusion of his prophecy denounces this
awful threatening (Chap. 4. I.) Behold, the day comes, that shall burn as an
oven; and all the proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be as stubble; and the
day that comes, shall burn them, says the Lord of hosts, that it shall
neither leave them root nor branch.

But this great truth is more clearly revealed in the New Testament. The
Apostle Paul expressly assures us, (2 These. 1.7, 8.) that the Lord Jesus Christ
shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and obey not the Gospel of Christ. The Apostle Peter tells us, in
our Context, that the Heavens and Earth which are now, are kept in Store,
reserved unto fire, against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men:
And that the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in which the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise; and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat; the earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burnt
up. Thus we find, that Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles,
foretell the future destruction of the world: not by dark and figurative
representations, but by plain and positive testimonies.

Nor is there any thing in the present state and constitution of the earth,
that militates against this doctrine, and renders the belief of it absurd and
irrational. On the contrary, the corruptible materials of which this admirable
frame is composed, the jarring elements contained in its capacious bosom,
expose it to continual changes and convulsions. It has already past through
mighty alterations, which have defaced its Glory, and destroyed multitudes of
its inhabitants.

Soon after this beautiful fabric was raised out of darkness and confusion,
and the almighty Creator had pronounced of every thing which he had made. That
it was very good; the whole earth was brought under a Curse for the iniquity of
man, and from a fruitful Paradise was turned into a desolate wilderness, from
the seat of innocence and joy it became the abode of guilt and sorrow.

When all flesh had corrupted their ways, and the wickedness of man was great
upon the Earth, God shower'd down a miraculous deluge of waters, and swept away
the whole world of sinners together.

When the Inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah had filled up the measure of their
sins, and attained to the most daring height of Impiety and Lewdness, they were
suddenly destroyed by fire and brimstone, and their flourishing cities were
turned into heaps of desolation and ruin.

And in all ages of the world there have been terrible examples of the divine
severity. Whole Countries and Kingdoms have been laid waste, by fire and sword,
-- by famine and pestilence, -- by thunder and lightning, -- by storms and
earthquakes. These things are awful warnings to a guilty world, and standing
evidences of God's just displeasure against the workers of Iniquity. The
Judgments that he has executed from time to time, loudly declare the Greatness
of his power, and the terrors of his wrath; and may abundantly convince us,
that the threatenings of his word are not designed barely to amuse and terrify
us, but will be exactly fulfilled in their appointed time.

And why should it be thought incredible, that God who made the world at first,
as a monument of his Power and Goodness, should destroy it at last, to adorn
the triumphs of his Justice and Holiness? What can be more reasonable than to
suppose, that this Earth, which was designed for the habitation of man, will be
dissolved when its Inhabitants are removed off the stage, and settled in their
everlasting abodes?

By what means this astonishing change will be brought about, is utterly
uncertain: but this we know, that there are innumerable fires imprisoned in the
bowels of the earth, which frequently break forth with astonishing fury, and
have produced surprising alterations in the surface of this Globe; the Air also
that surrounds us, is a continual magazine of thunder and lightning, and fiery
Meteors; all which afford abundant provision for an universal Conflagration.

We may therefore suppose, that at the time appointed in the decrees of heaven,
when the end for which this magnificent theater was erected, shall be
accomplished, and the sins of men cry aloud for divine justice, the great Lord
of the Universe will issue out his sovereign Orders: at which the mighty stores
of fire that have hitherto been pent up in the heart of the earth, shall be
broke open, flame out, and rage with irresistible force and fury: all the
combustible materials that are contained in these inferior heavens, shall be
set on fire, and descend in hidious cataracts upon the dissolving world. The
beautiful order, that has hitherto subsisted in the works of nature, will then
cease, and the whole sublunary world be involved in tumult and disorder: The
foundations of the earth will be put out of course, and all the admired
structures of nature and art shall perish together.

But it is not my design to attempt a description of this great and terrible
day of the Lord; it is beyond the capacity of man, to conceive, and the power
of language to express the horrors of this amazing Scene. I pass therefore to
the other thing proposed, viz.

PROP. II. That the consideration of this important truth is a powerful motive
to universal Purity and Godliness. Which will appear, if we consider the
following particulars:

It gives us an awful representation of the Greatness and Power of God.

It shows the malignant and destructive nature of Sin.

It depreciates the enjoyments of this present World.

It evidences the necessity of securing a more valuable and abiding inheritance.

It heightens the terror and solemnity of a future judgment. And

It affords a bright discovery of the love of Christ in saving his people from
the ruins of a dissolving world.

Of these in their order.

I. It gives us an awful representation of the Greatness and Power of God.

These attributes were wonderfully discovered, when he first laid the
foundations of the earth, stretched the heavens over us as a Curtain, and
settled the course of nature with such surprising regularity and exactness;
that its various parts mutually support and assist each other, and all conspire
to minister to the convenience and happiness of its numerous Inhabitants. But
they will still be more astonishingly displayed, when the heavens shall pass
away with a great noise, the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and all the
Glory of this goodly system shall be made a prey to devouring flames, for to
punish the contempt of his authority, and manifest the fierceness of his anger
against a sinful world.

How irresistible is the Power of that God, who made all things by the
authority of a Command, and can destroy them in a moment by a frown of his
countenance? -- How terrible is his Majesty, at whose rebuke the Earth shakes
and trembles, and the foundations of the hills are removed out of their place?
-- Who can stand before Him, when once he is angry? Who can support the terrors
of his almighty displeasure? Is not the thought of these things sufficient to
surprise the boldest sinners, to appale their Countenances, and make their
knees strike one against another, when they are giving a loose to their mirth
and jollity, and wasting their days in intemperance and debauchery? What
infinite madness, and worse than brutal stupidity, are they guilty of, who
affront and provoke the great Lord and Governor of the world, upon whom they
entirely depend, who can destroy them with the breath of his mouth, and make
them the flaming monuments of his righteous indignation? What more necessary
for us, than to bow before the Lord our maker, and humble our selves for our
innumerable provocations against him? How seasonable is that advice (22 Job.
21.) Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace: thereby good shall come
unto thee. -- How much does it concern us, to serve the Lord with reverence and
godly fear; seeing our God is a consuming fire? who though he now seems to take
no notice of the sins of men, and bears with innumerable indignities, yet he
has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness, and
fearfully destroy his implacable Enemies.

II. The dissolution of the world affords a convincing evidence of the
malignant and destructive nature of Sin.

That Sin is an infinite evil, odious to the blessed God, and attended with the
most dangerous consequences, is abundantly evident from the declarations of
God's word, and is still further verified by the inflictions of his wrath upon
obstinate and impenitent transgressors. -- How clearly did the purity of his
nature, and the severity of his Justice, shine forth in the terrible punishment
inflicted upon the fallen Angels? who for one sin were dethroned from their
exalted seats in Heaven, were cast down to the gloomy mansions of hell, and are
reserved in chains of darkness to the judgment of the great day. -- How awful
does the divine displeasure appear in the curse pronounced upon our first
Parents, for their primitive apostasy; by which the Glory of the creation was
stained, the harmony of nature disturbed, and Man (the Lord of all) was brought
under a peremptory sentence of death and misery? -- And who can recount the
various and distressing Afflictions, that are since become the sad inheritance
of the sinful children of men? -- This may assure us, that God is angry with
the Wicked, and that he will not suffer the wilful contempt of his authority to
pass unpunished.

But how illustriously will this truth be revealed by the fire of the last day;
when this lower world shall be consumed by the heat of the divine displeasure,
and all its adored treasures shall be sacrificed to the jealous resentments of
an offended God? For it is sin, that enkindles the fire of God's wrath, and
provokes him to destroy the works of his hands. How justly then are they
branded with the character of Fools, who make a mock of sin, who hug this
detestable evil in their bosoms; which has already been attended with such
destructive effects, and which will at last set on fire this frame of nature,
and sink a guilty world into the lowest hell, where the smoke of their torments
will ascend for ever and ever? What Consideration can more powerfully engage us
to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts? How much does it concern us, to have
no fellowship with these unfruitful works of darkness, but to flee from the
tents of the wicked, lest we be defiled with their sins, and partake of their
plagues?

III. The Consideration of the approaching Ruin of this World, greatly
depreciates all earthly Enjoyments, and shows the madness of placing our
affections upon such uncertain treasures.

The world is a strong and prevailing temptation, which wonderfully captivates
the hearts of men, and is the unhappy instrument of innumerable pollutions.
Many are so enchanted with wealth and riches, so fond of the pomp and glitter
of worldly greatness, so charmed with the gay amusements and pleasures of Life,
that they think of nothing but setting up their tabernacles here; and entirely
neglect their great and immortal interest: but surely, if we consider the
transitory nature of these enjoyments, it is enough to damp the force of
worldly temptations, and put us out of conceit with such perishing vanities.
Why should we put our trust, and place our happiness, in things that are of so
short and momentany a duration; which in a few years at furthest, will vanish
out of our sight, and take their leave of us for ever? Our daily experience
shows us, that all these beloved advantages are continually upon the wing, and
frequently fly from our embraces: but besides the common casualties and
adversities of life, to which all things here below are exposed, the world it
self, with all its grandeur and magnificence, with all its riches and
pleasures, is hastening to its final period. The time is swiftly approaching,
when the earth, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. Then all
those tempting objects, which now you so passionately dote upon, and for which
you sacrifice all Hope of the favor of God, and an heaven of immortal joys,
shall be turned into darkness and flame. All the great empires, which have been
raised by ambition or cruelty, and made such a mighty noise in the earth, shall
sink at once into ruin and confusion. All those flourishing cities, which have
been the pride and glory of their inhabitants, shall be laid waste and
desolate. All the proud monuments of human vanity, which have been reared with
such infinite toil and expense, shall be levelled with the dust, and the place
thereof shall know them no more. What an undeniable evidence does this afford
us of the little value of all earthly possessions? How should it abate our
affections to such vanishing trifles, and give check to our immoderate pursuit
of the world? This is the argument made use of by St. Paul, and carries with it
the greatest force and efficacy (1 Cor. 7. 29, -- 31.) But this I say,
Brethren, the time is short; it remains, that they that rejoice, be as though
they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that
use this world, as not abusing it: for the fashion of this world passes away.

I proceed to say,

IV. This also shows us the necessity of securing a more valuable and abiding
Inheritance.

Since the world is such a transient scene, and its most agreeable
entertainments are like a morning-cloud, and as the early dew, which will
quickly pass away; it is a Matter of no considerable consequence, whether our
circumstances be prosperous, or afflicting, whether we are carried through the
stage of Life with an easy and pleasant gale, or drove to our long home by
storm and distress. Our only concern is, to attend the duty of our station, and
fulfill the task assigned us by heaven; that at last we may safely arrive at the
peaceful harbor of happiness and everlasting rest. We are here in a
pilgrimage-state, and are bound for the regions of immortality; nothing
therefore deserves our anxiety and care, but that which will survive our
funeral, and pass over with us into a future world. And, blessed be God, an
heavenly and eternal inheritance is offered to our choice, and earnestly
recommended to our acceptance: This is the noblest object of our ambition, and
should engage the strength and vigor of all our powers.

Now by the Tenor of the Divine Promise, as well as the Nature of Things, this
can be obtained only by those that cleanse themselves from all filthiness of
flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness in the fear of God; who escape the
pollutions of the world, and are renewed after the image of the invisible God.
What manner of persons then ought we to be, in all holy conversation and
Godliness; that so when all things here below shall fail us, we may be admitted
into a city that has everlasting foundations, whose make and builder is God;
and obtain a crown of incorruptible and unfading Glory!

V. The destruction of the world by fire will heighten the terror and solemnity
of a future judgment: and so the Consideration of it is a powerful motive to
universal purity and holiness.

The wise author of our beings has implanted a principle of fear in the hearts
of men, to keep them from security and presumption, to quicken them in their
flight from impending dangers. Now what can be more suited to raise this
passion in the soul, than the consideration of that awful time, when we must
all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, and have an irreversible
sentence passed upon us, according to the nature and quality of our actions?
But how astonishingly will the terrors of that day be increased by the final
destruction of this lower world? What confusion and distress will seize the
sinner, when the heavens from above shall rain down fire and brimstone, and the
earth upon which he dwells, shall become one mighty Volcano, and discharge
whole rivers of flaming sulphur?

Will it not terrify the hardiest mortals, to see nature struggling in the
agonies of death, and themselves encompassed on all sides with the flames of a
dissolving world: The Sun turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, and
whole cities and countries sinking down in a moment into the fiery abyss below!
How will they support these visions of horror and amazement, or whither will
they fly for safety and defense? If they ascend to the top of the loftiest
mountains, there they will be exposed to the hot thunderbolts of divine fury:
If they descend into the gloomy caverns of the earth, there they will be
swallowed up in an Ocean of liquid fire. In short, wherever they go, the
vengeance of an incensed God will pursue them, and make them the monuments of
his almighty displeasure.

And now what more powerful argument can be used with sinful mortals to awaken
them out of their impenitence and security? If infinite justice cannot affright
them from their sins; if the prospect of a dissolving world leave no abiding
impressions upon them; they appear to be lost, beyond all possibility of
recovery: and it is to be feared, they belong to the number of those hardened
wretches, who are resolved to storm hell, and take the kingdom of darkness by
violence.

VI. This also has a prevailing influence upon the people of God, as it gives
them a bright discovery of the love of Christ, who will save them from the
terrors of this amazing day.

Though this will be a day of tribulation and anguish to impenitent sinners, yet
it will be a time of joy and refreshment to the Saints. For the Lord knows
how to deliver the Godly, and reserve the unjust to the day of judgment to be
punished 2 Pet. 2.9.
St. Paul assures us, that the righteous shall be separated from the wicked,
and rescued from the calamity, in which all things else shall be involved. For
the Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel and the trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then
we which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be with the Lord 1
These. 4.16, 17.
What an endearing expression is this of the love of God our Savior? What
obligations are we under, to bestow upon him our best and dearest affection? In
fine, what mighty encouragement does it afford us now to disentangle our
affections from this ensnaring world, to be fruitful in every good work, to
have our conversation in heaven; that so we may be accounted worthy to escape
all those things, which shall then come to pass, and may be able to stand with
confidence before the Son of Man at his appearing.

The APPLICATION of my discourse remains: which I shall dispatch in a serious
and earnest Exhortation to several sorts of persons.

I. Let those that are in Youth, be persuaded by these powerful motives that
have been set before them, to all holy Conversation and Godliness. -- You are
exceeding apt to banish all serious Thoughts out of your minds, and to imagine
that it will be time enough hereafter, to attend to religious Concerns, when
you have taken a surfeit of the Gaieties and Pleasures of Life. Youth is
naturally unthinking; and strongly inclined to sensual enjoyments. Their
constitutions are ordinarily firm and robust; not broken with fatigue, impaired
by sickness, or worn out with age. Their pulse beats high, their blood
circulates briskly through their veins, and all the powers of nature are in
their highest sprightliness and vigor: Their appetites are eager, their
passions are headstrong, and so apt to hurry them into all manner of riot and
excess, contrary to the sacred rules of virtue and sobriety. They esteem
Religion too dark and melancholy an entertainment for the flourishing bloom of
life, and fit for none but those whose temper is soured with losses and
disappointments in the world, and whose strength is wasted with sickness or
age. Hence they give an unbounded loose to their vicious inclinations, and
wallow in the grossest sensualities.

But make a pause, I beseech you, in the midst of your mad career, and consider
what will be the conseguence of your actions; Know it, that for these things
God will bring you into judgment, and call you to a strict account so: your
youthful follies. You may now drink wine in bowls, and sing away your cares,
spend your days in mirth, and your years in vanity and pleasure; but these are
dying comforts, shortliv'd enjoyments, which will soon end in disappointment
and sorrow. The sprightliness of Youth, the strength of your constitutions, is
no Protection against the sudden arrests of Death, and the inevitable summons
of your almighty Judge. How many of your companions have been cut off in the
flower of their days, and dispatched into an eternal world, without any
warning? And have you any security, that this shall not be your case? On the
contrary, have you not the greatest reason to fear, that whilst you are
revelling in your intemperate pleasures, and madly pursuing your guilty
designs, while you are flattering your selves with the prospect of long life
and prosperity, and dream of nothing but peace and safety, the fatal Period
will come upon you in a moment, and overwhelm you with swift and unavoidable
ruin? Knowing then the terrors of the Lord, we persuade you, to break off your
Sins by unfeigned Repentance, and get reconciled to God, and prepared to die.
-- O fly to the great Savior of the world, who alone can secure you from the
flames of vindictive Justice: Cry to him most importunately for the powerful
influences of his Spirit, to cleanse your polluted Souls; that you may be found
of your Judge in peace, without spot and blameless. -- But I pass,

II. To apply this Exhortation to those that are in the Evening of Life, and
have hitherto neglected to prepare for the approaching dissolution of all
things.

With what confidence will you, under your heavy Loads of Guilt and Defilement,
be able to hold up your heads at the bar of Christ? Can you hope to appear with
Safety before his Judgment Seat, who have hitherto spent your time in the
neglect of his Authority, in disobedience to his Gospel, and profane contempt
of his inestimable Blood? Alas, your days decline apace, your Sun is almost
set, and the Night hastens upon you, wherein no man can work. O then seize the
flying moments, and trifle no longer with your eternal Concerns; humble your
selves in the dust for your aggravated Iniquities, and turn from all your
Transgressions. Fly for Refuge to Christ, and give glory to the Lord your God,
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and before the terrors of a
future judgment surprise you. O how will you escape, if you neglect so great
Salvation!

III. Let what we have heard put the Children of God upon diligent endeavors
to grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of Christ, to increase in universal
holiness, that they may be better prepared for the awful Events they are
expecting, and which will surely come to pass.

To quicken our Zeal and Activity in the Christian Life, let us frequently be
looking forward to that important day, when our descending LORD shall make the
clouds his chariot, and shall ride upon the wings of the wind; when the Heavens
shall bow before him, and the rocks shall melt at his presence, and a fire
shall go before him to burn up his enemies on every side. -- Consider how vast
will be the joy of those holy Souls, who shall be saved from the ruins of a
burning world, and be admitted into the new heavens and the new earth, wherein
dwells righteousness. And let the prospect of this happy state engage us to
unfainting industry in the service of God our Savior, to a constant separation
from the defiling corruptions of the world, and unto a Care to have our
Conversation in Heaven: then we may be assured, that the day of Christ's solemn
appearance will be the day of our complete and eternal Redemption. While
ungodly Sinners shall tremble at the Presence of their righteous Judge, and at
the sight of a dissolving world, we that have served God, and waited for his
Son from Heaven, shall be able, amidst this Scene of darkness and horror, to
hold up our heads with Joy, and not be ashamed before Him at his coming. -- We
shall shout unto God with the voice of Gladness, and join in that triumphant
Song of Moses and the LAMB: Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God
almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints!

AMEN. FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 32. read of Moses --

P. 14. l. 13. r. Superstition --

P. 38. l. 4. r. Administered --

P. 41. l. 11. r. Should we --

P: 57. l. 33, 4. r. Preservative --

P. 69. l. 28. r. Our sollicitous --

P. 74. l. 12. r. Brighter --

P. 79. l. 23. r. Consideration --


