Mr. Whitefield's SERMON, ON Family Religion.

The great Duty of Family Religion.

A SERMON Preached to a numerous Audience in England.

By George Whitefield, A. B. Of Pembroke-College, OXFORD.

London Printed: Reprinted at Boston, by T. Fleet, for CHARLES HARRISON,
Over Against the Brazen Head in Cornhill, 1739.

The Great DUTY of FAMILY RELIGION.
JOSHUA xxiv. 15. As for Me and my House, we will serve the Lord.
THESE Words contain the Holy Resolution of pious Joshua, who having in a most
moving, affectionate Discourse recounted to the Israelites what great Things
GOD had done for them, in the Verse immediately foregoing the Text, comes to
draw a proper Inference from what He had been delivering; and acquaints them,
in the most pressing Terms, that since GOD had been so exceeding Gracious unto
them, they could do no less than, out of Gratitude for such uncommon Favors
and Mercies dedicate both themselves and Families to his Service. Now
therefore, says he, Verse 14. Fear the Lord, and serve him in Sincerity and
Truth, and put away the Gods which your Fathers served on the other Side of the
Flood. And by the same engaging Motives does the Prophet Samuel afterward
enforce their Obedience to the Commandments of GOD, I Sam. xii. 24. Only fear
the LORD, and serve him in Truth, with all your Heart: For consider (says he)
how great Things. He has done for you. But then, that they might not excuse
themselves (as too many might be apt to do) by his giving them a bad Example,
or think he was laying heavy Burdens upon them, whilst he himself touched them
not with one of his Fingers, he tells them in the Verse out of which the Text
is taken, that whatever Regard they might pay to the Doctrine he had been
Preaching, yet He (as all Ministers ought to do) was resolved to live up to and
Practice it himself; Choose you therefore, says he, whom you will serve, whether
the Gods which your Fathers served, or the Gods of the Amorites in whose Land
ye dwell: But as for me and my House, we will serve the LORD.

A Resolution this worthy of Joshua, and no less becoming, no less necessary
for every true Son of Joshua, that is entrusted with the Care and Government of
a Family in our Day: And, if it was ever seasonable for Ministers to preach up,
or People to put in Practice Family Religion, it was never more so than in the
present Age; since it is greatly to be feared, that out of those many Households
that call themselves Christians, there are but few that serve GOD in their
respective Families as they ought.

IT is true indeed, visit our Churches, and you may perhaps see something of
the Form of Godliness still subsisting among us; but even that is scarcely to
be met with in private Houses. So that were the Blessed Angels to come, as in
the Patriarchal Age, and observe our Spiritual Economy at Home, would they not
be tempted to say, as Abraham said to Abimelech, Surely the Fear of GOD is not
in this Place? Genesis XX. II.

How such a general Neglect of Family Religion first began to overspread the
Christian World, is difficult to determine. As for the Primitive Christians, I
am positive it was not so with them: No, they had not so learned CHRIST, as
falsely to imagine Religion was to be confined solely to their Assemblies for
Public Worship; but on the contrary behaved with such Piety and exemplary
Holiness in their private Families, that Saint Paul often styles their House a
Church: Salute such a one, says he, and the Church which is in his House. And,
I believe, we must for ever despair of seeing a Primitive Spirit of Piety,
revived in the World, till we are so happy as to see a Revival of Primitive
Family Religion; and Persons unanimously resolving with Good Old Joshua, in the
Words of the Text. -- As for Me and my House, we will serve the LORD.

FROM which Words I shall beg Leave to insist on these three Things: I. First,
That it is the Duty of every Governor of a Family to take care, that not only
He himself, but also that those committed to his Charge serve the LORD. II.
Secondly, I shall endeavor to show after what Manner a Governor and his
Household ought to serve the LORD. III. Thirdly and lastly, I shall offer some
Motives in order to excite all Governors, with their respective Households, to
serve the LORD in the Manner that shall be recommended.


I. AND First, I am to show that it is the Duty of every Governor of a Family
to take care, that not only He himself, but also that those committed to his
Charge should serve the LORD.

AND this will appear, if we consider that every Governor of a Family ought to
look upon himself as obliged to act in three Capacities; as a Prophet, to
instruct; as a Priest to pray for and with; as a King to govern, direct, and
provide for them. It is true indeed the latter of these, viz. their Kingly
Office, they are not so frequently deficient in, (nay in this they are
generally too sollicitous;) but as for the two former, viz. their Priestly and
Prophetic Offices, like Gallio, they care for no such Things. But however
indifferent some Governors may be about it, yet they may be assured, that GOD
will require a due Discharge of these Offices at their Hands. For if, as the
Apostle argues, He that does not provide for his own House, in temporal Things,
has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel; to what greater Degree of
Apostasy must he have arrived, who takes no Thought to provide for the
Spiritual Welfare of his Family!

BUT farther, Persons are generally very liberal of their Invectives against
the Clergy, and think they justly blame the Conduct of that Minister who does
not take heed to and watch over the Flock, of which the Holy Ghost has made him
Overseer: But may not every Governor of a Family be in a lower Degree liable
to the same Censure, who takes no thought for those Souls that are committed to
his Charge? For every House is, as it were a little Parish, every Governor (as
was before observed) a Priest, every Family a Flock; and if any of them perish
through the Governor's Neglect, their Blood will GOD require at their Hands.

WAS a Minister to disregard Teaching his People publicly and from House to
House, and to excuse himself by saying, that He had enough to do to work out
his own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, without concerning himself with that
of Others: Would not any one be apt to think such a Minister to be like the
unjust Judge, One that neither feared GOD or regarded Man? And yet, odious as
such a Character would be, it is no worse than that Governor of a Family
deserves, who thinks himself obliged only to save his own Soul, without paying
any regard to the Souls of his Household. For (as was above hinted) every House
is, as it were, a Parish, and every Master is concerned to secure, as much as
in him lies, the Spiritual Prosperity of every one under his Roof, as any
Minister whatever is obliged to look to the Spiritual Welfare of every
individual Person under his Charge.

WHAT Precedents Men, who neglect their Duty in this Particular, can plead for
such Omission, I cannot tell: Doubtless not the Example of Holy Job, who was so
far from imagining that He had no concern, as Governor of a Family, with any
one's Soul but his Own, that the Scripture acquaints us, When the Days of his
Children's Feasting were gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and
offered Burnt Offerings according to the Number of them all; For Job said, It
may be that my Sons have sinned and cursed GOD in their Hearts: Thus did Job
continually. Nor can they plead the Practice of Good Old Joshua, whom in the
Text we find as much concerned for his Houshold's Welfare as his own. Nor
lastly, that of Cornelius, who feared GOD, not only himself, but with all his
House: And were Christians but of the same Spirit of Job, Joshua, and the
Gentile Centurion, they would act as Job, Joshua, and Cornelius did.

BUT, alas! if this be the Case, and all Governors of Families ought not only
to serve the LORD themselves, but likewise to see that their respective
Households do so too: What will then become of those who not only neglect
serving GOD themselves, but also make it their Business to ridicule and scoff
at any of their House that do? Who are not content with not entering into the
Kingdom of Heaven themselves; but those also that are willing to enter in they
hinder. Surely such Men are Factors for the Devil indeed. Surely their
Damnation slumbereth not: For although GOD, in his Good Providence, may suffer
such Stumbling Blocks to be put in his Children's Ways, and suffer their
greatest Enemies to be those of their own Households, for a Trial of their
Sincerity, and Improvement of their Faith; yet we cannot but pronounce a Woe
against those Masters by whom such Offenses come. For if those that only take
care of their own Souls can scarcely be saved, where will such monstrously
profane and wicked Governors appear?

BUT hoping there is but few of this unhappy (...) we now to the

II. Second Thing proposed, viz. To show after what Manner a Governor and his
Household ought to serve the LORD.

1. AND the First Thing I shall mention is Reading the Word of GOD. This is a
Duty incumbent on every private Person. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have Eternal Life, is a Precept given by our blessed LORD
indifferently to all: But much more so ought every Governor of a Family to
think it in a peculiar Manner spoken to himself, because (as has been already
proved) he ought t^ ^ook upon himself as a Prophet, and therefore, agr^^^bly to
such a Character as bound to instruct those un^^^ his Charge in the Knowledge
of the Word of GOD.

THIS we find was the Order GOD gave his peculiar People of Israel: For thus
speaks his Representative Moses, Deuteronomy vi. 6, 7. These Words, that is the
Scripture Words, which I command thee this Day, shall be in thy Heart, and thou
shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, that is, as it is generally
explained, Servants, as well as Children, and shall talk of them when thou
sit in thy House. From whence we may infer, that the only Reason why so
many neglect to read the Words of Scripture diligently to their Children is,
because the Words of Scripture are not in their Hearts; for if they were, out
of the Abundance of the Heart their Mouths would speak.

BESIDES, Servants as well as Children are, for the generality, very ignorant,
and mere Novices in the Laws of GOD: And how shall they know, unless some one
teach them? And what more proper to teach them by, than the lively Oracles of
GOD, which are able to make them wise unto Salvation? And who more proper to
instruct them by these Lively Oracles, than Parents and Masters, who (as has
been more than once before observed) are as much concerned to feed them with
Spiritural as with Bodily Bread, Day by Day.

BUT if these Things be so, What a miserable Condition are those unhappy
Governors in, who are so far from feeding those committed to their Care with
the sincere Milk of the Word, to the intent they may grow thereby, that they
neither search the Scriptures themselves, nor are careful to explain them to
Others? Such Bamilies must be in a happy Way indeed to do their Master's Will,
who take such prodigious Pains to know it! Would not one imagine that they had
turned Converts to the Church of Rome; that they thought Ignorance the Mother
of Devotion; that those were to be condemned as Heretics, who read their
BIBLES? And yet how few Families are there amongst us, who do not act after
this unseemly Manner! But, shall I praise them in this? I praise them not:
Brethren, this Thing ought not so to be.

2. PASS we on now to the Second Means whereby every Governor and his Household
ought to serve the LORD, viz. Family Prayer.

THIS is a Duty though as much neglected, yet as absolutely necessary as the
former. Reading is a good Preparative for Prayer, as Prayer is an excellent
Means to render Reading effectual. And the Reason why every Governor of a
Family should join both these Exercises together is plain, because a Governor
of a Family cannot perform his Priestly Office (which we before observed he is
in some Degree invested with) without performing this Duty of Family Prayer.

WE find it therefore remarked, when mention is made of Cain and Abel's
offering Sacrifices, that they brought them. But to whom did they bring them?
Why, in all probability to their Father Adam, who, as Priest of the Family, was
to offer Sacrifice in their Names. And so likewise ought every spiritual Son of
the Second Adam, who is entrusted with the Care of an Household, to offer up the
Spiritual Sacrifices of Supplications and Thanksgivings acceptable to GOD
through JESUS CHRIST, in the Presence and Name of all who wait upon or eat Meat
at his Table.

THUS we read our Blessed Lord behaved, when he tabernacled amongst us: For it
is said often, that He was alone praying with his Twelve Disciples, which was
then his little Family. And He himself has promised a particular Blessing to
joint Supplications: For wheresoever, says he, two or three are gathered
together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. And again, If two or
three are agreed touching any Thing they shall ask, it shall be given them. Add
to this, that we are commanded by the Apostle to pray always, with all Manner
of Supplication, which doubtless includes Family Prayer. And Holy Joshua, when
he set up the Good Resolution in the Text, that He and his Household would serve
the LORD, certainly resolved withal to pray with his Family, which is one of
the best Testimonies they could give of their serving Him.

BESIDES, there are no Families, but what have some common Blessings, of which
they have been all Partakers, to give Thanks for; some common Crosses and
Afflictions, which they are to pray against; some common Sins which they are
all bound to lament and bewail: But how this can be done without joining
together in one common Act of Humiliation, Supplication, and Thanksgiving, is
difficult to devise.

FROM all which Considerations put together, it is evident, that Family Prayer
is a great and necessary Duty; and consequently those Governors that neglect
it are certainly without Excuse. And it is much to be feared, if they live
without Family Prayer, they live without GOD in the World.

AND yet such an hateful Character as this is, it is to be feared, that, was
GOD to send out an Angel to destroy us as he did once destroy the Egyptians
Firstborn, and withal give him a Commission, as then, to spare no Houses but
where they saw the Blood of the Lintel sprinkled on the Door-post, so now to
let no Families escape but those that called upon him in Morning and Evening
Prayer; few would remain unhurt by his avenging Sword. Christians shall I term
such Families, or Heathens? Doubtless they deserve not the Name of Christians;
and Heathens will surely rise up in Judgment against such profane Families of
this Generation: For they had always their Household GODS whom they worshipped,
and whose Assistance they frequently invoked. And a pretty pass those Families
surely are arrived at, who must be sent to School to Pagans. But will not the
LORD be avenged on such profane Households as these? Will he not pour out his
Fury upon those that call not upon his Name?

3. BUT it is Time for me to hasten to the Third and last Means I shall
recommend, whereby every Governor ought with his Household to serve the LORD,
viz. by Catechizing and Instructing their Children and Servants, and bringing
them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the LORD.

THAT this, as well as the two former, is a Duty incumbent on every Governor
of an House, appears from that famous Encomium or Commendation GOD gives of
Abraham. I know, says the Most High, that He will command his Children and his
Household after him to keep the Way of the LORD, to do Justice and Judgment. And
indeed scarce any Thing is more frequently pressed upon us in Holy Writ than
this Duty of Catechizing. Thus says GOD in a Passage before cited, Thou shall
teach these Words diligently unto thy Children. And Parents are commanded in
the New Testament, to breed up their Children in the Nurture and Admonition of
the LORD. The Holy Psalmist acquaints us, that one great End why GOD did so
great Wonders for his People was, to the Intent that when they grew up they
should show their Children or Servants, the same. And in Deuteronomy, Chap. vi.
at the 20th and following Verses, GOD strictly commands his People to instruct
their Children in the true Nature of the Ceremonial Worship, when they should
enquire about it, as he supposed they would do in Time to come. And if Servants
and Children were to be instructed in the Nature of Jewish Rites, much more
ought they now to be initiated and grounded in the Doctrines and first
Principles of the Gospel of CHRIST: Not only because it is a Revelation, which
has brought Life and Immortality to a fuller and clearer Light, but also
because many Seducers are gone abroad into the World, who do their utmost
Endeavor to destroy not only the Superstructure, but likewise to sap the very
Foundation of our most Holy Religion.

WOULD, then, the present Generation have their Posterity be true Lovers and
Honourers of GOD, Masters and Parents must take Solomon's good Advice, and
train up and catechize their respective Households in the Way wherein they
should go.

I AM aware but of one Objection that can, with any Show of Reason, be urged
against what has been advanced; which is, That such a Procedure as this will
take up too much Time, and hinder Families too long from their Worldly
Business. But it is much to be questioned whether Persons that start such an
Objection are not of the same hypocritical Spirit as the Traitor Judas, who had
Indignation against Devout Mary, who being so profuse of her Ointment, in
anointing our Blessed Lord, and asked Why it might not be sold for Two Hundred
Pence, and given to the Poor. For has GOD given us so much Time to work for
Ourselves, and shall we not allow some small Pittance of it, Morning and
Evening, to be devoted to his more immediate Worship and Service? Have not
People read, That it is GOD who gives Men Power to get Wealth, and therefore
that the best Way to prosper in the World is to secure his Favor? And has not
our Blessed Lord himself promised, that if we seek first the Kingdom of GOD and
his Righteousness, all outward Necessaries shall be added unto us?

Abraham, no doubt, was a Man of as great Business as such Objectors may be;
but yet He would find Time, to command his Household to serve the LORD. Nay,
David, was a King, and consequently had a great deal of Business upon his
Hands; yet notwithstanding, He professes that he would Walk in his House with a
perfect Heart. And, to instance but one more, Holy Joshua was a Person
certainly engaged very much in Temporal Affairs; and yet He solemnly declares
before all Israel, That, as for him and his Household, they would serve the
LORD. And did Persons but redeem their Time, as Abraham, David, or Joshua did,
they would no longer complain that Family Duties kept them too long from the
Business of the World.

III. BUT my Third and last General Head, under which I was to offer some
Motives, in order to excite all Governors, with their respective Households, to
serve-the LORD in the Manner before recommended, I hope, will serve instead of
a Thousand Arguments, to prove the Weakness and Folly of any such Objection.

1. AND the first Motive I shall mention is the Duty of Gratitude, you that are
Governors of Families owe to GOD. -- Your Lot, every one must confess, is cast
into a fair Ground: Providence has given you a goodly Heritage, above many of
your Fellow Creatures, and therefore, out of a Principle of Gratitude, you
ought to endeavor, as much as in you lies, to make every Person of your
respective Households to call upon him as long as they live: (Not to mention)
that the Authority, with which GOD has invested you as Parents and Governors
of Families, is a Talent committed to your Trust, and which you are bound to
improve to your Master's Honor. In other Things we find Governors and Parents
can exercise Lordship over their Children and Servants, and frequently enough
can say to one Go, and he goes; to another Come, and he comes; to a third, Do
this, and he does it. And shall this Power be so often employed in your own
Affairs, and never exerted in the Things of GOD? Be astonished, O Heavens, at
this.

THUS did not faithful Abraham; No, GOD says, that He knew Abraham would
command his Servants and Children after him. Thus did not Joshua: No, He was
resolved not only to walk with GOD himself, but to improve his Authority in
making all about him do so too: As for me and my Household, we will serve the
LORD. Let us go and do likewise.

2. BUT, Secondly, If Gratitude to GOD will not, methinks Love and Pity to your
Children should move you, with your respective Families, to serve the LORD.

MOST People express a great Fondness for their Children; nay so great, that
very often their own Lives are wrapped up in those of their Offspring. Can a
Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have Compassion on the Son
of her Womb? says GOD by his Prophet Isaiah. He speaks of it as a monstrous
Thing, and scarce credible. But the Words immediately following affirm it to be
possible, Yea They may forget; and Experience also assures us they may. Father
and Mother may ^^th forsake their Children: For what greater Degree of
Forgetfulness can they express toward them, than to neglect the Improvement of
their better Part, and not bring them up in the Knowledge and Fear of GOD.

IT is true, indeed, Parents seldom forget to provide for their Children's
Bodies, (though, it is to be feared, some Men are so far sunk beneath the
Beasts that perish, as to neglect even that;) but then how often do they
forget, or rather when do they remember, to secure the Salvation of their
immortal Souls: But is this their Way of expressing their Fondness for the
Fruit of their Bodies? Is this the best Testimony they can give of their
Affection to the Darling of their Hearts? Then was Dalilah fond of Sampson,
when she delivered him up into the Hands of the Philistines. Then were those
Ruffians well affected to Daniel, when they threw him into a Den of Lions.

3. BUT, Thirdly, if neither Gratitude to GOD, nor Love and Pity to your
Children, will prevail on you; yet let a Principle of common Honesty and
Justice move you to set up the holy Resolution in the Text.

THIS is a Principle which all Men would be thought to act upon. But certainly,
if any may be truly censured for their Injustice, none can be more liable to
such Censure than those who think themselves injured if their Servants withdraw
themselves from their bodily Work, and yet they in return take no care of their
inestimable Souls. For is it just that Servants should spend their Time and
Strength in their Master's Service, and Masters not at the same Time give them
what is just and equal for their Service?

IT is true, some Men may think they have done enough when they give unto their
Servants Food and Raiment, and say, Did not I bargain with thee for so much a
Year? But if they give them no other Reward than this, What do they do less for
their very Beasts? But are not Servants better than they? Doubtless they are:
And however Masters may put off their Convictions for the present, they will
find a Time will come, when they shall know they ought to have given them some
Spiritual, as well as Temporal Wages; and the Cry of those that have mowed down
their Fields will enter into the Ears of the LORD of Sabbath.

4. BUT, Fourthly, If neither Gratitude to GOD, Pity to Children, nor a
Principle of common Justice to Servants, are sufficient to balance all
Objections; yet let that darling, that prevailing Motive of Self-Interest turn
the Scale, and engage you with your respective Households to serve the LORD.

THIS weights greatly with you in other Matters: Be then persuaded to let it
have a due and full Influence on you in this; and if it has, if you have but
Faith as a Grain of Mustard Seed, how can you avoid believing that promoting
Family Religion would be the best Means to promote your own temporal as well as
eternal Welfare? For Godliness has the Promise of the Life that now is, as well
as that which is to come.

BESIDES, you all, doubtless, wish for honest Servants and pious Children; and
to have them prove otherwise, would be as great a Grief to you as it was to
Elijah to have a treacherous Gahazi, or David to be troubled with a rebellious
Absalom. But how can it be expected they should learn their Duty, except those
set over them take care to teach it them? Is it not as reasonable to expect you
should reap where you had not sown, or gather where you had not strawed?

DID Christianity, indeed, give any Countenance to Children and Servants to
disregard their Parents and Masters according to the Flesh, or represent their
Duty to them as inconsistent with their entire Obedience to their Father and
Master which is in Heaven, there might then be some Pretense to neglect
instructing them in the Principles of such a Religion. But since the Precepts
of this pure and undefiled. Religion are all of them holy, just, and good; and
the more they are taught their Duty to GOD, the better they will perform their
Duties to you; methinks then to neglect the Improvement of their Souls, out of
a Dread of spending too much Time in Religious Duties is acting quite contrary
to your own Interest, as well as Duty.

5. Fifthly and lastly, If neither Gratitude to GOD, Love to your Children,
common Justice to your Servants, nor even that most prevailing Motive
Self-Interest, will excite; yet let a Consideration of the Terrors of the LORD
persuade you to put in Practice the pious Resolution in the Text. Remember the
Time will come, and that perhaps very shortly, when we must all appear before
the Judgment Seat of CHRIST; where we must give a solemn and strict Account how
we have had our Conversation, in our respective Families in this World. How
will you endure to see your Children and Servants (who ought to be your Joy and
Crown of Rejoicing in the Day of our Lord JESUS CHRIST) coming out as so many
swift Witnesses against you; cursing the Father that begat them, the Womb that
bare them, the Paps which they have sucked, and the Day they ever entered into
your Houses? Think you not the Damnation which Men must endure for their own
Sins will be sufficient, that they need load themselves with the additional
Guilt of being accessory to the Damnation of others also? Oh consider this, all
ye that forget to serve the LORD with your respective Households, lest he pluck
you away and there be none to deliver you!

BUT GOD forbid, Brethren, that any such Evil should befall you: No, rather
will I hope that you have been, in some Measure, convinced by what has been
said of the great Importance of Family Religion; and therefore are ready to cry
out, in the Words immediately following the Text, GOD forbid that we should
forsake the LORD; and again, Verse 21. Nay but we will, with our respective
Households, serve the LORD.

AND that there may be always such a Heart in you, Let me, to conclude, exhort
all Governors of Families, in the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, often to
reflect on the inestimable Worth of their own Souls, and the infinite Ransom,
even the precious Blood of JESUS CHRIST, which has been paid down for them.
Remember, I beseech you remember, that you are fallen Creatures, that you are
by Nature lost to and estranged from GOD; and that you can never be restored to
your primitive Happiness, 'till by being born again of the Holy Ghost, you
arrive at your primitive State of Purity, have the Image of GOD reinstamped
upon your Souls, and are thereby made meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance
with the Saints in Light. Do, I say, but seriously and frequently reflect on,
and act as Persons that believe such important Truths, and you will no more
neglect your Family's spiritual Welfare than your own. No, the Love of GOD,
which will then be shed abroad in your Hearts, will constrain you to do your
utmost to preserve them: And the deep Sense of GOD's free Grace, in CHRIST
JESUS, (which you will then have,) in calling you, will excite you to do your
utmost to save others, especially those of your own Household, and though, after
all your pious Endeavors, some may continue unreformed; yet you will have this
comfortable Reflection to make, that you did what you could to make your
Families religious; and therefore may rest assured of sitting down in the
Kingdom of Heaven, with Abraham, Joshua, and Cornelius, and all the godly
Householders, who in their several Generations shone forth as so many Lights in
their respective Households upon Earth.

FINIS.

