The Glories of the LORD of HOSTS, AND The Fortitude of the Religious Hero. A
SERMON Preached to the ancient and honorable Artillery Company June 2. 1740.
Being the Anniversary of their Election of Officers.

By MATHER BYLES, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Boston.

II King. ix. 4, 5, 6. So the Young Man, even the young Man the Prophet, went.
-- And when he came, behold the Captains of the Host were sitting; and he said,
I have an Errend to thee. -- Thus says the LORD GOD of Israel. BOSTON Printed,
and may be had at the Shops of Thomas Fleet and Joseph Edwards, in Cornhill.
1740.

The Glories of the Lord of Hosts, AND The Fortitude of the Religious Hero.
I Sam. xvii. 45. -- THOU come to ME with a SWORD, and with a SPEAR -- But I
come to THEE in the NAME of the LORD of HOSTS, the GOD of the ARMIES of Israel.
IT is a hardy Enterprise, my Fellow Soldiers, to which you appoint us, in
your annual Elections of us, to preach upon these Occasions. More than an
Hundred Years, have called for as many Military Discourses from the Desk, to
sanctify your Arms, and add the peculiar Glory of Religion to your Elections,
and your Exercises. In order to gratify your Desires, and answer your
Expectations, your Ministers have at these returning Seasons, chosen their
various Subjects, suited to the Sons of Battle, and have in a Manner exhausted
all that can be said, proper for you to hear, and for the Pulpit to speak. Some
have led you up to the Origin of War in general, expostulating with the
Apostle, From whence come Wars and Fightings, come they not from hence, even of
your Lusts; at the same Time proving the Necessity to learn the Art of War, so
long as these Lusts remain in Men to occasion it. Some have urged our own
Danger as an exposed People in our defenseless, careless Posture, and far from
Zidon. Others have treated on the Nature and Necessity of Weapons, and led you
into a glittering Magazine of Armory. Some have represented the Lord as a Man
of War, to reflect a Glory upon your burnished Arms, and inspire you with
religious Fortitude. Some have lifted up JESUS as the Ensign to the Nations,
and pressed you to Battle under this Triumphant Banner. Some have transported you
with the Examples of former Heroes, who by Faith subdued Kingdoms, and bore
victorious through all the Conflict of human Life, that you might be animated
by so great a Cloud of Martyrs. Some have instructed you in the Glories of the
Captain of your Salvation; Gird thy Sword upon thy Thigh, and ride forth O most
mighty. Others have drawn out his (...) Armies upon the March; The Armies of
Heaven followed him. Some have exhorted you to be good Soldiers of JESUS
CHRIST, others have called on you to put on the whole Armor of God, others
have told the Soldiers what they should do, and described the Man expert in
War, and others explained and argued the Doctrine of Valor, only be thou
strong and very courageous; while others have taught you to encounter the last
Enemy, for there is no Discharge in that War. Since the preaching of the above.
I have been more critical in searching for the several Texts which have been
improved upon this Occasion. And as far as the Records of the Military Company
could assist me, they stand thus: Mr. Willard, Prove. 4. 23. Mr. Moodey, Prove.
16. ^2. Mr. Belcher, 1 Cor. 9. 26, 27. Mr. Willard of Boston, 1 King. 9. 22.
Mr. Wadsworth of Boston, Isa. 3. 2. Mr. Pemberton of Boston, Luke 3. 14. Dr.
Colmon of Boston, Heb. 11. 33. Mr. Rawson, Ephesians. 6. 11. Mr. Gibbs of Watertown,
Psalm. 44. 6. Mr. Bridge of Boston, Dan. 11. 32. Mr. Cotton, Mat. 11. 12. Mr.
Daniforth of Taunton, Heb. 12. 4. Dr. Increase Mather, Josh. 1. 7. Mr. Walter
of Roxbury, Act. 5. 39. Mr. Thatcher of Weymouth, 1 Samuel 18. 14. Mr. Stoddard
of Chelmsford, 1 Samuel 2. ^0. Dr. Sewall of Boston, Rev. 19. 14. Mr. Stephens of
Charlestown, Isa. 2. 4. Mr. Baxter of Medfield, Romans 8. 37. Mr. Blowers of
Beverly, 1 Samuel 16. 18. Mr. Barnard of Marblehead, Rev. 3 21. Mr. Webb of
Boston, Eccl. 8. 8. Mr. Symmes of Bradford, 1 Chronicles. 12. 33. Mr. Prince of
Boston, Psalm. 122. 6. Mr. Cooper, Psalm 45. 3, 4, 5. Mr. Foxcross, 1 Chronicles. 5.
18, 19, 20. Mr. Thayer of Roxbury, ^ Tim. 6. 12. Mr. Checkley of Boston, 2 Samuel
22. 35. Mr. Swift of Framingham, Act. 10. 7. Mr. Waldron of Boston, 2 Samuel 10.
12. Mr. Gay of Hingham, Zech. 1.8. Mr. Welsted of Boston, Isa. 55.4. Mr.
Hancock of Lexington, Prove. 21. 3^. Mr. Peabody of Natick, 1 Samuel 1. 18. Mr.
Appleton of Cambridge, Jam. 4. 1. Mr. Chauncy of Boston, Judge. 18. 27, 28. Mr.
Abbot of Charlestown, Exodus 15. 3. Mr. Clark 1 Cor. 16. 13. Mr. Williams of
Weston, Eccl. 9 18 Mr. Mather, 1 Samuel 17. 39.


AFTER all the pertinent, and pious, and sublime Things, which so many of my
Fathers and Brethren have advanced upon this Occasion, there seems to be
nothing new for me to add; nor do I readily think of any one proper Topic
which has not been touched upon by others before me. However, it has been
sometimes observed that the Art of Writing, among us in these latter Days,
consists not so much in starting new Matter, (for that were almost impossible
after all the Authors and Volumes which have gone before us) as in setting old
Thoughts in a newer, or stronger, or more agreeable, or at jest in different
Lights; and as every Author has something of his own, a Specific Quality which
distinguishes him from others, this must be my Excuse for yielding to your
unanimous Desire, and irresistible Importunities, and appearing at your Head
this Day.

AND if this be a just Apology for the Author, it is much more so for the
Preacher: For it is a plain Direction to us, as wise Stewards to bring out of
our Treasury Things new and old. You will therefore hear with Candor; and
though I should deliver the same Things, to you they will not be grievous.

ATTEND then to the Voice of my Text. The Words are a gallant Speech of young
David, rushing to encounter the tall Giant of Gath. Long had the huge Monster
daily strode toward the Camp of Israel, and roared his Challenge over the
Campaign, to the Ears of the frighted Army. An universal Panick run through the
Ranks, chilled their Blood, and shook their Fabric. Not a Man, not a Captain
bold enough to issue from their Ports, and engage the brawny Champion: They all
shrunk behind their Entrenchments, and retreated from the thundering Defiance.
Then it was that David, by Accident in the Host, heard the Menaces of the
godless Giant, and a generous Indignation fired his Breast. Away goes the
blooming Hero to the intimidated Monarch, and demands the Combat with Goliath.
The King is surprised at the daring Genius that glowed in a Heart so young, and
undisciplined to the Dangers and Art of War, and hardly consents to the unequal
Fight. " Thou art but a Youth, my Son, and he, a Man of War from his Youth."
Why, replied the Rosey Warrior, why may I not venture? These unpromising Arms
of mine, tender as they seem to you, are not unused to rugged Encounters. I am
the Stripling, that have wrested a Kid of my Flock from the Paw of a Bear, and
from the rubid Jaws of a Lion; and my God shall alike deliver this Philistine
into my Hand. Astonished, Saul gives a faint Consent; and David with a Sling,
and a few Pebbles, runs out to the glorious Expedition. Goliath saw; and in a
Transport of Disdain, cursed the little Adventurer by his Gods; "Come hither,
Youth, and by Dagon, will I scatter thy Limbs a Prey to the Beasts of the
Field, and to the Fowls of the Air." To this boasting Period, the Words of my
Text are the ardent Reply; Thou come to me with a Sword, and with a Spear,
and with a Shield; but I come to thee in the Name of the LORD of Hosts, the God
of the Armies of Israel, whom thou have defied.

THERE IS a noble Bravery in the Expression. The ardent young Champion takes no
Notice of the Bulk and Terror of his Rival's Person, but seems rather to
upbraid him with Cowardice. Tall and broad, and athletick as you are, says he,
it seems you dare not trust yourself against your little Enemy, without
abundant Arms and Armor. Thou come to me with a Sword, and with a Spear, and
with a Shield; but I come to thee in the Name of the LORD of Hosts, the God of
the Armies of Israel.

MORE than this had been unbecoming the manly Genius of a Warrior. Actions and
not Words must decide the Dispute. The mighty Philistine hasted onward, and
David rushed to meet him with undaunted Eyes, while the Sling in his Hand
whirled round, and away sung the Victor-Stone toward the broad Front of the
Enemy. It struck, it crushed, it sunk, and down fell the proud Boaster
thundering to the Plain.

THIS was the Courage, and this the Success of David; and Devotion and Religion
was the Spring and the Basis of all. A Zeal for the GOD of Israel inspired his
glowing Breast, and a firm Trust in Him animated him, undaunted in the
Undertaking, compounded of Religion and Enterprise.

Two glorious Characters David here gives of his GOD; the Lord of Hosts, and
the God of the Armies of Israel, and all our Fire while he marches on in this
great and fearful Name, he faces every Danger interested and victorious. In the
Name of GOD I will destroy them; in the Name of GOD I will destroy them.

And as in the glowing Sentence are comprised the Glories of GOD, and the
Fortitude of a pious Man: So the Words lead us to discourse, First of the Lord
of Hosts; Secondly, of the God of the Armies of Israel; and Thirdly, of the
Nature of true, rational and religious Fortitude, as taking hence its Origin, a
Regard to this glorious GOD.

I. I am to discourse a little of the Lord of Hosts, and consider the most high
GOD under this Character.

THIS is one of the magnificent and favorite Titles which he wears; and it is
about Sixty Times applied to him in the inspired Writings. The Lord of Hosts,
he is the King of Glory: The Lord of Hosts is his Name. Take a View of his
extended and potent Armies, and see him in his Glory at the Head of all.

THE Heavenly Hosts are his. So are the Angels in all their shining Forms and
un-numbered Regiments: An immeasurable Front, and an endless Rear! No Army of
so exact Discipline, such invincible Courage and fatal Execution. Our painted
Troops are a mere Mock-Show to these resistless Legions. Our Chariots and
Horses make no Figure at all before these Chariots of Fire and Horses of Fire.
The Chariots of God are Twenty Thousand, even Thousands of Angels, Psalm.
lxviii. 17. and he makes his Angels Spirits* his Ministers a Flame of Fire. A
whole Host of our (...) Warriors shall wither in a Night before one of them;
and threw the pale Camp with an hundred and fourscore and five thousand
Corpses. II King. xix. 35.

BELOW these, the Stars keep their Military Watch, the Out-Guards of the
Caelestial Army. And what a glittering Host of them range themselves over the
Blue Plains of Ether? List up now thine Eyes to Heaven, and tell the Stars if
thou art able to number them* These, in all their immense Dominions, are under
his absolute Command. He brings out their Host by Number, he calls them all
by their Names, Psa. cxlvii. 4. Isa. xl. 26. The Stars in their Courses fight
against his Enemies. How mysterious and unknown are the Laws of those
unnumber'd Squadrons; and how irresistible their Movements? Can thou bind the
sweet Influences of Pleiades, or loose the Bands of Orion? Can thou bring
forth Mazzaroth in his Season, or can thou guide Arcturus with his Sons? But
he, the great Monarch of all, commands with infinite Ease, and every rolling
World submits with exact Obedience. Behold, even to the Moon and it shines
not; and the Stars are not pure in his Sight. -- Sun, stand thou still upon
Gibeon! and thou Moon in the Valley of Ajalon! (Josh. x. 12.) Sun, go thou
back! -- and wondering Nations shall gaze, and enquire the meaning of the
astonishing Retreat. II King. xx. 8. --

BELOW these, and failing along our Atmosphere, the Clouds make their majestic
Appearance: A flying Camp; or a moving Magazine of Divine Artillery. Have thou
entered into the Treasures of Snow, or have thou seen the Treasures of Hail;
which I have reserved against the Time of Trouble, against the Day of Battle
and War. Job xxxviii. 22, 23. There the Northern Tempests plant their impetuous
Batteries; there the fierce Engines of the Sky play in various Forms of
Destruction.

There like a Trumpet, loud and strong,
Thy Thunder shakes the Coast;
There the red Lightenings wave along,
The Banners of thine Host! Dr. W^^^s.

HE is alike Lord of the Terrestial Hosts, while every Species of Creatures,
and every Individual is under his exact Command. But who can call over the List
of these extended Colors? Is there any Number of his Armies? The Earth is full
of his Legions; so also is the great and wide Sea, with all the Tribes and
Colonies there, from the fearless Leviathan in all his Terrors, to the minute,
invisible Swarms and Shoals in every Drop, unnumber'd and unnam'd! So on the
Surface of this our Earth the Lion leads up the Van among the Four-footed, and
the fiercer Animals form the foremost Line: Among which the Horse "paws the
Valley, and rejoices in his Strength, tosses the Thunder of his Neck, and
shakes the Lightning of his Main. The Glory of his Nostrils is terrible; he
goes on to meet the armed Men. He mocketh at Fear, and is not affrighted,
neither turns he back from the Sword. The Quiver rattleth against him, the
glittering Spear and the Shield. He swalloweth the Ground with Fierceness and
Rage: Neither believes he that it is the Sound of the Trumpet. He says among
the Trumpets, Ha! ha! He smells the Battle afar off, the Thunder of the
Captains, and the Shouting."

BUT need we speak of the greater Animals to raise our Terror at the Hosts of
GOD. Nay, the most sordid Remile, the most contemptible Insects can form a most
triumphant Army, and proclaim themselves God's huge Host. Never was an Allegory
better worked up, more forcibly and elegantly carried on, and finished, than
the Description of the Plague of Locusts in the Second Chapter of Joel. One
would imagine it a March of Nations, or a Muster of Angels sent upon the
Execution of Divine Vengeance. Turn to it, and read it: For it would affront
the Divine Eloquence of the Original to describe it in any other Words. -- So
grand (...) the Lord of Hosts, before the most despicable of his Armies.

AND where is the Creature that he cannot commission, or that dares to mutiny
against his Sovereign Edicts. He shall hiss for the Fly, Isa. vii. 18. and they
shall crowd rushing round his lifted Standard. The very Lice shall overpower
his proudest Enemy, and bend even the haughty Soul of a Pharaoh. His Air shall
scatter Venom Plagues and Death over devoted Nations. His Water shall rise from
its silent Fountains beneath, and overwhelm a guilty World. His Fire shall rage
through a frighted City with inexorable Violence, or drive down from Heaven in
a Tempest of showering Flame. His Earthquakes shall hurl splintered Rocks from
their Basis; and Mountains shall be cast into the midst of the Sea* The Earth
itself shall be broken down and dissolved before it, "and wander like a blazing
Star about the Ether," a Standard displayed to other Worlds denouncing
almighty Vengeance.

On the contrary, the most voracious Animal, and lawless Element shall grow
tame and placid at his Order, renounce its ravenous Nature, and protect instead
of destroying. Hungry Ravens shall fly with Rapture, and drop the Prey from
their Beak to reed the favorite Prophet. Foaming Waves shall roll fluid no
longer, but open to the Right and Left, and rise in Heaps, to guard the Wings
of his chosen Armies, marching under his Conduct. Devouring Flames shall refuse
to burn when he gives the Order, and shine round his distinguished Worthies a
lambent Glory. Rapacious Sea Monsters shall be a safe Convoy to the Man whom he
appoints to go upon his Embassy: And inhospitable Lions restrain their
Appetites, gaze with Pleasure upon the welcome Stranger, couch at his Knees,
and lick his Feet. Behold, what a Lord of Hosts is here, even the Wind and the
Seas obey him. He rules -- amidst the War of Elements
The Wrecks of Matter, and the Crush of Worlds.
Addison.


EVEN the Devils are subject to him. He commands the unclean Spirits, and they
obey him, through their warlike Regiments. Their Name is Legion, for they are
many. But their very Wrath shall praise him, and the Remainder of it shall he
restrain. Behold, I saw the Lord sitting upon his Throne, and all the Host of
Heaven standing on his Right Hand and on his Left. II Chron. xviii. 8. And lo,
a certain lying Spirit comes and asks Permission but to bring about, his high
Designs.

IT IS no Addition to him then to add, he is the Lord of our Hosts, and not an
Army gathers on this Earth without his Councils and Providence. The Lord of
Hosts mustereth the Host to Battle. He unfurls his Ensigns, and calls for the
March of Nations in universal Tumult, and ranges half the Globe on a Side,
confederated to a decisive Battle. What amazing Numbers have poured together
when he has unsheathed his Sword, and flung away the Scabbard? Armies
uncounted! Whose Rear lay hid in Night, whilst rising Dawn
Roused the broad Front, and called the Battle on. Dr. Young.



AND the Battle is the Lord's; and the Greatness, and the Power, and the Glory,
and the Victory, and the Majesty. Isa. v. 26, -- And he will lift up an Ensign
to the Nations from far, and will hiss unto them from the End of the Earth: and
behold they shall come with Speed quickly. None shall be weary nor stumble
amongst them: none shall slumber nor sleep: neither shall the Girdle of their
Loins be loosed, nor the Latchet of their Shoes be broken. Whose Arrows are
sharp, and all their Bows bent, their Horses Hoofs shall be counted like Flint,
and their Wheels like a Whirlwind. Their roaring shall be like a Lion, they
shall rore like young Lions: yea, they shall rore and lay hold of the Prey, and
shall carry it away safe, and none shall deliver it. And in that Day they shall
rore against them, like the roaring of the Sea: And if one look unto the Land,
behold Darkness and Sorrow, and the Light is darkened in the Heavens thereof. He
can strike an unaccountable Panick through the boldest Cohorts, defeat the most
numerous and potent, by the glare of a few Lamps, the crash of a few Pitchers;
and hurl down the proudest Bulwarks thundering to the Ground, with the Blast of
a few Tempests.

I have hardly Time to apply this. Suffer me a Word or two.

1. FROM what we have heard, how desperate their Hazard who are in a State of
War with the Lord of Hosts! So are all who are in a State of Nature for we are
born Children of Wrath. All Nature is armed against you to revenge the Quarrel
of its Maker. Not an Element, not a Creature, but stands ready to destroy you;
and with Vehemence urges, My Father, shall I smile them? shall I smite them?

HOW necessary is it for us to fling down our Weapons, and sue for
Reconciliation in the Merits of JESUS; for this Man is THE Peace. Agree with
thine Adversary quickly, while thou art in the Way with him, lest he anon tear
thee in pieces, and there be none to deliver thee.

2. LET us pay an humble Submission and Obedience to the Lord of Hosts, in
every Rank, and in every Post where he has placed us. To one he has committed
the Sword of the Magistrate, and you, my Fathers, must by no Means bear his
Sword in vain. Another he has posted at the Head of a Family, and we must
acknowledge it to him, With my Feast I passed over this Jordan, and now am I
become two Bands. Us has he constituted as Leaders to his Church, and it
becomes us to endure Hardship as good Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST. And you, my
Brethren, are called to the Glories of the Field; Be of good Courage, and play
the Man for your People, and for the Cities of your GOD. Others are Brethren of
low Degree, and but private Sentinels in his Hosts: Murmur not; be contented
upon Duty; and let every Man wherein he is called therein abide with GOD. You
to the Sword and Spear; and we to the Service of the Temple.

THE Second Thing to be spoken to is,

II. THE Lord of Hosts, is in an eminent Sense, the God of the Armies of Israel.

HE stands in a peculiar Relation to his Favorite People. So he descended with
his drawn Sword in his Hand, and made his Claim to Joshua, when the intrepid
General saw him, and bravely demanded, Art thou for us, or for our Adversaries?
Nay, replied the illustrious Vision, but as Captain of the Host of the LORD am
I come. Joshua v. 1^.
-- And the adoring Hero fell prostrate and kissed the Ground. This seems to be
literally the Glory of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, the Messiah who was to come, and
by a close attention to the holy Scriptures will, I believe, be found
appropriated to him. Compare Exodus xxiii. 20, 21. with Exodus xxxiii. 2, 3.

WHILE Israel was literally a People, he was immediately their LORD. He chose
them from among the Nations, led them through the Wilderness, and pitched his
Shekinah among them, his Pavilion of Clouds and Fire. And what People was there
so great, who had GOD so nigh to them? The Ark was a Symbal of his Presence;
and by it he led them in their March, and by it they halted. Numb. x. 35, 36.
And it came to pass when the Ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up, LORD,
and let thine Enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee, flee before
thee. And when it rested, he said, Return, O LORD, unto the many Thousands of
Israel.

AND this favorite Nation was only a Type of the Church to the End of the
World. GOD, in the Incarnate Son, is the Captain of their Salvation. He has
chosen them out of the World, they are listed under his Banners, he marches
before them conquering and to conquer, and they follow, whithersoever he goes,
more than Conquerors through him who loves them. The Armies of Heaven follow
him. And who is she that looks forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon, clear
as the Sun, and terrible as an Army with Banners. And who is he at their Head,
that comes from Edom, in died Garments from Bozrah, glorious in his Apparel,
traveling in the greatness of his Strength; and why are his Garments red, but
in the Blood of his Enemies. He proposes Rewards to the Soldier, and leads the
Way through the Labor to the Triumph: To him that overcomes will I grant to
sit down with me upon my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am sit down with
my Father upon his Throne.

IN every Light he is their GOD. They are all chosen Men. He pressed them into
Service; and they are also Volunteers in his Cause; bound by Military Oaths and
Sacraments. He is thy Lord, and worship thou him.

A Theme this for noble Discourse and Entertainment; but I must with Regret
leave it, with one or two Reflections.

1. WE learn hence the Immunities of the Church of JESUS CHRIST. No Monarch has
any Authority to make new Laws for his Church, or to bind a Burden on that
Conscience over which he claims an undivided Empire. The Armies of Israel, in
this Sense, own no other Lord. Stand fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith
CHRIST has made you free.

2. How victorious shall the Host of GOD be under such a Leader? David in the
Triumphs of my Context, was but a little Emblem of it. Though a Troop may
overcome them, they shall overcome at last. He that has clean Hands shall wax
stronger and stronger; as did the House of David. They shall overcome in the
Blood of the Lamb, and reign till all Things are put in Subjection under him.
The last Enemy to be conquered is Death. But Thanks be to God who has given us
the Victory through our Lord JESUS CHRIST. The whole Church Mllitant shall so
triumph. He that falls on it shall be brokens but be upon whom it shall fall
it shall grind him to Powder. -- All the Fowls that fly in the midst of Heaven,
come, and gather your selves together unto the Supper of the great God; that ye
may eat the Flesh of Kings, and the Flesh of Captains, and the Flesh of mighty
Men, and the Flesh of Horses, and of them that sit on them, and the Flesh of
all Men, both free and bond, both small and great. Rev. xix. 17, 18.


THE last Thing now remains, viz.

III. To speak of the Doctrine of true Fortitude, as taking hence its Origin, a
Regard to the glorious GOD, in every hardy Enterprise.

COURAGE is a Moral Virtue, and a Thing very different from a flush of Animal
Spirits, or a firmness of Fibers in the Heart and Brain. It must have its
Foundation in Reason, (and, shall I add, in Religion; which is the best Reason)
or it subsides into Stupidity, or foams up in Frenzy. There are some Things
indeed observable in the Brutal World, which by way of Analogy we call by Names
taken from Moral Virtues. But by no Means are they to be strictly understood.
So we speak of the Courage of the Lion and the War-Horse, and even the Charity
and Piety of the Stork feeding its aged Parents. But if we understand
literally these Virtues, the pure Effects of Nature in Creatures incapable of
Moral Government; methinks one had as good finish the Scheme at once, applaud
the Patience of a Log, and compliment a Block for Passive Obedience and Non
Resistance.

No; Courage is that Firmness of Mind which will enable a Man, from Principle,
to abide by the Dictates of his Rational Nature against all Opposition. Some
Men, indeed, have a natural Constitution that is a Mechanical Aid to this
Virtue: Others, from the unhappier Fabric of the Body, and the feebler
Consistence of the Fluids are more liable to Temptations from the contrary
Vices of Diffidence and Cowardice. But still the Virtues and Vices are distinct
from these material Operations: Their Foundation is Principle* and their
Subject is the Mind of a Moral Agent.

How many Actions have been applauded among Men as highly Heroic, which
examined to the Bottom will be found really mean; I will venture to add, the
pure Effects of a dastardly Spirit. Such I pronounce the SPIRIT OF A DUEL. I
believe upon impartial Enquiry it will be found that a Duel has been seldom
undertaken but from the ignominious Power of Fear. Reason, and Religion, and
the Man's own Inclinations have all conspired to forbid the Fact, but the poor
Paltroon has not had Presence of Mind, and Bravery of Resolution, to stand by
the Dictates of his Understanding and Conscience, only for Fear of being
laughed at. Call you this Courage, whose Original and Spring is all paltry
Fear? So many a Coward has kept the Field, purely by being afraid to run, or
ashamed of the Hiss of his Companions. Valor indeed, that cannot stand the
Shock of a little Banter!

THE Fortitude of the true Hero disdains to ask any Questions, but, -- What is
the present Duty? But it is the true Character of a Coward to consult, -- What
Evil can I best bear? And if from a distracted Judgment, Death and Divine
Vengeance at a distance, do not so much fright him as the present Contempt of
Mankind, the Dastard chooses Damnation rather than Ridicule.

Valor's a noble Turn of Thought,
Whose pardoned Guilt forbids her Fears;
Calmly she meets the deadly Shot,
Secure of Life above the Stars.
But FRENZY dares Eternal Fate,
And spurred by Honor's airy Dreams,
Flies to attack the Infernal Gate,
And force a Passage to the Flames. Dr. Watts.

How soon shall all this Flesh desert the Man? The Day hastens, when the great
Men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty Men shall fly to hid in the Dens
and Rocks of the Mountains. Then rejoice ye Righteous, lift up your Heads with
Joy, for your Redemption draws nigh.

IF Reason must be the Basis of true Courage, who can lay so fair a Claim to it
as the Hero of Religion? No Reason like his who marches on in Obedience to his
GOD, and vanquishes all the Reluctances within, nor will allow them so much as
to parley. No tall Champion of the Field so terrible as to drive him from his
Post, or cause him to desert his Colors. This is the little Stripling that
shall issue out with a Sling against an armed, gigantick Warrior, without a
Thought of Retreat. This the Man that shall bear up to the Battery of Cannon,
and be the first to leap over the Trench, and rush into the Breach, sustaining
with a steady Mind all the Tumult, and Havoc, and Horrors of the Storm. Not so
the Horse rusheth to the Battle. Not so the Lion faces the Lybian Hunters. Not
so the Leviathan raises up himself the Terror of the mighty; laughs at the
shaking of the Spear, and the stubble of the Darts, and scatters the Weapons
upon the Mire. But (in the Words of the correct, the delicate, the sublime
Addison) So when an Angel, by Divine Command,
With rising Tempests, shakes a guilty Land;
(Such as from Heaven over pale Britannia past)
Calm and serene be drives the furious Blast,
And pleased, the Almighty's Orders to perform,
Rides in the Whirlwind and directs the Storm.


AFTER so grand a Set of Images, and such a Pomp of Eloquence, nothing can
sound well but Inspiration itself. And David himself, the Hero of the Day, full
of the Holy Ghost, has given us a most animated Description of religious
Fortitude, in a Song for the Edge of Battle. Psalm. lxvi. 1. God is our Refuge
and Strength, a very present Help in Trouble. Therefore will we not fear,
though the Earth be removed, and though the Mountains be thrown into the midst
of the Sea; though the Waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the
Mountains shake with the swelling thereof. -- The Heathen raged, the Kingdoms
were moved; be uttered his Voice, the Earth melted. The LORD of Hosts is with
us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge. Happy stands this Man, while Heaven it self
draws his Character. He shall deliver thee in six Troubles: yea, in seven there
shall no Evil touch thee. In Famine he shall redeem thee from Death; and in War
from the Power of the Sword. Thou shall be hid from the Scourge of the Tongue:
neither shall thou be afraid of Destruction when it comes. At Destruction and
Famine thou shall laugh: neither shall thou be afraid of the Beasts of the
Earth. For thou shall be in League with the Stones of the Field: and the Beasts
of the Field shall be at Peace with thee. Job v. 19, -- 23.


THUS fearless may stand the Man secure of his Maker's Friendship. The greatest
Mortal General needs to be supported by Numbers, animated by Trumpets and
Shouts of Applause, inspired Examples of Bravery all round the Field, and
hurried out of himself from a cool Survey of Death and Eternity. How many a
Coward has stood his Ground, supported by such little Arts. But the Christian
can go alone, calmly, insulted, to a burning Stake, that most indisputable
Trial of thorough Courage. Persons the most unlikely have been so inspired. The
tenderest Age, and the softest Sex have in this way encountered and mocked the
King of Terrors; and at her Feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down; at her Feet he
bowed, he fell; where he bowed there he fell down vanquished Guilt and painful
Fear came into the World together. As Soon as our Fore-Father fell, he cried
out, I heard thy Voice in the Garden, and I was afraid. If there is a Conscience
of Guilt removed, then the Love will cast out the Fear. So that Courage in this
Light appears to be a Grace of the Spirit of GOD.

THUS, my Brethren of the Field, I have led you up to the Head-Spring of true,
manly, and Christian Fortitude. In this, I have not deserted my Station, but
acted as became a Minister of CHRIST, and agreeable to the Text I have chosen.
Had I treated of Skill in Arms; of Facings, Advances and Retreats, of
Evolutions, Counter-marches and Military Figures, I had descended from my Rank,
and you could easily drive me back to my Line, keep the Field, and outpreach
me. But every Man to his Post. Thou come to me with a Sword, and with a
Spear; but I come to thee in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of the
Armies of Israel. While You are called to the glorious below, We appear in the
Mount and lift up our Hands, and the Rod of GOD there. Or if need be, we will
come down and share your Hazards, and animate you to the Battle in the Name of
GOD. Deuteronomy. xx. 1, 2, 3, 4. When thou go out to Battle against thine Enemies,
and see Horses and Chariots, and a People more than thou, be not afraid of
them: for the Lord thy God is with thee --. And it shall be when ye are come
nigh unto the Battle, that the Priest shall approach and speak unto the People,
and shall say unto them, Hear, O Israel, you approach this Day unto Battle
against your Enemies: let not your Hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble,
neither be ye terrified because of them. For the Lord your God is he that goes
before you, to fight for you against your Enemies, to save you.

BUT I must hasten to a Close. And in the First Place you will allow me to
preach to my self, and improve at least something by my own Discourse.

AND from what we have heard, How becoming is Courage to a Minister of CHRIST?
None go forth more immediately in the Name of the Lord of Hosts than we. None
are called to bolder Services, knowing we are set for the Defense of the
Gospel. The Priests bearing the Ark of GOD must be the first to ford the Swell
of Jordan, and upon the deepest Sands below must they take their gallant Stand
till the meanest Israelite be passed over. What a poor Figure makes a cowardly
Minister! Shall he be afraid of the Faces of Men, who comes upon Embasseys from
the great GOD! Ezekiel. iii. 8, 9. Behold, I have made thy Face strong against
their Faces; and thy Forehead strong against their Foreheads. As an Adamant,
harder than a Flint, have I made thy Forehead: Fear them not, neither be
dismayed at their Looks. This was the brave Character of the intrepid Priests
that withstood the Monarch in his impious Invasion upon their sacred Office. II
Chron. xxvi. 16, -- 20. But when he was strong, his Heart was lifted up to his
Destruction: for he transgressed against the LORD his God, and went into the
Temple of the LORD, to burn Incense upon the Altar of Incense. And Azariah
(...) Priest went in after him, and with him Fourscore Priests of the LORD,
that were valiant Men: And they withstood Uzziah the King, and said unto him,
It pertains not unto thee, Uzziah, to burn Incense unto the LORD, but to the
Priests the Sons of Aaron, that are consecrated to burn Incense: go out of the
Sanctuary, for thou have trespassed, neither shall it be for thine Honor from
the LORD God. Then Uzziah was wroth, and had a Censer in his Hand, to burn
Incense: and while he was wroth with the Priests, the Leprosy even rose up in
his Forehead before the Priests in the House of the LORD, from beside the
Incense-Altar. And Azariah the chief Priest, and all the Priests looked upon
him, and behold, he was leprous in his Forehead, and they thrust him out from
thence, yea, himself hasted also to go out, because the LORD had smitten him.
And this was the Magnanimity and Resolution of our Apostle, Act. xx. 22, 23,
24. I go bound in the Spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the Things that shall
befall me there: Save that the holy Ghost witnesses in every City, saying, that
Bonds and Afflictions abide me. But none of these Things move me, neither count
I my Life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my Course with Joy, and the
Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the
Grace of God. So sings he in inimitable Periods, and with more than mortal
Eloquence, We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed; we are perplexed,
but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed;
always bearing about in the Body the Dying of the Lord Jesus; -- always
delivered unto Death for Jesus sake. II Cor. iv. 8, 9, 10, 11.
So JESUS himself led the Way; and on the Paschal Night when the Vengeance of
Heaven was marching through the Land, and GOD had given Warning, None of you
shall go out of the Door of his House until the Morning; then it was that our
Lord went forth as from between the sprinkled Door-Posts, to encounter Divine
Justice upon the March. This was his Work, and he has left us his own Example
of Courage upon Duty. My Brethren, let the same Mind be in us. Fight the good
Fight of Faith, lay hold on eternal Life. As we wrestle not against Flesh and
Blood, but against Principalities and Powers, against the Rulers of the
Darkness of this World, against wicked Spirits in high Places; so let the
Weapons of our Warfare, which is not carnal but spiritual, be mighty through
God to the pulling down of strong Holds. Anon, you shall put off the Harness,
and glory, I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept
the Faith, I go to the Reward. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and
the violent take it by Storm: And these shall, as Victors through a Breach,
have an abundant Entrance into the Joy of their Lord. Here shall we receive
immortal Laurels. Not a withering Chaplet, or a fading Garland, the transient
Crown, or an Olympic Victor; but the Crown of Life that fades not away.

IN the mean Time let our Examples and our Discourses inspire Courage into the
Breasts of the Militant Hosts of GOD below: And while Israel encounters her
Enemies let the Priests blow the Trumpets.

II. LET us all, from what we have heard, list our selves Volunteers in the
Hosts of GOD. Let us make sure of our Maker's Friendship through JESUS CHRIST;
and this be the Foundation of our Courage, I know whom I have believed. There Is
nothing irrational or enthusiastic in this. A Man may upon the most solid
Principles be assured of the Truth of the Christian Religion: And he may be as
rationally satisfied of his own being a true Christian. And these being
ascertained, -- The Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom shall I fear? The
Lord is the Strength of my Life, of whom shall I be afraid. Nor Life nor Death
can hurt us; all Things shall conspire our Good. Watch ye, stand fast in the
Faith, quit you like Men, be strong. Look with a disdainful Smile upon all your
armed Enemies, you have more numerous and powerful Auxiliaries. There is more
with us than with them. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that
fear him; and lo! the Mountain crowded with Chariots and Horses of Fire.

III. From what you have heard, you infer, a Man may lawfully engage in War. He
may go in the Name of the Lord of Hosts. This is a Subject that has been often
handled upon these Occasions, and to out short the Matter, the Proof may take
this direct Course. Is there any Man upon Earth, who does not own that a
Criminal ought to be punished? But suppose this Criminal stands upon his own
Defense, and is resolved to attack every one that shall attempt to punish him:
Suppose he engages a Number of others to stand by him, and to fight for him
rather than deliver himself up; what shall be done in this Case? Shall the
Officers of Justice let him alone, if they cannot persuade him to Chastisement
by Dint of Eloquence? This were to let the most egregious Criminal go free, and
correct only the more modest: The hardened Villain would escape, and, in a
Sense which Solomon never meant, The Rod would be only for the Fool's Back. It
must then be lawful by Force, to make a Thief, for Instance, refund his unjust
Gains, and by Punishment deter him from future Ravages. This is the Case of a
Nation engaged in a lawful War. It has been pillaged by a Combination of
Thieves: These unreasonable Banditti ought to make Restitution, and for many
Reasons, submit to Discipline, but the refractory Men stand upon their Defense.
There Is no other Way left then but to march out in the Name of GOD, and
overpower them by Force. And as the Laws of particular Kingdoms have appointed
such and such particular Men, as the Ministers of GOD to ex^c^te Vengeance; the
Law of Nations in general gives to every People Authority to protect
themselves, and to punish those who injure them as far as they are able, as
their own Executors. So that Fighting may be as necessary as Laws themselves;
for what signify Laws without Sanctions.

BUT I have stood longer than I intended, and must now dismiss you.

GENTLEMEN,

You profess Skill in Arms, and would be ashamed of any thing like Cowardice.
You are a Band of chosen Men, the Head and the Flower of all our Militia. To
honor Arms, and add a Glory to your Order, I have set before you the great GOD
as the Lord of Hosts. And at the same Time I have recommended to you the surest
way to arrive at true Fortitude, that greatest Glory of a Soldier: A religious
Regard to the great GOD the Basis of rational Courage; without which all
Pretenses to it are no better than the Stupidity of a Stock, or the Rage of a
Brute. Be ambitious of this Title, THE CHRISTIAN HERO.

YOU may now bear on fearless of every Danger, should the GOD of Armies call
you to immediate Service. How soon this may be GOD knows; for your Musters are
now something more than pretty Amusements, while the Sword of an injured Nation
is unsheathed, and Vengeance is thundered from the Mouth of her Cannon. Hark! to
the Sound of the Trumpet and Alarm of War! Hear the rushing of Nations, that
make a Noise like the Sea, a rushing, like the rushing of mighty Waters!
Methinks I can therefore address you with a better Grace, than when these
things only appeared at a distance, and your Exercises looked less in earnest.
Sure you will not make a Flourish in a Game, and when the Field gleams with
hostile Terrors bear to be insulted with the keen Sarcasm Judge. ix. 38. Where
is now thy Mouth, wherewith thou said, who is Abimelech --? Is not this the
People that thou have despised? Go out now and fight with them.

WE are certainly a most exposed People, and in our unfortified Posture seem to
lie an easy Prey to the first Invader. It Is not for me to charge the Fault of
this any where: Only to pray GOD that some happy Method may open for the
Redress of this Grievance. Do good in thy good Pleasure unto Zion; build thou
the Walls of thy Jerusalem. David himself, with all his Courage and Divine
Commission, would not encounter his Enemy without some Arms; a Sling and a
Stone at least, the Weapons which he knew best how to manage. To have gone in
the Name of the Lord of Hosts without, had been an unwarrantable Presumption.
While we have been sitting at Ease amidst the Ruins of our falling Batteries,
without so much as a Sling-Stone to defend us: Or rather have seen our
disjointed Fortifications dropping into separate Stones of no use but for the
Sling: Instead of Bulwarks a few loose Pebbles. My Brethren, these Things ought
not so to be. However, the Name of the LORD is still our strong Tower, the
Righteous fly to it and are saved. So our Place of Defense shall be the
Munitions of Rocks.

BUT You, Gentlemen, will do what in you lies to diffuse Skill and Valor
through your several Regiments and Companies; that at least we may keep our
Country, should we be obliged to give up our Frontiers on the Sea. A small
Number of disciplined Troops will over-match a Rout of Thousands. So a few Men
uniting their Strength, shall be able with ease, to lift a Weight, which Ten
times the Number trying seperately shall not be able to move. This is the
Reason that all the military Movements and Fires should be exactly together,
that the whole Battallion may act as one, with irrisistible Forces. The Drum
and the Trumpet should be articulate to every Soldier, and he should know at
the first Notes, the Charge, the Retreat, and the Parley. Every Man should be
acquainted with his Duty, and be exact to the Word of Command. The whole
Success of an Engagement, and the Fate of a Country, under GOD, depends upon
this one Military Maxim.

AND with how much Calm of Mind may you attend to it, in the midst of the most
hazardous Enterprise, if you can but assure your selves you are venturing in
the Name of the Lord of Hosts; and he is engaged for you. Then, to advance will
not be terrible; to retreat will not be shameful; for all will be under the
serene Conduct of Reason and Duty. You will not be meanly elated by the
compleatest Victory; nor afraid to fall in the hottest Battle; but with an
equal Mind hear the Shouts of Triumph and the Groans of Death. Thou shall not
be afraid for the Terror by Night, nor for the Arrow that flies by Day. A
thousand shall fall at thy Side, and ten thousand at thy right Hand, and thou
shall not be moved. Thou shall tread upon the Lion and Adder; the young Lion
and the Dragon thou shall trample under Feet. -- Go up and prosper: The LORD is
with thee, thou mighty Man of Valor.

FINIS.
THE Author having neither Leisure nor Inclination to transcribe his Notes for
the Press, when the Gentlemen of the Artillery asked his Copy, it has
occasioned many Errata. Some of the grosser the Reader is desired to correct as
follows:

Page 8. Line 15. for their read the. l. 5. from Bottom, for rubid read rabid.

P. 11. l. 3. for menal read mortal.

P. 12. l. 13. for Colors read Cohorts.

P. 13. l. 3. for Remile read Reptile.

P. 16. l. 12. from Bottom, for Feast read Staff.

P. ^1. l. 6. for What read Which l. 11. from Bottom, for Flesh read Flush.

P. 24 l. 9. for Line read Lines. l. 13. after glorious add Labors.


