Dr. Colman's SERMON At the Opening a Tuesday EVENING-LECTURE IN
Brattle-Street, October. 21. 1740.

Souls flying to JESUS CHRIST pleasant and admirable to behold.

A SERMON Preached at the Opening an Evening-Lecture, IN Brattle-Street BOSTON,
Tuesday October 21. 1740. By Dr. COLMAN. To a very crowded Audience. And
printed at the Desire of many.

ISAIAH LX. 8. Who are These, that fly as a Cloud, and as the Doves to their
Windows?

-- Multo plus habet Vehementiae, quam si simpliciter divisset ad volare
infinitam Multitudinem.

CIC. BOSTON, Printed by G. ROGERS and D. FOUL, for J. EDWARDS and S. ELIOT,
in Cornhill. 1740.

Pleasant to see SOULS Flying to CHRIST.
ISAIAH LX. 8. Who are these that fly as a Cloud, and as the Doves to their
Windows?


IT is a pleasant and wondrous Thing, to see Souls flying to JESUS CHRIST, to
the Means of Grace and Salvation which He has ordained and sanctified, and into
his Church. If this were not the proper and natural Sense of the Prophet's
Words, I would not have chose them for the Opening the present Lecture.

Our dear People, Your Ministers have with Pleasure seen you in the Weeks past,
Old and Young, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, high and low, rich
and poor together, gathering and passing as Clouds in our Streets, and as Doves
on the Wing in Flocks flying to the Doors and Windows of our Places of Worship;
and hovering about the same, those that could not get in.

The Fame of a singular fervent and holy Youth, an extraordinary Servant and
Minister of JESUS CHRIST, (who makes his Angels Spirits, and his Ministers a
Flame of Fire) had prepared you for his Visit; and with raised Expectations we
received him, even as an Angel of GOD for JESUS sake; as the Apostle St. Paul
was received by the Churches in Galatia.

GOD gave him a wonderful Manner of Entrance among us, just as in other Places
before us, among the Brethren of our Denomination; and we were sometimes melted
together in Tears, Ministers and People, Parents and Children, under the
commanding Addresses of Love to his Savior and our Souls. We led you with a
visible Pleasure in our Faces to the solemn and great Assemblies, and looked on
You there with great Satisfaction, in your uncommon Regards to the Beloved
Servant of CHRIST, for the Truth's sake that dwells in Him, and the Love of
the Spirit filling him, and reigning in his Ministrations to us.

And now our beloved Brethren and Sisters, You and your Children, we are going
to prove, confirm and increase, by the Will of GOD, the seeming good
Dispositions begun or revived in You, toward CHRIST and his Word, in a just and
reasonable pious Care and Solicitude for your Salvation.

Mr. Whitefield once and again in his Admonitions to You, and also in his
fervent, righteous and effectual Prayers for you (by the Will of GOD) led you
into this Trial and Proof of your selves; -- "Whether when he was gone from us,
you would better attend on the Ministry of your own Pastors, both on Sabbaths
and Lectures? For he had heard (and it was but too true) that there had been a
very great Defect in this Point among you before he came. -- Some of your
Ministers therefore now make a new Tender of themselves to you, in the Fear and
Love of GOD, in this new Lecture, for the Service of your Souls, if you will
encourage them by something of a like Attendance on it, as we have lately seen
you give to the Word preached. -- We preach the same CHRIST, the same Doctrines
of Grace, and according to Godliness, with the same Gospel Motives and
Arguments, Applications to Conscience, and Supplications to GOD for You. -- We
would look on the Fields, and behold them white for the Harvest, and desire to
enter into it; if by the Help of GOD we may cherish the Impressions made on any
of your Souls, and carry them on, clinching the Nails driven by the Master of
Assemblies that has been sent among us. -- For though we are Elder Ministers,
and have been many Years before Him in the Service of Souls, and He like David
going against Goliath, in the Sight of the Armies of Israel, has been seen to be
but a Youth and Stripling; yet are we not unwilling or ashamed to come and
serve after Him, in the Battles of our LORD, and in the Victories of his Grace.
-- You have seen, as it were, a young Elias, or the Baptist risen again, a
burning and shining Light, and you were willing for the Season to rejoice in
his Light and Heat: May we now preach and you hear for the future with more
Life and Spirit, Diligence and Constancy; and by the Will of GOD with new
Success. -- But we mean not, Brethren, at this Lecture only, but on every
Sabbath and every Lecture in the Town; and more particularly on the public
Thursday Lecture; which has been shamefully neglected by the Town.

To come then to my Text, which I acknowledge the late Concourse to the Word
among us, has led me to choose. I would now look round on the present Assembly,
and look back on our past Assemblies, and say to You, --

Who are these that fly as a Cloud, and as the Doves to their Windows?

The Prophet was here meditating the Glory of the Church in the abundant Access
of the Gentiles to it. Arise, shine, (says he Ver. 1.) for thy Light is come,
and the Glory of the LORD is risen upon thee. It was a lightsome Thought to the
holy Prophet, the enlarged State of the Church, after its long Confinement
within the narrow Bounds of Judea; and after its Diminution and Obscuration by
the Babylonish Captivity. He foretells, V. 2, this Time of Darkness covering the
Church, and gross Darkness the People; out of which the Church should emerge,
and the Gentiles come to her Light, and Kings to the Brightness of her rising.
Ver. 3.

Wherefore, Ver. 4, she is called upon to lift up her Eyes, and see round
about, the People gathering and flowing to her. And though at first there might
be some Fear and Distrust, as Peter felt, when he was about to go unto the
Uncircumcised; yet that would be soon over, and her narrow doubting Heart
enlarged with Joy; ( V. 5.) because of the Abundance of the Sea, and the Forces
of the Gentiles, coming to her. -- This Accession of the Gentiles to CHRIST is
further represented, Ver. 6, 7, by the Multitudes of Camels, laden with Incense
and Offerings of Gold; and the Flocks of Kedar presenting themselves for
Sacrifices to the Altar of GOD. The Riches of the Gentiles, together with their
Hearts, devoted to GOD in and through CHRIST, for the setting up and supporting
his Instituted Worship, is the Thing here represented.

And thus (says the HOLY ONE, in the Words immediately preceding my Text) will
I glorify the House of my Glory. -- GOD'S Church is the House of his Glory,
where he is glorified by his People, and where he glorifies himself in his
Grace to them. The Promise is here, to make it more glorious than ever. The
Christian Church State makes it so: The Ministration of the Law was glorious,
but the Gospel exceeds in Glory.

Upon the Vision of this it is, that the Prophet as in a Surprise and Ecstasy
exclaims, in the Words of my Text, " Who are these that fly as a Cloud, and as
the Doves is their Windows. He mightily admires this flocking of Converts to
CHRIST. The Manner wherein he expresses his Admiration is more elegant and
moving, than if he had only said, -- I see an infinite Number coming into the
Church. He speaks magnificently of the thing, says Calvin, and as wanting Words
to utter his Wonder and Joy. -- When the Church returned from Babylon, she left
many a Proselyte to the true GOD behind her, and some followed her; but those
were a small First-fruit, and as the Sheaf in token of the Harvest.

The Prophecy began eminently to be fulfilled in the wonderful Conversions to
CHRIST, by the preaching of his Apostles. "The Isles shall wait for me;" are
the Words following my Text; the many Isles in the Mediterranean were soon
visited, and the remote Isle of Great Britain very soon, considering its
Distance, and Separation from the Continent.

But the Prophecy is daily fulfilling, and at Times in a more remarkable
Measure; but more especially it will be so in the latter and more happy Days of
the Church, when the Calling of the Jews and the Fullness of the Gentiles shall
come on. -- The LORD hasten the promised Day.

It is the Power of Godliness, and the saving Conversion of Souls that is here
spoken of. The bare outward Profession, the Name and Form alone, without the
Power of Religion, were not worthy of this Affection and Joy; Who are these
that fly, etc. We have not so learned CHRIST, as to speak thus of any thing
short of the saving Efficacy of the preached Gospel on the Hearts and Lives of
Men, " turning them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto
GOD. In this Sense let us contemplate and admire the Event in my Text, " Who
are these that fly as a Cloud, etc!

In which Words is represented, 1. The Number and Multitude of Converts to
CHRIST. 2. Their Speed, Swiftness, Eagerness, Earnestness. 3. The Pleasure GOD
has in this Event, and Souls should have in it; both Ministers and People.

And so the Doctrine is, That it is a pleasant and admirable Thing, to see
Souls flocking and hastening to CHRIST.

But I will dwell a little more on the Phraseology of the Text, "There should
be a flying as the Cloud before the Wind: and as the Doves on the Wing, to
their Windows.

And 1. Let it be as a Cloud before the Wind, a Thing common in these lower
Heavens about us, the Atmosphere wherein we breathe and move: for the Clouds
come down sometimes to our very Houses, and terribly in their Lightnings and
pestilential Vapors. -- But when the Cloud is light and flies high, we see it
cross the Heavens swiftly, on the Wings of the Wind. -- The Cloud spreads wide
at Times, overspreads the Face of the Sky, or a great Part of it, and then may
well stand for a Multitude: A Cloud, i. e. a Crowd of People; as when we read
of " so great a Cloud of Witnesses, Heb. xii. 2. a few of which had been
enumerated. So spoke the Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 38. of Gog and Magog, the
Enemies of GOD and his Israel; "Thou shall be as a Cloud to cover the Land,
thou and all thy Bands and many People with thee.

Again, the Cloud flies in the open Heavens, in the open Sight; and so should
we be open, in the View of all, confessing CHRIST and coming into his Church;
with a conspicuous Zeal, that may appear to Friends and Foes. We may not be
ashamed of the Name of CHRIST, nor cover our Profession, nor fear to express a
Zeal for his Cause, Interest and Glory. Let the timorous Master in Israel come
alone to JESUS by Night; but let his Disciples choose rather to go in a Body and
by Day. We read of the risen Witnesses of CHRIST, that they heard a Voice from
Heaven, to them saying, " Come up hither! and they ascended in a Cloud, and as
a Cloud, and their Enemies beheld them. In Allusion to which, all that profess
the glorious Name of CHRIST should make one Cloud of Witnesses, and ascend up
after Him, Earth and Hell looking on: Phil. iii. 3. We are the Circumcision,
that worship GOD in the Spirit, and rejoice in CHRIST JESUS, etc.

Again, the Cloud flies irresistibly; no Art or Power of Man can stop it; so
our Profession of the Name of CHRIST must be above any Obstruction, Let or
Impediment, from Earth or Hell. There should be a Faith and Love and Zeal, that
shall carry us above Temptations, Difficulties and Oppositions! an open and
effectual Door should be opened, which none should be able to shut; a Love
which many Waters shall not quench, nor the Floods drown. Once more.

As the Clouds fly high, so our Hearts and Affections should be raised and
elevated above the World and all Earthly Things that would draw them down. We
must be looking to JESUS at the right Hand of GOD, and set our Affections on
Things above; as risen with Him and ascending after him in heavenly Frames and
Aspirations, to be with him where he is.

Or, 2. Let the Flight of Souls to CHRIST be as the Doves to their Windows;
which is the other, and more pleasant living, lively Part in the Comparison; or
what is there among the winged Fowl of Heaven, more beauteous, clean and
innocent, more meek, loving and lovely than the Doves! As the Descent of the
HOLY GHOST on the LAMB OF GOD at his Baptism is likened to that of the Dove; so
how pleased should our Souls be, to have their Ascent to CHRIST illustrated by
this Similitude!

The Doves hasten on their Wings, and fly swiftly; more especially as they
return to their Windows; with Pleasure and Joy they dart and light there. So
let us be glad to go to the House of the LORD, and there let our Feet rest. Why
are we loath at any Time to go? why make we no more haste and speed to JESUS
CHRIST, to find Rest for our Souls, Food, Dwelling, and a Place of Safety; a
Covering from the Wind and Tempest, and from the Powers of the Air that would
devour us; the Hawk and Vultur?

How eagerly do the Doves fly home at any Noise, or upon the least fright? so
will the convinced and awakned terrified Sinner, in the great Sense of his
Danger by Distance from his Savior, flee to Him as his only Shelter, and Place
of Refuge; he flies to Him to hide him, even to the Shadow of his Wings; for
thus has the LORD shown himself as with Wings unto his Doves.

Awakned Sinners have this Sight of CHRIST, as a prepared, ready and open Place
of Salvation for them; and on the Wings of earnest Desire, Faith and Love, Fear
and Prayer, they speed them to their Windows, his Church and Ordinances, or to
their Closets, his Chambers and theirs, where he is always present to help and
succor.

The Doves fly in Flocks unto their Windows; with strong Inclination and one
Consent they return thither; seeming eager which shall light first, they light
together, and cover the desired Spot: And so should the gathering to CHRIST be,
and into his Church; more general and universal. Not, as it is with us
commonly, now and then a single Soul; but as it was in the Beginning of the
Christian Church, when they came in Thousands, and were pricked to the Heart;
and the LORD (...) daily to the Churches of them that should be saved. So in
David's Time, they went in Multitudes, the Tribes went up from every Village
and City, meeting on the Way, from Strength to Strength, the Numbers increasing
by Concourse.

The Doves fly by Instinct for Food, Company and Rest; and so the new Nature to
CHRIST for spiritual Sustenance and the Fellowship of Saints, the Fellowship of
the SPIRIT, Communion with CHRIST: there is no Rest for the Sole of their Foot
but in HIM. Where can the Soul, created anew in CHRIST JESUS, be at home but in
HIM. Cant. i. 7. Tell me, thou whom my Soul loves, where thou feedest! The
Food for them is scattered from time to time on their Windows, to invite and
keep them there, for their spiritual Nourishment.

There they congregate, propagate and increase; they love their Windows for
Company and Society: and though they are not perfect in Love, (for there are
peckings and fightings among the Doves themselves; they have too much Gall in
'em) yet are they an allowed Emblem of Mildness and Sweetness of Nature,
Mekness and Gentleness; as Christians should converse and worship together in
the Meekness and Gentleness of CHRIST, and in the Love of the Spirit; harmless
as Doves. -- "Be ye so," are our LORD'S own Words to us; and " learn it of me
has he said, " for I am meek and lowly in Heart, and ye shall find Rest for
your Souls. To which agrees the earnest Address and even Supplication of the
Apostle to us, Col. iii. 12. " Put on therefore, as the Elect of GOD, holy and
beloved, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Charity; and let the Peace of
GOD rule in your Heart, to which you are called in one Body, and be ye
thankful: Let the Word of GOD dwell in you richly in all Wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another in Psalms, Hymns and spiritual Songs; and whatever ye
do in Word or Deed, do all in the Name of the LORD JESUS. Then shall we be, as
the Wings of the Doves covered with Silver, and their Feathers with yellow
Gold. This is the Beauty and Adorning of Souls, in the House of GOD, the Pillar
and Ground of Truth; in that which is not corruptible, and of great Price in
his Sight.

This is the Preparation of Souls for CHRIST, and for a Place in his Church,
and for Communion with him: This it is that has his Heart and delight, what he
loves and seeks in his Worshipers: Cant. i. 15. Behold thou art fair, my Love,
behold thou art fair, and have Doves Eyes; "a quick, chaste, sincere and single
Affection. Chap. ii. 14. O my Dove, that art in the Clefts of the Rock, let me
see thy Countenance, let me hear thy Voice; for sweet is thy Voice, and thy
Countenance comely. "The afflicted, mourning, persecuted and desponding Dove,
is nevertheless comely and beloved in the Eyes of CHRST, invited and welcome to
him in holy Duties. The Souls Answer is that, Psalm. lxi. 2. From the End of the
Earth will I cry to thee; lead me to the Rock that is higher than I! for Thou
art a Shelter for me, and a strong Tower from the Enemy! I will abide in thy
Tabernacle for ever; I will trust in the Covert of thy Wings.

Such is the Call, Command and Invitation of our Savior to us; Come unto me,
all ye that labor and are heavy-laden, and I will give you Rest! look unto me
and be ye saved, all the Ends of the Earth! Ho every one that thirsts come to
the Waters, yea come, buy Wine and Milk without Money and without Price. The
Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that is athirst come, and whosoever
will let him come, and take of the Waters of Life freely.

And is not this the Spirit of Grace in the People of GOD? I made haste and
delayed not! With my Soul have I desired thee in the Night, and with my Spirit
within me will I seek thee early. When thou said to me, seek ye my Face; my
Soul answered, Thy Face LORD will I seek.

This instant, earnest Concern and Solicitude should every one of us be
expressing for our own Souls Safety, and the Glory of GOD therein from us!
those Souls which GOD has made for Immortality, and formed for the everlasting
Enjoyment of Himself; and for his everlasting Service and Glory! Those Souls
which CHRIST has done and suffered so much to save! has so dearly bought with
his own Blood; and is striving by his SPIRIT In the Means of Grace so earnestly
to save! --

O why should not every Soul among us be on the Wing together, under these
Attractions and Drawings of Divine Grace! Why so few affected, attracted and
converted! why but here and there one overcome by the Grace of the Gospel
fervently preached and offered to us, from time to time! Why you and you singly
and alone! where are your Companions? why are they not come with you? your
Consorts, Children, Families, Neighbors, Friends, and Acquaintance! Is this
any thing like the Appearance of a Cloud, or as the Doves at their Windows?

We are in a Church-Relation and Fellowship; but where is the Cloud, with the
Glory of GOD in it, to fill his Tabernacle and Temple? and for the LORD to
reside in! Is the visible Church his Dove-house? but where are the Doves? where
the flying in of many together, or of all, apace, one after another! how few
are on the Wing? where is the Promise in the Text, fulfilled in us! Who is
flying to the Blood of CHRIST for Cleansing? to the Righteousness of CHRIST for
the Justification of Life?

My Text would suppose that it were thus with us; and then it would lead us to
admire and rejoice, and even triumph in the Thing; -- " Who are These, says the
Prophet, that fly as a Cloud, and as the Doves? He admires the Persons and the
Thing! It was lovely in his Eyes! He speaks with Delight and Transport, in a
Surprise of Pleasure: He sets his Eye and Heart upon them, as the Excellent and
Amiable of the Earth.

It is like other Expressions of Esteem and Joy, Cant. iii. 6. Who is this that
comes out of the Wilderness like Pillars of Smoke, from Myrrh and
Frankincense inflamed! etc. And, Who is this that looks forth as the Morning,
fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, etc. --

1. How good and pleasant would it be, and should it be, to see this Cloud
rising among us, this Flock of Doves on the Wing? -- To you that believe CHRIST
is precious, and Souls are precious. -- A pleasant Thing it would be to all
good People, to see many more like minded with themselves, in earnest caring
for their Souls, and sollicitous for their everlasting Welfare. Their Joy
herein would be fulfilled; their Joy in GOD, and their holy Jealousy for him
would be removed.

"I have been jealous for the LORD GOD OF HOSTS, said Elijah, for I have seen
his Courts deserted, his Altar cast down, and I only am left"! Could any thing
be more melancholy! -- Equally joyous had it been to him to have seen the
LORD's Courts crowded, and his Altar laden with Sacrifices, and his Priests
ministering about it. -- "The King's Honor is the Multitude of his Subjects,
and the Numbers of the Godly are the Glory of CHRIST. "Blessed be the Kingdom
of our Father David, and Hosanna in the highest", may we well cry, when we see
the Multitudes strowing themselves in their Savior's Way! The Friends of the
Bridegroom rejoice to hear the Report, John iii. 25. Rabbi, He of whom thou
barest witness, All Men come to him!

It Is pleasant when we are on a Journey, to find very good Company, and the
more the better sometimes, on the Road. How dull and heavy should it be to
travel alone heavenward, or but with a very few? Society evens and shortens the
Way, keeps up the Spirits and makes us lively and cheerful. Company is good in
bad Way and Weather, and helps over Difficulties. It Is pleasant on a Road for
Fellow Travelers to help each other on, and to be helped by one another. " Two
are better than one, says Solomon in the Wisdom of GOD; Eccle. iv. 9. For if
they fall one will lift up the other; but Woe to him that is alone; for he has
not another to lift him up. It Is good to travel strong toward Heaven. We
mutually consult our Safety and Comfort by going many together. Then we may be
like to sing in the Ways of the LORD, and his Glory will be greater in and by
us. Were we many more than we are, we should be much the more easy, pleasant
and happy: more pleased in each other, and profited by one another. Next to the
Comfort of Communion with GOD, is that with his SAINTS, and the one is promoted
by the other. CHRIST yet to this Day joins the Company and makes a third, as on
the Way to Emmaus where two or three are walking together in the Sorrows or
Joys of Religion.

More particularly, How pleasant must it be to your pious Ministers, to be
instrumental and successful in bringing many Souls to CHRIST, and to serve in
building up his Kingdom on Earth? and how grievous must the Complaint be from
their Hearts and Lips, which yet came from CHRIST's the great Prophet? Isai.
xlix. 8. " Thou art my Servant in whom I will be glorified! then I said, I have
labored in vain, and spent my Strength for naught! yet surely my Work is with
the LORD, and my Judgment with my GOD. The compassionate JESUS was more tender
of his poor Disciples, He sent them forth with these Words in their Mouth, Luke
x. The Kingdom of GOD is come nigh unto you! And they returned to Him with Joy;
LORD even the Devils are subject to us through thy Name! And He answered, I
beheld Satan as Lightning fall from Heaven! and behold I give you Power over
all the Power of the Enemy! -- This Manner of Entrance the Apostles gloried of,
after their LORD's Ascension! " Ye your selves know it, (writes blessed St.
Paul to the Thessalonians) that our Gospel came not to you in Word only, but in
Power and in the HOLY GHOST.

This saving Efficacy of the Gospel is one of the great Joys of Angels, who
behold the Face of their and our HEAVENLY FATHER: doubtless because they see
the Pleasures in the Face of GOD on this Account. He has given the benevolent
holy Spirits this Example and Commandment; " As I live, (have they heard the
LORD say, and so have we) I have no Pleasure at all that the Sinner should die.
They also know the Pleasure of the Soul of CHRIST, his Satisfaction in seeing
his Seed. He looks on his Flock of Sheep, that come up from the washing, every
one bearing Twins, and not one is barren among them? Ah! with what Eye and
Heart must the Good Shepherd see this! -- Only his own Heart knows the Joy of
it; only his own Mouth most sweet can speak it. Hell only, and the Children of
the Devil, are vexed to see Souls gathering to CHRIST! Satan and his may scoff
or gnash at it, as they did in CHRIST's Time, -- The World is gone after him!

But we should joy in it, not only for the Sake of particular Souls, and of
many Souls; and our own particular Relation to 'em, and Interest in 'em; but
also as the high Token of GOD's special Favor and Blessing on a People a
Kingdom, a Province, or a City; This is my Rest for ever (has he said and sworn
in Truth, and will not turn from it) here will I dwell, for I have desired it!
I will abundantly bless her Provision, I will satisfy her Poor with Bread! I
will clothe her Priests with Salvation, and her Saints shall shout aloud for
Joy: there will I make the Horn of David to bud, I have ordained a Lamp for
mine Anointed. -- When true Converts are numerous, than we may say without vain
boasting, The Temple of the LORD, the Temple of the LORD, the Temple of the
LORD are these, and the HIGHEST Himself shall establish her. -- But alas! When
Conversions are rare under the preached Gospel, how sad is the Token, how dark
the Omen! The Glory of the LORD is withdrawn to the Threshold of the House!
write on the Door Ichabod, "The Glory is departing! And Woe unto them, says the
LORD, if I depart from them. -- O the black Threatening! six times over repeated
by the HOLY GHOST in his inspired Word: Hear ye indeed but understand not, see
ye indeed but perceive not; make the Heart of this People fat, and make their
Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes; lest they see with their Eyes, hear with their
Ears, and understand with their Hearts, and be converted.

Finally, The Pleasure of feeing Souls flying to CHRIST rises to its Height, in
the Prospect it affords of their Meeting together at his Right Hand. This, says
the Apostle, is our Hope and Joy and Crown of Rejoicing! even Ye at the Coming
of CHRIST with all his Saints? for ye are our Glory and Joy.

Think, Fellow Christians, how glad you will be to see one another then and
there! to see all Temptation, Sorrow and Danger past for ever! to see the LORD
himself glorified and magnified in You together at the great and last Day! to
see your selves infinitely blessed in Him! let the Thought and Hope hereof
rejoice us now in our Fellowship together in the Gospel.

But then 2. A Word on the Wonder and Admiration that the Thing calls for; "
Souls flying as a Cloud to CHRIST and as the Doves to their Windows.

Who are these? a strange and surprising Vision! a vast Gentile Church! the
MESSIAH King of the many extended Nations! and Abundance of Conversions among
People hitherto Strangers to the true GOD, and Aliens from the Covenant of
Promise! without GOD and Hope in the World.

The Conversion of any one Soul is a Thing to be admired. The Rarity of the
Thing makes it admirable. What a Pity it is to give this as a Reason! a true
Conversion to GOD is a singular Thing in a World lying in Wickedness: Abundance
of Conversions then must be wonderful.

Again, The Difficulty of the Thing, and the Opposition made against it, both
from within and from without, increases the Wonder. The natural Enmity within
us to GOD and Godliness; indwelling Sin, and an evil Heart of Unbelief
departing from the living GOD, this makes the Wonder in the Conversion of any.
But then there are the Powers of Hell, Satan and his Hosts, in League with
Flesh and Blood, and a World that is Enmity to GOD.

The Evil One came and found nothing in CHRIST! he comes and finds every evil
and filthy Lust in us: " but be of good Cheer, has the HOLY ONE OF GOD said, I
have overcome! -- Saints admire his Conquest, and their own Salvation. -- " We
wrestle (says the Apostle) against Flesh and Blood, Principalities and Powers,
the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, and spiritual Wickednesses in high
Places.

Ah Grace and Power to be admired, and celebrated for ever? when JESUS the
Conqueror sets the Feet of his victorious Israelites on the Necks of these
Powers of Canaan!

But the Excellency of the Power is CHRIST's subduing the Soul it self; in
making a free and willing People, which is the Beauty of Holiness! For if the
SON make us free we shall be free indeed. We read therefore of a Translation
into the glorious Liberty of the Sons of GOD! What an admirable Word is that!
what a spiritual Empire is this, the Kingdom of GOD within us! from a
Renovation of the Mind and Heart, a new Creature formed, not only without any
Disposition in Nature thereto, but against all possible Indisposition
Reluctance and Aversation! This is "the Greatness of his Power usward, who
believe! which what Soul can know or comprehend; and therefore ever enough
admire the Thing in all its Grandeur! The Change which Grace makes in a Soul,
overcoming it to a delightful Consent to the whole good Pleasure of GOD. The
Surprise of this Effect of Grace, was equal to the Apostle and the Churches
round about! that by a Light and Word on the Way, He should be changed at once,
from a raging Enemy, into a dutiful Disciple! "LORD, What will thou have me to
do! that the furious Persecutor was at once become a zealous Preacher! and they
glorified GOD in me.

Admirably free and sovereign is this Grace, when, where, how, and by what
Means, and to what Degree it will work! singling out sometimes the most
unworthy, vile, and chief of Sinners! Admirable the Ease wherewith the Change
is effected, by a Word, a Thought, an effectual Conviction! admirably sudden
and silent when GOD will, as the Heart of Lydia was opened in attending to
Paul. Or admirable the Force and Roar of the Earthquake which shook the Jailor
to pieces! Admirable all the Variety of Ways wherein GOD pleases to work on one
and another!

Admirable is the whole Work of Grace for the Excellency thereof. It is all
holy, just, and good; glorious in Holiness, the Work is perfect! So admirable
the Thing was, to see a poor Demoniac at JESUS Feet in a right Mind! but how
does the Wonder rise to see abundance of like foolish distracted Sinners so
restored, and made wise unto Salvation.

But let us follow the whole Election of Grace to the Throne of the MOST HIGH
for ever and ever! and what a wondrous Sight will they be! The thousand times
ten thousands, and thousands of thousands; the Multitudes which no Man can
Number, of all Nations and Kindreds and People and Tongues, clothed with white
Robes, and Palms in their Hands! The Inquiry then will be the same as in my
Text concerning them! Revel. vii. 13. Who are these? and whence came they? --
These that have washed their Robes and made them white in the Blood of the
LAMB! -- which though it be primarily the more particular Character of the
Martyrs of JESUS, yet is really and in Truth the Honor and Glory of every
sincere Convert to Him, and Believer in Him.

Having thus finished on the pleasing Admiration of Souls flying to CHRIST in
Clouds and Flocks; let Us now show in fact that we do truly admire it, and have
Pleasure in it. -- Will we then be a Part of this lovely, happy, wise, holy,
admirable Number! Are we taken up into this Cloud! Are we on the Wing among the
Doves of CHRIST? Would we not desire to be of this blessed Number and Character.

Your Ministers would lead you in the Way, and go before you! Come, our dear
People, and fly with us! Descend, O SACRED DOVE! O blessed SPIRIT OF GRACE! and
raise and lift us up, and carry us away, on high together.

There is none of us, no not one, Ministers nor People, that can of our selves,
in our own Strength, rise or ascend, no nor so much as stand or go; impotent as
we are and diseased at the Pool! there we must lie, till the Angel of the LORD
come down and stir the Waters! Nor can we then put ourselves in! but JESUS is
on the Way, and we ly now in his Way, and can look and cry to Him; and at his
Word shall leap up and run and not be "weary, walk and fly and not faint.

My Brethren, (as I said to you in the Beginning of my Discourse) We have
rejoiced to see you as Clouds in our Streets, and as Doves about the Windows of
your Places of Resort for Worship in the Weeks past: We would now cherish,
preserve, increase, by the Help of GOD, (depending on Him, and found in his
appointed Ways) the good Impressions and Dispositions you seem to be under. --
You must abide and continue in the Use of the Means of Grace; seeking your
spiritual Food at the Windows which the Gospel has opened to you, and where it
is prepared and laid for you. These have been for Years past too much neglected
by you; you have not flown to them as you should have done; to your public
Weekly-Lecture in particular; where I must bear witness for GOD, and his
Servants, my Brethren, and your Pastors, there have been rich Provisions for
your Souls, which few came to feed on, the Multitude staying at Home, or roving
about in the Air, as light Clouds carried about of the Wind. -- Come, let there
be no more Reason for this Charge! be not those silly Doves without Heart! nor
let us have Cause to say by and by, "It was vain Curiosity, Novelty, the Fame
and Face of a Stranger; how dear soever to us and Venerable in his Youth: Walk
not your own Ministers in the same Spirit, in the same Truth, in the same
Wisdom and Grace of GOD! and share they not in the same Care, Desire and Zeal
for your Souls? Have they not shown it by receiving Him gladly in the LORD, who
lately came to you in his Name and Power? Why did we so receive him, encourage
his Heart and strengthen his Hands in preaching to you, after the wondrous
unfainting Manner he did? Was it not for your sake, that you might be quickened,
and more and more roused up to a Care for your selves? to " come away to
CHRIST, to come away to Him! as he loudly and earnestly, again and again,
called on you to do! and you seemed earnestly to hearken to him, as if you
would, as if you were ready, and even on the Wing!

Let us send the glad News after him, "that you are so; High and low, rich and
poor, Parents and Children, Ministers and People together! how good and
pleasant would this Unity among us be! not for a Party, not for a Distinction,
no but Heaven; all without Distinction!

My Brethren and Children, pray for your Ministers that they be more spirited
and enlarged in making full Proof of their Ministry; more gladly spending
themselves for Souls; as we have seen a bright Instance and Pattern, renewing
his Strength day by day, and anointed with fresh Oil. We would give more
Attendance on the LORD and you, if ye will attend more and better to our
Doctrine and Exhortation: Pray for us, that we may serve the LORD and you with
more Humility and Love, and that the Word of the LORD may have free Course and
run and be glorified.

We likewise pray for You, -- "Be ye also enlarged if you are not straightened in
us, be not in your own Bowels. "Give your selves first to the LORD, and then is
us by the Will of GOD, for your spiritual Edification. Come join your selves to
the LORD, in an everlasting Covenant never to be forgotten; to keep his
Sabbaths, to choose the Things that please him, to walk in all the Commandments
and Ordinances of the LORD blameless. Come into his Church, to full Communion,
to the LORD's Table, to eat of his Bread and to drink of his Cup: How else are
you flying into his Windows? -- Cry to the LORD, O discouraged Soul and say, "
The Companions hearken to thy Voice! cause me to hear it.

Come You that are high and rich among us, and you that are the Men of
Merchandise and Business, of Labor and Diligence! why should you be the poor
and low and Drones in Spirituals? why should the Cares of this World, and the
Deceitfulness of Riches choke the Word of GOD, and make it unfruitful! Why
should you be found at last the truly wretched miserable and naked, and that
for ever! Come, Honor the LORD with your Substance, and be rich toward GOD,
and lay a good Foundation for eternal Life. Improve every Talent, as our HOLLIS
and HOLDEN have taught you! -- And for your Encouragement let me say, that I
observe Many of a like Spirit with Them for Devotion and Liberality, that are
signally prospered and blessed by GOD in this Town.

But come my poorer Brethren, the poor of the Flock; to you is the Gospel
preached; by you let it be received, and it will make you rich in Faith, and
Heirs of Heaven. You see and hear your Calling Brethren! adore free and
distinguishing Grace! Obey, comply, come in from the "Highways and Hedges, and
fill the House and Table of CHRIST! why should you not seek the more of Heaven,
the less you have of Earth!

Parents, will not you come to the Windows of the LORD, and bring your Children
with you. Show them the Way into the Church of the living GOD; teach your young
Doves to fly thither after you. -- Or as soon as you are fledged, my Children,
fly thither of your selves! Your Ministers invite you, CHRIST calls you; he
stands ready to "take you up into his Arms and bless you! He has said to us,
"suffer them to come: LORD, we would not only suffer, but we require them in
thy Name! -- Your LORD has said to you, "I love them that love me, and they
that seek me early shall find me. You shall be to Him, as Abel was to Adam, as
Joseph was to Jacob, as Jabez was honorable among his Brethren, and as David
was to Jesse, and Samuel in the House of the LORD before Eli and all Israel; as
John was in the Bosom of JESUS, and as JESUS was to Mary, when twelve Year old
he went with her to the Passover; and said to her "Wist ye not, my Mother, that
I must be about my Heavenly Father's Business.

And you that are Servants, and the meanest of our Household Servants, even our
poor Negroes, choose you the Service of CHRIST; He will make you his Freemen;
The SON OF GOD, shall make you free, and you shall be free indeed. Why should
you be Men's Slaves and Satan's too. CHRIST calls you, mean as you are, into
the glorious Liberty of the Sons of GOD. Your Ministers welcome you to the
Table of CHRIST, to eat of the Children's Bread, as many of you as are willing
and meet to come. -- O that Masters would take more Care of your precious
Souls! The pious Master, who is CHRIST's Servant, will be glad to see his Negre
above a Servant, a Brother at the LORD's Table with him. It is in my Sight, I
can truly say, a Beauty to our Communions, to see a Number of the poor Blacks
with us.

Shall I speak now to Elder People, that have been sadly dilatory, sadly
negligent, and have not so much as crawled all their Life long into the Church
of GOD and the Fellowship of his Saints! -- Reverence to the Age of such should
have required me to have spoken to Them before; forgive the Indecency and
accept the Love of addressing you now. -- My LORD bids me say to you, now at
the Eleventh Hour, Why stand you here all the Day of Life loitering and Idle?
Go you also into my Vineyard! not for any thing you can now do (to be sure) yet
you shall have your Penny! your Labor (shall I call it) shall not be in vain
in the LORD. If there be but a willing Mind, a humble penitent Submission and
consenting Soul, it shall be accepted. -- You may be born again when you are
old! and though it be out of due time, yet so it was with the Apostle himself!
Last of all (says he) HE was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time,
who am therefore the least of the Apostles, and not meet to be called one; for
I persecuted the Church of GOD. And who is there in Age, that has sat under the
preaching of the Gospel from his Youth, and not been brought savingly to
CHRIST, of whom we may not truly say, that he has been a Persecutor of his
LORD! -- Yet may the LORD meet him even in his perverse Way, and call him, and
strike him down by his Light, and set him on asking humbly and (...) -- "Who
art thou LORD! and what will thou have me to do?

I shall only go into one more particular Point of Application; and that is to
convinced and awakned Sinners, and to true Converts and comforted Saints.

We have seen of late many greatly affected under the preaching of the Word;
now Cherish your Convictions, and beg of GOD, by the Power of his HOLY SPIRIT,
to fasten 'em deep in your Souls. Fear, O fear, lest your Goodness prove as the
Morning Cloud or Evening Dew, that passes away before the next Days Noon.
Improve the little Heat and Life you feel, and pray for a through saving
Conversion. Cry to the tender SAVIOR, Who will not break the bruised Reed, nor
quench the smoking Flax, but brings forth Judgment unto Victory. May He answer
you with good Words and comfortable; " Son, Daughter, thy Sins be forgiven. O
may it indeed be the Day of his Power, and the Time of his Love with your
Souls! And when you are ready to take the Words of Peace, take Care that you
turn not again to Folly. Watch and pray, that you enter not into Temptation:
When the Spirit seems most willing, remember that the Flesh is weak. Strait is
the Gate, and narrow is the Way, that leads to Life, and few there be that
find it. Strive therefore, has the LORD said to us, for many shall seek to
enter, and shall not be able.

Go, carry thy Sins, and not thy Penitence to the LORD JESUS, and cast a poor
perishing Soul on sovereign Mercy and free Grace. When he asks thee, What will thou that I should do unto thee? Answer, LORD save me I perish! LORD that I may
receive my Sight? LORD, that I may be made clean and whole of my Plague!

We have admired to see how many of you have been of late affected! we shall
admire more, wonder and be ashamed and grieved, if we see your Affections cool
and go off! if Sabbaths and Ordinances are neglected as heretofore, or formally
attended. If you have begun in the Spirit, take heed that it end not in the
Flesh. Confer not with Flesh and Blood, as blessed Paul tells us he did not,
when it pleased CHRIST to reveal Himself in him.

And now to You, my Brethren that are in CHRIST JESUS, who have chosen the LORD
to serve him, and have taken his Yoke upon you, easy and light to your Souls;
let the Joy of the LORD be your Strength; go on your Way rejoicing! He meets
him that rejoiceth, and works Righteousness, them that remember him in his
Ways. Lift up the Hands that hang down, strengthen the feeble Knees. Thank GOD,
who has wrought all your Works in you and for you, and so far carried you on,
kept and recovered you; thank GOD and take Courage. Say, I will never forget
thy Precepts, for by them thou have quickened me, I will run the Way of thy
Commandments as thou enlargest my Heart. -- The Grace of our LORD JESUS CHRIST
be with your Spirits! the Peace of GOD which passes all Understanding, keep
your Hearts and Minds through CHRIST JESUS, Unto Him be Glory in the Churches for
ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

