Faith absolutely necssary but not sufficient to Salvation without good Works.
IN TWO SERMONS, Preached at Christ-Church in Philadelphia, April 20. 1740.

By ARCHIBALD CUMMINGS, M. A. Commissary to the Bishop of London, etc.

Published in their own Vindication, from the false and rash Reflections of the
famous Mr. WHITEFIELD.

Immortalitate (...) quomodo possumus, nisi ea quibus Mors expugnatur et
vin^^tur, Christi Mandata servemus? -- Credere se in Christum quomodo dicit,
qui non facit, quod Christus facere precipit? -- St. Cypr. de Unitate Ecclesi.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by ANDREW and WILLIAM BRADFORD at the Sign of the BIBLE
in Front Street

The Preface, To the candid and unprejudiced Reader.
AS Mr. WHITEFIELD's gross Misrepresentations of the following Sermons have
obliged me to publish them, I must give some Account of his Conduct whilst: in
this Place. I know let me be never so careful to avoid personal Reflections,
and to represent his darling Doctrines and rash Censures in the truest Light
and tenderest Manner; yet shall I hardly escape the Reproaches of some --. But
the rudest Clamours will give me no uneasiness; for my Conscience bears me
Witness, that I am doing my Duty; that my Designs are fair and honest: I am not
so much Concerned for my own Vindication, as for the Credit of our holy and
reasonable Religion, and for the Reputation of our Mother Church under God, the
Bulwark of the Reformation, and of her ablest Champions industriously abused
and desamed of late.

When Mr, WHITEFIELD arrived here last Year, I gave him at first the use of our
Church; and looked upon him at first as a well-meaning though rash Young Man, who
had imbibed some mistaken Notions of Religion; for which reason I advised him,
in the most serious and tender Manner I could, to examine the Principles he
went upon with greater Deliberation; adding; that I was sorry he had lost the
esteem of the Clergy in England, whom even their Enemies allowed to be
generally eminent for Learning and Lenity. However, could he happily get over
his Prejudices, he might, through God's Blessing, do much good in America, by
means of his agreeable Voice and serious Manner, etc. I farther promised,
according to his Behavior, to use my Interest with my Brethren on the
Continent, to recommend him to the favor of the Clergy, upon his return to his
Native Country.

But I soon perceived him Proof against any such Advice; for some few Days
after, both from our Pulpit and in his Street-Preaching he rashly accused the
Clergy in general of Hypocrisy and false Doctrine; of subscribing without
believirg their Articles, in order to get into Preferment; and that when once
possessed of their Churches, they locked the Doors and put the Keys into their
Pockets, etc. When I expostulated the Matter with him, justly observing how
unjust, rash and uncharitable such a Charge was against a Body of Men, of whom
perhaps he knew not one in a Thousand; all the Answer he made was, that he did
not mean them all, only the Generality of them.

Soon after I saw, with his Name to it, an abusive Answer to the Bishop of
London's late Pastoral Letter, wherein his Lordship seriously and seasonably
cautions the People of his Diocese, against the two dangerous Extremes of
Lukewarmness and Enthusiasm. The Letter is wrote with that strength of Reason
and good Sense, with that Perspicuity and Gravity, which seems natural to our
pious and prudent Diocesan; with that Christian Calmness and true Z as, which
discovers his real Concern for sacred Truth, and his tender regard for the good
of Souls, in danger of being deluded and mislead.

His three Letters in Opposition to Infidelity were wrote, some Years agone,
with the same Candid and Christian Spirit; containing Arguments in a manner
Demonstrative, and yet so admirably fitted to all Capacities, that, by the
blessing of God, they proved an excellent Antidote againg the Poison so
industriously spread at that Time. Had Mr. WH -- D seriously perused them,
especially the 2d Letter; the short View there displayed of the Christian
Institution, would have instructed him in the true scriptural Sense of our
Articles, concerning Justification through Christ Jesus. For though we are
justified freely through his Grace; yet the Gospel Account is as full and
express, as Words can make it, on the one Hand, that Faith in Christ is the
Foundation of a Christians Title to Heaven; and on the other Hand, that
Repentance and good Works are necessary Conditions of obtaining it.

The Distinction between good Works being the Fruits, but not the Condition of
Justification is merely evasive and trifling; seeing Justifying Faith and good
Works cannot be separated, cannot be opposed One to another, without rendering
both useless and ineffectual: For in the plain Sense of Scripture, without
holiness no man shall see the Lord, or without good Works be finally justified
in his sight. And according to the 12 th Article of our Church they are
pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ. Nay this is the meaning of the 11 th.
Article, on which Mr. WH -- D magisterially imposes his own Sense, and
spitefully censurs the Clergy for not implicitly receiving his indigested
Notions; For when it is asserted, that we are accounted righteous before God,
only for the merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by Faith, and not for
our own Works ( viz. without Faith.) By Faith only an Evangelical Faith is most
certainly to be understood; which always includes sincere, though not perfect,
unsinning Obedience; as appears plain from the whole Tenor of the Gospel. And
farther our Church distinctly points out, in what Sense we are to understand
all her Doctrines, in the 6 th Article, Holy Scripture contains all things
necessary to Salvation, So that whatsoever is not read therein, nor may be
proved thereby, is not to be required of any Man, that it should be believed as
an Article of Faith, or be thought requisite or neccessary to Salvation.

The pious and learned Dr. Bull late Bishop of St. David's, in his Harmonia
Apostolica, has fully proved that by the Word of the 11 th Article, there is
not attributed any Efficacy or Dignity to Faith, more than to other great
Gospel Virtues, in the Business of Justification; and has confirmed the same by
the Suffrages of all the eminent Fathers of the primitive Church. And yet
because the Bishop of London recommends this true, genuine, scriptural and
intelligible Notion of Faith; Mr. WH -- D, with equal Truth and Decency, calls
him a Doctrinal-Papist, See Wh -- d' s late Letter to the Religious Societies
(with this malicious Sneer and slanderous Accusation against every Bishop in
England) though One of the most Orthodox Prelates in the Kingdom.

To make preaching up the necessity of good Works the Character of a Papist,
must proceed from very pernicious Designs, or else be owing to gross Ignorance
both of the Protestant and Popish Doctrines. Our Church both in her Articles
and Homilies asserts the necessity of good Works, but renounces the Merit of
them. The Church of Rome claims Merit by them, as appears from their Doctrine
concerning Works of Supererogation. And yet by other Superstitious Ceremonies,
by Pardons and Indulgences, and by one Device or another has enervated the
Christian Religion to that Degree, that it has lost its Virtue and Efficacy
upon the Minds and Lives of men. See Archbp. Tillotsons Sermon 154. Vol. 3.


The Church of Rome (says Dr. Bull Ser. I, Vol. I.) teaches and avoweth such
Doctrine, as evidently and utterly destroys the Necessity of a holy Life, and
encourages Men to hope they shall reap in Mercy, though they sow not to
themselves in righteousness. Such is that Doctrine of theirs, That a Man by
Attrition, or such a Sorrow for Sin, as arises only from Fear, and is void of
Charity and the Love of God above all things, with the help of the Sacrament of
Penance, i. e. of Confession to, and Absolution from a Priest, may obtain the
Pardon of his Sins, Justification and eternal Life. Council of Trent Chap. 14
Session 14. He adds, that it may be truly affirmed, that there is no Society of
Christians in the World, where Antinomianism and Libertinism more reign than
among the Papists, into whose Faith they are interwoven, etc.

Are not they then rather to be reckoned Doctrinal Papists, who zealously decry
Morality and the necessity of good Works, who constantly pronounce Damnation
against all that differ from them in Opinions; who maintain the Doctrine of
private Auricular Confession; who pretend to infalibility, to be certainly sure
of their own Salvation, and to know the Hearts of others; or who are, and who
are not regenerated; who decry Learning and the use of Reason, and consequently
promote Ignorance and encourage an Implicit Faith; who discredit and run down
the best Protestant Authors that have wrote with the greatest Learning and
Success, against the Errors of the Church of Rome? I could mention other Tenets
and Practices of the like nature. But

I proceed to observe, that Mr. W -- d's Charge against; the Clergy, as
asserting we are justified by Works only, is absolutely and scandalously false
Even that great and good Man Arch Bishop Tillotson (whom he has most grossly
abused in this, as well as in other respects) insists upon it, that Jesus
Christ, and no other, has merited the Blessings of Justification and Salvation
for us; that we ourselves can do nothing, whereby we can merit these Blessings
at Gods Hands; nay farther that all our Obedience is imperfect, and so far from
meriting, that it stands in need of Pardon. See his 174th Sermon Vol. 3d.

The Author of the Whole Duty of Man (though as pious and useful a Book as ever
was wrote, yet condemned and destroyed by Mr. W -- d's Orders) speaks fully to
Christ's meriting in our behalf, by satisfying the Divine Justice for actual as
well as original Sin, and purchasing an eternal and glorious Inheritance for
all that repent, believe and faithfully obey him, through the Assistance of his
holy Spirit.

But Mr. W -- d's Scheme of Christianity admits nothing to be required of us. I
have heard him in express Words declare, that good Works will not recommend us
to God's Favor, nor will evil Works;, even all the Sins that ever were
committed in the World, though centered in one Soul, for one Moment hinder its
Justification and Salvation. That we have free Will only to do evil, nay are
mere Machines, and therefore cannot do any thing; or should we attempt to do
any thing for ourselves, we thereby make ourselves half Saviors, and in that
Case should never be saved through Christ's Merits. That Christ by his Obedience
has every Way fulfilled the Law for us, and God will not desire to be paid
twice. That God will have no regard to Works past, present or to come. See his
Letter to the Societies.
That no Purity nor Impurity, no Fitness nor Unfitness are considered by him;
That no Conditons are required, and that the only Qualification is to be a
Sinner; and the greater the Sinner, the better Saint he will make etc.

What wild, distracted Notions are these? Into what dangerous Mazes may they
lead well-meaning credulous Souls? I know some are willing to put another
Meaning, on these, and the like irrational and unscriptural Positions, than
what is plain and obvious. But' it is impossible, by any Shifts and Evasions, to
elude the evil tendency of them. Those who first taught these pernicious
Doctrines, were called Antinomians; the name is now become odious and therefore
disowned; but what signifies desclaiming the Designation, it Men espouse and
propagate their distinguishing Persuasions, and darling Tenets? Tenets, by
which the Grace of God may be, upon Principle, turned into wantoness and
Christian Liberty be made a Cloak for all sorts of Sins, even the most heinous
Enormities. God, savs, St Paul Romans 2. 6. will render to every Man according to
his Deeds. Though our good Works are not required to make us capable of meriting
Heaven, (that being impossible for frail, sinful Creatures) yet are they
absolutely necessary to make us fit Objects, for the infinite Mercy of God in
Christ to bestow Heaven, on; or to use St. Paul's elegant Expression. Col. I.
12. To make us meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.
Know ye not says the same Apost.1 Cor. 6. 9. That the Unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? This is so often and so plainly inculcated in the
new Testament that he who runs, may read it; and they who know not this, know
nothing of Christianity, as they ought to know it.

To caution my Hearers against the Danger of mistaken Notions in this important
Doctrine, was the End I chiefly proposed in the following Discourses; which
were hastily put togother, and are printed as they were preached; except some
few Sentences in the afternoon Sermon purposely passed over in the Delivery,
which yet are necessary to preserve the Connection. Mr. W -- d heard them both;
and from Church repaired to Society Hill, attended with great Numbers of every
Persuasion; where, after naming the same Text, your Preacher to day, said he,
from these Words, etc. And so went on contradicting and preverting the
Doctrines I had delivered, without any regard to Decency, or our blessed Lords
Precept Mat. 18. 15. And in direct Contempt of the 53d Cannon of our Church,
whereby public Opposition between Preachers is strictly forbidden; because
thereby may grow much Offense and Disquietness to the People. As actually
happened in this particular Instance; For some have rashly deserted the
Communion of the Church implicitly obeying his Schismatical Advice viz. That
they should follow some rigid Itinerant Distenters, whom he named, as the only
Preachers of the true Gospel in these Parts. He peremtorily asserted (and, it I
am not misinformed, backed the Assertion with his familiar, though dreadful
Imprecations against himself, if what he said was not strictly true) that I had
preached up the sufficiency of an Historical Faith; and had taught
Justification by Works only, And then very pathetically exhorted the People not
to follow or listen to such Preachers. They teach, said he, the Doctrine of
Devils; vile Doctrine that leads to the Gates of Hell and Destruction.

And soon after in his Declamations, on the aforesaid Hill, to a numerous
Audience, he confidently affirmed; That the Bishop of London and his
Commissaries, and the present set of Clergy neither understand nor believe
their Articles; Do not ye therefore believe them; for they are Simon Maguses.
They are Sorcerers, Emissaries of the Devil; They are rotten Pillars, and have
for these hundred Years past, been pulling down the Church of England with
their unhallowed Hands.

Now was this rude Language, this low Scurrility, this false Accusation the
Dictates of the holy and infallible Sprit, or of the Spirit that works in the
Children of Disobedience? Sure not of the former. Such vile and slanderous
Invectives are Crimes doubtless, to be punished by the Judges being
inconsistent with the Peace of Society; a notorious Breach of the ninth
Commandment, and of his solemn Engagement at his Ordination. The true Religion
of Jesus Christ teaches Men to live without Disturbance, in that Society of
which they are Members; to be obedient to its Constitutions, and to be subject,
for Conscience sake, to those that have the Rule over them. St. Jude severely
censures the Gnostics, (a Sect extraordinarily inspired by their vain
Pretenses; but very profligate and irregular in their Practices) for their
despising Dominions, and speaking evil of Dignities.

It has always been the Method of Deceivers, to inveigh against received and
orthodox Principles, and the Pastors that are regularly appointed to teach and
maintain them: And it is a vast advantage they gain over any People, when they
can by art and Elocution restrain them from a rational Enquiry into the
Doctrines, they pretend to deliver by Inspiration; and from listening to the
Instructions of their lawful Guides; whom they will labor hard to make them
undervalue by secret Surmises, injurious Aspersions and undeserved Reflections.

As to the abusive Misrepresentation of me, or my Doctrine by Mr. W -- d; Let
his and my Superiors, and every impartial Man judge of it. I freely forgive
him, and pray God forgive him, and restore him to a sound Mind and regular
Conduct. Nothing could have prevailed with me, to have taken this public
Notice of one capable of acting so much out of Character; had it not been
absolutely necessary, in the conscientious Discharge of the Duty of my present
Station, to caution the serious and well-meaning, against being imposed upon
and lead astray by those, who are confident and rash, because they are not
rational: and supply with Grimace, Noise and Passion, what they are known to
want in Sense and Understanding; not to mention Learning, that is at present,
it seems, an attainment despicable, if not dangerous to the owners.

However, Religious Truths are always best conveyed by calmness of Reasoning,
and clearness of Argument. And it must be owing to the want of due and serious
Attention, if Men do rot receive the most useful and lasting Edification, from
Discourses calculated chiefly to inform their Understandings, and convince
their Judgments. But such Discourses, to some even well meaning Hearers appear
flat and unsavory, and to have nothing in them of Life and Power. They can
relish nothing, but what is delivered with eagerness and vehemence; what raises
Tempests and Earthquakes in their Breasts, like the Thunder and Lightning from
Mount Sinai. They think themselves better edified, when their Passions are only
affected, and their Imagination heated by the moving Voice or Gesture of the
Speaker. But the Devotion raised in this manner is only momentary and
vanishing; when the Judgment is not better instructed, Men are under the
strongest Delusions imaginable, and mistake the wild Freaks of an overheated
Fancy, for the Suggestions of Gods holy Spirit. By which Means their
Intellectual Faculties may be utterly spoiled; and being deceived may assent to
the most unaccountable absurdities; or waxing worse and worse, may run into
Religious Distraction, or furious rage.

Some, God be praised, are fully convinced of the Danger they were at first
running into; and, it is to be hoped, by degrees all considerate Persons will
reject with Indignation Errors so destructive, and so fruitful of Mischiefs;
Mischiefs which of late here, as well as in England have been done by such
Doctrines, and such Teachers. See Dr. Trapps late Sermons.
Some they have made stark mad, they have set the nearest and dearest Relations
at variance, disturbed the quiet of Families, nay thrown whole Neighbourhoods
and Parishes into Confusion by casting like Solomon's Madman, Pr. 26.
Firebrands, Arrows and Death; nay disgorging themselves in Flames of Fire and
Brimstone; threatening Hell and everlasting Damnation against all, that would
not implicitly believe their incredible Rhapsodies. Though it is much to be feared
that some, upon being convinced that they have been mislead by the most zealous
appearances of Sanctity, may at last grow indifferent and careless about
Religion in general. This Prospect is the more Melancholy, because both Deists
and Jesuits must be delighted with it, and will be ready to countenance and
help forward any attempts to divide and confound us.

I pray God keep and preserve every serious Soul from being drawn into Error,
flattered into Presumption, or frightened into Despair, by such Instruments who
cither are deceived themselves, or lie in wait to deceive others. And
doubtless, if we be steady and sincere in the Profession of our most holy
Faith, and in the practice of our reasonable Service; God will be with us, and
direct us by the powerful Influences of his Grace and Spirit; and by his over
ruling Providence will discover and disappoint all the secret and crafty
Adversaries of true Christianity, which gives us the most beautiful Idea of
Piety and Virtue, and recommends the Love of God and of Mankind as the Sum of
all true Religion: For according to St James's Description of it; That Wisdom
which is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle and easy to be
entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits, without partiality and without
Hypocrisy. Chap. 3. v 17.

JAMES ii. 18. Yea a Man may say, Thou have Faith, and I have Works; show me
thy Faith without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my Works.
THE Apostle seems here to introduce, as it were, two Christians; the one he
supposes to be Weak and Erroneous, the other Orthodox and well Instructed, and
to represent them as warmly engaged in serious Discourse concerning some
fundamental points of Religion, particularly the Nature of Justification and
the Means of obtaining it: The weak Christian looks upon Faith alone as the
only Means, and argues for the Sufficiency of it, though he should neglect to do
Works answerable and suitable to his Faith: But the better instructed Christian
does not think Faith alone Sufficient, if it be not accompanied with a suitable
Life and Conversation.

Both of them no doubt disclaimed all pretense of Merit either in Faith or
Works, and attributed (as we must always do) the whole of our Salvation to the
precious Death and meritorious Satisfaction of the holy Jesus, the Author and
Finisher of our Faith. Both of them were likewise agreed, that Faith was
absolutely necessary to Salvation; but then, as I hinted just now, they
differed very much in their Sentiments concerning the Nature and Sufficiency of
it; for one thought Faith alone absolutely full, complete and sufficient; and
on that account imagined he might safely supersede his concern about
maintaining Good Works, and proceeding daily in all holy Conversation and
virtuous Actions; whereas the other reasoning more justly, was firmly persuaded
that Faith could not be of a true and saving Nature, could not be manifested in
a right Manner, but by Good Works the genuine Fruits and Effects thereof.

This may serve to represent to us the very Case of some zealous Professors of
Christianity among ourselves; who, though they readily acknowledge and
inculcate the necessity of Faith and that they are under strict Obligations to
live and die therein, seem notwithstanding, with the erroneous Christian, to
lay too great Stress upon their Faith; thinking, nay boasting, that they will
be thereby saved; though their Tempers be Uncharitable, and their Behavior, in
many respects, Irregular; as if Speculative and bare Persuasion could save
Christians, without obeying the Evangelical Precepts.

Faith and Obedience are firmly joined together, and inseperably connected by a
moral efficiency, and have the Sanction from a divine Command; and it is
therefore presumptuously vain, extremely dangerous for any Man to flatter
himself or seduce others into a fond Persuasion, that just, or even inspired
Notions of Religion, will avail them in the Sight of God, will justify them
according to the Terms of the Gospel; whilst they indulge themselves in vice,
are ungodly, and walk disorderly. Would Men but once strive with a true and
holy Zeal, who should be the best Christian, who should keep at the greatest
distance from Sin and every appearance of evil, and who should square his Life
most exactly according to our blessed Savior's pure Precepts and holy Example:
There would then be little room left, and less if any Inclination in the Minds
of serious Christians, for these needless Controversies and unreasonable
Divisions with relation to Faith and Justification, Free Will and Free Grace,
which prevail too much at present, as they did in the last Century, to the
discredit of true Religion and disturbance of Society: Such Disputes are too
dry and intricate for useful Instruction; their natural tendency is to render
Men confident and troublesome, proud and uncharitable; but never to make them
either wiser or better.

As Matters therefore stand, we should look directly to the End of Faith, that
by it we may be partakers of the Benefits of Christ's Death and Imitatours of
the Virtues of his Life. The best Service and Credit we can do our holy
Religion is to give the World living Proofs of its Truth and Excellency, and to
defend and adorn it with a good, peaceable and exemplary Practice; for an
inoffensive Demeanor, a Life of true Virtue and unaffected Piety will always
have its effects; will in Time stop the Mouths of Gainsayers and conciliate
the Opinions and Affections of Men even disaffected: For as the Apostle St.
Peter observes, we may by well-doing put to silnce the Ignorance of foolish
Men, show our Faith by our Works, and secure to ourselves the Blessing of
Almighty God, and a good Title to the ample Promises he has graciously made
the Faithful in and through Jesus Christ.

Having premised this in order to explain my Text, I propose in my following
Discourse.

I. To show that Faith is absolutely necessary to Salvation, in all that have
heard the Gospel.

II. That Faith alone is not sufficient to Salvation, unless it be accompanied
with Good Works.

III. To offer some Instance of those Good Works, by which chiefly Men ought to
show forth and manifest their Faith.

I, Then I am to show, that Faith is absolutely; necessary to Salvation, in all
that have heard the glad Tidings of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

This may appear very plain, if we only consider, That Faith is the very
Foundation of a religious and devout frame of Soul, the first Principle of the
Christian Life, and the Master-Spring that excites and guides our spiritual
Motions; without which no Man can be truly and sincerely Religious; For without
Faith, says the Apostle to the Hebrews, 11 Chapter 6 ver. ' it is impossible to
please God; he that comes to God must Believe that he is; and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him. Now these two Expressions, pleasing
God and seeking him, are plainly of the same Importance, and both of them
signify Religion or the Worship and Service of God; which does antecedently
suppose our firm Belief and Persuasion of those two fundamental Principles of
all Religion, whether natural or revealed, viz. that there is a God, and that
he will Protect and Reward those that faithfully Serve and Obey him, because
without Men's first Believing these, there would be neither Ground nor
Encouragement for any such thing as Religion. Hence the Apostle to the Cor. 13.
5. requires us to examine ourselves if we be in the Faith; we must not be
careless and indifferent in a Matter of so great Weight and Moment, and that so
nearly concerns our eternal Interest and Welfare: For according to our
Savior's express Declaration, Mark 16. 16. He that believes and is baptized,
shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned. And John 8. 24. If
ye believe not that I am He ( viz. the promised Mesiah and Savior of the
World) ye shall die in your Sins. It being the principle Act of this Faith, to
believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and the Savior of Mankind;
consequently we must esteem his Doctrine to be pure, true and sacred; we must
receive it as such, and endeavor by the Assistance of Gods Grace (which he has
promised to all them that ask it in Sincerity and Truth) to fulfill his holy
Will and obey his Commandments; and he that thus Believes on the Son of God,
has everlasting Life, and he that Believes not the Son, shall not see Life,
but the wrath of God abides on him, John 3. 18 and 36. And St. Paul tells us
(2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.) That God will take Vengeance on them that know him not, and
that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. From hence appears both the
Necessity and Nature of Christian Faith, which instructs us not only to believe
in Christ, but also obliges us to embrace and obey that pure and undefiled
Religion taught and instituted by him in the holy Gospel. Any other Sense of
believing in Christ must needs be lame and imperfect, for what can it signify
or avail to believe in him, if we flight the Religion of which he is the
Author, and disregard those inspired and faithful Records of his Life and Rules
of this Doctrine? The holy Scriptures were given for our Learning and written
for our Instruction; and in the due use of Means, the Spirit of Truth will
guide us into the saving knowledge of what God has thought fit to reveal, what
he commands us to do, what he promises to the Obedient and threatens against
the Negligent; that thereby we may be induced seriously to deny all ungodliness
and worldly Lusts, and to live righteously, soberly and godly in this present
World.

This is a true Description of that Faith, which is required by the perfect
Revelation of Gods Will, and approves itself to the Reason of Mankind; though
there are some who labor to render it obscure and unintelligible. This is the
true meaning of coming to Christ, of receiving Christ, of putting on Christ,
which the Scripture requires, and in this Sense we must understand these
Phrases, when we apply them to this Matter. This is the Faith which is
necessary to Salvation, in all that live under the Sunshine of the Gospel. As
to those who have not had it revealed unto them, it would be rash and ill
become us to pronounce any thing peremptorily concerning them; we must not
affect to be wise above what is written: However we may on the charitable, and
therefore the safest side, suppose that God, whose Goodness is over all his
Works, may apply his uncovenanted Mercy unto them; and that though they do not
believe in Christ, of whom they have not heard, he may reckon them excusable;
the want of Opportunity and external Revelation being a good Apology in their
behalf. But as to those who have heard the glad Tidings of Salvation, who live
where the Gospel is taught in Purity and Truth, where the Evidences of
Christianity, and Motives to believe, ly so open to the general Apprehension of
Mankind. If any in such Circumstances be so obstinate as not to believe in
Christ, not to make use of the Means of Grace, not to pray earnestly with the
Man in the Gospel, Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief: Such Persons must be
without Excuse, and reputed unworthy to be saved through our blessed Savior's
Mediation, and are justly liable and consigned over to Condemnation: For thus
according to our Lords own Words ( John 14. 6.) No Man comes to the Father but
by me, and that coming to the Father is only by Faith in Jesus Christ.

As among Men he, that will not believe a Matter of Fact, upon the positive
Testimony of a credible Witness, will be reckoned to affront and do him an
Injury who attests it; so he, who refuses to believe or give his Assent to
those saving Doctrines, which God by the Gospel has graciously delivered to the
World, sins against God and affronts his Truths. 1. John 5. 9. If we receive
the Witness of Men, the Witness of God is greater: He that believes on the Son
of God, has the Witness in himself, he that believes not God, has made him a
Liar. In this Place the Apostle speaks of those who believed not, but rejected
the Gospel, and says that in so doing they made, i.e. accounted God a Liar: Not
that they denied Gods Veracity (an attribute of the Divine Nature, which
neither Jews nor Heathens disputed) but because, when the Gospel was in Truth
revealed by God, and they might (had they not been partial and wilfully
negligent) been convinced of its being so; they notwithstanding refused to
believe it; and therefore as highly affronted Gods Veracity by unbelief, as
they could have done his Authority by Disobedience. Unbelief affronts God by
rejecting the Doctrines he has amply confirmed by clear and miraculous
Testimonies: ' It Is a manifest Contempt or his infinite Goodness in sending our
Savior into the World; and does what it can to defeat his gracious Designs to
save Mankind.

Whoever rejects, perverts or corrupts this Faith, may be construed to sap the
sure Foundation of moral Duties; and to do the greatest Mischief to human
Societies, by rooting out of the Minds of Men those powerful Restraints from
Injustice, Violence, Sedition, and all kinds of Vice which Christianity has
laid them under: The influence of which is a great Security to mutual
Benevolence, Peace and Order; and produce Effects publicly and privately
beneficial, in many Cases that are without the reach of human Laws. It Is Faith
that makes us strictly diligent in the coniscientious Practice of social
Virtues, and careful to direct them to their true Ends: Nothing can inspire a
Man with the true Spirit of Charity, but the Contemplation of the infinite
goodness of God apprehended by Faith, nothing can make us truly humble, but the
knowledge of Gods transcendent Power and Perfection manifested by the same
efficacious Principle. Nor can any Thing but the Hope or the Divine Favor
excite Men to be unseignedly zealous for religious Virtue in general. Without
this Grace, the highest Perfection Men either will or can raise themselves to,
is to mortify and avoid one Vice that they may pursue another; for instance to
deny their Avarice, in order to gratify their Ambition, to shun the folly of
Lukewarmness, that they may indulge themselves in the mad Freaks of Enthusiasm;
and in one Word to do good for their own selfish Ends and private Interest; and
to be vicious and corrupt, is not by Principle, at least with less Disgrace and
greater Security. Though thus now it appears that Faith is absolutely necessary
to Salvation; yet it will appear, as I proposed to show in the Ild Place, That
Faith alone is not suffcient, unless it be accompanied with good Works. This
might be easily inferred son what has been said on the former Head, and is
abundantly plain and evident from the whole Tenor of the New Testament, which
instructs us in every Branch of our Duty, and furnishes us with the strongest.
Motives and Arguments to a good and exemplary Life, to let our Light so shine
before the World, that men may see our good Works -- St. Paul it is true, faith
that a Man is justified by Faith without the Deeds of the Law, Romans 3 28. Some
insist on it, that the Apostle here means no other than the Deeds enjoned by
the ancient Law, the Law of Moses the ritual Part thereof, such as Circumcision
and the Like; but granting that he affirms a Man is justified by Faith without
the Deeds of the Moral Law; yet he means only perfect Works, or exact,
unsinning Obedience required by the tenor of the first Covenant as appears
from the preceding Verses, where he declares, that all Men are concluded under
Sin, and therefore unable to do Works that can challange a Reward, that need no
Mercy, no repentance; by such Works since the Fall no Man living can be
justified: But the Gospel, in tender pity to the weakness of our depraved
Nature, abates the rigor and severity of the Law by requiring only sincere,
instead of perfect unsinning Obedience, and that too rendered easy and
practicable by the Succors of Heaven, by the Grace and Strength of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, who is our Advocate with the Father, and
apropitiation for our Sins The Gospel by requiring and accepting Repentance
affords Men all the Encouragement in the World to repeat and live well, and
Faith in St. Paul's Epistles generally comprehends Repentance and sincere
Obedience: The Faith by which a Man is justified is not, cannot be a son; but
must bring forth Fruit, must be attended with good Works: For as the same
Apostle tells us, ( Gal. 5. 6.) In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails
any thing nor Uncircumcision, but Faith that works by Love i.e. such a Faith
as moves Men to show forth their Love to God and their Savior be doing such
good Works, as the Precepts of the Gospel enjoin and strictly require.

And here it is proper to observe, that there is not so great difficulty in
reconciling the two Apostles St. James and St. Paul upon this Head, us some
Persons have fondly imagined. For Is It, when St. Paul asserts that we are
justified by Faith, I have already proved he means an active and lively Faith,
which approves itself by a ready sincere though imperfect Obedience; and
consequently he thereby affirms the same Thing with St James viz that Faith and
Works both, a virtuous and upright Life, as well as a sound and right Belief
are necessary to our Salvation. Or again when St Paul a firms that Minds
juftified by Faith without the Works of the Law; if we consider that he is
arguing against some Judaisers, who were still for imposing on Christians the
Yoke of the mosaic Ordinances, in particular that of Circumcision; as thinking
them necessary to their acceptance with God and their Justification. In
Opposition to this, the Apostle shows that such a Faith as is accompanied with
Evangelical Obedience, adorned with such Virtues and Graces as are the proper
and genuine Effects of it, is sufficient to Salvation in and through the Merits
and Mediation of Christ Jesus; without any farther Obligation of Observing the
many legal Rites and burdensome Ceremonies instituted by the Ministry of Moses.
But St James being engaged in a controversy of a different Nature, though he
spoke by the same Spirit and designed the same Thing yet he argues after
another Manner. Among the Christians he wrote to, were many Libertines who
denied the necessity of a Godly Life; and maintained that a bare Speculative
Faith was enough to save them; and very probably had perverted some difficult
Passages in St Paul's Epistles, to countenance and support that their erroneous
Doctrine; a Doctrine which St Paul himself decries in many Places, particularly
telling the Corinthians (I Ep. 7. 19.) That nothing would avail then, but
keeping the Commandments of God; and saving of himself (1 Cor 13. 2.) Though I
have all Faith -- and have not Clarity I am nothing; and a Doctrine that flatly
contradicts what our blessed Savior affirms concerning the design of his
appearance in the World, (Mat. 5. 17.) viz. That he came not to destroy the
Law, (the Moral Law) but to fulfill it; and accordingly when One asked him, What
he should do to obtain eternal Life? his Answer was, if thou will enter into
Life, keep the Commandments. So that if we will take the true Scheme and
principle Design of Christianity from him who first instituted and best
understood it; it is a practical not a bare Speculative Science, it is a strict
Institution which, though it offers Pardon for what is past, yet requires us to
endeavor after all purity of Heart and holiness of Life for the future. It
does not make void but establishes the Law; and is so far from dispensing with
Morality, that it has advanced it to the highest improvement, So groundless and
absurd was the Opinion of those Licentious Men who esteemed themselves exempted
and discharged through Faith, from the Practice of moral Duties. In Opposition
to this dangerous and wild Conceit, St James goes on to prove, that Faith when
it does not produce good Works is dead, lifeless and unactive; and by necessary
Consequence is insufficient to Justification and Salvation. For this purpose he
offers three or four plain and undeniable Arguments, in the Chapter of which my
Text is a Part; viz. He shows that Faith without Works is a dead Faith; because
Is It, such a Faith is useless and and unprofitable: from the 14, to v. 18. Where
he compares this kind of Faith to a Man, that fees his Neighbor necessitous
and destitute of daily Food; but though he is able, yet does not afford him
Things needful for his present relief, putting him off with a few formal good
Wishes: In this Case the poor Suppliant would receive no real Relief from his
rich Neighbor. Even so the Man that has Faith, and is not careful to maintain
good Works, his Faith in the issue can be no more profitable to him, than a few
good Words from a rich uncharitable Man can be helpful to his poor, famishing
Neighbor. For what can it benefit a Man to believe in Christ, unless he lives
and behaves himself as every sincere Christian ought to do. The Act of Faith
is, no doubt, good in itself; but if the Man possessed of it, does no more good
through its Influence than if he had it not; he may be said to have a good
Gift, but is never the better for it: It Is like a Treasure which a Man hides in
the Earth and there lets it remain, without ever useing it; and so the Man
reaps no more real good from it, than if he actually had it not. Such a Faith
therefore as is not accompanied with good Works is no better than a dead Faith,
because it is useless and unprofitable.

The Doctrine of our final Justification by Faith only, and by imputed
Righteousness, so grossly explained, as to supersede all our own Endeavors to
obey Gods Laws, through Christ who strengthens us; however comfortable it may
be to such as are resolved to live wickedly, and yet intend to get to Heaven at
last, in a shorter and easier Way than the true Gospel-Scheme of Salvation has
laid down; yet sure I am, the Hopes of such Hypocrites will perish; for our
blessed Savior, who taught all necessary Truth, speaks no such comfort in his
Sermons to impenitent Sinners; no, on the contrary he severely threatens those
who continue in any known Sin, and break the least of his Commandments; that
they shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Should the Solifidian Scheme
be embraced with all the absurd Consequences, as it is inculcated by Some; it
could not fail (according to its natural tendency) to have a bad Effect upon
Men's Manners: It would make them disparage virtuous Actions, and disregard
Morality, even Christian Morality, as a mean and low attainment. This must in
some Degree obstruct the Propagation of the Gospel: and be an Obstacle to the
Conversion of sensible and understanding Men either Jews or Heathens. How could
we demonstrate to them the excellency of Christianity, or show them the
advantage of it, or prevail with them to embrace it, if they must renounce
their Reason and part with their Morality in the Exchange? This would
deservedly render it to the Jews a Stumbling Block, and to the Greeks
Foolishness. This is moreover a rejecting the Commands of God (for which our
Lord severely reproved the Pharisees, Mark 7. 9.) that Men may keep their own
Traditions, i.e. may strictly adhere to the Prejudices and distinguishing
however unscriptural or unreasonable Tenets of a Party. This is certainly in
the most obvious Sense to make void the Law of Faith, which is the Rule and
Measure whereby our Lives are to be reformed and governed; because if good
Works are not necessary to our Pardon and justification, for what are they
necessary? And if they are not for our acceptance with God, or at all
necessary; what reason has any Man to concern or trouble himself about them? St
Paul himself rejects this wild Hypothesis with great and just abhorrence; Romans
3. 31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid. God forbid indeed
that the Statutes of the Lord, which are right, pure and rejoice the Heart,
should be abrogated and made void, and that too by Faith; by the Faith of the
glorious Gospel, that noble and excellent Institution for the Promotion of
holiness and happiness among Men; that last and most perfect Application of the
Divine Physician for the recovery and Restoration of a sinful and degenerate
World.

Again Ildly St James argues that Faith without Works is but a dead Faith,
because it cannot be showen. It has no Proofs, no Evidences, is like a Cause
without Effects; and for any thing that appears, is as it were not existent.
This much the Apostle intimates in the Words of my Text, Saving show me thy
Faith without thy Works; and I will show thee my Faith by my Works. By which
manner or Expression it is manifestly implied, that true Faith may be known by
good Works, as a good Tree is known by good Fruits, but cannot without them.
For in the Name of Goodness, how can he, that does not practice according to
his Profession, make it appear that he believes what he pretends to be
persuaded of? Is it not commonly observed that Men act, even in their worldly
Affairs, according to their real Persuasions? Thus if any prudent Person firmly
believes, that some particular acquaintance of his own will prove a good
Friend, an useful Benefactor to him; he will by all proper Means seek to
ingratiate himself more and more, and to court and secure his Countenance and
Favor. Or if one should be really persuaded, that at such a Time and such a
Place, he shall reap some considerable Benefit and Advantage, he will be sure
to give his punctual attendance, for fear of losing so fair an Opportunity; and
so it is in many other Cases.

If therefore Men pretend to be Christians, and yet do not live as becomes the
Disciples of the meek and holy Jesus. It they profess to believe the holy
Scriptures, and yet do not observe what they plainly teach and enjoin; if they
are ashamed of found religious Principles, because they are run down by Numbers
and will not turn to present Account. Why, these are shrewd, nay certain Signs
that they do not truly and really believe what they pretend, so that Faith in
this respect also is but a dead Faith; it brings forth no Fruit, has no proper
Evidences to prove it; nay the want of good Works rather proves it to be only a
false, pretended and hypocritical Faith: For that Faith is only Fancy which
thinks to be crowned without Obedience. If our Principles and Practices be not
of a Piece, if they do not mutually support and adorn each other, we are not
raised to newness of Life, but are still dead in our Sins.

I shall only add at present, that without all doubt, our Justification in this
Life must, proceed by the very same Measures, that it will do at the last Day,
when we shall publicly receive it from the Mouth of our Supreme Judge; who
has before hand told us, that the gr^^^ Question will then be, How we have
lived? What good, beneficent and charitable Actions we have done? And as we
shaall be able in the Affirmative or Negative to answer these Questions, so
shall we be finally justified or condemned. Our Lord and Saviors great Design
was to make us happy by making us holy; so St Paul expressly declares, Tit. 2.
14. Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem as from all Iniquity, and
purify to himself a peculiar People zealous of good Works. And exceeding
Strange it is, any Person should think or teach otherwise, who has with any
attention read the holy Scriptures, in which we are commanded to give Diligence
to make our Calling and Election sure; and to work out our Salvation with fear
and trembling.

What remains to be said on this Subject, I shall refer to the Afternoon.

Consider what you have heard at this Time, and God grant you Understanding in
all Things necessary to Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord-; to whom etc.

SERMON II.
JAMES II. 18. Yea a Man may say, thou have Faith and I have Works, show me thy
Faith without thy Works, and I will show the my Faith by my Works.
AFter I had this Morning explained these Words, I showed in the Is It Place,
that Faith was absolutely necessary to Salvation; because it is the very
Foundation of a religious and devout frame of Soul; the first Principle of the
Christian Life, and the Master Spring that excites and guides our spiritual
Motions, toward the attainment of everlasting Salvation: For according to our
blessed Saviors express Declaration, He that believes and is baptized shall
be saved; and if ye believe not that I am he, ( viz. the promised Messiah) ye
shall die in your Sins. Unbelief affronts God, and is a manifest Contempt of
our Saviors Goodness, and does what it can to defeat his gracious Designs to
save Mankind.

In the IId Place I proposed to show, that Faith alone is not sufficient unto
Salvation unless it be accompanied with good Works; such Works as the precepts
of the Gospel enjoin and require, when St. Paul affirms we are justified by
Faith, he means an active and lively Faith, which approves itself by a sincere
Obedience, and that too rendered easy and practicable by the Succors of
Heaven, by the Grace and Strength of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Apostle St.
James proves in this Chapter, that Faith when it does not produce good Works,
is dead, lifeless and unactive, and by a necessary Consequence is insufficient
to Justification and Salvation.

The first Argument which he makes use of to this purpose is ver. 14. The Faith
that Justifies must not only be a bare Assent of the Understanding to the
Gospel, but must include Obedience to the Commands thereof; and if it does not,
it no more deserves the Name of Faith, than good Words to a Man in want
deserves the Name of Charity.

The IId Argument is contained in my Text, which proves that Faith may he
showed by good Works, but cannot without them. A Man may pretend that he
believes; but if his Practice be disgreble to his Profession, it is the
shrewdest Sign in the World, that he does not believe what he pretends. If our
Principles and Practices do not mutually support and adorn each other, we are
not raised to newness of Life, but are still dead in our Sins. But to proceed,

A IIId Argument is advanced in the Context, to prove that Faith without Works
is but a dead Faith; because it is no more, nor nothing better, than what even
Devils themselves have. This St. James plainly intimates in the 19, and 20 ver.
-- Thou believe, says he, that there is one God, thou do well; the Devils
also believe and tremble. Are these wicked and unclean Spirits not destitute of
Faith; what a woeful and desperate Condition then must such amonq Christians be
in, who continue in a State of gross or affected Infidelity; not only void of
Faith, but Opposers of it too? Seeing in this Case, they not only fall short of
the Seize of Devils; but also go as great, if not greater, lengths in
their Enmity to Faith the Faith of the Gospel; for the Devils both believe and
tremble. We read in the Oracles of sacred Truth, that these evil Spirits have
several Times made open Confession of some of the prime Articles of the
Christian Faith; Thus Mark 1. 24. the unclean Spirits its fell down before
Christ, and confessed him to be Jesus of Nazareth, the holy One of God. And Chapter
5. 7. The Legion of Devils which entered into the Herd of Swine, acknowledged
that Jesus was the Son of the most high God. Thus likewise the Damsel,
possessed with a Spirit of Divination, told the People of St. Paul and his
Companions; that these Men were the Servants of the most high God, which show
unto us the way of Salvation, Acts 16. 17.

From all which it undeniably appears, that the Devils are not destitute of
Faith, since they have confessed that Christ is the Son of God; and that his
Gospel and the Doctrine of the Apostles instruct us how to walk in the Paths of
Righteousness, that lead directly to the Gates of Heaven. These are prime
Articles of the Christian Faith: But can any Man be so absurd, as to think he
can be justified and saved, whilst he has nothing more to qualify him for, or
to entitle him to Salvation, than those impure Spirits have? Can any Man be so
unreasonable, as to imagine, that Faith will be sufficient to justify him before
God, which carries him no greater length than what these accursed Spirits have
attained to? They have Faith, but want obedience; they can believe, it seems,
but cannot do well; whereas Men, by Gods preventing and assisting Grace, can
both believe and do well, if they be not wanting to themselves in the use of
the necessary and appointed Means. And therefore if, when God enables them,
they resist his Spirit, and will not endeavor to do more than Devils; what are
they better, I had almost said how much worse are they than these?

The IVth Argument urged by St. James, to prove; that Faith alone is not
sufficient to Salvation; is, because it is different from, and unlike to that
Faith, which God approved in his Saints and faithful Servants of old. Thus he
instances in Abraham and Rahab, (ver. 21 and 25.) who were approved of, and
rewarded by God, for showing their Faith by their Works. As to Abraham, was not
he, says the Apostle, justified by works (proceeding from his Faith) he
believed God, showed his Faith, very great Faith in Gods Power and Promises, by
leaving his Country and Friends, by offering his Son, his only Son Isaac, and
paying an entire Obedience to God's Commands, however seemingly severe they
were. The Faith which produced these good Works was imputed to him for
Righteousness; and upon that account he was called the Friend of God.

And as to Rahab, was not she, says St. James, justified by Works (proceeding
from her Faith) when she had received the Messengers and sent them out another
way. That she had a strong Faith in God, the Apostle to the Hebr. 11. 31.
testifies, and she herself declared it saying, Josh. 2. 11. The Lord your God,
he is God in Heaven above and in Earth beneath; and because she believed that
God would give the Land of Canaan to his peculiar People the Isralites, she
therefore acted according to her belief, and received into her House the Men
that were sent to spy out the Land; where she concealed them from their
Enemies, and saved them from falling into their Hands; and by so doing
preserved herself and Family from the Destruction that fell upon the City of
Jericho, where she dwelt.

Now if our Faith were like theirs as lively, strong and vigorous; the Effects
of it too would be as great, visible and conspicuous, had we the like Occasion
to show it. Were we thoroughly and habitually pessuaded that all the precepts
of our Religion are the express Laws of the ever-living Sin-revenging God; and
that all the Promises and Threatenings of the Gospel will one Day be verified
and made good; what manner of Persons would we strive to be in all holy
Conservation and Godliness? How would the lively Hopes of another World raise
us above the Vanities of this present Life; and set us out of the reach of the
most powerful Temptations, that this World can assault us withal: Such a Faith
would certainly induce us to do all things with a view to Eternity, with a due
Regard to that solemn and awful Account we must all one Day make to the
Sovereign Judge of the whole Universe. Such a Faith would never suffer us to be
biased by worldly Interest or selfish Views, in Opposition to sacred Truth, to
Christian Unity, and to the Dictates of a well-inform'd Conscience, that
faithful Monitor and Gods Vicegerent within us. Abrahams's outward Actions
declared his inward Principles; his Obedience was proportioned to his Faith;
because the one was strong and lively, the other was constant and uniform;
because his Faith was not staggered, he was called the Father of the Faithful;
and became an illustrious Example to others of sincere persevering Obedience in
the most difficult Instance. Now, faith the Lord, I know that thou love me:
because thou have not witheld thy Son, thine only Son from me.

Besides this Example, in the 11th Chapter to the Hebr. there is recorded a large
Catalogue of Saints, who showed their Faith by their Works. Abel the first that
suffered for Righteousness and Piety toward God, by Faith offered a more
excellent and acceptable sacrifice. Enoch's Faith had so good an influence on
his Life, that by a virtuous Conversation he pleased God, and was translated
into Heaven. By Faith Noah was preserved from two general Deluges, the one of
Sin, the other of Water overflowing the Earth; because he obeyed Gods Command
by preparing an Ark to the saving of his Family, by the which he condemned the
old World that believed not his Prediction, and became Heir of Righteousness.
Moses by Faith became an illustrious Example of self-denial; renouncing the
Honors, the Riches and Pleasures of a Court; and choosing rather to suffer
Affliction with the People of God. The same power (...) Principle afterward
enabled him to encounter and outbrave the obstinacy of an hardened Pharaoh; and
to preside over a most stubborn, ungrateful and mutinous Generation of People.
These holy Men of old with many others by their good Works showed their Faith,
and their Conduct was approved of God: But we do not find in all the holy
Scriptures one single Instance of any Person, whose Faith without Works
procured him acceptance with God. If any think that the Faith of the penitent
Thief upon the Cross is an Exception to this; they should consider that this
was an extraordinary Case: Besides was not his confussing Christ at his very
lowest Ebb; his sharp Rebuke to the other Thief, and his earnest Prayer, etc.
the proper Fraim and Works of Faith.
As a true and lively Faith is the pure Fountain of excellent Actions, he sure
Foundation of holy hope and the foretaste of eternal Glory; so good Works are
the genuine Fruits of saving Faith, and living concientiously in Obedience to
Gods Commands, is the ultimate End of every Article of our Belief, and of every
Religious Institution. Vicious and corrupts Minds therefore, who hate to be
reformed, and are Enemies to moral Virtues, which are the eternal and
unalterable Laws of God, must of Course be averse to the true Doctrine of the
Gospel; or if they profess Christianity, they always place Religion in the
frequent use of bare outward Means, Forms and Ceremonies; or in certain Systems
of Opinions consistent with unrighteous, uncharitable, disorderly Practice and
Behavior. But such Persons are miserably deceived: For in this (faith St. John
1 Ep. 3. 10.) the Children of God are manifest, and the Children of the Devil;
whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his
Brother.

From what has been said, I think, it may appear plain and evident to every
candid, unprejudiced Person, that their Notion of Faith is not just and true,
who assert that a firm Belief, a strong Persuasion, or as they are wont to
express it in unscriptural Phrases, a Recumbence, Resting or Relying on Jesus
Christ Justifies Sinners, without any manner of regard to the other Terms of
the New and better Covenant. This Notion of Faith as it is without any good
Foundation from Divine Revelation, so it very much tends to overthrow all the
Arguments and Motives to a holy Life, contained in the Bible; and can never be
fairly reconciled with those Texts which make Repentance, good Works and new
Obedience absolutely necessary to Salvation: For is it not as plain in many
Passages of holy Scripture, as words can express it, that to repent, to turn to
God, and to do works meet for repentance are required of us, in order to obtain
the pardon of our Sins, and the Salvation of our Souls.

So that Faith alone does not justify; and indeed, strictly speaking, neither
Faith nor Works justify; i.e. neither of them is, or can be the meritorious
Cause of our Justification: It Is God that justifies through the Merits of Jesus
Christ. Faith, it is true, is an instituted means, upon which God has promised
us an Interest in Christ's merits; but so likewise are Repentance, Prayer and
Obedience; and that Faith only is to be accounted justifying, which is
operative and discovers itself by holiness of Life; without which no Man
shall see the Lord. The good Works we should perform, the evil Actions we
should avoid in this Life, and the Rewards and Punishments we are to expect in
the next, ought frequently to employ our Thoughts, and to be the subjects of
our Religious Discourses.

Let ignorant or ill-designing Men call insisting on such Topics moral
Preaching; yet sure I am it is preaching after the Pattern of our Saviors
Divine Sermons: And St. Paul often made Justice and Temperance, Humility,
Contentment, and a Judgment to come, the chief Subjects of his Discourses; and
so doing preached Jesus Christ, and convinced and converted many to the Faith
of the Gospel. The Gospel of Christ does abundantly strengthen and confirm the
moral Law, by repeating and renewing its Precepts, by giving them a fresh
Promulgation, and stamping them with the Impress of greater Authority; by
clearing and improving the Sense and Obligation of them; and by adding thereto
new express precepts of its own; such as the Love of Enemies, poverty of Spirit
and Self-denial; and finally by enforcing the old and new Precepts, by more
powerful and awakening Sanctions, by more precious Promises and severer
Threatenings, by better Evidence and a greater Assurance of both, as bringing
Life and Immortality to light; which before the Son of Righteousness appeared
was clouded with much Darkness and Obscurity; and which Men either did not
heartily and fully believe, or upon very uncertain and unsatisfying Principles.

In all these respects the Gospel of Jesus Christ is the greatest establishment
of the Law; and the Christian Faith rightly understood lays an indispensible
Obligation on all its Votaries, to a suitable Improvement in all the Virtues
and moral Duties, (...) of a private and social Life. When we affirm that Faith
ingrasts us into Christ; let us withal consider what Christ himself faith, Jo.
15. 2. Every plant in me that bears not Fruit, he (the Father) takes away.
Though by Faith we are inserted into the Vine, yet if the Branch ingrafted be not
parturient and fruitful, it will be quite cut off from the Root, and thrown
into everlasting burning. It Is often said in Scripture, the Just shall live by
Faith, the plain meaning is, no Man shall live by Faith, but he who hungers and
thirsts, and endeavors after Righteousness; the unjust and the unrighteous Man
has no portion of that happiness. Thus again when it is said, we are justified
by the Death of Christ; it is the (...) as to (...), that Christ died for us; he
died for the Sin and (...) again or our Justification; i.e. by (...) he has
obtained this Power (...) this Mercy, that if we believe and obey (...) shall
be justified and made capable of all (...) Privileges of his Kingdom. But.

III. I proposed to show by what Instances of good Works. Man ought chiefly to
manifest their Faith. And in these are sumed up by St. Paul, Phil. 4. 8.
Finally Brethren, says he, whatsoever things are true, whatsover things are
honest, just, pure, lovely and of good report; if there be any Virtue, and if
there be any Praise, think on these Things. I shall reduce what have to say on
this Head to the following particulars, I we ought to show our Faith by our
sincere (...) and Devotion; having a deep sense of Gods (...) and continual
Presence with us impressed upon on Minds, and of our own absolute Dependence
upon him; that so we may walk humbly with our God, as his Son our Savior has
taught us; frequenting his public Worship, and living in the due and serious
use of his holy Ordinances, at proper Times and appointed Seasons. God, the
Object of all our religious Addresses, is a Spirit; and must therefore (as our
Savior argues) be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, with all sincerity, with
all the faculties and powers of our Minds, with the utmost intention, strength
and vigor of our Thoughts: We must always heartily endeavor to be that in our
Lives, which we beg in our Prayers to be made by the Divine Grace and Spine;
and which we promise solemnly at our Baptism, and in the other holy.Sacrament.

If we would show our Faith, we must have our Conversation much in Heaven, and
look beyond Things present and sensible, to things which arc not seen, but are
eternal; laboring principally to secure the great Interests of another World;
and referring all the Actions of this short and dying Life, to that State which
will shortly begin, but never have an End. If we are not thus serious and
servent in our Devotions, and hearty and constant in our Endeavors to glorify
God, to lead holy and Christian Lives; all other pretenses to Salvation will
most certainly fail us: It will signify nothing to rely upon any other
Election, than that which is made sure, and may be shown by a lively Faith and
virtuous Corversation. We are all to be esteemed the Elect of God, if we live
as becomes the Disciples of Christ Jesus; but shall be found Reprobates if we
do not. We should therefore

2dly. Show our Faith by the habitual Practice of those Virtues, which the
Gospel warmly recommends; such as Meekness and Humility, Patience and
Contentedness, Sobriety and Temperance, Purity and Chastity, Justice and
Honesty, Forbearance and Forgiveness Brotherly Love and Charity. These are the
genuine Effects of Faith, the blessed Fruits of the Spirit; and must be studied
and carefully practiced by all the sincere Followers, and true Disciples of the
Lord Jesus; who was made Flesh and dwelt among us, that in his own Person and
Life he might give us an Example of all that Purity and Holiness, of all that
Virtue and Godliness of Living, which his Laws require us to perform. Religion,
true and reasonable Religion did always chiefly consist in Immitation of God,
in as near a resemblance, as is consistent with with finite frail human Nature,
of those Excellencies which shine forth in the best and most perfect Being. But
we may now strive to imitate him with much greater ease and advantage, since
God was pleased to become Man, on purpose to purchase Peace and Pardon for us;
to turn us from Darkness to Light, and to show us how Men may become like to
God.

We cannot show our Faith in him, unless on the other Hand we abstain from
every appearance of evil, and renounce having fellowship with the unfruitful
Works of Darkness, we must put away from us all Pride, especially spiritual
Pride, and Ambition, all uncharitableness and evil-speaking, Hatred and Malice,
spiteful Resentment, Cruelty and Injustice. Our blessed Savior came into the
World to root out and destroy these Vices, and others of a like Nature; and
therefore so long as we continue in any of them, we may well be construed to
deny the Lord that bought us, and to put him to an open Shame; so far would we
be from demeaning ourselves, as highly becomes his Discipies; or showing forth
our Faith in him.

To teach otherwise is to transform and disfigure the Gospel of Christ and to
undermine the fundamental Design thereof; for if we believe in God, and trust
to be saved by the Merits and Intercession of our gracious Redeemer, we must be
careful to shun every thing displeasing in his sight, and to live as becomes
rational Creatures, though sold under Sin, yet ransomed by his precious Blood.
This very Faith would naturally engage us to be vigilant and circumspect, to
watch and guard against Temptations, to be wise as Serpents and harmless as
Doves; For Christ manifested in the Flesh, and the other Mysteries of our Faith
are Mysteries of Godliness, and designed to enlighten our Understandings, to
warm and purify our Hearts, to raise and sublimate our Affections, to enliven
and extend our Hopes, and to command a suitable Life, a correspondent Practice.

Once more, we should show our Faith by being steadfast, fixed and unshaken in
the Profession of it, notwithstanding all Temptations or specious Preten^^^^
all Discouragements or Allurements to the contrary. We were made to discern and
embrace Truth, and have Faculties whereby we may fix upon sure principles of
Action; when we do this deliberately, and firmly adhere to Truth and Right, we
answer the End for which (as Job expresses it, 32. 8) the Inspiration of the
Almighty has given us Understading: But when we are unstable and draw back
precipitantly, or float under uncertainties, we discover great Weakness of
Reason, and want of Consideration: St. Paul does not give such the Name of Men,
but calls them Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of
Doctrine, by the slight of Men and cunning Craftiness, whereby they lie in wait
to deceive, Ephesians. 4. 14. In holy Scripture there is nothing more earnestly and
frequently recommended to us, than a steadfastness of Faith in Christ; a being
rooted and built up and stablish'd in the Faith, as we have been Taught; in
that Faith which has been received and believed in the Christian Church from
the beginning, though not: without Opposition from Satan and his indefatigable
Emissaries. But the Foundation of God stands sure; let us adhere to the Form
of sound Words: We must not affect Christianity, which is a truly divine and
heavenly Institution, with Indifference and Lukewarmness; nor fluctuate, as it
were, between two Opinions; for if we have no settled Principles, we will be in
danger, like a Ship without Ballast, of being overset by every sudden. blast of
Delusion and Imposture.

No Man therefore should take up his Religion, the Profession of his Faith upon
trust; and yield in that point, wherein his eternal Welfare is concerned, to
the plausible pretenses of Infallibility, to the Authority or Recommendation of
others perhaps more inconsiderate, rash, and ignorant than himself: But it
should be a rational Service, the result of our own mature, impartial,
well-weigh'd Consideration; and what we find consonant and agreeable to the
Dictates of sound Reason and divine Revelation. By these doubtless every Man
should judge for himself, since in the Day of Judgment he must stand or fall by
his own Conscience.

The Church, to which we belong, encourages all Men to search and enquire into
her Doctrines; to bring them fairly to the Light of Scripture and unbyased
Reason; and desires to be concluded by their Verdict The Scriptures, says St.
Paul, are able to make us wise unto Salvation; they are the safe and standing
Rule both of Faith and Manners, so perfect and complete, that the Apostle to
the Gal. 1. 8. denounces a Curse against any that teach another Gospel, or Rule
of Life different from this. Let every one therefore examine his Faith, by
reading and meditating seriously on the holy Scriptures. This is required and
enjoined by our great Lord and Master, Jo. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in
them ye have eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me. It was by
Arguments drawn from them, that our blessed Savior repelled and confuted the
impudent Assaults and crafty Insinuations of the Devil; that his Apostles both
planted and waterd his Church; and that the primitive, pious Fathers and
Councils opposed and baffled the Heresies that sprung up among them; and
vindicated and established the purity of the Christian Faith, and the necessity
of sincere Obedience.

And indeed the best way to understand the Mysteries of Faith, is to practice
according to the plain and intelligible precepts of the Gospel; the further we,
by Grace assisting us, proceed in Goodness, the more Light will gradually break
in upon us; for the Path of the Just (says Solomon Prove. 4. 28.) is as the the
shinning Light, that shines more and more unto the perfect Day, The sober
regular Conduct of Men's lives, has a natural tendency to clear and enlarge the
intellectual Faculties, and when our ways please the Lord, we may expect all
necessary Communications of his Spirit: When we delight in the habitual
Practice of Virtue, we may with confidence pray in the Words of the Royal
Psalmist (Pl. 119. 18.) Open thou mine Eyes, that I may see the wonderful
Things of thy Law.

But how can it be expected that the wicked and profane should be admitted
into the Holy of Holies; or that those who wallow in the gross Pollutions of
Sin, should enjoy the secret Communications of Gods holy Spirit; or that the
greater Sinners Men are, they should for that Reason, it seems, and instantly
become the more glorious Saints. St. Paul, it is true, says, It is a faithful
Saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World to
save Sinners; but most certainly Christ came not to save obstinate, impenitent,
persevering Sinners: No, against such the full Vials of Divine wrath and
vengeance are Threatened: But they are only the returning, penitent and
reforming Sinners, that have any just Claim to the Merits of our Saviors
precious Death and gracious Intercession; and to them alone is that faithful
Saying to be applied.

We must not think it is possible for us to mount above the Clouds, through the
Vapors of repeated Debaucheries; or to jump directly out of a Dalilahs Lap
into Abraham's Bosom; what Communion has Light with Darkness? what Concord has
Christ with Belief? None surelv. They only that have done good shall go into
Life everlasting; but they that have done evil into everlasting Punishment. The
Time will come (says Bishop Tailor) when it: will more avail thee, O Man, to
have subdued one Lust, than to have known all Mysteries. And though I have all
Faith, says St. Paul, and have not Charity, (that quiet and peacable, that
kind, benevolent and social Virtue Charity) I am nothing, i. e. he ingeniously
concluded, he had no title to the savor of God, if he should disgrace the
Christian Profession by harshly cesuring others, by treating his fellow
Creatures with insulting rudeness. It is highly inexcusable, and altogether
inconsistent with Christian Charity to virify and defame, to accuse and condemn
our Brethren both the Living and the Dead; but I only mention this, and am
sorry there should be Occasion for it.

To. conclude, Let all of us, My Brethren, as we tender our present or future
Happiness; let all of us, at all Time?, endeavor to frame our Lives according
to our Christian Faith. Let our Belief have its due Influence upon our daily
Actions and Dealings with others; that we may not only be just and charitable,
but candid and inoffensive; as far as possible living peaceably with all Men.
Our Zeal even for our Faith, far less for uncertain, controverted Opinions,
should never outrun the Bounds of Christian Prudence, of Obedience to
Superiors, and Condescension to Inferiors. By doing these Things in the fear of
God, we show forth our Faith; If not, all the Precepts, the Promises and
Threatenings of the Gospel will rise up in Judgment against us; the Articles of
our Faith will be so many Articles of our Accusation; and it will be a weighty
Aggravation of the Charge laid against us; that we Professed the Christian
Faith, but lived like unbelieving Pagans.

The Christian Religion is so well confirmed by clear and undeniable Evidence,
that not to believe it is very absurd, unreasonable and impious: But to be
fully persuaded that it is true, and yet to live wickedly as if it were false,
is the greatest Contradiction to Truth that can be, and manifestly exposes to
the greatest Danger: For the whole World cannot produce a more wretched and
miserable Person, than a deluded and degenerate Christian; who falls into
unavoidable Perdition, after he has grossly abused the greatest Advantages, and
wilfully neglected the best Opportunities of being forever and infinitely
blessed and happy.

That we may avoid falling into so deplorable Circumstances, let us in earnest
and servent Prayer beg of God, who has promised to give to them that ask him,
the necessary Assistance of his Grace and Spirit, to enable us to grow in every
Grace and Virtue, and to abound in all the Fruits of Faith and Righteousness,
which are by Jesus Christ to the Glory of God.

Which that we may all do, God of his infinite Mercy grant through the Merits
of Jesus Christ our Mediator and Redeemer.

To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be ascribed, etc.

FINIS.

