OBSERVATIONS On that terrible Disease Vulgarly called The Throat-Distemper.
WITH Advices as to the Method of Cure.

In a Letter to a Friend.

By J. DICKINSON, A.M.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queenstreet, over
against the Prison. 1740.

To the READER.
T HE Reverend Mr. Dickinson, when at Boston nigh two Years since, being
consulted by several Gentlemen (anxious for themselves and others) about a most
malignant Disease, which had raged for a long Time in the Place where he lives,
and which had commenced its fatal Progress in these Parts, was desired to draw
up his Observations in writing, with a View to printing the same for the
public Benefit. Upon that Occasion he wrote the following Letter: which now
that we have a fresh Alarm by a Return of that astonishing Distemper among us,
it is thought a proper Season to publish it for a common Good.

Several of our ablest Physicians, upon the perusal of it, have expressed their
Satisfaction in the Author's Account of the various Phenomenon of the Malady
and his Method of Cure -- His Observations are the Result of a long Series of
Practice and Experience, and seem founded in the exactest Judgment. His
Informations are as full and particular, as any we have seen, and studiously
delivered in the easiest Language, to accommodate unlearned Readers. -- The
surprising Mortality of this Distemper is enough to attract every one's serious
Attention; and in such an extraordinary Case every compassionate Friend to
Mankind, will be ready to impart any useful Reflections: Which is a sufficient
Apology both for the Author and the Publisher.

Cambridge, Aug. 5. 1740.
A LETTER, etc.
SIR,
IN Compliance with your Desire, I shall now communicate to you some of those
Observations I have made upon that extraordinary Disease, which has made such
awful Desolations in the Country, commonly called the Throat-Distemper.

This Distemper first began in these Parts, in Febr. 1734,5 The long
Continuance and universal Spread of it among us, has given me abundant
Opportunity to be acquainted with it in all its Forms.

The first Assault was in a Family about ten Miles from me, which proved fatal
to eight of the Children in about a Fortnight. Being called to visit the
distressed Family, I found upon my arrival there, one of the Children newly
dead, which gave me the Advantage of a Dissection, and thereby a better
Acquaintance with the Nature of the Disease, than I could otherwise have had:
From which (and other like) Observations, I came pretty early into the Methods
of Cure that I have not yet seen Reason to change.

There have few Distempers been ever known, that have put on a greater variety
of Types, and appeared with more different Symptoms, than this has done; which
makes it necessary to be something particular in describing it, in order to set
it in a just View, and to propose the Methods of Cure necessary in its several
Appearances. And

1. I take this Disease to be naturally an Eruptive milliary Fever: and when it
appears as such, it usually begins with a Shivering, a Chill, or with
Stretching, or (...); which is quickly succeeded with a sore Throat, a
Tumefaction of the Tonsils, Uvula and Epiglottis, and sometimes of the Jaws,
and even of the whole Throat and Neck. The Fever is often acute, the Pulse
quick and high, and the Countenance florid. The Tonsils first, and in a little
Time the whole Throat covered with a whitish Crustula, the Tongue furred, and
the Breath fetid. Upon the 2d, 3d, or 4th Day, if proper Methods are used, the
Patient is covered with a milliary Eruption, in some exactly resembling the
Measles, in others more like the Scarlet Fever (for which Distemper it has
frequently been mistaken) but in others it very much resembles the confluent
Small Pox When the Eruption is finished, the Tumefaction every where subsides,
the Fever abates, and the Slough in the Throat casts off and falls. The
Eruption often disappears about the 6th or 7th Day; though it sometimes continues
visible much longer. After the Eruption is over, the Cuticle scales and falls
off, as in the Conclusion of the Scarlet Fever. If after the Crise of this
Disease Purging be neglected, the Sick may seem to recover Health and Strength
for a while; yet they frequently in a little Time fall again into grievous
Disorders; such as a great prostration of Strength, loss of Appetite, hectical
Appearances, sometimes great Dimness of Sight, and often such a weakness in the
Joints as deprives them of the Use of all their Limbs; and some of them are
affected with scorbutic Symptoms of almost every Kind.

When this Distemper appears in the Form now described, it is not very
dangerous: I have seldom seen any die with it, unless by a sudden Looseness,
that calls in the Eruptions; or by some very irregular Treatment. But there are
several other very different Appearances of the Disease, which are attended
with more frightful and deadly Consequences.

2. It frequently begins with a flight Indisposition, much resembling an
ordinary Cold, with a liftless Habit, a flow and scarce discernible Fever, some
soreness of the Throat and Tumefaction of the Tonsils; and perhaps a running of
the Nose, the Countenance pale, and the Eyes dull and heavy. The Patient is not
confined, nor any Danger apprehended for some Days, till the Fever gradually
increases, the whole Throat, and sometimes the Roof of the Mouth and Nostrils,
are covered with a cankerous Crust, which corrodes the contiguous Parts, and
frequently terminates in a mortal Gangreen, if not by seasonable Applications
prevented. The Stomach is sometimes, and the Lungs often, covered with the same
Crustula. The former Case is discovered by a vehement Sickness of the Stomach,
a perpetual vomiting; and sometimes by ejecting of black or rusty and fetid
Matter, having Scales like Bran mixed with it, which is a certain Index of a
fatal Mortification. -- When the Lungs are thus affected, the Patient is first
afflicted with a dry hollow Cough, which is quickly succeeded with an
extraordinary Hoarseness and total Loss of the Voice, with the most distressing
asthmatick Symptoms and difficulty of Breathing, under which the poor miserable
Creature struggles, until released by a perfect Suffocation, or stoppage of
Breath. -- This last has been the fatal Symptom, under which the most have
sunk, that have died in these Parts. And indeed there have comparatively but
few recovered, whose Lungs have been thus affected. All that I have seen to get
over this dreadful Symptom, have fallen into a Ptyalism or Salivation, equal to
a petit Flux de Bouche, and have by their perpetual Cough expectorated
incredible Quantities of a tough whitish Slough from their Lungs, for a
considerable Time together. And on the other Hand, I have seen large Pieces of
this Crust, several Inches long and near an Inch broad, torn from the Lungs by
the vehemence of the Cough, without any Signs of Digestion, or possibility of
obtaining it.

Before I dismiss this Head, I must observe, that the Fever which introduces
the terrible Symptoms now described, does not always make such a slow and
gradual Approach: but sometimes makes a fiercer Attack; and might probably be
thrown off by the Eruptions, and this Train of Terrors prevented, if proper
Methods were seasonably used.

3 This Distemper sometimes appears in the Form of an Erysipelas. The Face
suddenly inflames and swells, the Skin appears of a darkish Red, the Eyes are
closed with the Tumefaction which also sometimes extends through the whole Neck
and Chest. Blisters or other small Ulcers here and there break out upon the
Tumor, which corrode the adjacent Parts; and quickly bring on a Mortification,
if not by some happy Means prevented. Some that are thus affected, are at the
same Time exercised with all the terrible internal Symptoms above described;
and some with none of them. If this inflamed Tumor be not quickly discussed, it
will (I think) always prove mortal.

4 Another Appearance of this Disease is in external Ulcers: which break out
frequently behind the Ears; sometimes they cover the whole Head and Forehead;
sometimes they appear in the Armpits, Groins, Navil, Buttocks or Seat; and
sometimes in any of the extreme Parts. These are covered with the same Kind of
whitish Crustula, above described, which also corrodes the contiguous Parts;
and quickly, if not prevented, ends in a Mortification. I have ordinarily
observed, that if these outward Ulcers are speedily cured, the Throat and
internal Parts remain free from the above mentioned terrible Symptoms;
otherwise the miserable Patient must pass through the whole tragical Scene of
Terrors before represented, if an external Gangreen don't terminate his Agony
and Life together.

5. Sometimes this Disease appears first in Bubo's under the Ears, Jaws, or
Chin, or in the ArmPits, or Groin. These, if quickly ripened, make a
considerable Discharge; which brings a salutary End to the Disease; otherwise
they quickly end in a fatal Mortification; or else bring on the whole
forementioned Tragedy.

6. This Disease appears sometimes in the Form of a Quinsey. The Lungs are
inflamed, the Throat and especially the Epiglottis exceedingly tumefied. In a
few Hours the Sick is brought to the Height of an Orthopnoea; and cannot
breathe but in an erect Posture, and then with great Difficulty and Noise. This
may be distinguished from an Angina, by the Crustula in the Throat, which
determines it to be a Sprout from the same Root with the Symptoms described
above. In this Case the Patient sometimes dies in twenty four Hours. I have not
seen any one survive the third Day. But through the divine Goodness these
Symptoms have been more rarely seen among us, and there have been but few in
this Manner snatched out of the World.

As the Symptoms of this Distemper are very different, so the Methods of Cure
should be respectively accommodated to them; and I shall therefore consider
them distinctly.

When this Distemper makes its Attack with the Symptoms of a high Fever, a
florid Countenance and c. (as in the first Case described) the first Intention,
to be pursued toward a Cure, is to bring out the Eruptions as soon as
possible; to which End, I order the Patient to be confined in Bed, and put into
a gentle breathing Sweat, till they appear. A Tea made with Virginian SnakeRoot
and English Saffron, with a few Grains of Cochineal; A Posset made with Carduus
Mariae boiled in Milk, and turned with Wine, the Lapis contrayerva, or
Gascoign-Powder; any or all of these, as Occasions requires, answer to this
Purpose, and seldom fail of Success.

One of the most dangerous Circumstances that attend this Disease, is a
Looseness, that frequently happens upon the first Appearance of the Eruptions;
which must be speedily restrained, and the Belly kept bound, left the morbisick
Matter, evaporated by the Pores, be recalled into the Blood, and prove suddenly
fatal. -- To that Purpose, I ordinarily advise to Venice-Treacle, or liquid
Laudanum, which commonly answer all Intentions. But if the Patient should be in
a dozing Habit, that these cannot be used, or if these should fail of Success,
any other Astringent may be used that is proper in a Diarrhoea.

The Ulcers in the Throat should be constantly cleansed, from the Time of their
first Appearance. I have found the following Method most successful to this
Purpose. Take Roman Vitriol, let it lie as near the Fire as a Man can bear his
Hand, till it be thoroughly calcined and turned white. Put about eight Grains
of this into half a Pint of (...): Lay down the Tongue with a Spatula; and
gently wash off as much of the Crust as will easily separate, with a fine Ragg
fastened to the End of a Probe, or Stick, and wet in this Liquor made warm. This
Operation should be repeated every three or four Hours.

After the Eruptions are quite gone, the Patient should be purged two or three
Times, to prevent the Consequences above described; and this Rule should be
observed in every Form of the Disease.

If after the Crise of this Disease, in any of its Appearances, the Sick should
fall into any of the Disorders mentioned under the first Head, such as Loss of
Strength, a feverish Habit, Dimness of Sight, Weakness of the Joints etc.
Repeated Purging, as far as the Patient's Strength will bear, with Elixir
Proprietatis given twice a Day in a Glass of generous Wine, will constantly
remove these Difficulties.

When this Disease makes a more slow and leisurely approach with a lingering
Fever, pale Countenance etc as described in the second Case; all Attempts to
bring out the milliary Eruptions seem in vain. And therefore, though the Sick may
be very much relieved by the diaphoretick Medicines above mentioned, if
repeatedly used during the Course of the Illness; yet these are not to be
depended upon for a Cure. But a brisk Purge should be also directed every third
Day, and those Catharticks that are mixed with Colomel or Mercurius dulcis, are
most likely to be serviceable, where the Age and Strength of the Patient will
bear it.

If there be an extreme nauseating, and vehement Sickness of the Stomach, that
cannot be otherwise quieted, an Emetick seems necessary; though I have not found
Encouragement to use vomiting Physic in any other Case.

The internal Ulcers of the Throat should be treated as above directed; but if
there be a great Tumefaction of the Glands, I order externally a Plaster of
Diachylon cum Gummi and de Ranis cum Mercurio mixed; and internally the
following Fumigation. Take Wormwood, Pennyroyal, the Tops of St. John's Wort,
Camomile-Flowers and Elder-Flowers, of each equal Parts; both very strong in
Water; when boiled, add as much Brandy or Rum as of this Decoction; steam the
Throat through a Tunnel, as hot as can be born, three or four Times a Day.

When the Lungs are seized with this cankerous Crustula, which is indicated by
the Cough and Hoarseness above described, Mercurial Catharticks frequently
repeated, seem the best of any Thing to promote Expectoration. I have also
found Success in the Use of the Syrup of red Poppies and Sperma Ceti mixed.

When this Distemper appears in the Form of an Erysipelas, I have used the
following Fomentation with good Success. Take Wormwood, Mint, Elder-Flowers,
Camomile Flowers, the Tops of St. John's Wort, Fennel Seeds pounded, and the
lesser Centaury, equal Parts: Infuse in go^d Brandy or Jamaica Rum, in a
Stone-Jugg well stopped, and kept hot by the Fire: wet a Flannel Cloth with
this; and after moderately squeezing out the Liquor, apply three or four double
to the Tumor, as hot as can be born, every Hour. -- In this Case I repeat
Purging, as above directed.

As for the external Ulcers above described (under the 4th Head) they may be
always safely and speedily cured, by applying once or twice a Day a good thick
Pledget of fine Tow dipped in the above described vitriolick Water. I have never
known this fail in a single Instance, when seasonably used. But then it must be
observed, that some of these Ulcers will require this Water much sharper with
the Vitriol, than others will bear. It should be so sharp as to bring off the
Slough, dry up the flow of corrosive Humors, and promote a Digestion: but it
must not be made a painful Caustic. In this the Practitioner's Discretion will
guide him.

I need not say any more respecting the Bubo's, mentioned under the fifth Head;
but that they must by all possible Means be ripened as quick as they can; and
launced as soon as they are digested and found to contain any Pus.

I have not yet found any effectual Remedy in the 6th and last Case described.

Upon the Disease in general, I have made the following Remarks; which perhaps
may be of some Use.

I have observed, that the more acute the Fever is on the first Seizure, the
less dangerous; because there is more Hope of bringing out the Eruptions.

I have observed, that there is more Danger of receiving Injury from a cold Air
in this, than in any eruptive Fever I ^^ve seen. The Eruptions are easily
struck in; and therefore there ought to be all possible Care, that the Sick be
not at all exposed to the Air, till the Eruptions are quite over and gone.

I have also observed, that there is much greater Danger from this Disease in
cold Weather, than in hot. In cold Weather it most commonly appears in the Form
described under the second Head; while on the contrary, a hot Season very much
forwards the Eruptions.

I have frequently observed, that once having this Disease is no Security
against a second Attack. I have known the same Person to have it four Times in
one Year; the last of which proved mortal. I have known Numbers, that have
passed through it in the eruptive Form in the Summer Season, that have died with
it the succeeding Fall or Winter: though I have never seen any upon whom the
Eruptions could be brought out more than once.

I have ordinarily observed, that those who die with this Disease, have many
Purple-Spots about them; which shows the Height of Malignity and Pestilential
Quality in this terrible Distemper.

Thus, SIR, I have endeavored in the most plain and familiar Manner to answer
your Demands. I have not attempted a Philosophical Inquiry into the Nature of
this Disease, nor a Rationale upon the Methods of Cure. I have meant no more
than briefly to communicate to you some of my Experiences in this Distemper,
which I presume is all you expect from me. If this proves of any Service, I
shall have Cause of Thankfulness: If not, you will kindly accept my willingness
to serve you, and to contribute what I can toward the Relief of the afflicted
and miserable.

I am, SIR, Your most humble Servant, JONATHAN DICKINSON.
Elizabeth Town, N. Jersey. Febr. 20, 1738, 9.
POSTSCRIPT.
SINCE I wrote this Letter, I am informed by a Gentleman of the Profession, who
has had very great Improvement in this Distemper, That he has found out a
Method of Cure, which seldom fails of Success in all the Forms of this Disease
herein described, (the first, fourth, and fifth only excepted, which should be
treated as above directed) and that is a Decoction of the Root of the Dart
Weed, or (as it is here called) the Squaw-Root. He orders about an Ounce of
this Root to be boiled in a Quart of Water, to which he adds when strained, a
Jill of Rum and two Ounces of Loaf-Sugar; and boils again to the Consumption of
one quarter Part. This he gives his Patients frequently to drink, and with this
orders them frequently to gargle their Throats; allowing no internal Medicine
but this only, during the whole Course of the Disease, excepting a Purge or two
in the Conclusion. I have seen a surprising Effect of this Method in one
Instance; and shall make what further Observations I can: And if this answers
my present Hopes, I shall endeavor to give you further Information.

The Dart-Weed grows with a strait Stalk six or eight Foot high, is jointed
every eight or ten Inches apart; and bears a large white Tassel on the Top,
when in the Flower. The Root is black and bittarish.

FINIS.

