A Humble DISCOURSE OF THE Incomprehensibleness OF GOD. IN Four SERMONS,
Preached at the Lecture in Boston. 1714.

By BENJAMIN COLMAN, M. A. Pastor of a Church in Boston.

With a PREFACE by the Reverend Mr PEMBERTON.

The Second EDITION.

De Deo etiam Vera dicere Periculosum est. BOSTON: Printed by J. DRAPER, for D.
HENCHMAN, over against the Brick Meeting House in Cornhil. MDCCXL.

The Epistle TO THE READER.
THE Understanding is the superior Faculty in Man, by which he is raised above
the Rest of the visible Creation: And as this Power is the Glory of humane
Nature; so the Perfection and Glory of this consists in the Knowledge of GOD.
All other Knowledge compared with this is mean and trivial; and will never make
us wiser or better, unless placed in Subordination and Subserviency to our
Acquaintance with the Blessed GOD. This Knowledge is not perfected in a bare
Contemplation of the DEITY; but when true and genuine will exercise Dominion in
the Soul, and transform it into the Image of Divine Purity and Glory. Hence all
the vital Acts of Religion are either comprehended herein, or do flow here-from.

To attain this Knowledge is our great Work on Earth; and the Perfection of it
is reserved for our Reward in the expected World of Happiness: Where to see GOD
as He is, and to be like Him will be found to be Life Eternal. And the higher
our Improvements are herein in this Life, the more of Heaven do we at present
enjoy, and the greater is our Preparation for the happy State of Vision.

NOW nothing is more necessary to our right Knowledge of GOD than that all our
Enquiries after this Glorious BEING be tempered with a lively Sense that
Incomprehensibleness is a Divine Attribute; and that it is the sole Prerogative
of HIM, whose Understanding is Infinite, fully and adequately to know Himself.
We must remember that the most exalted and enlarged Conceptions of the
uncreated Excellencies of the Divine Nature, which our Minds can form, when
stretched to their utmost Capacity, are Inadequate to their sublime Subject,
and fall infinitely short of the Glory of those Perfections, which are
concentred in the Divine Nature, and shine forth in the glorious Works of
Nature, Providence and Grace. The Object is too vast and bright, and our
Faculties too short, weak and limited, to take, or bear, a full and
comprehensive View thereof. The Infinity of every Perfection in GOD, and the
Finiteness of our Powers of Knowledge, between which there is no Proportion,
will forever render a comprehensive Knowledge of GOD an utter Impossibility.
His Excellencies would not be the Perfections of a GOD were they not Infinite,
they would not be Infinite could the Creature entertain a full View, and form
an adequate Mea of them. The essential Glory of GOD, if unvailed, would
confound and overpower our Understandings with its insufferable Brightness.
What Creature can thus behold GOD and live! It is in Compassion to our
Infirmity that He holds back the Face of His Throne, and spreads a Cloud upon
it.

INDEED in the Future State, where all faulty Ignorance shall be done away, the
Minds of the Blessed will be raised to their full Strength, Purity and
Capacity, and these filled with the Knowledge of GOD, which shall render them
completely blessed: Which Knowledge is represented to us under the Phrases of
Seeing GOD as He is, and Face to Face; yet this will fall infinitely short of
Comprehension. For yet there will remain infinite Truths, and adorable
Mysteries undiscovered for the glorified Understanding to be prying into, and
reaching after a fuller Prospect of, which will render the Knowledge of the
Blessed eternally Progressive; and yet after all they cannot find out the
Almighty to Perfection. The Angels, who excel in Strength, Purity, and Glory,
are not here Comprehensors; for there are Secrets of Wisdom and Grace which
they still desire to look into.

HOW much so ever this may upbraid the Poverty and Weakness of the most exalted
Creature, it certainly loudly proclaims the Excellency of the CREATOR, whose
Nature and Perfections are vastly extended beyond the largest Prospect of a
created Intelligence.

AND this Article of the Incomprehensibleness of GOD is not to be looked on as
merely Speculative, to amuse the Mind; but will admirably advance the great
Interest of Piety when understood, weighed and realized.

DID Men live under a lively Sense of the unsearchable Greatness, and
Perfection of GOD, what holy Impressions would direct and govern the
Inclinations of their Souls! With what Humility, Reverence and Awe would they
Think and Speak of the Blessed GOD: being sensible that they know not how to
order their Thoughts or Speech of Him by reason of Darkness? With what
Submission, and Prostration of Spirit would they approach Him in all the Duties
of Divine Worship! How modest in their Enquiries into, and how little Positive
in their Determinations concerning, the Secrets of Divine Counsel; which are at
present, in a great measure, bid within the Vail? With what Silence and
Resignation would they ly before the Throne of Divine Sovereignty, when
incircled with Clouds and Darkness? Nothing wondering that they cannot unfold the
dark Riddles of Divine Providence; remembering that GOD's Judgments are
Unsearchable, and His Ways past finding out.

WERE the Hearts of Christians animated with these just Apprehensions of the
GOD they have to do with; with what Abasement of Spirit would they reflect upon
their most perfect Praise, and best Services? And with what Transports of
Admiration, Love and Praise would they consider the Condescentions of Heaven to
them, and all the Fruits of Divine Care and Love, which daily incircle them? At
how high a Price would they rate the Revelation GOD has made of Himself in His
Word, where the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of GOD shines bright in the
Face of Christ? And with what profound Veneration would their Understandings
submit to the incomprehensible Mysteries of Christianity? Not daring to darken
Counsel by Words without Knowledge. How much would this inflame their Thirst,
and quicken their Endeavors after a fuller Acquaintance with GOD? And how
ardently would they long, and how carefully prepare for Heaven? Where they
shall no longer view Him through a Glass darkly; but Face to Face, see as they
are seen, and know as they are known.

To promote these Designs of Holiness these Discourses, which are now put into
our Hands, are wisely adapted: In which we have the sublime Subject of GOD's
Incomprehensibleness treated of with a becoming Modesty and Reverence, with an
agreeable Life, Judgment and Perspicuity.

THE Character of the Reverend Author, and his Performances are too bright to
receive any Luster from my Recommendation. However I must be allowed to rejoice
in, and to bless the great Head of the Church for, those uncommon Gifts His
Servant is endowed with; which appear observably in these Discourses. And sure
I am, It is not Partiality to a Friend, but Justice to the Merit of the
Performance, which compels me to believe, That every impartial judicious Reader
will esteem these Meditations every way fitted to entertain, and improve the
Understanding of the most Intelligent; and to quicken the Devotion of the most
devout Christian.

FOR what will be thought suitable to afford Light and Heat to the pious Mind,
if these Contemplations on GOD will not? In these we have the Light, Beauty,
and infinite Fullness of the Divine Essence represented, acknowledged and adored
as Unapprochable, Impenetrable and Ineffable.

IN these we have celebrated the unsearchable Greatness, and Excellencies of
GOD, as they shine in the Works of Nature: And illustrated by many bright Hints
drawn from the Glory and Beauty of the greater and lesser World: In all Parts
whereof there appear legible Characters of a Divine Power, Wisdom and Goodness,
that are past finding out.

IN these we are entertained with a Prospect of Divine Providence; displayed in
its Extent from the highest Angel to the meanest Insect; and in the
uncontrolable Power, impenetrable Wisdom, and mysterious Methods of Divine
Administrations.

IN a Word, here the Wonders of Divine Grace in the Recovery of apostate Man
are assented and displayed. In which we are led into a surprising Contemplation
of the Glories of the Attributes of GOD, as they are manifested in the Person,
Office and Work of our REDEEMER; In the Impetration, Application, and
Perfection of our Salvation; in all which the Depths of Wisdom, the Riches of
Grace, and the Triumphs both of Mercy and Justice, are illustrated.

THESE exalted and mysterious Doctrines are here handled with an uncommon Force
and Flame of Thought, expressed mainly in the Language of the Divine Oracles,
which gives Life, Beauty, and Solemnity to the Diction.

WHEN these Discourses were delivered from the Pulpit, I have good Reason to
think, that they were heard with a singular Relish and Satisfaction by a
numerous and judicious Audience. And this excited me once and again to move the
Reverend Author to publish them; that they might become more extensively
serviceable to the grand Interests of Religion. I am firmly persuaded that the
great Aim of the Author in these Sermons was to advance the Glory of GOD and
the Good of Souls; I cannot therefore but with an hearty Importunity wish
Prosperity from Heaven to his pious Intentions.

AND may the Father of Lights, on whom all Success depends, send His Spirit to
bless these Labors of His Servant; that they may be effectual to beget in
Christians a more awful Sense of the Great GOD, to stir up and cherish the Life
of Devotion in their Souls, to render them more Solemn in all Acts of Worship
to Him, and more Holy in all Actions of Conversation before Him.

THUS many Souls will be improved in pure and undefiled Religion; and the
Author's Joy and Crown rendered more full, bright and weighty in the Day of
CHRIST.

Eb. Pemberton.
March 9th. 1714, 15.
A Humble DISCOURSE OF THE Incomprehensibleness of GOD.
JOB xi. 7, 8, 9 Can thou by searching find out GOD? Can thou find out the
Almighty unto Perfection? It is high as Heaven, what can thou do? Deeper than
Hell what can thou know? The Measure thereof is longer than the Earth, and
broader than the Sea.


THEY are the sublime Words of Zophar concerning the Ever-glorious and most
Blessed GOD. He had said very severe and harsh Things of Job in the preceding
Verses, wherein we cannot justify him: but now that he comes to speak of GOD,
His Greatness and Glory, it is in the best Manner that can be, and we cannot
but admire him. Yet the Sum of all that he at last says of GOD is only this;
That the Great GOD is Unsearchable and Incomprehensible in His Being and in His
Works.

THESE infinitely exceed the Capacity of our Understandings. Can thou by
searching find out GOD? No: What can thou do, what can thou know? The
Interrogation vehemently and elegantly rebukes the vain Pretenses of any mortal
Men; though never so Sagacious, Inquisitive and Industrious. We may by a humble,
diligent Search find out something of GOD, but cannot ever find Him out unto
Perfection. We may apprehend Him, but cannot comprehend Him. We may know that
He is, but not what He is. The Eye may see the Ocean but not over it. Mr. Henry
in Loc.
. The unmeasurable Dimensions which the great Apostle ascribes to the Divine
Love, Zophar here attributes to the Divine Essence and Operations. The Breadth
and Length, the Height and Depth of them passes Knowledge. The Heavens, Earth
and Sea have their Bounds, but GOD has none.

DOCTRINE. GOD is Unsearchable, Incomprehensible.
How little then are you to expect from Me of HIM? How unfit am I of all Men to
speak of HIM? How Unequal the Best of Men, the Best of created Minds, to this
mighty Subject? Let Humility preserve us in the devout Attempt, while Sense of
Duty imboldens and necessitates us to speak. And because GOD is in Heaven, and
we upon Earth, therefore let our Words be few.

HOWEVER, Surely the present Subject is the part of Creatures, and may become
well the lowest of them; being to confess our Distance from GOD, and Ignorance
of Him after our best Seize! that He is Incomprehensible to the highest
Orders in Heaven, and that much less can We Dust and Ashes in our fallen sinful
State, search out His Greatness by the utmost Study and Labor. This must needs
be Glorious to GOD, though our Thoughts and Words do at last but detract from
Him. For what speaks His Perfection more, than that the Highest finite
Understanding must have imperfect Thoughts of Him? Let us then make up in
Reverence and Veneration, what we fall short of in Knowledge Arch Bp. Tillotson.
Let me use the Words of Elibu, inverting the Order of them that I may the more
accommodate them to the present awful Thought I am upon: Job 37.19, 20. Shall
it be told Him that I speak? If a Man speak surely he shall be swallowed up! O
therefore teach Thou us thy Self what we shall say unto Thee and of Thee; For
we cannot order our Speech by reason of Darkness.

LET us contemplate the Unsearchable GOD, (1) In his Essence. (2) In his Works.


1. GOD is Unsearchable in His Being and Essence. The essential Perfections and
Glories of the GODHEAD are Incomprehensible GOD is Light and dwells in Light,
but it is unapproachable: more especially to our mortal Eyes. Yea the bright
Intelligence, in Heaven are dazzled before that excellent Brightness. The Glory
of the LORD descends to us in a dark Cloud.

TRULY we have but very obscure Ideas and Conceptions of GOD, notwithstanding
the Illuminations of Reason and Scripture.

First, LOOK we into the Ages and Places of this World that have been left to
the bare Discoveries of Reason, and it is easy to observe of all their
Searchings after GOD, that they have felt and grop'd as in the Dark; though
indeed GOD is not far from us. The World by Wisdom know not GOD. Men's Lusts
soon put out the Light of Reason, and the Light that was in them became
Darkness. The eternal Power and Godhead might have been clearly seen, but was
not; or soon forgotten. They became vain in their Imaginations, and their
foolish Hearts were darkened, and they changed the Glory of the incorruptible
GOD into Images, made like to corruptible Man, to Birds and four-footed Beasts,
and creeping Things: they changed the Truth of GOD into a Lie, and worshipped
the Creature more than the CREATOR, who is GOD over all, blessed for ever.

How little did the Philosophy of the Heathen World search out and discover of
the Great GOD? One of the wisest Things in Athens was (it may be) their Altar
to Him as Unknown! confessing their own Ignorance, and the Absurdities of their
Idolatry: for their Images they might know could not be GOD, but had confounded
them in their Notions of Him.

BUT this is not all: Not only is the Divine Being and Nature Unsearchable to
mere natural Reason; but also,

Secondly, SO is He to us after our Illuminations from his Holy Word, wherein
He has revealed Himself to us. GOD has made known so much of Himself as is
necessary in order to our serving him here, and to bring us to the Enjoyment of
him for ever: but no more. The Inspiration of the Almighty implies nothing of
the Comprehension of him. The deep Things of GOD are revealed to us to be
believed, not to be comprehended by us. We know but little of GOD now to what
we shall do hereafter, if our Spirits are gathered to the Assembly of the
Saints in Heaven; yet they and we for ever, even there, shall know but a little
part of Him the infinite Being: for finite Natures, how ever vast their
Capacities and Perfections, can never in any Measure contain or attain unto
what is Infinite. The Light of Heaven compared to what we now can know of GOD,
even after saving Illumination, and the most diligent Study of GOD's Word or
the Works of Nature, is as the Day now is with us unto the Night: 1 Cor. 13.12.
Now we see through a Glass darkly, but then Face to Face: Now I know in part,
but then shall I know, even as also I am known. But what is this? -- even as I
am known? Do Angels know GOD in any Equality as they are known of Him? No: He
charges his Angels with Foolishness! they pry into the Mysteries of his
infinite Essence, Decrees and Works: they grow daily in Knowledge and Happiness
by seeing Him as He is: their Knowledge of GOD is certain and true, distinct
and clear, so far as their enlarged Minds can receive of the blessed Object:
but a comprehensive Knowledge is everlastingly far from them.

HOW much less then can We search out the Almighty unto Perfection in this our
imperfect State on Earch? We that have no immediate Vision of his Glory, but
see as through a Glass darkly: through the Glass of his Works, his Word and
Ordinances. A Glass gives but a weak and languid Representation, a vanishing
and transient Glimpse. We rather can say what GOD is not, than what He is.

To descend to a few of the endless Instances, which the Scripture gives us of
the Mysteries of the Godhead.

1. HOW Unsearchable is the Eternity of GOD? " A Duration without Bounds or
Limits! an Everlasting Existence! Psalm. 90.2. From Everlasting to Everlasting
thou art GOD. A glorious BEING who never began to be. Our Reason easily argues
that this must be ascribed to GOD, the Creator of all Things: but when we (...)
back an eternal Existence, how are we lost in a boundless Abyss of Though It, which
yet the Existence of any Thing necessitates us to grant. Who can unfold those
Words, Isai. 57.15. The high and lofty One which inhabiteth Eternity. Who can
search out or comprehend Eternity? Job 36.26. Behold God is great and we know
him not, neither can the Number of his Years be searched out.

2. HOW Unsearchable is the Spirituality and Simplicity, Infiniteness and
Immensity of the divine Nature? GOD is an infinite Mind or Spirit, included no
where, nor excluded any where: So that supposing Millions of Worlds he is
necessarily and equally in every Part and with every Creature in them all; at
the same time and at all times upholding, disposing, governing them all. Now
what an unsearchable Idea is this? 1 Kings 8.27. Behold the Heaven, and Heaven
of Heavens cannot contain thee. Psalm. 139.7, 8. Whither shall I go from thy
Spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy Presence? If I ascend up into Heaven
thou art there: If I make my Bed in Hell, behold thou art there: If I take the
Wings of the Morning, and dwell in the utmost Parts of the Sea; even there
shall thy Hand lead me, and thy right Hand shall hold me. Here is Infinity: and
that which is infinite cannot be measured.

3. HOW unsearchable is the Knowledge and Wisdom of God, particularly his
Prescience. The LORD is a God of Knowledge: He is the Only-Wise; there is no
searching of his Understanding: it is infinite: Isai. 40.28. Angels are dark
and foolish and blind when set before this Light increated and ineffable. An
infinite Understanding is visible in the Frame and Government of the Universe;
yea in the Formation of the least Creature: There must be some mighty Mind that
has a perfect Comprehension of universal Nature; the Powers, Qualities and
Circumstances of all Creatures. He who made all, and by whom all things
consist, must have a perfect Knowledge of all. But who can think what this
boundless Mind itself is? Such Knowledge is too wonderful for us, it is high,
and we cannot attain unto it. Job 3^.4. He that is perfect in Knowledge is with
thee GOD knows the Secrets of all Hearts, and the Imaginations of the Thoughts:
yea he sees them afar off. He knows all future Events, that as yet are in the
Womb of Time; and every contingent thing is from Everlasting with GOD. But what
a dazzling Light is this to us ignorant Creatures! as the Sun is to our weak
Eye, over-pouring and taking away the Sight.

IT is most plain from the Holy Scriptures, and is easily demonstrable to our
Reason, that Prescience is a divine Attribute. Yet how to reconcile it with the
Creatures Liberty is a great deep: and so with the Permission of the Sin and
Misery which Men and Devils involve themselves in. When we are lost almost by
plunging into this Abyss, we must recover our selves with the Apostle's Words,
not daring to impeach what we cannot fathom or dive to the Bottom of: Romans
11.33. O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! for who has
known the Mind of the Lord? or who has been his Counselor? or who has first
given to him, and it shall be recompensed to him again! for of him, and through
him, and to him are all things; to whom be Glory for ever.

4. HOW unsearchable is the Power, Sovereiguty and Dominion of GOD? God has
spoken once, twice have we heard this, that Power belongs to GOD. But how
little a Portion is heard of it? The Thunder of his Power who can understand?
Almighty! Omnipotent! how do they found! Absolute Power is only with GOD. The
Powers on Earth would be so, and they call themselves Most Potent, High and
Mighty; but they are vain and empty Names: GOD is the thing it self: Romans 1.20.
His eternal Power and Godhead.

IN his Power is founded his Dominion; wherein his Majesty and Empire shines
forth. Whatsoever the Lord pleased that did be in Heaven, on Earth, in the Sea,
and in all deep Places. He is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we
can think. All the Powers of Creatures are united in him, for they all flowed
from him; and incommunicable Degrees of Power still remain with him to control
the most potent Creatures. At his Word the Worlds and all their mighty Orbs
came into Being, and he can cash them to Pieces one against another when he
will. In his almighty Hand all Creatures are lighter than the Dust of the
Balance is in ours. He holds the Waters in the hollow of his Hand; and weight
the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance. His Dominion is
universal, supreme, eternal. Dan. 4.35. His Dominion is an everlasting
Dominion, and his Kingdom from Generation to Generation: the Inhabitants of the
World are reputed anothing, and he does according to his Will in the Armies of
Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth: and none can stay his Hand, nor
say unto him, what do thou? Thus great is the Lord, and of great Power; his
Greatness is unsearchable.

5. HOW unsearchable is the Goodness, Mercy and Grace of GOD! We may well pry
into this with devout Admiration; how great is his Goodness! His common
Beneficence is for Number, Swiftness, Constancy, like the Rays of Light emitted
daily by the Sun. His Mercy is great unto the Heavens: like it for Amplitude,
and like the Stars of Heaven for Multitude and Brightness. All Creatures are
the Emanations of overflowing Goodness, and all do continually subsist by it.
Redeeming Mercy is such in the Salvation of sinful Man as has astonished
Angels; they desire to look into it. And Saints will to Eternity be admiring
and lauding it. Here are the Treasures of Grace; the unsearchable Riches of
Christ.

6. HOW unsearchable is the Holiness, Justice and Righteousness of GOD! The
Seraphims cry Holy, Holy, Holy, covering their Faces; not able to behold the
Brightness of the Glory thereof; and being unclean in their own Eyes before it.
The crowned and victorious Saints sing of it as great and mavelous, Rev. 15.4.

GOD is the Holy One: there is none holy as the LORD; the Heavens are not clean
in his Sight.

COMPARE the Goodness and the Holiness of GOD together and how wonderful are
they! A glorious BEING who made us happy and holy, and is of purer Eyes than to
behold Iniquity; and yet has not taken Vengeance of our Sin and Apostasy, but
has meditated and with an infinite Price accomplished our Redemption; in a Way
wherein his Holiness and his Grace have an equal Triumph. A GOD good to the
Evil though he be infinitely provoked by our Sins! and who waits to be merciful
to that Enmity which he detests and can destroy! who so loves our Souls that
rather than these shonid perish without Remedy has not spared his own Son, but
given him up for us all! and yet so abhors our Sins that no less Atonement for
them would he accept than the infinite Sacrifice in his Death.

WHAT unsearchable Holiness, and unsearchable Grace are here equally displayed!
which of the two are most to be admired and adored by us! Mysterious Union, and
Exaltation in our Redemption! which Angels pry into with Wonder! they being too
good not to commiserate us, and too pure not to loath us, and not so knowing
but to despair of us! They pitied our lost Souls, but the Holiness of GOD was
dearer to them far than these! nor could they but with high Resentment doom
them a Sacrifice thereto! Then did the holy and just One, while holy Angels
covered themselves in awful Reverence, and guilty Devils lay prostrate and
trembling in Fear and Horror! while Angels, could they mourn in Heaven,
bewailed our Ruin; and Devils triumphed in the sure Destruction they hoped they
had effectually betrayed us into! Then (I say) did the holy and just One reveal
his eternal Purposes of Grace, his everlasting Thoughts and Decrees of Mercy,
to the Amazement and ravishing Joy of heavenly Spirits, and to the Confusion
and Anguish of envious malicious Devils! But how to be entertained with
Astonishment and Thanksgiving by the redeemed Children of Men! before by their
Sin the Heirs of Wrath and Children of Death; and now again the Children of GOD
and Heirs of Glory by Faith in JESUS CHRIST. In HIM the Holiness, in HIM the
Mercy of GOD have their full Display, their last Glory, and are to be seen in
their truest Light! Whom all the Angels of GOD therefore worship! congratulate
us, and give Glory to GOD on high! Whom Devils tremble before and fly from,
tormented at his Name, knowing who he is, the holy One of GOD.

BUT to return from this Excursion.

7, and lastly, HOW unsearchable is the Doctrine of the Trinity! The revealed
Mystery of the eternal Godhead! The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and
these Three are One, equal in Being, Perfection and Glory! This we are
reverently to believe, but never to expect to be explicated to us. It Is above
our low Understanding, and how should it be otherwise? How should a created
Mind apprehend all that is in GOD? The least of whose Works are full of amazing
Mystery, and we see what is stupendous to us in the most despicable things; be
it the Life of a Mite, the Wing of a Fly, or the Feather of a Moth; and shall
we not then allow ineffable Mysteries in the divine Nature, the eternal Godhead?

THE LORD our GOD is one LORD, and there is no other but He: But what he is,
and how he is, who should inform us but himself? And what he says of himself
shall we doubt or deny, because it is incomprensible? Truly the more likely to
be true for that! For how should our narrow Minds contain the immense GOD?
Shall we say of what he has revealed to us -- It is inconsistent and
impossible? Have thou then found out the Almighty unto Perfection? Or can
thou by searching do it? And till it be done art thou a capable Judge? Have we
any thing to do but to receive what GOD says of himself with Adoration? Or if
we were daring eno' to enquire of GOD the Modus of these Things, could it be
revealed to thy Understanding? Or would the eternal GOD satisfy thee any
further of his Name and Essence?

EXODUS 3.14. I AM that I am: tell 'em, I AM has sent me unto you, See Bp.
Patrick and Mr. Henry in loc.
I the Fountain of Being, who do eternally and unchangeably Exist, of, from and
by my Self! The self-existent, the self-sufficient Being? The same Yesterday to
Day and for ever! Who always was what he is, and ever will be what he ever was!

I AM! A Name that sufficiently hints to us that it is Incomprehensible to us
what he is! A Name that checks all bold Enquiries concerning GOD, and in effect
says to us, as the Angel did to Manoah, Ask not after my Name, seeing it is
secret.

PROVE. 30.4. Who has ascended up into Heaven or descended? Who has gathered
the Wind in his Fists? Who has bound the Waters is a Garment? Who has
established the Ends of the Earth? What is his Name, and what is his Son's
Name? If thou can tell -- Add thou not to his Words, lest he reprove thee,
and thou be found a Liar.

IF he has told thee of Himself, that he is in some ineffable glorious Manner
and Subsistence Three in One, let us receive the mysterious and sublime Truth,
without adding our ignorant Explications of it; lest by Unbelief and Doubting,
or by any bold Positions concerning his inscrutable Essence, we do affront,
wrong and provoke him, who is jealous for his Name and Glory.

Plutarch tells us, That the Name EI was inscribed in the Front of the Temple
at Delphos; which is the Contraction of the Word EIMI, which signifies I am; or
as an entire Word it signifies Thou art. The Devil herein affected the Name of
GOD with his Worship. Plutarch also reports Ammonius his Sense of this Name,
which is very agreeable and surprising. Says he, " It is the most absolutely
perfect Compellation of GOD: the true, undoubted and only Appellation that
belongs to him alone.

YET in what sacred Darkness does this leave us? What Mystery does it involve
us in? What ineffable thing does it suggest to us? He that is! and who is what
he is! Eternity, Immortality, Independence, Immutability, Sovereignty,
Supremacy, and all Perfection is included in this Name.

LET this suffice to show how inconceivable, inexpressible GOD is in his Being
and Essence. He could not else be GOD; the Creator and LORD of all. For how
should the Creature comprehend his Maker? An utter Impossibility and
Contradiction in Nature! More than for an Artificer to frame something that
should equal or excel himself in Understanding and Knowledge! More than for a
Shell, which the Sea throws up, to pretend to contain in itself all the Ocean.

GOD cannot communicate the perfect Knowledge of himself to any Creature. The
Vessel can but contain its Measure: if we strain it further it necessarily
bursts, and holds nothing at all.

LET me shut up this Head with a few borrowed Passages from those two excellent
Writers, Mr. Charnock and Mr. Henry.

"GOD sits above the Cherubims; above the Fullness, above the Brightness of any
created Mind. Nothing is more present than GOD, yet nothing more hid: He is
Light and yet Obscurity: His Perfections are most visible but unsearchable. He
is known by Faith, enjoyed by Love, but comprehended by no Mind. GOD is an
excellent unlimited Nature; who only understands himself, and can unveil
himself.

"THE Ages of his Eternity cannot be numbered, nor the Spaces of his Immensity
measured: The Depths of his Wisdom cannot be fathomed, nor the Reaches of his
Power bounded: The brightness of his Glory can never be described, nor the
Treasures of his Goodness inventory'd.

O our Insufficiency to speak in any suitable manner of the immense Majesty of
Heaven and Earth! As we should begin with Fear and Trembling lest we speak
amiss; so we must conclude with Shame and Blushing that we have spoken no
better. Astonishment may well strike us dumb. If a Man speak surely be shall be
swallowed up: Consumed by the Flashes from the divine Shekinah if he speak
presumptuously; or lost in the insufferable Luster if he speak never so well.

I. LET us but carry away a due Admiration of GOD, and it will be a good Use
and Improvement of all that has been said. Let it enlarge our Thoughts of him,
and raise our Adorations of him; our Reverence, our Fear, and our Love. Let it
strengthen our Faith, and quicken us in his Worship.

O how devoutly should the GREAT GOD be approch'd to, though it of, named,
addressed unto and bowed before! How awful should his Presence be, how awful
the Idea of him? Well do the Angels praise him, with covered Faces! Well may
all Minds be full of his Praise; when filled to the utmost of their capacious
Natures they know so little of him! Ascribe ye GREATNESS to our GOD!

YOU know there is a great GOD, You say: You do well to believe it and tremble.
But O what need is there that our Thoughts, our Ideas of this great and blessed
Being be enlarged! Extended infinitely were it possible like his Essence. What
narrow, low, unworthy Conceptions shall we at the best have of him? When Saints
come into the other World to see him as he is, how ashamed will they be of all
their little Ideas of GOD here? " We think as a Child, we speak as a Child. And
when Sinners in the next State fall into the Hands of the living GOD, and under
his Wrath, how will they be amazed at the wretched, carnal, cursed, mean
Thoughts which they now have of him.

VAST are the Works of GOD we see: Vast our own Faculties, the least of us are
ready to think: Glorious is the Representation of GOD given us in his Word:
Vast is every single Perfection which we ascribe unto him: Vast is our Opinion
sometimes of the Goodness and Wisdom of a mortal Man: Yet GOD is often among
the least and most diminutive Things that occur to the Minds or in the Mouths
of Men. We think and speak of him lightly: which we could never do did we
consider how incomprehensibly Great and Good, and Holy and Wise and Powerful a
Majesty he is. No, the boldest and most profane would not dare then to use that
glorious Name in hellish Blasphemies, loose Jests, licentious Oaths,
Imprecations and Curses, or in guilty Perjuries: Nor others mock him in false
shows of Devotion; Formality, Hypocrisy and Irreverence in their very Prayers.
For if GOD be so great, can a common thought of him be innocent? And yet how
often are we guilty of this even in our express Acts of Prayer or Praise.

II. IF GOD be unsearchable, then how faulty are we that we do no more
diligently Study, and Search out what may be known of him from his Word and
from his Works. How little should we be content in the Knowledge we have
attained? What a Progress and Improvement is there eternally to be made? and
how should we long for that State of Vision, where all Imperfection shall be
done away for ever! Let it quicken us in the Study of GOD, his Word, and all
divine Things. Our Preparation for the Vision of GOD hereafter lies in our
present Increase in the Knowledge of GOD.

THE Incomprehensibility of GOD is no excuse for Ignorance or Sloth in us. We
may know much more of GOD than we do, and it is our Duty to aspire and labor
after more. Our intellectual Perfection and Felicity lies in this. The true
Pleasure and Blessedness of the intelligent Creature lies in the Knowledge of
the Creator. This is the Food of pure Minds, their Light and Radiancy.

SAY not, I can never attain it all: Thou can eno', and yet never eno': Thou
can all that a Creature of thy Faculties was made for; and that is so much as
shall greatly honor thy Maker, and advance thee high in Glory and Joys
unspeakable. This Knowledge will be pleasant to thy Soul; a continual Feast,
Refreshment and Satisfaction: Yea the Fullness of Heaven's Joys are at last
found in it. It Is the Manna, the Bread of Angels! and how bright does it render
'em?

WHAT is more valuable than Knowledge? What do vain Men more affect, than to be
esteemed for it? but what is all Science and Learning to the Knowledge of God?
where is the Wise, where is the Scribe, and the Wisdom of this World? Is it not
empty, unprofitable Folly, compared to this Wisdom that is from above? As GOD
is greater than his Works; so is the Knowledge of him before that of all
created Things. The Study of Nature is of use chiefly and ultimately to lead us
to the Knowledge of him. Divine Knowledge exalts the human Soul; purifies it
now, and glorifies it hereafter. This is to be wise as an Angel of GOD. This is
Life eternal.

LET us bless GOD for the Knowledge we have; and being found in the use of the
Means necessary to our growth therein, let us pray unto him the Father of
Glory, that he would give us the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the
Knowledge of himself; the Eyes of our Understanding being enlightened, etc.

AND let us desire that others may know and praise him with us. Let us pray
that the Knowledge of the LORD may cover the Earth, as the Waters do the Sea!
That the People may praise him, that all the People may praise him! And let the
whole Earth be filled with his Glory: Amen and Amen.

III. IF GOD be unsearchable in his Essence, then what a great Evil is it to
Sin against him, and to be under his Wrath? How evil the Nature, how
unsearchable the Desert of Sin? From the Greatness of GOD Sin takes it
Dimensions, and is an unknown Evil. It cant be little when GOD is so great,
against whom it is committed.

WONDER not at the infinite Punishment threatened against it: it can deserve no
less than infinite Wrath. Guilt and Wrath take their Dimension from the
infinite Perfections and Glory of GOD. How then do they pass all Imagination
and Fear. Job 37. ult. With GOD is terrible Majesty; touching the Almighty we
cannot find him out: He is excellent in Power, and in Judgment, and in Plenty
of Justice: Men do therefore fear before him.

LITTLE do Sinners consider with what a great GOD they have to do! they have
little Tho'ts of him, and so easily despise his holy Will and dreadful
Vengeance! Whereas an Apprehension of the divine Greatness ought to strike
Terror into the Soul of every impenitent Sinner. What will thou do when GOD
rises up? and when he visits, what wilt than answer him? Haft thou an Arm
like GOD, and can thou Thunder with a Voice like Him? Dick now thy self with
Majesty, and cast abread the Rage of thy Wrath, or fear that of his, when he
shall arise to Judgment!

WHEN GOD came down on Sinai, and they beheld his Glory, how did the People
quake, (both Saints and Sinners fearing to be consumed before him. And who
shall be able to stand before the fovereign Judge, when he shall come at the
last Day in his Power and great Glory.

IV. ON the other hand, If the Greatness of GOD is unsearchable, then what a
great Thing is it to have his Favor and Blessing? The Pardon of Sin; Peace
with him, a Relation to him, and Interest in him; his Image in us, his Comforts
with us, and the Hopes of the overlasling Enjoyment of him in Heaven.

HOW great must these things be, if GOD is so great! Truly Eye has not seen,
nor Ear heard, neither can it enter into the Heart of Man to conceive, the
Things which GOD has prepared for them that love him! How immensly Blessed must
they be who are the elect and chosen Favorites of this great GOD! who are
beloved of him, and sanctified by him, and who shall see his Face, and dwell in
his Presence for ever more! When Solomon's Magnificence was beheld, said the
admiring Queen, Happy are these thy Servants. How blessed then those Souls that
shall be before the Throne of GOD, and of the Lamb above! The Blessedness of
Heaven must be like the Greatness of the divine Majesty who dwells there. As is
his Perfection, Power, Dominion and Glory, such must the Gifts be that he will
bestow, and the Felicity of his Court. If GOD were less, so would the
Blessedness of Saints be less in Heaven: but as his Greatness cannot be
searched out, so the Felicity of Heaven must surposs all our present
Conceptions. Compasses all Understanding, and therefore so does his Peace. As
the Height and Depth, the Length and Breadth of his Essence cannot be taken, so
neither of his Love.

WHEN GOD appeared to Abraham it was by the Name of GOD Almighty; GOD Immense
and Alsufficient: and as was said to him, -- Look now to Heaven, and see the
Stars -- so say I -- Look we through the immense Spaces of the Creation and see
the Greatness of the Former of all Things; such is the Spread of thy Happiness,
if thou art a Child and Servant of GOD. GOD himself is thy Portion and
exceeding great Reward: this great GOD is thy Friend, and Father, and Savior:
He has blessed thee and thou shall be blessed.

VERILY, for want of enlarged Tho'ts of GOD Saints themselves have but too
little Tho'ts of the Promises of the Gospel, and the Good contained in them.
Does GOD offer his Spirit and Grace, his Son and Justification through him, his
Heaven and Himself to us? and are you an Heir of all this, by a Covenant Title,
of the free Grace of GOD? O your Blessedness! while others set so light by the
Offer! so easily hear it made to them and neglect it! Ah, dull Souls that we
have, to be no more affected with, nor moved at, nor wrought upon by these
incomprehensible things! Think only what GOD is, and it gives all the Motives
of the Gospel their true light. Such is his Wrath, such is his Love; Such is
the Loss, and such the Gain; according to the Greatness of GOD. The Light of
Heaven is unapproachable, because GOD is the Light thereof? The Blackness of
Hell is insufferable, because the Vials of (...) his Wrath are poured out
there: In his Favor is Life, and his Loving Kindness is better than Life.

V. IF GOD is so great, then how great are our Souls? Whether we consider them,
I. As the Offspring of this great Being, and bearing his Image; in
Spirituality, Knowledge, Holiness, Immortality. Or, 2. In his Desires and
Labors for their Salvation: the Price he has given for their Ransom from
eternal Death.

HE has given his own SON to die in our Nature, and redeemed us by his own
Blood. He has united himself to us and became Man, and advanced our Nature in
that personal Union above all Angels and every Name in Heaven.

OF what Worth and Value then were our Souls in his Eyes? What Thoughts and
Counsels has the great GOD spent upon them? That so mighty a Being, the Maker
and LORD of such mighty Worlds, should show such solicitude, and condescend to
such Methods for their Salvation! truly it should inconceivably magnify them in
our Eyes, and inhance the Dignity of them to us; the Redemption of which is so
precious to the infinite Mind and Understanding.

THE least Thought taken by so great a Being, the least Thing done by him for
our Salvation, would argue the Worth of the Soul exceedingly. But that GOD
should think and do so much herefor, even himself take our Nature and die
therein, is so amazing a thing, when we realize the Greatness of GOD, that we
should have thought the human and angelical Natures united could never have had
the Offering given for them.

THUS the Doctrines of Christianity are exalted from those of natural Religion.
There is a great God and our Savior! And how great are those Souls, and how
greatly to be prized and cared for, which are the Subjects of so great
Salvation?

VI. and lastly, LET me infer the Duties toward GOD from us, which do naturally
result from his unsearchable Greatness; and the Measures of Grace we should
aspire after; the meet Offering to so great a Majesty. Great is the Bond upon
us unto the Duties of Religion and Devotion, if GOD be so great; and great
should be the Engagedness and Fervency of our Souls always in them. With what
raised, enlarged Minds and Hearts should we always worship, serve and obey so
high and incomprehensibly Great a Creator? Our best, our utmost, our all is his
due. Certainly we may be justly ashamed of our little Devotions, when we
consider the Greatness of GOD. Psalm. 145 3. Great is the Lord, and greatly to
be praised; his Greatness is unsearchable.

BUT to be particular: 1. IF GOD be so great, how greatly should he be loved by
us? With all our Heart, and Soul, and Mind, and Strength; which is the first
and great Commandment. A GOD of unsearchable Glory and Excellency -- How great
is his Beauty? He is altogether lovely. 2. So great a GOD is greatly to be
seared. With what Reverence and Awe should we think of him? With what holy
Dread should we approach him? With what godly Fear and Trembling should we
serve him? -- That glorious and fearful Name, the LORD thy GOD. 3. IF GOD be so
great, what Humility and Abasement becomes us before him? What are we? Nothing
and Vanity! a Breath of Wind, a Mote of Dust! "All Nations as the Drop of a
Bucket, and less than nothing. 4. WHAT great Penitence does Sin against so
great a GOD call for? What great Fear of his Curse? What great Solicitude after
Peace with him through Christ? What great Thankfulness for a Savior? Say, "O
that my Head were Waters, and my Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep in
some Proportion to the least of my Sins! Now mine Eye sees thee, wherefore I
abhor my self and repent in Dust and Ashes. For it is this great GOD whom I
have despised. desied, grieved, affronted, rebelled against and dishonored;
cut my self off from, and exposed my self to his Wrath. O what Confusion of
Face belongs to me! What Contrition of Soul and Brokenness of Spirit does Sin
call for? The Heavens may be astonished at it, and the Earth be desolate. More
than Shimei's Remorse and Terror becomes us, till we have got the Pardon of our
crying Guilt granted to us. We should fall in the Dust, as that vile Traitor at
the Feet of his excellent King, saying, Let not my Lord impute Iniquity to me,
nor remember my Perverseness.


To conclude, Great is the Faith, Adoration, Submission and Obedience, which
the unsearchable Greatness of GOD demands from us. We must revere his Oraclds,
nor wonder at revealed Mysteries; we must bow our Wills to his Laws, tremble at
his Threatenings, and rely on his Promises. We must resign to him in all his
unsearchable Providence, and not dare to find Fault with him, whom we can so
little find out to Perfection: for if we are so little acquainted with the
divine Nature, we are most incompetent Judges of the divine Providence. And
finally, we must awfully adore and praise and pray to this great and glorious
BEING, according to his excellent Greatness.

BUT what Offering can we bring that is worthy of so great Majesty? What are
thousands of Rams, or ten thousand Rivers of Oil? We and our firstborn? Lebanon
is not sufficient to burn, nor the Beasts thereof for a Sacrifice. Yet may we
not withold our low Oblations; the best of our Flock; or bo it but a
Turtle-Dove, or a Widow's-Mite. And let is please us to think that GOD has
Myriads of holy Angels who know how to praise him; and with whom we hope ere
long to be eternally employed in that blessed Work.

SERMON II.
HAVING after our poor Manner meditated how unsearchable and incomprehensible
GOD is in his Essence; I am now with Humility and Reverence to go on and say,

II. GOD is Incomprehensible in his Works. In these his Greatness does sensibly
appear to us, but they are unsearchably Great too. He does great Things and
unsearchable, mavelous Things without Number, said Eliphaz, Job 5.9. To which
Job fully agreed, 9, 10. He does great Things past finding out, and Wonders
without Number. Elihu leaves it in Charge upon us, 36 Chap. 24. Verse. See that
thou magnify his Work which Men behold; every Man may see it; Man may behold it
afar off: Behold, GOD is Great, and we know him not.

THIS is a very great Article of Christian Devotion. The holy Psalmist of old
abounded in the Meditation: Among the Gods there is none like to thee OLORD,
nor are there any Works like unto thy Works: for thou art Great, and do
wondrous Things, thou art GOD alone. This also is a part of the Song of the
Lamb, (what Saints on Earth, and those in Heaven, will never cease to mention)
Rev. 15.3. Great and mavelous are thy Works, LORD GOD Almighty.

THE Works of GOD are Three; Creation, Providence and Redemption. I shall
attempt to say a little of each of them in their order.

1. GOD is unsearchable and incomprehensible in his Works of Creation. The
invisible things of GOD, his eternal Power and Godhead, are clearly seen from
the thing that are made. But when we survey them all, how unsearchable are they
to us? As the great GOD condescended to enquire and argue with his Servant Job,
38 Chap. init. Where wast thou when I laid the Foundation of the Earth? declare
if thou have Understanding? Who has laid the Measures thereof, if thou know
and or who has stretched the Line upon it! Have thou entered into the Spring
of the Sea? or have thou walked in search of the Depth? Where is the Way where
Light dwells? and as for Darkness where is the Place thereof? that thou
should take it to the Bound thereof, and know that Path to the House
thereof? What can be more elegant and convictive than this condescending and
yet disdainful Expostulation?

LET us contemplate a little, 1. The Universe together. 2. Our Globe of Earth
and Sea more particularly.


1. HOW unsearchable is the Universe; its Space and Limits! Who knows the
Extent of the Creation? how many Worlds there are? or even the Measure of our
own System? those Spaces which our Eyes and Glasses do after some manner reach.
It is the fixed Opinion now of learned Men, from what they do see and know of
the Creation by Tellescopes, that there may be, and in all probability are,
many such Worlds as this which we behold; many such Circles as this which our
Eyes view, when we take the Compass of the Heavens with them. And if it be so,
how does it enlarge the Creation to us, and the Greatness of the Creator? If
our Heavens and Air, the Sun, Moon and Planets in our vast Circle, are but one
single World, equal or superior to which there may be many others; to which our
Sun is but a Star as theirs to us: I say, supposing this to be the Truth of the
Universe, how does it magnify the Work of GOD, and extend our poor Conceptions
of his Greatness?

How soon should I lose my self in speaking of what we call the Sky, containing
as we imagine vulgarly the Sun, Moon and Stars. It would only astonish and
amaze most of you, if I should repeat what Philosophy has advanced about 'em,
by the best Observations, and nicest Calculation. The Learned think that the
fixed Stars, abundance whereof are invisible to us, and seen only with the help
of Glasses, do not belong to our System; but are Suns to other Worlds, like
what the Sun (in our Heaven, we say) it to our World. And to come within our
own certain Limits, they tell us such inconceivable Things of the Distances and
Magnitude of the Sun and Planets within our own Circle, that it quite
astonishes a common Mind.

So that supposing our own System, which we see through but very darkly, to be
indeed the Universe, yet is it demonstrably such a Space as we know not scarce
how to speak of, but as Immense, Infinite, etc. though in Truth and strictly
Speaking multiply this Space a Million times over, and those again Millions of
Millions, all together would have a Limit at last, and not be properly Immense.
However, to abide by the Word in the Text, it is a Space properly unsearchable,
while we lose our selves in Numbers.

THE Almighty put it to Job, 38.18. Have thou perceived the Breadth of the
Earth? Declare if thou know it all. So far our Moderns dare I suppose to
answer, just now in the Ends of the Word, having attained, as they think, to
measure our Earth and Planetary World. And what do they tell us of its
Vastness? I Am afraid truly to repeat in a common Audience what they count
themselves pretty certain of. If it were not to glorify the CREATOR to you, and
let you see how unsearchable his Works are, I would not hint them to you.

THE Diameter of the Earth is computed to be thout Eight Thousand Miles. The
Diameter of Jupiter Whiston's Theory 81, 000. Sun, 763, 000.
(the Star so called) Fifty Two Thousand. But (to name no more) the Diameter of
the Sun 494,000. See then how much vaster than our Earth other Orbs are that
belong to our World, and which look so small to us. The Reason of their
appearing so small to us is, because of their wonderful Distance from us.

WE are calculated to be Fifty Four Million Miles 81,000,000
distant from the Sun. And yet there are other Planets unspeakably further from
it than we are: For Instance, The Star Saturn (which is though it to be 61,000
Forty Three Thousand Miles Diameter, when our Earth is but Eight Thousand) is
also supposed distant from the Sun, Five Hundred and Thirteen millions of
Miles. 777,000,000.


THESE things theys tell us, who should best know the System of the Creation,
after a profound Study, and laborious Search thereinto. In all which, supposing
them at last to err and be mistaken, what is the Consequent thereform but the
Truth I am upon; scil. That GOD and his Works are unsearchable to the most
improved, diligent and enlarged Minds on Earth.

BUT if this sold be some pretty just Measure of the World we belong to, then
say, how great the LORD GOD is! Does it not magnify the Creator to you? Don't
it raise and extend your narrow Thoughts of him? And will you not be
constrained thereby to admire, reverence and fear him the more? And to worship
him with the more Humility, and Awe, and Fervor of Devotion.

BEFORE I descend from these mighty Circles which my Meditations would have
been compassing; let us pass one Thought on Comets in their unknown, but it is
likely no less regular Courses; though they seem wandering as well as blazing
Stars to us, passing from World to World; The frightful Ministers it is probable
of divine Justice Dr. Cheyne.
that may have brought, and may still bring about the great Catastrophees of
our System; by lending us their noxious Vapors, by raising our Waters,
changing the Figures and Positions of the Planets, and the very Nature of the
Orbits themselves. Or are they the first Rudiments of Planets not yet bro't
into any System? Or father the Ruins of them banished thence? And so the
Habitations of Creatures in a State of Punishment? See Whiston's Theory, 4th.
Edit. 188, 437.


BUT whither have I wandered after these portentous Prodigies! Yet having gone
so far, let me take yet one Step higher, and think --

WHAT must the Dimensions of the highest Heavens be? The Heavens of Heavens --
which as Solomon says, cannot contain GOD; how much less our Earth and visible
Heavens? How spacious as well as glorious (think you) is that World of Light
and Bliss, where is the Throne of GOD and of the Lamb, and where the highest
created Intelligences dwell, and whither all holy Spirits are at last gathered?
How many thousand Kinds of rational Creatures there may be in the Creation of
GOD, equal or superior to our Selves in our first State, GOD only knows, known
unto whom are all his Works. But this we know, that there are innumerable
Myriads of holy Angels, bright Morning Stars, and heavenly Hosts, who excel in
Wisdom and in Strength, who see the Face of GOD, and minister in his Presence;
the happy Objects of his Complacency and Love. Now how superior these Realms of
Light are to our dark World, and how spacious this Palace of the eternal King
of Glory; no Eye has seen nor can see. 1 Timothy 6.16. The blessed and only
Potentate, who only has Immortality; dwelling in the Light which no Man can
approach unto; whom no Man has seen, nor can see, to whom be Honor and Power
everlasting. Amen.

LEAVING then the angelical Nature to their native Heaven; that and their
Orders and Capacities and Bliss unknown; let us descend to our sublunary World,
and observe,

II. HOW unsearchable our Globe of Earth and Sea is to us who inhabit it, and
over which GOD has given us the Dominion.

And,

1. HOW mysterious is it to think, What this and the other mighty Orbs di hang
on, or roll in? See Chambers his Universal Dictionary, on Attraction,
Gravitation, Magnetism, Electricity, and Newtonian Philosophy.
How do they keep their Places, Distances and Motions in such Constancy and
Celerity, for so many thousand Years together? The Word of GOD has fixed 'em so;
and at last we must submit to say with Job, 26.7. He stretches forth the North
over the empty Place, and hangs the Earth upon nothing. It has no visible
Foundations, but is like a Ball hanging in the Air, we know not how.

THE Almighty put this among his Queries to Job, 38.6. Where upon are the
Foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the Cornerstone thereof? or who shut
up the Sea with Doors, and brake up for it it is decreed Place? How unsearchable
is the Law of it is Center or Gravitation, whereon it is fixed? He has founded it
upon the Seas, says the Psalmist, and established it upon the Floods. But these
Expressions do but confess and amplify upon the Mystery of its Situation and
Consistence where it is. Psalm. 104.5. He laid the Foundation of the Earth that
it should not be removed for ever; he covered it with the Deep as with a
Garment. This is all that GOD sees good to tell us of the matter. Psalm. 33 8.
Let all the Earth fear the Lord; let all the Inhabitants of the World stand in
awe of him: for he spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast.

2 HOW unsearchable are the Clouds which water the Earth. I will not go back
again so far as the Moon, which is a Body inferior to our Earth; nor speak of
its mysterious Dominion over the Flux and Reflux of the Sea, the Juices of
Plants and Trees, the Humors of our Bodies, and those of other Animals. But to
ascend no higher than the Clouds, which in Storms of Rain and Thunder do often
descend lower than the Tops of our Mountains and Hills; -- what a Mystery are
they to us? Let us meditate them with Eliba, Job 36. 26, 29. Behold, GOD is
great, end we know him not; he makes small the Drops of Water, they pour down
Rain according to the Vapor thereof! -- Can any understand the Spreading of
the Clouds, or the Noise of his Tabernacle? Behold, he spreads his Light upon
it, and by the Terrors of his Lightnings he judges the People. Read on in the
37th Chap. At this also my Heart trembles and is moved out of his Place. Hear
attentively the Noise of his Voice, and the Sound that goes out of his Mouth.
He directs it under the whole Heaven, and his Lightning unto the Ends of the
Earth: After it a Voice roareth, -- GOD thundreth marvelously --; Great things
deeth he which we cannot compretend. -- Hearken unto this, O Job: stand still,
and consider the wondrous Works of GOD. -- Do thou know the Ballancings of
the Clouds, the wondrous Work of Him that is perfect in Knowledge?

3. EVERY Creature here on Earth, even to the lowest Degrees of Life, are
mysterious and unsearchable. So is the very Grass we tread on, and every Weed
in the Field, as well as the green Herb and painted Flower in the Garden. We
are ignorant how these grow, and what dies and colors them, so that Solomon in
all his Glory was never in any like Array. But then the living Creatures in the
Air, Earth and Sea are an inexpressible Variety of divine Workmanship, both for
Beauty and Use. So are the Furrs of the Beasts, the gaudy Feathers of the
Birds, and the silver Scales of the Fish. Innumerable Wonders fill the Land and
Sea and Air. The most common Creatures wear 'em; whether we discern it in 'em
as we might and should, or not. The Almighty therefore sent Job to consider the
wild Goats of the Rocks, and the wild Asses of the barren Wilderness.

THREE Things are unsearchable in the Creatures, which I would select out of
the many thousand Instances that might be given.

1. THE Minuteness of some of the wonderful Works of GOD is unsearchable. The
Discoveries of this kind made by Microscopes are astonishing. In less far than
a Grain of Sand we find as curious Workmanship, Proportions, Imbroideries,
Parts and Figures, as you see in any of the greater Creatures. No Man alive can
say how small a Dust may be animated, and be a perfect living Creature. But
then how incomprehensibly fine are the Parts and Proportions of that animated
Mite? The Wing of a Moth is seen to contain as perfect and gay Feathers, as do
the goodly Wings of the Peacock. This we see with our Eyes by the help of
Glasses. The Grain of a common Chip of Wood, and more of a piece of Cork or
Sponge, and more yet the Wing of a Fly, are all such delicate Embroideries as
the Necks of Queens never wear. The Crowns of Princes are nothing so
magnificent as what GOD has set on the Head of a Fly: nor their polished Armor
to be compared to the silver Studds wherein the Body of this despicable
Creature is incas'd.

THUS the smallest Insect is full of Wonders. The Greatness of the Creator is
seen in the least Things, as much as in the greater: but the Minimum quod sit
can never be known by us. It was the Saying of the religious and learned Judge
Hale; That if a Man should spend his whole Life in the Study of one poor Fly,
he could not with the most singular Wit discover one Half of the Wonders
therein. The Great GOD, out of the infinite Riches and Fullness of his
Perfection, crowds unsearchable Treasures into the Compass of a Grain of Sand.

2. ON the other Hand, How unsearchable are the Wonders of divine Power and
Majesty, in the Creatures of greater Bulk and Magnitude? There are not wanting
huge and vaster Creatures, as well as smaller and more minute; together with
innumerable intervening Kinds and Degrees, between the Humm-Bird and the
Ostritch, between the Mite and the Elephant, between the Shrimp and the Whale.
The Almighty instances to Job in the greater Creatures of one Kind and of
another; the Ostrich, the Horse, the Elephant, and the Crocodile. These are
some of the chief of the Ways of GOD Hear the Words of GOD concerning the last
of them: Job 41.12. etc. I will not conceal his Parts, nor his Power, nor his
comely Proportion; who can open the Doors of his Face? his Teeth are terrible
round about. -- When be raises up himself the Mighty are afraid: -- be
esteems Iron as Straw, and Brass as rotten Wood: -- he makes the Deep to boil
as a Pot, (to swell and foam by his strong Motion.) -- Upon Earth there is not
his like, who is made without fear. When Job had heard this magnificent
Description of this single Creature, he immediately replied to GOD with the
utmost Abasement; I know that thou can do every Thing, and that no Though It can
be withbolden from thee: -- Now mine Eye sees thee, in thy Works, wherefore I
abhor my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes. I had though it also to have said.

3. How unsearchable the Instinct of the Creatures is? which is to them instead
of Reason; and whereby even some of the least and vilest of them do act with
that Art, Prudence, Sagacity and Foresight as may instruct, shame and astonish
Mankind. Such is the Wisdom and Diligence of the Ant and Be, the Spiders Webb,
the Wasps Nest, and the Beavers House: these and other Things are little upon
Earth, but exceeding wise. Inimitable their Works. The most despised things
has GOD chosen to vie with all human Understanding and Discretion. Thus in all
Creatures, even to the lowest Degrees of Life, we see the unsearchable
Greatness of GOD.

2. To have done with these Instances in the visible Creation, and to rise the
highest in them on the Earth, We our Selves are unsearchable to our Selves;
both in the Formation of our Bodies, and in the Nature and Faculties of our
immortal Spirits.

1. OUR Bodies are a stupendous Piece of divine Workmanship. We are fearfully
and wonderfully made: Psalm. 139.13. yet originally of the Clay. But who knows
the Mystery of his own Formation? or can dissect and anatomize himself? So as
to display the Wonders of every Vessel, Artery and Fiber in his Flesh? Our
Sustentation also is next to miraculous, our Life hanging on so many fine
Threads. Confider the Elegance of the whole Form, the Harmony and Use of every
Part, and how the Frame answers the Ends of a rational Nature, in respect of
Dominion over the Creatures, Society, Discourse and Worshipping GOD; and we
must needs see much of the Greatness of GOD in these Bodies of Clay.

2. How much more unsearchable are our Sculs, the more immediate Offspring and
express Image of the Father of Spirits. Indeed we have but poor and confused
Ideas of our own Souls; but that we have Souls we feel and know, being endowed
with such Faculties as can in no wise agree to Matter in it self alone, but
only to a spiritual Nature. We find in our selves the Powers of thinking,
reasoning, remembering, willing, choosing, desiring, loathing, self-judging,
etc. We can easily argue that these do not belong to dull and stupid Matter,
and therefore that there is in us a Spirit, which though united to this Body is
yet distinct from it, and performs these noble and superior Operations, and by
its vital Union enlivens and uses the Body in its various Offices and Actions
of Life, to whose Service therefore the Body is adapted. It is the living Soul
that gives the Body its Life, Majesty, Beauty, Vigor: without this it becomes
a Carcass, unsightly, ghastly, noisome. The Soul sits on the Eye, and issues out
its Will at the Lips, and all the Members are under its Authority.

MOST wonderful is the strict Union of Soul and Body, in which Union both do
delight inexpressibly, and by a most tender Sympathy share in each others Joys
and Sufferings. But what Art or Power could join Spirit and Matter thus
together? and make them so natural that their Ease and Pain, their Pleasure and
their Grief should be one and the same! What has so endeared Things so widely
different in their Natures!

THUS are we a Mystery to our selves, and find that within our selves which we
know not how to describe: A Mind, a Will, a Conscience, Desires and Affections,
which how they are, and how we received them, and how we exercise'em we know
very imperfectly: but that we have 'em, and that we exercise 'em we are very
sure. We know we have Souls by their Operations, but what they are, or where
seated in the Body, or how united to it, or how they suffer from it, or it from
them, is all inconceivable to us.

THE Soul of Man is a most wonderful thing; the Light is not brighter nor
swister than its Motion; it surveys the visible World in a Moment of Time, and
forms Images of infinite invisible Things. It is made to rule, to rule the
Body, and over the lower Creatures, yea and one single Mind over mighty
Nations. It is nobly endowed, and formed for great things. A sovereign Power
resides in it: high are its Seize: Itascends to GOD and Heaven, can know
much of him who is invisible, be like him, honor and glorify him: which is
more than to say, that it can dive into the Secrets of Nature, take the Rule of
the Universe, and enjoy the Good of every Thing in it. How transcendently Great
and Glorious is the Father and Former of these noble Beings, the Spirits of Men.

Now if we know not our little Selves, how shall we conceive of GOD? if we are
puzzled in our Searches into the Nature of a finite Spirit, the Perfection and
Powers of an Angel or human Soul, how shall we understand Him who is the
infinite and eternal Spirit!

To Conclude, If the Creatures be unsearchable, much more is the CREATOR
incomprehensible. If such dazzling Wisdom and Perfection shines forth in the
things that are made, what then is the Light wherein GOD dwells? Whom no Man
has seen nor can see.

ALL this while I have omitted to speak of that first and most wondrous Work of
GOD, the Light: by which we see all other Things, and the eternal GODHEAD
clearly in them, but least of all is it seen it self. Mr. Henry.
It is the great Beauty and Blessing of the Universe; and like the first-horn
it does of all Bodies most resemble its great Parent, the Father of Light and
Glory; in Purity, Brightness, Beneficence, and Spirituality; for of all things
visible Light comes the nearest to the Nature of a Spirit. There is nothing
more excellent and admirable in the visible Creation of GOD. An immense flowing
Tide of Glory.

Mr. Milton.
Etherial Stream! thy Fountain who can tell? "Before the Sun, before the
Heavens thou were. The Velocity of the Rays of Light is amazing, and so the
infinite endless Emissions of many Millions of them every Moment of Time, for
so many thousand Years together, without any sensible Diminution. What a vast
Globe of Flame must it be, and how extremely small and fine the Particles of
Light! Immense the Benefit also of its Effusions to all the distant rolling
Worlds, in the Center of which it stands. It was it may be the most excusable
of all the Pagan Idolatries to worship the Sun.

BUT after all, where is the Way where Light dwells? and by what Way is the
Light parted? that thou should take it to the Bound thereof, and know the
Parth to the House thereof? Job 38. 19, 20. All our Hypotheses of the Light are
full of Darkness and Obsecurity. We are lost and struck blind with the Excess
of Radiancy and Luster. But how much more does GOD dwell in Light
unapproachable, and full of Glory!

GIVE me leave to add upon the whole,

1. UNSEARCHABLE is the Power of GOD that thines forth in the Work of Creation.
To crease is the Top of almighty Power. By a Word to command all things into
Being, out of Nothing. How great is it to do this! Rev. 4.11. Thine is the
Power, -- for thou have created all things. psalm. 150 Praise him in the
Firmament of his Power: (i. e. for here is the admirable Evidence of it, within
the Compass of the Firmament, wherein are so many vast Effects of it to be
seen:) Praise him for his mighty Acts; praise him for his excellent Greatness.

HERE God began to show his Greatness and his mighty Hand, and what GOD is
there that can do according to these Works and this Might? Moses his Account of
the Creation is the most august, absolute and worthy of GOD that can be: And
GOD said, Let there Light, and there was Light: Let a Firmament be, and it was,
Let the Warers bring forth abundantly, etc. How easy is every thing to this
powerful Will and Word? He spoke and it was done, he commanded and things were!
By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Hosts of them by the
Breath of his Mouth, Psalm. 33.6.

AN instantaneous Production by a Word was incomprehensible to the old
Philosopher Aristotle; he chose therefore to allow the Eternity of Matter and
of the World. He erred not knowing the Scriptures and the Power of GOD. By
Faith we understand that the Worlds were framed by the World of GOD. Heb. 11.3.
He commanded and they were created. Psalm. 148. 5. Thus says the LORD of Hosts,
the GOD of Israel, -- I have made the Earth, the Man and the Beast that are
Upon the Ground, by my great Power, and by my stretched-out Arm, Jerr. 27.5.

2. UNSEARCHABLE is the Knowledge and Wisdom of GOD displayed in the Works of
Creation. This is legible in the whole Frame of the Universe. Prove. 3.19, 20.
The LORD by Wisdom bath frounded the Earth, by Understanding bath be
established the Heavens, by his Knowledge the Depths were broken up. Every
Creature bears the Signatures of manifold Wisdom. Psalm. 104.24. O LORD, how
manifold are thy Works! in Wisdom thou have made them all.

WHAT Beauty, Variety and Harmony is there in each distinctly, and in all
conjunctly? What Art in their Composition, and what wise Design in their Uses,
Subordinations, and mutual Services? The World by Wisdom know not GOD; to its
reproach be it spoken, for it might easily and should have surely done so by
the infinite Variety and Depths of Wisdom in the Works of Nature.

OUR Understandings serve to the Contemplation of the divine Wisdom, in the
Form, Order, Motions and Creatures of the Universe, and when we see a little
into these Things we are lost in Admiration. Wisdom and Strength are his, he is
mighty in Strength and Wisdom, Job 36.5.

HOW soon are the truly knowing and wise convinced of their own Ignorance? How
soon do they confess with Amazement that they know nothing at all! that they
are lost in their Searches into the least Creature? The brutish Person knows
not, neither does the Fool understand this: He overlooks the admirable Effects
of divine Wisdom that encompasses him on every Side, in a wretched Carelessness
and sottish Inconsideration! Whereas would Men but open their Eyes and see,
would they give their Minds to contemplate GOD in his Works, would they use
their Reason and survey the same Things that daily occur to them; would they
but seriously set themselves to think of what they behold every Day with their
Eyes; the Wisdom of GOD would necesarily appear ravishing to their Minds, and
in its exquisite Beauty captivate their Souls.

BUT at last put all together that has ever been seen or said, by philosophical
and devout Persons, the Learned and Religious of all Ages, concerning the
Wisdom of the Creation, and it infinitely falls short of the Truth of the
glorious Subject. After all we must say of it, as the wise Queen of Sheba did
to Solomon when she had seen his Works, and heard his Wisdom; not Half has been
told us, nor ever can be. That Queen of the South felt her Spirit fail her, and
there was no more Strength left in her, when she did but behold the Art and
Elegance of Solomon's Architecture, and the Ascent by which he went up to the
House of the LORD: But behold, a greater than Solomon is here, and how much
greater a Fabric than his Temple! The Builder and Maker of it is GOD, and
unsearchable is the Wisdom in the Design and Finishing hereof. Job 11.5. O that
God would speak, and open his Lips unto thee, and that he would show thee the
Secrets of Wisdom; that they are doable to that which is!

3. UNSEARCHABLE is the Goodness of GOD that appears in the Works of Creation.
All Beings flowed from the mere Good Will and Bounty of the first Cause, who
only is good. "He was eternally possessed of infinite Felicity in himself, and
had no need of the Existence of any thing. He created the reasonable Creature
to communicate of Blessedness unto them. He designed infinete Communications of
Good unto them, when he stamped his Image on them. He knew himself to be eno' to
make 'em everlastingly happy, and therefore he created them. He stored the
Earth with an unsearchable Variety of Bounties and Delights, and then he
brought forth Man upon it. As are our Desires, Wishes, Hopes, and far beyond
the Conceptions of any Creatures, so is the Goodness of GOD. He has endowed us
so richly that he may replenish and fill us.

LOOK through the visible Creation, and see the Provision made thro'our it all
for the Entertainment of Man, his Soul and Body! Immense Stores from the divine
Fullness and Munificence! What Wonders of Wisdom for our muring Minds? What
Beauties for our gozing Fyes? What pleasing Sounds for our Ears? What Delicacy
of Food for our Palates? What a Paradise the Earth -- if by our Sins we had not
blasted it? and GOD Himself for our Souls if we had not apostatized and cut our
selves off from Him?

GOODNESS formed our Body for the Soul, and Goodness breathed the heaven-born
Spirit into the Body. Goodness furnished the World for our Sustenance, and
Goodness made us for GOD and Immortality. Goodness made all Things very Good,
and fills them with their proper Good of every Kind, and in every Measure. But
who can trace the eternal Spring of the divine Munificence, through every Stream
of it? We know not how to speak of it suitably and adore it. He is the One GOD
and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in all.

USE 1. See the Use and End of all the Creatures, of one part of the Creation
of GOD and another; Namely, to show forth the Greatness, the unsearchable
Gratness of the CREATOR. The Universe can have no greater Design, nor any more
worthy Use than this. Rev. 4.11. Thou art worthy, O LORD, to receive Glory and
Honor and Power: for thou have created all things, and for thy Pleasure they
are and were created. What other Reason or Motive could there be for the
creating any thing? Surely GOD has made all things for Himself. Of him, and
through him, and to him are all things. All Creatures look to GOD, and lead us to
him, and speak to us of him, and call upon us to glorify him. The Heavens
declare his Glory, and the Firmament shows his Handiwork: Day unto Day
utters speech, and Night unto Night shows Knowledge: There is no speech nor
Language where their Voice is not heard. The Creation in all its Parts unite in
that Acclamation, and in a manner answer and fulfill that Vision, Rev. 19.6. And
I heard as it were the Voice of a great Multitude, and as the Voice of many
Waters, and as the Voice of mighty Thunderings, saying, Alleluia, for the LORD
GOD omnipotent reigns.

THE highest Creatures can have no higher End than this, to serve unto the
Creator's Glory: and the leust of Creatures can have no less an End, and in
their Places do as truly serve thereunto as the best and greatest. Man's chief
End is to glorify GOD, and the End of any Worm or Insect is his Glory also:
only the one is to serve hereunto in a free and active Way, the other in a more
passive; the one is to give GOD the Glory of the other Isai. 43.20, 21. The
Beasts of the Field shall honor me, the Dragons and the Owls: -- this People
also have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my Paraise.

2. LET us infer the Duty of the raitional Creature, resulting from the visible
Creation, to contemplate GOD in his Works, and to give him Adorations and
Praises on account of them. The rational Mind, the Eyes and Tongues of Men were
certainly made for this. At the Formation of the Earth the Morning Stars sang
together, and all the Sons of GOD shouted the Praises of the CREATOR. The
stupid Mass, out of which our Bodies were formed, and the Creatures brought
forth, could not praise him: but Angels beheld these Worlds of ours come into
Being, and then into Order, and gave him the Glory due unto his Name. So
neither can the World that now is, the Earth and Sea, with the dumb Creatures
in them, know and laud the Creator; but We have Understanding and Speech to do
it for them and from them, and from us the Almighty expects the Tribute. The
Heathen Poet this and said, Os Homini sublime dedit, etc. The Creator gave to
Man this Face and Eye, that he should behold the Heavens, and look through the
spacious Worlds, and give the Maker of them Glory. And this Date of
Contemplation, and consequent Admiration and Worship is abundantly pressed on
us in the Holy Scriptures. A Duty which Mankind are sadly wanting in, though why
has GOD made us wiser than the Beasts of the Field, and than the Fowls of
Heaven, but for this! Why are the Beasts dumb, and we speak? Why look they
down, and we up and abroad through the Universe? Sorely it is to see GOD in his
Works, and adore his Greatness in them. We ought frequently to consider with
David, GOD's Heavens, the Work of his Fingers, the Moon and the Stars which he
has created; and while we do so we ought to be making our devotional
Reflections on the Greatness, Glory, Wisdom, Goodness and Power of the great
CREATOR. The Works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have
Pleasure therein. I will praise thee, O LORD, with my whole Heart, I will show
forth all thy marvellows Works. Among the Gods there are none like unto thee, O
LORD, neither any Works like unto thy Works: All Nations whom thou have made
shall come and worship before thee, O LORD, and shall glorify the Name: for
thou art Great, and do wondrous Things, thou art GOD alone. Thus ought the
great GOD to be greatly reverenced and honored by his reasonable Creatures.
And indeed the very Heathens are left inexcusable in their Idolatries and gross
Immoralities, from what GOD has shown us of his Greatness and Glory in his
Works. Excellent is the Strain of Argument and Reasoning to this purpose in the
first Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. No Man that will use his Senses,
and observe the Heavens and the Earth, can without forfeiting his Reason, and
the highest Contradiction to it, worship a Stock and Stone, or the Image of
Heaven; for if he will but think he must easily know that all these things have
some glorious Maker, whose Creature he himself is also, and whom only he must
therefore Worship If a Heathen will not thus use his Reason, he despises his
Maker, and dishonours and abuses his own Nature: or if he violates his
Understanding and Conscience, lives like a Brute or worships a brutal Form, he
does despite unto GOD and is guilty before him as truly, though not so
heinously, as we Christians are if we perish under the written Law. The Law of
Nature is a very sacred Law, and the Light of Nature a very great Light: to
live up to it is a very great Thing; and to quench it by Lust, or wilfully to
Sin against it is a very high Guilt.

3, and lastly, NONE of the Creatures of GOD are in themselves vile or
diminutive; but how little a Creature is Man in the Universe and before his
MAKER? We cannot lightly esteem the least Creature, nor may we vilify any one,
because the least and meanest are unsearchable. All are admirable: Much of GOD,
his Wisdom, Power, Goodness and Dominion is to be seen in each, and in all of
them. GOD who knows his own Work treats them all with a Regard. Not a Sparrow
misses it, and even the Hairs of our Heads are numbered by him. He has given Man
the Dominion over and Use of the inferior Creatures, and put them under our
Feet; but it becomes us not to trample, either in Pride or Carelessness, on a
very Worm; which as no Man can form, nor eno' admire the Formation of, so the
great GOD that made it feeds it and cares for it. We should look upon every
Creature we use with Wonder, and while for our Necessities and Conveniences,
Comfort and Delight, GOD has subjected them to us, let us neither needlessly
ravage and destroy them, nor abuse them to Wantonness and Lust. Let the Work of
GOD be always honorable and glorious to us; and as GOD has put the Honor of a
superior Nature on us, crowning us with his own Image and Likeness; so let us
reverence our selves and debase neither Soul nor Body from those rational and
religious Services, which the LORD our GOD has designed us for.

BUT at the same time, in the midst of this vast Creation, LORD, what is Man!
What Reasons for Humiliation and Abasement in our own Eyes may we fetch from
the Unsearchableness of GOD in his Works? How little is it that any single
Person possesses of this vast Creation? The Kings and Princes of the Earth
parcel it out among themselves, but what have they at last to be proud of? Like
some Master-Ant upon his Hillock, compared to the wide Extent of the Creation
round about them! What have the richest Mortals to cast into the Treasury of
the GOD of Nature, but a Widow's Mite. How soon must Man be dispossessed of his
Earth, and return to his Dust? And when he is gone, the Earth misses him not,
the World keeps on its Course, as if he never had been.

AGAIN, HOW little can Man command of the Things he sees and is conversant
with? Will the Winds and Seas obey him? Can he lift up his Voice to the Clouds,
that abundance of Waters should cover him? Have thou commanded the Morning
since thy Day? Or shall the Earth be removed out of its Place for thee?

TO have done, How little is Man's Knowledge after he has searched into the vast
Works of GOD! What seems he then to himself but Ignorance and Darkness! even as
a Beast before GOD! He that is Half-learned may Conceit that he knows a great
deal, and they that are truly Learned among Men do so compared with their
unread or tho'tless Nei'bours; but he that knows most here below sees most his
own Defects and Incapacity, and the unsearchable Riches of Knowledge, which he
cannot now attain unto. We are of Yesterday, and know nothing.

SERMON III.
HAVING in some little Manner meditated the unsearchable Greatness of GOD in
his Works of Creation, I pass on now to the second Instance.

II. GOD's Works of Providence.

THAT there is a glorious Providence exercised over all things, whereby in all
their Motions and Actions all Creatures are upheld and governed, in a most holy
wise and powerful Manner, is one of the first Doctrines of natural Religion. As
sure as the Being of a GOD, and the Creation of the World, so sure is the
Doctrine of his Providence. If GOD created it, he must uphold it. The
Preservation of Things in their beautiful and useful Order requires the same
Power and Wisdom which gave them their Being and Use. If GOD made the World it
can neither be below him, nor difficult to him to govern it: Nay, it must be
necessary to his Glory, and part of his Felicity to do so. Can it be his
Dishonor to be the Governor of the Universe? the LORD over all, in the actual
Exercise of Rule? or can it be a Burden to the infinite Mind, to the almighty
Word, to which all Things are alike easy? A Million as One! and the Greatest as
the Least!

IN short, I shall now take it for granted that there is an all-disposing
Providence, and thereupon I have only to say -- How unsearchable the Greatness
of GOD is appearing in it! in the Order, Sustentation and Disposition of every
thing which we behold.

IN general: How unsearchable is the Universality of a Providence! A sufficient
Care had to all Things, infinitely various, however distant, however opposite
in their Nature; at the same Time, for Ever-more, and with infinite Ease! What
a glorious Mind is it that does this! Every Species and Kind preserved, and in
all their Individuals supplied, in their constant Succession, from the
Beginning of the World unto this Day! and all overruled and directed to the
wisest and best Ends, by his sovereign Influence and Will! So that in the
infinite Variety and Contrariety of Creatures, they are all made together to
serve unto the general Good of the Universe, the mutual Benefit of one another,
and the high Glory of the CREATOR ultimately. Here is perfect Order in seeming
wild Confusions, and perfect Harmony in all present seeming Discords and
Jarrings. But the mean while it is perfect Mystery and an unsearchable Conduct.
Eccl. 3 11. He has made every Thing beautiful in his Time, also he has set the
World in their Heart, ("given a whole World of Matter for the Hearts of Men
copiously to meditate on) yet so that no Man can find out the Work that GOD
makes from the Beginning to the End.

BUT to be more particular in our Meditations on the Mysteries of Providence.
1. Over the Highest and Greatest of the Works of GOD. 2. Over the Least and
Lowest of Creatures. 3. Over what we call Chance and Accident.


I. UNSEARCHABLE is the Greatness and Majesty of GOD in that Providence which
he exercises over the highest and greatest of his Works: whether Things,
Creatures, Persons and Intelligencies.

1. THE greatest Things. By which I mean the visible Orbs and Globes; the vast
planetary Bodies, whereof our Earth is one. What a mighty Being is HE, who has
assigned to these their Distances, Places, Motions, Center, Magnetism, and they
inviolably obey the Law he gave them for Ever-more, in their exact Revolutions.
If the great GOD did not govern these in our Favor, how soon would the Earth
sink under us, and the Pit open and swallow us quick; or the Sea drown us! If
the Sun should roll near to us it would soon scorch us to Death; or if the
Earth should roll further from it we should be as soon frozen stiff with Cold:
if the Moon should leave us and wander away, the stagnated Sea would soon
poison us; or if it should roll on nearer to us 'twould raise the Tides so high
that they would run over our Houses. Now how great is that Providence which
keeps these vast Bodies in their Places, and makes 'em so kindly minister to
one another through every Generation? So that Day and Night, Summer and Winter;
Tides, Dews and Rains do not fail us; but vital Heat and Moisture and
Respiration is provided for and preserved unto us and all the living Creatures!

BUT to keep to our own Limits a little more,

1. IT is the unsearchable Power of GOD that commands the Winds, and infinite
is the Goodness and Wisdom which orders that mild or wild Element the Air. How
thin, and light, and soft and yielding an Element in its Calm? how strong, and
fierce, and raging, spreading wide Desolations, when GOD bids it storm? How
much is the World governed by the Ministrations thereof? GOD uses it, raises
and stills it as he please. His Way is in the Whirlwind, and in the Storm, and
the Clouds are the Dust of his Feet! His Fury is poured out like Fire, and the
Rocks are thrown down by him. He gathers the Wind in his Hand, and when he lets
them sly, how do they roar and tear? Divine Majesty and Wrath rides upon its
Wings; the Earth shakes and the Hills move under its Force and Weight; A Smoke
goes out of his Nostrils, and Fire out of his Mouth devours; Darkness is under
his Feet, and at his Brightness the thick Cloud passes, Hailstones and Coals
of Fine. Psalm. 18.10, 12.

THUS GOD looks to the Ends of the Earth, and sees under the whole Heavens, to
make the Weight for the Winds, and to weigh the Waters by Measure; to give
Decrees to the Rain, and to make a Way for the Lightning and Thunder; he sees
it and declares it, he prepares it and searches it out; which none beside him
can do. He causes it to come whether for Correction or Mercy. Now out of the
South comes the Whirlwind, and Cold out of the North, and Frost is the Breath
of GOD: Presently again he quieteth is the Earth by the same South Wind, and we
know not how our Garments grow warm upon us. Now he persecutes a guilty World
by his Tempests, and makes them afraid by his Storm; again he mercifully fanns
and purges the Air for us, by bringing the Winds out of his Treasures, and the
pleased Mariners improve the welcome Gale, the Ships stagger under their
Courses, and are driven with their rich Freight to their Port. Thus the
Greatness and Goodness of GOD is seen in the blowing of the Wind.

2. No less is it in the Ruling and Ordering of the Sea: in commanding the
Waters, the vast Deep and Abyss wherein our Earth seems to float, and with
which it is washed, by which it is also in a great Measure stocked and
enriched. The Creatures in it, and the Dwellers upon it, are beyond Number; and
what a mighty Providence is it that watches over them all! There go the Ships,
and there plays Leviathan! Let us look and dive a little into this wide and
great Sea, wherein are Things creeping innumerable, both small and great
Beasts, which do all wait upon GOD, as much as the Creatures on the Land do,
and he gives them their Meat in due Season, they are filled with Good, Psalm.
104.25, etc. At the same time Men go down to this Sea in Ships, doing Business
on these mighty Waters; they see the Works of GOD and his Wonders on the Deep:
Sometimes to their Terror and great Danger he commands and raises the stormy
Wind, which lifts up the Waves; they mount up to the Heavens, they go down
again to the Depths, their Souls melt for Trouble, they reel to and fro, they
stagger like drunken Men, and are at their Wits end: then they cry unto the
LORD in their Trouble (to Him that made the Sea and rules it, and is the
Confidence of all that are afar off upon it) they cry to him as from the Belly
of Hell, and he brings them out of their Distresses: He makes the Storm a
Calm, the Waves are still, the Mariners Hearts at ease and glad, so he brings
them unto their desired Haven, Psalm. 107.23. etc. Now what Manner of Word and
Rule is this, which even the Winds and Seas obey? The eternal Word as it were
awaked in the Storm and rebuking it: saying -- Peace be still -- and there is a
great Calm! O that Men would praise the LORD for his Greatness, and for his
wonderful Works to the Children of Men! Let them exalt him also in the
Congregation of the People, and praise him in the Assembly of the Elders.

THIS is no small part of the divine Dominion, from Sea to Sea. His Way is in
the Sea, and his Paths in the great Waters, and his Footsteps are not know,
Psalm. 77.19. He rules the raging of it, when the Waves arise he stilleth them:
O who is a strong LORD like unto him, or to his Faithfulness round about him!
Psalm. 89.8, 9. The Floods may lift up their Voice and their Waves, but the LORD
on high is mightier than the Noise of many Waters, yea than the mighty Waves of
the Sea.

3. THE dry Land, our habitable Earth, is under a most wonderful, wise,
gracious and powerful Preservation and Government. How is it stocked with
Creatures, and not a Species lost! How is it clothed with Grass, and covered
with Corn, and watered with Springs and Rivers, which run in the Valleys, yea
ascend up into the Hills! What a rich yearly Provision is made for the living
Creatures, and in them for us? What rich and vast Stores of Vapors are daily
ascendings, and by Night descending in Dews on us? Why does not the Earth sink
in the vast Abyss, how does it swim so even in it, and so safely in the stormy
Day? Or rather what Power restrains the foaming Waters in its spacious Womb?
What saves us from desolating Earthquakes, and who is it that now and then
creates that new and rare thing; when the Earth opens its Mouth and swallows up
Cities; Multitudes go down together quick and alive into the Pit. "He removes
the Mountains at his Pleasure, and they know it not, he overturneth them in his
Anger; he shakes the Earth our her Place, and the Pillars thereof tremble, Job
9.5, 6. But the ordinary Course of his Providence is gracicus and bountiful, a
tender Car: and Mercy to us: " By his Strongth he sets fast the Mountains,
being girded with Power; be makes the Morning and Evening to rejoice; he visits
the Earth and waters it and greatly inriches it; he blesses the springing
thereof, and crowns the Year with his Goodness; the Pastures are clothed with
Flocks, and the Valleys are laden with Corn. Thus the Earth is full of the
Riches of divine Bounty, and satisfied with the Fruit of his Works.

AND thus I have in the Phrase of Scripture meditated the divine Providence and
Government respecting the greater Parts of the Creation; the Orbs and Globes we
see in our World, and particularly our own Air and Earth and Sea.

2. UNSEARCHABLE is the Work of Providence in the Supply and Government of the
living Creatures in all these: which are mighty Hosts for number, of every
Kind; yet GOD feeds them all, lays in a daily Provision for them, and by
Instinct guides them to provide for themselves, both as to Defense and
Sustenance. He gives to the Beast his Food, and to the Ravens which cry to
him: the young Lions seek their Meat of him while they roar after the Prey: and
the Shoals of Fish in the Sea, both the small and great there, wait on him to
gather what he scatters among them with a full Hand.

NEITHER is there any Creature so vast but GOD rules it; none so strong as to
be Masterless. Though the Bones of Behemoth be as pieces of Brass, and as Bars of
Iron (one of the Chief of the Works of GOD) yet he that made him, can make his
Sword to enter into him: though the huge Creature drinks up a River, and
trusts that he can draw up Jordan into his Mouth; yet Providence fills him
with Grass, and finds him drink end for his mighty Thirst. Again, the Leviathan
that huge and fearless King of the Sea obeys and reverently ministers at the
command of GOD: for instance, when Jonah (the LORD's Prophet) was cast into the
Sea, and the Whale carefully took the Charge of him, and hid him in a Corner of
its spacious Jaw, that the Sea should not suffocate him, nor would the Monster
devour him himself: only to show Jonah the Greatness of GOD who had sent him,
down he flounc'd with him to the Bottom of the Mountains, and sported with him
as his Prey; while Jonah prayed and cried, as out of the Belly of Hell, to the
GOD of Heaven; and the LORD spoke unto the Fish, and he rose and vomited him
out upon the dry Land. The Crocodile I think is the Creature mount by Leviathan.


ALMIGHTY Providence easily commands the dumb Creature, and they forget their
Instinct, and go against their Nature. Voracious Ravens are made to feed Elijah
at one time, and Angels themselves do it at another. The Fish crowd into the
Net at the Call of Christ, as proud which should first obey and feast their
Maker, and declare his Glory to the dull Sons of Men. The hungry Lions show
reverence to his Prophet, while they pant for the Blood of his Enemies. The
Lion slew the disobedient Prophet at GOD's Word, but to show that it was merely
and Act of Obedience, and not of his savage Nature, he stood by the Carcass and
by the Ass and touched neither of 'em any more: as tame now after the Execution
as a Home-Mastiff: Nay, the Passengers go by him safe and he stirs not after
them: nor yet touched he the old Prophet himself, when he came to bring away
the Body of his Brother; a Boldness in the wretched Man which I can scarce
think how to account for! For how could he look on the Corpse but as the Ghost
of him whom his Lies had murdered? And how could he see the Lion and not fear
himself to be his next Morsel? Yet did not the Beast, the Minister of the
divine Justice that Day, harm him at all, not having the Commission from GOD.

To name no more: When the Philistines weary of the Ark had put it in a New
Cart, and their Sin-offering with it, to be drawn by two Milch-kine that had
never before been yoked, putting all the late Dispensations of Providence
toward them upon this Issue: 1 Samuel 6.9. If it goes up by the Way of its own
Course, (i e. in the Road and straight Highway toward the Land of Israel, a
Road that the Creatures had never gone, nor indeed had they ever drawn at all
in a Yoke) then has the GOD of Israel done us this great Evil; but if not,
then shall we know that it was not his Hand that smote us, but it was a Chance
that happened to us. Providence agreed and joined Issue on the Event, and both
the Philistines and Israel saw the Glory of JEHOVAH, the only true and living
GOD. For immediately the Kine took the straight Way to Bethshemesh, the next
Border of Israel, lowing as they went, ( scil. after their Calves which they
left behind, yet constrained to go on by an invisible Power againft the strong
Inclinations of Nature) they turned not aside to the right Hand nor to the
left; and the Lords of the Philistines went gazing and wondering after them;
convinced by the dumb Beasts, but not converted.

NOW what an unsearchable Government is this over the living Creatures and
brute Animals, besides their usual abundant Services to Man. But to pass from
the greater Things and Creatures; unto Persons and Intelligences created.

3. UNSEARCHABLE is the Providence of GOD in its Government of intelligent and
rational Creatures: whether in Heaven, Earth or Hell; Angels, Men and Devils.

1. As to the boly Angels and their high Orders, we know by Revelation that
they are a noble Part of GOD's Dominion. We read of their ready Obedience,
Subjection and Ministrations. " They excel in Strength, and do his
Commandments, harkening unto the Voice of his Word: Are they not ministering
Spirits, sent forth? And do they not gladly come, pleased in the lowest
Services to Men? They humbly own themselves the Fellow Servants of Prophets and
holy Saints. They worship and adore GOD the CREATOR, and the Lamb our SAVIOR
with more Abasement, as well as Fervor and Delight, than we on Earth can
attain unto. They cover their Faces, though so bright, and cry -- Holy, Holy,
Holy, LORD GOD of Hosts! the whole Earth is full of thy Glory.

AT the same time these Thrones and Dominions in the Heavens are such high and
potent Beings, that the Empire over a few of these we may think more glorious
to the CREATOR, than the Subjection of all the Nations of the Earth. They seem,
some of them, to have a Presidency as Princes over the Empires here below; but
however that be, we know them to be so mighty Beings, that a single One, by the
divine Commission, could slay Nations in a Day.

2. DEVILS that fell from Heaven, yet have not made their Escape from the
divine Dominion and Government. When some of the Hosts of Angels revolted from
GOD, how easily were they cast down to Hell? And shall be shut up there for
ever in a Pit and Prison, together with the weaker wretched Ghosts of ungodly
Men. This infernal Prison shows the Greatness and Dominion of Providence, as
well as the Palace of Heaven: Here the Triumphs of Grace, and there those of
Justice. Read the Power of GOD over Devils: Rev. 20.1, 2. And I saw an Angel
come down from Heaven, having the Key of the bottomless Pit, and a great Chain
in his Hand; and he laid hold on the Dragon, that old Serpent the Devil and
Satan, and bound him --, and cast him into the Pit, and shut him up, and set a
Scal upon him.

INDEED evil Spirits have a Range permitted to them, and are used too by
Providence in judicial Executions, as in Ahab's Seduction, and Judas his
tragical End. But they are under Restraints, and Frustrations; are limited, and
overruled to good, as well as wicked Men. The Devil could not touch Job nor
his Substance till GOD suffered him: nor enter into the Herd of Swine without
our Savior's Permission; at whose Sight he trembled also and lay grovelling in
Torment. In their malicious Desires and Designs against GOD and our Souls, they
are often made Instrumental to the Salvation of Souls; as eminently in the
Crucifixion of our Savior. It is the Greatness and Glory of GOD to have these
"Slaves at the "Oar, while Providence steers the World.

3. GREAT is the Providence of GOD in the Government of Mankind. In his Hand is
the Soul of every living Thing, and the Breath of all Mankind, Job 12.9. He
rules by his Power for ever, his Eyes behold the Nations, Psalm 66.7. Let us
here contemplate: 1. The Greatness of Providence in the Disposal and Government
of the Princes and Kingdoms of the Earth. 2. Of every individual Person.


1. THE Greatness of Providence is illustrious in its Government of Nations,
Kingdoms and Provinces. By GOD Kings rule and Princes decree Justice; yea, even
the inferior Judges of the Earth are ordained by him. He sets up Kings and
removes them, he exalts and abases them; he enlarges the Nations and
diminishes them again. GOD is the King of all the Earth: GOD reigns over the
Heathen; GOD sits upon the Throne of his Holiness: the Shields of the Earth
belong unto GOD; he is greatly exalted, Psalm. 47.9.

HE has ordained Government for the Good of the World. He permits Tyrants for a
Scourge and Punishment of it. He uses the Powers on Earth to serve his Church
and Truth, when they know it not nor mean it. Cyrus was his Shepherd, the
Assyrian was his Rod. Daniel's four Beasts in their rice, ravages and final
Destruction, were each under the strict notice of Providence: and so is the
little Horn, which yet keeps boasting of its Power from Heaven, to bind Kings
themselves and the Consciences of their People.

PROVIDENCE restrains the proud Powers on Earth, and takes its time to punish
them. It decks it self now with Majesty and Excellency, and arrays it self with
Glory and Beauty: It casts abroad the Rage of its Wrath, and beholds every one
that is proud to abase him. It treads down the wicked in the Dust; and it is
gloriously seen that the Most High rules in the Kingdoms of Men, and gives
them to whomsoever he will.

AGAIN, He gives Salvation unto Kings; takes their Persons and Lives under a
more special Care and Guard, and their Counsels under a special gracious
Influence. He turns their Hearts, which are deep, as the Rivers of Waters, and
by spiriting or dispiriting, infatuating or directing them, be brings about
what Revolutions he pleases with the utmost Ease and Certainty: A single Spirit
in his Hand being as the Helm in the Pilots, to govern the vastest Bodies of
People, either in Mercy or in Judgment. At the Council Board divine Providence
presides, frustrating the Oracles of Ahithophel, and he hangs himself for
Madness; and circumventing the deep Designs of Haman, and hangs him on the
Gallows which he had reared for another. Job 12.16 -- 23. With him is Strength
and Wisdom: the deceived and the deceiver are his. He leads Counselors away
spoiled, and makes the Judges fools. He loses the Bond of Kings, and girdeth
their Loins with a Girdle. He leads Princes away spoiled, and overthrows
the Mighty. He removes away the Speech of the trusly, and takes away the
Understanding of the Aged. He pours Contempt upon Princes, and weakneth the
Strength of the Mighty. He discovers deep Things out of Darkness, and
brings out to Light the Shadow of Death. Now if this be the Dominion of GOD
over Kings and Governments, what must we say of it but as Nebuchadnezzar did, I
bless the most High, and I praise and honor him that lives for ever, whose
Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, and his Kingdom is from Generation to
Generation: -- I extol the King of Heaven, all whose Works are Truth, and his
Ways Judgment, and those that walk in Pride he is able to abase.

2. UNSEARCHABLE is the Providence of GOD in its governing, ordering and
disposing the Circumstances of every individual Person, Man, Woman and Child,
through every Generation: the Care that extends to all, the Power that protects,
the Goodness that supplies all, and the Wisdom that orders the Concerns of all,
in the best manner, for all together, and for each distinctly. This we must
needs believe, but it is too mysterious to see clearly through it now.

1. UNSEARCHABLE is GOD's Empire over the Souls of Men, their Mind, Thoughts,
Consciences, Wills, Desires, Purposes. The LORD searches all Hearts, and knows
all Thoughts: He gave Solomon his Wisdom and Largeness of Heart, David his
Courage and Art for War, Abithophel and Hushai their Spirit of Counsel and
Judgment; and Absalom's Rashness and Fickleness was also from his Dominion over
the Spirit. As to Men's Desires he restrains them when he will, even against
their own Will: as he withheld Abimelech from touching Sarab, how fierce
soever his Love, and his Soul inflamed by her Beauty. Men's Passions and Wrath
he lays, as he does the raging of the Sea and the noise of its Waves; so the
Tumult of the People. Even the Spirits of the mutinous Multitude he governs, in
all their wild Projects and Executions. He turns the Heart in a Moment from
Hatred to Love, as Esau's to Jacob: and from Revenge into Endearment, as
David's before the wise Abigail; and again from Envy into Admiration and
Esteem, as Saul when he stopped in the midst of his pursuit at the Voice of
David, and turned back praising and blessing him. In like manner when the
Soldiers in the heat of Fight and flushed with Victory were rushing upon
Jeboshaphat, the good King did but cry to the LORD and they turned from him. I
might also speak here of GOD's Empire over Conscience, making Men a Terror to
themselves when he pleases, as Cain, Saul and Judas. In these and many other
ways GOD appears the Governor and the Judge of the Spirits of all Flesh.

2. GREAT is the Empire of Providence in permitting and overruling the Lusts
and Sins of Men to its own Glory, and abundance of Good sometimes to Themselves
and Others. It is a Mystery in Providence, which only Revelation can unfold to
us and enlighten us in, that so much Sin and Confusion therefrom is permitted
to be in the World. But as Man bro't Sin and Misery upon himself, being made by
GOD at first holy and happy; so the great GOD lets the fallen Creature see his
Glory and Greatness in that he can yet govern Him, and his very Sins, and all
the Mischiefs and Disorders that attend the same, unto most wise and great and
holy Ends; to his own Glory, to the Good of others, and even to the Salvation
of Sinners themselves. Joseph's Brethren sinned in selling him, his Mistress
also in her foul and false Accusation of him; they glutted their Hatred and
Spite, and though it they had ruined him for ever: but all the while they were the
Instruments of Providence toward his Advancement, and the saving of Egypt and
Canaan and Themselves from Famine. Haman meditated his own Revenge, and the
satiating his bloody Hatred of the Jews, but Providence made it the very means
of their Peace and Enlargement. Pharaob's Hardness gave GOD and his Israel
those Triumphs, which will be celebrated in the Church for ever. The Jews and
Romans, Herod and Pilate united against the LORD CHRIST and crucified him; but
it was to do what the Hand and Counsel of GOD had before determined for the
Salvation of the World, Acts 4.26, 28. Yea, Men's foul Sins have been made the
Means of their own Conversion: O mysterious Providence, and unsearchable Grace!
Thus are Sinners sometimes effectually awakened to see their own exceeding
Vileness, and Sins sinfulness. Thus Medicines are made of Poisons, and the
Flesh of the Scorpion a Cure for the Bite of it.

3. UNSEARCHABLE is the Mystery of GOD's governing Providence in the present
unequal Dispensations of Prosperity and Adversity. This from the Days of Old
has been a Wonder in Providence, if not an Objection against it. Job in his
Adorations spoke of it, as well as Asaph in his Insirmity complained of it. But
it is easy to clear the Justice, Wisdom and Goodness of Providence in this
Disposition of Things, from the Consideration of GOD's Sovereignty, our own
Sins and Deserts, the distinguishing Judgments we see at times inflicted on
singular Sinners, and the Knowledge we have of a future State, and a just
Recompense then to every one according to his Works done here in the Body. Yet
nothing is more Mysterious and Unsearchable than this Conduct of Providence in
a thousand particular Instances, if we consider them by themselves. Thus for
Instance, Job's Trial was an unsearchable Thing; amazing to himself, as well as
confounding to his wise and religious Friends. And so very often have the
Dispensations of Providence been dark and mysterious toward the Church. Isai.
31.2. He also is wise and will bring Evil. 45.15. Verily thou art a GOD that
hidest thy self, O GOD of Israel the Savior. Psalm. 36.6. Thy Righteousness is
like the great Mountains, thy Judgments are a great deep; O LORD thou
preservest Man and Beast.

THUS I have very briefly considered the Greatness and Majesty of GOD in that
Providence, which HE exercises over the Highest and Greatest of his Works:
whether Things, Animals, or Persons. This is his high Dominion, and full of
incomprehensible Mystery, but bright with dazzling Glory.

TWO Words remain still on this Subject, besides those infinite Researches
which I shall not enter at all into; scil. The Government of Providence over
the least and lowest Creatures, and over Accidents and Chance as we call it.

WHEREFORE:

II. THE Greatness and Majesty of GOD is unsearchable in that Providence which
he exercises over the least and lowest of his Creatures. For it is most certain
that the preserving and governing Providence of GOD extends to the meanest and
most minute Things which he has made: Nor can this look little in the supreme
Majesty of Heaven, but it is his true and infinite Greatness. It is not like
the contemptible Idleness and Childishness of the Roman Emperor, who was
trifling and catching Flies when he should have been at the Council Board,
bearing and directing the weighty Affairs of the Empire. GOD neglects none of
his Creatures, and least of all do the greater Affairs of the World escape him.
His general and common Care is to the least, a more special Providence is over
the greatest.

THE narrow Mind of Man can attend but to a few Things at a time, and therefore
they had need always be the greater and weightier: but the infinite GOD with
the same Ease governs and cares for a Million of Creatures as One; and ten
Million swarms of Gnats, as a Family of Men. Nor is it below him, any more than
it was to create the Insect, which all the Art and Powers of Creatures cannot
do. Nay, the Things which GOD has seen good to make, he must needs take care
of, for they are the Work of his Hand.

"Do you see thousands of little Motes and Atoms wandering up and down in a
Sunbeam? (says Bishop Hopkins) it is GOD that so peoples it: He guides their
in numerable and irregular Strayings: Not a Dust flies in the beaten Road, but
its uncertain Motion is guided, and the Storm shall not carry it further than
its appointed Place.

OUR SAVIOR tells us that the Hairs of our Head are numbered, and that though two
Sparrows be but the Price of a Farthing, yet not one of them falls to the
Ground without our Father in Heaven, Matthew. 10.29, 30. The great GOD also was
pleased to magnify himself to his Servant Job, from the Care he takes of the
wild Goats of the Rocks, and the wild Asses of the Wilderness. David celebrates
his Maker likewise from his Care of the Birds of the Air, and the Shoals of
small Fish in the Sea. It is the Honor and Glory of GOD thus to extend his
Care to the most minute of his Works.

FOR how great would that King be though it, who were able to know and supply every
Want of the least of his Subjects, and could daily serve them with the Fruits
of his royal Bounty? It is recorded to the Honor of the Grecian Prince, that
he could callevery one of his vast Army by Name; and is it not the Glory of GOD
to know and provide for the least of all his Hosts? That as it is said of
Moses, so in a Sense it may be of every Creature, -- I know thee by Name, and
thou have found Grace in my Sight, so far as the Necessities of thy Nature and
Place in my Creation requires. Or as it is said of the Stars, so may it be of a
Fly or a Mote, Psalm. 147.4. He tells the Number of them all, he calls them
all by their Names: Great is our LORD, and of great Power, his Understanding is
infinite.

MOREOVER, We know also how GOD uses the smallest Creatures in his wise
Providence to the greatest Effects, and in unsearchable Manner to the
Preservation or Destruction of Mankind. How many gross and noxious Attoms do
the Flics, the Spiders, the Toads, etc, suck in and deliver us from? And so
GOD's Care of them is his Care of us: Their ministry to us is unknown. Again,
GOD brings forth his great Armies of Caterpillars, Locusts, Canker-Worms, and
Palmer-Worms, and how do the Inhabitants of the Earth tremble and fail before
them? Thus Pharaoh and his Kingdoms were plagued with Lice, and beaten by Frogs
and Flies.

III To multiply no further Instances: The Greatness of Providence is
unsearchable in its Cognizance, Disposing and Government of what we call
Accident and Chance, Fortuitous and Casual. Many things are so to us, but
nothing is so to GOD. They are his Counsel, though to us Contingent. The Divine
Mind directs in all casual Motions and Events. There is no Goddess Fortune to
be found in Heaven, however the blind Heathen Poet would have placed her there.
It suits only the Mouth of a Philistine to say, A Chance has happened unto us.
There is no such Thing to an Omniscient Mind, an all-disposing Providence.

THE Lot is cast into the Lap, but the whole disposing it is of GOD, Prove.
16.33 Thus Achan was accurately selected out of the many thousands of Israel.
It was an Appeal to the divine Providence to discover the Sinner and his
accursed Thing. So Jonathan was taken, or rather his rash Father for his
unadvised Adjuration. Hence the use of Lottery has been by many esteemed too
sacred to be made common; because the LORD only can give a perfect Lot. To be
sure the religious and solemn Use of it supposes the Government of divine
Providence in those things that are most contingent with us.

DISGUIZED Ahab was thus singled out, not by the Soldier, but by Providence in
the Battle. He drew a Bow at a venture, but the Arrow entered between the
Joints of the Harness of the King of Israel. Accidental to their own Intention
Men often accomplish special Purposes of GOD; and are Instrumental of much
undesigned Good in their occasional Actions; Natural, Civil and Political.
Pharaoh's Dau'ter came accidentally to the River to take up Moses, and give him
a Princely Education, to be in time the Deliverer of Israel. Augustus his
Taxing the World fulfilled the glorious Prophecy of the Messiah's Birth at
Betblehem. Saul by wandering after his Asses is led to a Crown. When a Man
shoots after Game and kills his Nei'bour whom he saw not, or if a Man be
felling a Tree and the Head of his Ax fly off and kill his Nei'bour, in these
Cases the LORD is said to deliver the one and the other into his Nei'bours Hand.

IN short:

WHATEVER is done by Design, or wherein the Wills of Men are pursued, is by do
means done at last without the Will of GOD overruling them: And whatever is
effected without or against the Mind of Creatures, has the Counsel and
Direction of GOD in it.

AND now let us make a pause a little, and contemplate the unsearchable
Perfection shining forth in this Government of the World! What Wisdom and
Knowledge! What Goodress, Care and Bounty! What Power! and in all what
Greatness!

1. WISDOM and Knowledge. So Ezekiel in Vision saw the Wheels (the Globes and
Orbs of the Universe, rolling like Balls) on their four Sides; the Rim of them
high and dreadful, and full of Eyes round about. The Eye of Providence is on
the whole Circle of Creatures, and all their Motions are wisely directed
thereby; as if every Orb had a Million of Eyes, and each of them a wise
Intelligence for its Guidance.

2. GOODNESS to the least and to the worst of Creatures: rich, free and
sovereign Goodness! Never weary, never failing! never short or scanty! But
abundantly sufficient, and super-abundant to all the Numbers, and all the wide
Extents, and all the capacious Natures in the Universe. The Earth is full of
his Riches. The World swims in it as in a boundless Ocean; and its Streams run
circling through all its habitable Parts to water them: the River of GOD which is
full of Water! all Creature daily drink thereof and are filled. The divine
Bounty that supplies us Day by Day is like the Manna every Morning about our
Dwellings; and the Flights of Quails of old might sooner far be numbered than
the Supplies of every Evening. The Earth is the LORD's, and the Fullness
thereof: It Is Stores are divided among the Children of Men with a munificent
Hand.

3. UNSEARCHABLE Power is displayed in the Exercise of a Providence over all
Things. The Eyes of the LORD run to and fro, through the whole Earth, to show
himself STRONG, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. There is no Government without Power, to
command, constrain and punish. Much less can the Universe be governed without
supreme, absolute and irresistible Power. No Creature has Power to preserve it
self, and less can any one uphold another in Being and Action. Equal is the
Power of God seen, whether in keeping to the ordinary Course of Nature, or in
preter-natural Effects: Whether when he keeps on in the usual Course of Mercy
to a sinful World; or when he changes the Face of Providence and comes forth in
ways of Judgment. He equally shows the Might of his Arm, when he casts down the
Mighty from their Seat, or when he exalts the Humble: when he showers down
Blessings, or when he pours down Hail and Fire: when he uses a Fly as when he
uses an Angel to minister unto his Will. For which is greatest? to effect great
Things by small Means, or to use those which he has greatly endowed, and made
in some Measure equal to the Effect produced. In either the Greatness of
Providence does equally appear. Joh 42.2. I know that thou can do every
Thing, and that no Thought can be withholden from thee.

THE Use shall be in three Words only: namely, to teach us Resignation,
Adoration and Obedience.

I. RESIGNATION to the great GOD in all his unsearchable Providence: whether
of a personal and private Reference, or of a public Nature and Concern.
However GOD dispose of us or our Families, or whatever he order concerning
Nations and Kingdoms of the Earth, or how dark soever his Providence may look
with respect to his Church, his Cause and Interest through the World; we must be
still and know that He is GOD; who will be exalted in the Earth. The highest
Creatures owe an absolute Submission to the Will of the unsearchable GOD. Eccl.
3.14. For I know that whatsoever GOD does it shall be for ever: nothing can be
put to it, nor any thing taken from it: and GOD does it that Men should fear
before him.

IT is not for us to Doubt or Question the Goodness, Righteousness or Wisdom of
GOD. Whatever the Sins of Persons and Times are, or whatever Calamities come
upon a sinful World; let it quiet and silence us to remember that GOD governs.
We must adore Him that dwells in the thick Darkness: Psalm. 97.2. Clouds and
Darkness are round about him, but Righteousness and Judgment are the Habitation
of his Throne.

WHO has directed the Spirit of the LORD? or being his Counselor has taught
him? With whom took he Counsel, and who instructed him, and taught him in the
Path of Judgment, and taught him Knowledge, and showed to him the Way of
Understanding? Behold the Nations are as a Drop of a Bucket, and are counted as
the small Dust of the Balance: Behold he takes up the Isles as a very little
thing: -- All Nations are before him as Nothing, and they are counted to him
less than Nothing and Vanity, Isa. 40.13, etc.

THE ALMIGHTY thus silenced Job, and stopped his complaining Tongue, and bro't
him to his first Submissions and Worship: Behold I am vile, what shall I answer
thee? I will lay my Hand upon my Mouth. How vainly had Job said before, that as
a Prince he would dare to go near even to his Judge, and come even to his Seat
in the Conscience of his Integrity? No, when his Judge came and spoke, and
showed him his incomprehensible Glory in his Works; the holy abased Man left
off his arguing, and fell to worshipping as he began at first: I have uttered
that I understood not, things too wonderful for me that I knew not: -- Now mine
Eye sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes.

WHEREFORE:

II. EXPRESS and awful Adoration, Prayer and Praise are a meet Acknowledgment
of the unsearchable Providence of GOD. We must fall down and worship. And
whence should we take our high Adorations of GOD'S excellent Greatness, but out
of his Word? Words only worthy of Himself, being his own Inspiration.

Psalm 95 3 -- 6. For the LORD is a great GOD, and a great King above all gods.
In his Hand are the deep Places of the Earth: the Strength of the Hills is his
also. The Sea is his, for he made it; and his Hands formed the dry Land. O
come, let us worship and bow down; let us kneel before the LORD our Maker.

Psalm. 96. 3, -- 9. Declare his Glory among Heathen, his Wonders among all
People. For the LORD is great, and greatly to be praised; he is to be feared
above all gods. For all the gods of the Nations are Idols, but the LORD made
the Heavens. Honor and Majesty are before him, Strength and Beauty are in his
Sanctuary. Give unto the LORD, O ye Kindreds of the People; give unto the LORD
Glory and Strength. Give unto the LORD the Glory due unto his Name: bring an
Offering and come into his Courts. O worship the LORD in the Beauty of
Holiness: fear before him all the Earch. Say among the Heathen that the LORD
reigns: the World also shall be established that it shall not be moved: He
shall judge the People righteously.

Psalm. 103.19, -- 22. The Lord has prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his
Kingdom rules over all. Bless the LORD ye his Angels that excel in Strength;
that do his Commandments, harkening to the Voice of his Word. Bless ye the LORD
all ye his Hosts, ye Ministers of his that do his Pleasure. Bless the LORD all
his Works in all Places of his Dominion: Bless the LORD O my Soul.

Psalm. 104. ult. The Glory of the Lord shall endure for ever, the LORD shall
rejoice in his Works. He looks on the Earth and it trembles, he touches the
Hills and they smoke. I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live, I will sing
praise unto my GOD while I have my Being. My Meditation of him shall be sweet,
I will glad in the LORD.

Psalm. 136. O give Thanks unto the GOD of gods! O give Thanks unto the LORD of
lords! -- To him who alone does great Wonders; -- To him that by Wisdom made
the Heavens: To him that stretched out the Earth above the Waters; -- To him
that made great Lights: -- The Sun to rule by Day, -- the Moon and Stars to
rule by Night: -- Who gives Food to all Flesh: for his Mercy endures for
ever: O give thanks unto the GOD of Heaven, for his Mercy endures for ever.

Psalm 148. Praise ye the LORD from the Heavens! Praise him in the Heights!
Praise ye him all his Angels! Praise ye him all his Hosts! Praise him Sun and
Moon! Praise him all ye Stars of Light! Praise him ye Heavens of Heavens, and
ye Waters that be above the Heavens.

PRAISE the LORD from the Earth, ye Dragons and all Deeps! Fire and Hail, Snow
and. Vapor, stormy Wind fulfilling his Word! Mountains and all Hills, fruitful
Trees and all Cedars! Beasts and all Cattle, creeping Things and slying Fowl!
Kings of the Earth and all People! Princes and all Judges of the Earth! both
young Men and Maidens, old Men and Children! let them praise the Name of the
LORD, for his Name alone is excellent; his Glory is above the Earth and Heaven.

III. GOD's unsearchable Greatness and Providence do challenge from us the most
reverential Obedience to his Will and Law. Universal Nature obeys him, and
shall not We? The mighty Angels listen to his Word, and do his Pleasure! The
Heavens, Earth and Sea mind his Decree, and keep the Orders he gives them! The
Monsters of the Deep, and the fierce Beasts of the Wood, forego their Prey to
obey him! Fire, Hail and Snow, Vapor and stormy Wind fulfill his Word! And
shall We be the only Rebels and Disobedient? Shall we not learn of the
Creatures a dutifui Observance of the Will of GOD in our Places, Actions and
moral Conduct? Or if they were capable of Learning, or needed to be taught
Obedience, should not we be Examples to the inferior Creatures?

SHALL a Subject say to his Prince on Earth that he wont, when he commands what
is Good! Shall his Word be scorned in his very Court, while he wisely directs
with consummate Counsel? Yet this were a little Offense, and a small
Presumption, compared with our Disobedience to the GOD of Heaven.

THIS is the Sanction to the divine Law: Ye shall keep my Statutes, I am the
LORD! And this is the constraining Motive to the most careful and strict
Observation of it: For the LORD your GOD is God of gods, and Lord of lords; a
great GOD, a mighty, and a Terrible --.

SERMON IV.
IN some little manner we have been contemplating the great GOD in his
unsearchable Essence and Works: His glorious Works of Creation and Providence
have been considered; and now I go on in the third and last Place, and so
finish my short Essay on this infinite and unsearchable Subject.

III. GOD is unsearchable and incomprehensible in the glorious Work of our
REDEMPTION by the LORD JESUS CHRIST.

THIS is by way of Eminence the Mystery. It is so to Angels as well as Men.
Mysterious Grace! which we could never have conceived of, and which it had been
high Presumption and Blasphemy to have imagined, if it had not been revealed to
us by GOD: And now it is revealed it is never to be comprehended, but to be
studied and looked into for ever (in the Church here, as it is in Heaven by
Saints and Angels there) with Admiration, Astonishment and Praises.

WE read, Ephesians. 3.8. Of the unsearchable Riches of Christ. Riches imply
abundance, and an abundance of those Things which are in themselves of great
intrinsic Worth, Price and Value. These are immensly to be found in Christ; the
Treasures of Wisdom, and the Riches of Glory.

UNSEARCHABLE Riches! never to have been discovered by the Wit of Man, and
incomprehensible to us now after the Discovery of them. The Mystery hid from
Ages and Generations, but now made manifest to the Saints; (as the Apostle
speaks to the Colossians) to whom GOD would make known the Riches of the Glory
of it; which is Christ in you the Hope of Glory, Col. 1.27.

IT is a wonderful Passage in Ephesians. 3.10. To the Intent that now unto the
Principalities and Powers in heavenly Places, might be known by the Church the
manifold Wisdom of GOD The Mystery of our Redemption was a secret to the
glorious Angels, who gradually have come into the Knowledge of it by
Revelation, and that mediately by the Church on Earth, as GOD has occasionally
revealed it more and more to us. Hence the Apostle Peter tells us, that the
Angels desire to look into these Things, 1 Pet. 1.12. They are ever seeking and
ever gaining a more perfect Insight into this Mystery; and as they gaze on this
Light of GOD's Glory in the Face of Jesus Christ, so grows their Admiration and
Delight in their high State of Blessedness. Therefore were the Cherubims placed
over the Mercy-Seat of old, Exodus 25.20. to fignify how Angels pry with Wonder
and intent Admiration into the Mysteries of our Redemption. "These sublime and
transcendent Manifestations of the Glory of GOD are ravishing and transporting
to adoring Angels. Their Eyes above are all turned toward, and fixed upon the
Mercy-Seat: They worship the Redeemer's Person; the Manner and Method of our
Redemption astonishes them; accurate and earnest is their Inspection, but their
vast Capacities can never comprehend it.

INDEED the Apostle to the Ephesians speaks of the Capacity of all Saints, GOD
granting them according to the Riches of his Glory, to be strengthened with
Might by his Spirit in the inner Man, to comprehend what is the Breadth, and
Length, and Depth, and Height, and to know the Love of Christ which passes
Knowledge, being filled with all the Fullness of GOD. But these Words explain
themselves, for there can be no proper Comprehension of that which passes
Knowledge; wherefore the Apostle's meaning can be no more than this -- Such a
simple Apprehension and Belief of the mysterious Truths, such a clear and
distinct Understanding of them, as to affect our Souls with the unsearchable
Wisdom and Grace of GOD therein displayed.

BUT to be particular. 1. Unsearchable is the Mystery of the Redeemer's Person.
2. His Sufferings and Death. 3. His Benefits. 4. His Kingdom and Works of Grace
here in this World. 5. The infinite divine Perfections shining forth in all.


I. UNSEARCHABLE is the Mystery of our Redemption in the Person of the
REDEEMER. And that whether we consider Him in his eternal Generation, the
only-begotten of the Father; or in his Incarnation, God-Man.

1. How unsearchable is the Doctrine of the Redeemer's eternal Generation and
Sonship? His Divinity and Godhead, the Sameness of Essence, and Equality in
Glory with the Father, from Everlasting. This supposes the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and is built on that Foundation. This eternal Communication of Essence
is a thing ineffable, yet firmly to be believed by us in adoring Humility:
scil. That there is a glorious second Person in the eternal GODHEAD, very GOD
of very GOD, begotten not made. How unsearchable are all those mysterious, and
yet plain positive Texts, which teach us this Truth? John 1.1. In the Beginning
was the WORD, and the Word was with GOD, and the Word was GOD. John 5.26. As
the FATHER has Life in Himself, so has he given to the SON to have Life in
Himself. John 16.15. All that the Father has is mine. John 10.30. I and my
Father are One.

HERE is the divine Nature totally communicated; and so the Begotten the same
divine Being with him that begets; in the Form of GOD, and without robbery
equal to GOD: the Brightness of the Father's Glory, and the express Image of
his Person, Phil. 2.6. Heb. 1.3.

HOW expressly are we told of our Savior, -- that the LORD possessed him in
the Beginning, -- that he was set up from Everlasting: and how expressly are we
required to believe in the Name of the only-begotten Son of GOD? And how often
is this Style used to us -- We beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the
Only-begotten of the Father: -- No Man has seen GOD at any time, the
Only-begotten which is in the Bosom of the Father, he has declared him.

BUT who shall conceive of or declare his Generation? Wise Agur adores in the
Meditation of this inconceivable Thing; and teaches us to do so too, and not
break through unto the LORD to gaze: Prove. 30.2, -- 6. Surely I have not the
Knowledge of the Holy! What is his Name, and what is his Son's Name, if thou
can tell? Every Word of GOD is pure: add thou not unto his Words, lest he
reprove thee and thou be found a Liar.

CHRIST truly was, and did exist before all Worlds: Yea the Worlds were made by
him; therefore is he the CREATOR himself, and so essentially Divine. Yet was
the divine Nature possessed by him communicated from the FATHER, perfect and
total, and so a proper Generation; incommunicable and utterly impossible to any
Creature: for to which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this
Day have I begotten thee? -- but to the Son he says, Thy Throne O GOD is for
ever and ever: and when he brings in the First-Begotten into the World he
says, And let all the Angels of GOD worship him, Heb. 1.5, 6.

Now who can unfold and explain this sublime Doctrine? This incomprehensible
Person; the Image of the invisible GOD! Col. 1.15, 16. For by Him were all
Things created, visible or invisible; whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers! all Things were created by him and for him; and he
is before all Things, and by him all Things consist.

SEE then the Riches of the Glory of the GODHEAD in the Person of Christ: who
it is that has given to Angels and Men all the Perfection of their Being, Life,
Endowments, etc. Contemplate the Treasures of creating Wisdom, Power and
Goodness in Him and flowing from Him! HE together with the FATHER, the One
infinite and everlasting overflowing Fountain of all Being and Perfection in
the Creatures! The Author, End and Upholder of them all! " All Things were
created by him and for him; he is before all Things, and by him all Things
consist. Here is the Riches of the Deity, the Fullness of the GODHEAD in Christ,
Heb. 1.2, 3. Col. 1.16.

2. How unsearchable is the Doctrine of the Incarnation of this divine Person?
The personal Union of the divine and human Nature in him! "That he is GOD and
Man in two distinct Natures, and one Person for ever. -- Without Controversy
great is this Mystery of Godliness; GOD manifested in the Flesh, by a
miraculous Conception of a Virgin! What new and single Thing is this which GOD
has created for our Redemption! his only Son assuming our Nature! The immense
Being compassed in a Womb, and tabernacling in a House of Clay! A Virgin shall
conceive and bear a Son, whose Name is Immanuel.

I will choose the Words of the excellent Bishop Beveridge, wherein to lay this
mysterious Doctrine before you A personal Union of two distinct Natures: Not as
if the divine Nature took upon it a human Person, but a divine Person took upon
him the human Nature: Not the divine Nature in general, without respect to the
Persons, but one of the Persons in the divine Nature took upon him our Flesh.
Yet not the divine Person abstracted or distinct from the divine Nature; but it
was the divine Nature in that Person which thus took upon it the human. -- Thus
the Son of GOD, in the glorious Trinity, is become the Son of Man in a gracious
Mystery: -- Not leaving his Godhead to take upon him the Manhood; but he took
the Manhood to his Godhead. -- The divine Person so assumed the human Nature as
still to remain a divine Person; and the human Nature was so assumed into a
divine Person as still to remain the human Nature. GOD therefore so became Man,
as to be both perfectly GOD and perfectly Man, united together in one Person:
-- So that every Action which he did, and every Passion which he suffered, was
done and suffered by him that was GOD as well as Man. And hence it is that
CHRIST is so fit, yea only fit, to be our Redeemer, Mediator and Surety;
because he alone is both GOD and Man in one Person. If he was not Man he could
not undertake that Office; if he was not GOD he could not perform it. -- Man
can suffer, but he cannot satisfy; GOD can satisfy but he cannot suffer: but
CHRIST being both GOD and Man can both suffer and satisfy too; and so is
perfectly fit both to suffer for Man, and to make Satisfaction unto GOD; to
reconcile GOD to Man, and Man to GOD.

THUS unsearchable is the Incarnation of the Son of GOD, or his Assumption of
our Nature. We must neither enquire from Doubting nor from Curiosity -- How can
these Things be? What is there too great or hard for the LORD? And who shall
unfold his Work? We must sit down content in the Angel's Words to the blessed
Virgin; It is of the HOLY GHOST, and the Power of the Highest: which Power and
its glorious Effects who can understand?

II. THE Humiliations, Sufferings and DEATH of the Son of GOD in our Nature,
are an unsearchable Mystery. If the Son of GOD were indeed to come in the
Likeness of Flesh, yet though it the Jews not in any Likeness of that Sin and
Misery into which we are fallen. He could not come (though it they) in a low and
humble Condition, in a poor, contemptible and afflicted State, to redeem us by
Sufferings, and an accursed Death: No, said they, the Messiah will come as a
triumphant King and Conqueror, in Power and Pomp, in worldly Grandeur and
Splendour. Hence were they so offended, in spite of all their ancient
Prophecies, at the mean Appearance of our Savior. They could not take Him to
be the Son of GOD, whom in the midst of all his divine Words and Works, they
beheld in outward Appearance to be but a mortified holy Prophet: Astonished
indeed at his Doctrine and Miracles, but stumbled at his Poverty and Cross: An
enthroned Messiah they looked for, and behold a crucified One: This was such a
Stone of Stumbling, and Rock of Offense to them, that they fell on it and were
broken to pieces. But blessed are they whosoever are not offended at that,
which they ought rather to admire with the most profound Veneration.

IT must needs be stupendous to us to meditate, the supreme Lawgiver obeying
and fulfilling the divine Law, to work out a Righteousness for the
Justification of Sinners; and then bearing the Curse of the holy Law to expiate
and atone for our Guilt in the Transgression thereof. What an amazing Though It is
it for the Most High GOD to take the Form of a Servant; and the Possessor of
Heaven and Earth to appear in a destitute Estate, that we through his Poverty
might be enriched! For the most blessed Being to subject himself to Sorrows,
and HE who alone has Immortality to Die! For the most holy One to be made Sin
for us, and the most just One a Sacrifice to divine Justice! What Paradoxes are
these Things, which break our Tho'ts in the Meditation of them, even as Nature
was convulsed at the Time of the Crucifixion of our LORD? Now it beclouds our
Minds with Darkness, and then dazzles them with Light, 1 Cor. 1. 23, 24. 2.6,
-- 10.

III. UNSEARCHABLE are the Benefits of Redemption. Who can comprehend, conceive
of or utter what is the Price of GOD's pardoning Mercy, of sanctifying Grace,
or of eternal Salvation?

1. The Worth of pardoning Mercy: Adoption in Christ, Justification through him,
and Reconciliation to God. That guilty, condemned, perishing Sinners, the Heirs
of Death and Hell, should obtain the Remission of their Sins, become Righteous
in the Eyes of the holy GOD, his Children by Faith in Christ Jesus, and his
Soul have Pleasure in them, even as though they had not been born nor lived in
Sin! What manner of Love is this, which the Father has bestowed upon us, that
we should be called the Sons of God? Let a convinced Sinner, a wounded Spirit
say, what the Worth of a Pardon is: or let him that through Grace has the
comfortable Sense of his sealed Pardon declare if he can the inestimable Price
of it! Let Saints in Glory look down and tell it us in their smiling Joys! Or
let us look down into the Pit below, and read it in the Anguishes and Wailings
of the Damned. Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven,
whose Sin is covered, etc.

HEAR the Triumphs of a justified State -- I know in whom I have believed --
Behold, now are we the Sons of God -- and if Children then Heirs -- Ye know
that ye have eternal Life -- Who is it that condemns, it is Christ that died
-- What shall separate us from the Love of GOD -- Though now we see him not, yet
believing we rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. O the unsearchable
Riches of a Pardon!

2. So likewise of sanctifying Grace. By Nature we are now shapen and born in
Sin, in a miserable Bondage to it, and Pollution from it. It is the mysterious
Work of God to change and renew the Soul. It confounded the Master in Israel to
hear of the Necessity of the New-Brith But unsearchable must the Price be of a
renewed Heart and Mind: to have God's Image restored in us! To be made
Partakers of his Holiness! From Slaves to Satan to become the Servants of God!
and his holy Temples who were the Habitations of every unclean Lust! To have
our blind Eyes opened! Our hard Hearts softened! Our depraved Affections
purified! Our desiled Consciences purged! The Law of Gof written in us, the
Spirit of God dwelling in us! To have Christ formed in us, the Flesh crucified,
the Spirit of Life acting us, Grace Growing in us, the Life of Jesus exhibited
in this mortal Flesh, which naturally is in vile Subjection to Sin. O what does
the great GOD work in and for the Souls of his Chosen in Christ! A Work
mavelous and glorious as Man's first Creation in the Image of God! For in
this new Creation there also is commanded Light out of Darkness, Order and
Beauty out of a Chaos of Confusion and Emptiness.

3. WHO can search out Heaven, and the eternal Life by Jesus Christ, Salvation
with eternal Glory! This is the Promise which he has promised; the Purchase of
his Death, and the Gift of God through him. He has begotten us unto this lively
Hopen by his Resurrection from the dead, and Ascension to Heaven; and thither
where he is will he gather his Redeemed, and they shall behold his Glory, and
be glorified with him. But what this future and heavenly Glory is, is to us
unsearchable. Now are we the Sons of GOD, if we believe in CHRIST the
only-begotten Son, but it does not appear what we shall be; only we know that
we shall be like him, (inexpressibly Blessed in him) for we shall see him as he
is.

READ over the Descriptions given us of the heavenly Felicity, and think what
is the Hope of our Calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance
in the Saints, Ephesians. 1.18. It is an Inheritance in Light: Incorruptible and
Undefiled: A Crown of Glory that fades not away: A far exceeding and eternal
Weight of Glory: A Fullness of Joy in the Presence of God, and Pleasures at his
right Hand for evermore: Infinite and everlasting Happiness. We must comprehend
GOD and Eternity, his Glory and Bliss, before we can conceive of all the
Benefits of Christ. These Riches in Glory are past the Power of Numbers to cast
up; they are past all Account or Reckoning: When we have risen to Millions of
Millions, and Often multiplied them, there are the same Numbers yet behind. The
Benefits of Redemption have no Compass short of the infinite and eternal GOD.
They are Immense like Him, wide as the Heavens, deep and long as Eternity!
Things neither lawful nor possible to be spoken.

IV. UNSEARCHABLY great and glorious is the Administration of the Kingdom of
Grace, and GOD's gracious Working on the Souls of Sinners by and with the
Dispensation of his Word and ordinances. We sce the glorious Effect wro't, we
feel the enlivening refreshing Gale blow: The Thing is sensible, the Manner
incomprehensible. John 3. 9. The Wind blows where it lists, and thou
hear the Sound thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, or whither it
goes: so is every one that is born of the Spirit. He works arbitrarily,
powerfully, mysteriously. Unaccountable it is -- where, in whom, when, and in
what manner he pleases to work. The Breathings of the HOLY SPIRIT are like the
Wind upon us, both in respect of the Freeness and Variableness of its Motion.
GOD blows out of his Treasuries upon us, from what Quarter, in what
Measure,with what Continuance, with what Intermissions, with what Changes, more
or less, as he pleases. It is very secret and exceeding various Mr. Burkitt.
. Various in the Method of working; some wro't upon by the Corrosives of the
Law, others by the Lenitives of the Gospel. Various in the Manner and Means; on
some by a powerful Odinance, on others by an awakening Providence. Yet the Work
is one in all, the Effect the same, scil. Conformity to GOD, his holy Nature,
and revealed Will, in Heart and Life.

REGENERATION is the Riches of CHRIST. It is Christ formed in us: The Spirit of
Christ given to us: The lmage of Christ restored in us. He has purchased this
invaluable Gift for us: It is the Spirit of the Son sent forth into our Hearts;
the Comforter whom 1 will send -- said our ascending Savior; be shall receive
of mine, and shall show it unto you: the Graces, the Comforts, the Glory which
I have purchased for you, he shall produce in you, and prepare you for.

BUT to be more particular:

1. UNSEARCHABLE is the Administration of the Kingdom of Grace, in God's
sending the Gospel to some and not to others; to one Country and Nation and not
to another. It was altogether sovereign and unaccountable, that first Abraham
should be singled out from an idolatrous World, and the Church be shut up
within the narrow Walls of his House, which by a Covenant of Peculiarity and
Circumcision, as by a Wall of Partition, was separated from the rest of the
World, for so many Ages and Generations. And now that the Gentiles are
Fellow-Heirs and Partakers of the Promise in Christ by the Gospel, it is the
unsearchable Conduct of divine Grace to leave great Empires, and vast
Territories of the Earth in the Darkness of Nature and without a Revelation: to
use the Words of Scripture, -- without GOD in the World, aliens to the Covenant
of Promise, afar off and without Hope; while other Places and People are made
nigh, bro't near, and exalted high in spiritual Privileges.

WHAT a dark and melancholy Mystery is it, in Providence and in Grace, that so
great a part of the known Earth is at this Day perishing in Pagan Idolatries,
serving dumb Idols even as they are blindly led by Satan? Again, that so great
a part of it lies sunk under the Mohammedan Imposture? and so great a part of
Christendom also in the Romish Superstitions and Abominations? And why to us in
these remote Regions should the Truth and Worship of GOD be sent, and preserved
pure? A Mercy denied to Millions better than we! Why these late barbarous and
salvage Places of the Earth be illuminated, and honored to become the visible
Kingdom of Christ, while the noble Empires of the East, China and others, are
left in their deplorable Ignorance!

IT is not that we are greater or better than they, as was said to Israel by
Moses when they were chosen, called and separated from the World: but
altogether of the sovereign and unsearchable Will, Wisdom and Grace of GOD. As
of old it was with the Seed of Abraham; not all of them were alike adopted; but
in Isaac was his Seed called: And again, when Rebecca had conceived, the
Children not being yet born; neither having done either Good or Evil, that the
Purpose of GOD according to Election might stand, not of Works, but of him that
calls, it was said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger; Jacob have I
loved and Esau have I hated, Romans 9.10, -- 13. And what shall we say to this,
save to adore the Sovereignty of the divine Will! As he says to Moses, I will
be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and I will have Compassion on whom I
will have Compassion! To show his Wrath and to make his Power known, he rejects
Places as well as Persons, fitted for Destruction, like the Cananites of old;
and again to make known the Riches of his Mercy on those whom he has ordained
unto Glory, even us whom he has called of the Gentiles; as he says in Osee, I
will call them my People which were not my People, and her beloved which was
not beloved: And it is come to pass that in the Place where it was said unto
them, Ye are not my People, there are they called the Children of the living
GOD. In this Meditation it is, even of the Riches of the Gentile World, by the
Fall and Diminishing of the Jews, that the Apostle cries out, Romans 11.33. O the
Depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of GOD! how unsearchable
are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out! For who has known the Mind
of the LORD, or being his Counselor has taught him?

2. UNSEARCHABLE it is that the same Means enjoyed by many, are so efficacious
upon some and not on others. The divine Election and Purpose of Merey makes
here the like wonderful Difference between Persons, in respect of internal
Efficocy, as the divine Providence does any where in respect of outward Call
and Privilege. And the same Words used in that Case, are meant and applied in
this too by the HOLY GHOST. It is not of him that wilieth, nor of him that
runs, but of GOD that shows Mercy. There is the same corrupt Nature in one
and all, the same natural Enmity and Opposition to the almighty Grace of GOD,
the same Inability both to will and to do in one and another: there is the same
Guiltiness by Nature, and very often more increased by vicious Practice, where
the divine Election is shown after all. We little know where GOD means to work;
but it is often there where Man least expects, and where our Desires and
Prayers have been less express. Nor is it more admirable to any than to the
happy Vessels of Mercy themselves, to find themselves singled out when
sometimes they could least of all have looked for it: As the Apostle Paul was
full of Adorations that he should be called to preach the unsearchable Riches
of Christ, in the very Heat and Act of his fierce Opposition to, and
Persecution of the Name of JESUS.

IN short:

THERE is an Excellency of Power and Sovereignty in these Things, that we may
admire GOD in his free and effectual Calling whom he will, and working what,
and how, and when, and where he will. He divides to every Man severally as he
will, and has Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will he hardneth.
To some of the same Congregation it is given to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven, to others it is not given. Jam. 1.18. Of his own Will begat
be us by the Word of Truth. He could of the same Mass of Pollution, and from
the same Quarry of Stones, have raised up other Children to Abraham; yet here
and not there have the purifying and softning Dews of the Word fell and abode,
or the rending Flashes of it struck, and not there. Ephesians. 2.1, -- 7. And you
has he quickened who were dead in Trespasses and Sins: wherein in time past ye
walked according to the Course of this World --: Among whom also we all had our
Conversation in time past, in the Lusts of our Flesh, fulfilling the Desires of
the Flesh and Mind, and were by Nature the Children of Wrath even as others:
But GOD who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he loved us, even
when we were dead in Sins, has quickened us together with Christ, etc. -- For
by Grace ye are saved, through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the Gift
of GOD.

EVERY Saint may look in upon himself, if he perce ves a saving Change wro't in
him, and say, LORD, why me? And every Minister or observing Christian will find
frequent Reason to admire with respect to others, and say (not from Complaint,
but full of humble Adoration) Why here (blessed GOD) and not there! Why on this
Soul, and not on that! Even so Father, because it pleases thee! O that Ishmael
also might live in thy Sight.

3. UNSEARCHABLE is the Diversity of the Ways and Manner whereby it pleases GOD
to work savingly on the Souls of Men. These are many, and all mysterious,
comparing the Means in themselves unto the Glory and Greatness of the Effect.
It is the Glory of GOD to use the smallest Means, to the most illustrious
Effect; and sometimes to bring about his own great Ends by ways seemingly cross
thereunto; that so his Hand may be the more signal, and the Event the more
surprising. As the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are his Tho'ts above
ours. The Variety here is pleasant to contemplate, working with the most sweet
Harmony to one blessed End. The Heart of one is softly opened, sweetly dilated
and quickened by the silent Breath of the Almighty: Another is pricked to the
Heart, has his Conscience gash'd, and lies in Agonies of Spirit. Sometimes a
Word does either of them; sometimes a gracious Providence the one, and an
awakening Affliction the other. He works severally as he wills. To name a
few of his Ways, -- And how little a Portion is heard of him!

1. IT is of the unsearchable Riches of Grace that the Foolishness of Preaching
should save any. This the Apostle amplifies on as a strange but notorious
thing; the Effect and the Means not at all proportionate, 1 Cor. 1. 18, -- 21.
It is the Wonder of the World, that the Doctrine of a crucified Savior, and of
the Cross to be taken up by his Disciples, should ever prevail over the Hearts
of Men; their Hearts opposite to the Shames of the one, and to the Pains of the
other! And that the naked Proposal of this divine Doctrine by Men of no
Learning or Influence should so Triumph over the Prejudices, Superstitions and
Customs of People. Yea, the daily Efficacy of the preached Gospel, is to our
own Times a living lasting Wonder.

CAN we speak to the Souls of Men, or can we reach their Hearts? And very often
can the inferior Preacher? (whose Sermons and Composures are in the Wisdom and
Judgment of Man yet more Foolishness) who yet is used by God most of all to
enter into the Souls of Sinners! 2 Cor. 4. 7. For we have this Treasure in
earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the Power may be of GOD, and not of us.

IT pleases GOD for his own Glory to put a precious Treasure in his poor
Ministers, and to display his own Power in their weak Administrations. There is
an Excellency of Power displayed in convincing and humbling the Souls of
Sinners, in enlightening, purifying and sanctifying them; in the Mortification
of Sin and Lust in them, and in the Dominion of Grace upon its Expulsion. There
is an Excellency of Power in reaching the Hearts and Consciencies of Men, and
in a manifest Empire over the Thought and Will, Mind and Affections.

WHO is sufficient for these Things? What Means or Instruments equal to them?
Truly none: yet how easily is it all effected by the poor Labors of weak Men,
ordained and blessed of GOD hereunto? The Effect equally wonderful if you
thro'ly consider it, as when the Waters divided against their Nature and Course
at the Word of Elisha! Or as when the Midian Army was routed before the blast
of a Trumpet, and the Lamps in their earthen Pitchers. Or as when the great
Syrian Leper was cleansed by dipping in the Waters of Jordan.

AND since I have named him, let it be the Instance for the illustrating this
Head. A little Israelite Girl was the first Means toward the cleansing this
noble Syrian: but when he came to the Prophet, and was bid to go and wash
himself seven times in the River Jordan, how did he despise the thing? How did
he pet and storm at the Direction of Heaven? Were there not as good Rivers in
Syria for him to have washed at? Had the Waters of Jordan any natural Virtue
more than those? No, no more than the Lips of Ministers, or their Preaching has
in it self a Power to purify the Heart. Yet was it soon found that the ordained
Waters, like those of the Sanctuary, had the divine healing Power and Blessing
with them: the Leper's Flesh was restored like a newborn Child, or a ruddy
Youth's for Purity and Beauty; he was a new Creature, as one formed and born
anew: He admired the wondrous Renovation, adored the Power and Mercy of GOD in
the Change wro't, declared that there is no GOD beside him in all the Earth,
would needs have some of the consecrated Earth of Israel to build an Altar in
his own Country, and vowed that he would never worship or do sacrifice to any
dumb Idol of Syria any more. Truly the Ordinances of the Gospel are as
wonderful in their Effects upon the Soul, as the Waters of Israel were in their
Effects upon the Body of Naaman. John 15.3. Now are ye clean through the Word
that I have spoken to you. Heb. 4.12, 13. Psalm. 45.3, 5. 1 Cor. 1.21, -- 28.

2. THE Operations of the divine Grace on our Souls by particular Providence,
both merciful and afflictive, are equally unsearchable. These in themselves are
equally ineffectual, as thousands do experience, as the Teachings out of GOD's
Law. Both Mercies and Judgments are lost on Multitudes. Yet when and where GOD
pleases to work by either, they have (both one and other) an irresistible
Constraint; the one to allure and draw and bind the Soul by the Bands of Love,
the other to compel and force and drive us to GOD, not against the Will, but by
a potent Conquest and turning of it.

UNSEARCHABLE are the Purposes of Mercy, and the evident Proofs thereof in the
End, in many terrible Dispensations of Providence to particular Persons and
Families. The greatest outward Rebukes prove not seldom the greatest spiritual
Mercies, and surest Consolations of their Lives. However Nature may groan and
cry out under the Operation, yet the Life and Health of the Soul is graciously
consulted, and marvellously compassed. We often see People take on grievously
now, at those things which they will rejoice in for ever, with Joy unspeakable
and full of Glory. All that seems sadly against them, which is making
marvellously for their everlasting good.

IN what Anguish cried the poor Mother to the Prophet, O Man of GOD! art thou
come to call my Sins to remembrance, and to stay my Son? Ah, blessed Mean of a
more effectual Calling her Sins to Remembrance, and working her up unto a more
full Repentance, and a future Life of more Faith in GOD, and Devotedness unto
him. Heaven will unriddle many of the dark Works of GOD's Grace now.

3. UNSEARCHABLE is the Conduct of divine Grace in making the very Sins of Men,
and their foul Falls into Sin, to be the Occasion very often, and effectual
Means of their Conversion and Salvation Happy the Sinner that is bro't to see
the Sinfulness of Sin, and his own exceeding Vileness. But it is a melancholy
Way to Conviction, by some Over-Wickedness to raise a hideous Guilt, to glare
us in the Face, and fright us to our Knees. By one Sin breaking out GOD often
discovers to a Person more Sin in himself; as if you stir a Pool of Water the
Mud and Filth of the Bottom rises and shows it self. Conscience is made tender
by its Wound, and watchful by its Fall and Bruise. GOD sometimes mercifully
shames Souls into a saving Humiliation by a serious Reflection on their
Scandals; they see their own Deformity in the Glass of GOD's Word, and are
covered with Blushes and deep Confusion before GOD and Man. They are frighted
to see their own Faces, and ashamed to be seen of others. From loathing a
particular Fact they come to the loathing all Manner of Sin, as such. I have
sinned, said David, and into what a glorious Exercise of Repentance did it cast
him? Psalm. 51. Peter by his Fall learned Humility and Fear, and so gained a
future Stability. Paul doubled his Industry and Adorations of GOD, when he
remembered his old persecuting the Saints. No Good can possibly be in Sin, and
yet saving Good is bro't out of it. Many a Saint looking unto Means must be
forced to say -- I had perished if I had never fell heinously. The Blow that
might have stunned Persons, or dashed 'em to Pieces, has sometimes through Grace
only awakened them out of their previous Stupor, and Security in Sin. O the
Riches of Grace to such a Soul! by plunging in the Ditch so that his own
Clothes have abhorred him, he came to see his Pollution and need of Cleansing.

4. And lastly, UNSEARCHABLE is the Method of Grace also in making the great
Temptations, Assaults and Terrors of Satan, not seldom the Means of the
Conversion and Salvation of them that suffer by 'em. The Purgatory (I may say)
through which elect and chosen Vessels are often made to pass, and by which they
are refined and prepared for Glory. It looks all to be of Wrath, and the
Blackness or Flames of Hell about the Soul; but in the End it is found full of
the Intention of Love and utmost Compassion. As were the kind and tender Tho'ts
of Heaven to holy Job, while the Devil for his Trial and Increase of Grace had
Permission to fright and scare him.

HOW mysterious is it to see gracious Persons annoyed with impure, diabolical,
cursed, blasphemous Tho'ts, which they loath and detest, and fly from; but are
haunted and pursued by, as by some hideous Spectre or unclean Spirit, which
terrifies because it seems to pollute them. It looks to them even as Satan's
Possession of them, when indeed it is the Means of his utter Ejection, and of
the souls being cleans'd and swept from all Impurity and Defilement, and
becoming a Temple and Mansion for the Holy Ghost.

THESE hellish Assaults have often driven Souls to Christ, the impregnable
Reck: these foul Suggestions have left no Ordure of Hell behind them; but bro't
the poor Soul to see and loath its natural Pollution and Defilement, and
hastened its Flight to the open Fountain for Cleansing in the Blood of Christ.
These cursed Blasphemics, hated as they are to the suffering Heart, have only
fixed and raised it in the Reverence and Love of GOD, and in the Spirit of
Devotion. These Amazements and Disquiets have only established the Soul in a
sober Fear, and a composed, humble, watchful, prayerful, steady Course of
Obedience and Trust in GOD.

IT is in the Works of Grace as it is in those of Providence: As Jacob's
Sorrows and Joseph's Sufferings were but the wise and happy Means of their
future Honor, Safety and Comfort; so is the Malice and Envy, the Rage and Fury
of Satan, and the inexpressible Sufferings of Souls therefrom, often the sure
Means of their eternal Salvation, Felicity and Glory. We may apply in this Case
that Exhortation and Consolation: Phil. 1. 28. And in nothing terrified by your
Adversaries, which is to them an evident Token of Perdition, but to you of
Salvation, and that of GOD.

THUS GOD has many mysterious Ways whereby to work savingly on the Souls of
Sinners. May we but Experience any, even the darkest, of these Ways of divine
Mercy, that we know how to adore GOD therein and magnify his Work; and that the
exceeding Riches of his Grace in his Kindness to us through JesusChrist may be
exemplified and admired for ever in us.

I am now arrived unto the last Head propounded, which is,

V. UNSEARCHABLE are the divine Persections shining forth in the Work of
Redemption. The Harmony See Dr. Bates, and Mr. Charnock on that Subject.
of the divine Attributes in Man's Redemption is a sweet, a copious and a
celebrated Subject. Wisdom, Power, Holiness, Justice, Sovereignty, Goodness,
Mercy and Grace do all meet and unite, and are all exalted and glorified
together in this last and highest of GOD's Works.

1. UNSEARCHABLE is the WISDOM of GOD in the great Work of our Redemotion. The
manifold Wisdom of GOD made known in Christ. Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge
are hid in him, and in him bro't to Light. The Riches of Understanding is
requisite to the Acknowledgment of the Mystery of the Father, and of Christ.
How vast the Stores of the most precious and enriching Knowledge! salutary and
saving Knowledge! of the last Necessity and Efficacy to make us happy.

IN this Work of Redemption GOD is said to have abounded to us in all Wisdom
and Prudence. In all his Works much of his Wisdom appears, in this it abounds.
That Justice and Mercy, Righteousness and Peace, Truth and Grace should be
bro't to meet and unite in our Redemption! "The most different Interests be
reconciled, the most distant Ends accomplished; and in the untho't of, yet most
perfect. Way that can be! How does it astonish and yet charm the Mind that
attentively and graciously considers it!

HOW wonderful a REDEEMER has GOD provided for us? How suitable a Mediator
between himself and us! for his own infinite Honor, and our sure Salvation!
That HE should have wherewith to offer and wherewith to satisfy! be able to
suffer and yet able too to save! able to stand between Sinners and the
consuming Fire of GOD's Wrath, in our weak Nature, and not be consumed, but
bear and appease that Wrath at once! Here is a more admirable Work of GOD in
the Person of Christ, than in all Angels and all Men put together! A more
astonishing Effect in one Life and Death, than in the laying the Foundations of
the Earth, or than the spreading forth the Heavens over us. Such an High Priest
became us, who should be so near to us, and yet as near to GOD; clothed in our
Infirmities, and yet arrayed in the Glories of the GODHEAD.

"A Nature wherein to suffer, and a Nature whereby to sanctify those
Sufferings, and give an infinite Worth and Merit to them. GOD in our Nature to
conquer Sin and Satan for us! the Image of the invisible GOD a visible Pattern
to us! the Law answered for us both in the Precept and Penalty! The
Commandments of it perfectly obeyed, the Fighteoasness of it fulfilled, and the
Curse of it punctually exceuted! What a Display of divine Wisdom is here?

2 UNSEARCHABLE is the POWER of GOD displayed in the Work of our Redemption.
CHRIST the Power of GOD, and the Wisdom of GOD, 1 Cor. 1.24. The Mighty GOD and
the Prince of Peace are One. Our Salvation was a mighty Work to undertake and
perform: to bear the Wrath of the infinite GOD for us! to make Atonement for
our Sins, and to bring in an everlasting Righteousness for us! to overturn the
Kingdom and Power of Satan, to bestow sanctifying Grace and eternal Life! The
whole Work of our Redemption from first to last, both in the Impetration and
Application of it, is a Work of unsearchable Power. Ephesians. 1. 10. And what is the
exceeding Greatness of his Power usward, who believe, according to the Working
of his mighty Power, which he wro't in Christ, etc. What was so blasphemously
said by the deluded People of Simon the Sorcerer, is religiously to be ascribed
to CHRIST, and to Him only, This Man is the great Power of GOD.

IN his ineffable Conception, that new and singular Creation of GOD, it was the
Power of the Highest over-shadowing. The same Power was glorious in the mighty
Works of his Life, in the Manner of his Death, in his Resurrection and
Ascension. He endued his Apostles with like Power from on High, and they went
forth in his Might and Spirit, and converted the World. And what Means did they
use? Did they gather Armies? Form Leagues, inspire Princes to arm for them? or
People to Mutiny and Rebel? Did they preach up Force and Blood like Mahomet? or
a holy War like Antichrist? No, the Weapons of this Warfare were not carnal,
but altogether spiritual, and mighty through GOD, to the pulling down the strong
Holds of Sin, casting down Imaginations, and every high Thing that exalts it
self against the Knowledge of GOD, and bringing into Captivity every Though It to
the Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4. The naked Doctrines of the Cross were
preached, no enticing Words of Man's Wisdom used, the Philosophy of the Schools
and the Idolatries of the Nations were decried, Men's Lust sorbidden and
condemned, the Mortification of the Flesh and Self-Denial were required, and in
spite of the Rage of the Jews, and Contempt of the Gentiles this holy Doctrine
established it self, in Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power.

IN a Word: The same Power that commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness,
shines into and illuminates the Sinner's Heart. The same Power that raises the
dead quickens them that are dead in Trespasses and Sins. The same Power that
smote and broke the Rock softens the stony Hearts of Sinners. The Power that
divided the Sea, turns the Sinner's Heart against the Violence of natural
Inclination. The Power that gave Sampson his wondrous Strength to drive the
Armies of Philistines and slay Heaps upon Heaps; to snap asunder the strongest
Cords, to pluck up and bear away the City Gates, and to bow together the mighty
Pillars of a vast Fabric; the same divine Power (and a greater) is it that
arms a Soul against its own Lusts, and the Worlds Temptations and the Legions
of Hell; that breaks the native Dominion and inveterate Habits of Sin, and
pulls down its strong Holds. Look not on Men in your Amazement at these Things,
as the wondering People once did on the Apostles, as if by any Power or Virtue
of theirs these Things are done; No, GOD has glorified his Son JESUS, and this
is His Power whereby he subdues all Things to himself.

3. UNSEARCHABLE is the HOLINESS and JUSTICE of GOD in the Work of our
Redemption. The infinite Sanctity of GOD has more shone forth in the
Satisfaction for Sin in the Death of Christ, than even in the Severity of the
Law condemning and threatening it. Herein eminently is the LORD of Hests exalted
in Judgment, and GOD that is Holy is sanctified in Righteousness. What Hatred
of Sin, and Vengeance against it, appears in the Sacrifice of the Son of GOD,
and his shedding his precious Blood? A Life worth more than the Blood of all
Men, and the Life of Myriads of Angels added to them! Where does GOD appear so
glorious in Holiness, so irreconcilable to Sin, and so full of the Detestation
of it, as in this Demand of his Justice, and Oblation to it. That Holiness
might not suffer, CHRIST did: rather than spare Sin GOD spared not his own Son,
and was inexorable to the strong Crying and Tears of his everlasting Love.

THE Glory of Holiness and Mercy together was the End of our Savior's Death;
the glorious Design and Fruit of Redemption. HE, the HOLY ONE of GOD,
sanctifies whom he saves. The Faith in Him that justifies us, purifies us also.
The Elect are chosen in Him unto Sanctification, and called to be Saints.

WHAT will not GOD sacrifice to the Honor of his Holiness! What Myriads of
apostate Angels! What Worlds of impenitent Sinners! What are these compared
with the Offering of his own Son?

I need not add:

4. THAT the divine GRACE and MERCY are Unsearchable in the Work of Redemption.
The Height and Depth of the Love of GOD herein expressed passes Knowledge. It
is his great Love wherewith he loved us: to the Praise of the Glory of his
Grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved.

" GOODNESS was the Spring of our Redemption: the Motive to it was mere Love:
the Benefits thereof are an infinite Variety of eternal Mercy. It was free
Grace against Desert: the Riches of Grace to supply our infinite Wants:
Distinguishing Mercy that regarded us when it passed by Angels.

THIS is but a very transient and general View of the unsearchable Glories of
the divine Perfections, shining forth in the Work of Redemption. Let us pause
here and recollect, what unspeakable Things GOD has done for it! What
inestimable Treasures he has expended on it! What unsearchable Things he has
provided in CHRIST for poor Sinners! What has he not given for us, what has he
not given to us! It surmounts all Though It, surpasses all Conception and
Admiration! We can never in any equal or fitting Manner adore, praise, extol
the Mercies and Benignity of our gracious GOD toward us Could we Think with all
the Swistness and Intenseness of Angels, and speak with their Tongues, and
should we spend our whole Life here and Eternity hereafter, in looking into and
magnifying the divine Wisdom, Power, Holiness and Mercy in our Redemption, yet
at last it were ineffable.

LET us reflect on what has been said, and infer:

1. THE incomprehensible Glory of our SAVIOR. His Glory is great in our
Salvation; Honor and Majesty does it put upon him: it declares him most
Blessed for ever: His Name shall continue as the Sun; and Men shall be blessed
in him; all Nations shall call him Blessed. His Dignity and Excellency, Merits
and Benefits fill the whole Earth with his Glory.

2. THE Reproach of the CROSS cease. A Glory dwells upon it: The King of
Glory hung upon it. No more let it be called the cursed Tree, but the Tree of
Life; like that in the midst of the Paradise of GOD, yielding all manner of
rich and precious Fruit. With what Garlands and Trophies is the triumphant
Standard hung? Yea, with Crowns of Glory for them that are not ashamed of his
Reproach! Worthy to be esteemed greater Riches than the Treasures of the Indies!

BUT when I speak of the CROSS you know how to take me right, of the
meritorious Sacrifice offered thereon, by our Savior, and the most blessed
Effects of that Offering. Men may magnify the material Cross to gross Idolatry,
and abuse the Sign of it to Superstition; but the Virtues of a crucified
Savior, the Merits and Power of his Death, cannot be too much honored by us.

3. FROM all the incomprehensible Things already spoken of we may well infer,
What is not an Interest in Christ worth? A Relation to him, a Fortion in him, a
Name among his redeemed! O unsearchable Blessedness! O immense Felicity! How
little do Men consider what is offered to 'em daily in the Tenders of
Salvation! How great are the Things which we hear so carelefly of, which we so
easily neglect, and set so light by? O if thou knew the Gift of GOD! GOD
forgive us our Madness and Frenzy, for we know not what we do. That when the
Offers of Salvation by CHRIST are daily made to us, and we are prayed in his
Name to accept of the great Redemption through him, yet we despise it as if it
were the most minute, contemptible, despicable Thing! The meanest Trash and
Dung in our Way! Whereas all Things should be so to us for the Excellency
hereof!

4. SEE the Guilt and Sin of Unbelief and Impenitence under the Gospel. What a
high Indignity and Provocation is it to redeeming Mercy! A most astonishing
Baseness as well as Madness! That when the immense Grace of GOD is revealed to
us, it should be but as a Pearl cast before Swine, who are ready to crucify
afresh, to turn again and rend the Son of GOD. Our Slight of a Savior is (as
Dr. Bates expresses it) a Sin of that transcendent Height, that all the
Abominations of Sodom are not equal to it. It exasperates Mercy it self, that
dear and tender Attribute, the only Advocate in GOD's Bosom for us. It is to
strike at the Heart, and kick at the Bowels of a Savior.

5. LET what we have heard beget in us the highest Confidence and Trust in
Christ as an alsufficient Savior. He is able to supply all our Needs, and to
do for us beyond all that we can ask or think. Nothing is too great for him to
do; nothing can be wanting in him. There are no Bounds to be set, how far he
can pardon and save; He is able to save unto the uttermost all that come unto
GOD by him.

6, And lastly, LET us learn Humility and Modesly in our Researches into the
deep Things of GOD, and let us believe and adore where GOD has revealed those
Things which we cannot now comprehend. GOD is Unsearchable, -- therefore we
must submit to the Revelation which he makes of Himself. Our Reason is by no
Means the Measure of Truth. No Man has seen GOD at any time; the Only-Begotten
of the Father he has revealed him. The Glory of GOD is now to be seen in the
Face of Jesus Christ. He that has seen Him has seen the Father. Our Faith
must stand in the Wisdom of GOD, and his plain Declarations concerning himself,
who is Truth, and who is Incomprehensible, by a Necessity of Nature.

Now to the only-wise GOD our SAVIOR, be Glory, and Majesty, Dominion and
Power, both now and ever. Amen.

WORTHY is the LAMB that was slain to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing.

FINIS.

