Mr. Heminway's SERMON

On Proverbs XVI. 7. When a man's Ways please the LORD, He makes even his
Enemies to be at Peace with him. THE Favor of GOD THE BEST SECURITY OF A
PEOPLE AND A Concern to Please Him, Urged;

In a SERMON delivered before the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Colony of
Connecticut, at Hartford, May the 8 th, 1740.

Being the Day for Electing the Honorable the GOVERNOR, the DEPUTY GOVERNOR,
and the Worshipful ASSISTANTS, there.

By Jacob Heminway, A. M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in East Haven.

Psalm xci. 1. He that dwells in the secret place of the Most High, shall
abide under the shadow of the Almighty. N LONDON. Printed and Sold by T. GREEN,
Printer to the GOVERNOR and COMPANY, 1740.

At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY holden at Hartford on the Second Thursday of May, Anno
Domini, 1740.
Ordered by this Assembly,
THAT Joseph Whiting Esquire; and Capt. Isaac Dickerman, Return the Thanks of this
Assembly to the Reverend Mr Jacob Heminway, for his SERMON delivered before the
Assembly on the Eighth Instant, and desire a Copy thereof that it may be
Printed.

George Wyllys Secr.

The Favor of GOD the best Security of a People.
PROVERBS XVI. 7. When a man's Ways please the LORD, He makes even his Enemies
to be at Peace with him.
IT being the pleasure of the All-wise GOD to suffer War to happen in our
Nation at this Day as in gives us all grounds to fear that our Ways have not
been Pleasing unto Him; so if we are sensible o^ our Danger, it can scarcely be
imagined, but that we should be thoughtful and inquisitive what we may best do
to secure our selves from the invasions of our Enemies*

And truly at this day, this has been the solicitous though it and Enquiry of many
in this Government: And in a time of Danger it is but reasonable that every one
should have a suitable Concern for his own and others Safety. But here lies the
difficulty* fully to determine what is the b^st ^e h^d and way that a Person or
People can t^ke for their own Defense and Security from their Enemies. And some
are for one way and some for another* And this being an Enquiry of such
Importance, that it is needful it should be satisfyingly Answered, I have
therefore though it it best for us to seek for an Answer to this Enquiry from the
Oracles of God* For as God is wiser than men, so his Counsels and Directions
are the safest for us to follow And therefore I have though it it might be season
b^e and suitable at this time, to Entertain you from this Portion of (...).
Writ, even this wise Proverb of Solomon; who as he was one of the Wisest of
mere men, so being a King he had the clearest insight into the affairs of
Government, and well knew what would most of all conduce to the Peace, Security
and Prosperity of a People. And whereas at some times and under some
circumstances, it might appear a difficult and puzzling Question to some how to
make their Enemies to become their Friends and to be at Peace with them, he
h^th in these words resolved this Problem and wisely answered the Case in this
sa^^ng, When a many ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to be at
peace with him* The words in themselves are p^ain and obvious, and need little
or no Exp^ication. And by one who^e ways please the Lord, we may understand a
godly Person, one who orders his Conversation a^^ght; One who is careful to
obey God in all his ways, one that above all things is studious of g^^ning the
friendship and favor of God. And when the case is so with any man or people,
God will make even their Enemies to be at Peace with (...) Th^^i^, He will not
onl^ keep his Friends in peace with him but will also move and incline his very
Enemies unto peace and friendship, so that they shall not in any wise (...)
him* As if he h^d said, When ^^ce a man has (...) the favor and friendship of
God, God will protect and secure him, and not only make hi^ Friends (...)
Friends; but will make (...) very (...) to be either at Peace or become his
Friends. God will make his worst Enemies to be either so far at Peace with him
as that they shall no ways hurt him, or be cordial Friends to him and do him
good* And so in these few words, Solomon does very much commend Religion is the
most likely way to Protection and Security from all Adversaries.

But here seems to be one Objection lying in the way of this Truth which may
need a little Solution, and it is this;

How often in all Ages has it been observed, That th^se that have been godly
and whose ways did please the Lord, yet have had Enemies that were never at
peace with them, but always endeavored to do them mischief? And Christ tells
his faithful Followers, That they should be hated of all men for his Name sake.
And we read of some of the Primitive Saints of the first Magnitude, of whom the
world was not worthy, Heb. 11. 36, -- Who had trials of cruel Mockings and
Scourgings; Yea, moreover of Bonds and Imprisonment. They were stoned, they
were sawn asunder, werr ^emoted and slain by the Sword; They wandered about in
Sheepskins and Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented: They wandered
in Deserts and Mountains, in Dens and Caves of the Earth. So that to a carnal
Eye, one would be ready to think this Aphorism of Solomon to be but a Paradox,
and that the Truth lay in the Reverse; and that th^se had the fuel Enemies
and most Peace whose ways displeased God: As it has been often found in
Experience, That the tabernacles of Robbers prosper, and that those that temp
God are secure.

How then must we understand this saying of Solomon, That when a man's ways
please the Lord, he will make even his Enemies to be at peace with him?

Now for an Answer to this Objection, we must remember, That God makes a man's
Enemies to be at Peace with him in a twofold sense.

1. When he makes them become his Friends: When those that were at Enmity with
him and hated him, become Reconciled and cordial Friends to him, to love him
and carry it friendly to him.

2. God makes a man's Enemies to be at Peace with him, when He protects and
secures him from all harm from them: So that though their Enmity remains and they
would destroy him if they could, yet God curbs and restrains their Power, so
that their hands cannot perform their Enterprise: And so a man is as secure
from all harm from his Enemies, as if they were at perfect Peace and Amity. In
this sense we may understand that Text, Job 5. 23. Thou shall be in league with
the stones of the field, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with
thee. That is, You shall be secure from harm by them. Now though it be true. That
when a man's ways please the Lord, he does not always make his Enemies become
his Friends, and so at peace with him in that sense; yet He does always secure
him from all harm from his Enemies, whether secret or open; and does in his
Providence so order the matter, That though the Enemies of the godly are sometimes
permitted to make a spoil and a prey of their Estates, and to destroy their
Children and Friends, yea, and sometimes also to take them Captives and keep
them in Slavery, ye^, and sometimes to destroy their Persons; yet nothing they
do or can do to them, shall be for their hurt: And God permits them to take
nothing from them, but what they may better want than have: For this stands and
must stand as an everlasting truth, Romans 8. 28 All things shall work together
for good, to them that love God. So that in this sense, when a man's ways please
the Lord, He does always make his Enemies to be at peace with him: That is, So
far as that they shall do him no hurt, but good, whatever their evil intentions
may be.

And we may farther take notice, That Solomon here speaks of man in particular,
and not of man in general; because it might then be justly Objected, That such
a thing never was, and probably never would be, that all men should conspire
together to please God in their ways; And yet it is so spoken of man in
particular, that all men in general may be encouraged to endeavor after it;
and every one has reason to hope for the good of the Promise if his ways please
God.

And we may farther observe, That Solomon here speaks of the Ways of a man
pleasing the Lord, rather than of his Heart, because the ways of man are the
best discovery of his heart; and it is but in vain for men to flatter
themselves that they please God in their hearts, when they displease him in
their lives and ways.

And the words thus considered may afford us this

DOCTRINE, That the best way for men to be Secured from all their Enemies, is
to Please GOD.

So much Solomon here teaches us in this Text, When a man's ways please the
Lord, he makes even his Enemies to be at Peace with him.

In speaking to this Doctrine, I shall offer these Two Propositions. [ I.] That
all men are more or less subject and lie exposed to Enemies. [ II.] That the
best way for them to be secured from all their Enemies is to please God.

PROP. I. That all men are more or less subject and lie exposed to Enemies,

There is no man on this side Heaven, can justly look upon himself as
altogether free and out of danger from his Enemies. Now, as men are made up of
two main constituent parts, Namely, their Souls and their Bodies; so there are
two sorts of Enemies that all men are more or less exposed to, Namely, the
Enemies of their Souls and the Enemies of their Bodies.

And under the first sort of Enemies may be comprised the Devil and his Angels;
even all the powers of Hell and Darkness, even all those Apostate Angels that
kept not their first State, but left their own Habitation; who are reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness to the Judgment of the great Day; who being
filled with rage and malice against God and all that belongs to Him. These
envious spirits being grieved that any of the Sons of men should fill up those
empty Mansions in glory, which they by Sin have lost, are therefore continually
doing their utmost to hinder men from happiness. And they are very subtle and
cruel Enemies, and such as all men have need to watch against and beware of; as
the Apostle exhorts us, 1 Pet, 5. 8 Be sober, be vigilant, because your
adversary the devil as a roaring lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour.
And under this head, may also be comprehended the Lusts of the Flesh, even all
Sins which have a tendency to destroy the Souls of men, the wages of which is
death. And therefore the Apostle for this reason exhorts men to abstain from
fleshly Lusts which war against the Soul, 1 Pet 2 11 Yea, and men themselves,
so far as they by their Temptations, Persuasions and evil Examples, do draw us
to Sin, are the Enemies of our Souls

And under the second sort of Enemies, even the Enemies of our Bodies, may be
comprehended whatever is Hurtful and Destructive to our Bodies and outward
Estate; Even Men that are Enemies to us in a more secret or open way; and all
things that tend to the hurt and destruction of our Bodies, even all Sickness
and Casualties that we are exposed to in this world, which have a tendency to
shorten our days and bring us to death. And truly, if there be so many things
that may be counted Enemies, what man is there or can there be on Earth that is
not subject to them? And truly, if we look upon ourselves and consider, our
state, we shall see our selves more or less exposed to Enemies. If we look both
within and without, before and behind, on the right hand and on the left, we
shall see our selves lying open and exposed to Enemies. And this brings us to
our

PROP. II. That the best way for men to be secured from all their Enemies, is
to please God.

And to explain this Proposition, we shall consider two things.

1. How men are to please God. And 2. Evidence that this is the best way for
men to be secured from all their Enemies.
1. We shall consider, How men are to please God And truly this is a Question
of very great importance. And it will be the Inquiry of every Soul truly
sensible of Sin and of the dreadfulness of God's Wrath. Thus the People of God
of old, were very inquisitive how to please God: And were ready to offer him
any kind of Service, even that which was impossible, if they might but please
him. Mic. 6. 6, 7 Wherewith shall I come before the Lord and how my self before
the high God? Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with calves of a
year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or ten thousands of
rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my
body for the sin of my soul? But however, men are naturally at a loss about the
way how to please God, yet He has clearly Revealed it in his Word: As the Lord
told his People, aforesaid, Mic. 6. 8 He has showed thee, O man, what is good,
and what does the Lord thy God require of thee. And as Adam was to please God
by keeping the Law of his Creation and performing the Covenant of Works, so now
this power being lost by the Fall, and man rendered unable to please God by the
works of the Law, we must now only endeavor to please God by direction from
the Gospel. Therein the Lord has showed us what is good and what he does
require of us in order to please him. And particularly,

(1) If we would please God we must believe in his Son. This is the great
Command of God in the Gospel, That we believe in the Name of his Only Begotten
Son. And this is the summary Condition of the Gospel Covenant. And as the
Covenant of Works required us, To do and live, so the Covenant of Grace
requires us, To believe and be saved. And whosoever now pleases God, must
please him in his Son: For it is in Him only that he is well pleased with
sinners, Mat 3. 17. And all men out of Christ, are under the Anger of God; for
He is angry with the wicked every day. Man being fallen and sinful, and God
being infinitely holy, of purer Eyes than to behold evil and that cannot look
upon iniquity, it is impossible for men to obtain the Favor of God without
Faith in his Son, So the Apostle tells us, Heb 116. That without faith it is
impossible to please God. This therefore is the only way which God has found
out and revealed in the Gospel for men to please him, even to believe in
Christ: By which we shall obtain the forgiveness of our Sins and an Inheritance
among all them that are sanctified: And so soon as we are Justified by Faith,
we have Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5 1.

(2) The way for men to please God, is to Repent and turn from all their Sins.
This is another great gospel Command, Act* 17. 30. He now commands all men
every where to repent. This Repentance implies the work of God's grace in the
thoro' Change of heart and life; which the Apostle calls. A turning from
darkness unto light, and from the power of satan unto God, Act. 26. 18 And this
the Gospel does require of men, in order to the obtaining the Pardon of their
Sins and the Favor of God, Act. 3. 19. Repent ye therefore and be converted,
that your sins may be blotted out. And in this way God does in his Word give
men good assurance of their obtaining his Favor; See Isa. 1. 16, 17 Wash you,
make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease
to do evil, learn to do well, etc. Come now, let us reason together, says the
Lord; though your sins are as scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though they
be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. So Isa* 557. Let the wicked forsake
his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return to the Lord
and he will have mercy on him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.
So Jer. 3 12. Go and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, Return
thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to
fall upon you for I am merciful, says the Lord, and will not keep anger for
ever. So Jer. 31. 20. Upon their Repentance God says, Is Ephraim my dear son?
is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember
him still; therefore my bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy
upon him, says the Lord God. And so in the Prodigal's return to his Father,
Luk 15 20. While he was yet a great way off, his Father saw him and had
compassion, and ran and fell on his neck and kissed him. Christ shows us how
well pleased God is in the Return of Sinners to him.

(3) The way for men to please God, is to become Holy, and that ^^th in heart
and life. If we would be pleasing unto God, we must be Converted, Renewed and
Sanctified by the grace of God: For the Apostle tells us plainly Romans 8 8 That
they that are in the flesh cannot please God. That is, Those that are in a
state of Sin and Unconverted. And as we must be Holy in heart, so also in life.
If we would please God, we must lead a life of holiness and conformity to the
Will of God, endeavoring always to keep a conscience void of offense both
toward God and toward men. For although our best works being imperfect, cannot
Justify us before God, yet when we are in Christ by Faith, God is well pleased
with our good works and does graciously accept them, and will for Christ's sake
reward them. Thus we read, That God had a respect to Abel and to his offering,
Genesis 4. 4. And so he has to the Persons and Services of his People. Thus the
Psalmist tells us, Psalm 11. 7. That the righteous Lord loves righteousness,
and his countenance does behold the upright And God has in all Ages of the
world manifested his Favor and Love to those that have walked obediently
before him. And the Lord promised his People of Israel (and always made good
his Promise to them) That he would be with them while they are with him. And so
the Apostle says indeed concerning all others, Act. 10 34, 35 Of a truth,
says he, God is no respecter of persons; but in every nation he that fears
him and works righteousness is accepted with him. And truly it is but vain
for men to flatter themselves that they please God, when they walk in a course
of Sin and Rebellion against him. For he hates all the workers of iniquity, and
is angry with the wicked every day, Psalm 7 11. These are the ways which the
Gospel directs us to in order to please God, and there is no possibility of
pleasing Him in any other way. And thus much for the first particular.

2. The second thing for the clearing of this Proposition, is, To show that
thus to please God is the best way to be Secured from all Enemies.

And this appears,

(1) Because God is Almighty. And that he is so is fully declared in his Word
and Works. Thus God was pleased to make himself known to the Fathers, to
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, by the Name of God Almighty, Exodus 6 3. And his
Eternal Power and Godhead is seen in the things that he has made, Romans 1. 20.
And God is said to be Almighty, because he can do all things simply in their
own nature possible to be done, which do not contradict the Nature of God nor
the Creature And being Almighty he is able to secure and defend us from all our
Enemies, both of Soul and Body Be they never so Po^ent, yet they are not
Omnipotent. And if we please Him he will m^st certainly do it. Thus when Job by
his holy and upright walking pleased God, Satan said* of him, That God had made
an hedge about him, and about all that he had on every side, Job 1. 10. Now it
was the Power of God that made this Hedge, so that neither Men nor Devil could
break over it to do Job any harm* until God gave them leave. And therefore
Eliphaz advised Job, To acquaint himself with God and be at Peace: And then
tells him, That the Almighty would be his defense, Job 22. 25 And truly a
better Defense it is not possible for a man to have And therefore Moses
mentions this as the great Privilege and Security of the People of Israel, That
the Eternal God was their Refuge, and underneath were his everlasting Arms: And
that they were a People saved by the Lord, who was the shield ^f their help and
the sword of their excellency, Deuteronomy 33 27, 29.

(2) For men to please God is the best way for them to be secured from all
their Enemies, Because he is the All-wise God, who is infinite in Wisdom, and
knows all things which have been, are, or ever shall be. Known unto God are all
his works from the foundation of the world. He sees in the darkness, and the
light dwells with him* And there is no darkness nor shadow of death where the
workers of iniquity may hide themselves: And all things are naked and opened
unto the Eyes of him with whom we have to do: And he searches the hearts and
tries the reins of all the Children of men; and no thought can be withheld from
him. And therefore he sees all the secret Plots and Designs of our Enemies
against us, and can easily discover and disappoint them, and turn their
counsels into foolishness: And let them dig never so deep, they cannot hide
their Counsels from the Lord, And therefore to please God and i^gage him on our
side, is the best way to be secured from all our Enemies For he being infinite
in Wisdom, can take the wise in their own cra^tiness, so that their hands
cannot perform their enterprise: And if we have the Almighty and All-wise God
on our side, we need not fear what Men or Devils can do against us.

(3) For men to please God is the best way to be secured from all their
Enemies, Because he is Omni-present. He is of Infinite Presence neither
included in any Place, nor excluded from any Place* but is every where Present.
And God being present every where, if we can but please him and get him on our
side, He will be a present help in time of trouble. Many persons have been
overcome by their Enemies, because their help has been at a distance from
them: But God is with us always, where ever we are: And we can never go from
his Spirit, nor fly from his Presence. He is not only a God at hand, but a God
afar off: And none can hide themselves in secret places that he should not see
them. Go where we will, God is always with us* And so his Favor will be our
best Security from all our Enemies.

(4) To please God is the best way to be secured from all our Enemies, Because
he is the Everlasting God. He is the same Yesterday, to Day and for Ever. All
other things that we can trust to or depend upon for Protection from our
Enemies, are but mortal, fading and perishing things: And though they might be
able to deliver us if they could continue with us, yet by reason of their
Frailty, they leave us to shift for our selves; and it may be, when we have
most need of them. But God is the true God, the living God, and the everlasting
King. He is the Lord JEHOVAH, in whom is Everlasting Strength. And is the same
in all Generations. As able to Protect us now, as he was our Fathers in the
days of old; and is a strong habitation, where unto we may continually resort.
And his Name is a strong Tower, to which we may (...) and be safe. And
therefore the best way for us to be secured from all our Enemies is to please
him; and so we shall get the Eternal God to be our Refuge, and his Everlasting
Arms underneath us.

(5) To please God is the best way to be secured from all our Enemies, Because
he is the Lord of Hosts, that has the command and disposal o^ all Creatures in
Heaven and Earth, and always does his Pleasure both in the Armies of Heaven and
amongst the Inhabitants of the Earth; and none can stay his Hand: And even the
worst of Men, n^y, the Devils themselves are subject to his Universal Kingdom
and are under his Command., Now as we are apt to look upon our selves very
secure when we have the Favor and Friendship of some mighty King, that has
many Subjects under his Domions, so much more reason have we to look upon our
selves very secure indeed, when the Lord of Hosts is with us, who has all
Angels, Men and Things under his Command. Therefore the Church does rejoice and
triumph in this, Psalm* 46 7. That the Lord of hosts was with her, and the God
of Jacob was her refuge.

(6) It will further appear to be the best way to be secured from all Enemies,
even to please God, i^ we consider that he is the Preserver of all things As he
made, so he upholds all things by the word of his Power: And every thing is
dependant on him for their continuance in being. And God need not put forth any
act of Power to destroy the World, but the very suspension of his Preserving
Power would be sufficient for that purpose. Hence he is called, The Preserver
of man and beast. And in his hand is the Soul of every living thing, and the
Breath of all mankind: And it is in him we live, move and have our being; and
his Visitation preserves our spirits: And therefore none of our Enemies can
take away our Lives from us, without his leave and permission. And neither our
Life nor our Enemies, is in their hand, but in God's. And therefore the best
way for us to be secured from all our Enemies, both of Soul and Body, is to
please God and get him on our side. And we may then say with the Apostle, Romans
8. 31. If God be for us, who can be against us?

(7) (...) It will further appear that to please God is the best way to be
secured from all Enemies, if we compare God's Favor and Protection, with
whatever m^n do or possibly can put their Trust in for Safety, besides God And
truly we shall find that whatever we do or can put our Trust in besides God* is
but vain. If we trust to foreign Aids and Helps, they will commonly prove but
as Egypt did to the Jews, Even like a broken Reed, on which if a man lean it
will go into his hand and pierce him, Isa 366 Or if we trust to our own Numbers
of men, the Psalmist tells us, It is better to trust in the Lord than to put
confidence in man, Psalm. 118. 8. Or if we should trust to our Military
Preparations, as Horses, Chariots, or the like, the Psalmist tells us, That an
horse is a vain thing for safety, neither can he deliver any by his great
strength, Psalm 33. 17. And the Church renounces trust in Chariots and Horses,
and rather chooses to trust in God, Psalm 20* 7. Some trust in chariots, and some
in horses; but we will remember the Name of the Lord our God. And if we should
make strong Walls and Bulwarks for our defense, they could not Protect us
without God: For the Psalmist tells us, That Except the Lord keep the city, the
watchmen waketh but in vain. And if we put our trust in Kings or Princes,
however under God they may be a defense to us, Yet it is better to trust in the
Lord, than to put confidence in Princes, Psalm. 118. 9. And therefore the
Psalmist bids us not put our trust in princes, nor in the son of man in whom
there is no help: His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth, in that
very day his thoughts perish. But says he, Happy is he that has the God of
Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the Lord his God, Psalm. 146. 3, 4, 5.

And thus I have finished what I designed for the Proof of the Doctrine, and
proceed to the Improvement of it.

USE, I. OF INFORMATION.

1. If it be then as we have heard, That it is the best way for a Person or
People to be secured from their Enemies, even to please God; then hence we may
see, on the other hand, That for a Person or People to Provoke and Displease
God, is the most ready way to lay themselves Open and Exposed to their Enemies.
And as, when God is for us none can be against us; so when He is against us
none can be for us. And as when a People please God, his Favor is as an hedge
and wall of Security round about them, to keep off all Adversaries and evil
Occurrent: So when a People displease God they break down this Hedge, and lay
themselves open to all their Enemies. And this we may observe in the Experience
of the People of God in all Ages. And as the Lord by Moses threatened them, Deuteronomy
32. 21, -- 25. That Because they provoked him to jealousy, therefore he would
let in their Enemies upon them As we may see he did in after ages And while
they pleased him he gave them Peace, and secured them from their Enemies but
when they provoked him by their Sins, be sent the Sword upon them to avenge the
quarrel of his Covenant* And the like we may expect, that God will still do
with his People in all after ages: For God is still the same, and with him is
no respect of Persons* And therefore it is a very dangerous thing for men to
displease God; and they take the most ready way to bring ruin and destruction
upon themselves. And truly, he knows not what the anger of God means, that
cannot see all Woes, Plagues and Miseries in the bosom of it.

2. This Doctrine may inform such as are concerned in the Electing of Persons
to any place of Civil Rule and Government among a People, how to direct their
Choice. If the pleasing of God be the best Protection and Security of a People,
then make choice of such Men who are most conscientious in the pleasing of God
in their ways; such as are true fearers of God and best friends to Religion. It
is true indeed, That Godliness alone is not sufficient to Qualify men for
places of Power and Trust in the Common Wealth. Every good man is not fit for a
Ruler* There are other Qualifications tha^ (...) eye must be had to in the
Choice of Civil Rulers: For Wisdom and Knowledge are also necessary in a Ruler.
The great God whom Rulers represent, and whom they ought to resemble, is a God
of Knowledge, by whom Actions are weighed. And truly, Ignorent and Imprudent men
are as unfit to be placed at the Helm of Government, as an Unskilful Pilot at
the Helm of a Ship. And that the happy Ends of Government may be obtained,
th^se that are entrusted with it should be like the men of Issachar, which were
men that had understanding of the Times, to know what Israel ought to do, 1 Chronicles 12 32. It was therefore a needful direction that Moses gave to Israel
about the choice of Rulers, Deuteronomy. 1. 13 Take ye wise men and understanding and
known among your tribes, and I will make them rulers over you. And it was a
needful request of Solomon, Give me wisdom and knowledge, to go in and out
before the people, 2 Chronicles. 1. 10. Justice and Faithfulness are also necessary
Qualifications in a Ruler. This is plainly required, 2 Samuel 13. 3. The God of
Israel said, He that rules over men must be just. And if this be wanting in
Rulers, the Ruled will have cause to lament it Prove. 29. 2. When the wicked
bear rule the people mourn. And again, Courage and Resolution is necessary.
Rulers must be men of Courage because of the many difficulties they will meet
with in the faithful discharge of their Trust. And they should not fear the
faces of men, Deuteronomy 1. 17 All such Qualifications are very desirable in Rulers:
But Piety and the pleasing of God, is the prime Qualification, and that which
will put a Luster on all the rest. And therefore as a People desire their own
protection and security, they should choose such to be Rulers as please God
themselves, and endeavor what they can to promote it in all those under their
Government.

USE, II. OF EXHORTATION, Unto all, to endeavor in their respective places to
promote the ^le^sing of God, seeing the Protection and Security of a People
does so much depend upon it.

And particularly,

1. This Exhortation may be proposed to RULERS, Endeavor to promote the
pleasing of God among this People And here, I hope I may take leave, in all
humble submission, and in a deep sense of my own unworthiness, to propose this
Exhortation to the Honorable the GOVERNOR, the DEPUTY GOVERNOR, and the
Worshipful ASSISTANTS in Government, who are, or this Day may be Established,
or Re-established Rulers over us, with the rest of the Gentlemen of the GENERAL
ASSEMBLY here present. Honorable, Worshipful and much Respected, You doubtless
know that the Public good is the end of Government, Romans 1^. 4. He is the
minister of God to thee for good. Rulers are to design and endeavor the
Public good of those over whom Providence has placed them. And this being the
end of your Advancement, suffer me to remind you, That the most likely way to
promote the Security and Prosperity of a People, is to promote the Pleasing of
God. And it cannot be reasonably expected, that a People can do well and be
well, while they displease God and are a generation of his Wrath. Oh! Therefore
do all that may be done by you to promote the pleasing of God. And,

(1) Be careful always to recommend the pleasing of God, by your own Example to
those under your Rule, and be bright Examples in every good Work. And let all
those under your Rule see that you make it your main study, not to please men
but God that tries your hearts. Good Examples are more influential than naked
Precepts, and direct us better in the practice of Virtue, and have an
encouraging influence. And it is on many accounts necessary that you shine as
Stars in your exalted Stations by the light of an holy Conversation; that you
be Exemplary in every good work. Rulers being Leaders, had need to be always
careful that they don't go wrong, for they will be apt to Lead many after them:
and then the Event is like to be very sad, Isa 9 16 The leaders of this people
cause them to err, and those that are led of them are destroyed.

(2) You may do much toward the promoting Religion and the pleasing of God, by
putting such in Executive Power, as are truly Religious and have the fear of
God in their hearts, and are careful to please God. Though this Qualification be
not of it self sufficient, yet it may not be ove^look'd And truly if regard be
not had to this, both our Civil and Sacred in^e^est will be much endangered.
Men of loose Principles and Practices, are not fit to fill up the Seats of
Government. Those that cannot rule themselves, are not fit to (...) others. And
truly, to advance such to Place as are men of loose Conver^^^i^n, is the re^dy
way to bring in ^rophaneness like a flood P^^^ 12 8 The wicked will walk on
every side, when the vilest men are exalted.

(3) You may also do much toward the pleasing of God, by endeavoring (...),
Prevent and Suppress every thing that is displeasing to God, even all Vice and
Immorality. This must be done, or God cannot be pleased: For he hates all the
workers of iniquity and is angry with the wicked every day. Sin is that
abominable thing that God hates; and his wrath is revealed from heaven against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men And therefore, Sirs, as you would
please God, do what you can to suppress Sin, and improve your Power against it
to the uttermost: and be like Phinehas of old, who was zealous for God and
against Sin; and bear not the Sword in vain, but whet and brand sh^it against
Sin; and endeavor in the use of all proper means the Reformation of every
thing that is amiss among us. Let proper Laws be made against Sin, wherein they
are wanted, and let the just and wholesome Laws already made, be faithfully
Executed. And remember that you are God's Ministers avengers to execute wrath
on them that do evil Romans 13. 3 And if Sin be duly Punished, it will be a good
means to Suppress it. For this is the main design of humane punishments, to
prevent Sin. Deuteronomy 1^. 11. All Israel shall hear and fear, and do no mo^^ such
wickedness. And truly, if Sin can be prevented and suppressed, we have reason
to hope that God will be well pleased.

These, Sirs? ^e things of Moment belonging to your Trust which I would humbly
recommend to you. And for your Encouragement, I might remind you, That this
will gain you Honor and Respect, both with God and men; and the remembrance
hereof will be comfortable to you both in Life and Death; and then you will be
able to say, as he did after great Services done for the Public, Neh 5 19.
Think upon me, O my God for good, according to all that I have done for this
People.

2. This Exhortation may be proposed to my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the
MINISTRY. O Sirs, if the pleasing of God, be as we have heard, the best way to
protect and secure a People from all their Enemies then suffer me, my Brethren,
though less than the least of all Saints, and the most unworthy of your Order, to
remind my self and you, of the great Necessity lying upon us to endeavor the
pleasing of God.

And particularly,

(1) Let us see to it that me please God our selves. Let us study to show our
selves approved unto God; and let us endeavor to please him in all our ways.
Let us be sincere and upright in our walking with God* and let us endeavor to
order our whole Conversation aright before him. We that are set to teach
others, ought in the first place to teach our selves; and should learn and
practice those lessons which we teach others. And we must be le^t
Self-Condemned and Speechless in the Great Day, if we do it not. Surely, the
love and regard of our own Souls should quicken us hereunto And though we have
been teachers of others, yet if we neglect our selves, Christ will refuse us at
the Last Day: as he has told us, Mat. 7. 22, 23. Many will say unto me, Lord,
Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name cast out devils? and
in thy Name done many wonderful works? And then I will profess unto them, I
never knew you; depart from me ye that work iniquity. And, Oh! How sad and
dismal would our State be, if Christ should so say to any of us in the Last
Day? We must then, when it is too late, eternally Mourn over our wretched
Souls, and say, as it is in, Cant. 1. 6. They made me the keeper of the
Vineyard, but mine own Vineyard have I not kept.

(2) As we should endeavor to please God our selves, so let us endeavor to
promote it in Others. Let us do our Utmost that every one of our People may
please God and become Religious. Let us zealously endeavor the Reformation of
growing Evils. Let us Cry aloud and not spare, and lift up our voice like a
Trumpet to show our People their transgressions and sins. Let us faithfully
Warn the wicked of his way to turn from it. Let us endeavor to do all the
Duties belonging to our Ministry faithfully. Let us take heed to the Ministry
which we have received of the Lord Jesus, that we fulfill it. And let us be
instant in season, and out of season; Reprove, rebuke and Exhort with all
long-suffering and doctrine. Let us not only take heed unto our selves, but to
all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made us Overseers, to feed the
Church of God which he has purchased with his own Blood. Let us teach
transgressors God's ways, that sinners may be Converted unto him* And to all
our endeavors, let us add our fervent Prayers to the God of all grace, for the
down-pouring of his Spirit: And let us make that our constant Request,
mentioned by the Prophet, Hab 3. 2. Revive thy work, O Lord, in the midst of
the years, in the midst of the years make known; in wrath remember mercy. And
to quicken us to all faithfulness in the discharge of our Trust, let us
remember the solemn Charge of God that is upon us, and the many Souls committed
to our Care: Every one of which is of more Value than all the World; and for
every one of which we must give an Account unto God: And if any of them (...)
in through our neglect, God will severely require their Blood at our hands.

3. This Exhortation may be proposed to PARENTS and HEADS of FAMILIES. Seeing
the preasing of God is the best way for the security of a People from all their
Enemies, ^e Exhorted to do your utmost to please God, both in your Persons and
Families. Good Family Government and Instruction, has a wonderful tendency to
promote Religion, And the savor of what seasons our Youth commonly abides till
old Age, Prove. 22. 6. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is
old he will not depart from it. And we may observe all the world over, how
tenacious men are of what is delivered to them by their Parents, be it good or
bad. And the neglect of good Family Government and Instruction, is fatal and
ruinous to Religion and to the Souls of men. And too many Parents, and some of
those that are otherwise Religious, yet are guilty of too many Neglects herein,
either through Carelessness, worldly Encumbrance, or fond Indulgence. And by this
means many of the Offspring of godly Parents, turn into degenerate Plants and
prove a generation that know not the God of their Fathers. And thus are many
spoiled in the Bud, for want of good Family Care. And there are some other
Parents that are Rude and Ignorant, who perhaps have been Bred themselves much
like the Beasts they converse with, and they breed up their Children without
any thing of Religion in their Families. And there are others in the world,
that breed up their Children as Profanely, as the others do Sottishly; Teaching
them, at least by their Example, the newest Oaths that were last formed in
Hell; and to Revile and Scoff at all serious godliness and the Professors of
it: And perhaps sometime smiling to hear with what Emphasis they can speak in
the dialect of Devils, and how wittily they can deride and scoff at the godly.
Such Families are but Nurseries for Hell: And though God may sometimes snatch
one or two of them by Conversion, from among them, as Brands out of the Fire,
yet generally they die as they live and go to the generation of their Fathers,
where they shall never see light. Oh! Then of what vast Importance is it for
all Parents to see to it, that both they and their Houses do serve and please
God.

And to quicken them here unto,

(1) Let all Parents Consider what a fearful thing it will be, for them to be
the Instruments of Ruining for ever, those that received their Beings
Instrumentally from them; and to seek whose Welfare they stood obliged by all
the Laws of God and Nature. And in vain are all your Cares and Studies for
their Bodies, whilst their Souls Perish for want of Knowledge. You, perhaps,
Rejoiced at their Birth; but they will have cause to Curse the day they were
Born of you. You were careful of their Bodies, but careless of their Souls;
Earnest to see them Rich, but indifferent whether they were Gracious. You
neglected to teach them the way of Salvation, but the Devil did not neglect to
teach them the way of Sin. You will one day wish, You had never been Parents,
when the doleful Cries of your damned Children shall ring such Notes as these
in your ears, Oh! Cursed Father, Oh! Cruel and Merciless Mother, whose Example
has drawn me after you into all this Misery. You had Time enough and Motives
enough, to have Warned me of this place of Misery, while my heart was tender
and my affections pliable. Had it not been as Easy for you to have Chastned me
when I Sinned against God, as when I Provoked you about a Trifle? One word
spoken in season might have saved my Soul. And, Oh! Who can think without
horror and amazement, of these and such like Cries and Curses of their
Children, who have been cast away and eternally lost, by the very Instruments
of their Being?

(2) Let all Parents Consider, That God has Entrusted them with the Care of
their Children; and does require them to do, as Abraham did, even to command
their Children and Household after them to keep the ways of the Lord: And will
severely Punish them (and probably in their Children) if they prove Negligent
herein. Think and tremble at what God threatened against good Eli for this, 1 Samuel 3. 13 For I have told him, That I will judge his house for ever, for the
iniquity which he knows, because his sons made themselves vile and he
restrained them not.

4. And lastly, This Exhortation may be proposed to the BODY OF THIS PEOPLE.
And, Sirs, it being a time of War and Rumors of War, and there is a probability
that God will join our Enemies together. Every considerate Person will be ready
to Enquire, What will be our best Security from the Invasions of our Enemies?
And, Sirs, in Answer to this Enquiry, I have this Message from God unto you,
Oh! Endeavor to please God in all your ways, bec^me truly godly, and devote
your selves to his Service; and endeavor always to have a Conscience void of
Offense toward God and toward men, and so get God to be your Friend, and then
you need not fear what man can do unto you. And, dear Sirs, I have little
reason to believe that I shall ever stand again in this Desk, upon such a
public Occasion; for I am now grown into Years, and am going the way of all
the Earth: And I would therefore leave it with you as my dying Counsel and
solemn Charge, That as you desire to be safe here and happy for ever, you would
now and hence forward set your selves to please God in all your Ways. This, Oh!
This, Sirs, will be greatly for your Comfort while you live; this will be your
Rejoicing, even the testimony of your Conscience, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity, not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God you have had your
Conversation in the world. And this will also be for your unspeakable Rejoicing
when you come to leave the world, if you are able to say, as good Hezekiah did
upon his supposed Deathbed, Remember, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in
truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which was right in thine
eyes.

And in this way you may with good grounds expect, That God will still he with
you, as he has been with your Fathers, That He will not leave nor forsake you;
but will still be a Wall of Fire round about you, and the Glory in ^he midst of
you; and that his Salvation shall still (...) for Walls and Bulwarks.

FINIS.

