A SERMON ON REGENERATION, Preached to a numerous Audience in England.

By George Whitefield, A. B. Of Pembroke-College, OXFORD.

The SECOND EDITION, in Boston.

London Printed: Reprinted at Boston, by T. Fleet, for CHARLES HARRISON,
Over Against the Brazen Head in Cornhill. 1739.

On Regeneration.
2 Cor. v.17. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature.


THE Doctrine of our REGENERATION, or NEW BIRTH in CHRIST JESUS, though one of
the most fundamental Doctrines of our Holy Religion; though so plainly and
often pressed on us in sacred Writ, that he that runs may read; nay, though it
is the very Hinge on which the Salvation of each of us turns, and a Point too
in which all sincere Christians, of whatever Denomination, agree; yet is so
seldom considered, and so little experimentally understood by the Generality of
Professors, that were we to judge of the Truth of it by the Experience of most
who call themselves Christians, we should be apt to imagine they had not so
much as heard whether there be any such Thing as Regeneration or no. It is
true, Men, for the most Part, are Orthodox in the common Articles of their
Creed; they believe there is but one GOD, and one Mediator between GOD and Man,
even the Man CHRIST JESUS; and that there is no other Name given under Heaven,
whereby they can be saved, besides his: But then tell them, They must be
REGENERATE, they must be BORN AGAIN, they must be renewed in the very Spirit,
i. e. in the inmost Faculties of their Minds, ever they can truly call CHRIST
Lord, Lord, or have any Share in the Merits of his precious Blood; and they are
ready to cry out with Nicodemus, How can these Things be? Or with the
Athenians, on another Occasion, What will this Babbler say? He seems to be a
Setter-forth of strange Doctrines, because we preach unto them CHRIST, and the
New Birth.

THAT I may therefore contribute my Mite toward curing the fatal Mistake of
such Persons, who would thus put asunder what GOD has inseparably joined
together, and vainly expect to be justified by CHRIST, i. e. have their Sins
forgiven, unless they are also sanctified, i. e. have their Natures changed,
and made holy; I shall beg leave to enlarge on the Words of the Text in the
following Manner.

First, I shall endeavor to explain what is meant by Being in CHRIST, If any
Man be in CHRIST. Secondly, What we are to understand by being a New Creature:
If any Man be in CHRIST, says the Apostle, he is a new Creature. Thirdly, I
shall produce some Arguments to prove Why we must be new Creatures ever we can
be in CHRIST. Fourthly and Lastly, I shall draw some Inferences from what will
have been delivered, and then conclude with a Word or two of Exhortation from
the Whole.
AND first then, I am to endeavor to explain what is meant by this Expression
in the Text, If any Man be in CHRIST.

Now a Person may be said to be in CHRIST two Ways. First, only by an outward
Profession. And in this Sense, every one that is called a Christian, or
baptized into CHRIST's Church, may be said to be in CHRIST. But that this is
not the sole Meaning of the Apostle's Phrase now before us, is evident, because
then every one that names the Name of CHRIST, or is baptized into his visible
Church, would be a new Creature. Which is notoriously false, it being too
plain, beyond all Contradiction, that comparatively but few of those that are
born of Water, are born of the Spirit likewise; or, to use another Scriptural
way of speaking, Many are baptized with Water, which were never, effectually at
least, baptized with the Holy Ghost.

To be in CHRIST therefore, in the full Import of the Word, must certainly mean
something more than a bare outward Profession, or being called after his Name.
For, as this same Apostle tells us, All are not Israelites, that are of Israel,
i. e. when applied to Christianity, all are not real Christians that are
nominally such. Nay, this is so far from being the Case, that our Blessed LORD
himself informs us, That many that have prophesied or preached in his Name, and
in his Name cast out Devils, and done many wonderful Works, shall
notwithstanding be dismissed at the last Day with a Depart from me, I know you
not, ye Workers of Iniquity.

IT remains therefore, that this Expression, If any Man be in CHRIST, must be
understood in a second and closer Signification, viz. to be in him so as to
partake of the Benefits of his Sufferings. To be in him not only by an outward
Profession, but by an inward Change and Purity of Heart, and Cohabitation of
his holy Spirit. To be in him so as to be mystically united to him by a true
and lively Faith, and thereby to receive spiritual Virtue from him, as the
Members of the natural Body do from the Head, or the Branches from the Vine. To
be in him in such a Manner, as the Apostle, speaking of himself, acquaints us
he knew a Person was, I knew a Man in CHRIST, says he, i. e. a true Christian;
or, as he himself desires to be in CHRIST, when he wishes, in his Epistle to
the Philippians, that he might be found in him.

THIS is undoubtedly the full Purport of the Apostle's Expressions in the Words
of the Text; so that what he says in his Epistle to the Romans about
Circumcision, may very well be applied to the present Subject, viz. That he is
not a real Christian who is only one outwardly; nor is that true Baptism, which
is only outward in the Flesh. But he is a true Christian, who is one inwardly,
whose Baptism is that of the Heart, in the Spirit, and not merely in the
Water,, whose Praise is not of Man but of GOD. Or, as he speaks in another
Place, Neither Circumcision or Uncircumcision avails any thing of itself, but
a new Creature. Which amounts to what he here declares in the Verse now under
Consideration, that if any Man be truly and properly in CHRIST, he is a new
Creature.

WHAT we are to understand by being a New Creature, was the next and second
general Thing to be considered.

AND here it is evident at the first View, that this Expression is not to be so
explained as though there was a Physical Change required to be made in us, i. e.
as though we were to be reduced to our primitive Nothings, and then created and
formed again. For, supposing we were, as Nicodemus ignorantly imagined, to
enter a second Time into our Mother's Womb, and be born, alas! what would it
contribute toward rendering us spiritually new Creatures? since that which was
born of Flesh would be Flesh still, i. e. we should be the same carnal Persons
as ever, being derived from carnal Parents, and consequently receiving the
Seeds of all Manner of Sin and Corruption from them. No, it only means, that we
must be so altered as to the Qualities and Tempers of our Minds, that we must
entirely forget what Manner of Persons we once were. As it may be said of a
Piece of Gold that was in the Ore, after it has been cleansed, purified and
polished, that it is a new Piece of Gold: As it may be said of a bright Glass
that has been covered over with Filth, when it is wiped, and so become
transparent and clear, that it is a new Glass. Or, as it might be said of
Naaman, when he recovered of his Leprosy, and his Flesh returned unto him again
like the Flesh of a young Child, that he was a new Man; so our Souls, though
still the same as to Essence, yet are so purged, purified and cleansed from
their natural Dross, Filth and Leprosy, by the blessed Influences of the Holy
Spirit, that they may properly be said to be made anew.

How this glorious Change is wrought in the Soul, cannot easily be explained.
For no One knows the Ways of the Spirit, save the Spirit of GOD Himself. Not
that this ought to be any Argument against this Doctrine; for, as our Blessed
LORD observed to Nicodemus, when he was discoursing on this very Subject, The
Wind, says he, blows where it lists, and thou hear the Sound thereof,
but know not whence it comes, and whither it goes; and if we are told of
natural Things, and we understand them not, how much less ought we to wonder,
if we cannot immediately account for the invisible Workings of the Holy Spirit?
The Truth of the Matter is this: The Doctrine of our Regeneration or New Birth
in CHRIST JESUS is dark and hard to be understood by the natural Man. But that
there is really such a Thing, and that each of us must be spiritually born
again, before we can enter into the Kingdom of GOD; or, to keep to the Terms
made use of in the Text, must be new Creatures before we can be in CHRIST, I
shall endeavor to show under my Third general Head, in which I was to produce
some Arguments to prove, Why we must be new Creatures, in order to qualify us
for being savingly in CHRIST.

AND here one would think it sufficient to affirm, that GOD himself, in his
holy Word, has told us so. For, not to mention many Texts that might be
produced out of the Old Testament to prove this Point, (and indeed, by the way,
one would wonder how Nicodemus, who was a Teacher in Israel, and who was
therefore to instruct the People in the spiritual Meaning of the Law, should be
so ignorant of this grand Article, as we find he really was, by his asking our
Blessed LORD, when he was pressing on him this Topic, How can these Things be?
Surely, he could not forget how often the Psalmist had begged of GOD, to make
him a new Heart, and renew a right Spirit within him; as likewise, how
frequently the Prophets had warned the People to make them new Hearts, and new
Minds, and so turn unto the LORD their GOD. But not to mention these and such
like Texts out of the Old Testament, this Doctrine is so plainly and often
repeated in the New, that, as I observed before, He that runs may read. For
what says the great Prophet and Instructor of the World himself? Except a Man (
i. e. every one that is naturally engendered of the Offspring of Adam) be born
again of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of GOD. And
lest we should be apt to slight this Assertion, and Nicodemus-like, reject the
Doctrine, because we cannot immediately explain, How this Thing can be; our
Blessed Master therefore affirms it, as it were, by an Oath, Verily, verily, I
say unto you, or, as it may be read, I the Amen; I, who am Truth itself, say
unto you, that it is the unalterable Appointment of my heavenly Father, that
unless a Man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of GOD.

AGREEABLE to this are those many Passages we meet with in the Epistles, where
we are commanded to be renewed in the Spirit, i. e. as was before explained, in
the inmost Faculties of our Minds; to put off the Old Man, which is corrupt;
and to put on the New Man, which is created after GOD, in Righteousness and
true Holiness; That Old Things must pass away, and that all Things must become
New; That we are to be saved by the Washing of Regeneration, and the Renewing
of the HOLY GHOST. Or, methinks, was there no other Passage to be produced
besides the Words of the Text, it would be full enough, since the Apostle
therein positively affirms, that If any Man is in CHRIST, he is a new Creature.

Now what can be understood by all these different Terms of being born again,
of putting off the Old Man, and putting on the New, of being renewed in the
Spirit of our Minds, and becoming new Creatures; but that Christianity requires
a thorough, real, inward Change of Heart? Do we think these, and suchlike
Forms of speaking, are mere Metaphors, Words of a bare Sound, without any real
solid Signification? Indeed, it is to be feared, some Men would have them
interpreted so; but alas! unhappy Men! they are not to be envied their
Metaphorical Interpretation: It will be well, if they do not interpret
themselves out of their Salvation.

MULTITUDES of other Texts might be produced to confirm this same Truth; but
those already quoted are so plain and convincing, that one would imagine no one
should deny it; were we not told, There are some, who having Eyes, see not, and
Ears hear not, and that will not understand with their Hearts, or hear with
their Ears, lest they should be converted, and CHRIST should heal them.

BUT I proceed to a second Argument to prove, Why we must be new Creatures, in
order to be rightly in CHRIST. And that shall be taken from the Purity of GOD,
and the present corrupt and poluted State of Man.

Now GOD is described in Holy Scripture (and I speak to those who profess to
know the Scripture) as a Spirit; as a Being of such infinite Sanctity, as to be
of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity; as to be so transcendently Holy, that it
is said the very Heavens are not (...) in his Sight; and the Angels themselves
he charge with Folly. On the other Hand, Man is described (and every
Regenerate Person will find it true by his own Experience) as a Creature
altogether conceived and (...) Sin; as having no good Thing dwelling in (...)
under Sin; nay, as having a Mind which is (...) with GOD, and such like. And
since then there is such an infinite Disparity, can any one conceive how such a
filthy, corrupted, polluted Wretch can dwell with an infinitely pure and holy
GOD, before he is changed, and rendered, in some Measure, like him? Can He,
that is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, dwell with it? Can He, in whose
Sight the Heavens are not clean, delight to dwell with Uncleanness itself? No;
we might as well suppose Light to have Communion with Darkness, or CHRIST to
have Concord with Belial. But I pass on to a

THIRD Argument to make good the Apostle's Assertion in the Text, which shall
be founded on the Consideration of the Nature of that Happiness GOD has
prepared for those that unfeignedly love him.

To enter indeed on a Minute and particular Description of Heaven, would be
vain and presumptuous, since we are told, that Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive, the Things
that are there prepared for the sincere Followers of the Holy JESUS. However,
this we may venture to affirm in the general, that as GOD is a Spirit, so the
Happiness he has laid up for his People is spiritual likewise; and
consequently, unless our carnal Minds are changed, and become (...), we can
never be made meet to partake of that Inheritance with the Saints in Light.

IT is true, we may flatter ourselves, that supposing we continue in our
natural corrupt Estate, and carry all our Lusts along with us, we should,
notwithstanding, relish Heaven, was GOD to admit us therein. And so we might,
was it a Mohammedan Paradise, wherein we were to take our full Swing in sensual
Delights. But since its Joys are only spiritual, and no unclean Thing can
possibly enter those blessed Mansions, there is an absolute Necessity of our
being changed, and undergoing a total Renovation of our depraved Natures,
before we can have any Taste or Relish of those heavenly Pleasures.

IT is, doubtless, for this Reason, that the Apostle declares it to be the
irrevocable Decree of the Almighty, that without Holiness, i. e. without being
made pure by Regeneration, and having the Image of GOD thereby reinstamped upon
the Soul, no Man living shall see the LORD. And it is very observable, that our
Divine Master, in the famous Passage before referred to, concerning the
absolute Necessity of Regeneration, does not say, unless a Man be born again,
he SHALL NOT, but unless a Man be born again, he CANNOT enter into the Kingdom
of GOD. For it is founded in the very Nature of Things, that unless we have
Dispositions wrought in us suitable and answerable to the Objects that are to
entertain us, we can take no Manner of Complacency or Satisfaction in them. For
Instance; What Delight can the most harmonious Music afford a deaf, or what
Pleasure the most excellent Picture give a blind Man? Can a tasteless Palate
relish the richest Dainties, or a filthy Swine be pleased with the finest
Garden of Flowers? No: And what Reason can be assigned for it? An Answer is
ready; Because they have neither of them any Tempers of Mind correspondent or
agreeable to what they are to be diverted with. And thus it is with the Soul
hereafter. For Death makes no more Alteration in the Soul, than as it enlarges
its Faculties, and makes it capable of receiving deeper Impressions either of
Pleasure or Pain. If it delighted to converse with GOD here, it will be
transported with the Sight of his glorious Majesty hereafter. If it was pleased
with the Communion of Saints on Earth, it will be infinitely more so with the
Communion and Society of holy Angels, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect
in Heaven. But if the Opposite of all this be true, we may assure ourselves, it
could not be happy, was GOD himself to admit it (which he never will do) into
the Regions of the Blessed. But it is Time for me to hasten to the

FOURTH and last Argument I shall offer to prove, that we must be new
Creatures, ever we can be in CHRIST, viz. because CHRIST's Redemption will not
be complete without it.

IF we reflect indeed on the first and chief End of our Blessed LORD's Coming,
we shall find it was to save us from our Sins, to be a Propitiation for our
Sins, to give his Life a Ransom for many. But then, if the Benefits of our Dear
Redeemer's Death were to extend no further than barely to procure Forgiveness
of our Sins, we should have as little Reason to rejoice in it, as a poor
condemned Criminal that is ready to perish by some fatal Disease, would have in
receiving a Pardon from his Judge. For Christians would do well to consider,
that there is not only a legal Hindrance to our Happiness, as we are Breakers
of GOD's Law, but also a moral Impurity in our Natures, which renders us
incapable of enjoying Heaven, (as has been already proved) 'till some mighty
Change has been wrought in us. It is necessary therefore, in order to make
CHRIST's Redemption complete, that we should have a Grant of GOD's Holy Spirit
to change our Natures, and so prepare us for the Enjoyment of that Happiness
our Savior has purchased by his precious Blood.

ACCORDINGLY the holy Scriptures inform us, that whom CHRIST justifies, i. e.
(as we said before) whose Sins he forgives, those he also sanctifies, i. e.
purifies and cleanses, and totally changes their corrupted Natures. Nay, in
one Place of Scripture, Sanctification is put before Justification, on purpose,
as it were, to convince us that there is no Salvation to be had without it. But
ye are washed, says the Apostle, but ye are sanctified; and then follows, but
ye are justified. As the Scripture also speaks in another Place, CHRIST is to
us Justification, Sanctification, and then Redemption. Let this therefore be
admitted as another in disputable Argument why we must be new Creatures, ever
we can be in CHRIST, because without it CHRIST is dead in vain.

PROCEED we now to the next general Thing proposed, viz. To draw some
Inferences from what has been delivered.

AND First then, if he that is in CHRIST must be a new Creature, this may serve
as a Reproof for some, who rest in a bare Performance of outward Duties,
without perceiving any real inward Change of Heart.

WE may observe a great many Persons to be very punctual in the regular Returns
of public and private Prayer, as likewise of receiving the Holy Communion, and
perhaps, now and then too in keeping a Fast. And so far we grant they do well.
But here is the Misfortune, they rest barely in the Use of the Means, and think
all is over, when they have just complied with these sacred Institutions:
Whereas, were they rightly informed, they would consider, that all the
instituted Means of Grace, as Prayer, Fasting, Hearing and Reading the Word of
GOD, Receiving the Blessed Sacrament, and such like, are no further serviceable
to us, than as they are found to make us inwardly better, and to carry on the
spiritual Life in the Soul.

IT is true, they are Means, and Essential ones too; but they are only Means,
they are Part, but not the Whole of Religion: For if so, Who more religious
than the Pharisee? who fasted twice in the Week, who gave Tithes of all that he
possessed, and yet was not justified, as our Savior himself informs us, in the
Sight of GOD.

YOU perhaps, like the Pharisee, may fast often, and make long Prayers; you
may, with Herod, hear good Sermons gladly; or as Judas himself, in all
Probability, did, receive the Blessed Sacrament. But yet, if you continue vain
and trifling, immoral or worldly-minded in your Conversations, and differ from
the rest of your Neighbors barely in going to Church, or in complying with
some outward Performances, are you better than they? No, in no wise; You are by
far much worse, because those that wholly neglect the Means, are answerable
only for omitting the Use of GOD's Ordinances; whereas if you use them, and at
the same Time abuse them, by not letting them produce their intended Effect,
you thereby encourage others to think there is nothing in them, and therefore
must expect to receive the greater Damnation.

BUT, Secondly, If he that is in CHRIST must be a new Creature, then this may
check the groundless Presumption of another Class of Professors, who rest in
the Attainment of some Moral Virtues, and falsely (...)magine they are good
Christians, if they are just in (...)heir Dealings, are temperate in their
Diet, and do Hurt or Violence to no Man.

BUT if this was all that is requisite to make us Chri(...)tians, Why might not
the Heathens of old be good Christians, who were remarkable for these Virtues;
Or St. Paul, before his Conversion, who tells us, That (...)hen he lived in all
good Conscience, and was, touching the Law, blameless; And yet, after his
Conversion, we find he renounces all Dependence on Works of this Nature, and
only desires to be found in CHRIST, and to know the Power of his Resurrection,
i. e. to have an experimental Proof of receiving the HOLY GHOST, purchased for
him by the Death, and ensured and applied to him by the Resurrection of JESUS
CHRIST.

THE Sum of the Matter is this: Christianity includes Morality, as Grace does
Reason; but if we are only mere Moralists, if we are not inwardly wrought upon,
and changed by the powerful Operations of the Holy Spirit, and our Moral
Actions, proceed from a Principle of a new Nature, however we may call our
selves Christians, it is to be feared we shall be found naked at the Great Day,
and in the Number of those, who vainly depend on their own Righteousness, and
not on the Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, imputed to and inherent in them, as
necessary to their eternal Salvation.

NOR, Thirdly, will this Doctrine less condemn those who rest in a Partial
Amendment of themselves, without going on to Perfection, and experiencing a
thorough, real, inward Change of Heart.

A little Acquaintance with the World will furnish us with Instances of no
small Number of Persons, who, perhaps, were before openly profane; but seeing
the ill Consequences of their Vice, and the many worldly Inconveniences it has
reduced them to, on a sudden, as it were, grow civilized; and thereupon flatter
themselves that they are very religious, because they differ a little from
their former Selves, and are not so scandalously wicked as once they were:
Whereas at the same Time they shall have some secret darling Sin or other, some
beloved Dalilah or Herodias, which they will not part with; some hidden Lust,
which they will not mortify; some vicious Habit, which they will not take pains
to root out. But would thou know, O vain Man! whoever thou art, what the LORD
thy GOD requires of thee; thou must be informed, that nothing short of a
thorough, sound Conversion will avail for the Salvation of thy Soul. It is not
enough to turn from Profaneness to Civility; but thou must turn from Civility
to Godliness. Not only some, but all Things must become new in thy Soul. It
will profit thee but little to do many Things, if yet some one Thing thou
lackest. In short, thou must not be only an almost, but altogether a new
Creature, or in vain thou hopest for a saving Interest in CHRIST.

Fourthly and Lastly, IF he that is in CHRIST must be a new Creature, then this
may be prescribed as an infallible Rule for every Person of whatever
Denomination, Age, Degree or Quality, to judge himself by; this being the only
solid Foundation, whereon we can build a well-grounded Assurance of Pardon,
Peace and Happiness.

WE may indeed depend on the broken Reed of an external Profession; we may
think we have done enough, if we lead such sober, honest, moral Lives, as many
Heathens did. We may imagine we are in a safe Condition, if we attend on the
public Offices of Religion, and are constant in the Duties of our Closets. But
unless all these tend to reform our Lives, and change our Hearts, and are only
used as so many Channels of Divine Grace! as I told you before, so I tell you
again, Christianity will profit us nothing.

LET each of us therefore seriously put this Question to our Hearts: Have we
received the HOLY GHOST since we believed? Are we new Creatures in CHRIST, or
no? At least, if we are not so yet, is it our daily Endeavor to become such?
Do we make a constant and conscientious Use of all the Means of Grace required
thereto? Do we fast, watch and pray? Do we not only lazily seek, but
laboriously strive to enter in at the strait Gate? In short, Do we renounce
ourselves, take up our Crosses and follow CHRIST? If so, we are in that narrow
Way which leads to Life: We are, at least shall in Time, become new Creatures
in CHRIST. The good Seed is sown in our Hearts, and will, if duly watered and
nourished by a regular persevering Use of all the Means of Grace, grow up to
eternal Life. But on the contrary, if we have only heard, and know not
experimentally, whether there be any HOLY GHOST; if we are Strangers to
Fasting, Watching and Prayer, and all the other spiritual Exercises of
Devotion; if we are content to go in the broad Way, merely because we see most
other People do so, without once reflecting whether it be the right one or not;
in short, if we are Strangers, nay Enemies to the Cross of CHRIST, by leading
Lives of Softness, Worldly-mindedness, and sensual Pleasure, and thereby make
others think, that Christianity, is but an empty Name, a bare formal
Profession; if this be the Case, I say, then CHRIST is as yet dead in vain as
to us; we are yet under the Guilt of our Sins; we are unacquainted with that
true and thorough Conversion, which alone can entitle us to the Salvation of
our Souls.

BUT, Beloved, I am persuaded better Things of you, and Things that accompany
Salvation, though we thus speak; and humbly hope, that you are fully and heartily
convinced, that nothing but the Wedding Garment of a new Nature, can gain
Admission for you at the Marriage Feast of the Supper of the Lamb; that you are
sincerely persuaded, that he that has not the Spirit of CHRIST is none of his;
and that unless the SPIRIT, which raised JESUS from the Dead, dwell in you
here, neither will your mortal Bodies be quickened by the same SPIRIT to dwell
with him hereafter.

LET me therefore (as we proposed in the last Place) earnestly exhort you, in
the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to act suitable to those Convictions, and to
live as Christians, that are commanded in Holy Writ, to put off their former
Conversation concerning the Old Man, and to put on the New Man, which is
created after GOD, in Righteousness and true Holiness.

IT must be owned indeed, that this is a great and difficult Work; but, blessed
be GOD, it is not impossible. Many Thousands of happy Souls have been assisted
by a Divine Power to bring it about, and why should We despair of Success? Is
GOD's Hand shortened, that it cannot save? Was He the GOD of our Fathers, is he
not the GOD of their (...)? Yes, doubtless, of their Children also. It is a
Task likewise that will put us to some Pain; it will oblige us to part with
some Lust, to break with some Friend, to mortify some beloved Passion, which
may be exceeding dear to us, and perhaps as hard to leave, as to cut off a
right Hand, or to pluck out a right Eye. But what of all this? Will not the
being made a real living Member of CHRIST, a Child of GOD, and an Inheritor of
the Kingdom of Heaven, abundantly make Amends for all this Trouble? Undoubtedly
it will. Lastly, Setting about and carrying on this great and necessary Work,
perhaps may, nay, assuredly will expose us to the Ridicule of the unthinking
Part of Mankind, who will wonder, that we run not into the same Excess of Riot
with themselves; and because we may deny our sinful Appetites, and are not
conformed to this World, being commanded in Scripture to do the one, and to
have our Conversation in Heaven in Opposition to the other, they may count our
Lives Folly, and our End to be without Honor. But will not the being numbered
among the Saints, and shining as the Stars for ever and ever, be a more than
sufficient Recompense for all the Ridicule, Calumny, or Reproach, we can
possibly meet with here?

INDEED, was there no other Reward attended a thorough Conversion, but that
Peace of GOD, which is the unavoidable Consequence of it, and which, even in
this Life, passes all Understanding, we should have great Reason to rejoice.
But when we consider this is the least of those Mercies GOD has prepared for
those that are in CHRIST, new Creatures; that this is but the Beginning of an
eternal Succession of Pleasures; that the Day of our Deaths, which the
unconverted, unrenewed Sinner must so much dread, will be, as it were, but the
first Day of our new Births, and open to us an everlasting Scene of Happiness
and Comfort; in short, if we remember, that they who are regenerate and born
again, have a real Title to all the glorious Promises of the Gospel, and are
infallibly certain of being as happy, both here and hereafter, as an ALL-WISE,
ALL-GRACIOUS, ALL-POWERFUL GOD can make them; methinks, every one that has but
the least Concern for the Salvation of his precious, his immortal Soul, having
such Promises, such an Hope, such an Eternity of Happiness set before him,
should never cease watching, praying, and striving, till he find a real,
inward, saving Change wrought in his Heart; and thereby knows of a Truth,
that he dwells: CHRIST, and CHRIST in him; that he is a new Creature in CHRIST;
that he is therefore a Child o GOD; that he is already an Inheritor, and will
ever long, if he endure to the End, be an actual Possessor of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

WHICH GOD of his Infinite Mercy grant, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD.

To whom, etc.

FINIS.

