Mr. Foxcroft's SERMON UPON Evangelic Preaching.

Some seasonable Thoughts on EVANGELIC Preaching; its Nature, Usefulness, and
Obligation. A SERMON Delivered (in Part) at the Old-Church-Lecture in Boston,
Thursday, Oct. 23. 1740. To a numerous Audience. OCCASIONED By the late Visit,
and uncommon Labors, in daily and powerful Preaching, of the Rev. Mr.
WHITEFIELD. -- The Brother, whose Praise is in the Gospel, throughout all the
Churches. Published at the general Motion of the Hearers.

By THOMAS FOXCROFT.

-- "You are not to stand up here [ in the Pulpit] as a Professor of ancient or
modern Philosophy, nor an Usher in the School of Plato, or Seneca, or Mr. Lock:
but as a Teacher in the School of CHRIST. -- Thus says the Prophet, or Thus
says the Apostle, carries greater Weight with it both to convince and
persuade, than a long Series of Demonstrations from remote Principles, though
they should be firm and strong as those of Euclid, or Sir Isaac Newton. -- It Is
the vain Exaltation of ruined Nature, that makes the Gospel so despised in our
Age. Dr. WATTS, Humble Attempt. BOSTON, N. E. Printed by G. ROGERS and D.
FOUL, for S. ELIOT, in Cornhill. 1740.

SOME Seasonable Thoughts UPON EVANGELIC Preaching.
ACTS XXVIII. 31. Preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching those Things which
concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all Confidence; no Man forbidding him.
THE inspired Evangelist closes his entertaining Narrative of the Acts of the
Apostles with this remarkable and instructive Passage in the Story of the great
Doctor of the Gentiles: who, from a Destroyer of the Faith and Persecutor of
Christ, had long since, by the Grace of God bestowed upon him, become an
Apostle of Christ, and Preacher of the Faith, yea a Sufferer for the Gospel;
and was now evangelizing the famous City of Rome.

It had been foretold him in a Vision, that as he had testified of Christ at
Jerusalem, he should bear Witness at Rome also. He had himself promised, and
once and again purposed a Visit to the Romans; longing to have some Fruit among
them, even as among other Gentiles. But being obliged to delay for a while, it
seems as if some had taxed him of using Lightness, in promising and not
performing; or we may suppose they might (like some at Corinth) be puffed up,
as though he would not come to them, either for Fear or Shame. Therefore he
takes Occasion in his Epistle to the Romans (written while yet unknown by Face
unto them) to make those solemn Protestations: I am a Debtor both to the Greeks
and to the Barbarians, both to the Wise and to the Unwise; so, as much as in me
is, I am READY to preach the Gospel to You that are at Rome also: for I am NOT
ASHAMED of the Gospel of Christ. -- From Jerusalem and round about unto
Illyricum, I have FULLY preached the Gospel of Christ. And I am SURE, that when
I come unto You, I shall come in the FULLNESS of the Blessing of the Gospel of
Christ.

Agreably the Apostle was no sooner arrived among them, although under some
uncomfortable Restraints and manifest Disadvantages, but he enters with
Alacrity into this new Scene of Labors in the Word, showing himself (as he had
wrote) not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, but ready to preach it even at
Rome; neither regarding the Envy of any judaizing false Brethren of his own
Communion there, nor the Malice of the unbelieving Jews; neither fearing the
Power of pagan Idolaters, nor all the Sophistry of the Disputers of this World.
Flesh and Blood indeed, had he consulted that, might have prompted him to
Silence, as a prudent Caution, and the best Security, in his present critical
Situation; being under a judicial Prosecution by his own Countrymen, condemned
by the Jewish Priests as violating their Law and the Customs of their Fathers,
and upon his Appeal to Caesar consigned over into the Hands of the Romans. --
But our christian Hero, at all Hazards, quickly begins his Testimony in Rome:
and ceased not daily to teach and preach Jesus Christ. He had too active a
Genius, and too just a Sense of the Worth of Time, to sweel away any of his
precious Hours in Sloth and Indolence; He had a most sensible Compassion for
guilty perishing Souls, and he felt the Love of Christ powerfully constraining
him; Necessity was laid upon him; and he found the Spirit of Glory and of God
now resting on him: So that, thus principl'd, thus fortified and animated, he
applied himself to the Work of an Apostle without Delay, and pursued it with a
steady Resolution, with ardent Zeal, and an indefatigable Industry; being in it
sometimes from Morning till Evening, and continually in Labors more abundant.
From Rome he seems to have wrote almost all his Epistles. And here he seems to
have eminently devoted himself to the Ministry of the Word: preaching and
teaching with all Confidence; and indeed no Man forbidding him.

Liberty was indulged him by the Authority of the Place: And though he wanted not
for Adversaries, they wanted the Courage or the Power to forbid and withstand
him. Particularly the Men of his own Nation, who seem every where to have
distinguished themselves for their Spleen and Rancour against this Apostle, and
often had made Uproar, and Insurrection, and Conspiracy against him in his own
Country, would doubtless now also at Rome, if their Power had been equal to
their Will, have thundered out Menaces and Prohibitions, and laid all possible
Obstructions in the Way, to prevent his speaking in the Name of Jesus, or his
preaching among the Gentiles. But Paul, a Prisoner of Jesus Christ, and a
Stranger at Rome, happily found more Indulgence here, than at Jerusalem; being
by the Favor of the Roman Captain suffered to dwell by himself (with a single
Attendant) in his own hired House, to admit what Company he pleased, to preach
as often as he would; and none permitted to disturb him.

[By the Way, here is a teaching Example to Men in Power, to countenance
faithful Preachers of the Gospel: and how can persecuting Rome at this Day,
reflect on it without Blushing and Confusion!]

This Liberty afforded the Apostle a glorious Opportunity: which he well knew
how to value, and neglected not to make Use of to the best Advantage. A wide
Door, and effectual, was here opened to him, to send abroad the Sound of the
Gospel: he quickly filled Rome with this Doctrine, and it reached even Caesar's
Household. Some of all Stations, Characters, and Circumstances (it seems)
crowded to his Ministry, as the Doves flock to their Windows: And it is said
here, like his Divine Master, he received all that came to him; whether Jew or
Gentile, whether Male or Female, Old or Young, Bond or Free, Wise or Unwise: he
regarded no Man's Person; he received all indifferently, without partial
Respects or Disrepects, for their Nation, Condition, Rank, or Figure in the
World. And how did he receive them? Was it only to good Fellowship, to pass
away the Time together in empty Chatt and trifling Amusements! No. -- Or was it
to doubtful Disputations, to scholastic Babblings, and Oppositions of Science,
falsely so called! No. -- Or was it to mercenary and selfish Ends, hoping for
Money, or for Favor from 'em! No, nor this. But it was in pure Love, from a
generous and disinterested Zeal for their Good, hoping to win their Souls to
Christ, and bring them to God. With this noble View he received them all. All
that had Ears to hear, He received, to preach to them, and to teach them, as
Jesus (it is said) received the People, and spoke to them of the Kingdom of God.
And this he did with great Fidelity, Freedom and Assurance; not ashamed of his
Doctrine, nor balking the Truth; not sparing Vice, Error, or any Thing contrary
to sound Doctrine; neither flattering the Vanity of the Great or Learned, nor
despising the humble Condition of the Poor, or Illiterate. That Is the Character
of this Divine Apostle, in our Text; Preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching
those Things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all Confidence.

We may more particularly observe here,

1. The Matter of his Preaching and Teachings, viz. The KINGDOM of GOD, and the
Things which concern the Lord JESUS CHRIST. -- Not the Wisdom of this World;
not the Philosophy of the Greeks; nor yet the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees. -- Not the Rituals of Moses, or Traditions of the Fathers, to humor
his Jewish Brethren; -- Not human Politics, to please the Court; -- Not
liberal Arts and Sciences, to tickle the Scholars itching Ears; -- Not mere
Ethics, or natural Religion, to gratify the heathen Moralists: No, but the
important Truths and Precepts of the Gospel-Revelation, The Kingdom of God, and
the Things concerning Jesus Christ. These momentous and sublime Subjects were
the reigning Themes of his public Ministry and private Converse. On these two
Arguments hang all the Law and the Prophets, the Gospel and the Apostles.
Here Is the Center of Revelation: Here Is the Sum of Christianity: And here is an
inexhaustible Fund of the most useful Preaching and Conversation. These are
Things that Angels are Students in; but not able fully to comprehend.

Observe,

2. The Manner of his Preaching and Teaching, viz. with all CONFIDENCE.

A Door was now opened to him of the Lord; a Door of Opportunity, and a Door of
Utterance: and he spoke boldly the Mysteries of God. Sometimes he remarks it to
the Churches, that he had been with them in Weakness, and in Fear, and in much
Trembling: though never to that Degree as to hinder him from declaring to them
the Testimony of God, and triumphing in Christ. It seems, even inspired
Apostles had not the Presence of the Comforter with them always in an exact
Proportion. But in some Places, and on some Occasions, they had the Joy of the
Holy Ghost in signal Measures, so that at such times they remarkably waxed
bold: and never perhaps was Paul more thoroughly made manifest, than among the
Romans. His Speech and his Preaching was now very eminently in Demonstration of
the Spirit, and of Power. His Faith seems now triumphant, and to spread all its
Glories upon him. He needed a peculiar Presence of God, to support him under
the Weight of that uncommon Service (private, as well as public) which he must
have upon his Hands in so great and populous a City, while all Comers at all
Seasons had free Access to him. -- Here too he had some of the most subtle and
powerful Adversaries, to conflict with; Here he had his Martyrdom in the
nearest Prospect; and here one of the bitterest Trials was to befall him, the
Desertion of Friends: on all which Accounts, as he remarkably needed his Lord
to stand by him, and strengthen him, so he had now a very remarkable Experience
of the gracious Presence of Christ, which gave him Utterance and a Fortitude
extraordinary. So that even in learned proud and imperious Rome he was bold in
his God, to make known the Mysteries of the Gospel; and preached Christianity
with much Power, with a victorious Faith, and intrepid Assurance. He preached
the Kingdom of God, though amidst Idol-Temples, and near the Palace of Caesar, as
jealous as he was for the Dignity of his Crown, or the Priests and Populace for
the Honor of their Idols. The Apostle, while he was for allowing to Caesar the
Things that were Cesar's, yet boldly claimed for GOD the Things that are GOD'S,
and for CHRIST the Things that are CHRIST'S, in Opposition to the Works of the
Devil, and the Usurpations of Men. He dared preach the Kingdom of God in the
Imperial City, the Mistress of the World, and the Mother of Abominations. And
here he triumphed in Christ, though despised of Men. He gloried in the Cross of
Christ, though to the Jews a Stumbling Block, and to the Greeks Foolishness.
They might pour Contempt on the Doctrine of a crucified Savior, and a Kingdom
not of this World* but he saw a Divine Glory in the Gospel, and counting all
Things but Loss, for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus, he preached the
Things concerning Christ, and the Kingdom of God, with all Confidence, with the
full Assurance of Faith, and the Rejoicing of Hope firm to the End; free from
all anxious Diffidence, Reluctance, Fear, or Shame; and surmounting all
Discouragements.

Perhaps (by the Way) this his heroic Confidence might be one Occasion of that
happy Circumstance, No Man forbidding him: for they might as well attempt to
stay the Sun in the Heavens from its Course, as go about to forbid the Progress
of this bold and zealous Preacher in his Work, who like the Sun was a burning
and shining Light, and in the daily Revolutions of his Ministry went forth in
the Strength of the Lord, rejoicing as a strong Man to run a Race. But the good
Hand of his God upon him, is principally to be eyed in this remarkable
Concurrence of Events; the Boldness of the Apostle, and the Tameness of his
Adversaries. The God that stopped the Mouths of ravening Lions, in the Case of
Daniel, made all Iniquity to stop her Mouth, in the Case of this Apostle, and
delivered him out of the Mouth of the Lion. So it was that God, who makes
Man's Mouth; even He, who put forth his Hand, and touched Jeremiah's Mouth; He,
who sent one of the Seraphim, with a live-Coal from off the Altar, to touch
Isaiah's Lips, and made his Mouth like a sharp Sword; 'twas the same Hand of
God, that opened the Mouth of this Apostle, and gave him that good Treasure he
had within, of Knowledge, Grace and Comfort, so that out of the Abundance of
his Heart, his Mouth spoke, of the Kingdom of God, and the Things which concern
the Lord Jesus Christ, with all Confidence.

Having held you thus long in reflecting on the Context, and descanting on the
Words, This long Introduction has sundry Passages in it, which I have taken the
Liberty to insert here, though for Brevity omitted in the preaching. -- I Have
done the like in some of the following Pages.
I shall wave all other Observations that might be made from them, and single
out this one for the Theme of our further Meditations.

DOCTRINE.
That Ministers of the Word are to preach the KINGDOM of GOD, and the Things
concerning CHRIST, revealed in the Gospel, with all holy Confidence.



The special Occasion, which has led my Tho'ts to this Subject, you are all
aware of; and will expect no other Apology. -- In discoursing upon this
Doctrine, I shall take the following Method: Premising, that the Gospel reveals
to us the Kingdom of God, and those Things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ;
then showing, that Ministers of the Gospel are to preach and teach these
Things; and this with all holy Confidence. -- To each in their Order, as
briefly as will well consist with doing any Justice to Points of such
Importance.

PROP. I. The Gospel reveals to us the Kingdom of God and those Things which
concern the Lord Jesus Christ.

Here it may be said distinctly,

1. The Gospel reveals to us the Kingdom of God.

And if it be inquired, What Kingdom? I answer,

(1). It reveals to us a Kingdom of Providence, which extends through the
universal Creation.

It tells us, that God has prepared his Throne in the Heavens, and his Kingdom
rules over all: reaches through all Worlds, Heaven, Earth, and Hell. The
Doctrine of a Divine Providence is the Dictate of Reason, as well as
Revelation: though the Glories of this Providential Dominion are veiled to the
Eye of natural Reason. It appears but a base Kingdom, without the Gospel to
show us the Mysteries of it. -- Nor can we by the Light of Nature learn the
Manner of the Kingdom, as administered by Jesus, the Mediator; to whom all Power
in Heaven and Earth is committed, and who has the Keys of Hell and of Death.
This is one of the Peculiars of Revelation: a Doctrine of Christianity, full of
Mystery and Glory, and big with Lessons of Duty. -- But it is not the Kingdom
of Nature, the Dominion of Providence, in any View of it, that our Text has so
direct a Reference to.

(2.) The Gospel reveals to us a Kingdom of Grace, which extends only to the
Church and peculiar People of God in the Earth.

The Kingdom of God, spoken of in our Text, and which is so celebrated a
Subject in Revelation, means in general the Dispensation of Redemption by
Christ; and particularly that mediatory Dominion of Grace, which concerns Souls
in this World, and which our Lord-Redeemer exercises over them by his Word and
Spirit.

The Metaphor of a Kingdom is chosen to shadow out the Excellencies of this
Dispensation of Grace; and particularly to represent the glorious Rectitude,
the beautiful and blessed State of Things in a renewed Soul. It imports a
Throne erected, a Divine Authority exercised, and a Divine Power exerted; a Law
written, Allegiance sworn, and Homage paid; a comely Order and Harmony
restored; a Pardon dispensed, and Peace spoken; Privileges and Honors
conferred; great and precious Promises applied: a vital Union to Christ, the
Head of his Body, the Church; and I may add, an Union of Hearts among all the
Subjects of this Kingdom; and, what crowns all, the Stability of this Dominion
and Happiness. For the Foundation of God stands sure: The Lord knows them
that are his. The Throne of Christ in his People's Hearts shall endure for
ever; and the Gates of Hell shall not be able to prevail against it. This
Kingdom of Grace in the Soul, is a Kingdom that cannot be destroyed: molested
it may be, but not dissolved.

This is sometimes called the Kingdom, by way of Eminence; because it is
incomparable for true Glory, Happiness, and Duration; and because this was that
Kingdom, the diffusive Spread and flourishing State whereof the Old Testament
Prophecies spoke of, upon which the Jews founded their Expectation of the
Kingdom's being restored to Israel, though their Notion of the Thing was all
carnal and worldly.

It Is sometimes called the Heavenly Kingdom; because in its Nature it partakes
of Heaven, and prepares us for it, tends to it, and ends in it.

It Is called in our Text, and elsewhere, the Kingdom of God: because it is of a
divine Nature, and of a divine Original, resulting from the Purpose of Divine
Grace from everlasting, contrived by divine Wisdom, effected by Divine Power,
and exhibiting the Image of Divine Holiness; because the Divine Sovereignty is
here displayed in its brightest Glory; because a Submission to God is the great
Law of this Kingdom, and the Fruition of God is the great Reward of its
Subjects; because the Righteousness, which is of God by Faith, is the grand
Basis of this Kingdom; the Word of God, the Charter of its Privileges; the
Christ of God, the Purchaser, and the Spirit of God, the Bestower of them: in
fine, because this Kingdom stands in direct Opposition to the Kingdom of Satan,
the god of this World; is above the Reach of human Usurpation, and infinitely
excells all the Kingdoms of the Sons of Men.

The Kingdom spoken of in our Text, is primarily of a moral spiritual Kind, an
inward Thing, in the hidden Man of the Heart. It Is a Kingdom not of this World,
as our Savior assures us; not of an earthly and temporal Reference; not lying
in Civils, and mere Externals; not having Men's natural Lives, Liberties, and
Properties in this World, for the immediate Object of its Dominion: No, but it
is a Kingdom within Men, a Kingdom in the Soul, a Rule over the Understanding
and Will, the Heart and Conscience; rectifying and conducting the Powers of the
inner Man; a Kingdom of heavenly Light and Love, and filial Liberty within; a
Kingdom that consists (as the Apostle expresses it) in Righteousness, Peace,
and Joy in the Holy Ghost. -- It is a Kingdom set up in Honor of God, our
Savior; that the Son of God may manifest his Glory, in destroying the Prince
of this World, and that Men may with their Heart, as well as Lips, honor the
Son, even as they honor the Father Having multiplied Scripture-Quotations in
this Discourse, I have for Brevity often omitted citing Book, Chapter and Verse.
.

It Is to be observed, that the Kingdom of Grace may be considered as in some
Respects under an outward and visible, as well as an inward and invisible
Administration.

By the Kingdom of God, sometimes in Scripture seems to be meant the visible
Kingdom of Christ, or the external Administration of his spiritual Government
in the Church, mediately by his Word and Ordinances: as where we read of the
Kingdom's being taken away; the Children of the Kingdom, their being cast out,
etc. -- The Laws and Orders of this outward Polity are exhibited to us in the
sacred Scriptures: The Subjects of it are visible Saints: One eminent Sign or
Badge of it is the holy Sabbath: An Oath of Allegiance to the King of Zion is
administered in Baptism, and a Recognition of the Vows of God upon us solemnly
made at the Lord's Table: Societies for Communion in Worship, Church Order, and
Discipline, are instituted: and Officers appointed, with a subordinate
ministerial Power, to lead and preside in the House of the Kingdom etc. -- Now
the Kingdom of God, in this Notion of it, we must take Heed that we don't
reject, or slight: but acknowledge Christ's kingly Authority in his visible
Church and outward Ordinances, by a professed Subjection to the Gospel, and by
a Care to walk in all his Commandments and Institutions, blameless. We must
make it our Concern and Study, to hold fast the Form of sound Words, and to
keep the Ordinances as they have been delivered to us; confessing Christ before
Men, and honoring him by all due Acknowlegements in external Practice. -- It Is
usual to say, There Is the visible Kingdom of God among a People so doing.

We may note here, The Kingdom of God, as to it is external Appearance, Form, or
Mode, has passed under a Variety of Dispensations, Revolutions and Degrees of
Advancement, since its original Foundation. The Kingdom has ever been
substantially one; but administered at sundry Times in diverse Manners. The
last, and present, which is commonly named the Gospel Dispensation, the Kingdom
of Jesus, the Son of God incarnate, is the most perfect of all. This was long
looked for by the Jews; though they had wrong Ideas of its Nature and Design. We
read of devout Men among them, who waited for the Kingdom of God. And the
Pharisees inquired the Time, when the Kingdom of God should come; meaning, when
the Messiah would inherit the Throne of his Father David, and introduce his
expected Reign.

It Is thought by some, this visible Dispensation of the Gospel is only
intended, where Christ says to the unbelieving Pharisees, No Doubt the Kingdom
of God is come upon you; and concerning the little Children bro't to him, Of
such is the Kingdom of God. So where the christian Hebrews are said to have
received a Kingdom which cannot be moved; and the Colossians to be delivered
from the Power of Darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of God's dear Son.
-- But I cannot help thinking, although that Sense be comprehended, yet there is a
richer and more exalted Sense, which is by no means to be excluded, in the most
(if not all) of these, and other such Passages.

If we would speak of the Glory of God's Kingdom, and talk of his Power, we
must turn our Eye to the inward and vital Dispensation. The Kingdom of God,
considered subjectively, is in its general Notion the same with what is
elsewhere denominated the New Creature, the Image of God, etc. It means that
System of heavenly Graces, inwrought in the Soul by the Power of God, in
Conversion. And how great is its Beauty and Worth, its Importance and
Necessity! The Externals of the Kingdom are, in their Order and Place, truly
excellent and highly amiable. His Foundation is in the holy Mountains: The Lord
loves the Gates of Zion, more than all the Dwellings of Jacob: Glorious Things
are spoken of thee, O City of God. But among all its Glories, this is the most
remarkable; Of Zion it shall be said, This and that Man was BORN in her. --
What are all the visible Beauties and Benefits of the outward Dispensation, to
those of the secret invisible Empire of God, set up in a Soul, in the new
BIRTH! The King's Daughter is all glorious WITHIN. As for the Glory of external
Advantages, it lies in their being Divine Appointments, and wisely adapted
Means, owned and sanctified of God, to subserve the blessed Purposes of his
Grace, in regard to the internal Dispensation. They are a noble Apparatus and
Attendant to this: but separate from this, the external Frame of Christianity
fails of its genuine Use and End; and in that Regard has no Glory, however
splendid an Appearance it may make. The visible Dispensation of the Covenant of
Grace, without the invisible Work of Grace in the Heart; the mere Form of
Godliness, though brightened with the fair Show of all homiletical Virtues,
giving Persons or Societies a Name that they live; This is certainly but the
Shadow, not the Substance and Reality of the Kingdom of God. -- Reigning
Hypocrisy (which is consistent with the Height of external Zeal in Offices of
Devotion and Duties of moral Practice) determines Men real Slaves to the Prince
of Darkness: and we have Reason to fear, many a Church on Earth, that calls it
self a Church of Christ, is indeed little else but a Synagogue of Satan.
However highly they may make their Boast in God and his Kingdom, little more
can be said, than that the Kingdom of God is come nigh them. -- We may, in
regard of Convictions and Reformation, be not far from the Kingdom of God; and
yet in Fact not receive it. Nevertheless, where there is a truly prosperous
State of Externals in Religion, it is to be hoped, there is usually the secret
Work of Grace carrying on, and so the Kingdom of God in Reality.

Receiving the Kingdom of God, means a vital Application and active Assumption;
most aptly expressing the Nature and Operation of Faith, which is a receptive
and accepting Grace; whose Seat is in the Heart or Spirit, and whose Office is
to receive Christ Jesus the Lord, our Righteousness. -- The Soul of Man is the
prime Object of the whole Administration of this Kingdom; and it is in its
whole Genius and Frame spiritual, suited to our immortal Part. -- The Law of
this Kingdom is spiritual: I mean the royal Law of Liberty, the Law written,
not with Ink, nor in Tables of Stone, but in fleshly Tables of the Heart;
reaching to the inmost Recesses of the Soul, and bringing into Captivity every
Thought to the Obedience of Christ. -- The Service of the Kingdom is in its
Nature, its Principles and Motives, spiritual: It Is a worshipping God in Spirit
and in Truth, a serving Him with our Spirit in the Gospel of his Son. -- The
Privileges of this Kingdom are spiritual Blessings and heavenly Things in
Christ Jesus. It Is a Kingdom in this World, but not of it, not derivative from
it, nor terminating in it, not participating of it, nor dependent upon it. --
Its Properties, its Effects and Ends, are all sublime and spiritual. -- The
distinguishing Character of such as have received this Kingdom is, They that be
spiritual; spiritually minded, walking in the Spirit, etc. -- Which leads me to
observe, The grand Operator, in setting up and advancing this Kingdom, is the
blessed Spirit of Grace: He is the immediate Agent, and (strictly speaking) the
sole Efficient. Indeed the Apostle sometimes intitles Ministers Fellow-workers
to the Kingdom of God: But this is to be understood of their Employment in the
external Administration. For they have not, by any Art of their own, an Access
to the Hearts of Men; nor Power, as of themselves, to produce the Kingdom of
God within Men. In respect of this Effect, the same Apostle confesses himself
Nothing: but glories in his Infirmities, that the Power of Christ might rest
upon him. We have this Treasure (says he) in earthen Vessels, that the
Excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of Men. And when it pleases God
to send forth the Spirit of his Son into our Hearts, exerting his Divine
Influences in Concurrence with the Ministry of the Word, it is seen that the
King-of God is not in Word, but in Power. The holy Ghost with unerring Wisdom
and Skill conducts the Affairs of this spiritual Kingdom; and with
uncontrollable Liberty, with an Energy invincible, and overpowering all
Opposition, he prosecutes the glorious Designs of it: sets it up in
Regeneration, and carries it on in progressive Sanctification. -- But in the
whole He acts in Subordination to the Son of God, who is represented as the
supreme Trustee of Divine Power, and prime Head of Influences, whom the Father
has set King on his holy Hill of Zion. Unto the SON he says, Thy Throne, O
God, is for ever and ever: Sit thou at my right Hand, until I make thine
Enemies thy Footstool: Thy People shall be willing in the Day of thy Power.

Let it be subjoined here; This is a Kingdom that is daily carrying on among
Men, and shall be commensurate in Duration with Earth and Time, yea with Heaven
and Eternity. Indeed when the World ends, and the whole Scene of Temporals is
shut up, the present Manner of administering this spiritual Dominion will cease:
the Mode of Exercise will be altered, but the Dominion it self shall have no
End, and its Effects never cease. This Kingdom is called the EVERLASTING
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. He will doubtless be for ever, in
some Sense, Head of his own Body, the Church; it is the Reward of his
meritorious Passion and Obedience. Yet it is the Opinion of Divines, that the
Mediatorial Form of administering the Government will utterly expire; which they
ground on that Text, Then shall the Son deliver up the Kingdom to the Father.
Though, this may only mean Christ's presenting to the Father his spiritual
Subjects, his peculiar People In familiar Language, Kingdom is taken
objectively, for the governed Community; as well as formally, for the governing
Power and Constitution.
(who are described a Royal Priesthood, a Kingdom of Priests) the Church, that
he loved, and gave himself for; the same, it is said, He will present to HIMSELF
a glorious Church. -- Then most evidently and emphatically God shall be all in
all. The whole World of the Redeemed shall be filled with all the communicable
Fullness of the Godhead. So the Kingdom of God shall be perfect; arrived at its
absolute Completion in Glory, a Glory that will never pass away.

This brings me to say,

(3.) The Gospel reveals to us a Kingdom of Glory, in the future and eternal
World.

This Kingdom is administered in Heaven, the Seat of God's glorious Presence,
and m^^^ beatific Influx. The Gospel acquaints us, that it was prepared from
the Foundation of the World; declares it the Purchase of the Cross of Christ;
makes the Promise of it to them that are in Christ; pronounces Jesus the
Forerunner, who is for us entered into it, and set down with his Father in his
Throne; proclaims Jesus the final Judge, the Resurrection, and the Life; in a
Word, reveals the incarnate SON of God, as together with the FATHER, and the
SPIRIT (One God over all, blessed for ever) the eternal Object of Worship and
Happiness to the Saints in Light. Hence these are represented as standing
before the Throne of God and the Lamb, reigning with Him Kings and Priests for
ever.

But what is the Manner of the Kingdom above, what it is peculiar Laws and
Methods of Administration (whether in the present State of separate Souls, or
the future Resurrection-State) and what its admirable Immunities, divine
Treasures, exalted Honors, Delights, and verily Eye has not seen, neither Ear
heard, nor of these Things is the Heart of Man, in this our degenerate and
feeble Condition, capable of forming or admitting any exact and adequate Ideas.
-- Only the Gospel reveals so much as sufficiently assures us, in the general,
it is a Kingdom of infinite Glory, immense Riches, and ecstatick Pleasures
without End. -- Enough this, in the Sense of inlighten'd Reason, to draw our
Attention, to attract our Desires, and warm our Affections, to excite our
Hopes, and engage us in the Pursuit of this Kingdom of God: Enough, to nourish
the Saints Faith and Love and spiritual Life, to refresh us in our
Pilgrim-State, to ease our Griefs, and silence our Complaints, while under many
Burdens, and through mighty Oppositions, we are walking in the narrow Way,
which leads to the Kingdom. -- Thus much concerning it we have revealed to us,
with infallible Certainty: and nothing further was really needful for us at
present to know. What of the Glory remains to be revealed, we shall know
hereafter.

Let it be observed now, Tho this State of Glory in Heaven be ultimately
respected in our Text; yet it is the State of Grace here on Earth, that is more
immediately in View. The Kingdom, tho a heavenly Kingdom, tho not of this World
(neither established on a worldly Design, nor having its Issue in the present
World) yet has its Existence and Operation here. -- This spiritual Kingdom has
been erected and supported among Mankind from the Beginning: taking the Date of
its Projection from the Days of Eternity, but of its actual Rise from the Days
of our first Parents, commencing with that primitive and fundamental Promise
made upon their Fall, That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpent's
Head. -- All along through the Patriarchal and Jewish Ages, there was in one
Degree or another the Kingdom of God among Men. Yet the most illustrious
Dispensation of it was reserved to be the Distinction of the Church's last Age.
Says our Lord, From the Days of John Baptist the Kingdom of God is preached,
and every Man presses into it. But in the Days of the Apostles, after Christ's
Ascension, this was eminently the Case. Then was that Saying of our Lord
fulfilled, I tell you there be some standing here, which shall not taste of
Death, until they have seen the Kingdom of God come with POWER. Truly, then was
there an extraordinary Display of the Power of God, in a quick Progress of his
spiritual Kingdom, in its wide Extent, and in the transcendent Degree of its
Prosperity and Glory, as to the Internals, as well as Externals of it. Then
Conversions were numerous; Thousands at a Time added to the Lord; Nations born
in a Day. And the Converts of Zion, in that happy Season, appear to have had
the Spirit in eminent Measures. Not to mention their miraculous Gifts, it seems
their heavenly Graces were in general very signally in a flourishing State;
having a Vitality, a sensible Growth and Evidence, beyond what is common. -- O
when shall we see the Return of such triumphant Days of the Son of Man! By the
Grace of God we have a Prospect of another blessed Period, that will even
exceed in Glory: when the everlasting Gospel shall fly like Lightning, with
resistless Power and astonishing Success; shall again be preached with the Holy
Ghost sent down from Heaven in a remarkable Manner, and the Kingdom of God be
every where diffused and established through all the Earth; when the Kingdom and
the Greatness of the Kingdom shall be given to the People of the Saints of the
most High. We should pray for the hastening of those glorious Times of
Reformation.

In the mean time we have it to acknowledge unto the Praise of a sovereign God,
that there is even now a Remnant according to the Election of Grace, and a
promising Appearance of the Increase of their Number, who have received the
Kingdom of God, tho in lower Measures. For this heavenly Kingdom as it now
exists and appears in Believers, especially in its Beginnings, seems in general
comparatively but as a Grain of Mustard Seed, in regard to its small Figure,
and at least oftentimes but as Leven hid in Meel, with regard to its secret
Operation; yet there is the Reality, and a gradual Prevalence. Every one that is
born of the Spirit, does actually see the Kingdom of God, in its initial
Dispensation. To such it is given to know vitally and experimentally the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven. For it must be noted, that (properly
speaking) the Kingdom of Grace and the Kingdom of Glory are not two Kingdoms,
specifically or essentially distinct; but only differing gradually, and in
respect of their various Modes of Administration: Otherwise, they are for
Substance one and the same, and go under the common Name of the Kingdom of
Heaven. The State of Grace, and the State of Glory, are not only connected
inviolably in the Purpose and Covenant of God, but also nearly related, and
united in their general Nature. Heaven comes down into the Soul in
Regeneration; this is the actual Commencement of heavenly Bliss. The Kingdom of
Grace is the Kingdom of Glory in its inchoate and imperfect Estate. And what is
the Kingdom of Glory, but the Kingdom Grace in its Consummation, its triumphant
State, and full display under a varying Form of Administration?

I shall now close this Point with suggesting a few practical Reflections.

By this we see the forlorn and wretched State of Souls unregenerate, in that
they are Strangers to the Kingdom of God in this World; and continuing so, must
necessarily be excluded the Kingdom of God in the next. -- By this we see how
happy is the Day of a Sinner's Conversion, and the Occasion there is for Joy at
every spiritual Birth, when a Soul is initiated into the Kingdom of God. -- We
see the Reason of believing Parents so anxiously weeping for their Children
while in a State of Nature, and travailing in Birth again, until Christ be
formed in them, the Kingdom of God set up in their Souls. -- What honorable
Sentiments should we have of the Saints, tho poor in this World, yet rich in
Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom! -- And what mutual Endearment ought there ever
to subsist between all these! These, who are Companions in the Kingdom and
Patience of Jesus Christ here, and will hereafter be Companions for ever in the
Kingdom and Joy of their Lord. -- Let it be added; while we reflect with Grief
and Shame on our Apostasy and Fall in Adam (by whom came Sin into the World,
and by this the Kingdom of the Devil, that wicked Spirit which rules in the
Children of Disobedience ever since) we should admire and magnify the
stupendous Wisdom and Grace of God in raising up a second Adam, to repair the
suffering Honor of his violated Law, to dethrone the Enemy of our Souls, and
restore the Kingdom to Israel. -- And should we not with equal Wonder and
Praise celebrate the infinite Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ! who has restored
that which be (...) not away, and has done this at the Expense of his own
precious Blood; by the Merit of which he purchased the Kingdom of God, and in
Virtue of which he received Power, in his risen State, to dispense the heavenly
Blessing to whom he will; even to as many as the Father has given him for a
peculiar People to himself. The Kingdom is the Lord's; his Property, and at his
Dispose. Hence that of Christ to his Disciples, I appoint unto you a Kingdom,
as my Father has appointed to me a Kingdom. And we read, Him has God exalted
with his right Hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance unto
Israel, and Remission of Sins: which two Redemption-Blessings are the leading
Benefits of the Kingdom of God, the first royal Donatives of our Prince and
Savior. O what Reasons of Adoration and Thanksgiving to Christ do these
Reflections present to us! Shall we not all join in the Cry of the Multitude
that followed him at his triumphant Entrance into Jerusalem, saying, Hosanna!
Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord: Blessed be the Kingdom of
our Father David, that comes in the Name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest!

But in many of these Hints I have been insensibly anticipating the proper
Thoughts on the other Article before us: which therefore I shall be the briefer
upon.

2. The Gospel reveals to us those Things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ.

By the Light of Reason we have some Notions of the Being and Perfections of
God, and his Kingdom of Providence: but the Kingdom of God, intended in our
Text, and the Things that concern the Lord Jesus Christ (which do abundantly
improve and add to rational Light in the Things of Nature and Providence) are
discoverable only by the supernatural Light of Revelation. The Kingdom of God
is a Kingdom of Grace, constituted and administered according to the Counsel of
his own Will: And hence Divine Revelation was necessary to the Knowledge of
that. So the Things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, are Matters of pure
Revelation: such as the natural Reason of Man could never have brought to
Light. It Is the appropriate Glory of the Gospel, to reveal these Things to the
Sons of Men.

And what a rich Variety of Things, great and glorious Things concerning
Christ, are discovered to us in the Gospel of his Grace! The Kingdom of God is
a comprehensive Article among those Things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ;
and sometimes they seem all to be sum'd up in that. But the Apostle here adds a
more extensive Phrase, in order to include all other Things not so evidently
couched in the Idea of the Kingdom of God. The whole Revelation in sacred Writ,
from Genesis to the Apocalypse, is relative to CHRIST, in some Manner and
Degree: But our Text eminently points us to those Things which have a more
evident and next Reference to him in the Christian Revelation.

Thus for Instance, the Gospel reveals to us the Person of Christ, as God
manifest in the Flesh; his Office, as Mediator, under the several Characters of
a Prophet, and a Priest, as well as King; the Covenant of Redemption, and the
Promises made to Him before the World began; the Predestination of the Elect
unto Life in and by him; the Types and Prophecies of Him in old Time, and their
punctual Accomplishment in Him; the History and Mystery of his Incarnation,
Conception and Birth, his Life, Miracles and Sufferings, his Death and
Resurrection, his Ascension into Glory, and sitting down at the right Hand of
the Majesty in the Heavens; so the Doctrine he taught, the Laws and Institutes
he made, the Promises he gave, whether in Person, or by his inspired Ministers;
the Mission of his Spirit, as a Teacher, Sanctifier and Comforter, his
sovereign Agency, and abiding Presence; the Commission and Inspiration of his
Apostles, the Revelations made to them, and published by them, their Ministry
and Preaching, confirmed with Signs and Wonders; his setting up of the
Gospel Church, demolishing the Jewish Dispensation, and visiting the Gentiles
to take out of them a People for his Name. -- In brief, we have revealed to us
the Example of Christ; his Sacrifice and Righteousness, and his Intercession in
the Merit thereof; the unsearchable Riches of his Grace, and the absolute
Sufficiency of his Power to save; the Way of Salvation by him, the Benefits we
receive from Him, and the Duties we owe to Him; his being the Head of his Body,
the Church, and Head over all Things to the Church; his being appointed the
Heir of all Things, and Judge of the World; his second Appearing, his raising
the Dead, and dispensing both Rewards and Punishments everlasting. -- This is
an incomplete and immethodical Abstract of those Things which concern the Lord
Jesus Christ. I pretend not to an exact and perfect Enumeration: much less to a
perfect Comprehension of the Meaning of all these Things. But when I meditate
them, I soon find my self lost in Wonder, and cannot order my Speech by reason
of Darkness. Without Controversy, GREAT is the Mystery of Godliness, the
Mystery of Christ, and his Kingdom. Yet all that is necessary to be known by us
in our present State, is in the Gospel sufficiently revealed: and as for what
transcends our Conception, this however must exercise our Humility, our Faith
and Hope, and remain the Subject of our adoring Thoughts.

A REFLECTION.
O what Reason have we to be thankful for the Gospel, which thus reveals to us
the Kingdom of God, and the Things concerning Christ! -- Well might it be
styled (as it is) the GLORIOUS Gospel, the GLAD Tidings of the Kingdom of God
etc. -- Surely the Doctrine of Christ our Redeemer, and of the Things which
concern him, must needs carry much of Glory in it, that bespeaks our Wonder and
Praise. -- The Tidings of a Kingdom, the Kingdom of God, must be glad Tidings
indeed; Tidings of great Joy to all People. Shall they not be such to us! to us
in our miserable Captivity and hellish Bondage! Are we for News? here is News
worth our hearing, worth our sollicitous Attention, our cheerful Belief, and
thankful Admiration. When we consider how we deserved to hear nothing from God
but the Thunders of his Law and Curse; when we consider the Mysteries of the
Kingdom, and the Things concerning Christ; their Excellency in themselves, and
the Importance of their Discovery to us; when we consider how they surpass the
most improved Lights of human Reason, and what a vast Part of our
Fellow Creatures are left in the Darkness of apostate Nature; and at the same
time consider that we, as unworthy as any in the World, have our Lot cast under
the clear Sunshine of the Gospel, the Gospel of Christ, the Gospel of the
Kingdom; when we consider what Multitudes of Sinners are daily perishing out of
the Earth, and dragged by Devils into the Place of Torments, where they must
hear for ever the Shrieks and Wailings of their Partners in Misery, but never
once more hear the Voice of Mercy, while we are yet reprieved, and still know
the joyful Sound; O how surprizingly great and distinguishing does the
Compassion of God to us appear! -- Let us take Care to cherish a grateful Sense
of our infinite Obligations to God our Savior, and a just Value for the
Privilege we enjoy. Let us prize the Gospel for its heavenly Original, for its
intrinsic Glory, and its relative Advantage, count it worthy of all
Acceptance, and study to do all possible Honor to it, both in Profession and
Practice: believe its Truths, embrace its Promises, and obey its Precepts. Let
us be much in searching the Scriptures daily, which testify of Christ, and the
Kingdom of God. Let the Word of Christ, the Word of the Kingdom, dwell in us
richly. Let us be SWIFT to hear; gladly embracing all Opportunities of hearing
the Word; instant, in Season, out of Season. [And here I would take a public
Notice of it with Thankfulness to God, that a Spirit of Zeal to the House of
God is awakened in many at this Day, as appears by our crowded Assemblies from
time to time. O that this hearing Ear may be continued, and that we may all
have an understanding Heart!] Let us take Heed HOW we hear. And let us also
take Heed WHAT we hear. Let us determine not to know any Thing, save Christ,
and him crucified; Christ, and him glorified; the Things concerning Christ, and
the Kingdom of God. These are Things of the highest Dignity, and of everlasting
Consequence. These are the Things of our Peace. No other Things are worth our
Knowledge or Regard in Comparison of these. What is the Chaff, to the Wheat?
says the Lord. What is the Knowledge of the World, Insight into Politics, or
into the Springs of Business, Skill in the Mysteries of Trade, and the Arts of
thriving and prospering in the World? Nay, What Is all human Learning? What Is
the noblest Philosophy? What Is even Scripture-Knowledge itself, in Points of a
secular Aspect, or a civil Concern, of a ritual Nature, or external Reference?
It Is all to be accounted but as Dross and Dung, for the Excellency of the
Knowledge of Christ, and the Things of Christ, his Kingdom, and his
Righteousness!

O let us all bewail our many practical Contempts of these excellent Things.
Let impenitent Sinners very often and very solemnly expostulate with
themselves, How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation! -- And forget
not the Exhortation, Beware lest that come upon you, which is written in the
Prophet, Behold, ye Despisers, and wonder, and perish! -- As you have any Care
for your Souls, despise not the Gospel: nor despise the plain and faithful
Preaching of the Gospel. Quench not the Spirit: Despise not Prophesyings. If
any are under Convictions, inquiring what you must do to be saved, and would
not lose your Convictions, nor miss of proper Direction and Assistance, then (I
say again) take Heed what you hear, as well as how. In fixing under a
particular Ministry, choose wisely; and ever prefer a faithful true
Gospel Ministry.



Which leads me to

PROP. II. Ministers of the Gospel are to preach the Kingdom of God, and teach
those Things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ.

Our Text tells us, the Apostle did so; it is remarked of of him twice in this
Chapter, and often elsewhere: and this is recorded for our Admonition, upon
whom the Ends of the World are come. -- Here let it be said briefly,

1. We must preach the Kingdom of God, revealed in the Gospel.

Our Context speaks of Paul's expounding and testifying the Kingdom of God. And
we read (Chap. 19. 9.) of his daily disputing, and persuading the Things
concerning the Kingdom of God. Even thus Ministers must labor (every one, as
of the Ability, which God gives) to testify, and expound, also (if need be) to
dispute, and persuade these Things.

We should testify the Kingdom of God, asserting its Reality and Existence; and
it will be well, if we are able to witness unto this from our own happy
Experience. So we must expound it, as we are able, in its whole Extent and
Compass; its Nature, its Properties, and Purposes; the Laws and Benefits of it;
the Promises concerning it; and the Truths relating to it, or inseparably
connected with it; particularly the Doctrine of Original Sin, that Truth which
is so evidently fundamental to the Scheme of Christianity, and without a due
Attention to which we shall be likely to entertain very crude Conceptions of
the Kingdom of God; also the Doctrine of Regeneration, its Necessity resulting
from Original Sin, its Author the Holy Ghost, its Fruits in the christian Life,
its essential Connection with eternal Happiness, and c. without a just Regard
to which important Points, we shall have but very superficial Notions of the
Kingdom of God. Hence, if we would expound, as we ought, the Kingdom of God, we
should study and preach these great Gospel Truths. -- We must likewise be ready
even to dispute, as the Apostle did, and contend earnestly for the Faith, in
regard of the Things pertaining to the Kingdom of God; with Meekness and Wisdom
instructing such as oppose themselves; laboring to convince Gainsayers, and
put them to Silence. We must contend against all the Enemies of the Kingdom of
God; wrestle against Flesh and Blood, and against spiritual Wickednesses in
high Places; resist the Devil and the World, Vice and Error, in all their
various Forms, with the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of Truth. -- And like the
Apostle, we must also persuade the Things concerning the Kingdom of God;
reasoning with Men out of the Scriptures, to convince them of the Folly of
Rebellion, and the Wisdom of Submission to God; exhorting and calling Men to a
professed Subjection, and Obedience to the Gospel: as Paul showed to the
Gentiles, that they spou'd repent, and turn to God, and do Works meet for
Repentance: He testified both to Jews, and Greeks, Repentance toward God, and
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ: And the Disciples he persuaded to continue
in the Grace of God, bringing forth the Fruits of the Kingdom, the Fruits of
Righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ to the Praise and Glory of God.

In a Word, we must teach the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God,
and the Communion of the Holy Ghost. This enters into the Notion of preaching
the Kingdom of God. The adorable Trinity all concur in the Dispensation of
Redemption; acting each his distinct Part in the Affairs of this Kingdom: and
so far as Divine Revelation will carry us, we must testify, expound, and
persuade these Things, as Things pertaining to the Kingdom of God. We must
preach the Father of Mercies and God of all Grace: we must preach the Spirit of
Holiness: and we must preach the Lord of Glory. While we remember the Creator,
we must never forget the Redeemer, and the (...): but display their several
Glories, and assert their respective Rights. But this (...) me to say,

2. We must teach the Things, revealed in the Gospel, concerning our Lord JESUS
CHRIST; those Truths especially that have a near Relation to Christ, his Person
and Mediation. So the Apostle did: he preached Jesus, and the Resurrection. He
preached not himself, but Christ Jesus the Lord. -- He preached Repentance and
Remission of Sins in the Name of Jesus Christ.

Though we are not to confine our Preaching wholly to the Things which in their
direct Aspect concern the Lord Jesus Christ; but may and ought to teach many
Things that do but reductively and remotely concern Christ: Yet the special
Subject, on which we should often dwell, and very much lay out our Ministry, is
Christ, and the Things more immediately concerning Christ. Here must be the
Emphasis, the Accent, in our Preaching. We must preach the Things concerning
the Name of Jesus Christ: his Person, Natures and Perfections both Divine and
Human; his Messiahship, or mediatorial Character; his Charge of a peculiar
People, chosen in him, and given him of the Father, before the World; his
Mission, and Incarnation in Time; his Offices, and Execution of them; his
States of Humiliation and Exaltation: the Authority, Excellency, and Usefulness
of his Doctrine and Revelation; the Reasons of his Obedience and Sufferings;
the Ends of his Resurrection, and Ascension; his Priestly Intercession in
Heaven, his Prophetical Acts, and Regal Administration; his second Coming and
Kingdom, the Resurrection and eternal Judgment. In Sum, his Purchases, his
Victories, and Triumphs; the Benefits of his Salvation, and Value of an
Interest in Him; the Office of his Spirit in the Application of Redemption; the
Necessity and Efficacy of his Righteousness, imputed to us, and received by
Faith, in the Business of Justification; the Necessity and Efficacy also of his
Grace, in the Conversion of Sinners, and Perseverance of Saints; the Stability
of the Promises in him; the exceeding Riches of God's Mercy in and through him;
the Greatness and Freeness of his Love, the Obligations of Gratitude we are
under to him, and the righteous Claims he has upon us; -- the Duties we owe
him, and more especially that comprehensive Duty of believing in him,
submitting to his Righteousness, and depending on his Grace, living by the
Faith of the Son of God, and doing whatsoever we do, whether in Word or Deed,
in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; in Virtue of his Grace in and with us, in
Obedience to his Will, with a Reliance on his Merits, and with an Eye to his
Glory; that the Name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in us, and we in him,
according to the Grace of our God, and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Let it be subjoined now,

3. We should preach the Kingdom of God, and the Things concerning Christ, both
in Conjunction, and in their Relation to one another.

The Ideas are somewhat distinct, yet so united, as mutually to involve one the
other: and it seems to me, there is no forming any just Notions of either
Subject, without comprising both. While we preach the true Scripture-Doctrine
on the one head, we do indeed implicitly teach the other: But it is abundantly
best to be explicit, in preaching both together. This is to preach after the
Manner of the Apostles, and primitive Ministers, as they were taught of God,
and led by the Spirit. (See Acts 8. 12. -- Chap. 19. 8, 10. and Context ver.
23. with many other Places.) They are the proper Standard of Evangelic
Preaching The Gospel indeed at the first began to be spoken by the Lord Jesus
Christ, in his personal Ministry: But the Confirmation and full Declaration of
it was left to his Spirit, speaking by the Mouth of the Apostles, and other
inspired Ministers, after our Lord's Ascension. Jesus indeed, when he was
risen, abode forty Days on Earth, speaking to his Disciples of the Things
pertaining to the KINGDOM of God, and expounding to them, in all the
Scriptures, the Things concerning HIMSELF: But those Discourses of his, the
Holy Ghost has not been pleased to put on Record. And as for his Preaching in
the Days of his Flesh, it was very much in Parables, and evidently with a
designed Reserve, as to the Peculiars of Christianity: But these, after his
Ascension, were clearly revealed by his Spirit to the Apostles; and they, with
other faithful Men, fully preached the Gospel. They are therefore the just
Pattern, and adequate Rule of our Preaching. -- See Mr. Jennings's two
excellent Discourses, of preaching Christ etc. Edit. N. E. p. 26, 29.
and it will be our Honor, to follow their Example, left on Record for
Imitation. -- Our Charge is to preach the Word: and the Word we preach must be
both the Word of the KINGDOM and the Word of the Lord JESUS. The Things
concerning the Kingdom of God, and those concerning Christ are, as in their
Nature reciprocally dependant, so in Revelation inseparably connected: And
surely what God has joined together, Man may not put asunder.

It Is Pity a Minister should at any time lay the Plan of his Discourse on one
of these Subjects, so as to preclude the other: and much worse it is, if he
ever makes a Sermon without any explicit Regard to either of them. This (in
plainness of Speech) is to handle the Word of God deceitfully: and no Apology
can in any measure justify such' Management. -- Every suitable Theme of a
Pulpit-Discourse is reducible under one or other of these Heads, improvable to
serve the Purposes of both, or capable of receiving Illustration and
Enforcement from them. Whatever our Text is, the Things of the Kingdom, and the
Things of Christ, may with the utmost Propriety and Pertinence be introduced,
either under the Doctrine, or the Application; and it will be a most faulty
Omission, in any Discourse to pass them wholly in Silence. -- The Strain of our
Preaching should turn upon one or other of these Evangelic Subjects: frequently
we should consider them both together, presenting them in one complex View: and
when discoursing on either of them more directly, yet always remember their
Connection and mutual Dependence, and accordingly consider the one in its
Reference and Subserviency to the other.

In this Method of Preaching we shall be likely to declare the whole Counsel of
God, and not keep back any Thing that is profitable, whether as to the
Doctrinals or the Practicals of Revelation. -- In this Way we shall lead our
Hearers into the most distinct and most consistent Notions of the Gospel, in
the Variety of its rich Contents. -- In this Way, we shall show our selves
approved unto God, Workmen that need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word
of Truth. -- And this is the Way to commend our selves unto every Man's
Conscience in the Sight of God, to suit every one's Relish, and to hit every
one's Case, in the Multiplicity we have to do with. -- This is the Way to
preserve the christian Religion in its full and evident Distinction from
Paganism, Judaism, Mahometism, and every false Religion. This is the Way to
keep the Gospel distinguished from the Law, Faith from Reason, the Graces of
Christianity from the Morals of Philosophy, and the Profession of Protestants
from that of Papists. -- In this Way we shall be able by sound Doctrine both to
exhort, and to convince the Gainsayers. This is the Way to remove the Offense
of the Cross, and to make Christ crucified appear the Wisdom and the Power of
God. -- This is the Way to keep Professors sound in the Faith, -- and at the
same time bring them to be obedient to the Faith. -- In short, This is the Way
to advance the Kingdom of God, and to promote the true Knowledge of God, and of
Jesus Christ, which is Life eternal.

On the one hand, Those Things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, exhibit
themselves to us in their strongest, their most beautiful and striking Light,
when discoursed in Conjunction with the Things pertaining to the Kingdom. When
we teach the Things of the Spirit, the Things of the Covenant, the Things that
be of God, conjunctly with the Things of Christ: When we preach Christ Jesus
the Lord, and our Righteousness; the Apostle, and High Priest of our
Profession; Messiah, the Prince; our Advocate, and Judge; the Object of our
Trust and Hope, and of our Fear, Love and Obedience: When we preach both his
Cross, and his Crown; both the Merits of his Death, and the Power of his
Resurrection; both the Scepter of his Grace, and the Rod of his Anger; both his
Doctrine and Example; both his Promises and Precepts; both Remission of Sins,
and Conversion through his Name; in a Word, both Repentance toward God, and
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ: When we thus teach and preach (skilfully
harmonizing, tempering and balancing Subjects of such a various Tendency and
Aspect) then the Things which concern Christ appear in their genuine Light,
Excellency and Importance; carry with them the greatest Force of Attraction,
and are most likely to reach their practical Ends and Uses. This is to handle
the Matter wisely; and they that win Souls, are wise. -- But if we confine our
Ministry to the sublime Mysteries concerning Christ, and treat them in a
speculative and abstract Manner, exclusively of their practical Inferences, and
neglecting the Things pertaining to the Kingdom, we preach the Gospel of Grace
in a very imperfect Manner, and may promise our selves but a very imperfect
Success. Jennings, ubi supra, p. 30, 37.
-- This is a faithful Saying, and these Things I will that thou affirm
constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain
good Works: these Things are good and profitable unto Men.

On the other hand, if ever the Kingdom of God comes not in Word only, but in
Power, it is when we preach it in Connection with the Things that concern the
Lord Jesus Christ. When considered in one View with these Things, it then
appears in its true Glory and Luster, and is preached with the most flaming
Light, and successful Energy. If we mean to save our own Souls, or theirs which
hear us, we must take Heed to ourselves and to our Doctrine, that we teach and
live the Doctrine of Christ. We must keep the Faith, and preach it, pure and
entire. Our Mouths must be filled with the great Arguments of the Gospel; the
Principles of the Religion of Jesus must reign in our Sermons; else they will
freeze on our Lips, however warmly we may seem to preach the Kingdom of God, in
a moral Strain, with a philosophic Turn of Thought. Indeed how can we pretend
to be Preachers of the Gospel, if we drop the Doctrines, and Duties, of a
supernatural Discovery? With what Face can we call our selves Christian
Ministers, if the Run of our preaching is upon the Principles and Laws of
Nature (though taken into Christianity) while we consider 'em only under their
natural Form, under the Notion of mere Morality or natural Religion; forgetting
that by their being incorporated into the Gospel, they have lost that Respect,
changed their Use and End, put on a new Form, and in Effect are turned into
Evangelic Principles and (...), so that there is (strictly speaking) nothing at
all (...) moral, nothing purely natural, in the christian (...) or Canon. --
Sure I am, that to philosophise merely, without an Eye to Revelation, or to
harangue upon natural Truths and moral Duties, in a rational Way, without
reducing them to their proper Place and Use in the christian Scheme, and
without paying a due Regard to the Things concerning Christ, this is not (in
the Sense of Scripture) to preach the Kingdom of God. -- What though the Text be
taken out of the Bible! If the Sermon be in 2 philosophical and unevangelic
Strain, the Preacher might as well have taken his Text out of Seneca's Morals.
-- I deny not, Morality is to be preached: but then it must be christian
Morality; a Morality springing from Faith in Christ, and animated by
Gospel-Principles and Incentives, governed by Gospel-Rules, and directed to
Gospel-Ends. Repentance is to be preached, but it must be excited by looking
upon Him whom we have pierced. And Obedience is to be preached, but it must be
the Obedience of Faith. A good Conversation is to be recommended; but it must
be a good Conversation in Christ. -- The Law is to be taught: but then it must
be the Law as exhibited in revealed Religion; and so taught, as that it may do
the Office of a Schoolmaster in bringing Sinners to Christ, and the Part of a
Guide in conducting Saints through the Paths of moral Duty. The Law is good, if
a Man use it lawfully, and teach it wisely. By the Law is the Knowledge of Sin:
it is improvable to awaken Sinners by the Terror of the Curse, to humble 'em by
the Sense of their own Depravity and spiritual Impotence, to drive 'em out of
their false Confidences, and compel them to seek an Interest in Christ, by a
Sense of their absolute Need of his Righteousness and Grace: And the Law is of
Use also to the Believer, for the Direction of his moral Carriage, for the
preserving his Humility, and keeping him ever dependant upon Christ. -- With
such Views as these, the Law is to be taught: and these Uses of it are to be
kept carefully in our own and our Hearers Eye. Whenever we teach the Law, we
must still send Men to Christ, for Righteousness and Strength, for the
Justification of Life, and for the Sanctification of the Spirit: ever guarding
our more moral Discourses with proper Cautions against false Ends and false
Measures of Obedience, and enforcing all our practical Exhortations by the
Principles and Motives of the Gospel.

Why should not we introduce the Things concerning Christ, on all Occasions, as
well as the Apostles See this Point debated by Dr. Watts, H. At. p. 40, etc.
who manifestly delight to bring in these Evangelic Peculiarities, whatever
Argument they are upon? It our Notions of Christianity are such as forbid our
doing this, or if our Temper be such as don't dispose us to it, it is justly to
be feared we are in a different Scheme, or else of a different Spirit, from
that of the Apostles. -- Methinks, it looks as if we were ashamed of the
Gospel, in its peculiar Discoveries, if we are silent on these Heads. Or can we
think to excuse our Silence, by pretending that these Things are liable to be
wrested by unlearned and unstable Souls to their own Destruction! But surely
this is a Caution, which the Apostles have set us no Pattern of. Though they
knew, Men of corrupt Minds actually did and would still pervert the Gospel to
their own Ruin, yet they fully and faithfully preached it, and run all
Ventures. So must we, if we would, as becomes us, show all good Fidelity: and
indeed if we would hope for any good Success. For upon what reasonable Grounds
can we look for the Presence of Christ with our Sermons, if there be an Absence
of Christ in them; if his Person and Mediation, his Sacrifice and his Spirit be
not allowed a Place in them, or are only complemented with an occasional and
cursory Hint, when they ought to be the reigning Topics, and live on our Lips
continually? -- Can we deem it our Glory, to neglect these Evangelic Themes,
and act the Jewish Doctor, or the Pagan Philosopher in a christian Pulpit, by
preaching up Works without Grace, or Virtue without Faith, when we are assured
that it is by Grace we are saved through Faith! Can we hope for a Divine Blessing
to attend us in such a Way of preaching? No. Mr. Jennings thinks, "GOD' s
Honor is concerned to blast these Maimers of the Gospel. (ubi supra, p. 25.)
And Dr. Watts solemnly admonishes such to "lay down the Ministry, as likely to
waste their Breath in vain Declamations, and have a terrible Account to give at
the last Day. Humb. Attempt. p. 48.
If we banish the Things concerning Christ out of our Divinity, or treat them
with a cold Neglect, our Preaching will most probably be in vain: Yea, though in
preaching the Kingdom of God, after our legal or moral Manner, we may speak as
with the Tongues of Men and of Angels, so artfully and strongly, yet in the
Event we shall be but as sounding Brass, and a tinkling Cymbal, that makes an
empty Noise, and useless Music. Verily, though we speak with all the Force of
natural Reasoning, with all the Beauties of Eloquence, and with all the Arts of
Elocution and Address superadded, with all the Light and Fire and Skill in the
World, we shall never be likely to make a real effectual Conquest of any one
Soul, to add to the Lord, and to enlarge the Kingdom of God. See Dr. Watt's H.
Attempt, p. 37, -- 39. 81, -- 83.
Indeed we may perhaps move the Conscience, and melt the Passions of a Sinner;
but that is a very different Thing from the pricking his Heart, the subduing his
Will, and conquering his Lusts. We may obtain to reform a little his Temper and
Manners; which is but a very defective Success, and to little Purpose, without
softning his Heart, and bringing him to Newness of Life. In such a Way of
dealing with the Sinner, we are never like to prevail on him, truly to humble
himself, and bow to God's Authority, as his willing People do; but rather shall
flatter the Pride and Naughtiness of his Heart, nourish the Pharisee in him,
the Spirit of Self-Righteousness and Self-sufficiency, so natural to him; and
thus unhappily promote his falling into the Condemnation of the Devil, rather
than further him in the Way of Salvation. -- Nay, "It has justly been
observed, that where a great and universal Neglect of preaching Christ has
prevailed in a christian Nation, it has given a fatal Occasion to the Growth
of Deism and Infidelity." See Mr. Jennings's two Discourses, p. 30, 37, 38.
With Dr. Watts's Pref. p. 2. -- See also the Dr.'s H. At. p. 46, 47. And see
Dr. Wm. Sherlock's 2d Vol. of Ser. p. 222, 324, 364, 365, 388, where the Zeal
of some Modern Christians for natural Religion and Morality (without a due
Regard to Christ and Faith) meets with many just Rebukes, and is loaded with
the Imputation of being the grand Cause of the Infidelity and Deism of the Age.
-- So far is such moral unspiritual and unevangelical Preaching from having an
actual Influence, or probable Tendency, to advance the Kingdom of God, in the
Scripture-Notion of it. I think, I could readily direct an Inquirer where he
may find many Sermons, that run to a faulty Excess upon a philosophic Strain.
And for the sake of the Subject, so near akin to that we are upon, I will
single out Dr. TILLOTSON'S two Discourses on Matthew. 6. 33. which though perhaps
less censurable than many other of his Sermons, yet have a Variety of
exceptionable Strokes in them, and among other culpable Omissions, are
remarkable for this One Thing lacking in 'em, a Regard to the Things which
concern the Lord Jesus Christ. -- The single, cold and casual Hint, at the
Close of the latter Sermon, relating to the Merits of Christ, I think bro't in
but after an odd Way. -- However, I mean by this, only to note how very
defectively he has treated that particular Text. -- I think it a pertinent
Remark of Dr. Sherlock (who seems in his advanced Age to have very much
reformed his Scheme in Theology) "That this is the greatest Thing of all in the
Religion of a Sinner, to know by what Means to reconcile God, and obtain the
Forgiveness of Sin; and if mere Nature cannot certainly teach us this, all the
rest that it teaches us, is of very little Use to Sinners. -- "Some wise and
good Men (says he) have insisted very much upon the Distinction between natural
and revealed Religion, with a very honest Design; but without being aware of
the ill Consequences of it." -- So he proceeds to show how Socinianism is
grafted upon it, and Deism at length springs from it. [ Vol. 2. p. 311, 325:
etc.] -- It Is a good Observation of the famous Professor Frank; -- "The
bringing Sinners to CHRIST should be in some measure the Design and Drift of
every Sermon a Minister preaches; so that if a Person should happen to hear him
but once in all his Life, he might, even by means of that one Sermon, get some
Notion of the one Thing needful, and be just entered at least into the Way of
Salvation. -- See Appendix to Mr. Jennings's two Discourses, p. 75.


When ever then we attempt to preach the Kingdom of God, we must not content
ourselves with picking out the more practical Texts of Scripture, and handling
moral Precepts in an abstract Way, without a just Reference to the Things
concerning Christ. No, but it must ever be remembered, that Christ is the
Foundation and Head of the Kingdom, the great Origin of its Laws and Blessings.
So One speaks; Christ is the chief Cornerstone (upon which the whole depends,
both as to its Strength and Beauty) though so much set at Naught by our modern
Builders. For whose Conduct he accounts in this Manner: The practical Commands
of the Gospel are too excellent, the Justice of them too evident, for the Devil
to attack them: But still, while he artfully allows the Excellence of the
Morality of the Gospel, he endeavors to cut away the chief Props and Supports
of it, to overthrow the noblest Motives of our Gratitude, Love and Obedience,
by seducing Men to Infidelity, or Indifference, about the Fundamentals of the
Christian Faith: And accordingly in all Ages, even to this Day (says he) they
that deny the Divinity of the Son of God, and that strike deepest at the very
Foundations of Christianity, OR are the most cold and indifferent about them,
still talk the loudest of Morality. Dr. J. Adams (Chapl. in ord. to Q. Ann)
Ser. on Rev. 2. 10.
Truly by leaving the peculiar Doctrines of the Religion of Christ out of our
Ministrations, we give a mighty Advantage to the great Adversary of Souls: For
the Sword of the Spirit is the Word of Jesus. The Truths of the Gospel are the
main Weapons of our spiritual Warfare, mighty through God to the pulling down of
strong Holds. -- The Kingdom of God stands on the Pillar of TRUTH. It is
established and advanced in the World by bearing Witness unto the TRUTH, the
Truth as it is in Jesus. This our Lord intimates in his Reply to Pilate's
Question (upon Occasion of his having said, My Kingdom is not of this World)
Art thou a KING then? Jesus answered, To this End was I born: And for this
Cause came I into the World, that I should bear Witness unto the TRUTH. Every
one that is of the TRUTH, hears my Voice. (John 18. 37.) In like manner
Christ's Messengers are to bear Witness unto the Truth. That Is their Character,
Fellow-Helpers unto the TRUTH; and in being such, they are Fellow-Workers unto
the Kingdom of God.

If we would approve ourselves as the Ministers of God, it must be (among other
Things) by the Word of Truth. We must testify the Gospel of the Grace of God;
the great Truths of the Gospel relating to the Work of Grace in Redemption; the
Grace of God in the Purpos^, the Grace of Christ in the Purchase, and the Grace
of his Spirit in the Application of it. This is Preaching. And it carries a
Light and Power with it, beyond all philosophical Argument and Persuasive, to
promote the Conviction and Conversion of Sinners, and so to promote the Kingdom
of God. If ever we mean to have Sinners conquered, and effectually subdued to
God, we must bring them the Testimony of Jesus, in the Word of Truth; proclaim
the Gospel-Report concerning Christ and the great Salvation: And if once they
come to receive the Witness of God, to believe the Truth upon Divine Testimony,
and entertain the Gospel, not as the Word of Man, but as indeed the Word of
God, Then it is like to Work in them effectually, to their being translated out
of the Kingdom of Darkness, into the Kingdom of God. If God has from the
beginning chosen them to Salvation, it is through Sanctification of the Spirit,
and Belief of the Truth, whereto He calls them by the Gospel, to the
obtaining of the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. -- When therefore we attempt
to preach the Kingdom of God, we must never forget the Sanctification of the
SPIRIT: But apply to Him our selves for his sanctifying Influences to rest on
us, and to accompany our Labors for the Good of Souls; and we must send our
Hearers to Him, teaching them to depend on his renewing Grace, and to pray for
it; frequently opening the Nature of Conversion, and the Necessity of being
born again, if they hope to see the Kingdom of God. -- As the Belief of the
Truth, in this Point, is of singular Importance, we should endeavor to have
them instructed and established well in the Doctrine of Regeneration, together
with that other it is grounded upon, the Doctrine of Original Sin.

Let me add, Another most necessary Point to be often insisted on, is the
Doctrine of Justification by imputed Righteousness, even the Righteousness of
God, without the Law. Among all those Things which concern the Lord Jesus
Christ, and by testifying of which the Kingdom of God is advanced in the World,
this is one very eminent Article, That Christ is the Lord our Righteousness;
that Christ is the End of the Law for Righteousness to every one which
believes; That as by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners, so by the
Obedience of One (the second Adam) many are made righteous; that through the Name
of Jesus, whosoever believes in him, receives Remission of Sins, and the
Justification of Life. -- This Truth is the grand Basis and Support of the
Kingdom of God. Indeed, what is the Kingdom of God, in its subjective Notion,
but this great Truth bro't home to the Soul, powerfully applied, and producing
its genuine Effects? Hence the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, might well
be put in Conjunction, as the one Object of our first Pursuit. -- This Truth is
the main Subject of the Testimony of Jesus: to this gave all the Prophets and
all the Apostles Witness. -- This Truth is that wherein the Stamp of Divine
Authority on Scripture-Revelation is chiefly manifest. All the Parts of
Revelation depend on this, and are connected with it; so that, take away this
Truth (concerning Christ delivered for our Offenses, and raised again for our
Justification) take this out of the Gospel, it will be another Gospel, and the
whole Doctrine of both Testaments will be utterly made of none Effect. This
therefore is the great Touchstone for the Trial of true and false Doctrine. --
The Name whereby Christ is called among the Subjects of his Kingdom is that,
The Lord our Righteousness. That Is the Motto of the christian Church, whereby
it is distinguished from all other Societies. -- This is peculiarly the
characteristic Truth of the Gospel, whereby Christianity is conspicuously
differenced from the Religion of Nature, and from all false Religions. -- This
Truth exhibits the Substance of those ancient Types in the Religion of the
Jews, and is the Foundation of the Promises made to the Fathers. -- This Truth
(whatever any Enemies of the Cross of Christ may pretend) does not make void
the Law, but establish it: declaring all Righteousness fulfilled by our Surety,
and being a powerful Principle of Obedience in the Believer. -- This Truth
signally contributes to illustrate the Wisdom and Grace of God in Redemption,
and to display the Grace and Glory of Christ the Redeemer. -- This Truth is the
prime Encouragement of the Saint's Hope, and affords the first and great Relief
to Sinners under the Spirit of Bondage. It Is the Truth, in this main Point
especially, that makes them free. -- In a Word, This Truth is the great Mean,
whereby God puts forth his Power to save Sinners, and subject them to Him in
his Kingdom. It was by the Revelation of Christ's Righteousness in the Gospel,
that the Kingdom of God our Savior was at first set up and advanced in the
World: and it was by the Revival of this great Truth, after it had been buried
under Antichrist's Reign, that the Lord began to consume that wiced one. -- The
Strength of Christ's Kingdom, and its Safety, lies in this great Truth: So that
they who would advance his Kingdom, must bear this Truth about with them, in
their Hearts, in all their Preaching, and in all their Conversation. And truly
this would be a Spring of daily Refreshment to themselves, and of great Liberty
and Boldness in all the Labors of the Gospel Ministry, and in all the
Sufferings that attend it. The Words of Mr. Glass, a Minister lately silenced
in Scotland, for professing Congregational Principles. See his Discourse on
John 18. 37. -- page 204, etc.


Which brings us to our last general Head.

PROP. III. Ministers may well, and ought to, preach and teach these Things
with all Confidence.

The Story of the Apostle Paul acquaints us, that he began and finished his
Ministry with a noble Fortitude, speaking boldly in the Lord, speaking the
Gospel of his God with much Contention, and with all Confidence: "As one who
was himself well assured of the Truth of wh^^ he preached, that it was what he
durst stand by, and of the Worth of it, that it was what he durst suffer for."
He preached with Confidence too of Success, and of his own Safety, and of a
future Reward. -- Herein he is an instructive Example. And if we have the
Spirit of this Apostle, we also shall preach and teach with all holy
Confidence. -- I put in this qualifying Word, because there is a Confidence
that is faulty; the Result of Ignorance and Rashness, and a Sign of Pride and
Presumption; highly unbecoming in a Minister above all Men. But still there is a
Confidence that is gracious, meek, humble; both an Ornament and Help, and
therefore an important Requisite in a Preacher. It Is the Fruit of the Spirit,
the Result of inward vital Experience. Ministers that have felt the Power of
the Gospel on their own Hearts; that have themselves been experimentally taught
the Kingdom of God, and the Things of Christ; such, I say, will have a
proportionable Boldness in the Faith. They will neither be cold, nor cowardly
Preachers: but will usually teach these Things with a holy Confidence, Vigor
and Warmth; with a certain Parrhesia, Liberty, Skill, and Force; something like
the heroic Paul; or like Stephen, a Man full of Faith, who spoke with a Wisdom
and Spirit, that his Adversaries could not withstand.

We should every one make it our Aim, and our Concern, that we may be able,
upon the Grounds and Motives of Experience, to preach the Gospel of Jesus with
all Confidence: -- With Confidence of the Divine Authority, Truth and
Excellency of the Christian Revelation; also with Confidence in the Promise of
Christ's gracious Presence with us, in his Providence, to watch over us, and by
his Spirit, to assist and succeed us; and with Confidence in his Righteousness,
to procure our Acceptance and Reward. Verily, if our Hearts condemn us not, we
may thus have Confidence toward God. -- But then there is also a Confidence
toward Men, which becomes us in our sacred Ministrations. We must take Heed,
that the Fear of Man be not a Snare to us, and that a false Modesty don't
influence us to betray or conceal the Truths of the Gospel, to walk in
Craftiness, to do the Work of the Lord deceitfully, or in any Regard to fail of
making full Proof of our Ministry. We must speak, not as pleasing Men, but God
which tries our Hearts: and look that we be not ashamed of Christ, or of his
Words, however sinful and adulterous a Generation our Lot may be cast among. We
must approve ourselves good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, quit ourselves like Men,
and be strong; strong in the Grace which is in Christ Jesus; strong in Faith;
strong in Spirit; boldly exerting our best Powers in the Service of the Gospel;
in nothing ashamed of it, and in nothing terrified by its Adversaries; but
willing (if God please) even to resist unto Blood, above the Fondness of Life,
and the Fear of Death. Let him that speaks, speak as the Oracles of God; that
is, as they instruct us, and as becomes them, with Gravity, with Humility, and
yet with all Authority, and with all Confidence, with all Plainness, and all
Boldness of Speech; lifting up our Voice like a Trumpet, in reproving and
exhorting; never ashamed, never afraid. -- In a Word, we should preach as Men
alive, and in Earnest, with a bold-spirited Zeal, with a Heart warmly engaged
in our Master's Cause, deeply affected with Compassion to Souls, and thoroughly
concerned for our own, as knowing that ere long we must give an Account.

All this seems implied in the Confidence, recommended to us by the Example in
our Text. And surely when we consider whose we are and whom we serve, and what
it is we preach, and for what Ends, this is enough to inspire us with Life and
Courage, to inflame our Affections, to animate our Utterance, and make us
preach and teach with all Confidence. -- Alas, while the Teachers of Error, and
the Teachers of Sin, put on a bold Front, and exert themselves with Vigor,
shall we that are set for the Defense of the Gospel, be lukewarm, or
pusillanimous! -- Have we not seen the happy Success of this Apostolic Zeal and
Confidence? Have we not sometimes beheld the most rampant Vice, and the Spirit
of Error, bold as it is, strangely crouch and sneak before the Word of Jesus,
plainly and powerfully preached, with a humble and zealous Confidence? -- And
if we hold fast the faithful Word, and hold the Beginning of our Confidence
steadfast to the End, shall we not have the Comfort of Hope, in Life and in
Death, and Boldness in the Day of Judgment? Yea, we shall have Confidence
amidst the Terrors of a (...) World, and not be ashamed before the Son of Man
(...) Appearing.

What remains now, but some brief Exhortations, agreeable to the general Scope
of this Discourse?

USE 1. Let what has been said, be applied by us, to raise our Thots of the
Kingdom of God, and the Things concerning Christ, and to direct us in forming
worthy Ideas of them.

The Jews expected, the Kingdom of the Messiah would be a Temporal one: and the
Disciples themselves were difficultly bro't to shake off their old Jewish
Prejudice; nay, Christians to this Day are apt to entertain too carnal and
gross Conceptions of it. But let us remember, Our Lord assures us, that his
Kingdom is not of this World: and that it comes not with Observation; for
behold, says he, the Kingdom of God is within you. It is not a Terrene Kingdom;
it shines not in worldly Pomp, but in a Celestial Beauty. It Is Rise and
Progress is not after the manner of earthly Kingdoms, with mighty Noise,
Ostentation, and outward Show: but it has its secret Subsistence in the Soul,
makes a silent Entrance, and its Glory is invisible to the bodily Eye. --
Indeed, in a Sense it may be said to come with Observation, especially in some
Cases, when ushered in by a remarkable Train of preparatory Convictions, when
making an illustrious Progress, and displaying it self in very triumphant
spiritual Victories and Successes, drawing Attention and exciting Admiration.
-- In a Sense it may be said to have an external Show, as outward Means, the
Word and Ordinances, under the Conduct of the Spirit, are employed in the
Administration of it; and as the Kingdom of God, when it comes with Power,
always produces observable Effects in the outward Life. -- But still it must
ever be kept in Mind, that its Seat is in the hidden Man, its principal
Operations are unseen, and its Glory lies all in Spirituals. -- How great is
the Mystery of this Kingdom! How transcendent its Dignity and Benefit! Let us
maintain high and honorable Conceptions of it. And as those that have a raised
Opinion of its Worth and Advantages, let us wish its Prosperity, its extensive
Spread through all the Earth, and its more flourishing State where it is. That
must be our daily fervent Petition, Thy Kingdom come.

And let it be remembered, that the Things concerning Christ are related to
this Kingdom, and contribute to advance it. The Foundation, the Security, the
Genius of this Kingdom, is Truth, the Truth as in Jesus. -- The Doctrine of
Christ is a Doctrine according to Godliness. Let us value it for its practical
Tendency, as well as Divine Sublimity. Let us search for Knowledge in this, as
for hid Treasures. Let our own and others Ignorance and Slight of these Things
be the Matter of our mournful Regret: and let it be for a Lamentation, that
there is in general no greater Appearance of the Kingdom of God, and of a
Regard to the Things of Christ, prevailing among us. But what Tokens for Good
may be seen at this Day, in some hopeful Beginnings among our selves, and the
Tidings of Joy we have from other Parts, both in Europe and America, these
challenge our thankful Notice.

USE 2. Let what has been said, be applied by way of Incentive and Direction in
the great Duty of Self-Examination.

What will it profit, my Brethren, to have the Kingdom of God, and the Things
that concern Christ, preached to us, unless, we have experienced indeed the
inward and vital Dispensation hereof by the Spirit of Grace! Let us be willing
then to come to the Light, and bring our selves to the Test.

Have we ever had a through Conviction of our miserable State by Nature? Been
made to see and bewail our Fall in Adam, and to know the Plague of our own
Heart? To see our selves under the Power of Satan and the Rule of Sin, hateful
to God, and under the Curse of his Law? To see the absolute Necessity of a
Change of our State? To see our utter Impotence to deliver our own Souls, and
our utter Unworthiness of Divine Relief? -- And has this View of our wretched
Case had its genuine Influence, to humble our Pride, and bring us to abhor
ourselves? -- Have we beheld the Majesty of God, and been persuaded by the
Terrors of the Lord, to throw our selves at the Foot of sovereign Mercy? --
Have we as in a Glass beheld the Glory of Christ, heard his Voice and seen his
Shape at any Time? Have we heard Him speaking to our inner Man, searching the
Secrets of it, and instructing our very Reins? While the external Word has been
sounding in our Ears, has there been an inward Word spoken to our Hearts,
making them even burn within us? -- Has the Spirit, whose Office it is to
glorify the Son, taken of the Things of Christ, and shown them to us? -- Are we
of the Truth, on the Side and under the Power of Truth, the Truth which came by
Jesus Christ? -- Have we felt the Love of Christ constraining us, to submit
ourselves to his Righteousness, and his Yoke; to receive Him in all his
Offices, and for all his Benefits; to prize Communion with Him; to love his
Image, wherever we see it; to follow his Example, obey his Will, and seek his
Glory; and long to dwell in our Master's Joy, free from all Sin, as well as
Sorrow, and perfect in Holiness for ever?

Let Conscience give a faithful Answer to these Questions. Let us expostulate
with our selves in solemn manner; at the same time depending on, and imploring
the Aids of the blessed Comforter: and let us employ our utmost Caution, that
we ben't deluded, by groundless Presumptions, into a false Peace in this World,
and eternal Perdition in the next. O what an awful Thing will it be for us,
when we have been flattering ourselves with Dreams of the Kingdom of God, to find
our selves at last in the Kingdom of Darkness! to sink from the Views and Hopes
of Heaven, into the Horror and Despair of Hell! Amazing will be the
Disappointment: and ten fold, yea ten thousand fold the Torment! -- If a Man
thinks himself Something, while he is Nothing, he deceives himself. The
grossest Folly! -- O let us take Care that we ben't found amongst those Fools
in Israel.

USE 3. Let Ministers be reminded of the Lessons of Duty taught them by the
Example in our Text.

We also are sent to preach the Kingdom of God and the Things concerning
Christ. -- These were the exalted Themes of the inspired Apostle's Ministry. --
These are Things which the Angels desire to look into. The Psalmist, when in
the Spirit musing upon them, though it his Heart was inditing good Matter, and when
he spoke of the Things which he had made touching the King, his Tongue was as
the Pen of a ready Writer. Surely these are Things every way worthy to be
studied and preached. -- Such Preaching is eminently suited to the
Gospel Dispensation, its Spirit and Design, and to the End of our Ministry, the
Glory of Christ, in the Conversion and Edification of Souls; peculiarly adapted
to the Wants of Sinners, and to the Gust of Saints. -- Let us therefore, my
Fathers and Brethren, be careful to lay out our Labors in the Word and
Doctrine, on these great and important Subjects. Let none have Occasion to
complain, that of the Matter of the Kingdom we told 'em not, or that we ceased
to preach and teach Jesus Christ. -- Sad it is, if any of us have been wanting
here, or if we need to have the Way of the Lord expounded even to our selves
more perfectly. O let us meditate on these Things, and give our selves wholly
to them, that our profiting may appear unto all. -- Let them fill our Sermons;
and not merely be dragged in, to make a sort of eccentric and glimmering
Appearance now and then. We should take the Gospel for our Vade Mecum. Let the
Dead bury their Dead: but go thou, and preach the Kingdom of God. Go forth in
the Strength of the Lord, and make Mention of his Righteousness, even of his
only. -- These Things let us preach and teach with all Confidence; with all
humble Confidence internal toward God, and external toward Men. We have the
Example of the Apostle, to countenance and quicken us.

And I cannot forbear observing here, We have in a fresh Instance seen this
Pauline Spirit and Doctrine remarkably exemplified among us. We have seen a
Preacher of Righteousness, fervent in Spirit, teaching diligently the Things of
the Lord, ceasing not even daily to preach the Kingdom of God, and the Things
concerning Christ; and this with all Confidence. May I not say, that the Gospel
he preached came not unto us in Word only, but in Power, and in the Holy Ghost,
and in much Assurance? For your selves, Brethren, know his Entrance in unto
you, that it was not in vain! -- And as for us, we have been surpised -- We
have been pleased -- And shall we not now strive to imitate! -- As every Man
has received the Gift, so let him minister the same. And as we have been put in
Remembrance, let us stir up the Gift of God in us. -- Brethren, pray for us.

USE 4. Let what has been said, recommend to all of you, the diligent Study and
delightful Contemplation of these Things. -- Surely, the Matter of our
Preaching is worthy to be the Matter of your Meditation. I might enforce this
Duty by a Variety of Considerations. -- And I had though it here to direct the
Exhortation to our Candidates for the Pulpit. As you would be Fellow-Helpers
with us, Resolve that through Grace you will be the Students and the Preachers of
CHRIST, his Kingdom, and his Righteousness. See the venerable aged Mr. Wm.
Williams' s excelent Sermon on Col. 4. 11. ( at Anniv. Conven. Min.) p. 20.
But I forbear.

USE 5. Let the Children of the Kingdom endeavor to strengthen the Hands of
the Ministers of the Kingdom; doing nothing to abate our holy Confidence, or to
hinder the Gospel, but helping together by your Prayers, your Counsels, and
Examples. Let us see you both exemplarily attending and profiting by our
Labors. So shall we thank God, and take Courage. -- Be ye also bold in your
Profession, and resolute in your Practice of Christianity, adorning the
Doctrine of God your Savior in all Things. -- Rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
have no Confidence in the Flesh. Rejoice and fear not, because it is your
Father's good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Adore electing Love, redeeming
Mercy, and renewing Grace: And walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his
Kingdom and Glory. Remember, it is a Kingdom of Holiness; and live under its
Restraints, live by its Rules. Mourn your Defects. Grow in Grace and in the
Knowledge of Christ. Pity and pray for Christless graceless Sinners. Be
concerned in particular for those under your Family-Charge, that the Kingdom of
God may be formed in their Souls, that Christ may dwell in their Hearts by
Faith; that your dear Lord may be known and honored in your Families. -- I
leave with you that excellent Portion of Scripture, for the Exercise of your
retired Tho'ts, 2 Pet. 1.

And now in the last Place,

USE 6. Let me exhort such among you as are yet in your Sins, to give an
earnest Heed to the Things which you have heard.

I hope, none of you will act as if I had been merely amusing you with a
tedious Discourse on insignificant Impertinences, and treat it accordingly with
Coldness and Neglect. Surely, the Kingdom of God, and the Things concerning
Christ, are not Matters of empty Speculation, to be made a Jest of, nor Matters
of Indifference, to be trifled with. No, assure your selves, they are Things of
the highest practical Concern, and of infinite Moment, in which your Souls and
your everlasting Interests are deeply involved. Let none of you then be
careless forgetful Hearers. Apply what has been said, to excite in you a just
Solicitude, that you may be found obeying that Call of our Savior, Matthew. 6.
33. Seek first the KINGDOM of God and his RIGHTEOUSNESS. -- Understand the
Expressions as equivalent to those in our Text.

It Is the Kingdom of God, which is within Men, and the Righteousness of God,
which is by Faith of Jesus Christ, that is the proper Object of the Sinners
first Pursuit. These are Blessings of the first Importance; they demand your
first Thought and Care, and must be obtained, as ever you hope for future
eternal Happiness. If you are not in Christ, and have not him of God made unto
you Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, you are undone for
ever. The Kingdom of God must be set up in your Souls, by the Operation of
regenerating Grace; or you have no possible Meetness for the heavenly
Inheritance. And the Righteousness of God our Savior, that everlasting
Righteousness, which he bro't in by his Obedience unto the Death, must be upon
you, unto the Justification of Life, through Faith in Christ; or you have no
possible Title to Heaven and Blessedness, but must die in your Sins, and be
herded among unpardoned Devils for ever. -- Think not to spin a Righteousness
for your selves, by any Works that you can do: It will prove but a Spider's
Webb, and not hide the Shame of your Nakedness. If you are Enemies of the Cross
of CHRIST, your End will be Destruction. Take Warning from that of Christ to
the self-righteous Pharisees, -- Verily I say unto you, Publicans and Harlots
enter into the Kingdom of God before you. And, again, Verily I say unto you,
Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God, as a little Child, shall in no
wise enter therein. You must be humbled, and bro't to lie abas'd at the foot of
sovereign Grace, to submit to the Righteousness of God; or you cannot receive
the Kingdom of God: and if you don't receive the Kingdom of God in this World,
the Kingdom of Hell must inevitably be your Portion in the next. -- But if you
receive the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, this will secure to you
complete and eternal Blessedness. How worthy then are these of your first
Concern, and most earnest Pursuit! -- O that we could see in our Day the
fulfilling of that Scripture, The Kingdom of God is preached, and every Man
presses into it! On the preceding Lecture we were entertained (by Mr. Cooper)
with a very seasonable and excellent Sermon from those Words: which occasioned
my being so brief in this last Exhortation. Otherwise I should have left Room
for the proper Enlargements here, and have gone into various distinct Addresses.
Hear, all ye Inhabitants of Zion, Young and Old, High and Low, Rich and Poor
together! O let all agree in making this your prime Care, Aim, and Desire, That
you may receive the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness. -- Mind the Things
which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, and seek Righteousness; yet not as Israel
sought it, as it were by the Works of the Law. But knowing that a Man is not
justified by the Deeds of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ, be
concerned that you may have it given you to believe, with the Heart to believe
unto Righteousness; that being justified by Grace, you may be Heirs according
to the Hope of eternal Life. -- But take Heed, lest while ye seek to be
justified by Christ, ye yourselves be found Sinners, unrenewed, and vain
Pretenders to the Faith of Christ. Remember, the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness are joined in the Gospel, and dispensed in Connection. You have
both, or you have neither. Make them therefore the joint-Object of your first
Pursuit. Be equally sollicitous for Pardon and Conversion, for the sprinkling
of the Blood of Jesus, and for the Washing of Regeneration. -- Be waiting at
the Posts of Wisdom's Doors, attending the Means of Grace, in Season, out of
Season, with earnest unceasing Prayer, that you may win Christ, and be found in
him; that the Kingdom of God may be implanted within you, and his Righteousness
applied to you. -- Let such as are at at Ease in Zion, awake out of their
Security, lest the Doom be passed upon them, He that is filthy, let him be
filthy still. -- And let such as are under Convictions, be looking diligently
lest they fail of the Grace of God, and lest they be of them which draw back
unto Perdition. -- And let us all that have received the Kingdom of God, in the
revealed Model and outward Dispensation, and have received his Righteousness in
external Profession, attend to that solemn Exhortation of the Apostle, with
which I conclude, Heb. 12. 28, 29. Wherefore we receiving a Kingdom which
cannot be moved, let us have Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with
Reverence and godly Fear. For our God is a consuming Fire.

FINIS.

