A LETTER From the Reverend Mr. WHITEFIELD, To the Religious Societies lately
formed in England and Wales.

Printed for the Benefit of the Orphan House in Georgia.

PHILADELPHIA Printed and Sold by ANDR^^ and WILLIAM BRADFORD, at the Sign of
the Bible, in Front Street.

A LETTER From the Reverend Mr. WHITEFIELD, etc.
My Dear Brethren in Christ,
THE Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews Chap. x. 23. Exhorts them to hold
fast the Profession of their Faith without wavering; and immediately adds, as a
most effectual means for producing so desirable an end, Let us consider one
another, to provoke unto Love and good Works, not forsaking the Assembling of
ourselves together.

As Christianity was not then the National Religion, I suppose by Assembling
themselves together, the Apostle does not understand open Assemblies, such as
our public Congregations, but rather little and private Societies, as was the
Custom of the Primitive Christians, who we are told continued in Fellowship.

This was the Apostle's Exhortation to the Christians of those Times, and I am
fully persuaded there was never more occasion for renewing it than in the Age
wherein we live: For nothing has of late more alarmed the Enemies of the Cross
of Christ, than the Zeal which God has stirred up in the Hearts of many, to put
in Practice this Apostolical Injunction. -- Balls, Plays, Horse-Races and such
like Diabolical Entertainments are countenanced and supported by public
Authority.

Few if any (publicly at least) now dare to speak, preach, or write for
Suppressing them so explicitly as they ought. But if the Children of God meet,
as they are required, to build up each other in their most holy Faith, almost
every one's Mouth is opened against them. Nay (with grief, God is my Judge, I
speak it) even most of our Masters in Israel, who ought to be Patterns and
Promoters of every good Word and Work, are not content with Countenancing the
sinful Diversions and polite Assemblies of the Age by their Presence and
Approbation, but are generally most bitter in their Invectives against
Religious Societies, continually crying them down (especially if any life or
divine Power appear amongst them) as Schismatical and Seditious, and as
Meetings which have a tendency to weaken the present established Constitution.

For these, and many such like Reasons, as present with you in Spirit, though
absent in Body, I thought it my Duty to put you in mind zealously to persist in
Practicing the 'forementioned Injunction once delivered to the Saints, and so
much the more as in all probability the Day of Persecution nearer and nearer
approaches.

There has been a gathering, undoubtedly a winnowing Time will come. -- God's
Fan is already in his Hand, yet a little while, and if the Work lately begun be
carried on, I am persuaded he will thoroughly purge his Floor. The Shepherds
first must be smitten; next endeavors exerted to scatter the Sheep. The
Religious Societies, Satan no doubt has desired to have, that he may sift them
as Wheat. My Brethren, Watch and Pray, that you may be counted worthy to stand
in such an Hour of Temptation.

Religious Society is of a Divine Extraction. As God first made Man, so God
first said, It is not good that Man should be alone, I will make a help meet
for him. -- Meet, as I take it, not merely for his Body (Man had but few
Corporal wants in Paradise) but chiefly and primarily for his better Part, the
Soul, viz. that he might have one to converse with of his own Species, Bone of
his Bone and Flesh of his Flesh.

It Is true, Man is now a fallen, but yet a social Creature. And as the End of
his coming into this World, was to prepare himself for a better, so without
doubt the chief End of Society in general, and Religious Society in particular
is, that we may be helps meet for each other, in the great Work of our
Salvation.

Upon this account, the first Christians so frequently Assembled themselves
together, though obliged to shut the Doors for fear of the Jews. And their
continuing in Fellowship with each other, was one main Reason why they
continued steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine. -- No doubt they went up to the
Temple at the Hour of Prayer, whilst the Temple stood, but then they thought
that no excuse for their meeting from House to House to edify each other in
Love.

The Societies of which you are Members, I hope, are of this Nature. Take then,
My Brethren, the Primitive Christians for your Ensamples. Their Practices were
Recorded for our Learning. No Power on Earth can lawfully disanul or prevent
out imitating them. -- In all such Cases we must obey God rather than Man.
Otherwise we so far deny our holy Profession, and are Enemies to the Cross of
Christ, and though because you are got a little out of the usual formal way, some
blind Zealots may brand you as Schismatical and Seditious, yet if you fear God,
truly Honor the King, and are of the Number of those who are quiet in the
Land, there is no one Reason can be urged against your Societies, which will not
equally hold good against all the Societies in the two great Cities of London
and Westminster.

In this Respect a private Prelate has no more Authority than a private
Presbyter. If it be lawful for more than five to meet in a private Vestry, it
is equally lawful to meet in a private House, as is the Practice of some of
th^se Societies who are under the Government of the Twelve Stewards. If they
ask you by what Authority you sometimes use Extempore free Prayer? You may ask
them again, by what Authority they use the Church forms any where but in the
Church? If they reply they use Dr. Woodward's Form. You may answer them with
this Question, what difference is there between a Persons reading a Form which
few knew before they heard it, or a Persons praying Extempore as the Holy
Spirit give him utterance? If they laugh at all Pretensions o^ Praying by the
Spirit, Brethren, I hope you know better. Stand fast therefore in the Liberty
where with Jesus Christ has made you free. The Church of England confines none
to forms but in the House of God. In private Assemblies, such as yours, all are
lest to their Liberty. Whoever make it their Business to prevent you, discover
a Spirit too like the Pharisees of old. They are Strangers to the Liberties of
the Gospel themselves, and those that are Partakers of them they hinder.

Many trifling Objections were made against your Conduct in this particular
when I was last in England. But they were generally urged with so much Bigotry
and Passion, and were so weak in themselves, that I seldom thought they
deserved an Answer. I commonly showed my contempt of them by saying nothing at
all about them.

But I trust, My Brethren, you have not built your House upon so Sandy a
Foundation, as to suffer it to be thrown down by a few high swelling Words of
Vanity. I am persuaded you think it meet, right, and your bounden Duty, not
only to Assemble yourselves together, but also to make use of your Christian
freedom, and not again to be entangled in a Yoke of Bondage, for God has
called you to Liberty.

How to improve your Meetings so as best to promote God's Glory and the Good of
your own Souls, ought to be your constant and chief Concern. For as Christians
in general, so Members of Religious Societies in particular, are as Cities
built upon a Hill, and therefore it more highly Concerns them, so to let their
Light shine before Men, that they seeing their Good Works, may glorify our
Father which is in Heaven.

Not that a perfect Communion of Saints is to be expected here on Earth; or
that you ought to be immediately offended, if some of your Brethren should be
over taken with a fault. In this World Tares will be always Springing up
amongst the Wheat. Many that are first will be last and the last first. Nay it
is well, if some, Judas like, do not at length lay aside their Profession and
openly betray their Master. In all such Cases, every one that stands should
take heed lost he fall, be exceeding jealous of his own Heart, and not say,
Lord is it my Brother; but, is it I that shall deny thee next.

To prevent such fatal miscarriages, you ought to be very Cautious, My
Brethren, whom you admit into Fellowship with you. -- Examine them again and
again whether they be in the Faith. Set them upon proving their ownselves, and
by no Means receive them into your Brotherhood, unless they can produce
sufficient Proofs of their having tasted the good Word of Life, and felt the
Powers of the World to come in a special and saving Manner. This some may
object is not a very good way to increase and multiply you as to Number: But it
is the best way my Brethren, to increase Piety amongst those that you have. And
a Society consisting of a few solid Christians, is far preferable to one that
is filled with a great Number of such who do not bring forth Fruit unto
Holiness, but have only the Fig Leaves of an outward Profession. Formal
Hypocrites will do you more harm than good; and however they may endure for a
while and receive the Word with Joy, yet having no Root in themselves, in time
of Temptation they will shamefully fall away. -- From all such, Good Lord,
deliver thy Church.

Next to your Care about admitting others, I think it highly concerns you
whenever you do assemble, to remember the End of your Meeting, and then to use
the Words of the wise Son of Sirach, on another Occasion, you will never do
amiss. Now the End of your Meetings, My Brethren, is not that you may think
yourselves more Holy than your Neighbors, much less to form a Party, or
promote a Schism or Sedition in the Church or State. No! such Thoughts I trust
are far from you: For they are Earthly, Sensual, Devilish! And if ever any such
Designs should be set on foot, I earnestly pray God, the Abettors of them may
be immediately detected, and all their Schemes, though ever so plausibly
concerted, fall to the Ground. The only End I hope you all propose by your
Religious Assemblies, is the same for which you were Created, viz. The renewing
of your depraved Natures and promoting the hidden Life of Jesus Christ in your
Souls. These Terms however they may seem foolishness to others, I trust, my
Brethren, are not so to you. -- I take it for granted, you not only are
desirous of, but already, in some measure, are blessed with a saving,
experimental Knowledge of Jesus Christ in your Hearts. For unless a Man be born
again from above and is made a partaker of the Indwelling of God's Holy Spirit,
he shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God. -- Whoever denies this to be
true in the most literal, real, and absolute Sense of the Words, knows nothing
yet as he ought to know. -- For it is grounded on a self-evident Truth, viz.
That we are all fallen from God in Adam, and must be renewed in the Spirit of
our Minds, ere we can be restored to a blissful Communion with him again.

The only way to this is Faith in Christ Jesus. -- Faith, in Contra-distinction
to, though necessarily productive of Good Works. I am the Way, the Truth and the
Life, Whosoever believes on me, though he were dead (as we all are by Nature)
yet shall be live, says Christ himself. -- And I think it my bounden Duty to
exhort you to contend earnestly for the Doctrine of Justification by Faith
alone, because so many blind Guides are lately gone out into the World. -- It
is much to be feared, that the generality of our present Preachers are no
better than Doctrinal Papists. -- And however this, to those who having Eyes,
see not, may be judged an uncharitable Censure, yet surely they cannot justly
blame me for want of Candor, if they consider how one of the most Orthodox
Prelates in the Kingdom in a late Pastoral Letter, advises his Clergy so to
explain the Doctrine of Justification in the sight of God, by Faith alone, as
to make Good Works a necessary Condition of our Justification. Such Advice from
a Roman Cardinal would be no more than we might expect, but coming from a
Bishop of the Church of England is surprising and much to be lamented.!

God forbid, My Brethren, that you should so learn Christ. -- If the Scriptures
be true, such Doctrine is absolutely false. The lively Oracles of God no where
declare, Good Works to be a necessary Condition of our Justification in the
Sight of God. On the contrary, they every where affirm, that Salvation is the
free Gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. -- that we are saved by Grace
through Faith -- that it is not of Works, lest any Man should Boast. -- No! my
Brethren, in the great Scheme of Man's Salvation by Jesus Christ, Boasting is
entirely excluded. We must not expect to be saved, or any ways to recommend
ourselves to God's Favor, by any or all the Works of Righteousness which we
have done, or shall, or can do. -- The Lord Christ is our Righteousness -- His
must be imputed to us instead of our own. -- We are complete in him, says the
Scripture -- We are accounted Righteous before God, only for the Merit of our
Lord Jesus Christ by Faith, says the Eleventh Article of our Church. And if so,
how are Good Works, My Brethren, a necessary Condition of our being Justified
in the Sight of God? If this was to be the Case, no Man living ever was or ever
will be Justified in the Sight of God. -- The Law indeed says, Do and Live. --
But the Gospel brings us the Glad Tidings, that Christ is the End of the Law
for Righteousness to every one that believes. -- Christ by his Obedience has
every Way fulfilled the Law for us, -- and God will not desire to be paid
twice. -- Christ bought our Justification. It comes to us free, without any
regard to works, past, present, or to come. -- That we may understand, says the
Apostle, that which is freely given us of God. Wherefore to use the Words of
the forementioned Article, that we are justified by Faith alone is a most
wholesome Doctrine, and very full of Comfort.

Observe my Brethren,

By or through, and not for Faith. -- For Faith is only the Mean or Instrument
whereby the whole Righteousness of Jesus Christ is applied to the Sinners Soul.
And whosoever does thus believe in their Hearts, may be assured their Pardon is
sealed in Heaven, notwithstanding they may have lived in an open Breach of
God's Commandments all the Time before their Conviction. Believe, says the
Apostle to the trembling Jailer, and thou shall be saved.

Not that this Faith if True will be Dead, Idle or Inactive. -- For it is not a
Faith of the Head An assenting to things Credible as Credible, as it is commonly
defined. The Devils thus Believe and Tremble. -- But it is a Faith of the
Heart, a living Principle wrought in the Soul by the Spirit of God, applying
that inwardly which was wrought out for him outwardly by Jesus Christ upon the
Cross, and continually exciting the Possessor of it, to show it forth by his
Works, not as necessary Conditions of his Justification, but as Proofs of his
having a living Faith, and as so many tokens of his Gratitude and Love for what
God has done for his Soul. This is what the Apostle styles a Faith working by
Love.

I cannot conclude this better than in the Words of a truly Evangelical Writer
now by me. -- The Law (say thou) must be obeyed. I answer, Christ Jesus has
done that in his own Person, and Justified me thereby; and for my own part, I
will not labor now to fulfill the Law for Justification, lest I should
undervalue the Merits of the Man Christ Jesus, and what he has done without
me; and yet will I labor to fulfill, if it were possible, ten thousand Laws, if
there were so many: And Oh! let it be out of Love to my sweet Lord Jesus -- For
the Love of Christ constrains me.

B^^^hren, this is a Topic I love to be discoursing (...)* A divine Fire
kindles in my Heart whilst I am Musing on and Writing to you about it -- And I
should be much more explicit had I not, with this Letter sent over a Sermon on
this important Subject, entitled, What think ye of Christ?

But to proceed. -- A Catholic Spirit of Universal Love, is what I would
earnestly recommend as worthy the Name whereby you are called. Why should
Bigotry or Party Zeal be so much as once named amongst the Followers of Jesus
Christ? Our Lord was a Stranger to it. Whoever did the Will of his Father, the
same was his Brother, his Sister and his Mother. Wherever he saw the Marks of a
true Faith though in a Centurion, a Syrophenician, Aliens to the common Wealth of
Israel, and Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, how did he publish and
commend it? Be followers then of him my Brethren as dear Children, and love all
(however in every thing they follow not with us) who love our Lord Jesus in
sincerity and Truth. Thus it will be in Heaven. Why should not our Heaven begin
on Earth? Pharisees and Saducees the Self-Righteous and Free-Thinkers of this
Generation, all the Children of the Devil whether rich or poor, high or low,
however different in other respects yet agree in this one Thing, viz. To
conspire against the Lord, and against his Christ. Why should not the Children
of God, notwithstanding their little Differences unite in one common Interest
against the Powers of Darkness. Oh that all that call themselves Christians
were thus minded! How should we see the Kingdom of Christ come with Power, and
Satan like Lightning fall from Heaven. From the beginning it has been his
Policy to divide Professors into Sects and Parties, hopeing thereby not only to
weaken their Interest, but to make them believe Religion wholly consisted in
being of this or that particular Communion.

And his serpentine Subtiety has so prevailed that though we all profess to hold
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, yet numbers look upon all that differ from
them almost as Creatures of another Species, and forbid us with such even to
Eat. This was once the State of the Jewish, as it is now of the Christian
Church, but God showed his dislike of such a Temper, by telling Peter in a
miraculous Manner, That he was henceforward to call nothing that God had
cleansed common or unclean, but freely to converse with all who feared him and
worked Righteousness for such were accepted of him. My Brethren be not you
disobedient to this Heavenly Vision -- For oursakes no doubt it was written,
many hereby will call your Conduct in question (as the Brethren did Peter) when
they spy out your free Conversation in Christ -- But Peter has furnished You
with an Answer. For as much as God has given them the like Gift as to us, who
believed on Jesus, what are we that we should withstand God? How dare we make a
difference when God has made none? How dare we not freely converse with those,
who have received the Holy Ghost as well as we?

Further, My Brethren, content not your selves with reading, singing, and
praying together, but set some time apart to confess your Faults and
communicate Experiences to one another. For want of this (which I take to be
one chief Design of private Meetings) most of the London Societies I fear are
sunk into a dead Formality, and have only a Name to live. They meet on a Sunday
Evening, read a Chapter, sing a Psalm, but seldom if ever acquainteach other
with the Operations of Gods Spirit upon their Souls. Hence it is that they have
only the Form of (...) amongst them, (...) utter Strangers to the State of one
another Hearts. How little Love or Power of Religion may be kept up by such a
low superficial Way of proceeding, is not difficult to suppose. My Brethren, do
not you go on in such a Formal round of Duties, but frankly and freely tell one
another what God has done for your Souls -- For this End you would do well to
form yourselves into little Bands, and without reserve tell each other what is
in your Hearts. None but those that have Experience can tell the unspeakable
Advantages of such an union of Souls -- By this Means, brotherly Love will be
excited and kept up amongst you; and you will learn to watch over one another
for Good: This will teach you the better, how to pray for each other in your
private retirements, and put off, if not totally prevent many Snares of the
Devil: For Satan loves solitary Virtue, but cares not to tempt him, who he
knows will discover his Devices to his Brethren. Besides, this is a most
effectual Means for each to try the sincerity of his own Heart, as well as
another. No one I think that truly loves his Soul and his Brethren will be shy
of opening his Heart, in order to have their Advice, Reproof, Admonition and
Prayers as his Occasions require. A sincere Person will esteem it one of the
greatest Blessings; nor do I know a better Means in the World to keep
Hypocrites out from among you. Pharisees and Unbelievers will pray, read and
sing Psalms, but none save an Isrealite indeed, will endure to have his Heart
searched. He that has Ears to hear let him hear.

Finally, My Brethren, expect a great deal of contempt: For Christ's Servants
were always the World's Fools -- As for this Sect, said the Jews to Paul, we
know it is every where spoken against. And again, Paul had Authority from the
chief Priests to bring as many as he found of this Way -- Thus were the
Disciples of the Lord treated in the infancy of the Church; and as it was
formerly, so it is now in our Days. To be a true Christian, is realy to be
scandalous: If you were of the World, the World would love its own, but if you
are not of the World, and are in the Number of those whom Christ has chosen out
of the World, My Brethren the World will hate you: However it may seem a
Paradox to the natural Man, yet there was never a true Saint who was not
accounted a mad Person; and they that will live Godly in Christ Jesus must to
the End of Time suffer Persecution.

But God forbid, My Brethren, that a little, nay that all the contempt in the
World, should any Ways move you from your Profession of the Gospel. Our Lord
was despised before us; and you know the Servant must not be above his Master.
No, it is sufficient if he be as his Master, made perfect by Sufferings like
unto him -- Be steadfast therefore, My Brethren quit yourselves like Men, be
strong, be not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; but follow your-Master without
the Camp, bearing his reproach. When you are reviled, revile not again, bless
my Brethren but curse not, be true Followers of the meek and dear Lamb of God,
never entertain the least Thought of resisting the higher Powers upon any
pretense whatever: The Powers that be, are ordained of God; whosoever therefore
resists the Power; especially because he will not patiently suffer for the
Truth sake, justly receives Condemnation to himself. Brethren I am jealous over
you, with a Godly jealousy. In troublesome Times many that make a fair show of
Religion in the Flesh, are apt to turn Religion into Faction. I beseech you by
the Mercies of God in Christ Jesus our Lord, beware of all such who would turn
Religion into a Party. O let me once more entreat you never suffer any such
thing to subsist amongst you, show that you truly fear God by paying all due
honor, tribute and obedience to the King as Supreme, and to Governors, as to
such who are sent by him, remember again and again that our Weapons are not
Carnal -- And that they who take the Sword shall perish by the Sword.
Christians are to expect Sufferings, and though they must obey God rather than
Man, yet they are patiently if need be to suffer for so doing, but not to
resist in any wise. May God make you all thus minded, and then the Spirit of
Christ and of Glory will rest upon your Souls.

Thus, My Brethren, out of the fullness of my Heart, I have wrote unto you. Many
of you I never yet saw, and perhaps never may see in the Flesh. However I love
you in the Bowels of Jesus Christ, and heartily beseech God to bless what his
Spirit has enabled me to send unto you.

You see, My Brethren, I have confined my self only to such Things which
chiefly concern you as Members of Societies. I take it for granted you will
take heed to your Ways in common Life and never give the Adversary room justly
to speak reproachfully of your Conduct. My Brethren, the Eyes of all Men are
upon you -- Indeed it highly concerns you to walk exceeding circumspectly to
those that are without -- I am sure you will not be oftended, if out of Love I
remind you to perform all relative Duties to Men, with the utmost cheerfulness,
and a single Eye to the Glory of God. Let your Obedience, be constant
universal, and uniform, founded on a living Faith in Christ Jesus your Savior,
that by well doing ye may put to silence the Slanders of evil Men -- Let your
Speech and every Thing you do betray whose Disciples you are. Confess your Lord
publicly before Men, and be not afraid to tell those that have Ears to hear
what God has done for your Souls. It is good to keep close the Secrets of a
King, but it is honorable to reveal the the Works of God -- Above all Things,
My Brethren, have fervent Charity among yourselves -- Bear ye one another
Burdens and so fulfill the Law of Christ -- Be pitiful, be courteous, be tender
hearted, and when a Brother is overtaken with a Fault, show that you are
spiritual by restoring him in the Spirit of meekness. Let it be said of you as
of the primitive Saints See how those Christians love one another. Fulfill all
Righteousness by constantly attending on every Ordinance of God -- Use but not
abuse the Means of Grace by resting in them; knowing that the Kingdom of God
does not consist in Meats and Drinks or any Thing without us, but in
Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Think that Day lost, wherein
you do not make Advances in some of these: The Work of Regeneration though
instantaneous at first, is progressive afterward: The Seed sown in the Heart,
must be continually watered, otherwise it will not grow into a great Tree -- My
Brethren, be clothed with humility -- In honor prefer one another, and be
willing to be made the Servants of all -- In lowliness of Mind let each esteem
another better than himself -- Brethren pray for us, and I pray God sanctify
your whole Spirits, Souls and Bodies, and preserve you blameless till the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Then all Tears shall be wiped away from our
Eyes, and we shall spend an endless Eternity in singing praises to him who
sits upon the Throne forever.

Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
Faultless before the presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy, to the only wise
God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both now and ever.
AMEN.

From on board the Elizabeth, Capt. Stevenson bound from London to
Philadelphia. Septem. 22, 1739.
Gloria in excelsis Deo!

