Indwelling of the Spirit, the common ^^^vilege of all Believers. A SERMON
Preached in the Parish Church of Bexly in Kent, on Whitsunday, 1739. From JOHN
vii. 37, 38, 39.

By George Whitefield, A. B. Of Pembrooke-College, OXFORD.

Published at the Request of the VICAR and many of the Hearers.

BOSTON, N. E. Re printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN in Queen Street
over against the Prison. 1739.

The Indwelling of the Spirit, the common Privilege of all Believers.
JOHN vii. 37, 38, 39. In the last Day, that great Day of the Feast, Jesus
stood and cried, saying. If any Man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink He
that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his Belly shall flow
Rivers of living Water. -- But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that
believe on him should receive.


NOTHING has rendered the Cross of Christ of less Effect, nothing has been a
greater stumbling Block and Rock of Offense to weak Minds, than a Supposition,
now current among us, that most of what is contained in the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, was designed only for our ^^rd's first and immediate Followers, and
consequently calculated for one or two hundred Years. *Accordingly many now
read the Life, Suff^rings, Death, and Resurrection of Jesus Christ, in the same
Manner as learned Men read Caesar's Commentaries, or the Conquest of Alexander.
As Things rather intended to afford Matter for Speculation, than to be acted
over again in and by us.

As this is true of the Doctrines of the Gospel in general, so it is in
particular of the Operations of God's Spirit upon the Hearts of Believers, for
we no sooner mention the Necessity of our receiving the Holy Ghost in these
last Days, as well as formerly; but we are looked upon by some, as Euthusiasts
and Madmen; and, by others, represented as wilfully deceiving the People, and
undermining the established Constitution of the Church.

JUDGE ye then, my Brethren, whether it is not high Time for the true Ministers
of Jesus Christ, who have been themselves made Partakers of this heavenly Gift,
to lift up their Voices like a Trumpet; and if they would not have those Souls
perish for which the Lord Jesus has shed his precious Blood, to declare with
all Boldness, that the holy Spirit is the common Privilege and Portion of all
Believers in all Ages; and that we also, as well as the first Christians, must
receive the Holy Ghost ever we can be truly called the Children of God.

For this Reason, (and also that I might Answer the Design of our Church in
appointing the present Festival) I have chosen the Words of the Text.

THEY were spoken by Jesus Christ when as the Evangelist tells us, he was at
the Feast of Tabernacles. Our Lord (herein leading all an Example) attended on
the Temple-Service in general, and the Festivals of the Jewish Church in
particular. The Festival at which he was now present, was that of the Feast of
Tabernacles, which the Jews observed according to God's Appointment in
Commemoration of their living in Tents. At the last Day of this Feast, it was
customary for many pious People to fetch Water from a certain Place, and bring
it on their Heads, singing this Anthem out of Isaiah, And with Joy shall they
draw Water out of the Wells of Salvation. -- Our dear Lord Jesus observing
this, and it being his constant Practice to spiritualize every Thing that he
met with, cries out, If any Man thirsts, let him come unto me, rather than
unto that Well and drink. -- He that believes on me, as the Scripture has
spoken, (where it is said, God will make Water spring of a dry Rock, and such
like) out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living Water. -- And that we might
know what our Savior meant by this living Water, the Evangelist immediately
adds, But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive.

THESE last Words I shall chiefly insist on in the ensuing Discourse, and shall
treat on them in the following Manner,

First, I shall briefly show what is meant by the Word Spirit.

Secondly, I shall show that this Spirit is the common Privilege of all
Believers.

Thirdly, I shall show the Reason on which this Doctrine is founded.

Lastly, I shall conclude with a general Exhortation, to believe on Jesus
Christ, whereby alone we can be qualified to receive this Spirit.

AND, First, I am briefly to show what is meant by the Spirit.

By the Spirit, or the Holy Ghost, is to be understood the third Person in the
ever blessed Trinity, consubstantial and co eternal with the Father and the
Son, proceeding from, yet equal to them both. For to use the Words of our
Church in this Day's Office, that which we believe of the Glory of the Father,
the same we believe of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, without any Difference
or Inequality.

THUS says St John, in his first Epistle, Chap. v. Ver. 7. There are Three that
bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these
Three are one. And our Lord when he gave his Apostles Commission to go and
teach all Nations, commands them to Baptize in the Name of the H^ly Ghost, as
well as of the Father and the Son. -- And St Peter, Acts v. Ve^ ^. said to
Ananias, Why has Satan filled thine Heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? And Ver. 4
he says, Thou have not lied unto Men, but unto God. From all which Passages, it
is plain, that the Holy Ghost, is truly and properly God, as well as the Father
and the Son. This is an unspeakble Mystery, but a Mystery of God's revealing,
and therefore to be assented to with our whole Hearts. Seeing God is not a Man
that he should lie, nor the Son of Man that he should deceive.

I proceed Secondly, to prove, that the Holy Ghost is the common Privilege of
all Believers.

BUT, here I would not be understood of so receiving the Holy Ghost, as to
en^ble us to work Miracles, or show outward Signs and Wonders. For I allow our
Adversaries tha^ to pretend to be inspired, in this Sense, is being Wise above
what is written. Perhaps it cannot be proved, that God, ever interposed in this
extraordinary Manner, but when some new Revel^t^on was to be established, as at
the first Settling of the Mosaic and Gospel Dispensation. -- And as for (...)
own Part, I cannot but suspect the Spirit of those who insist upon a Repetition
of such (...) es at this (...) now become nominally Christian, as least (though,
God knows, little of the Power is left among us) there need not outward
Miracles, but only an inward Cooperation of the holy Spirit with the Word, to
prove that Jesus is that M^ssiah which was to come into the World*

BESIDES, it is possible for thee, O Man, to have Faith, so as to be able to
remove Mountains, or cast out Devils; nay, thou might speak with the Tongue
of Men and Angels, yea, and hid the Sun stand still in midst of Heaven; yet,
what would all these Gifts of the Spirit avail thee, without being made
Partakes of his sanctifying Graces? Saul had the Spirit of Government for a
while, so as to become another Man, and yet was a Castaway And many, who cast
out Devils in Christ's Name, at the last will be disowned by him. If therefore
thou had only the Gifts, but was destitute of the Graces of the Holy Ghost*
they would only serve to lead thee with so much the more Solemnity ^o Hell.

HERE then, I say, we join issue with our Adversaries, and will readily grant,
that we are not in this Sense to be inspired, as were our Lord's first
Apostles. But unless Men have Eyes which see not, and Ears which hear not, how
can they read the latter Part of the Text, and not confess that the Holy
Spirit, in another Sense, is the common Privilege of all Believers, even to the
End of the World? This spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him
should receive. -- Observe, he does not say, they that believe on him for one
or two Ages, but they that believe on him in general, i e. at all Times, and
(...) all Places. -- So that unless we can prove that St. (...) was under a
Delusion who he wrote these Words, we must believe tha^ we, even we also, shall
receive the H^ly Ghost, if we believe on the Lord Jesus with our whole Hearts.

AGAIN, our Lord, just before his bitter Passion, when he was about to offer up
his Soul an Offering for the Sins of the World; when his Heart was most
enlarged, and he would undoubtedly demand the most excellent Gift for his
Disciples, prays, that they all may be one, as thou, Father are in me, and I in
thee, that they also may be one in us -- I in them, and thou in me, that they
be made perfect in one; that is, that all his ^^ue Followers might be united to
him by his Holy Spirit, by as real, vital, and mystical an Union, as there is
between Jesus Christ and the Father. I say all, his true Followers. For it is
evident from our Lord's own Words, that he had us and all Beli^vers in View,
when he put of this Prayer, Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also
which shall believe on me through their Word; so that, unless we treat our Lord
as the High Priests did, and count him a Blasphemer; we must confess, that all
who believe in Jesus Christ, through, the Word or Ministration of the Apostles,
are to be joined to Jesus Christ, by being made Partakers of the Holy Spirit.

THERE IS a great Noise m^de of late, about the Word Enthusiast, and it has been
cast upon the Preachers of the Gospel, as a Term of Reproach -- But every
Christian, in the proper Sense of the Word, must be an Enthusiast. -- That is,
must be inspired of God, or have God in him. For who dare say, he is a
Christian, till he can say, God is in me? St. Peter tells us, we have many
great and precious Promises, that we may be made Partakers of the Divine
Nature. -- Our Lord prays, that we may be One, as the Father and He are One;
and our own Church, in Conformity to these Texts of Scripture, in her excellent
Communion Office, tells us, that those who receive the Sac^ament worthily,
dwell in Christ, and Christ in them; that they are One with Christ, and Christ
with them. -- And yet, Christians in general, must have their Names cast out as
Evil, and Ministers in particular must be looked upon as Deceivers of the
People, for affirming, that we must be realy united to God, by receiving the
Holy Ghost. Be astonished, O Heavens as this!

INDEED, I will not say, our* Letter-learned Preachers deny this Doctrine in
express Words -- But however, they do it in Effect. -- For they talk
professedly against inward Feeli^gs, and say, we may have God's Spirit without
^eeling it, which is in Reality to deny the Thing itself. And had I a Mind to
hinder the Progress of the Gospel, and to establish the Kingdom of Darkness, I
would go about, telling People, they might have the Spirit of God, and yet not
feel it.

BUT to return, -- When our Lord was about to ascend to his Father, and our
Father; to his God, and our God; He gave his Apostles this Commission, Go and
teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost. -- By the Term, All N^tions, it is allowed, are meant all
that should profess to beli^ve on Jesus always, even to the End of the World.
And accordingly, by Authority of this Comm^ssion, we do baptize them in this
and every Age of the Church. And if this be true, then the Proposition to be
proved will be undeniable. For though we translate these Words, baptizing them
in the Name; yet as the N^me of God, in the Lord's Prayer, and several other
Places signifies his Nature, they might as well be transl^ted thus, baptizing
them into the Nature of the Father, into the Nature of the Son, and into the
Nature of the Holy Ghost. -- And consequently, if we are all to be baptized
into the Nature of the Holy Ghost, ever out Baptism be effectual to Salvation,
it is evident, that we all must actually receive the Holy Ghost, ever we can
say, we truly believe in Jesus Christ. For no one can say, that Jesus is my
Lord, but he that has thus received the Holy Ghost.

NUMBERS of other T^xts might be quoted, ^o make this Doctrine, if p^ssi^le*
still more plain -- But I am astonished, that any, who call themselves Members;
much more, that many who are Preachers of the Church of England, should dare so
much as open their Lips against it. And yet with Grief, God is my Judge, I
speak it, Persons of the established Church seem. more generally to be ignorant
of it, than any Dissenters whatsoever.

BUT, good God! My dear Brethren, what have you been doing? How often have your
Hearts given your Lips the Lie? How often have you offered God the Sacrifice of
Fools, and had your Prayers turned into Sin, if you approve of, and use our
excellent Church-Liturgy, and yet deny the Holy Spirit to be the P^rtion of all
Believers? In the daily Absolution, the Minister exhorts the People to pray,
that God would grant them Repentance, and his Holy Spirit -- In the Collect for
Christmas Day, we beseech God, that He would daily renew us by his Holy
Spirit. -- In the last Week's Collect we prayed that we may evermore rejoice in
the Comforts of the Holy Gh^st -- And in the concluding Prayer, which we put up
every Day, we pray not only, that the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Love of God, but that the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost may be with us all
evermore.

BUT farther -- A solemn Season is now approaching, I mean the Ember Days, at
the End of which, all that are to be ordained to the Office of a Deacon, are in
the Sight of God, and in the Presence of the Congregation, to declare, that
they trust they are inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost, to take upon them that
Administration -- And to th^se who are to be ordained Priests the Bishop is to
rep^at these solemn Words, R^ceive thou the Holy Ghost, now c^mmitted unto
thee, by the Imp^sition of our Hands -- And yet, Oh that I had no Reason to
speak it, many that use our Forms, and many that have witness^d this good
Confession, yet dare talk and preach against the Necessity of receiving the
Holy Ghost now as well as formerly; and not only so, but cry out against those,
who do insist upon it, as Madmen, Enthusiasts, Schismatics, and Underminers of
the Established Constitution.

BUT you are the Schismatics, you are the Bane of the Church of England, who
are always crying out, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; and yet
starve the People out of our Communion, by feeding them only with the dry Husks
of dead Morality, and not bringing out to them the fatted Calf, I mean the
Doctrines of the Operations of the blessed Spirit of God. -- -- But here is the
Misfortune; many of us are not led by, and therefore no wonder that we cannot
talk feelingly of the Holy Ghost. -- -- We subscribe to our Articles, and make
them serve for a Key to get into Church Preferment, and then preach contrary to
those very Articles to which we have subscribed. -- Far be it from me, to
charge all the Clergy with this hateful Hypocrisy -- No, blessed be God, there
are some left among us, who dare maintain the Doctrine of the Reformation, and
preach the Truth, as it is in Jesus. -- But I speak the Truth, in Christ, I lie
not. -- The Generality of the Clergy are fallen from our Articles, and do not
speak agreeable to them, or to the Form of sound Words, delivered in the
Scripture -- We be unto such blind Leaders of the Blind! How can you escape the
Damnation of Hell? It is not all your Learning (falsely so called) it is not
all your Preferments can keep you from the just Judgment of God -- Yet a l^ttle
while and we shall all app^ar before the Tribunal of Christ. -- There, there
will I meet you. -- There Jesus Christ that great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls
shall determine, who are the false Prophets, who are the Wolves in Sheep's
Clothing -- Those who say, that we must now receive and feel the Holy Ghost,
or those who exclaim against it, as the Doctrine of Devils.

BUT I can no more. It is an unpleasing Task to censure any Order of Men,
especially those who are in the Ministry -- Nor would any thing excuse it but
Necessity: That Necessity which extorted from our Lord himself so many Woes
against the Scribes and Pharisees, the Letter-learned Rulers and Teachers of
the Jewish Church. -- And surely, if I could bear to see People perish for lack
of Knowledge, and yet be silent toward those who keep from them the Key of
true Knowledge, the very Stones would cry out.

WOULD we restore the Church to its primitive Dignity, the only Way is to live
and preach the Doctrine of Christ, and the Articles to which we have
subscribed. Then we shall find the Number of Dissenters will daily decrease,
and the Church of England become the Joy of the whole Earth.

I AM now in the Third Place, to show the Reasonableness of this Doctrine.

I SAY, the Reasonableness of this Doctrine. -- For however it may seem
Foolishness to the natural Man, yet to those, who have tasted of the good Word
of Life, and have felt the Power of the World to come, it will appear to be
founded on the highest Reason, and is capable, to those who have Eyes to see,
even of a Demonstration -- I say of a Demonstration. For it stands on this
Self-evident Suppositon, that we are fallen Creatures, or, to use the
Scripture*Expression Have a^ died is Adam.

I KNOW indeed, it is now no uncommon Thing amongst us, to deny the Doctrine of
original Sin, as well as the Divinity of Jesus Christ, who is God over all,
blessed for ever -- But it is incumbent on those who deny it, first to disprove
the Authority of the Holy Scriptures -- If thou can prove, thou Unbeliever,
that the Book, which we call The Bible, does not contain the lively Oracles of
God; if thou can show, that holy Men of Old, did not write this Book, as they
were inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost, then will we give up the Doctrine of
origina^ Sin. -- But unless thou can do this, we must insist upon it, that we
are all conceived and born in Sin; if for no other, yet for this one Reason,
because that God, who cannot lie, has told us so.

BUT what has Light to do with Darkness, or polite Infidels with the Bible?
Alas! As they are Strangers to the Power, so they are ge^^rally as great
Strangers to the Word of God. And therefore, if we will preach to them we must
preach from their Hearts: For talking in the Language of the Scripture, is but
like talking in an unknown Tongue. Tell me then, O Man, whosoever thou art,
that deniest the Doctrine of original Sin, if thy Conscience be not sea^ed as
with a hot Iron! Tell me, if thou do not find thy self by Nature to be a
Motly Mixture of Brute and Devil? I know these Terms will stir up the whole
Pharis^e in thy Heart; but let not Satan hurry th^e hence. Stop a little, and
let us reason together. Do thou not find, that by Nature thou art prone to
Pride? Otherwise, wherefore art thou now off^rded? Again, do not thou find in
thy self the S^eds of Malice, Revenge, and all Uncharitableness; And what are
these but the very Tempers of the Devil? Again, do we not all by Nature follow,
and suffer ourselves to be led by but natural Appetites, always looking
downwards, never looking upwards to that God, in whom we live, move, and have
our Being? And what is this but the very Nature of the Beasts that perish? Out
of thy own Herrt therefore will I oblige thee to confess, what an inspired
Apostle has long since told us, that the whole World by Nature lies in the
Wicked One, i.e. the Devil; that we are no better than those whom St. Jude
calls Brute Beasts. For we have Tempers in us all by Nature, that prove to a
Demonstration, that we are altogether Earthly, Sensual, Devilish.

AND this by the Way will serve as another Argument, to prove the Reality of
the Operations of the blessed Spirit on the Hearts of Believers, against those
false Professors, who deny there is any such thing as Influence of the Holy
Spirit that may be felt. For if they will grant that the Devil works, and
that so as to be felt in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience (which they
must grant, unless they will give an Apostle the Lie) where is the Wonder that
the good Spirit should have the same Power over those that are truly Obedient
to the Faith of Jesus Christ?

BUT to return. If it be true then that we are all by Nature a Motly Mixture of
Brute and Devil, it is evident, that we all must receive the Holy Ghost, ever
we can dwell with and enjoy God.

WHEN you read how the Prodigal in the Gospel was reduced to follow a
Condition, as to eat Husks (...) Swine, and how Nebuchadnezzar was turned (...)
to graze with Oxen, I am confident, you pity their unhappy State. And when you
hear, how Jesus Christ will say, at the last Day, to all that are not born
again of God, Depart from me, ye Cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, do not your Hearts shrink within, you, with a secret
Horror And if Creatures with only our Degree of Goodness cannot bear, even the
Thoughts of dwelling with Beasts or Devils, to whose Nature we are so nearly
allied, how do we imagine, God, who is infinite Goodness and Purity itself, can
dwell with us, while we are Partakers of both their Natures? We might as well
think to reconcile Heaven and Hell.

WHEN Adam had eaten the forbidden Fruit, (...) fled and hid himself from God.
Why? because (...) was N^ked; that is, He was alienated from (...) Life of God,
the due Punishment of his Disobedienc^ Now we are all by Nature naked and void
of God, as he was at that Time, and consequently, till we are changed, and
clothed upon by a Divine Nature again, we must fly from God also.

HENCE then appears the Reasonableness of our being obliged to receive the
Spirit of God It is founded on the Doctrine of Original Sin And therefore you
will always find that those who talk against feeling the Operations of the Holy
Ghost, very rarely or very slightly at least, mention our Fall in Adam. No,
they refer St. Paul's Account of the Depravity of Unbelievers, only to those of
old Time. Whereas it is obvious on the, contrary, that we are all equally
included under the Guilt and Consequences of our first Parent's Sin, even as
others; and to use the Language of our own Church-Article, bring into the World
with us a Corruption, which renders us liable to God's Wrath, and eternal
Damnation,

SHOULD I preach to you any other Doctrine, I should wrong my own Soul: I
should be found a false Witness toward God and you. And he that preaches any
other Doctrine, howsoever dignified and distinguished, shall bear his
Punishment whosoever he be.

FROM this plain Reason then appears the Necessity why we, as well as the first
Apostles, in this Sense, must receive the Spirit of God.

FOR the great Work of Sanctification, or making us holy, is particularly
referred to the Holy Ghost. And therefore our Lord says, Unl^ss a Man be born
of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

FOR Jesus Christ came down to save us not only from the Guilt, but also from
the Power of (...). And however often we have repeated ^ur Creed, and told God
we believe in the Holy Ghost, yet if we have not believed in him, so as to be
really united to Jesus Christ by him, we have no more concord with Jesus Christ
than Belial himself.

AND now, my Brethren, what shall I say more? Tell me, are not many of you
offended at what has ^een said already? Do not some of you think, ^^ough I mean
well, yet I have carried the Point a ^^le too far? Are not others ready to cry
out, if this be true, who then can be saved? Is not this driving People into
Despair?

Yes, I ingenuously confess it is. But into what Despair? A Despair of Mercy
through Christ? No, ^od forbid; but a Despair of living with God with^^t
receiving the Holy Ghost. And I would to ^od, that not only all you that hear
me this Day, (...) that the whole World was filled with this Despair. pair.
Believe me, my Brethren, I have been doing no more than you allow your bodily
Physicians to do every Day. If you have a Wound in your Bodies, and are in
earnest about a Cure, you bid the Surgeon probe it to the very Bottom. And
shall not the Physician of your Souls be allowed the same Freedom? And what
have I been doing but searching your natural Wounds, that I might convince you
of your Danger, and put you upon applying to Jesus Christ for a Remedy? Indeed
I have dealt with you as gently as I could: and now I have wounded, I come to
heal you.

FOR I was, in the last Place, to exhort you all to come to Jesus Christ by
Faith, whereby you, even you also, shall receive the Holy Ghost, For this spoke
he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive.

THIS, this is what I long to come to. Hitherto I have been preaching only the
Law, but behold I bring you glad Tidings of great Joy. If I have wounded you
before, be not afraid, behold, I now bring a Remedy for all your Wounds. For
notwithstanding you are all now su^k into the Nature of the Beast and Devil,
yet if you (...) beli^v^ on Jesus Christ, you shall receive the quick^ni^g
Spirit promised in the T^xt, and b^restor^^ to the gl^^ious Liberties of the
Sons of God. I say, if y^u believe on Jesus Christ* For by Faith we are sav^d;
it is not of W^rks least any one should boast (...) ho^^ver some M^n may say
there is a F^n^s, req^^^ed in the Creature, and that we must ^ave a
Righteousness of our own, before we can lay hold on the Righteousness ^f
Christ; yet if we believe (...) sure. Salvati^n is the free Gift of God (...)
^^^ist J^su^ our Lord and who^ever b^lieveth on him with (...) whole Heart,
though his Soul be as black as (...) shall receive the Gift of the Holy G host
-- Behold then, I stand up, and cry our in this great Day of the Feast, Let
every one that thirsts come unto Jesus Christ and drink. He that believes on
him, out of his Bell^ shall fl^w not only Streams or Rivulets, but whose Rivers
of living Water. This I speak, my Brethren, of the Spirit, which they that
believe on Jesus shall certainly receive. -- For Jesus Christ is the same
Yesterday, to Day, and for ever. He is the Way, the Truth, the Resurrection,
and the Life. -- Wh^soever believes on him, though he were d^ad, yet shall he
live. -- There is no Respect of Persons with Jesus Christ. -- High and low,
rich and poor, one with another, may come to him with an humble Confide^c^, if
they draw near by Faith. From him we may all receive Grace upon Grace -- For
Jesus Christ is full of Grace and Truth, and ready to save to the uttermost all
that by a true Faith ^urn unto him -- Indeed the Poor generally receive he
Gospel. and God has chose the Poor in this World rich in Faith. But thou^h not
many Mighty, not many Noble are called; and though it be easier for a Cam^l to
go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a rich Man to enter into the Kingdom
of God, yet even to you that are (...) do I now freely offer Salvation by Jesus
Christ, if you will renounce yourselves, and come to Jesus Christ as Poor
Sinners, I say, as Poor Sinners; for the Poor in Spirit are only ^o bl^ssed a^
to have a Right to the Kingdom of God. -- And Jesus Christ calls none to him
but those ^ath thirst after his Righteousness, and feel themselves neary and
heavy laden. with the Burden of their Sins ^^^us Christ justifies the ungodly.
He came (...) to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance.

Do not then say, you are unworthy, for this is a faithful and true saying, and
worthy of all M^n to be received, That Jesus Christ came into the World to save
Sinners; and if you are the chief of Sinners, if you feel yourselves such,
verily Jesus Christ came into the World chiefly to save you -- When Joseph was
called out of the Prisonhouse to Pharaoh's Court, we are told, that be staid
some time to prepare himself; but do you come with all your Prison Clothes
about you; come poor, and miserable, and blind and naked as you are, and God
the Father shall receive you with open Arms as he did the returning Prodigal.
He shall cover your Nakedness with the best Robe of his dear Son's
Righteousness, shall seal you with the Signet of his Spirit and feed you with
the fatted Calf, even with the Comforts of the Holy Ghost -- Oh let there then
be Joy in Heaven over some of you believing. Let me not go back to my Master,
and say, Lord, they will not believe my Report: Harden no longer your Hearts,
but open them wide, and let the King of Glory in. Believe me, I am willing to
go to Prison or Death for you, but I am not willing to go to Heaven without
you. -- The Love of Jesus Christ constrains me to lift up my Voice like a
Trumpet -- My Heart is now full -- Out of the Abundance of the Love which I
have for your precious and immortal Souls my Mouth now speaks -- And I could
now not only continue my Discourse till Midnigth, but I could speak till I
could speak no more -- And why should I despair of any? No, I can despair of no
one, when I consider Jesus Christ has had Mercy on such a Wretch as I am --
However you may think of your selves, I know that by Nature I am but half a
Devil, and half a Beast. -- The free Grace of Christ prevented me. -- He saw me
in my Bleed, He passed by me, and said unto me Live. And the same Grace which
was sufficient for me, is sufficient for you also. -- Behold, the same bl^ss^^
Spirit is ready to bre^^^^ all your dry Bones, if you will believe on Jesus
Crist whom God has sent. -- Indeed you can never believe on, or serve a better
Master, one that is more mighty, or more willing to save. Indeed I can say the
Lord Christ is gracious, his Yoke is easy, his Burden exceeding light. After
you have served him many Years, like the Servants under the Law, was he willing
to discharge you, you would say, We love our Master, and will not go from him.
-- Come then, my guilty Brethren, come and believe on the Lord that bought you
with his precious Blood. Look up by Faith, and see him whom you have pierced.
-- Behold him bleeding, panting, dying! Behold him wit^ Arms stretched out
ready to receive you all. Cry unto him as the penitent Thief did, Lord,
remember us now I en in thy Kingdom, and he shall say to your Sou^, Shortly
shall you be with me in Paradise. -- For t^^se whom Christ justifies, them he
also glorifies, ^^en with tha^ Glory which he enjoyed with the Father ^^fore
the World began -- Do not say, I have bought a ^^ece of Ground, and must needs
go see it; I have bought Yoke of Oxen, and must needs go prove them; I have
married a Wise, I am engaged in an eager pursuit after the Lust of the Eye, and
the Pride of Life, and therefore cannot come -- Do not fear having your Names
cast out as E^il, or being accounted a Fool for Christ's sake. Yet a little
while, and you shall shine like the Stars in the Firmament for ever. -- Only
believe, and Jesus Christ shall be to you Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and eternal Redemption. -- Your Bodies shall be fashioned like
unto his glorious Body, and your Souls fall into all the Fullness of God.

Which may God of his infinite Mercy grant through Jesus Christ; to whom, with
thee, O Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one God, be ascribed, as is most due,
all Power, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, now, and for evermore, AMEN! AMEN!

FINIS.

