Mr. Dickinson's SERMON ON THE Witness of the SPIRIT.

The Witness of the SPIRIT.

A SERMON Preached at Newark IN NEW JERSEY, May 7 th. 1740.

Wherein is distinctly shown, in what Way and Manner the Spirit himself bears
Witness to the Adoption of the Children of GOD.

On Occasion of a wonderful Progress of converting Grace in those Parts.

By Jonathan Dickinson, M. A.

Minister of the Gospel at Elizabeth Town in New Jersey.

Gal. iv. 6 And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into your Hearts, crying Abba Father.

BOSTON: N. E.

Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queen Street, over against
the Prison. 1740.

The Witness of the SPIRIT of GOD to the ADOPTION of his Children.
ROMANS VIII. 16. The Spirit it self bears Witness with our Spirit, that we are
the Children of God.


EVERY individual Person of this numerous Audience that are here before the
Lord, are going into an eternal State, where they must be unspeakably happy, or
intolerably miserable throughout an endless and unchangeable Duration. Such of
my Hearers as have a saving Interest in Christ by Faith, and are created in
Christ Jesus unto good Works, that they walk in them, have an undoubted Title
to the Inheritance of the Saints in Light; and shall certainly spend a blessed
Eternity, in the enjoyment of what Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has
entered into the Heart of Man. But they who are in a State of Impenitence and
Unbelief, under the Power of their Lusts, and Guilt of their Sins, are all of
them Heirs of eternal Perdition; and if they continue in their present State,
must eternally lament their dreadful Condition among Devils and damned Spirits,
where the Smoke of their Torments must ascend for ever and ever, and they have
no Rest Day nor Night. Since therefore we are all Candidates for Heaven or
Hell, for eternal Salvation or eternal Damnation; and our State must be quickly
fixed beyond possibility of Change or Alteration for ever; it is of infinite
Concernment, that we don't deceive our selves in an Affair of such unutterable
Consequence, and that we ben't ashamed of our Hope when it is too late to
rectify the fatal Mistake.

But what Security can we obtain that may be safely depended upon, in this
State of Darkness and Ignorance, Temptation, and Imperfection? How shall our
Foundation be so laid, that we may with Joy and Comfort expect the last
decisive Trial? The Words of our Text are an Answer to this Demand. They set
before us a clear and safe Evidence of our good Estate; and show us how we
shall know what is the Hope of our Calling, and what is our Title to the Riches
of the Glory of an Inheritance with the Saints. We are safe, if we have the
Spirit it self witnessing with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God.
This therefore we are concerned to seek, with a most earnest and assiduous
Application. Without this we should by no Means content and satisfy our selves,
since there is so much depending upon it.

Let me then endeavor to assist you in the pursuit of this blessed Attainment,
by considering the following Things.

I. What we are to understand by the Spirit it self.

II. How the Spirit bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children
of God.

Under which Head, I shall take Occasion to consider, whether all the Children
of God have a clear and satisfying Evidence of their Adoption.

And then

III. Conclude with some Improvement.

I. Then, I am to consider, what we are to understand by the Spirit it self.

To this I answer in one Word,

We are hereby to understand the Holy Ghost, the third Person in the adorable
Trinity; the same God, in all the Perfections of his infinite Nature, with the
Father and the Son. -- I may here remark, that the Words before us might be
more properly rendered, the Spirit himself. For this is not only agreeable with
the Original; but more directly leads our Minds to contemplate the Personality
of the blessed Spirit, here spoken of. It Is he himself, that is the eternal
God, that is of the same Nature and Essence with the other Persons of the
Godhead, who must work all the good Pleasure of his Goodness in our Souls, who
must begin and carry on the Work of Grace in us, if ever we are sanctified; and
he himself also must give us the comforting View of his own gracious
Operations; must confirm and establish us, by enabling us to see the Evidence
of this gracious Change, if ever we find Joy and Peace in believing.

II. I am to consider how the Spirit himself bears witness with our Spirit,
that we are the Children of God.

Now that I may set this in a clear Light, it will be proper to observe to you,
that there are two Ways by which the holy Spirit bears this witness with the
Spirit of a Believer: the one ordinary, medi^^^ and common to the most, if not
all true Believers; the other extraordinary, immediate and less common, even to
those that are the sincere Children of God. It may be proper to consider each
of these distinctly.

1. Then, the Spirit bears witness with our Spirit, in a more ORDINARY and
MEDIATE Way, that we are the Children of God.

I shall mention some of those ordinary Means and Methods, by which the Spirit
witnesses our Adoption; and by which we may obtain the most clear and
satisfying Evidences of it.

And I shall first observe, that one of the ordinary Means, by which the Spirit
bears witness in our favor, is the Word of God. The blessed Book of God
contains the immediate Dictates of his Holy Spirit. All Scripture is given by
Inspiration of God; and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, 2 Timothy iii. 16, 17. Whatsoever therefore is written in the divine
Oracles, is witnessed by the Spirit himself; for he is the Author of them. And
we must receive nothing as the witness of the Spirit, which is not agreeable to
this sure and infallible Standard, and only sufficient Rule of Faith and
Practice. By this Rule we must try our State, and all our Qualifications for
future Glory. By this Rule we must discover all sorts of false Confidences and
vain Hopes, in our selves and others. If any Man or an Angel from Heaven,
preach any other Gospel to you, let him be accursed. If any Man pretend to any
Qualifications, Experiences, or spiritual Impressions, as necessary to our
Comfort and Safety, which are not consonant to, or warranted by these Oracles
of Truth, we have no business to regard them or take any notice of them. This
is a Caution well worthy of our special Attention in these present Times. As
the Spirit of God has been in a glorious Manner displaying his Power and
Goodness, in exciting a solemn Inquiry after the Way of Salvation in many of
our People in these Parts of the World, we must not wonder if the Adversary
should sow Tares among the Wheat. We must not be stumbled at it, if we meet
with some Pretensions to spiritual Influences, which want a new Bible for their
justification. We must not believe every Spirit; but try the Spirits, whether
they be of God, 1 John iv. 1. And how shall we try them, but by the Word of
God? This we know to be the Witness of the Spirit himself; and thence we also
know, that whoever speak not according to this Word, it is because they have no
Light in them. Isa viii. 20 -- We have no Cause to be distressed by any new
Lights, or new Pretenses, that are not to be found in the Bible; nor any Cause
to quiet ourselves with any imaginary Seize, which are not there
represented as the sure Marks and Characters of a Child of God. If the Spirit
of God does by the Scriptures witness in our Favor, we are out of Danger of
miscarrying. If he there witnesses against us, we can have no grounded Hope of
Salvation, whatever Pretenses we may make, whatever Experiences we may boast of.

I may further observe to you, that another ordinary and mediate Way by which
the Spirit himself bears Witness with our Spirit, is by his sanctifying and
renewing Influences upon our Hearts. If we are renewed in the Spirit of our
Mind; if old Things are passed away, and all Things are become new in our
Souls; if we have put on the new Man, which is renewed in Knowledge, after the
Image of him that created us; we have then the witness of the Spirit himself to
our Adoption. Such a Change as this cannot be the Production of any created
Power; but must be the powerful Operation of the Spirit himself, and is a
better Witness in our Favor, than if an Angel from Heaven should testify to us
our Title to the Kingdom of God. I would here therefore take Liberty to be
something distinct and particular, in setting before you what are these
sanctifying Influences of the blessed Spirit, by which he bears Witness that
we are the Children of God.

The first Thing wrought in the Heart of a Sinner, in order to his Conversion
to God, is a Conviction of his Sin and Misery, and a deep Impression of his
dangerous perishing Circumstance, whilst an Enemy to God, and an Heir of
eternal Perdition. -- While Sinners are in an Estate of carnal Security, they
will not know and consider the Things of their Peace, they will not endeavor
to flee front the Wrath to come, nor to lay hold on the Hope set before them.
No Means will prevail with them, no Arguments will persuade them to come to
Christ, that they might have Life. This is a sad Truth, open to our continual
Observation and Experience. We see a poor secure World going on boldly in the
Paths of Destruction and Death, notwithstanding all the Terrors of the Law of
God, notwithstanding all the faithful Warnings of the Ministers of Christ, and
all the shocking Dispensations of Providence. What an astonishing Thought is
this! Can rational Creatures cast themselves down the dreadful Precipice with
their Eyes open! Can they run upon the flaming Sword, when it is brandished
before their Breasts! Can they venture upon Hell and eternal Damnation, without
Care or Fear! When seriously considered, it seems impossible: and yet it is
obvious to every Observer, that this is the Conduct of the far greatest Part of
the World of Mankind; and it will continue to be the Conduct of every
unconverted Sinner, until the Spirit of God opens their Eyes, sets their Danger
in View, and awakens them out of this stupid and dead State. It is accordingly
the first Operation of the blessed Spirit in order to a Sinner's
Sanctification, to convince him of Sin. (Joh. xvi 8) This he sometimes does
more suddenly; and by a more forceable Impression, filling the Soul with the
greatest Agony and Distress, from the most lively Views of his aggravated Sins,
and of the amazing Wrath of God. This alarms all the Powers and Passions of the
Soul, pricks the poor Sinner to the Heart, with (...) ( Acts ii. 37) causes
him to (...) with the (...) (Acts xvi. 29) to tremble and be astonished with
Saul at his Conversion. ( Acts ix. 6.) -- But in others these Convictions are
more gradually brought on; and with lower Degrees of Terror and Amazement.
These have such a Sense of their Sin and Danger, as makes them in earnest
inquire what they shall do to be saved, though they do not approach so near to
Desperation, from the astonishing Prospect of their dreadful Deserts. Some
Sinners agonize long under these Distresses, before they can find Rest in
Christ. Others are sooner brought to act Faith in him; and to the comfortable
Evidences of it. But all must hereby be brought to such a discovery of their
Guilt and Misery, that they can no longer rest in their present Condition; nor
be easy without an Interest in Christ and the Favor of God.

And now my Brethren! It Is your Business to consider, whether you have had this
witness of the Spirit with your Spirit, or not. If you have been thus awakened
out of your carnal Security, you have the Testimony of the Spirit himself, that
he has begun a good Work in you. It is true, that this is no certain Evidence
of a sanctifying Change. Many have been brought thus far, that have worn off
these Impressions; and returned to Folly, like a Dog to his Vomit, and like the
Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the Mire. And it therefore infinitely
concerns you to take Care. that you don't begin in the Spirit, and end in the
Flesh; that you don't quench the Spirit of God; and cause him to withdraw, and
leave you to your former Security and Stupidity. But as for such of you that
have had no Experience of these awak'ning Influences of the blessed Spirit, the
Case is at once determined against you. There needs no other Evidence, that you
are yet in your Sins, and under a dreadful Sentence of Death and Condemnation.

Another Method of the Spirit is by his humbling and Soul-abasing Influences.
-- A Sinner must be bro't out of himself, or he will never fly to Christ for
Refuge, and receive him upon his own Terms. Convictions will awaken him to a
solemn Concern about his State; will drive him to Duty, and produce a
Reformation of his external Behavior. But it is too common that these
Seize quiet the Conscience, and procure Peace to the Soul, short of an
Interest in Christ, and a real sanctifying Change of Heart and Life. But if the
Spirit of God carry on his Work to purpose, he will bring the convinced Sinner
to see the infinite Defect of all his Performances and of all his Seize,
of all his Duties, Reformations, Promises, religious Frames, and moral
Carriages, and of all he does or can do, to render him acceptable to God. He
will bring him to see, that he is undone, and cannot help himself; and that he
is utterly unworthy that God should help him. He will bring him to see, that it
is a wonder of God's Patience that he is out of Hell; and that it will be a
Wonder indeed of sovereign free Grace, if such a polluted guilty Rebel finally
escapes eternal Ruin. He will bring him to lie at God's Footstool, as a guilty
condemned Malefactor with the Halter about his Neck, having nothing to plead in
his own Favor, nothing to depend upon, but abused and forfeited Grace and
Mercy. -- Convinced Sinners commonly struggle a great while to get out of their
Distresses by some self-righteous Attempt or other. One while they will make
Promises, and take up Resolutions to watch their Hearts, and to reform their
Lives: but alas! they find their Hearts are an inexhaustible Fountain of
Corruption, which they cannot cleanse; Their Lusts get the Victory over all
their good Designs and strongest Resolutions. Then they will be ready to fly to
Duty; and perhaps add new Duties to their old (...), and hop-by these to
recommend themselves to God. But here also their Confidence withers away; they
find so much deadness and dullness, so many sinful Thoughts and straying
Affections in their best Peformances, that they cannot hope for Safety from
this Refuge. In this Distress, they will perhaps be ready to flatter themselves
with Safety from their Convictions, from a Sense of their Vileness and Misery.
They vainly hope that such Distress for their Sins, such Sorrow and Mourning,
such earnest Desires of deliverance from their guilty perishing State, will
move God to pity and relieve 'em. But alas! this Bed also will be found too
short to stretch themselves upon. The blessed Spirit will still make them
sensible that their Convictions, legal Terrors, and Sense of their own vileness
and sinfulness, will no more serve to justify them in the Sight of God, than
their Resolutions, their Reformations, or their Duties. And what shall they do
in this Case? They now see that there is no Refuge but CHRIST only; and to Him
they would therefore repair, were it not for the same self-righteous Principles
still obtaining in them. They would commit their Souls to Christ for Salvation;
but they cannot think he will receive such poor guilty sinful Creatures as they
are: They have hard Hearts, and corrupt Affections: They have not been
sufficiently convinced of their Sins, or not sufficiently humbled: They have
not the necessary Qualifications for coming to Christ and believing in him; and
are therefore yet striving in their own Strength to obtain some Preparations,
some Fitness of Soul for coming to Christ. But the Spirit of God will not leave
those he designs for Mercy, in these unhappy Toils. He Will show 'em, that they
are not to hope, that the Case will ever be better, by any Thing they do or can
do; that they neither have, nor ever will have any Qualifications at all to
recommend them to Christ; that it is in vain to strive with their own Hearts, in
vain to work in their own Strength, or with a dependence on Creature-Helps. In
vain is Salvation hoped for from the Hills, or Multitude of Mountains. He will
show them, that they justly deserve to perish; and cannot help themselves: that
if ever they come to Christ at all, they must come as they are, wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; that if ever he saves them, he must
have all the Glory; and that the whole of their Salvation must be ascribed to
the Riches of his infinite free Grace and sovereign Mercy, to helpless,
unworthy, perishing Sinners. -- If my Hearers would now apply this to
themselves, it may show them, whether they have this Witness of the Spirit, in
their Favor, or not. If you are thus humbled, and brought to the Foot of God's
sovereign Grace; if you have had this discovery of your own spiritual
Impotency, of your desert of God's Wrath, and of your just exposedness to
perish, notwithstanding all your own Refuges that you can possibly betake
yourselves to; it is the Spirit himself that has thus humbled you. It is He
that has knocked all your false Foundations from under your Feet, and has given
you this humbling View of your lost Condition. And though the greatest Degree of
Humiliation alone is not a sufficient Evidence of a saving Conversion to God,
it is however the Witness of the Spirit himself of such a good Work begun in
your Soul, without which you could never be saved; and by which there is a
hopeful Prospect, that you will be brought to give up your selves to Christ,
and depend upon his Righteousness only for Justification and eternal Salvation.
Blessed are the poor in Spirit; for theirs is the Kingdom of God. The Hungry
shall be filled with good Things, while the Rich are sent away empty. He will
deliver the Needy, when he cries; the Poor also, and him that has no Helper.
But how lamentable, how dreadfully dangerous is the State of those of whom it
may he said, that they are not humbled unto this Day! Whatever Seize
there may have, whatever Confidence they may entertain, they will quickly be
convinced, that their Hopes are built upon the Sand, and must fall before the
approaching Tempest.

I proceed to show you in the next Place, that the Spirit of God does in an
especial manner bear Witness to our Adoption, by working in us a lively Faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ. We read in Gal. iii. 26. that we are all the Children
of God by Faith in Jesus Christ. If therefore the Sense of our indigent
helpless and hopeless Estate in our selves, which I have described, brings us
to look to the Fullness and Sufficiency that there is in Christ, to receive him
upon his own Terms, as revealed in the Gospel, and to depend upon him only as
the Author of our eternal Salvation; we have therein good Evidence of a
glorious Change wrought in us by the Spirit of God, and that we are the
Children of God; for we are such by Faith in Jesus Christ.

This, my Brethren, is (...) great Concern, this the grand Point that we should
be especially careful to clear up to ourselves. If this Foundation be well
laid, we are happy for ever: But a Mistake here is the eternal Loss of our
immortal Souls. Have we been bro't to yield our unfeigned Assent to
GospelTruths, and our unfeigned Consent to Gospel-Terms, and to live by the
Faith of the Son of God? Have we been brought to rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
to have no Confidence in the Flesh? Have we esteemed all Things as Loss and
Dung, in Comparison of Christ, that we may be found in him, not having our own
Righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith? Have we valued an Interest
in Christ above all the World; and chosen Him for the Portion of our Souls?
Have we received the Lord Jesus Christ in all his Offices, and for all his
Benefits? Have we depended only upon the influences of his blessed Spirit, to
renew, (...) and quicken us; and upon his Righteousness alone, to justify us in
the Sight of God? Have we submitted to him as our Lord, as well as our Savior?
Is his Throne set up in our Hearts; and do all the Powers of our Souls bow down
to him? Do we desire him as our Savior from future Sin, as well as from past
Guilt; from the Pollution and Dominion, as well as from the damning Effects of
our Lusts? In a Word, Do we depend upon the Lord Jesus Christ, to be of God
made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption? Do we
depend upon him to do all in us, all for us; and to be all to us? And do we
constantly in the solemn Practice of all religious Duties, thus commit our
Souls to him as the Lord our Righteousness; and as the only Foundation of our
Hope for eternal Salvation? Do we lament the Imperfections of our Faith, and
all the Actings of Unbelief in our Hearts; and do we repair to this great
Advocate to interceed for us, and cover the Defects of our Graces and Services,
as well as of our Persons? -- Happy beyond Comparison is that Person, who upon
an impartial Trial can find these Operations of a saving Faith in his Soul. It
is the Spirit himself, that has according to his abundant Mercy, begotten him
again to a lively Hope; and he has a Witness from Heaven to his Adoption and
Justification; a Witness that cannot possibly deceive him. He may depend upon
it, that He which has begun this good Work in him, will perform it unto the
Day of Jesus Christ. The Match is concluded between Christ and his Soul. He may
look upon this precious Savior as his own for ever.

I must vet further go on to show you, that the Spirit witnesses with our
Spirits, that we are the Children of God, by working in us a true sincere Love
to God. Alas, Our carnal Minds are Enmity against God; and this Enmity will
remain and reign in the Heart of every Unbeliever, until the Spirit of God by
his powerful Influences, renews the Sinner's Nature, sanctifies the Affections;
and enables the Soul to live in the Love of God. And whenever this Change is
wrought in us, we have thereby the Witness of the Spirit himself, to the Safety
and Goodness of our State and Hope. Let us make sure of this; and the Case is
plain. All Darkness and Doubts will vanish before the clear shining of this
Evidence. -- If upon a strict Inquisition into our own Hearts we can find, that
we sincerely admire and adore the glorious Perfections of God's excellent
Nature; and uprightly endeavor universal Conformity to his imitable
Properties; and in particular, that we endeavor to be holy, as our Father
which in Heaven is holy: If we esteem God's Favor as Life, and his
Loving Kindness as better than Life: If we love what God loves, and hate what
he hates: If we love his Ordinances, and delight in drawing near to him: If we
delight in Communion with God; and cannot content ourselves with an empty
Ordinance, without God's special Presence with us therein: If we are greatly
uneasy, when he hides his Face from us; and the Light of his Countenance is the
greatest Joy, Satisfaction, and Comfort of our Souls: If our Imperfections and
Sins are our Burden, peculiarly because dishonorable to God, because against
such Love and Compassion as he has manifested to us, and because of the base
Ingratitude we are therein chargeable with: If we have much at Heart the
Flourishing and Prosperity of his Kingdom and Interest in the World, and exert
ourselves with Diligence in our respective Stations to promote it: If herein we
labor to glorify our heavenly Father, by bearing much Fruit: If we love his
Image, where ever we see it; and manifest our abiding in his Love, by a
constant Endeavor to keep his Commandments: In a Word, If we cannot rest
contented with our Defects and Imperfections in any of these Instances, but
greatly lament them before God, and mourn all our want of Conformity to him,
all our want of Affection and Devotion to him, and all our want of Communion
with him: Then we may conclude we have the Witness in ourselves, that we are
the Children of God. -- Can these Things be the Productions of Nature? Are
these the Fruits of that Fountain of Enmity to God, which we have formerly
experienced in our own Hearts? No, It cannot be! The Spirit himself has wrought
these gracious Affections and Dispositions in our Souls. And he thereby gives
an incontestable Evidence of our renewed Natures. If we love him, it is because
he has first loved us, 1 John iv. 19 -- O that all my Hearers could upon good
Grounds take the Comfort of what has been said! But alas! there is just Cause
to fear, that the greatest Part of them are Lovers of themselves, and not of
God; Lovers of their Lusts and sinful Pleasures, Lovers of the World,
Neglecters of Godliness; or at the best but formal Professors: and therefore
whatever their Hopes and Expectations are, they can have no Part or Lot in this
Matter. These do not love the Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore must be Anathema
Maranatha, accursed when the Lord comes, I Cor. xvi. 22 -- Oh how different are
these two Sorts of Persons; and how very different ought their Views and
Expectations to be!

I must furthermore proceed to show you, that the Spirit of God bears Witness
with our Spirit, to our Adoption, and to our Interest in the Favor of God, by
giving us a Love to his Children. We read I Joh iii 14 We know that we are
passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren. This cannot imply,
that a natural Affection to the Children of God, because of any Relation to
'em, or any personal Friendship, or because of their Kindness to us, their good
Neighborhood, or the like, is an Evidence of our Sanctification. Nor on the
other Hand, does it imply, that as an Evidence of our Adoption, we must love or
approve the Faults and Mistakes, the Errors and Imperfections of those whom we
esteem the Children of God. But it implies, that if we love the Persons, and
especially the gracious Qualifications of those whom we have Reason to conclude
the Children of God, for his Sake: if we love the Image of Christ wherever we
see it, or wherever we think we see it (for there can be no infallible
certainty in this Case) if we love the Brethren as Brethren, love their
Company, love Communion and Fellowship with them in religious Exercises; and
love an Imitation of them, labor after a Conformity to them in their Graces,
their Piety, and virtuous Demeanor; it is a Witness for us, that we are born
of God. The Spirit himself has wrought these gracious Affections in us. We were
naturally in love with Sinners; and how comes it to pass, that their sinful
Practices and their sinful Company and Fellowship become so grievous and
burdensome to us? On the other Hand, we are naturally full of Enmity to the
gracious Seize, spiritual Dispositions, and religious Lives of the
Saints; and how come they to be so delightful to us now? How come they to be
our only chosen Companions? How come they to appear to us the only excellent
ones of the Earth? How come we not only to love their Persons, but their Piety;
and to be transformed into the like spiritual Affections, Dispositions, and
Conversations, which were before so contrary to us? Is it not most evident,
that this Change is from the Spirit himself; and that he himself does hereby
bear Witness, that we are among the Children of God, having the same sanctified
Habit of Soul, that we so highly value and esteem in them? This certainly must
be the Case; and they that find these Qualifications in themselves, should take
the Comfort of them; while others (poor Souls!) are like to spend their
Eternity with such Companions as are most agreeable to them now, but will prove
their Tormentors in the End.

I go on to add, that the Spirit bears Witness with our Spirit, by giving us
a Victory over the World; and by making us spiritually minded. We are naturally
of the Earth earthy; and we mind earthly Things. Our Cares, Thoughts, and
Affections are chiefly exercised about, and in a great Measure limited to, the
Affairs and Interests of Time and Sense. This we have found by Experience. And
is it otherwise with us now? Does the World shrink to nothing in our Sight,
when compared with the Favor of God, and the Concerns of a future State? Do we
look, not to the Things which are seen and temporal; but to those Things that
are unseen and eternal? Are these Things the Subjects of our principal Care and
Concern, of our chief Affections, Meditations, and Pursuits? Are these the
first and the last with us? Do we endeavor so to use the World, as not to
abuse it; and to have our Conversation in Heaven, from whence we look for the
Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ? Is it our chief Concern to secure a better
World than this; and to lay up a good Foundation against the Time to come, that
we may lay hold on eternal Life? Do we take more Delight in the Service of God,
than in the Pleasures of Sense; and when others are saying, Who will show us
any Good! do we rejoice more in the Light of God's Countenance, than they do
when their Corn, and Wine, and Oil increase? Whence then comes this great and
wonderful Change? The Answer is prepared for us: It is because we are risen
with Christ, that we seek those Things which are above, where Christ sits at
the Right Hand of God. It is because we are dead, and our Life is bid with
Christ in God, that we set our Affections on Things above; and not on Things on
the Earth. (Col iii. 1, 2, 3) It is the Spirit himself that has thus raised us
above sensible and worldly Views; and he thereby bears Witness for us, that
to be thus spiritually minded is Life and Peace. (Romans viii. 6.) -- And now, my
Brethren! if you can find upon a serious and impartial Search into your own
Hearts, that you have thus overcome the World, that you thus mind the Things of
the Spirit, and that in the midst of your worldly Encumbrances and necessary
Concerns, your Hearts and Affections are raised above the World and it is
Enjoyments; If you can find, that you are out of your Element while necessarily
entangled with worldly Things; you may expect the Acceptance and Approbation of
your Judge: when those who mind earthly Things, will have their End
Destruction, and will receive a dreadful Conviction, that they have so loved
the World, and the Things of the World, as that the Love of the Father was not
in them.

I must once more subjoin, that the Spirit bears Witness with our Spirit, by
being in us a Spirit of Supplication. Prayer is the very Breath and vital Air
of a Child of God. No sooner is Saul converted, but the next News is, Behold,
he prays! He doubtless had prayed as a Pharisee before; but now as a
Christian. He might before have offered many formal and hypocritical Prayers to
God; but now he prays in Faith and Sincerity. And thus every one that is truly
converted to God, employs himself with a special Diligence and Delight in this
Duty of Prayer. He prays, not only to quiet his Conscience; but that in this
delightful Ordinance he may obtain Fellowship with the Father, and with his Son
Jesus Christ. He prays, that he may thereby get more Victory over his
Corruptions, more Evidences of God's Favor, more of the gracious Influences of
God's Spirit; and be ripened for more near intimate and eternal Communion with
God. Real Saints cannot content themselves with a bare Performance of the
external Duty. They cannot (as before their Conversion) quiet themselves by
flattering God with their Lips, and lying to him with their Tongues, when their
Hearts are far from him. But they follow hard after God; their Hearts burn
within them, and pant after God, the living God; after his gracious Presence
with them in the Duty. And though they often find Occasion to complain of the
deadness of their Hearts, and the wandering of their Thoughts and Affections in
their nearest Approaches to God; This is their greatest Burden, and gives them
Pain and Distress, like a Bone out of Joint. This will quicken them to more
Earnestness and Diligence in their Addresses to God. In this Case their Desire
is before God, and their Groaning is not hid from him, that when their Souls
thus cleave to the Dust, he would quicken them according to bis Word.

And now, my dear Friends! Is this your Case? Have you this Delight in Prayer?
Have you these holy Ends in performing it? Can you call God for your Witness,
that you serve him with your Spirit in this Ordinance? Are your Affections
engaged, and your Graces exercised, in your Applications to the Throne of
Grace? Do your Enlargements in the Duty afford you the greatest Comfort and
Satisfaction; and is your want of such Enlargements the Grief and Burden of
your Soul? Are you humble, as well as spiritual, in your Addresses to God? Do
you come to him with deep Impressions of your own Nothingness; and with high
Apprehensions of the Fuslness and Sufficiency that there is in Christ? Do you
mourn for, loath and abhor that Pride and Selfishness, that is ready to creep
into this Duty, even in your most watchful Periods? -- Happy are those Souls,
who have truly experienced such Seize. This is not a Production of
Nature; but proceeds from the Spirit himself. It is from the Spirit of
Adoption, that they are thus able to cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit helps
their Infirmities; for they know not what they should pray for as they ought:
but the Spirit himself makes Intercession for them with Groanings which cannot
be uttered. (Romans viii. 26.) -- But then on the contrary, to what Purpose are
the dead, dull, and hypocritical Prayers of those, that rest in a mere Round of
Duty; and raise their Hopes of Salvation from their superficial Performances?
When these spread forth their Hands, God will hide his Eyes; and when they make
many Prayers, he will not hear. (Isai. i. 15.)

Thus I have in some particular Instances set before you, how the Spirit
himself bears Witness to our Adoption, by his ordinary sanctifying Operations.

But you will now perhaps be ready to inquire, How shall we know that we are
not deceived? Many have flattered themselves in their own Eyes, imagining
themselves possessed of these Seize, when really they had them not; and
we are as liable to be deceived as others. What therefore shall we do, that we
may not be fatally and eternally ashamed of our Hope? -- I answer; You must not
only seriously, impartially, and frequently examine your selves, whether you
have these Characters of the Children of God in your Souls: but must depend
upon the Spirit himself to give you the Evidences of it. For he must not only
work these Qualifications in your Souls; but also give you the happy Discovery
that they are there, and keep you from a fatal Mistake about them. To him
therefore you must repair with most earnest and constant Application, in such
Language as that (Psalm. cxxxix. 23, 24) Search me, O God, and know my Heart;
try me, and know my Thoughts, and see if there be any wicked Way in me; and
lead me in the Way everlasting. -- And now I Am prepared to say, in the next
Place,

2. The Spirit of God does sometimes bear Witness, in an IMMEDIATE and more
EXTRAORDINARY Way, to the Adoption of his Children. -- And here I must confess,
I am at once nonplus'd, in any Attempt to describe the unspeakable Light and
Joy, that flows from this wonderful Love of God shed abroad in the Heart of a
Believer, by the Holy Ghost. This is a new Name written, which no Man knows,
saving he that receives it. (Rev. ii. 17.) As no Idea of sensible Objects can
possibly be communicated to those that have not the proper Senses to perceive
them; so neither can any just Conceptions of this Fellowship of the Spirit,
this Joy of the Holy Ghost, be communicated to any but to those that have had
the happy Experience of it in themselves. Thence it is, that some Persons from
enthusiastic Heats, from working up their animal Affections and Passions, or
else from diabolical Delusions, have pretended to these Immediate Influences of
the Spirit of God, where the Consequence has evidently shown, they have been
Strangers, that have never intermedled with these Divine Joys. This Witness of
the Spirit is nevertheless distinguishable from any Counterfeits, or false
Pretenses whatsoever, not only by its own Light, which dispels all Doubts and
Darkness of the Soul, and gives it an Earnest and Foretaste of its future
Blessedness: But it may be also distinguished by the concomitant Graces of the
Holy Spirit. If the Person thus signally favored of God, has before
experienced the ordinary Influences of the Grace of God, renewing his Nature,
enlightening his Mind, and sanctifying his Heart; if this blessed Experience
humbles the Soul at God's Foot, in an abasing Sense of his own Vileness and
Unworthiness, and in an adoring View of God's distinguishing Mercy and Love to
such a base and worthless Worm; if this purifies the Heart, and purges the
Conscience from dead Works to serve the living God; if this mortifies remaining
Lusts, makes the Affections more spiritual and heavenly, excites more ardent
breathings after the eternal Inheritance; and in kindles a greater Zeal for the
Glory of God, as the highest End; and if this be attained in a Way of Duty; and
makes all the Ordinances of God more pleasant to the Soul; if it increases
Devotion to God, and Benignity to Men: I say, if the Case be thus with any, he
has doubtless the Witness of the Spirit himself, and may well rejoice with Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory. -- But all Pretenses to this extraordinary
Witness of the Spirit, which are not accompanied with these gracious
Dispositions of Mind, are false and counterfeit, and are like to end in a
dreadful Disappointment.

But before I dismiss this Head, I must remember my Promise; and take Time
briefly to consider whether all the Children of God have a clear and satisfying
Evidence of their Adoption, and whether the Evidence of a sanctified State be
absolutely necessary to the Truth of Grace.

In Answer to this I would first observe, that the Influences of the Spirit of
God upon our Souls are in themselves sensible or perceptible Operations; that
they may certainly be felt and perceived by all that have had them. It is
impossible (for Instance) for any Person at an Age of Observation to be
ignorant of his Convictions, if he has been brought out of a State of carnal
Security, and had any lively Impressions of his Guilt and Danger. It is
impossible but he must feel the bumbling Sense of his own Unworthiness,
Impotence, and Desert of God's Wrath, if ever he has been brought out of
himself to the Footstool of God's Sovereignty. It is impossible but he must
know the Actings of bis own Mind, when he has exercised Repentance toward God,
and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. It is impossible but he must know the
Comforts which he has enjoyed, if he has found Peace in Believing. And it is
impossible but he must know the Fruits of his Faith and Hope in the
Mortification of his Lusts, and the Renovation of his Heart and Life. These
Things are (I think) certain, even to Demonstration. How vain therefore is the
Confidence, and how false the Peace, of those that know nothing of these
Things, and who have never felt the Agency of the Spirit of God, creating them
anew in Christ Jesus!

But all this notwithstanding, there are doubtless many that have really felt
all these divine Influences in their Souls, who remain nevertheless uncertain
of their Conversion. Sometimes the humbling Views of their own Unworthiness
make them afraid to apply the Comfort to their Souls, that belongs to them, and
that would result from the manifest Marks of Grace, which they could not but
see, did they not think it was too good News for them, and what they dare not
flatter themselves with. Sometimes the actual Prevalence of their Corruptions
darkens all their Hopes; and they are ready to imagine their Imperfections
inconsistent with a State of Grace. They know it is hard to distinguish between
the Remains of Sin in the Children of God, and the Reign of Sin in Unbelievers;
and they are afraid of being deceived; and therefore dare not conclude in their
own Favor. They know that there is an Eternity depending, and if they are
deceived, it may prove an eternal Disappointment. -- Sometimes a Sense of the
Deceitfulness of their own Hearts renders all their Evidences doubtful; and
makes them afraid peremptorily to conclude upon what they even see and feel.
They cannot but acknowledge, that they have experienced what looks like Grace in
their Souls: But their Hearts being so deceitful, they dare not trust them.
Others have been deceived; and they are equally liable to the same Mistakes
that have ruined so many others; and they dread to think what would become of
their Souls for ever, if a deceived Heart should turn them aside, and they
should be found with a Lie in their right Hand. -- Sometimes the frequent
Return of Deadness and Dullness in Duty, keep them under a Spirit of Bondage.
They are afraid whether this can be consistent with a sanctified State; and are
therefore afraid, that what they have experienced, has been but counterfeit
Grace. -- Sometimes a melancholy Habit of Body keeps the Believer under an
unhappy Course of Darkness and Fear, and prompts him unreasonably to argue
against himself. -- Sometimes one and sometimes another of these Difficulties
may arise in the Mind of a sincere Christian; and perhaps all of them together,
with many others of the like Kind, may conspire to darken his Evidences, and
bring him into a most uncomfortable Suspense about his spiritual State.

Whoever therefore teach such Doctrine, that every converted Person must
necessarily know that he is converted, do offend against the Generation of
God's Children, go contrary to the constant Doctrine of the most eminent
Protestant Divines from the Reformation to this Day, and contrary to the
blessed Oracles of Truth. -- How sad, how dark and melancholy does Heman
represent his Case, in Psalm 88th throughout? How does he complain, that his Soul
was full of Troubles; that he was laid in the lowest Pit, in Darkness, in the
Deeps; that God's fierce Wrath went over him; and his Terrors had cut him off;
and the like? And this was not a sudden or short Desertion; but he had been
thus efflicted and ready to die from his Youth up. Now why may it not he as
well supposed, that true Believers may in these Days meet with the same Trials?
To whom but such doubting Believers, is that Exhortation given (Isai. 1. 10)
Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the Voice of his Servant,
that walks in Darkness and has no Light? Let him trust in the Name of the
Lord, and stay upon his God Christ came to deliver such who through fear of
Death, were all their Life Time subject to Bondage. (Heb. ii. 15.) Read also to
the same Purpose the Beginning of the 32d, with the Beginning of the 38^ and
the 77th Psalms; and it will appear, that many which sow in Tears, shall reap
in Joy; and they who go forth weeping, bearing precious Seed, shall come again
rejoicing, bringing their Sheaves with them, according to Psalm. cxxvi. 5,6. --
But it is time I should make some more particular APPLICATION of what you have
heard. And

1. This teaches us the Folly of those, that content themselves without clear
and sure Evidences of their Sanctification and Adoption. The most of our
Professors seem to be easy and quiet with a general Hope or Salvation, without
any special Evidences of their Title to it. They seem to suppose, that
Assurance is not attainable, or at least that it is not attainable by them; and
therefore satisfy themselves with Expectations of Acceptance with God, they
don't know why. But consider (I entreat you, my dear Brethren) what the
Consequence will be, if you are mistaken. What Comfort will it be to you, if in
the Day of Judgment you should be found at the left Hand of Christ, to say, "I
expected better Things than this; alas! I never thought it would have come to
this; I am dreadfully disappointed." What Comfort will it afford you, to plead
at that (...), that you have eaten and drank in Christ's Presence, and that he
has taught in your Streets, if you must then be rejected of your LORD, and meet
with that dreadful Repulse from him, I tell you, I know you not whence you are,
Depart from me all ye Workers of Iniquity! (Luke xiii. 27) Can you be easy and
secure, when you don't know but you must be damned to all Eternity; when you
don't know but Weeping, and Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth under the
unutterable Anguish of God's terrible Indignation, must be your eternal
Portion. Would you be satisfied with no better Security of a Title to your
Houses and Lands? Can you in these Cases he contented with a general Hope, that
no Body will take them from you, while you don't know that you have any Claim
that will secure your Possession? And are not your Souls and your Eternity (my
dear Friends) of infinitely more Consequence and Concern, than these vanishing
Treasures, which must perish with the using. O why (dear Souls!) why will you
rest in such a dreadful Uncertainty? What may be, may not be; and there is
infinite Danger, that your present Uncertainty of Salvation, will issue in an
absolute Certainty of your missing Heaven, and falling into eternal Perdition.

2. This shows us the dreadful and amazing Condition of all those, who cannot
but know, that they have never yet experienced the sanctifying Influences of
the Spirit of God in their Souls. Without Breach of Charity, I am afraid, that
this is the State of the greatest Part of this numerous Audience. I would
appeal to your own Consciences; and summon them in the Name and Fear of God, to
deal impartially with you, and to determine, whether this be not truly your
Case. And if it be, what an astonishing Case is it! Do you know that you are
yet in your Sins, that you are under the Power of Satan, under the Condemnation
of the Law, under the Wrath of the eternal God; and under a dreadful
exposedness to the Horrors of his infinite and eternal Vengeance? Do you know,
that there is but a Step between you and Death, between you and the Fire that
shall never be quenched? Do you know, if you should be suddenly snatched out of
the World in your present Condition, that there would be no Hope, no Help, no
Possibility of recovering your lost Soul to all Eternity? And can you sleep in
such a State as this? Can you rest secure, when you are condemned already, and
the Wrath of God abides on you? What are your Hearts made of! Who has
bewitched you, that you can thus venture upon the thick Bosses of God's
Buckler! Is Damnation so light a Matter; that you can fearlesly rush upon it?
Can your Hearts endure, or your Hands be strong, when the Lord shall deal with
you? O consider this, you that forget God, lest he tear you in Pieces; and
there be none to deliver! Awake, you that sleep; and arise from the Dead, that
Christ may give you Light!

3. I would improve this Subject by way of earnest Exhortation to every one, to
apply yourselves with the utmost Concern and Industry, in all possible
Endeavors to obtain this Witness of the Spirit himself, that you are the
Children of God. O my Brethren, be entreated to give Diligence, to make your
Calling and Election sure! How much Comfort and unspeakable Joy would this
blessed Attainment afford your Souls! How would it fill you with admiring and
adoring Views of the Love of God in Christ Jesus to you! How would it quicken
you in your spiritual Course, mortify your Corruptions, render all the
Ordinances of God delightful to you; all the Ways of Wisdom Pleasantness, and
all her Paths Peace! What Safety, as well as Comfort, would redound to your
Souls, from your being thus sealed by the blessed Spirit, unto the Day of
Redemption! -- Attend therefore to the following Directions and Advices.

1. Take it for granted, that this Witness of the Spirit is attainable. Others
have attained it: And why may not you, as well as others? If you do not obtain
this blessed Privilege, the Fault must be in your selves Be not therefore
discouraged in the Attempt: but press after it with Hope and unfainting
Expectation. God would not have made it your Duty to seek the Witness of your
Adoption, if such Assurance were not to be hoped for. I am afraid that many
lose this blessed Privilege and Comfort, by giving up the Case as hopeless,
and sitting down in Despair.

2 If you would obtain this Witness of the Spirit, strive for it in all the
Ways of God's Appointment. In thiis Case it is eminently true, that the
diligent Hand makes Rich. If you are slothful and remiss, you must expect to
be dark and doubtful about your State. But up and be doing; and you may hope
that the Lord will be with you. Be in earnest in attending upon all the Means
of Grace and Life; and wrestle with God, with insatiable Desire and
Importunity, that he would lift up the Light of his Countenance upon your
Souls; and give you the Spirit of Adoption. And be not discouraged, if you
don't presently find Success; but still follow on to know and seek the Lord.

3. Be constant in solemn Self-Examination. Make it a daily Business to examine
your Selves, whether you be in the Faith. Search and try whether you have these
gracious Influences of the Spirit in your Soul, or not. Set apart Time on
purpose. You will do well to take the Help and Assistance of some good Book,
that most plainly and clearly sets the genuine Marks of the new Creature before
you; and to your Self-Examination join fervent Prayer, that God would
graciously show you your State as it is. In this Way a truly sanctified Person
will be like to discover that he is such.

4 Be very watchful Watch over your Hearts, your Thoughts and Affections. Watch
over your Conversations. Watch over your Duties. Watch and pray, that you enter
not into Temptation. Watch lest the Prevalence of your Corruptions, the
Formality of your Duties, the deadness of your Spirits, and the decay of your
Graces, intercept the Light of God's Countenance, and leave your Souls in
Darkness and Distress

5 Labor to evidence the Truth of Grace in your Hearts, by the present
Exercise of it Thus, for Instance, if you doubt the sincerity of your
Repentance, go roundly to work with your Souls: Labor now to get them under
the Power of Conviction, and a through Humiliation: Review your Sins both of
Nature and Practice: Confess 'em to God with Shame and Sorrow; Cry for Pardon
and Cleansing in the Blood of Christ: Resolve against 'em, and renounce 'em for
ever: And be importunate with Him, who is exalted at God's Right Hand for that
End, that He would give you Repentance unto Life. -- If you doubt the sincerity
of your Faith, endeavor now to commit your Soul to Christ, to come
empty-handed to him, and to depend upon him only for Justification and Life.
Endeavor to see the Fullness and Sufficiency there is in him; and so cheerfully
venture your Soul and your Eternity in his Hands. -- If you doubt the sincerity
of your Love to God, endeavor now to raise your Affections to him; and to make
it sure to your selves that you love him, by your Love to his Ordinances, and
to his People, by your seeking Communion with him, by your studying a
Conformity to his Will, and by your imitating of Him as dear Children. In this
Road, you gain Ground by going it over again.

Finally, Acknowledge the Evidences of your gracious State so far as you see
them. As on the one Hand, you should be awfully careful not to take up with
false Appearances and counterfeit Graces, left you be ashamed of your Hope: So
on the other Hand, you must take Care not to deny God the Glory, and your
selves the Comfort, of his gracious Operations in your Souls. Don't conclude,
by a false Humility, that this Witness of the Spirit, is a Privilege too great
and good for you to pretend to; and that you dare not flatter your selves with
having 'such peculiar and distinguishing Seize; but rather let this
blessed Discovery inflame your Souls to the highest Elevations of Gratitude,
Love, and Praise; and now begin the joyful Song, that shall be your eternal
Employment, To him that has loved you and washed you from your Sins in his own
Blood, and has made you Kings and Priests to God and his Father:

To Him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

