Mr. Whitefield's SERMON ON Early Piety.

THE Duty and Interest OF EARLY PIETY Set forth IN A SERMON From ECCL xii, i.

By George Whitefield, A. B. Of Pembrooke-College, Oxford.

BOSTON, N. E. Reprinted and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in
Queen Street; and by CHARLES HARRISON, over against the Brazen-Head, in
Cornhill. 1739.

On Early Piety.
ECCL. xii.1. Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth.
THE Amiableness of Religion in itself, the innumerable Advantages that flow
from it to Society in general, as well as each sincere Professor of it in
particular* cannot but recommend it to the Choice of every considerate Person,
and make even wicked Men, as they wish to die the Death, so, in their more
sober Intervals, envy the Life of the Righteous. And indeed we must do the
World so much Justice as to confess, that the Question about Religion does not
usually ar^se from a Dispute whether it be necessary or not (for most Men see
the Necessity of doing something for (...) Salvation of their Souls;) but when
is the (...) Time to set about it Persons are convinced by (...) Experience,
that the first Essays or Endeavors toward the Attainment of Religion are
attended with some Difficulty and Trouble, and therefore they would willingly
defer the beginning such a seemingly ungrateful Work as long as they can. The
wanton Prodigal, that is spending his Substance in riotous Living, cries, A
little more Pleasure, a little more Sensuality, and then I Will be sober in
earnest. The covetous Worldling* that employs all his Care and Pains in heaping
up Riches, though he cannot tell who shall gather them, does not fl^tter himself
that this will do always; but hopes, with the rich Fool in the Gospel, to lay
up Goods for a few more Years on Earth, and then he will begin to lay up
Treasures in Heaven And, in short, thus it is that most People are convinced of
the Necessity of being religious some Time or another; but then, like Felix,
they put off the acting suitably to their Convictions, till (what they imagine)
a more conv^nient Season: Whereas, would we be so humble as to be guided by the
Experience and Counsel of the wisest of Men, we should learn that Youth is the
fittest Season for Religion; Remember now thy Creator, (says Solomon,) in the
Days of thy Y^uth By which Word Remember, we are not to understand a bare
speculative Remembrance, or calling to Mind, (for that, l^ke a d^ad Faith, will
profit us nothing) but such a Rem^mbrance as will constrain us to Obedience,
and oblige us out of G^atitude to perform all that the LORD our GOD shall
require of us For as forgeting GOD, in Scripture Language, impl^^^ a total
Neglect of our Duty, in like Manner r^^embring him, signifies a perfect
Performance of it: So that, when S^lomon says, Remember thy Creator in the Days
of thy Y^uth, it is the some as if he had said, Keep GOD's Commandments; or in
other Words, B^ religious in the Days of thy Youth, thereby implying that Youth
is the most (...) Season for it.

I SHALL in the following Discourse, First, endeavor to make good the Wise
Man's Proposition implied in the Words of the Text, and to show that Youth is
the fittest Season for Religion

Secondly, By Way of Motive. I shall consider the many unspeakable Advantages
that will arise from remembering our Creator in the Days of our Youth.

Thirdly and Lastly, I shall conclude with a Word or two of Exhortation to the
younger Part of this Audience.

AND First then, I am to make good the Wise Man's Proposition implied in the
Words of the Text, and to show that Youth is the fittest Season for Religion:
Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth. -- But in order to proceed
more clearly in this Argument, it may not be improper, first, to explain what I
mean by the Word Religion. By this Term, then. I would not be understood to
mean a bare outward Profession or naming the Name of CHRIST; for we are told,
that many that have even prophesied in his Name, and in his Name cast out
Devils, shall notwithstanding be rejected by him at the last Day: Nor would I
understand by it barely being admitted into CHRIST's Church by Baptism* for
then Simon Magus, Arius, and the Heresiarchs of old might pass for religious
Persons, for these were baptized; nor yet the receiving the other Seal of the
Covenant, for then Judas himself might be canonized for a Saint; nor indeed do
I mean any or all of these together, considered by themselves: but a thorough,
real, inward Change of Nature, wrought in us by the powerful Operations of the
Holy Gh^st, conveyed to and nourished in our Hearts, by a constant Use of ^ll
the Means of Grace, evidenced by a good Life, and bringing forth the Fruits of
the Spirit.

THE attaining this real, inward Religion, is a Work of so great Difficulty,
that Nicodemus, a learned Doctor and Teacher in Israel, thought it altogether
impossible, and therefore ignorantly asked our blessed LORD, how this Thing
could be? And truly to rectify a disord^r'd Nature, to mortify our corrupt
Passions, to turn Darkness to Light, to put off the old Man, and put on the
new, and thereby to have the Image of GOD reinstamp'd upon the Soul, or in one
Word, to be born again, however light some may make of it, must, after all our
Endeavors, be owned by Man impossible. It Is true, indeed, CHRIST's Yoke is
said to be an easy or a gracious Yoke, and his Burden light; but then it is to
those only who have been accustomed to bear and draw in it. For, as the wise
Son of Syra^h observes, At first Wisdom walks with her Children in crooked
Ways, and brings them into Fear; and torments them with her Discipline, and
does not turn to comfort and rejoice them, till the has tried them and proved
their Judgment. -- No; we must not flatter ourselves, that our depraved Natures
can be renewed, unless we submit to a great many Difficulties The spiritual
Birth is attended with its Pangs, as well as the natural: For they that have
experienced it, (and they only are the proper Judges) can acquaint you, that
frequent Acts of Self-denial must be exercised, a constant regular Discipline
kept up, lest, after all, when we come to the Birth, we should want Strength to
bring forth.

BUT if 'these Things are so,' if there are Difficulties and Pangs attending
our being born again, and Discipline must be called in, what Season more proper
than that of Youth; when, if ever, our Bodies are robust and vigorous, and our
Minds active and courageous, and consequently we are then the best qualified to
endure Hardness as good Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST^

WE find in secular Matters People commonly observe this Method, and send their
Children abroad among the Toils and F^tigues of Business, in their younger
Years, as well knowing they are then fittest to undergo them And why do they
not act with the same Consistency in the grand Affair of Religion? Because, as
our Savior has told us, the Children of thi^ W^rld are w^s^r in their
Generation, than the Children of L^ght.

But, secondly, if pure Religion and undefiled consists in the total R^newal of
our corrupted Natures, then it is not only a Work of D^fficulty, but of Time:
For, as the ^ld was not, so neither is the new Creation completed in a Day.
No, good Men know, by certain Experi^nce, that it is a long while e're old
Things can pass away, and all Things become new in them. The strong M^n armed
has gotten too great Possession of their Hearts to be quickly driven out, and
they are obliged to combat many a weary Hour, e'e^ their Corruptions, which is
the Armor in which the strong Man trusted, be wholly taken from him. Nay, they
find their whole Lives short enough to perfect the Work of Regeneration, which
they were sent into the World to do, and never expect to say, it is finished,
till with their blessed Master they bow down their Heads and give up the Ghost.

AND, if this be the Case* if the Renovation of our Nature be not only
d^fficult, but requires so long a Space to complete it in; then, it highly
concerns every one to set about it betimes, and to work their Work while it is
Day, before the Night comes, when no Man can work.

COULD we, indeed, live to the Age of Methuselah, and had but little Business
to employ ourselves in, we might then be more excusable, if we made no other
Use of this World, than, what too many do, take our Pastime therein; but since
our Lives are so very short, and the working out our Salvation requires so much
Tim^, we have no Room lest for Trifling, lest we should be snatched ^way while
our Lamps are unttimed, and we are entirely unprepared to meet the ^^idegroom.

DID we know a Friend or Neighbor, who had a long Journey of the utmost
Importance to m^ke and yet should stand all the Day idle, neg^ecting to set out
till the Sun was about to go down, we could not but pity and condemn his
^gregious F^lly: And yet it is to be feared most Men are j^st such Fo^ls: they
have a long Journey to t^k^, nay, a J^urney to Eternity, a Journey of infi^^te
importance, and which they are obliged to dispatch be^^r^ the S^n of their
natural Life be gone down; and yet t^^y lo^t^r away their Time allotted them to
p^^form their Journey in, till Sickness or Death su^p^^z^^ them; and th^n they
cry out. What shall we d^ to inherit eternal Life? But* alas! Is this a proper
Season to ask such a Question? Is this a Time ^o ^^g^n their Journey, when they
should be at the End o^ it; or to enquire what they must do, when perhaps they
have have hardly any Strength or Ability l^st to do any Thing to the Purpose,
and when they should be waiting with humble Patience, in (...) of speed^ly
receiving their Wages for Work alre^dy d^ne? O fo^lish People and unwise! If
you ^ffer the Blind for Sacrifi^e is it not evil* and if ye off^r the La^e and
Si^k* (...) it not evil? Offer it now unto thy G^vernour, will he be pleased
with the^, or accept thy Person? says the Lord of H^sts. But leaving such to
the Mercies of GOD, I pass on to

THE Second general Thing propos^d, viz. To show the Advantages that will (...)
from rem^mbring our Creator in the D^ys of our Y^uth* which may serve as so
many Motiv^s to excite and quicken all Persons immediately to set about it.

AND the first Benefit resulting from thence is, that it will bring most Honor
and Glory to GOD This, I suppose, every serious Person will grant, ought to be
the Point in which all our Actions should center; for to this E^d were we born,
to this End were we redeem^d by the precious Blood of JESUS CHRIST, that we
should promote GOD's eternal Glory. And as the Glory of GOD is most advanc^d by
paying Obedience to h^s Precepts, they that begin soonest to walk in his Ways,
act most to his Glory: For the common Obj^ction against the divine Laws in
general, and the D^ctrines of the Gospel in particular is, that they are not
practicable, that they are contrary to Flesh and Blo^d, and that all those
Precepts concerni^g Self Denial, Renunciation of and Deadness to the Worl^, are
but so many arbi^^ary Restraints imposed upon humane Nature But when we see
mee^ Striplings not only practicing* ^ut delighting in such religious Duties*
and in the Days of their Youth, when if ev^r, they have a R^lish for Sensual
Pleasures, subduing and despising the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye,
and the Pride of Life -- This is acceptable with GOD; this vindicates his
^njur'd Honor* this sh^ws that his Service is perfect Freedom, that ^is Yoke
is easy, and his Burden light.

BUT, S^condly, as an early Piety redounds most to the Honor of GOD, so it
will bring m^st H^nour to ours^lves: For th^se that honor GOD, GOD will
honor. We find it therefore remarked to the Praise of Obadiah, that he served
the LORD from his Youth: Of Samuel, that he stood, when young, before GOD in a
Linen Ephod: Of Timothy, that from a Child he had known the holy Scriptures:
Of St I^^n, that he was the youngest and most beloved D^sciple; and of our
blessed LORD himself, that at twelve Years old he went up to the Temple, and
s^t among the Doctors, both hearing and asking them (...)

NOR, Thirdly, will an early Piety afford us less Comfort than Honor, not only
because it ^enders Religion habitual to us, but also because it gives us a
well-grounded Assurance of the Sincerity of our Professions Was there no other
Argument against a D^ath-Bed Repentance but the Unsatisfacto^in^^s and A^xiety
of such a State, that would be sufficient to de^er all thinking Persons from
deferring the m^st important Business of their Life to such a dreadful Period
of it. For supposing a Man be sincere in his Professions of Repentance on a
Death B^d (which is very much to be doub^ed) yet he can take no great Comfort
in them, because he is u^certain whether his Convictions and R^mo^s^ proceed
from a (...) Sorrow for Sin, or a servile ^^ar of Punishment. -- ^ut a young
Saint need f^^r no such (...)* he knows that he loves GOD for his own Sake, and
is not driven to him by a Dread of impend^ng Evil: He does not decline the
Gratifica^^^ns of S^nse, because he can no long^r hear the Voice of Singing Men
and Singing Wom^n; but wil^ingly takes up his Cross, and follows his blessed
Master in his Y^u^h; and therefore must have great Confidence of his Si^c^rity
toward GOD. But farther, as an early Piety shows the Heart of its Sincerity,
so likewise it (...) ^s present Reward with i^, as it renders Religion, and all
its Duties, habitual and easy A young Saint, was you to ask him, would joyfully
tell you the u^sp^^kable Comfort of beginning to be good betimes: As for his
Part, he knows not what Men mean by talking of Mortification Self Denial, and
Retirement, a^ h^^d and ri^orous Duties; for he (...) so accust^m^d (...) to
them, that they are n^w b^c^me even (...), and he takes infinitely more (...)
in practisi^g the severest Precepts of the Gosp^l, than a l^xu^i^us Dives in a
Bed of State, or an (...) H^rian at ^ Royal Banquet. And, Oh! how h^ppy must
that Youth be, whose Duty is become a second Nature, and to whom those Things,
which seem terrible to others, are grown both easy and delightful!

BUT the greatest Advantage of an early Piety is still behind, viz That it l^ys
in the best Provision of Comfort and Support against such Times as we shall
stand most in N^ed thereof, viz. all Times of our T^^bulation, and in
particular against the Time of old Age, the Hour of Death, and the Day of
Judgment.

THIS is the Argument the wise Man makes Use of in the Words immediately
following the Text: Remember now* says he, thy Creator in the Days of thy
Y^uth, while the evil Days (...) not, nor the Years draw nigh when thou shall
say, I have no Pleasure in them. Observe, the Time of old Age is an evil Time,
Years wherein there is no Pleasure; and ask thos^ tha^ are grown old, and they
will inform you so. Cordials surely th^n must be exceeding proper to support
our drooping Spirits: And, Oh! What Cordial comparable to the grateful R^view
of a well-spe^^ Life? When the (...)* lik^ (...), are grown dim with Age; when
the Keepers of the House, i* e. the Hands, shall tremble; as the wise Man goes
on to describe the Infirmities of old Age; when the strong Men bow themselves,
i e when the Legs grow ^eeble; and the Grin^ers, i e. the Teeth shall cease to
do their proper Office, because they are few, for a Person then to hear the
Precepts of the Gospel read over to him, and to be able to lay his Hand on his
Heart, and to say sincerely, All these have I kept from my Y^uth: This must
fill him with such unsp^^kable Comfort, that I want Words to express, and
Tho'^s to conceive it. But, supposing it was p^ssible for us to escape the
Inconveniences of old Age, yet still Death is a Debt we all must pay; and what
is worse, it generally comes attended with such dreadful Circumstances, that it
will make even a F^lix tremble. But as for the Godly, that have served the LORD
from their Youth, it is not so with them; no, they look upon Death not as the
King of Terrors, but as a welcome Messenger, that is come to conduct them to
their wished for Home. All the Days of their appointed Time have they waited,
and it has been the Business of their whole Liv^s to prepare themselves for the
Coming of their great Change, and therefore they rejoice to hear, that they are
called to meet the heavenly Bridegroom. Thus ^ies the early (I mean the early,
if persevering) pious: whose Path has been as the shining Light, that shines
more and more, unto the perfect Day. But follow him beyond the Grave, and see
with what an holy Triumph he enters into his Master's Joy; with what an humble
Boldness he stands at the dreadful Tribunal of JESUS CHRIST; and can you then
forbear to cry out. Let me die the Death of the Righteous, and let my latter
End, and fu^ure State, be like his?

NEED I then, after having shown so many Advantages to arise from an early
Piety, use any more Arguments to persuade the younger Part of this Audience, to
whom in the third and last Place I shall add^^ss my self, to remember their
Creator i^ the Days of their Youth?

WHAT! will not a Desire of bringing Glory to GOD* Honor and Comfort to
themselves; will not the Pleasure of an habitual Piety, and the comfortable
Assurance of being sincere* above all, will not the H^pes of an honorable old
Age, a p^ac^ful Death, and a glorious Appearance at the tremendous Day of
Judgment, will not these, I say, prevail with them to leave their Husk^, and
return home to eat of the fatted Calf^ Wha^, will they thus requite their
Saviou^'s Love? That be far from them! Did he come down and shed his precious
Blood to de^iver them from the Power of Sin; and will they spend their youthful
Strength and Vigor in the Service of it, and then think to serve CHRIST, when
they can follow their Lusts no longer? Is it fit, that many who are endowed
with exc^llent Gifts, and are thereby qualifi^d to be Supports and Ornaments of
our sinking Church, should notwithstanding forget the GOD that gave them, and
employ them in Things that will not profit? O why will they not arise, and,
like so many Phin^a's, be z^alous for the Lord of H^sts? Doubtless, when Death
overtakes them, they will with they had: And what hinders them, but that they
may live as well now, as they will wish they had when they leave the World?
Think you that any one yet ever repented that he began to be good too soon? But
how many, on the contrary, have repented that they began to be good too late?
May we not well imagine, that young Samuel now rej^yces that he wa^ted so soon
at the Tabernacle of the LORD? Or young Timothy, that from a Child he knew the
holy Scriptu^es? And if you wish to be Partakers of their Joy, let me persuade
you to be Partakers of their Piety

I could still go on to fill my Mouth with Arguments; but the Circumstances and
Piety of those amongst whom I am now preaching the Kingdom of GOD, remind me to
change my Style; and instead of urging any more D^ssuasives from Sin, to fill
up what is behind of this Discourse, with Encouragements to persevere in
Hol^ness.

Bl^ss^d, for ever blessed be GOD and the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST! I am
not speaking to Persons i^flamed with youthful ^usts, but to a Multitude of
young Profess^rs, who, by frequently assembling together, and forming
th^mselves into religious Societies, are in a ready Way to be of the Number of
those young Men who have ove^^^me the wicked one

BELIEVE me, it gladdens my very Soul, to see so many of your Faces set
Heaven-wards; and the visible happy Effects of your uniting together, cannot
but rejoice the Hearts of ^ll sincere Christians, and oblige them to wish you
go^^ Success in the Name of the LORD The many Souls that are nourished weekly
by the spiritual Body and Blood of JESUS CHRIST by your Means; the weekly and
monthly Lectures that are preached by your Contributions; the daily Incense of
Thanksgiving and Prayer which is publ^ckly sent up to the Throne of Grace by
your Subscriptions; the many Children which are trained up in the Nurture and
Admonition of the LORD by your Cha^^^^es; and lastly, the commendable and pious
Zeal you exert in promoting and encouraging divine Psalmody, are such plain and
apparent Proofs of the Benefit of your religious Societies, that they call for
a public Acknowledgement of Praise and Thanksgiving to our blessed Master, who
has not only put into your Hearts such good Designs, but enabled you also to
bring the same to good Effect

IT is true, it has been obj^cted, "That young Men's forming themselves into
religious Societies has a Tendency to make them spiritual^y proud* and think
more highly of themselves than they ought to think" And perhaps the imprudent
impe^ious Behavior of some Novices in Religion, who, though they went out from
you, were not of you, may have given too much Occasion for such an Aspersi^n.

BUT you, Brethren, have not so learned CHRIST. Far, be it from you to look
upon yourselves as righteous* and despise other^, because you often assemble
yourselves together. No, this, instead of creating Pride, ought to beget an
holy Fear in your Hearts, l^st your Practice should not correspond with your
Prof^ssi^n, and that, after you have benefited and edified others, you
yourselves should become Cast aways.

WORLDLY-MINDEDNESS, my Brethren, is another Rock against which we are in
Danger of splitting. For, if other Sins have slain their Thousands of
professing Christians, this has slain its ten Thousands. I need not appeal to
past Ages; your own Experience, no doubt, has furnished you with many unhappy
Instances of young Men, who, after (as one would have imagined) they had
escaped the Pollutions which are in the World through Lust, and had tasted the
good Word of Life, and endured for a Season, whilst under the Tuition and
Inspection of others; yet when they have come to be their own Masters, through a
Want of Faith, and through too great an Earnestness in laboring for the Meat
which perishes, have cast off their first Love, been again entangled with the
World, and returned like the Dog to his Vomit, and like the S^w that was washed
to her wallowing in the Mire. You would therefore do well, my Brethren,
frequently t^ ^^mind each other of this dangerous Snare, and to exhort one
another to begin, pursue, and end your Christian Warfare, in a thorough
Renunciation of the World, and worldly Tempers; so that, when you are obliged
by Providence to provide for your selves, and those of your respective
Households, you may continue to walk by Faith, and still seek first the Kingdom
of GOD, and his Righteousness; not doubting but all other Things, upon your
honest Industry and Endeavors, shall be added unto you.

AND now what shall I say more? To speak unto you, Fathers, who have been in
CHRIST so many Years before me, and know the Malignity of Worldly-mindedne^s,
and Pride in the Spiritual Life, would be altogether needless. To you,
therefore, O young Men (for whom I am distressed, for whom I fear as well as
for my self,) do I once more address my sel^ in the Words of the beloved
Disc^ple, Look to (...) selves, that we lose not those Things which we have
wrought, but receive a full Reward. Be ever mindful, then of the Words that
have been spoken to us by the Apostles of the Lord and Savior. Give Diligence
to make your Calling and Election sure. Beware, lest ye also being led away by
the Error of the Wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. Let him that thinks
he stands, take Heed lest he fall. Be not high-minded, but fear. But we are
persuaded better Things of you, and Things that accompany Salvation, though we
thus sp^^k For God is not unrighteous, to forget your Works and Lab^urs of Love
And we d^si^e that every one of you do show the same Diligence, to the full
Assurance of H^pe unto the End: That ye be not slothful, but Followers of them,
who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. It Is true, we have many
D^fficulties to encounter, many powerful Enemies to overcome, ever we can g^t
Poss^ssio^ of the promised Land. We have an artful Devil, an ensnaring World,
and above all, the Tre^chery of our own Hearts, to withstand and strive
against. For strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way (...) eternal Life But
wherefore should we fear? since he that is with us is far more powerful, then
all who are against us. Have we not already experienced h^s Almighty Power, in
enabling us to conquer some D^f^i^ulties which seemed as insurmountable then,
as those we struggle with now? And cannot he who delivered us out of the Paws
of th^se Bears and ^ions* preserve us also from being hu^t by the strongest
G^liah's?

BE (...) therefore, my Brethren, be imm^veable. Consider the (...) future
Reward^ as well as present (...) that a^tend ^n early (...). Be not ashamed of
(...)* Gospel of CHRIST: For it is the Power of ^OD unto Salvation Fear (...)
M^n* fear not the (...) and Revilings which you (...) meet with in the Way of
Duty: For one of you shall chase a Thousand; and two of you put ten Thousand of
your Enemies to Flight. And if you will be content to be abused for a short
Time here, I speak the Truth in CHRIST, I lie not; then shall ye be exalted to
sit down with the Son of Man, when he shall come in the Glory of his Father
with his holy Angels to Judgment hereafter. May Almighty GOD give every one of
us such a Measure of his Grace, that we may not be of the Number of those that
draw back unto Perdition, but of them that believe and endure unto the End, to
the Saving of our Souls.

Which GOD, etc.
FINI

