Mr. Browne's SERMON On the Day of the Execution of Penelope Kenny.

Religious Education OF CHILDREN Recommended, In a SERMON Preached in the
Church of Portsmouth December 27th 1739. Being the Day appointed for the
Execution of Penelope Kenny.

By Arthur Brown, A. M. And Missionary from the Society for the Propagation of
the Gospel in Foreign Parts.

Published at the Desire of the Church Wardens and Vestry.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. Kneeland and T. Green, in Queenstreet over
against the Prison. 1739.

Religious Education of Children Recommended.
PROVE. XXII. Ver. 6. Train up a Child in the Way he should go, and when he is
old, he will not depart from it.
BLindness and Ignorance in Things of the highest Moment for us to know, is one
of the greatest Miseries that can possibly happen to the Soul in this Life; for
as Souls are designed to live happy or miserable for ever, which Happiness
depends upon the right Use of their Liberty; and that upon their Knowledge how
to use and determine it; it will be impossible for them to attain eternal
Happiness, or escape eternal Misery, without Knowledge to steer, or direct them
right.

From hence appears the great Importance of training up Children in the Ways of
Virtue, that so early Custom may reconcile them to their Duty: And it is so
much the more indispensibly necessary, because the Seducer is always at Hand to
lead them aside.

My Business therefore shall be, to enforce the good Work of training up
Children in the Way they should go, for the important Reason intimated in my
Text, that, when they are old, they may not depart from it.

And shall then make an Application suitable to the Occasion of our present
sorrowful Meeting.

First, I am to enforce the good Work of training up Children in the Way they
should go, for the important Reason intimated in my Text, that, when they are
old, they may not depart from it.

I would not here be understood to suggest, that this general Rule admitted of
no Exception; there have been, and will be again, Instances to the contrary:
But such Instances are very uncommon; and it rarely happens, that such Persons
totally and finally miscarry.

It is a great Advantage to Religion to have been seasonably planted in the
tender Soil, and to have taken the first Possession: And Education has the most
considerable, though not the only Share in our Tempers and Manners. -- Children
are very early capable of ill Impressions, and what is imbibed in Youth, is
more lasting and influential. -- The human Mind is as prone to bring forth
Error and Vanity, as the Earth is to bring forth Thorns and Thistles; for by
Nature we are Children of Wrath, and by the earliest Practice Children of
Disobedience. The Imaginations and Thoughts of our Hearts, from our Youth up,
are only Evil continually. It is a lively though dreadful Picture, which St. Paul
gives of our natural State, Romans 3. Chapter 16. 17 v That Destruction and Misery
are in our Ways, and the Ways of Peace we have not known. Yet these very Souls
thus vitiated by Sin, are capable of being restored and sanctified, and of
being prepared to serve God graciously in this World, and to enjoy him in Glory
in the World to come.

Shall such Souls then as these be thrown away? Are they to be let alone? Are
no Means to be used to enlighten them, to turn them, and to deliver them from
their Folly and Misery? The dreadful Consequences of such a Neglect, are worth
our Consideration.

As has been already observed, we are naturally inclined to Evil; the neglect
therefore of Education lays Children under a kind of Necessity of pursuing what
they are by Nature inclined to; Sin and Vice become soon habitual to them; and
when once these are grown familiar, there seems to be an End of Liberty and
Choice; they are then for the most Part deaf to good Counsel and Instruction:
or if they are disposed to hear, they want the Power to follow it, being bound
in the Chains of their Sins, and led Captive by Satan, at his Pleasure. And
when they are reduced to this Condition, their Ruin seems to be sealed, and
without a Miracle of God's Grace, are never to be reclaimed. It fares with our
Minds, as it does with our Bodies; They are supple and pliable in their first
and early Years, easily bowed and turned this way or that: but they grow fixed
and stiffen'd as they ripen into Age, then preserving the same Shape, Figure
and Frame into which they had been first molded. The very Disposition and Turn
of Mind depends much upon it: and perhaps a great deal of what we call natural
Temper, is little more than that particular Frame of Heart, which was first
infused in our Education. This shows the Necessity of sowing the Seeds of
Religion early in so tender a Soil, and the evil Consequence of such a neglect.

How invaluable a Blessing then is it, to have been set right at first? How
easily, I had almost said insensibly, may such arrive at the greatest Heights?
They run through the Difficulties of a religious Course, without so much as
feeling the Pain and Toil of it. Happy they who have been thus conducted
through the Paths of Virtue! Who have never known what it is to have been
captivated to Sin and Satan, never felt the weight of prevailing Lusts, corrupt
Customs, or vicious Habits. How easily may they obtain a Crown? which must cost
others dear, and be hardly gained, (if gained at all) after many doubtful
Struggles, many Sighs and Tears, many bitter Pains and Agonies of Mind.

To be then a Parent is surely a Concern of great Weight and Moment, every
Child being a considerable Charge entrusted with such by God: And although
Parents are not expressly named, yet are they necessarily implied and supposed
in the Text, for all Acts must have their Agents, as well as their Objects. But
what is hinted proverbally in my Text; is elsewhere more expressly declared,
Deuteronomy. 6. Chapter 6. v. 7. Thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, and
thou shall talk of them when thou sit in thy House, and when thou walk
by the Way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. Nor is the Gospel in
this particular less pressing than the Law. Fathers provoke not your Children
to Wrath, but bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.
Chapter 4. ver. (i. e.) In a literal Sense, bring them up in the Christian
Religion; teach them their Duty, what they are to believe and practice;
instruct them in the Knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ; show them in what
Condition they are by Nature; and to what they are advanced by Grace; let them
know, that without believing in Christ, they can reap no Benefit from his
meritorious Undertakings; that without Holiness there can be no Happiness; and
that therefore they must be careful to keep a good Conscience toward God and
Man, and by a blameless Conversation to adorn the Doctrine of the Gospel. Above
all, inform and endeavor to convince them, that there is a Life after Death,
wherein Men shall receive from God, a mighty and eternal Reward, or a terrible
and endless Punishment, according as they have done, or neglected their Duty in
this Life; and therefore urge it upon them as an undeniable Truth, that if they
live unholy Lives, they shall die miserably; and that though their Lives be never
so long and prosperous, yet if they die in their Sins, it would be better, far
better for them they had never been born.

And as it is the Business of Parents, to instill into their Children's Minds
the Principles of Religion; so should it be their Care, to frame their Lives
according to the Rules and Precepts of it: to train them up in the exercise of
Obedience, and Modesty, of Diligence and Sincerity, of Tenderness and Humanity,
as the general Dispositions to Religion; to accustom them to the government of
their Passions and Tongues, as the Foundation of it; and to inure them to the
Practice of Piety and Devotion toward God; of Sobriety and Chastity with
regard to themselves, and of Justice and Charity toward all Men, as the
principal Parts of it.

By conducting themselves in this manner, Parents no less consult their own
Good, than that of their Children; for by this faithful discharge of their
Duty, they secure to themselves some of the prime Blessings both for this World
and the other; having secured the refreshing Testimony of a well discharged
charged Conscience, so as to wash their Hands in innocence from the Guilt of
sharing in their Children's Sins, and Ruin, should they miscarry; and taking
the most effectual Course of enjoying the unspeakable Blessing of good and
dutiful Children while they live here; and of lying down at last in their
Graves, with the transporting Hopes of meeting them all again with endless Joys
in Glory hereafter. Neither finally, will the Public be less hereby obliged:
since Families are both Nursuries for Church and State, on the Management
whereof their Happiness or Misery does wholly depend; so that Men can in no
other Way deserve better of Mankind, or become greater Benefactors to the
World, than by training up their Children in the Principles of Virtue and
Goodness. -- Which is the Reason, why in Rome, and Athens, and Sparta, and
other well ordered Governments, a more especial Care was taken about the
training up of Youth. -- Without this, Men would grow wild and savage, unfit
for Society. Rebellions, Rapines, Murders, and other monstrous Impieties, are
but the natural Fruits of depraved Nature, uncultivated by Education. But if
Youth be wisely and justly managed, how happy will its Influence be upon
Society, and what Blessings will it draw down from Heaven upon Men. -- And Oh!
happy the Children that have such Parents? And happy the Parents that thus take
care of their Children?

But because Providence brings Children into many other Dependencies and
Relations in the World, and by various Ways cuts them off from the immediate
Care of their Parents; as by the Parents Death, or Distance from them, or by
their Inabilitity or Unwillingness to instruct them; it is therefore incumbent
on others, whether Masters or Governors, who have the Care of them, to provide
Instruction for their Minds, as well as Food and Clothing for their Bodies. --
Abraham as the Head of the Family, has this honorable Testimonial from God
himself; I know him, that he will command his Children, and his Household after
him, and they shall keep the Way of the Lord, Genesis 18. Chapter 19. ver. -- Joshua,
Moses's Servant and Successor said, As for me, and my House, we will serve the
Lord, Josh 24 Chapter 15. ver. The general Precepts of loving our Neighbor as our
Selves, and of doing to others as we would they should do unto us, makes it
necessary for all those who have the Care of Children, to train them up in the
Way they should go. -- And let this be a further Motive toward promoting the
Discharge of this Duty of Instruction, that the neglect of it will not only
involve those concerned, in the Inconveniences, Shame, and Sorrow of
Children's Miscarriages, but in a great Measure in the Guilt of them. For
certain it is, that Parents must be one Day accountable for all their Neglects
of their Children, in Matter of Instruction, Example, and Restraint from Evil.
-- And let me entreat all Masters of Families to be especially careful in the
Particular of setting good Example; for there is small probability of Success,
where there is a constant Contradiction between the Instructor's Precepts and
his Practice. The Force of a President (as Experience convinces us) is vastly
more prevalent, than that of Precept. And even Children will be more apt to
follow a bad Example, than the best Instructions: Vain therefore will your
Cautions against those Things be, which you practice your selves; vain will
your Punishments be for the commission of them; when all your Arguments may be
baffled with this single Question, Thou that teach another, teach thou
not thyself? How then will it make your Ears tingle, when God shall arise
terribly to Judgment, and say to you, Behold! the Children which I have given
you; they were Ignorant, and you instructed them not; they made themselves
Vile, and you restrained them not. Why did you not teach them at Home, and
bring them to Church, to the public Ordinances, and Worship of God, and train
them up to the Exercise of Piety and Devotion? But you did not only neglect to
give them good Instruction, but you gave them bad Example: And lo! they have
followed you to Hell, to be an addition to your Torment there.

Would not such a Charge as this make every Joint of you to tremble, would it
not cut your Hearts, would it not strike you with Horror, to be thus
reproached? I am not able to make so dreadful a Representation of this Matter,
as it deserves, but I would awaken Parents to a Sense of their Duty, and
terrify them out of this gross and shameful neglect, which too many are guilty
of.

Let Parents then carefully administer, and Children patiently and gladly
receive Instruction, their future Interest depends upon it. And what is the
Life of the Body compared with the Life of the Soul, or the Pleasures of Time
compared with eternal Torments? And let me prevail on all, (who are not yet
arrived to Years of maturity) to consider, that no Objections or Prejudices
against a compliance, can be of equal Weight with the eternal Life or Death of
your Souls. When Satan or Sinners, or your own Hearts would cause you to refuse
Christ, and neglect Salvation; have this Answer to all their Pleas in
readiness; My Life or Death, my eternal Happiness or Misery depend upon my
receiving or neglecting Christ; If I have not Christ, I cannot have Life; If I
have no Grace, I can never have Glory.

Since then you have precious and immortal Souls to be saved? Since you have
Helps and Encouragements which many others want? Is it not better to be good
and happy with a few, than to be wicked and miserable with a Multitude? Shall
all the Care, Cost and Kindness of your Friends be lost, and your Souls undone
for ever? Can all the Pleasures of Sin make amends for the Sorrows it will
bring in the End; when you will be forced to mourn at the last, and to say, How
have we hated Instruction, and our Hearts despised Reproof, and have not obeyed
the Voice of our Teachers, nor inclined our Ears to them that instructed us?
But before it comes to this, may the Lord incline your Ears that you may hear,
and your Souls may live! Take fast hold of Instruction, let her not go, keep
her, for she is thy Life.

The Time will not permit me to prosecute this important Subject any further; I
must break off the Thread of my Discourse, by entreating you to turn your Eyes
to a miserable poor Creature, under the deepest Distress and Agony of Soul,
from the consciousness of a misspent Life, and the certainty of her very near
approaching Execution; reduced to this deplorable Condition, chiefly from a
want of those Opportunities of Instruction, you so plentifully enjoy: being
heretofore instructed neither in the Doctrines of Faith, nor seasoned with the
Principles of pure Religion. This was the Scource of all her Misfortunes; an
utter Insensibility or Ignorance of the Ways of living usefully in this World,
or happily in another. May her untimely End influence you all to lay fast hold
on Instruction; may her Example and Sufferings answer the Intention of the Law,
and deter all viciously and wickedly disposed Persons among you from incurring
the like Condemnation.

She is to die for concealing the Death of her Bastard Child, supposed to be
murdered by her; and if so, the most unnatural Murder! But this Part of the
Charge she denies, yet acknowleges her Sentence to be just, in as much as she
neglected the necessary Means of it is Preservation. -- Murder is a horrid
Crime, and therefore punished by the Laws of most Nations with Death, because
the Commonwealth is deprived of an innocent Member, by one that is apparently
pernicious. -- But why should I at present upbraid or insult this poor
Malefactor! She is convinced I trust of the heinousness of her Sins, and may
her Preparation and Repentance avail her in the Day of the Lord.

My Business is to address my dull Hearers, to rouse them up to a Consideration
of their own Ways, and (although their Consciences may acquit them of the Sin of
Murder) to exhort them to inquire if there are not Sins of as damning a Nature,
that they may be involved in. -- What think you of Adultery, Fornication,
Extortion? These triumph with great Security, are left unmortified and
unsubdued, in fast possession of your Hearts, and in full sway there. -- What
think you of Malice, Envy, Slander, Detraction, Backbiting, Lying? These, my
Brethren, are Sins of the Flesh, and though not punished with a Gallows here, are
reserved for God's eternal Judgment. St. Paul tells us, that they which do such
Things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. It is dreadful to behold a poor
miserable Sinner, in perfect Health, taking her Leave of the World, and all the
Vanities of it: The uncommonness of the Sight strikes us with Horror, and
shocks our very Nature. But upon Reflection, how is her Case more desperate
than that of a forlorn wretched Sinner upon a Deathbed? Nay the Advantage is
manifestly on her Side; for she has had some Time, and we trust Power, to make
her Peace; the Deathbed Penitent, neither Time, Power, nor Disposition: for to
make a sincere Penitent, Industry, Consideration, Strivings, and Contests with
our selves, are required: And how unable and unfit is a Man for these Things,
when he lies languishing on a Death Bed. -- Were we not stupid and infatuated
with the deceitful Charms of Sin, we should see our Danger, and whilst we have
Strength of Body and Mind, Time, Opportunity, and Means of Grace, should secure
our everlasting Happiness: We should wipe out our Sins by timely Repentance.
Then cannot the evil Day come upon us unawares, whenever it comes. -- When
after any Miscarriage, we have reconciled our selves to God, we lie down in
safety; and are in Security, though that very Night our Soul should be required
of us. -- Since then upon this short, this uncertain Life, depends our eternal
Fortune in the next World, how infinitely does it concern us to trifle no
longer. -- Methinks every Spectacle of Mortality, the sound of every
Passing Bell should alarm us.

But to return to the sorrowful Object before us. -- Behold her then
overwhelmed with Shame and Confusion of Face, lamenting her Ignorance, and
bewailing her innumerable Commissions of Sin, and Omissions of Duty; which Way
soever she casts her Eyes, she is presented with nothing but Horror. If she
looks inwards, there she finds a Soul all over foul and leprous, oppressed with
intolerable Loads of Guilt, and filled with the remembrance of a thousand
Instances of Folly, and the ugliest Ingratitude -- If she looks upwards, she
sees an angry offended God, whose Laws she has affronted, whose Threatenings she
has despised, whose Spirit she has done despite to; whether shall she turn her,
what is to be done in this deplorable State. With thee, O God! there is Mercy.

Run over then in thy Thoughts thy whole past Life, recollecting the many
Mercies and Deliverances, that God has vouchsafed thee, acknowledging his
Goodness with Praise and Thanksgiving. Then reflect on the great Miscarriages
of thy Life; once more weep over thy old Sins, and again repent of them with
the uttermost Abhorrence and godly Sorrow that thou can possibly affect thy
Soul withal, to make up all thy former Defects. Then incessantly pray to God,
that He would be with thee, and support thee, that he would increase and
strengthen all thy Christian Graces, thy Faith, and Patience, and Hope, and
Trust in Him, and that He would fill thee with all Joy and Peace in believing
through the Power of the Holy Ghost. -- Utterly renounce thine own Righteousness,
and place all thy Hopes in the Mercy of GOD, through the Merits and Mediation of
our Redeemer. Trust to the Merits of his Passion only for thy Salvation; for in
Him only is thy Help found. Therefore by Faith look up unto Jesus, the great
Propitiatory Sacrifice, the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World
-- Then adore the divine Goodness, that has with such infinite Mercy to us,
given Him to be the Propitiation for our Sins; and earnestly beg from the
bottom of thy Heart God's Pardon for all thy Sins from thy Youth up, until now,
(particularly that for which thou art shortly to suffer) in his Name, and for
his Sake; humbly beseeching the God of all Grace and Goodness, that He who is
in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, would for Christ's sake, be
reconciled to thee, and receive thee to his Mercy.

Here is comfort for the sincere Penitent, (though miserable Sinner,) by the
Stripes of Jesus he is healed, the Benefit of his Blood does not only reach the
Righteous, and the Innocent; those that through a good Education, and a
virtuous Disposition have, in a great Measure, escaped the Pollutions of the
World, and have all their Lives long given up themselves to the Service of
Jesus Christ; I say, it is not to these only, that the Mercies of the Gospel
are extended; (though of all others these are the most happy People*) but the
Gate is open, even to the prodigal Children; those that have wasted all their
Father's Substance in Lewdness and riotous Living; even these the Father is
ready to receive with open Arms, if they can have but the Heart to return to
him. Many Instances and Examples do the Scriptures of the Old Testament afford
of those that have found Mercy from God, after their falling into sinful and
grievous Crimes; as David, after his commission of Murder and Adultery;
Solomon, after a Course of Debauchery and Idolatry; Manasses, after a long Life
of horrid Impieties. -- And sure the Gates of Repentance are as open in the New
Testament, as the Old, under the Gospel as under the Law.

I will not take upon me to say, which were the greatest Sins that ever were
committed by Mankind; but I will Instance in two, that must needs be
acknowledged to have been very great, which yet have obtained Pardon: and they
are the Sin of our first Parents, and the Sin of the Jews in crucifying our
Savior. -- In the latter of these Instances, besides the greatness of the
Person, against whom they sinned, (putting to Death the Lord of Life and Glory)
there was designed Malice, Perjury, Subornation, Contumely, Ingratitude,
Contradiction to the plainest Evidence of Miracles of all Kinds, and to the
Conviction of their own Consciences: And notwithstanding St. Peter exhorts the
same Men to Repentance. -- And our blessed Savior himself apologizes for their
Ignorance, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do: And the
Scriptures bear them witness, that if they had known him, they would not have
crucified the Lord of Glory. This Ignorance is all the Extenuation the horror
of their Crime was capable of. -- And some Extenuation it always is, though in
proportion less, as the Means of Knowledge are greater. -- I would not here be
understood to insinuate the Prisoner's Ignorance of the capitalness and
wickedness of the Crime she is convicted of; I only apply it to some of the
Actions of her past Life, for which she must account at the great Tribunal, as
well as for this.

Further, although I can by no Means think the Case of the Laborers coming into
the Vineyard at the eleventh Hour, nor that of the Penitent Thief upon the
Cross to be exactly parallel with the Case of this condemned Malefactor; yet
some Resemblance may be discovered; and these Instances may afford some
Encouragement to her, whose Misfortune it has been to live a long Time in
Ignorance and Sin. -- In the Thief upon the Cross we have an Instance of a poor
Wretch almost expiring; certain Death upon him, dying under public Punishment
for a very heinous Crime: And yet at the End of a Life, led probably after the
Rate that theirs generally are, whose Wickedness at length brings them to an
untimely End: This Creature is softened at once, received into Favor, and
promised a translation from a Gibbet into Paradise. -- This certainly is a
Monument of Mercy, a standing Comfort to all in the same Circumstances who
truly repent, though at their last Hour. -- For even they who have lain long in
the Snares of the Devil, and through the Course of a whole Life, been taken
Captive by him at his Will, shall like this reclaimed Thief, be rescued,
accepted, rewarded; provided they like him return to God, and improve their
never so small remainder of Time to the best Advantage.

And this we trust is pretty near the Case of our poor condemned Sister; the
Scales have fallen from her Eyes, and Streams of Tears gushed out, the bitter,
but wholesome Tears of Repentance: -- The Sincerity of which, though none but God
that sees the Heart can certainly tell, yet Man also may, and ought to believe,
not only in the Judgment of Charity, but of moral Practice, from all evident
Signs of it, which are to be given by one in her Condition. -- And though to
forsake Sins then, when we can no longer enjoy them, seems to be rather the
Effect of Impotency and Necessity, than of Choice, and therefore not so
acceptable, or Praiseworthy; yet we find Almighty GOD often uses the one to
bring about the other; and improves a forced abstinence from Sin, into a
settled loathing and detestation of it. -- So that I think we may charitably
conclude, that her Condemnation, through the Grace of God has proved an effectual
Means of a true, though late Repentance: And that if she has done all that
possibly she could in that little Time that has been allowed her; even this her
Work shall not be lost; she shall be much happier than she deserves.

Grant we beseech thee therefore, O Heavenly Father, that she may End her Life
in thy Fear and Favor, and that she may receive her Death, which is so very
near at Hand, not as a Curse, but as a Deliverance. --

And I entreat you all here present to join with me in commending her Soul into
the Hands of Almighty GOD, as into the Hands of a faithful Creator, and most
merciful Savior, humbly beseeching Him, that it may be precious in his Sight.

Lord, wash her Soul in thy Blood, that it may be presented without Spot unto
thee. And let her die in thy Favor, and rest in Peace, and rise again in
Glory. -- Strengthen her O God! in her Agonies; as her Strength fails, let her
Pains wear off. But when her Strength fails, let not her Faith fail; even in
Death, let her Trust in thee. And the nearer she is drawing to thee, the more
do thou manifest thy Mercy. -- Lord Jesus have Mercy upon her! Thou Lamb of God
that take away the Sins of the World, be merciful to this poor Sinner;
perfect her Repentance, and accept it; blot out all her Mis Deeds, as thou
engagest to do to all who sincerely repent of the same. Deliver her O Lord,
from fear of Death, and from all violent Disorders of a troubled Fancy, or
painful Delusions of her Ghostly Enemy. Let not him now be able to disturb or
terrify her, or any way to prevail against her, but guard thou thy Servant. --
Give thy Holy Angels charge to stand about her, to guard and receive her poor
Soul at her Departure, and to conduct and carry it to the blessed Receptacles
of Rest and Peace. -- And teach us, Good Lord, who are to survive, so to number
our Days, that we may seriously apply our Hearts to that holy and heavenly
Wisdom whilst we live here, which may in the End bring us to Life everlasting.
AMEN.

FINIS.

