Mr. Whitefield's SERMON ON SELF-DENIAL.

A SERMON ON SELF-DENIAL, Preached to a numerous Audience in England.

By George Whitefield, A.B. Of Pembroke-College, OXFORD.

London Printed: Reprinted at Boston, by T. Fleet, for CHARLES HARRISON,
Over Against the Brazen Head in Cornhill. 1739.

A SERMON ON SELF-DENIAL.
LUKE ix.23. And he said unto them all, If any Man will come after me, let him
deny himself.


WHOEVER reads the Gospel with a single Eye, and sincere Intention, will find,
that our Blessed Lord took all Opportunities of reminding his Disciples that
his Kingdom was not of this World; that his Doctrine was a Doctrine of the
Cross; and that their professing themselves to be his Followers, would call
them to a constant State of voluntary or Self-suffering and Self-denial.

THE Words of the Text afford us one Instance, among many, of our Savior's
Behavior in this Matter; For having in the preceding Verses revealed himself
to Peter, and the other Apostles, to be The CHRIST of GOD; lest they should be
too much elated with such a peculiar Discovery of his Deity, or think that
their Relation to so great a Personage would be attended with nothing but Pomp
and Grandeur; He tells them, in the 22d Verse, That the Son of Man was to
suffer many Things in this World, though He was to be crowned with eternal
Glory and Honor in the next: And that if any of them, or their Posterity,
would share in the same Honor, they must bear a Part with him in his
Self-denial and Sufferings. For He said unto them all, If any Man will come
after me, let him deny himself.

FROM which Words I shall consider these three Things; I. First, The Nature of
Self-denial recommended in the Text; and in how many Respects we must deny
ourselves, in order to come after JESUS CHRIST. II. Secondly, I shall endeavor
to prove the Universality and Reasonableness of this Duty of Self-denial. III.
Thirdly and lastly, I shall offer some Considerations, which may serve as so
many Motives to reconcile us to, and quicken us in the Practice of this
Doctrine of Self-denial.


I. AND First, then, I am to show the Nature of the Self-denial recommended in
the Text; or in how many Respects we must deny ourselves, in Order to follow
JESUS CHRIST.

NOW as the Faculties of the Soul are distinguished by the Understanding, Will,
and Affections; so in all these must each of us deny himself. We must not lean
to our own Understanding, being wise in our own Eyes, and prudent in our own
Sight; but we must submit our short-sighted Reason to the Light of Divine
Revelation: For there are Mysteries in Religion, which are above, though not
contrary to, our natural Reason: and therefore we shall never become Christians
unless we cast down Imaginations, and every high Thing that exalts itself
against the Knowledge of GOD, and bring into Captivity every Thought to the
Obedience of CHRIST. It is in this Respect, as well as others, that we must
become Fools for CHRIST's Sake, and acknowledge we know nothing without
Revelation, as we ought to know. We must then, with all Humility and Reverence,
embrace the mysterious Truths revealed to us in the Holy Scriptures, for thus
only can we become truly Wise, even Wise unto Salvation. It was Matter of our
Blessed Lord's Thanksgiving to his heavenly Father, that he had hid these
Things from the Wise and Prudent, and had revealed them unto Babes. And in this
Respect also we must be converted and become as little Children, teachable, and
willing to follow the Lamb into whatsoever Mysteries he shall be pleased to
lead us; and believe and practice all divine Truths, not because we can
demonstrate them, but because GOD, who cannot lie, has revealed them to us.

HENCE then we may trace Infidelity to its Fountain Head: For it is nothing
else but a Pride of the Understanding, an Unwillingness to submit to the Truth
of GOD, that makes so many, professing themselves Wise, to become such Fools as
to deny the Lord who has so dearly bought them; and dispute the Divinity of
that Eternal Word, in whom they live, and move, and have their Being: Whereby,
it is justly to be feared, they will bring upon themselves sure, if not swift,
Destruction.

BUT to return: As we must deny ourselves in our Understandings, so must we
deny, or, as it might be more properly rendered, renounce our Wills; that is,
we must make our own Wills no Principle of Action, but whether we eat or drink,
or whatsoever we do, we must do all, not merely to please ourselves, but to the
Glory of GOD. Not that we are therefore to imagine we are to have no Pleasure
in any Thing we do, (Wisdom's Ways are Ways of Pleasantness) but pleasing
ourselves must not be the principal, but only the subordinate End of our
Actions.

AND I cannot but particularly press this Doctrine upon you, because it is the
grand Secret of our Holy Religion. It is this, my Brethren, that distinguishes
the True Christian from the mere Moralist and formal Professor; and which alone
can render any of our Actions acceptable in GOD's Sight; For if thine Eye be
single, says our Blessed Lord, Matthew. (...) that is, If thou aimest simply to
please GOD (...) any Regard to thy own Will, thy whole (...) that is, all thy
Actions, will be full of Light; agreeable to the Gospel, which is called Light:
But if thine Eye be evil, if thine Intention be diverted any other Way, thy
whole Body, all thy Actions, will be full of Darkness, unprofitable, and
capable of no Reward. For we must not only do the Will of GOD, but do it
because it is his Will; since we pray that GOD's Will may be done on Earth as
it is in Heaven. And, no doubt, the blessed Angels not only do every Thing that
GOD wills, but do it cheerfully, out of this Principle, because GOD wills
it: And if we should live as we pray, we must go and do likewise.

BUT farther; as we must renounce our own Wills in doing, so likewise must we
renounce them in suffering the Will of GOD. Whatsoever befalls us, we must say
with good old Eli, It is the LORD, let him do what seems him good; or with
one that was infinitely greater than Eli, Father, not my Will, but thine be
done. O JESU, thine was an innocent Will, yet Thou renouncedst it: Teach us,
even us also, O our Savior! to submit our Wills to thine, in all the Evils
which shall be brought upon us; and in every Thing enable us to give Thanks,
since it is thy blessed Will concerning us!

THIRDLY, and lastly, we must deny ourselves, as in our Understandings and
Wills, so likewise in our Affections. More particularly, we must deny ourselves
the (...) Indulgence and Self-enjoyment of Riches: If any Man will come after
me, says our blessed Lord, he must forsake all and follow me. And again (to
show the utter Inconsistency of the Love of the Things of this World with the
Love of the Father) he tells us, that unless a Man forsake all that he has, he
cannot be my Disciple.

FAR be it from me to think that these Texts are to be taken in a literal
Sense, as though they obliged rich Persons to go sell all that they have, and
give to the Poor, (for that would put it out of their Power to be serviceable
to the Poor for the future) but, however, they certainly imply thus much, that
we are to sit loose to, sell, and forsake all in Affection, and be willing to
part with every Thing, when GOD shall require it at our Hands: That is, as the
Apostle observes, we must use the World, as though we used it not; and though
we are in the World, we must not be of it. We must look upon ourselves as
Stewards, and not Proprietors of the manifold Gifts of GOD; provide first what
is necessary for ourselves and our Households, and expend the rest, not in
Indulgences and superfluous Ornaments, forbidden by the Apostle, but in
clothing, feeding, and relieving the naked, hungry, distressed Disciples of
JESUS CHRIST. This is what our Blessed Lord would have us understand by
forsaking all, and in this Sense must each of us deny himself.

I AM sensible that this will seem an hard Saying to many, who will be offended
because they are covetous, and Lovers of Pleasure more than Lovers of God: But
if I yet pleased such Men, I should not be the Servant of Christ. No, we must
not, like Ahab's false Prophets, have a lying Spirit in our Mouths, nor fail to
declare (with St. Paul) the whole Will of GOD; and, like honest Micaiah, out of
Pity and Compassion, tell Men the Truth, though they may falsely think we
prophecy not Good, but Evil concerning them.

BUT to proceed: As we must renounce our Affection for Riches, so likewise our
Affections for our Relations, when they stand in Opposition to our Love of and
Duty to, GOD: For thus says the Savior of the World: If any Man will come
after me, and hates not his father and Mother, his Children and Brethren and
Sisters, yea, and his own Life also, he cannot be my Disciple. -- Strange
Doctrine this! What, hate our own Flesh? What, hate the Father that begat us,
the Mother that bare us! How can these Things be? Can GOD contradict himself?
Has he not bid us Honor our Father and Mother? And yet we are here commanded
to hate them. How must these Truths be reconciled? Why, by interpreting the
Word hate, not in a rigorous and absolute Sense, but comparatively: not as
implying a total Alienation, but a less Degree of Affection. For thus our
Blessed Savior himself, (the best and surest Expositor of his own Meaning)
explains (...) a parallel Text, Matthew. x.37. He that loves Father or Mother
more than me, is not worthy of me* He that loves Son or Daughter more than me,
is not worthy of me. So that when the Persuasions of such our Friends (as for
our Trial they may be permitted to be) are contrary to the Will of GOD, we must
say with Levi, we have not known them; or, agreeable to our Blessed Lord's
Rebuke to Peter, Get you behind me, my Adversaries; for you savor not the
Things that be of GOD, but the Things that be of Men.

To conclude this Head: We must deny ourselves in Things indifferent; For it
might easily be shown, that as many, if not more, perish by an immoderate Use
of Things in themselves indifferent, as by any gross Sin whatever. A prudent
Christian therefore will consider not only what is lawful, but what is
expedient also; not so much what Degrees of Self-denial best suit his
Inclinations here, as what will most effectually break his Will, and fit him
for greater Degrees of Glory hereafter.

BUT, is this the Doctrine of Christianity? And is not the Christian World then
asleep? If not, whence the Self-Indulgence? Whence the reigning Love of Riches
which we every where meet with? Above all, whence that predominant Greediness
of sensual Pleasure, that has so overrun this sinful Nation? that was a pious
Stranger to come among us, he would be tempted to think some Heathen Venus was
worshipped here, and that Temples were dedicated to her Service. But we have
the Authority of an inspired Apostle to affirm that they who live in such a
Round of Pleasure are dead while they live: Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost says,
Awake thou that sleep, and CHRIST shall give thee Light. But the Power of
raising the spiritually Dead belongs only unto GOD. Do Thou therefore, O Holy
JESUS, who by thy almighty Word command Lazarus to come forth, though he had
lain in the Grave so many Days, speak also as effectually to these spiritually
dead Souls, whom Satan for these many Years has so fast bound by sensual
Pleasures, that they are not so much as able to lift up their Eyes or Hearts to
Heaven.

II. BUT I pass on to the Second general Thing proposed; viz. To consider the
universal Obligation, and Reasonableness of this Doctrine of Self-denial.

WHEN our Blessed Master had been discoursing publicly concerning the
Watchfulness of the faithful and wise Steward, his Disciples asked him,
Speak thou this Parable to all, or only to us? The same Question, I am
aware, has been, and will be, put concerning the foregoing Doctrine: For too
many, unwilling to take CHRIST's easy Yoke upon them, in order to evade the
Force of the Gospel Precepts, would pretend, that all those Commands concerning
Self-denial, renouncing ourselves and the World, belonged only to our LORD's
first and immediate Followers, and not to us or to our Children. But such
Persons greatly err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of Godliness in
their Hearts. For the Doctrine of JESUS CHRIST, like his Blessed Self, is the
same Yesterday, Today, and for ever. What he said unto one, he said unto all,
even unto the Ends of the World; If any Man will come after me, let him deny
himself: And in the Text it is particularly mentioned that He said unto them
all. And lest we should still absurdly imagine, that this Word all was to be
confined to his Apostles, with whom he was then discoursing, it is said in
another Place, that JESUS turned unto the Multitude and said, If any Man will
come after me, and hates not his Father and Mother, yea, and his own Life
also, he cannot be my Disciple. When our Blessed LORD had spoken a certain
Parable, it is said, the Scribes and Pharisees were offended, for they knew the
Parable was spoken against them: And if Christians can now read these plain and
positive Texts of Scripture, and at the same Time not think they are spoken of
them, they are more hardened than Jews, and more insincere than Pharisees. Law
's Christian Perfection.


IN the Former Part of this Discourse, I observed, that the Precepts concerning
forsaking and selling all did not oblige us in a literal Sense, because, the
State of the Church does not demand it of us, as it did of the Primitive
Christians; but still the same Deadness to the World, the same abstemious Use
of, and Readiness to part with our Goods for CHRIST's Sake, is as absolutely
necessary for, and as obligatory on us, as it was on them. For though the
Church may differ as to the outward State of it, in different Ages, yet, as to
the Purity of the inward State, it was, is, and always will be, invariably the
same. And all the Commands, which we meet with in the Epistles, about
mortifying our Members which are upon the Earth, of setting our Affections on
Things above, and of not being conformed to this World; are but so many
incontestable Proofs that the same Holiness, Heavenly-mindedness, and Deadness
to the World, is as necessary for us as for our LORD's immediate Followers.

BUT farther, as such an Objection argues an Ignorance of the Scriptures, so it
is a manifest Proof that such as make it are Strangers to the Power of
Godliness in their Hearts. For since the Sum and Substance of Religion consists
in our Recovery from our fallen Estate in Adam, by a New Birth in CHRIST JESUS,
there is an absolute Necessity for us to embrace and practice the Self-denial
before recommended. Because, we have not only a new House to build, but an old
one first to pull down; we must, necessarily, therefore be dead to the World,
before we can live unto GOD. In short, all Things belonging to the Old Man must
die in us, before the Things belonging to the Spirit can live and grow in us.

WHEN JESUS CHRIST was about to make his public Appearance, and to preach the
Glad Tidings of Salvation to a benighted World, his Harbinger, John Baptist,
was sent to prepare his Way before him. In like Manner, when this same JESUS is
about to take Possession of a Converted Sinner's Heart, Self-denial, like John
the Baptist, must prepare the Way before him: For we must mourn before we are
capable of being comforted; we must undergo the Spirit of Bondage, in order to
be made meet to receive, the Spirit of Adoption.

WERE we, indeed, in a State of Innocence, and had we, like Adam before his
Fall, the Divine Image fully stamped upon our Souls, we then should have no
Need of Self-denial; but since we are fallen, sickly, disordered Creatures, and
this Self-suffering, this Self-renunciation is the indispensable Means of
recovering our Primitive Glory; methinks, in that Case, to endeavor to shake
off and reject such a salutary Practice, on Account of the Difficulty attending
it at first, is but too like Obstinacy of a perverse sick Child, who nauseates
and refuses the Potion reached out to it by a skilful Physician or tender
Parent, because it is a little ungrateful to the Taste.

HAD any of us seen Lazarus, when he lay full of Sores, at the Rich Man's Gate;
or Job, when he was smitten with Ulcers, from the Crown of his Head to the Sole
of his Foot: And had we at the same Time prescribed to them some healing
Medicines, which, because they would put them to Pain, they would not apply to
their Wounds, should we not most justly think, that they were either fond of a
distempered Body, or were not sensible of their Distempers? But our Souls, by
Nature, are in an infinitely more deplorable Condition than the Bodies of Job
or Lazarus, when full of Ulcers and Boils: For, alas! our whole Head is sick,
and our whole Heart is faint; from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the
Foot, we are full of Wounds and Bruises and putrefying Sores, and there is no
Health in us. And JESUS CHRIST, like a good Physician, in the Gospel Doctrine
of Self-denial, presents us with a spiritual Medicine to heal our Sickness; but
if we will neither receive nor apply it, it is a Sign we are not sensible of the
Wretchedness of our State, or else that we are unwilling to be made whole.

EVEN Naaman's Servants could say, when he refused, pursuant to Elijah's
Orders, to wash in the River Jordan, that he might cure his Leprosy, Father, if
the Prophet had bid thee do some great Thing, would thou not have done it?
How much rather then, when he says unto thee, Wash and be clean? And may not
I, very properly, address myself to you in the same Manner, my Brethren: If
JESUS CHRIST, our Great Prophet, had bid you do some great and very difficult
Thing, would you not have done it? much more then should you do it, when he
only bids you deny yourselves, what would certainly hurt you, if enjoyed; and
behold, you shall be made perfectly whole.

BUT to illustrate this by another Comparison; In the 12th Chapter of the Acts,
we read that Saint Peter was kept in Prison, and was sleeping between two
Soldiers, bound with Chains: And behold an Angel of the Lord came upon him, and
smote Peter on the Side, saying, Arise up quickly: and his Chains fell off from
his Hands. But had this great Apostle, instead of rising up quickly, and doing
as the blessed Angel commanded him, hugged his Chains, and begged that they
might not be let fall from his Hands, would not any one think that he was in
Love with Slavery, and deserved to be executed next Morning? And does not the
Person who refuses to deny himself, act as inconsistently as this Apostle would
have done, if he had neglected the Means of his Deliverance? For our Souls, by
Nature, are in a spiritual Dungeon, sleeping and fast bound between the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil, not with Two, but Ten Thousand Chains of Lusts and
Corruptions. Now JESUS CHRIST, like St. Peter's good Angel, by his Gospel comes
and opens the Prison Door, prescribes Self-denial, Mortification, and
Renunciation of ourselves and the World, as so many spiritual Keys which will
unlock our Shackles, make them fall off from our Hearts, and so restore us to
the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of GOD. But if we will not arise quickly, gird
up the Loins of our Mind, and deny ourselves, as he has commanded; Are we not
in love with Bondage, and deserve never to be delivered from it?

INDEED, I will not affirm that this Doctrine of Self-denial appears in this
just Light to every one. No, I am sensible that to the Natural Man, it is
Foolishness; and to the Young Convert, an hard Saying. But what says our
Savior? If any Man will do my Will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it
be of GOD, or whether I speak of myself. This, my dear Friends, is the best,
the only Way of Conviction: Let us up and be doing: Let us arise quickly and
deny ourselves, and the Lord JESUS will remove those Scales from the Eyes of
our Mind, which now like so many Veils, hinder us from seeing clearly the
Reasonableness, Necessity, and inexpressible Advantage of the Doctrine that has
been now delivered. Let us but once thus show ourselves Men, and then the
Spirit of GOD will move on the Face of our Souls, as he did once upon the Face
of the great Deep; and cause them to emerge out of that confused Chaos, in
which they are most certainly now involved, if we are Strangers and Enemies to
Self-denial and the Cross of CHRIST.

BUT notwithstanding this Doctrine of Self-denial is, when rightly understood,
so reasonable and beneficial; yet many, it is to be feared, like the young Man
in the Gospel, are ready to go away sorrowful.

III. PROCEED we, therefore, now to the Third and last general Thing proposed;
viz. To offer some Considerations which may serve as so many Motives to
reconcile us to, and quicken us in the Practice of this Duty of Self-denial.

I. AND the first Means I shall recommend to you, in order to reconcile you to
this Doctrine, is, to meditate frequently on the Life of our Blessed Lord and
Master JESUS CHRIST. Oh! may we often think on Him, our Grand Exemplar! follow
him from his Cradle to his Cross, and see what a self-denying Life He lead! And
shall not we drink of the Cup that He drank of, and be baptized with the
Baptism that He was baptized with? Or think we, that JESUS CHRIST did and
suffered every Thing in Order to have us excused, and exempted from Sufferings?
No, far be it from any sincere Christian to judge after this Manner! For St.
Peter tells us, He suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we should
follow his Steps. Had CHRIST, indeed, like those that sat in Moses's Chair,
laid heavy Burdens of Self-denial upon us (supposing they were heavy, which
they are not) and refused to touch them himself with one of his Fingers* we
might have had some Pretense to complain; but since He has enjoined us nothing,
but what he has first put in Practice himself, Thou art inexcusable, O
Disciple, whoever thou art, who would be above thy persecuted self-denying
Master: And thou art no good and faithful Servant, who art unwilling to suffer
and sympathize with thy mortified, heavenly-minded LQRD.

2. NEXT to the Pattern of our Blessed Master, think often on the Lives of the
glorious Company of the Apostles, the goodly Fellowship of the Prophets, and
the noble Army of Martyrs; who, by a constant looking to the Author and
Finisher of our Faith, have fought the good Fight, and are gone before us to
inherit the Promises. View, again and again, how holily, how self-denyingly,
how unblameably they lived: And if Self-denial was necessary for them, why not
for us also? Are we not Men of like Passions with them? Do we not live in the
same wicked World as they did? Have we not the same Good Spirit to assist,
support, and purify us, as they had? And is not the same Eternal Inheritance
reached out, as a Reward of our Self-denial and Renunciation of the World, as
was offered to them? And if we have the same Nature to change* the same wicked
World to withstand, the same Good Spirit to help, and the same Eternal Crown to
reward our Obedience; why should we not lead the same Lives as they did? Do we
think They did Works of Supererogation? If not, why don't we do as they did? Or
why does the Church set apart Festivals to commemorate the Deaths and
Sufferings of the Saints, but in order to excite us to follow them as they did
CHRIST.

3. THIRDLY, Think often on the Pains of Hell: Consider whether it is not
better to cut off a Right Hand or Foot, and pluck out a Right Eye, if they
offend us (or cause us to sin) rather than to be cast into Hell, into the Fire
that never shall be quenched; where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not
quenched. Think how many Thousands there are now reserved, with damned Spirits,
in Chains of Darkness unto the Judgment of the Great Day, for not complying
with the Precept in the Text. And think withal that This, this must be our own
Case shortly, unless we are wise in Time, and submit to those easy Conditions
our Savior has prescribed us, in Order to avoid it. Think you they now imagine
JESUS CHRIST to be an hard Master; or rather think you not they would give Ten
thousand times ten thousand Worlds, could they but return to Life again, and
take CHRIST's easy Yoke upon them? And can we dwell with everlasting Burnings
more than they? No; if we cannot bear this Precept, Come, deny yourselves, take
up your Crosses, How shall we bear that irrevocable Sentence, Depart from me,
ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels? But I
hope those, amongst whom I am now preaching the Kingdom of GOD, are not so
disingenuous as to need to be driven to their Duty by the Terrors of the LORD,
but rather desire to be drawn by the Cords of Love.

LASTLY, therefore, and to conclude, -- Often meditate on the Joys of Heaven:
Think, think, with what unspeakable Glory those happy Souls are now incircled,
who, when on Earth, were called to deny themselves as well as we, and were not
disobedient to that Call: Lift up your Hearts frequently toward the Mansions of
eternal Bliss, and with an Eye of Faith, like the great Saint Stephen, see the
Heavens opened, and the Son of Man with his glorious Retinue of departed
Saints, sitting and solacing themselves in eternal Joys, and with unspeakable
Comfort looking back on their past Sufferings and Self-denials, as so many
glorious Means which exalted them to such a Crown. Hark! methinks I hear them
chanting forth their everlasting Halelujahs, and spending an eternal Day in
ecchoing forth triumphant Songs of Joy. And do you not long, my Brethren, to
join this heavenly Choir? Do not your Hearts burn within you? As the Heart
pants after the Water Brooks, do not our Souls so long after the blessed
Company of these Sons of GOD? Behold then a heavenly Ladder reached down to
you, by which you may climb to this Holy Hill. If any Man will come after them,
let him deny himself and follow them. It was this, my Brethren, exalted the
Holy JESUS Himself, as Man, to sit at the Right Hand of his adorable Father. By
this alone every Saint that ever lived, ascended into the Joy of their LORD:
And by this we, even we also, may be lifted up into the same most blissful
Regions, there to enjoy an eternal Rest with the People of GOD, and join with
them in singing Doxologies and Songs of Praise, to the Everlasting, Blessed,
All-glorious, most Adorable Trinity, for ever and ever.

Which GOD of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
BOOKS neatly Bound, Gilt on the Back and Lettered, with all Sorts or plain
Binding, by Charles Harrison, over against the Brazen Head in Cornhill; where
may be had the following Sermons of the Rev. Mr. WHITEFIELD, viz.

1. A Sermon on Regeneration, the Second Edition in Boston. 2. The Almost
Christian. 3. Family Religion. 4. Intercession, every Christian's Duty. 5. Self
Denial.
N.B. There will be several others of the same Author's Works published in a
short Time, and sold at the same Place.


