Mr. Phillips's SERMON ON The Children's HOSANNAHS.

CHILDREN well employed, and, JESUS much delighted: OR, The Hosannahs OF Zion's
CHILDREN, Highly PLEASING TO Zion's KING: A plain Discourse lately preached to
the CHILDREN of the South-Parish in Andover: And now dedicated to their Use: By
SAMUEL PHILLIPS, M. A. And V. D. M. Published at the Desire of many of his
Hearers, both Parents and Children.

Matt. xix.14. JESUS said, suffer LITTLE CHILDREN, and forbid them not, to come
unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

And therefore,

Psalm. cxlix.2. Let the CHILDREN of Zion be joyful in their KING.

BOSTON: Printed by S. Kneeland, and T. Green, for D. Henchman, in Cornhill.
1739.

TO The CHILDREN belonging to my Congregation.
MY DEAR CHILDREN.
I Do here, as I proposed in my last --, present to your View, a plain
Discourse compose^ for you, and, not long since, preached to you: -- The true
Design and Scope of which, is, to quicken, and encourage you, (more especially)
now, in your tender Yars, to adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior, in all the
Instances of a well ordered Conversation, and to assist you in so doing: And,
in a more peculiar Manner, in those religious Exercises of PRAYER and PRAISE;
the devout and frequent Practice of which, will be your own greatest H^nour and
Ornament --.

I am very sensible, that the Word in the Original (...).
, which is translated Children, in my T^xt, does not always, and only intend
Children in Years: For, we are h^reby to understand, not only little Children,
but sometimes, either Sons, -- Daughters, -- Servants, or Maidens; and
sometimes, even all the Domestics, excepting the Master and Mistress of the
Family Vid. Leigh's Crit. Sac.
: But then I shall further say, that, even, from hence it follows, that little
Children are not exempted; nay, but the Word bids as fair for them, as for
those who are something more advanced in Age: Yea, and without Doubt, there
were some such, who joined with the Multitude, in this Acclamation, v^z.
Hosanna to the Son of David: "And t^uly, the Praise was perfected by the sweet
Voices of these Lambs; yea, it had been Defective if these had been wanting
Psalm. 8.2
."

It will be very easy for you to observe, that I consider you, in this
Discourse, not as in your Childhood only; but also, as hastening on a pace, if
your Lives be spared, into the midst of numerous Temptations; and therefore
this little Book may be profitable to you, not only now, but also in your more
advanced Age At which Age, viz. in the Time of Youth, it may be also proper for
you, to peruse my Discourse from Prove. 1.10.


And, O! that I might be a happy Instrument, in the Hand of my great Lord and
Master, not only, of nourishing you up in the Words of Faith, and of good
Doctrine; but, moreover, of exciting you to the practical Part of our holy
Religion, even, to speak and live the Praises of our exalted Redeemer; and, in
all your Ways, to acknowledge God, as your Father in Heaven; and as the Guide,
first, of your Childhood, and afterward, of your Youth, and so on to old Age
and even through the Shades of Death, and, up to that high and holy Mount, where
there shall be no more Death, nor Sorrow nor Crying Rev. 21.4.
.

And whereas, there is Duty (with respect to you) in cumbent on your tender
Parents, as well as on your Minister; I have therefore, in Love to you, as well
as in faithfulness to them, offered, in the Close of this Discourse, a Word of
Exhortation to them, namely to do all they can to promote and further your
spiritual Weal; and in order hereunto, to lead you unto CHRIST, and to direct
and assist you in his Service --: Which Exhortation will, I doubt not, be well
accepted by them; and, as I humbly trust, will be a M^ans of Quickening to them.

And I am not without Hope, my Children, that the Consideration of the
distinguishing Goodness and Kindness of God your Savior, in sparing you from
Death, at a Time, when many Children and Youth, of this Town, as well as
others, have so suddenly and so awfully, been taken out of the World It is
said, that more than an Hundred d^'d the last Year, of the Throat Distemper, in
this Town.
, will prevail with you, in Love and Gratitude to him, and in Kindness to your
selves, to improve this, and even, all other Means vouchsafed you, in such a
Manner, as shall advance his Praise and Glory, and promote the Weal of your own
immortal Souls.

This, you know is the third Time, wherein I have directed my Speech to you, in
particular; -- The two former, chiefly for your Instruction, and this for your
Quickening, in the Things of God: -- Whereby, you may plainly see, how much I
bear you upon my Mind, and how desirous I am, that you may be accounted to the
Lord for a Generation: to wit, that you may be a Generation of his Praise, and
not a Generation of his Wrath: -- And O! I beseech you, let not the Words which
I have spoken, and which I have written to you, be produced against you, in the
Day of Judgment, to your Confusion and Condemnation: Hear me now therefore, O
ye Children, and depart not from the Words of my Mouth: -- I have no greater
Joy, than to hear that my Children walk in Truth --.

I shall only add, that the following Discourse, together with the two former,
being suitable to your Age, as also, consonant to the Oracles of the
ever-living God, I do, therefore, recommend them to your frequent and diligent
Perusal; and do solemnly exhort, yea, and charge you, to receive and regard the
same, not only, as coming from the Mouth of your Minister; but also, and
especially, as the Word of your Father in Heaven, to wit, of that God, who has
lately formed you, and has shown you great Favor, to whom you were betimes
devoted; in whom you live, and move, and have your Beings; unto whom you are
accountable; and wh^ alone is able to make these, and all other Means, to be of
saving Benefit and Advantage to you --.

To his Favor and Blessing I unfeignedly commend you all; expecting* that both
you, and your pious Parents, will be mindful of me, in your Addresses, from Day
to Day, to the Throne of Grace --: And assuring you, that it is my Heart's
Desire, that you may be the Care and Charge of a kind Providence, and the happy
Subjects of a special, saving, Grace; and that when you have served God, and
your Generation according to his Will, you may, then, be admitted into his
Presence Chamber, where there is Fullness of Joy, and Pleasures evermore: -- As
also, that the true Protestant Faith may be transmitted, and that real and
vital Piety, may prevail, from Generation to Generation, in this Place, to the
second Coming of our Lord and Savior, JESUS CHRIST.

Which is, and shall be the Prayer of your affectionate Pastor, and cordial
Friend, S. Phillips.
Andover. March 30th 1739.
THE Children's Hosannahs Highly Pleasing TO OUR GREAT SAVIOR.
MATTHEW XXI.15, 16 -- And the Children crying in the Temple, and saying,
Hosanna to the Son of David; they were sore displeased: -- And Jesus says unto
them, yea; have ye never read, out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings thou
have perfected Praise.


SUCH is the unparellel'd Love of CHRIST to Souls, that he has shown his kind
Regards, not only, to the elder; but also, to the younger Sort: Yea, and not
only to those, whom we commonly call young Men and Maidens, but also, to such
as are in their Childhood.

And accordingly, he has charged his Ministers, to allow of their coming to
him: Yea, he has strictly commanded them to feed his Lambs, as well as his Sheep

Now, the Lambs of Christ are of several Ages; and the least or youngest of
them may not be neglected; but they must be f^d, as soon as ever they become
capable of receiving Instruction. -- Ministers are obliged to feed them with
Milk, the sincere Milk of God's Word, as well as the stronger Christians with
Meat.

Yea, and our LORD JESUS CHRIST expects, that if his Ministers have an
unfeigned Love to him, that then, they will do it voluntarily; and that their
Love to him will even constrain them to it: as you may see in John 21 15. which
Pass^ge of Scripture, I purpose to take further Notice of, by and by.

I have, as you well know, off^r'd, at one Time and another, several Discourses
to the young People of this Place, and at the same Times, have spoken to the
Children among us, that i^, being considered as young Persons.

But I purpose now, to speak more directly, and exor^sly to them; and
theref^re, shall endeavor to suit my Discourse to their Capacity; and to give
such Advice as is proper for their Age

Not, that I intend to confine my Speech wholly to them; for the young People*
as they are called; yea, and Persons advanced in Years, may here find some
Words suitable for them also.

Wherefore,

I crave the Attention of you all, but, more especially of the CHILDREN of the
Congregation:

And,

O that I might be instrumental to lead you to the great Shepherd of the Flock,
the LORD JESUS CHRIST!

In this Chapter, we have an Account of CHRIST'S riding in Triumph into
Jerusalem.

The Beast which he rode upon, is said to be, an Ass, and a Colt the Fool of an
Ass. The Words do not intend, that he sat on both; sometimes on one, and then
on the other, as some have imagined: It plainly appears by the other
Evangelists, Mark 11. and Luke 19
that Christ rode on the Colt only. Matthew names two for one, by a Synecdoche;
or, after the familiar Use of the Hebrew Tongue, he rehearses one Thing twice
Calv.
; or, both are mentioned, because the Dam might probably follow after her Colt
Non utrique insedit, sed pullo vehebatur, sequente, illius matre. Live.
-- And this was done, that the Scripture might be fulfilled; see Zech 9 9. The
Beast which Christ improved, is called a Colt; and is said to be one, on which
never Man sat* Mark 11.2. But notwithstanding, he was fit for Man's Use, and,
without Doubt, the Owner-intended him for speedy Service; for we read, that the
Disciples found him tied: And it was no unusual Thing, for young Asses to be
called Colts, even, after they were used for Riding, as may be seen in Judge.
10.4 and 12.14. -- The Ass being sent for, and, by the Owner's Leave, bro'^,
for he was borrowed; the Disciples put on him some of their Garments, and then
they set Jesus thereon: Which plainly teaches us, to part with our very
Clothing for Christ's Sake, and that freely, when called thereunto; and when
we have an Opportunity to serve him, and advance his Glory, by our so doing.

As for Christ's Attendants, they were a very great Multitude: -- It is true
indeed, they were the meaner Sort of People, but yet they did him great Honor
by spreading their Garments in ^he Way, and by cutting down Branches from the
Trees, and s^r^wing them in the Way: This, as we are informed was a Thing usual
among the Jews at the Feast of Tabernacles, in Token of Liberty, Victory, and
Joy: The Children of Israel, at that Feast, carried their Boughs to make Booths
of, in Manner of Arbours, wherein to dwell for the Space of seven Days; to put
them in Mind, of their Forefathers dwelling in Tents and Tabernacles. (See
Levit. 23 39, to the End) Which Bundles they called their Hosanna: -- But then,
besides those which they prepared to make their Booths of, they also, it seems,
provided themselves with Palm Boughs, which they carried in their Hands, and as
they w^nt, cried Hosanna: And in All^si^n to this, the People, here, cut down
Branches from the Trees, and strewed them in the Way, when our Savior rode
into Jerusalem, and they cried Hosanna to the Son of David -- v 8*9.

Being come into Jerusalem, the whole City was moved: The Acclamations of the
Multitude put the People upon looking out of their Houses, and enquiring, Who
is this? v. 10 To which, the Multitude replied, This is Jesus, the Prophet of
Nazareth of Galilee. v. 11. Thus he was known, and called among them; and they
were free and forward to spread the Knowledge of him where they came, and to
speak what they knew concerning him. -- The Multitude had, just before,
declared him to be the Son of David, and proclaimed, that he came in the Name
of the Lord, and professed, by their Hosanna, that they wished well to him, and
to his Undertaking; and by their so doing, they plainly sh^w'd, that they
believed him to be the Messiah: And yet, which one would not have expected, the
People of the City enquire, Who he is: That is, Whence came he? How do you
describe him? Have we, or, can you help us to have, any Knowledge of this Man?
Pray, tell us what you know concerning him In Answer to which, some of the
Multitude describe him (1) By his Name, Jesus. (2) By his Office, the Prophet.
(3) By the Place, not of his Nativity, but of his Resilence at that Time, when
his Life was in Danger; of which we have an Account in Matt. 2.22, 23.

In the next Place it is to be observed, that Christ being entered into
Jerusalem, he went directly to the Temple: He, as the Head of the Church, w^nt
strait forward to the Temple of God, and purged it, by casting out all them
that sold, and bought, in the Temple etc. v. 12. And it is undeniable, that he
produced sufficient to warrant the doing of what he did; for, he said unto
them. It is written, my House shall be called the House of Prayer Isa. 56.^.
; but, ye have made it a Den of Thieves. v. 13.

And, it may not pass unobserved, that neither the Honor done him by the
Acclamations of the People, nor yet, the Work of purging the Temple, could
hinder our blessed Lord from showing Pity to the Blind and Lame; for they came
to him in the Temple, and he healed them. v 14 Thus, Christ embraced all
Opportunities for the doing of Good; and truly, he was wont to show himself
most gracious, even, to those, whom Men are most apt to despise -- And, as true
it is, that he has yet a tender Regard to all those, who, being sensible of
their spiritual Blindness and Lameness, do cry to him for Healing and Guidance:
Yea, and the House of God is a very suitable Place, for such to come into, and
here to wait on the Lord for saving Mercy. Prove 8.34, 35.

But, that which I shall take a more particular Notice of, is, the Account
which we have of the CHILDREN's crying in the Temple, Hosanna to the Son of
David -- What bro't those Children thither, is uncertain: We know it to be a
common Thing for Children, to resort to any Place, where they see a Concourse
of People, and where there is something new and strange to be seen or heard:
"And we would hope, that some of these Children, if not all of them, were
worshipping at the Temple," at the Time, when Christ came thither: -- But, let
what will be the particular Occasion of their being convened at that Time and
Place; yet, this is certain, that the governing Providence of God must be
observed in this Matter, viz. in inclining them, not only, to repair thither at
that Juncture, but also, to unite, in crying Hosanna to the Son of David; that
is, to the promised M^ssiah, whom all M^n acknowledg^d, should be the Son of
David, according to the Flesh

They cried Hosanna; which Word signifies, Save, and is a Petition for
Salvation: And may be looked upon, first, 'As a Prayer to the FATHER." to save
his Son, and prosper him in his Undertaking: Also, it carries in it Gratitude
and Thankfulness to him, for making such Provision for the Salvation of poor,
lost Man. -- And secondly, "It may be considered as a Prayer to the LORD JESUS
CHRIST," the Son of God himself, to become their Savior: As also, a Note and
Evidence of Joy and Praise, that he was pleased to condescend, to take upon him
the Office of a Savior --.

In a Word;

The Term H^sannah is an Expression both of PRAYER and PRAISE: A welcoming
Christ's Kingdom, and a wishing well unto it: And it very plainly refers to a
Part of the 118th Psalm: In which Psalm our Lord Jesus Christ is very clearly
pointed unto; for, we have his State of H^miliation and Exaltation both
prophesied of, in v. 22. Which is styled the marvelous Work of God in v. 23.
Then, in the next Verse, it is said, This is the Day, which the Lord has made,
we will rejoice and be glad in it: Which Words may point to the Time of the
Gospel Dispensation in general; but more particularly; either, to the Day
spoken of in our Text and Context, on which Christ rode in Triumph into
Jerusalem, which was but little before his Passion, and was without Doubt, a
Specimen of that Conquest, which he should obtain over his Enemies; and of that
Power and Glory, which he should be exalted unto: Or else, it may especially
point out to us, the Day of the Christian Sabbath, which is the Day of our
Savior's Resurrection from the Dead -- I say, though the Words may look forward
to all that I have now mentioned, yet, this latter, viz the Christian Sabbath,
i^, most probably, especially intended: For, when he arose from the Dead, then,
he actually triumphed over Death, Hell, and the Grave, and led Captivity
captive; of which, as was before observed, his Riding in Triumph into Jerusalem
was a Specimen. -- Then it follows in v. 25 Hosannah, as may be seen in the
Hebrew, which is rendered in our T^a^slation, Save: Save now, I beseech thee, O
Lord* O Lord, I beseech thee, send now Prosperity. As though they had said,
Although others despise thee; yet, Lord, we wish thee Prosperity; and
notwithstanding, others refuse to yield Subjection to thee; ye^, we profess
ourselves thy loyal Subjects, and faithful Servants. -- It is added in v. 26
Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord. Agreeable to which, is that
in the 9th ver. of our Context: As though they had said, Seeing thou ^^mest in
the Name of the Lord, and art sent by the Father, from Heaven, upon this great
and important Errand, and art ordained by him, to be our Lord and Savior; we
do, with all Thankfulness, accept of thee; and will with all Readiness submit
unto thee --.

So that, you see, our Text and Context plainly refer to some Verses in the
118th Psalm; and is, in Part, the ACCOMPLISHMENT of that glorious Prophecy --.

But to proceed;

The Chief Priests and Scribes taking Notice of the wonderful Things, which
Christ did; and of the Words, which were spoken by the Children, viz. Hosanna
to the Son of David; It is said, they were sor^ displeased. v. 15. -- But, how
did they discover their Resentment? Not by saulting him for the Cures, which he
wro't on the Blind, and Lame; No, for then, all the People would have cried out
Shame upon 'em: But, they blamed the Children, or rather Christ, for suffering
the Children, to do him as great Honor, as though he was a God; Or else, for
allowing them to meddle with that, which, as they supposed, those Children did
not understand; and therefore, as they imagined, took the Name of the Lord
their God in vain -- Hear thou what they say? That is, Do thou take Notice
of it or not? If not, they spend their Breath in vain: And if thou do hear
and observe, then, why are they allowed to go on? -- Whereunto, Jesus replied,
Have ye never read, out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings thou have perfected
Praise; Or, ordained Strength Psalm. 8.2.
: For, "it is to the Praise of God's Strength; yea, his Praise is perfected,
when he inclines and enables such weak Instruments to show forth his Praises."

Thus Christ answered the chief Priests and Scribes; and it was sufficient to
still those Enemies of his, who would gladly, if they dared, have avenged
themselves on him Same Verse.
: -- We don't read of any Reply, that they made to Christ: Whether is was,
because they were convicted in their own Consciences, that they were in the
wrong; or, whether, because they had not the Opportunity for it; is uncertain:
But this is certain, that Christ quickly left them, and went out of the City
into Bethany, and lodged there, which was about two Miles distant from
Jerusalem; for they had forfeited the Favor of his Presence.

It is very evident, from Christ's not commanding the Children to forbear; and
from his making such a Reply as he did, to the chief Priests and Scribes; that
he allowed of, yea, that he was pleased with, the Children's Hosannas. Christ
could easily have checked them: Yea, and truly they would not have proceeded,
had they so much as discerned, that it was in any Measure, disagreable to
Christ, that they should thus express themselves: But, Christ did not discover
any such Thing; No, but the Contrary* ev^n, that he allowed and approved of
wha^ they did.

So that, we may observe from hence, thi^ plain Truth, for our

DOCTRINE,
That our LORD JESUS CHRIST not only observes, but also, is well ple^sed, and
highly gratified, with the PRAYERS, and PRAISES of CHILDREN

The Term HOSANNA carries in it the Voice of PRAYER and PRAISE, as was before
noted.

And

That CHRIST observes all such, who are thus employed, is undeniable: Nothing
escapes his Notice: He has Eyes as a Flame of Fire: His Eyes run to and fro
through out the whole Earth* to show himself strong in the Behalf of them, whose
Heart is perfect toward him 2 Chr^n 16.9. He is God as well as Man; and none
can hi^e themselves in secret Places, that ^e should not see them. Him has the
Father ordained to be the Judge of the World; and in order to his passing a
just Sentence, and rendering to every one according to his Ways, it is very
necessary, that he observe what their Ways are, whether good or bad: And, not
only the Ways of ^lder People, but also, of Children, fall under his
Observation; for, these latter, as well as the former, must come into Judgment.
Rev. 20 12 And I saw the Dead, Small and Great, stand before God, and the Books
were opened: -- And the Dead were judged out of these Things, which were
written in the Books, according to their Works.

But then, Christ not only observes, but, is well pleased with the Voice of
Prayer and Praise

It is pleasing to him, when Persons, whether elder or younger, do, either in
the Way of Prayer, or of S^nging Psalms, Praise him, for the many Mercies
b^stowed by him, on themselves and others: And, in ^n especial Manner, when
they p^aise him for his great Love, in coming into the World, and giving
himself for poor Sinners; and for m^king known himself to them, and the Way to
Life through him; and for his striving with them by his Spirit, and waiting to be
gracious to them -- In a Word; It is pleasing to Christ to be praised, for what
he is in himself, and for what he has done and suffered, and is still doing for
fallen Man; and, even, for all that Good, which we have in Hand, and which we
have i^ Hope. -- And indeed, he very justly expects it, inasmuch as, he is both
the Purchaser and Disp^nser of all our Favors Of him, and through him, are all
Things, and therefore, to him, not excluding the Father and the Holy Ghost,
should be Glory for ever; Amen.

And, as it is pleasing to Christ, that People show forth his Praises; so also,
that they make their Requests to him, for themselves and others; and for the
Advancement of his Kingdom, and the Overthrow of Satan's, through the World: It
pleases him well, when Persons pray for spiritual Blessings with Fervency and
Importunity; and for Temporal, with an entire Submission to the sovereign Will
and Pleasure of God; and when they offer up their Requests to the Father, in
his Name; that is, by Faith in his Satisfaction and Intercession; which is not,
in the least, inconsistent with making their Prayers to Christ himself; for, we
must bear in Mind, that the Three Persons in the Godhead are but one God: If,
in our Worship, we should consider each Person as a separate God, then we
should worship, in a Manner, three Gods instead of One: So that, we must take
great Care, to adore One in Three, and Three in One, and to give equal Honor
to each Person. I cannot think upon One, but, by and by, I am compassed about
with the Brightness of Three; and I cannot distinguish Three, but I am suddenly
driven back unto One; said Nazianzen.


But then, let it be remarked, that Christ does not take Delight in the Prayers
and Praises of any, but of those, who so regard him, as to sit at his Feet, and
hear his Word; and that, with a Desire and Purpose, to know, and do, their
Duty, respecting God, their Neighbor, and themselves. -- This, I say, is very
pleasing to Christ, when Persons daily read and consult his holy Word, and
diligently attend to the same when preached, and lay it up in their Hearts, in
order to bring forth the Fruit of it in their Lives. --

And, in a Word;

Christ is pleased, when People worship him in public, according to his
Appointment; and, when they have their private Meetings, to worship the Lord,
and to edify one another; and, when they join in Family Devotions; each Family
apart offering up, daily, the Morning and Evening Sacrifice of Prayer and
Praise; and finally, when each Person makes Conscience of observing and
attending the Religion of the Closet, and takes Care to order his whole
Conversation aright; and especially when little Children do so.

And I may venture to say, that all such, Old and Young, as are sincere in
these their Services, will actually promote the Interest of Christ all they
can; exciting and encouraging those wh^m they converse with, to the Duties of
Prayer and Praise: Yea, and truly, they will seek to propagate the true
Religion among such, as are ignorant of it; or those, w^o are not able, of
themselves, to support the Charge of it. Endeavors, I say, will be joined with
sincere and humble Prayers, according to Persons Ability and Opportunity; and
This will be an Odor of a sweet Smell; a Sacrifice, acceptable, and well
pleasing to God, through Jesus Christ --.

But my Text leads me to speak of Children only, and therefore, for the further
clearing of the Doctrine, I shall endeavor to speak to two Things, briefly:
viz.

I. To show, that it is a Truth, that Christ (...) well pleased with the
Prayers and Praises of Children. And then, II. To give you the Reasons of the
Doctrine.
Here then,

I. I am to evince the Truth of the Doctrine; Or, to show, that Christ is
certainly well pleased, and highly gratified, with the Prayers and Praises of
Children. -- And truly,

This is very evident from our Text and Context; for, we find here, that
Christ, not only, tolerated the Children's crying in the Temple, Hosanna to the
Son of David; but moreover, he vindicated them, although the chief Priests and
Scribes would have had him rebuked 'em; which plainly argues, that what the
Children said, was pleasing to him, Hosanna to the Son of David, or the
Exercises of Prayer and Praise, well become the Mouths of Children* otherwise,
the Lord Jesus would, doubtless, have put a Stop to their Proceeding; but on
the other Hand, he encouraged them in it, and stopped the Mou^^^s of Gainsayers
--.

But, the Truth of the Doctrine will yet more clearly appear, by considering
these few Things following, viz

1. It is the express Commandment of Christ, that Persons seek first the
Kingdom of God and his Righteousness. Matt. 6 33. Seek first; that is, not only
first in Affection, and above all other Things; but also, first in Time, and
before all other Things. And in Eccles. 12.1^ it is written, Remember now thy
Creator in the Days of thy Youth. -- You may not imagine, that Persons are
hereby excused, from remembering the Lord in their Childhood; No verily; but,
the Words may be considered, as related, or connected, to those immediately
preceding, which are, Childhood and Youth are Vanity: So that, the Meaning is
this, do not, like many others, who spend their Childhood and Youth in Vanity;
but, in your early Days, remember your Creator, even, as soon as you are
capable, and have the Exercise of Reason. -- Children! here is a Remedy
prescribed to cure you of your Vanity, and that is, remember now thy Creator:
And it is the Commandment and Expectation of the great GOD, who has lately
formed and fashioned you, that you apply and improve this Remedy. Indeed, if
you can make it appear, that the Lord is not your Creator, then, you are
excused from remembering and obeying him; but otherwise, you are not.

2. I may argue further, for the Proof of the Doctrine, viz from the
Consideration, that Christ has ordered, that little Children be allowed to come
to him, and that they be not forbidden --.

This is plainly set forth before us, in Matt. 19.13, 14, 15. -- Those Persons,
who bro't these Children, showed their Love to, and Faith in, Christ, but the
Disciples rebuked them; probably, thinking it to be below their Master, to
regard Children; or else, that he had Work enough besides: But, for what Reason
soever they did it, yet Christ was displeased with them for it, and said,
Suffer little Children to come to me, and forbid them not, for of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven: Yea, and he actually laid his Hands on them, in token of his
blessing them: "And thus, our Lord asserted the Rights of the Lambs of his
Flock: To them belong the Privileges of visible Church Membership, as among the
Jews of old;" for, says our Savior, of such is the Kingdom of Heaven: They are
Members of the visible Church, being Children of believing Parents: Now, the
Promise is to such Parents, and to their Children. Acts 2.39. -- It is very
plain, that these Children, who were bro't to Christ, were small; even, so
little, as to be bro't in the Arms; probably, they were a Year or two old, or
less: And it is as plain, that they were very welcome to Christ. -- Which by
the Way, affords a very weighty Argument for Infant Baptism: -- But, not to
insist upon that at present, but to come to what I intend; I may argue thus,

If Christ welcomed little Children, when they were bro't to him by others;
doubtless, it is pleasing to him, when Children come to him themselves and do
actually and voluntarily join in the Exercises of Prayer and Praise, giving to
him the glory due to his Name, and waiting upon him for his Blessing: If the
Lord Jesus will accept of Children, when offered and dedicated by their
Parents; without Question, he will accept of them, when they present
themselves, an Offering unto the Lord Pious Parents devote their Children to
the Lord, desiring, that they may be his; but when the Children present
themselves, it is supposed that they are determined to be his. In the parental
Dedication, Children are merely passive, but in the Self-Dedication, they are
active; and we would hope, sincere too, in Obedience to that Command, which is
written in Prove. 23 26 MY SON, GIVE ME THINE HEART.

3. I might also mention, by Way of Argument, the Pleas, which Christ has been
pleased to put into the Mouths of Children. -- I shall just hint at one or two
of them.

Thus, they have their Baptism to plead with Christ, for his Acceptance of
them: This Ordinance is administered to the Infants of believing Parents; and is
done, as we conceive, by the Order and Appointment of our Lord and Savior: And
it both lays Persons under Engagements to be his Servants, and gives them
Ground to hope for, and expect, his Acceptance and Blessing, when they make it
their great Care to fulfill those Engagements.

Furthermore, they have a special Word of Promise put into their Mouths, to
plead with Christ. Such as that, in Prove. 8.17. They that seek me EARLY, shall
find me. And that, in Isa. 45.19. I said not unto the SEED of Jacob, seek ye me
in vain And many other that might be named. --

Now, I say, Christ having furnished Children with such Pleas, it argues, that
it is pleasing to him, when they improve them in the Ways of divine
Appointment; and particularly, in the Duty of Prayer --.

4. The Truth of the Doctrine is further evident, from the Consideration, that
Christ has commanded his Ministers to feed his Lambs:

This may be seen, in John 21.15. Which Words were directed, not to Peter only,
but, do also concern all those, who serve in the Work and Business of the
Ministry. -- And truly, not only Ministers, but also Parents, and even all who
have the Care of Children, are obliged to train them up in the Way they should
go; and to bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. -- Now,
doubtless, these Things argue, that Christ is pleased, when Children engage in
religious Exercises themselvos. -- The Lord Jesus Christ would have Children
instructed by his Ministers, and by their Parents, and others, who have them
under their Watch, for this very End, viz. that they may be led, actually, to
engage in his Service themselves. He would have them to know their Duty, in
order to do it: And the sooner they understand, delight in, and practice their
Duty, the more do they please and gratify the Lord Jesus.

5 It is agreeable to Scripture Prophecies and Promises, that Children should
bring Praise to the Name of God, by their Devotions.

See for this Purpose, that forecited Psalm. 8.2. Out of the Mouth of Babes and
Sucklings, have thou ordained Strength; or, perfected Praise, as in our
Context. And agreeable hereto, is that in Isa 44 3, 4, 5 I will pour my Spirit
upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thine Offspring, and they shall spring up
as among the Grass, as Willows by the Watercourse; One shall say, I am the
Lord's; and another shall call himself by the Name of Jacob; and another shall
subscribe with his Hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the Name of
Israel. -- Now I say, it is abundantly evident, from such like Promises and
Prophecies, that the Devotions of Children are pleasing to Christ He is greatly
delighted, when the holy Scriptures are fulfilled, especially, the promissory
Part, or, that which brings Glory to his Name, and, at the same Time, holds
forth Grace and Favor to the Children of Men.

6 It also appears from Christ's inclining and disp^sing some Children to
religious Exercises, that, he is pleased, when they are so engaged.

To illustrate this, consider briefly,

It is a very common Thing for Children to delight in Play; and it is very
natural for them to Sin, they even incline to it, as the Sparks to fly upwards:
From hence it follows, that they are naturally averse to the religious
Exercises of Prayer and Praise: They are corrupt, each one, for that which is
born of the Flesh is Flesh; and the carnal Mind is Enmity against God. -- So
then, we may conclude, that whenever Children do freely and voluntarily engage
in religious Exercises, that it is CHRIST, who, by the Operations of the Holy
Ghost, inclines them thereunto. -- Alas! How many Children are there, who are
well instructed, and yet, don't incline to seek and serve the Lord! May we not
then look upon it, as the Work of the Lord, when some are thus inclined; and
especially, if they continue in the Way of Well-doing? Doubtless, we may* and
we ought, to account it to be the Doing of the Lord.

Now I say, if it is Christ, who by his Spirit, inclines Children to religious
Exercises, then, without Question, he is pleased with their Devotions: For, he
would have all, old and young, to regard the Motions and Strivings of the Holy
Spirit. Hence it is said in 1 These. 5.19 Quench not the Spirit. And in Ephesians. 4
30 Grieve not the holy Spirit of God. And agreeable to this, we find, that it is
very offensive to God, when Persons are so stiff-necked, as to resist the Holy
Ghost. Acts. 7.15.

I shall only add,

7. and lastly. As the first ripe Fruits are, ordinarily, of greatest Account
among Men, even so, early Religion is most highly pleasing unto the blessed
Jesus.

We find that it was an Ordinance of old, Exodus 22 29 Thou shall not delay to
offer the first of thy ripe Fruits --: Which teaches us, that little Children
may not delay to offer unto God, the first Fruits of their Time and Strength,
for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased, yea, the Lord accepts them with a
sweet Savor. -- We read also in Genesis 4.4. That Abel brought of the Firstlings
of his Flock, and of the Fat thereof --: Which teaches us, that it is a good
Thing for Children to be well taught, and trained up betimes in religious
Services (as Abel was) that so, when they come to be capable of acting for
themselves, they may, of their own Accord (as Abel did) bring an Offering to
the Lord: Yea, "and he was curious in the Choice of his Offering, for he bro't
not the Lame, or the Lean, or the Refuse, but the Firstlings of the Flock, the
best he had, and the Fat thereof; that is, the best of those best." From whence
we learn, that he who is the First and best, should have the first and best of
our Time, Strength, and Service --: Well, but how did Abel succeed in his
Devotions? Truly very well; for it is added, that the Lord had Respect unto
Abel, and to his Offering. -- And indeed, it holds true to this very Day, viz
That all such who sincerely offer the first and best of what they have, and can
do, unto the Lord Jesus, they shall be accepted of him, which is the Thing
principally to be aimed at in all Acts of Religion: Yea, he has a special
Delight in all such little Ones, who truly fear and serve him: Not only is
there Joy in the Presence of the Angels of God over such, but the Lord of Glory
himself takes Pleasure in them, and his Delights are with these Sons and
Daughters of Men.

Yea, I may go on to say, th^se are they whom the King of Glory delights to put
Honor upon: And agreably, we find that such as were, of old Time, Serious and
Pious in their early Days, their Names are left upon Record, in the Oracles of
God, for this End, that so, they may be transmitted, with a fragrant Smell and
a sweet Savor, to the latest Posterity; for the King's Favor is toward such
wise Children. -- But then, this is not all, no, but furthermore, such as are
religious betimes commonly prove the most eminent Saints, yea, and moreover,
God oftentimes improves them in the most eminent and honorable Services, in
their Day and Generation: -- Thus, to mention a few Instances --; Joseph, a
well disposed Child, and a godly young Man, was, through Grace, even, in that Age
of Life, Strong, and overcame the wicked One: And did God disregard him? No
indeed, but he was greatly advanced, highly exalted; for, After the Word of the
Lord had tried him, the King sent and loosed him; even the Ruler of the People,
and let him go free: He made him Lord of his House, and Ruler of all his
Substance: To bind his Princes at his Pleasure, and teach his Senators Wisdom.
-- Also Job was well disposed, and well employed betimes, for he began very
early to do Good, (Job. 31.18.) and this Man proved an eminent Saint, yea. he
excelled all that lived in his Day; there is none like him, says God, in the
Earth: Well, and did not the Most-High confer still more Honor upon him? Yes
indeed, for, even, in his Youth, the Candle of God shined on his Head; yea, and
he had sweet Communion with God, for the Secret of the Lord was with him (Job.
29, 3, 4.) moreover, he abounded in Wealth, and was promoted to great Honor
and Power in his Country, and had Respect paid him by all sorts of People, in
token of the Sense they were under, of their Obligations to him, for the many
good Services which he did, from Day to Day. Chap. 29 -- Also David was
virtuous and pious, even, from his Childhood, and theref^^e* said, as in Psalm.
71.5. and 17. Thou art my Hope, O Lord God; Thou art my Trust from my Youth. O
God, thou have taught me from my Youth; and hitherto have I declared thy
wondrous Works. Neither was the Most High unmindful of him in the following
Scenes of his Life; nay, but he had very great Honor conferred upon him being
both a Prophet, and a King, in Israel; for, them that honor God, he will
honor; But, that which redounds most of all to the Honor of King David, is
this, that from him. as concerning the Flesh, Christ came; and therefore, our
Savior is styled, in our Text, the Son of David What greater Honor can be
done to David, than this, that the Son of God should be called the Son of
David? This will be to his everlasting Honor. -- And then, as to Obaliah; as
he feared the Lord from his Youth, so, he became very eminent in his Day; and
that in sundry Respects; viz. as a Saint, for he feared the Lord greatly 1 King
18 3. and 12. And he was highly advanced, for he was a great Man at Court, and
Steward of the King's Household. And finally, the good Service which he did in
the Cause of the true Religion rendered him very eminent; for, he improved his
Wealth and Power, for the Protection and Support of the Lord's Prophets, and
that with a View to their being S^rviceable hereafter, though now they were laid
aside -- And I shall further add, that as to Josi^h, we read, that while he was
yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his Father. 2 Chronicles. 34.3
And the Lord bestowed great Honor upon him, for he was not only King of
Israel, but also, very zealous for his God, yea, a None such for Sincerity and
Zeal in carrying on a Work of Reformation, for it is said, that there was none
like him. And as he had the Honor to live greatly desired so also, to die much
lamented. -- But why do I spend Time in multiplying Instances? -- Let One
suffice to be mentioned out of the New Testament, viz. Timothy; concerning whom
it is written, 2 Timothy 3 15. From a Child, (...), from a little Child, yea, from
an Infant, as the Word properly signifies. Vid. Leigh's Crit.
thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. And did our Savior overlook
his early Acquaintance with the Things of God? No, for he put so great Honor
upon him, as to employ him, as his Ambassador, to evangelize the Nations: Yea,
and he had the Honor to glorify God, by dying a Martyr, in the Cause of that
holy Religion, which he had preached and propagated.

And now upon the whole, when we consider, how acceptable to God, the Offerings
of well disposed Children be; and how he has been wont to honor such, from
Time to Time, in the Course of their Lives, who were early devoted to his Fear
and Service; does it not from hence plainly appear, that early Religion is most
highly pleasing, and infinitely delghtful, to him?

Behold, as we commonly set most by those Trees in the Orchard, which prove
fruitful betimes, and whose Fruit is pleasant both to the Eye and Taste; even
so, the great Lord of the Vineyard is most highly gratified with such Persons,
who, in their early Days, conform to the Dictates of Wisdom, and with whom are
betimes* found some good Things toward the Lord God of Israel --

A little to illustrate this Ma^ter, I shall make use of the most familiar and
easy Terms I can; Thus suppose that there be a few Children in the Parish;
(some being four, some six, some eight, others ten, and others twelve Years of
Age) who daily, and of their own Accord, read in the holy Bible, learn their
Catechism, and enquire into the Meaning of the same; also retire daily, both
Morning and Evening, for secret Devotion; and who, in their Conversation,
plainly discover an Abhorrence of every evil and false Way, an Awe of the
Almighty, and a Love to him, and to his Sabbaths, his Ordinances, and People;
and who behave dutifully toward their Parents and other Superiors, and
obligingly toward their Inferiors and Equals. -- What think you concerning
such Children as these? Will not our Lord Redeemer look upon them with a great
deal of Pleasure and Satisfaction? Yes verily, he has a peculiar Kindness for
them.

We read in the Gospel (Mark 10 17 and on) concerning a young Man, who had
preserved his Youth unblemished, and had an Inclination to know, what was
further incumbent on him, in order to his obtaining eternal Life: -- It is
said, that Jesus beholding him loved him; he looked upon him with a pleasant
Countenance; which plainly teaches us, that our great Savior dearly loves to
behold Children and Youth behave inoffensively, and to see and hear them
inquisitive how to live better, asking the Way to Heaven with their Faces
thitherw^rd. -- Go you therefore, and do likewise.

Children, if you have any Ingenuity in you, you will be very desirous to do
such Things, as are pleasing to your pious Parents: But, O! How much more
sollicitou^ should you be, to please and gratify him, who is both your and
their LORD and SAVIOR.

What you have heard, may suffice to show, that Christ is well pleased with the
Prayers and Praises of Children.

Wherefore I shall proceed to the Second Thing mentiond. viz.

II. To give you the Reasons, why Christ is pleased and gratified with the
Prayers and Praises of Children.

Which I shall little more than mention; namely, Because it is eminently for
the Honor of Christ, and for the Children's Good, that they be thus employed I
say,

It will redound to the Honor of Christ, when Children are found to be thus
inclined and disposed; for it will be readily acknowledged by People, to be the
Doing of the Lord, as was before hinted; and will appear wondrous in their
Eyes: It will cause Christ, and his Religion, to be taken the greater Notice of
by Men of Figure; and even, by all, who are more i^ Years: Yea, and it has a
great Tendency to put them to Shame, for their Neglect, and to excite them to
redeem Time; which if they are bro't to do, it will be much to the Honor of
Christ, as well as for their own Interest.

Furthermore, well disposed Children are most likely to continue in the Service
of God, and to abound in well-doing; which if they do, they will greatly honor
Christ, as also, lay up in Store for themselves against the Time to come. Now,
I say, Persons are most likely to abide in that Service, which they early
engage in. Agreably we read, in Prove. 22.6. ^^ain up a Child in the Way he
should go and when he is old, he will not depa^^ from it, And the Psalmist
speaks of such as are planted in God's House, that they shall still bring forth
Fruit in old Age. Psalm 92 13, 14. Still bring forth Fruit -- that is they shall
continue to do, as they have done -- Hence then, it follows, that God will be
greatly glorified by them, in that they will bear much (...) it; for, their
virtuous Actions and pious Ex^rcises will be frequently repeated: The sooner
Persons begin to do well, the more Days they have to spend in the Service of
God; and the more Days they have to spend, the more Duties are to be performed;
and the more Duties they perform, the more Glory will redound to the Name of
God. In a Word;

It is undeniable, that Sin is the abominable Thing which the Soul of God
hates: It is this by which his holy Law is violated, and his curious
Workmanship in his Creature, Man, abused: It is this, and this alone, which
reflects Dishonor to the Name of God: So then; for Persons to devote
themselves to the Service of Christ in their early Days, must needs be very
pleasing to him; because by this Means, instead of dishonouring him by their
Transgressions, they honor him by Acts of Obedience: Yea and they 'scape
Abundance of Guilt and Pollution, which others contract, and which they
themselves would have contracted, were they not thus devoted and employed.

And I may add;

That when we behold Children religiously disposed, we have a fair Prospect of
Religion's being transmitted and propagated to those, who are yet to be born;
and that they also, shall be to the Lord, for a Name and a Praise: Which
Prospect moves the People of God to bless and magnify his holy Name; as also,
ministers much Joy and Comfort unto them; for truly, this is their great
Desire, that such may survive them, who shall be counted to the Lord, for a
Generation; yea, that the Name of the Lord may have Glory from the Children of
Men, even unto all Generations.

These Things might easily be enlarged upon; but I hasten to the

IMPROVEMENT.
USE I. Of INFORMATION in three Inferences.
Infer. 1. What we have heard, plainly shows, that Ministers are in the Way of
their Duty when they endeavor the Instruction, and the Conversion of Children.

This may not be accounted a Work too low and mean for Ministers, seeing Christ
is pleased with the Prayers and Praises of Children. -- Neither may those who
keep School reckon it to be beside their proper Business, to instruct Children
in the Things of God -- Some of the greatest and best of Men that have lived,
have undertaken to instill good Principles into the Minds of Children, and so
to mould them for the Service of God, and of their Generation. Thus King David
called them together, as you may see, in Psalm. 34 11. Come ye Children, hearken
unto me: Then we have the good Lesson, which he taught them, as in the 12, 13,
and 14 Verses. -- And King Solomon informs us, that he took the same Method,
and that he was excited to it by his Father's Example. Prove. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. --
Also, we find the Apostle John taking Notice of little Children, and directing
his Speech to them, as well as to Fathers, and to young Men. 1 John 2.13. Yea,
we find, that our Lord Jesus Christ himself showed a particular Regard to
little Children, even, so as to lay his Hands on them, and bless them; and this
was as much as could be then expected, for, those Children were not capable of
receiving Instruction.

Infer. 2 If Christ is pleased with the Prayers and Praises of Children, we
hence learn, that he is displeased with such Children, as do neglect to pray to
him, and to praise his Name.

He observes, who are naughty Child^en, and had rather spend their Time in
Play, than to learn their Book, and seek his Face and Favor: He knows all such
Children, where they live, what their Names are, and all the Follies, which
they are chargeable with: There is nothing hid from his piercing Eye: The Lord
takes Notice even of all that they say and do in their Play: They are commonly
very full of Talk and Action, and yet, there is not a Word in their Tongue, but
the Lord knows it altogether: Parents are sometimes ignorant of what their
Children say and do, but the Lord is not so: Parents sometimes discover their
Approbation of a profane Speech, provided it be Witty: but, Christ is of purer
Eyes than to behold Iniquity, even, in Children, with the least Approbation.
Yea, and it is very offensive to him, not only, when Children run into Sins of
Commission, but also, when they omit their Duty; whether of Prayer and Praise
toward him, or of Obedience and Respect toward their Parents, Brethren and
Sisters, or any other --: And he will reckon with them for all their Sins, both
of Omission and Commission; and particularly, for their Forgetfulness of God
their Savior, unless they repent, and bring forth Fruit meet for Repentance.

And here, I might go on to say; that if the Lord be displeased with the
F^llies and Neglects of Children, then, doubtless, he is also with these of
elder People; namely, such who are in their Y^uth, middle Age, and old Age:
When these, or any of them, do take the Liberty to talk rudely and vainly; much
more, when they speak reflecting on God, or their Neighbor; then, is the Lord
displeased with them. Such of them, who are not righteous, sober, and pious in
their Conversation, do offend the Lord: Yea, if they live in Sins of Om^ssion
only, suppose Prayer, and the like; or, if they perform the same but seldom,
or, if after a careless Manner, and with a lukewarm Spirit; the Lord observes
it, and is angry with them. And if they have, as they imagine, been very
careful to do their Duty to God, yet, if they have been negligent of doing
their Duty toward their fellow Creatures, the Lord resents it as Rebellion
against him. -- Wherefore, it nearly concerns all such Persons, to repent and
reform.

Yea, and seeing the Lord is displeased with the Follies of Children, surely,
it concerns us all, who are past our Childhood, to bewail it that we have spent
that Age of Life so foolishly. We should reflect, I say, upon our Childhood,
and call to Mind, as far as we can, the Sins of our Childhood and Youth, as
well as of our riper Years, and repent thereof, and humble ourselves therefore,
before the Lord.

We may not account the Sins of Childhood to be little Sins, or not worth
taking Notice of; but, should consider, that God knows them, and will reckon
with us for them, if we refuse, or carelessly neglect, to call ourselves to
Account for the same: And, if we seriously reflect, we shall, doubtless, see
Reason, to humble and abhor ourselves for such Sins as these, viz. for
neglecting to seek after God in our Childhood; as also, for taking his holy
Name in vain; and for profaning his Day, by Play, or, by Idleness: And
moreover, for Misbehaviour toward our Parents, and Brethren, and Sisters, and
School-Fellows, in that Age of Life --: "Time does not wear out the Guilt of
Sin; and therefore, the Faults and Follies of our Childhood, ought to be Matter
of our Repentance and Humiliation still."

Inser. 3. If Christ be pleased with the Prayers and Praises of Children, hence
learn that it is very hazardous for any to be abusive toward Children; and
especially, toward such Children, who are piously disposed

If Children may not abuse one another, then, surely, it very ill becomes
those. that are more in Years, to be abusive toward them: Such Persons, as
behave thus, do discover a vile, sordid, Spirit; and are near a kin to Ishmael,
who is said to have mocked Isaac. Genesis 21 9, 10 And of whom it was prophesied,
that his Hand should be against every Man, and every Man's Hand against him:
Those who abuse Children, seem to be Enemies to the human Race, and can expect
no other, but that Persons of an ingenious Disposition will resent it, but much
more will God -- Children, as the Patriarch Jacob once said, are tender, and we
must lead them, as they are able to endure: They are both, the most Helpless,
and the most Harmless, among Mankind; on which Accounts, we ought to be tender
of 'em, and helpful toward 'em. Our Savior discovered a particular Regard to
little Children, as was before observed. And God has shown such a tender Care
of them, as to caution others against hurting them; and has even appointed his
Angels to watch over and guard them; hence it is said, that their Angels behold
the Face of God. Matt. 18.10. These holy Ones are ready to go at the least
Beck, to defend them: and truly, it is very wonderful how they are preserved.

I proceed to another Use, viz

USE II. Of EXHORTATION
In two Branches I. To Children. and II. To Parents.

I. To CHILDREN.
And my Exhortation is this, Seeing Christ is pleased with the Children's
Hosannas, be ye persuaded, to begin, and to continue in, his Service.

Some of you have already made a good Beginning; and we thank God, who has thus
disposed and inclined you: O, bewa^e, lest you grow weary of, and draw back
from, the Way of Well-doing It is very sinful, and very hazardous, for any to
do so; wherefore, do not hearken to any Temptations to Apostasy --.

And let the rest of you be exhorted, to begin to serve the Lord, without
further Delay: Make haste to engage in holy Duties, and particularly, those of
Prayer and Praise.

And here, I shall lay before all of you, my Children, a few Motives, and then
a few Directions, to quicken you to, and lead you in, the Way of your Duty.

1. I shall speak by Way of MOTIVE.

And that in the Text and Doctrine before us, is indeed a very weighty one,
namely, that Christ is pleased with the Devotions of Children: And all who know
how to value the Favor of Christ, will look upon this, as a sufficient
Encouragement: -- But, seeing there are many, who know not the Worth of this
Favor, I shall present you with some other Considerations, not omitting this
as I go along.

Mot 1 There have been many Examples of Persons, seeking after the Lord, and
behaving themselves discreetly, and piously, in their Childhood.

It is recorded of our blessed Lord Jesus himself, that, when he was twelve
Years old, he was in the Temple, hearing the Doctors, and asking them
Questions; and the Reason, which he gave for it, was, because he must be about
his Father's Business. Luke 2.42, 46, 49. And, by so doing, he has set Children
an Example, of repairing to the House of God for Instruction: Furthermore, we
find in the 51 st Verse of that Chapter, that he was subject to his Parents;
and so, has taught Children to be obedient to their Father and Mother. I say,
CHRIST has left you an Example, that you should follow his Steps. -- We also
read of Timothy, that from a Child he had known the holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy
3.15. And this, my Children, is written for your Instruction, and to quicken
you to learn your Book, and especially, to study the Scriptures, that you may
know your Duty, in order to do it. And, besides these, and some others, upon
Record, in the BIBLE, there has been an Account of several Children since, who
were remarkable for their Seriousness and Piety; as may be seen in a little
Book, entitled, A Token for Children, written by Mr. James Janeway -- Yea,
there have been sundry Examples of Children in this Country, in whom the Fear
of God remarkably appeared; some of which are published in the latter Part of
Mr. Janeway's Token, just now mentioned.

Now I say, you ought to follow the Example of such Children; otherwise you
will not suitably improve the History, which divine Providence has put into your
Hands, concerning them.

Mot. 2 Consider farther, that it is altogether just and reasonable, that you
betimes engage in the Service of God. For,

(1.) It is the Commandment of God unto you, to seek first, and before all
other Things, the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, Mat. 6.33. And his
Commandments are all holy, just, and good. --

(2.) The Lord deserves your Love and Esteem, your Service and Obedience, more
than any other: Has he not made, and preserved you? And has not Christ laid
down his Life to redeem you from Destruction? And does he not offer actually to
save you from your Sins, and from the Wrath to come, and to give you an
Inheritance among them that are sanctified? Yes, verily: Then, doubtless, the
Lord deserves your Love and Service. Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to
receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and
Bl^ssing, Rev. 5.12. And not only worthy that Strength should be ascribed to
him; but also, that the first, and even the whole of your strength should be
devoted to him, and improved for him: And you will be, not only ungrateful,
but very unjust, and rebellious also, if you refuse or delay to be obedient --
And you may be further convinced of the Reasonableness of what I exhort you
unto, if you consider,

(3.) That you are already devoted to the Lord, inasmuch as you have been
baptized in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; for, your
Baptism lays you under Engagements to be the Lord's, as your Catechism
instructs you: The Nature of Baptism is such, that it binds to present and
perpetual Obedience: So that, for you, after you are come to Years of
Understanding, to delay to seek after the God of your Fathers, is plainly to
rob God of his Due: It is to disregard your Baptism, and put Contempt upon
that; as well as to undervalue the Good Will of your Parents, in making a
Dedication of you to the Lord; by which Act of theirs, they have not only
obeyed the Commandment of the Lord, but have indeed done you very great Honor
--: And moreover, the Truth is, your Baptism will prove of unspeakable
Advantage to you, if it be not your own Fault; for, Baptism not only obliges
you to Obedience; but, moreover, the Blessings of Goodness are thereby made
over and secured to you, provided you do become willing and obedient --.

To proceed,

Mot. 3. It is very hazardous for you to delay the doing what you can to please
Christ. You are condemned in Law already, for you are Children of Wrath by
Nature; and then besides, you have contracted a great deal of Guilt since your
Birth. And you are in the Hands of that God, whom you have offended, and who
can easily stop your Breath, and send you to Hell when he pleases: And he will
do it ever long, unless you do the Things that please him. As for your Parents,
they are oftentimes ignorant of what you say and do amiss, but God is not: Yea,
I have heard of some Parents, who, when informed of their Children's foul
Language or ill Behavior, would not so much as check and admonish them for it;
but only reply, It Is like Children, and so let it pass: But truly, God will
reckon with them. Rev. 20 12 I saw the Dead, small and great, stand before God,
and the Books were opened --. And, I say, you are in Danger, Children, every
Moment, of being summoned to make your Appearance before your Judge. Prove.
27.1. Boast not thy self of Tomorrow, whosoever thou art, for thou know not
what a Day shall bring forth. -- But suppose, you should be spared, and your
Lives be lengthened out, yet, if you neglect the present Age of Life, and
Season of Grace, God may deny you the Grace to repent afterward. And
furthermore, suppose the Lord should not utterly abandon you for your present
Neglect, yet you will certainly find it much more difficult, to cease to do evil,
and to learn to do well, hereafter; for, repeated Acts strengthen the Habits of
Sin daily, more and more: It will never be so easy to repent and turn to the
Lord, as now.

Mot. 4 You shall be abundantly rewarded for your Service, if you now become
willing and obedient.

None shall loose any Thing, at long run, by being religious: In keeping God's
Commandments there is great Reward; as might be shown in a few Particulars.

(1.) This is the Way to have Life prolonged in this World; which is the very
Motive made Use of by the Psalmist, with the Children whom he called together,
to instruct in the Fear of the Lord; as you may see in Psalm. 34.11, 12, 13, 14.
But don't mistake me, for I don't intend, that all the Children of God shall
certainly live to Old Age: Many, who are regenerate, without Doubt, die in
their Infancy; and other gracious Ones have been taken out of the World in
their Childhood, soon after they were capable of expressing their Hatred of
Sin, and their Love to Christ, and his Commandments: Others in their Youth,
soon after they have begun to serve God, and their Generation in the World. And
thus it is, partly in Wrath, for the Punishment of the Ingratitude of a wicked
World; and partly in Favor to themselves; for God takes them away from the
Evil to come, they having, through Grace, done the Work assigned them, and being
ripe for Heaven.

Again: Neither do I intend, that all such who live to Old Age, are the
Children of God: It is a sad Truth, that some aged Persons are vain and wicked;
the older they grow, the worse they grow; as they advance in Years, and draw
nearer to the Grave, they become more ripe for Destruction. The Sinnner, though
he live to be an hundred Years old, shall be accursed; his living so long,
shall be no Token to him of the divine Favor and Blessing, nor shall it be any
Shelter to him from the divine Wrath and Curse; the Sentence he lies under will
certainly be executed, and his long Life is but a long Reprieve: Nay, it is,
itself, a Curse to him, for the longer he lives, the more Wrath he treasures up
against the Day of Wrath, and will have the more Sins to answer for.

So that I don't intend, that the Children of God, and they only, shall
certainly live to a great Age in this World; but my meaning is, that Life shall
be enjoyed by them, so long, and so far as it shall be for God's Glory, and
their Good; and that is eno', and as much as any well disposed Person would
desire. We read, that The Child shall dye an hundred Years old, Isai. 65.20
Which teaches us, that when a Child dies, being in Favor with Christ, it may
not be reckoned to die untimely: 'When a Child dies, that is eminent for Wisdom
and Grace, above many who are more in Years, it may be said to die an hundred
Years old.'

(2.) Such as please Christ, not only take the best Course that they can
p^ssibly take, to have Life prolonged in this World, but moreover, they are in
the best Way to prosper. Our blessed Savior has graciously promised, That all
these Things shall be added to those, who seek FIRST the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, Mat. 6.33. And the Psalmist informs Children, that if they would
see good Days, they must be good, and do good, (forecited Psalm. 34.12, 13, 14.)
And the Apostle to the same Purpose, in 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable
unto all Things, having Promise of the Life that now is --. And of the godly
Man, it is said. in Psalm 1 3. Whatsoever he does shall prosper --: But yet the
Words are not to be looked upon as an absolute Promise, but as conditional;
namely, so far as shall be consistent with the Glory of God, and the best Good
of his Servants; and who could desire more?

(3) Such who make it their Care to please Christ, are in the most likely Way
to take Comfort in what they do, or shall possess or enjoy, whether it be
little or much: Now Godliness with Contentment is great Gain; And the Truth is,
They are most properly the rich People, who have a Sufficiency of this World's
Goods, and are content therewith, and thankful therefore: They are very much
mistaken, who imagine, that the only way to be comfortable, is, to enjoy
Abundance; for, as the wise Man observes, the Eye is not satisfied with
seeing, nor the Ear filled with hearing, Eccl, 1.8. And a greater than Solomon
informs us, in Luk 12.15 That a Man's Life consi^teth not in the Abundance of
the Things which he poss^sseth* It is too too evident, that some Persons live
very miserably, who yet have Plenty of this World's Goods: They possess
Abundance, and yet have but little Comfort of it. They bereave their Souls of
Good, Eccl. 4.8. They are discontented and fretful. as Ahab and Haman; and
then, What Good does their Abundance do them? But, on the other Hand, some pass
through the World with a great deal of Comfort, who, yet have but little of the
Wealth of it. Now, I say, such as have but little, and yet have the Grace to be
content, are truly rich.

But, you must observe, that I am speaking, all this while, of the Grace of
Contentment, as that which is enriching; for, there are some, who appear to be
easy with their Condition, though it be but mean* and yet are destitute of this
Grace: Their Easiness proceeds from Inconsideration, and from a Spirit of Sloth
and Carelessness: They are a tho'tless Generation; have not the Wisdom of the
Ant; but are rather like to the Horse and Mule, which have no Understanding.

The Truth is, such as are properly content, are diligent in their Business,
according to their Ability; and well satisfied with the Portion which divine
Providence curves out unto them: These Men do certainly eye the Hand of God in
all Things; and if God gives them but little, yet they are thankful, as knowing
that the Lord may do what he will with his own, and being sensible that they
are less than the least of all the Mercies of God.

Now certainly, such a Man has a truly excellent Spirit, who can accommodate
himself to every Condition of Life, and carry an equal Temper of Mind through all
the Vicissitudes of his State, saying, after the Apostle, Phil. 4 11, 12. I
have learned, in whatsoever State I am, therewith to be content; adding those
Words, in v. 13. I can do all Things through Christ, who strengthens me. -- And
the Truth is, none may expect this Strength to be granted unto them, but those
who devote themselves to the Service of Christ, and profess to have their
humble Dependence on him for Strength to enable them to perform their Duties in
Sincerity, and to accept their Mercies thankfully, and to resign their Wills to
his Will, under all the Circumstances of Life.

And among the Servants of the Lord, none may, on better Ground, expect to have
this Strength granted to them, than those who do betimes engage in the
Exercises of Prayer and Praise: God is good to Israel, to those that are of a
clean Heart; but especially to those who early seek his Face and Favor. They
have the same Promises to plead, which others have; such as that, They that
wait upon the Lord shall renew their Strength. -- And moreover, they have
particular Promises for to build their Hope upon; such as that, They that seek
Me early, shall find Me. And that, The Lord never said to the Seed of Jacob,
seek ye Me in vain: which is as much as to say, seek, and you shall find Me.

And now I say, Contentment being that which sweetens Life, O how greatly
should this encourage Persons to become the Lord's Servants betimes; and even
while they are Children, to inure themselves to the religious Exercises of
Prayer and Praise?

(4.) To endeavor to please Christ now in your Childhood, and so in the
following Ages of Life, is the best Way to make great Proficiency in the Graces
and Virtues of the divine Life, and to become strong in the Grace which is in
Christ Jesus; and consequently; more and more like unto God, and so the more
fit for Service in this World, and ripe for Glory in the other -- I say, the
sooner Persons begin, if they are careful to proceed, and go on in the good
Way, they will attain to a greater Growth and Increase in Knowledge and Grace,
than others who do not begin so soon; as it is written, then shall you know, if
you follow on to know the Lord.

Now, certainly this ought to be looked upon by you, as a very weighty Motive,
to excite you to the Duties of Religion; For what in this Life can be so
desirable, as Grace and Growth therein? Surely nothing here below may be
liken'd to it: All the Things which you can desire, are not to be compared with
it: It is infinitely better than Gold, even the most fine Gold.

You are very much inclined, I am sensible, to take Delight in Baubles: But, my
Children, I must inform you, that these Things will not profit you; they are
all Vanity, and even such as you yourselves will be ashamed of as you grow
older: Wherefore, be advised to regard those Things less; and even now in your
Childhood, to look upon them but as Toys and Trifles, and instead thereof, to
mind your Books, and to take Care of your precious Souls. Endeavor, I say, to
know your Duty, and to put the same in Practice, now betimes; and this is the
Way to be early qualified for the Service of God, and of your Generation; and
so you will, probably, in your youthful Days bring Glory to the Name of God,
and be instrumental of Good unto others: And truly, this Consideration ought to
be of very great Weight with you; for, What were you born for, but to honor
God, and to serve your Generation; or, to get Good, and to do Good, aiming at
the Glory of God in both?

And verily, this will not only be a Favor and Kindness unto others, for you
to do them Service; but also it will be of Service to yourselves; for hereby
you will make Advances Heavenward, and be laying up in Store against the Time to
come, when none of your good Services shall be forgotten, or pass unrewarded;
for God will render to every one according to his Works: He that does most for
God, provided it be done in Sincerity, and with christian Prudence, shall
receive the most distinguishing Reward.

And in a Word, HEAVEN will be your Portion if you now become the Lord's
Children and Servants; and this will be infinitely better than any Portion
which your earthly Parents can possibly bestow upon you. As it is written, The
Lord will give Grace and Glory, and no good Thing will be withold from them
that walk uprightly. And now what greater Encouragement can be laid before you?
One Hour's Enjoyment of Heaven is preferable to all the Honors, Profits, and
Pleasures of this vain World: Then, and there, you shall enjoy God your Maker,
and Christ your Redeemer, and the Holy Ghost your Sanctifier, without any
Interuption: There also you shall enjoy the Society of Saints and Angels, and
be employed in no other Exercises but such as are holy and delightful.

Thus we have considered the fourth Motive, namely, That you shall be
abundantly rewarded for your early Piety, if adhered to, and persever'd in. And
indeed, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has entered into the Heart of
Man to conceive, what God has laid up for them that love him

Mot. 5 By being religious betimes, you will exceedingly gratify all those, who
are desirous of your Welfare.

For Instance,

Then your Parents will be full of Joy on your Behalf: Pious Parents have no
greater Joy than to see that their Children are walking in the Truth, and
exercising themselves to have always a Conscience void of Offense. This truly
will minister more Joy to them than your first Birth did: Now you ought,
without doubt, to labor to please them, who are the Instruments of your Being,
and who are wishing and endeavoring your Welfare continually; and if you do
not, you will prove yourselves very ungrateful indeed.

Also, you will greatly oblige your Minister by your early Piety: He desires
the Good of your precious Souls, and would gladly promote the same all he can;
and would fain give up his Account concerning you with Joy, and not with Grief;
for that would be unprofitable for you.

Moreover, it would be very pleasing to the good Angels to see you piously
employed; for we find in Luke 15.10 That there is Joy in the Presence of the
Angels of God, over one Sinner that repents. These holy ones delight to do
the Will of God themselves, and consequently they are highly pleased, when they
behold any of the Children of Men prevailed with to do the like: They very
gladly encamp about such, and minister to them for their Good, Psalm 34 7. Now
it is certainly very desirable to please this heavenly Host, who are capable
either of preserving or destroying us, according as the Lord shall give them
Order.

But more than all this, it ought to be considered, that it will be very
pleasing to the only living and true GOD, for you to become serious and
religious, Now, in your Childhood. And it is certainly both your Duty and
Interest to please Him; for he is your Creator, he has made you, and not you
yourselves; And whom should you serve but the GOD that made you? O come let us
worship and bow down, says the Psalmist, let us kneel before the Lord our
Maker, Psalm. 95.6. Moreover, consider that this same GOD is your Preserver; he
has cared for you in that Age of Life when you were not capable of taking Care
of yourselves, and has, by the Ministry of his Angels, saved you from
innumerable Evils: And it is his Corn, and Wool, and Flax, and Milk, which you
have been spending upon: All your Strength is from him, and by his Blessing
upon your Enjoyments: Wherefore, I say, it is highly reasonable that you study
to please him, by spending your Strength in his Service, and to his Glory. O!
beware of giving the LORD Reason to complain, that although he has formed and
nourished you, yet you rebel against him. Yea, furthermore, let it be
considered, that you have not only hitherto lived upon his Bounty, but must
continue to do so as long as you live; and therefore it will certainly be your
Interest (...) do the Things which please him -- And let it not be forgotten,
how that the LORD JE^US CHRIST has given Evidence of his unparalled Love and
Good Will to the Children of Men, and to you among others: This Love of his
appeared by what he submitted unto in his Infancy, Childhood, and Youth; and
even from his Birth to his Death; for he was all the while a Witness to the
People, of his own and of his Father's Good Will toward Man: And agreably, we
have that Doxology in Luke 2.14 Glory to God in the higest, on Earth Peace, and
Good Will toward Men. O! Let it be seriously considered, that our LORD JESUS
CHRIST spent his Time, his Strength, his Blood, in the great Work of Man's
Redemption, and is now in Heaven making Intercession for Sinners; yea, and is
often striving with them by the holy Spirit; and I trust with you among others,
for your Good: Be persuaded therefore, now, I say, to show forth your Love to
him, by devoting yourselves to his Service; and be not backward to spend your
Time and Strength in doing the Work which he has given you to do. Certainly you
would think CHRIST worthy of your best and of your all, if you did seriously
consider who he is, what he has done, and what he is still doing for poor
Sinners: But now, How can you devote your all unto him, unless you dedicate
yourselves henceforth to be his Servants? O that his Love toward you, might
prevail with you to do it! And this the rather, considering that it is the Way,
as I said before, to have his Love confirmed toward you, and even to secure a
Part to yourselves, not only in his Benevolence and Benificence, but also in
his Complacency and Delight, Prove. 8.17. I love them that love Me, and they
that seek Me early shall find Me. The Kindnesses of your Childhood and Youth
are what the glo^ious God will take infinite Complacency in John the youngest
Disciple, was emphatically the Disciple whom Jesus loved.

Thus you see that by becoming religious betimes, you will please the great God
himself, also good Angels, and good Men: Not only Parents and Ministers, but
others also; all the Lord's People would be pleased with it; this is what they
pray for, and what they would rejoice to have the Opportunity and Occasion to
give Thanks for. -- And the Truth is, by this Means you would take the most
effectual Method to gain Respect, even from such as have not a saving Principle
within them: There are not many among Men, who don't secretly respect and
reverence those that fear the Lord: So vile a Man as Herod, feared John, and
did many Things, and heard him gladly.

Indeed such as are perfectly lost to all Sense of Goodness, they will malign
and spite you, and so will the Devil himself; but what then? This may not be
any Discouragement to you: These are Enemies to God himself, and consequently
you ought to account them as your Enemies, and by no Means to gratify them, by
following their evil Counsels: But, on the other Hand, you ought both to resist
the Devil, and to decline having any n^edless Familiarity with the Workers of
Iniquity, and to say as the Psalmist. Depart from me, ye evil Doers, for I will
keep the Commandments of my God.

And I shall add, That if y^u will make it your great Care to please God, by
hearkening to, and obeying his Voice, Now, in your Childhood; then, you may,
with much more Reason, hope and expect, that God will hear your Voice, and your
Cry, in an evil Day: Then you may humbly plead that gracious Promise, in Psalm
50.15 Call upon Me in the Day of Trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify Me. This Word of Promise has been made good many a Time, to such who
were early devoted to the Fear of God: Moses, David, Samuel, Hezekiah, Obadiah,
and many others, who feared the Lord, and served him betimes, have found him to
be a present Help in Times of Trouble: But, on the other Hand, if you will not
labor to please the Lord, by hearkening to his Voice, why should you expect
him to hear your Cry? Surely, you will have Reason to fear the contrary; for,
the Lord has said. Because I called, and ye refused, -- I w^ll laugh at your
Calamity, and mock when your Fear comes.

In a Word; If you comply with what I am urging you unto, you will never see
Reason to repent of it: And truly, by so doing, you will have the fewer Sins to
repent of; for, it is the Way to be kept from many Sins, which young Ones are
addicted unto, and which they are very often found guilty of: Without the Fear
of God reigning in your Hearts, you can never conquer those impetuous Lusts and
Passions, which destroy Multitudes of People: But, if you are religious
betimes, then you will prevent Corruption getting Head against you; for, you will
engage God's gracious Presence with you, and so, you will be guided by his
Counsel, from Day to Day: And O happy you, if the Lord be your Father, and the
Guide of your Childhood and Youth: And he will be so, if you do Now unfeignedly
make Choice of him for such, and do submit yourselves to his Conduct and
Government. The Steps of a good Man, and so, of a good Child, are ordered by
the Lord; if he fall, yet, he shall arise again, for the Lord upholdeth him
with his Hand. Now, the Consideration, that this is the best Way that you can
take, to prevent Sin, and subdue Corruption, ought to be of very great Weight
with you; for, verily. Sin will be found to be Something in Repentance, though
accounted Nothing in the Commission.

To add no m^^e by Way of Motive; Let it be considered, that early Piety will
be of unspeakable Advantage to you, in all your Ways, all your Days; and will
be the best Provision that you can possibly make for Old Age and Death --: O,
what a Support was it to Obadiah, that he could say, I fear the Lord from my
Youth. 1 Kings 18 12. And so, to King Hezekiah, that he was able to say, (on
his Deathbed, as he then supposed) I have walked before thee in Truth. Isai 38
3. Verily, the Testimony of your Consciences, that in Simplicity, and godly
Sincerity, by the Grace of God, you have had your Conversation in the World,
will be found more valuable, and comfortable, than thousands of Gold and
Silver, if you live to Old Age; and so, when you come to lie upon a Sick Bed.
-- Yea, you may receive it for a Truth, that if ever you repent, it will grieve
you at the Heart that you did not repent sooner Alas, Lord! said Austin, Nimis
se^o te amare caepi. I began to love Thee too late.
Ask your pious Parents, whether they turned from Sin to God too soon? They Will
answer, No verily, but we lived too long at a Distance from God --: And indeed,
if the Saints in Glory were capable of mourning, ^hey would mourn, that they
remained so long a Time in a State of Enmity against God; and that after their
Conversion, they bro't no more Glory to his Name in the World.

Well then; In Consideration of these Things, be persuaded to become the Lord's
willing and obedient Servants without any Delay; and hereby you will lay a sure
Foundation, for a comfortable Life, a peaceful End, a joyful Account, and an
happy Eternity.

I shall proceed in the next Place, to give you a few DIRECTIONS: And, in order
to engage your Attention, I call upon you in the Words of the Psalmist, viz
Come ye Children, hearken unto me, and I will teach you the Fear of the Lord,
and show you the Path of Life; which if you walk in, you shall find Rest to
your Souls.

Direct. I. Take Time to consider. -- Seriously consider, besides what has been
mentioned by Way of Motive, on these Things following:

Namely,

(1.) On your present State and Condition: That you are indeed Children of
Wrath by Nature, dead in Trespasses and Sins, and that in your Flesh there
dwells no good Thing: -- That you are Enemies to God in your Hearts, and bent
unto Sin, to that only, and to that continually: Behold you were shapen in
Iniquity, and in Sin did your Mothers conceive you, Psalm 51.5. So that, God
might have justly turned you down to Hell, presently after you were born; but,
blessed be his holy Name, he has pitied and spared you, and so, has granted you
a Space to repent in.

Then consider, how you have spent your Time hitherto, viz. in Sin and Vanity:
Have done little, if any thing, for your precious Souls; but, on the contrary,
have been going further off from God, and thereby rendered yourselves more
odious to his Holiness, and more obnoxious to his Wrath and Curse; so that,
now, you are in imminent Hazard, every Moment, of being cut off by the Hand of
Justice. -- I say, you are under the condemning Sentence of the Law, as you are
the Children of apostate Adam; and by your actual Rebellion, you have further
confirmed that Sentence against you: And although you have a Reprieve granted
you, yet it is but for a short Space of Time; and how short you know not;
there is daily Hazard that the Sentence will be ex^cuted; so that, I say, your
present Condition is truly very dangerous.

(2) In the next Place; Consid^r of the four last Things; viz Death Judgment
H^aven and Hell.

-- On Death; the Certainty of it, and the Uncertainty of the Time when: You
may not, how young soever you be, boast of Tomorrow, for you know not what a
Day shall bring forth Many Children have been snatched away by Death,
especially of late Years; and you are as much exposed to the fatal Stroke, as
others --.

Then consider of the last Judgment; and endeavor to realize to yourselves,
what an amazing Thing it will be to appear before Christ, in that Day, without
the Wedding Garment; that is, without the Justification of your Persons, and
the Sanctification of your Natures; for, without this Garment, you may not have
Admission into the Kingdom of Heaven: Without Holiness, no Man shall see the
Lord.

Then, proceed to meditate on Heaven; which is a most glorious Place, and
abides forever: It is the City which has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker
is God: There, the Saints shall glorify and enjoy the blessed God, World
without End: There, they shall neither sin nor sorrow any more: Nothing shall
ever separate them from God, and Christ, and the Society of holy Angels. The
Righteous shall go into Life eternal; and nothing shall offend in all that holy
Mountain --: And little Children, as well as others, shall, if pardoned and
renewed, be admitted into that most glorious Place, for our Savior has said,
of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Once more; Meditate on Hell; which is a most doleful Place, where there is
Weeping, Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth, for ever: Where the Worm dies not,
and the Fire is not quenched: And into this Place, naughty Children, they
remaining such, must be cast: For, all the wicked, younger as well as elder,
shall be turned into Hell: They shall go away into everlasting Punishment. --
Now, consider seriously with yourselves, can you bear your Finger, one Quarter
of an Hour, in our common Fire? How then, can you dwell in everlasting
Burnings, and endure the Wrath of God to all Eternity? And yet, be assured, you
shall bear it, unless you become good Children: God himself will uphold you,
that he may punish you: His Power will sustain you, that he may glorify his
Justice upon you --. O, consider seriously, if you are once cast into Hell, you
shall never, never come out thence: No Entreaties will prevail with God for
your Redemption: Neither indeed, will your pious Friends pray for you, but will
acquiesce in your Condemnation, and freely acknowledge, that the Lord is
righteous, and that his Ways are just and true. -- Neither shall you obtain any
Respit or Relief there, No; for, if you desire a single Drop of Water ^^ly, it
will be denied you.

I say, consider of these Things, until you become full of Concern for your
poor Souls, and how you shall escape the Wrath to come: And then,

(3.) Go on to consider, that there is Help laid upon One that is Mighty, even
the dearly beloved, and only begotten Son of God: And consider, that He is a
suitable Savior, being both God and Man in one Person: In him all fullness
dwells; and he can easily supply all your Wants: He is invested with a
threefold Office, in the Execution of which, he becomes the perfect Savior of
his People. -- And, he is not only able, but willing to save, to the uttermost,
all that come to God, by him. It is impossible for him to lie; and he has said,
Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. His Incarnation, his
Doctrines, and Invitations, the Joy which he expressed at the Tidings of the
Success of the Gospel, and the Sorrow which he discovered on the Account of the
Obstinacy and Unbelief of Sinners, his unwearyed Labors, Day and Night, and
his healing all who sought to him for it; and in a Word, his whole Life, and
his bitter Death, and his appointing the Gospel Ministry, and sending the Holy
Spirit to strive with Sinners, and lastly, his making Intercession for them
himself, now, he is risen from the Dead, and ascended up into Heaven, do
sufficiently evince his Good Will toward the Children of Men: You may
therefore be assured, that the Lord Jesus Christ is ready to accept of you, and
to become your Savior; provided, you ap^^^ve of his Terms and are unfeignedly
will, to be under the Restraints, and to do the Duties, of his holy Religion;
Or, if you will close with him, as your Priest, Prophet, and King; and humbly
depend upon him, to guide, govern and save you: -- This is what Christ expects
of you: And indeed, nothing can be more reasonable, than that the Person, on
whom you depend for Salvation, should also guide and govern you. And the T^u^h
is, There is no other Name under Heaven, given among Men, whereby you can be
saved: There is no other, there needs no other, and there can be none better;
neither is it possible, that any better Laws and Ordinances should be enacted
than his are.

Consider of these Things, until you find and feel your Souls going forth, in
earnest and fervent Longings after Christ; and, 'till you are brought to close
with him, according to the Gospel.

O, that you would be persuaded, my Children, to comply with this Part of your
Duty; namely, To consider of your own wretched Estate and Condition by Nature,
and of the Vanity of your Childhood, and the imminent Hazard, which you are in:
-- As also, of the spiritual Nature, and Extent, of the divine Law; and of the
four last Things, Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell; until you come to be
awak'ned, and filled with Concern, about the Salvation of your precious and
immortal S^uls. -- And then, O, that you would meditate on Christ, as a
suitable, mighty, and willing Savior; and as the only Savior of the Children
of Men: If you will seriously think on these Things, then, and not 'till then,
you will be in the Way of Life. -- Let me tell you, there is little, if any,
Hope, of a Person's Conversion unto God, until he becomes serious and
considerate; but, then there is Hope: Consideration is, ordinarily, the first
Step to Conversion.

Dir. 2. Shun, as much as may be, the Company of naughty Children*

Bad Company has occasioned the Destruction of many, both Body and Soul: And
agreably, says the wise Man, A Companion of Fools shall be destroyed, Prove.
13.20. And elsewhere, he earnestly exhorts Persons, and particularly, young
People, to avoid the Way of the Wicked; and plainly tells them, that if they
would not be found in that Way, they must not pass by it, but turn from it, and
pass away, Prove 4.15. And we find the Psalmist pronouncing the Man blessed, who
stands not in the Way of Sinners --. Psalm 1.1. So then, be able to say after
him, I am a Companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy
Precepts, Psalm. 119.63. The Truth is, you cannot walk with God, if you take
Pleasure in the Society of the Wicked: The Psalmist was sensible of it, and
therefore said, Psalm 119 115. Depart from me ye evil Doers, for I will keep the
Commandments of my God. -- And I shall further say, That if you are, at any
Time, obliged to be in the Company of such, whether Children, or Others, who
are light and vain in their Conversation, then, be on your Watch; and fail not
to lift up your Souls to God, entreating him, to preserve you from being
infected by them; and moreover, be advised, to get out of their Company again,
as soon as may be; for one Sinner destroys much Good. And, in a Word; follow
not the bad Examples of any of your Associates, nor yet, of your Superiors,
No, not of your Parents themselves.

Dir 3 Get and keep in Mind the Decalogue, or the Ten Commandments. -- And not
only remember them, but also, labor to understand the Intent and Meaning of
them; and that for this End, that so, you may duly observe and practice them.

I shall just mention them to you --:

The First Commandment obliges you to worship and serve the living and true
God; and forbids the giving of divine Honor to any other.

The Second enjoins you to worship and and serve the Lord in the Ways of his
own Appointment, and no other Ways.

The Third forbids your taking the Name of God in vain; which is an Evil too
too common with some Children, and young Folks: -- The Name of God, such as,
his Titles, Attributes, Ordinances, Word, and Works, should be always used,
both by Old and Young, with godly Fear and Reverence.

The Fourth Commandment requires you to remember the Sabbath Day to keep it
holy. -- This I shall a little enlarge upon, and inform you, that you must
beware of playing on the Lord's Day, also of Laughter, and idle Talk: -- You
may play a little on other Days, with your Parent's Leave, but not at all on
the Sabbath Day: God, your Maker, and your Savior, has strictly forbidden you;
and it is very dangerous to displease him: His Anger is much more terrible than
that of an earthly Father; yea, he can consume you in a Moment. And let me tell
you, that you may not needlessly go out of Meeting, in Meeting-time; nor take
the Liberty to run hither and thither between Meetings; but must be very
serious and sober through the Day, remembering, that the Eye of the all seeing God
is upon you. -- In the Morning, you must, not only make your Prayer to God, but
also, read in the BIBLE, and other good Books; and so, between and after
Meeting; and without fail, learn your Catechism, and get more and more of that,
every Sabbath. -- And in the Time of public Exercise, you must very diligently
attend to what is said by the Minister; and not only labor to join with the
Congregation in the public Prayers, but moreover, be able to rehearse some of
the Sermon, when you go home: And take care, all the Week after, to put in
Practice, what you shall hear on the Sabbath Day --. In this wise (not omitting
to read, every Day, some Portion of Scripture) do your Endeavor, that, from
Children, you may know the revealed Will of God, which is able to make you wise
to Salvation. -- And, in a Word; as you would hope ever to obtain the Blessing
from the Lord, and to be in Favor with him, you must be good Children, and
remember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy.

The Fifth Commandment obliges you to Honor your Father and Mother, as also
all other your Superiors; and moreover, to pay a due Respect to your Inferiors,
and Equals. Children, obey your Parents, in the Lord, for this is right; and
rise up before the hoary Head, and honor the Face of the old Man: And live in
Love with one another; for behold, how sweet, and how pleasant a Thing it is,
for Brethren, and Sisters, to dwell together in Unity. -- And whether you be at
Home, at School, or Church, or elsewhere, let your Behavior be sober, and
inoffensive

The Sixth Commandment requires you to be tender of your own, and of others,
Health.

The Seventh enjoins you to Chastity, in Thought, Speech, and Behavior.

The Eighth not only forbids your Stealing, by Fraud or Violence; but moreover,
requires* that you, by fair and honest Means, endeavor to advance your
Parent's, or Master's, Estates

The Ninth forbids all false-Speaking; and requires that you be tender of your
own, and of your Neighbor's, Reputation. And

The Tenth forbids your c^veting of any Thing, which is your Neighbor's; and
requires a full Contentment with your own Condition, as also, a charitable
Disposition toward others.

These Commandments, the Meaning of which is given you more largely in your
Catechism, you must regard as the Man of your Counsel, and improve them as a
Lamp to your Feet, and a Light to your Path. --

And,

Think it not eno' to be regular in your Conversation; but moreover, you must
hate every false Way, and love the Lord your God with all your Heart, Soul,
Strength, and Mind, and your Neighbor as yourselves. -- And to convince you of
this, you should (as was before hinted) consider of the spiritual Nature, and
Extent, of the divine Law* The young M^n, of whom we read in the Gospel, said,
Mat. 19 20. All these Things have I kept from my Youth up Which plainly shows,
that he was ignorant of the Nature and Extent of the divine Law -- By the Law,
says the Apostle Paul, is the Knowledge of Sin; and agreably, he says
elsewhere, I had not known Sin, but by the Law, for I had not known Lust, that
is, he had not known, that there was any Harm in indwelling Sin, except the Law
had said, thou shall not Covet, Romans 7 7. And again, says he v. 9. I was alive
without the Law once, but when the Commandment came, Sin revived, and I died:
For, then, and not before, I plainly saw myself to be in a lost and undone
Condition. -- The Law, therefore, is a Lamp, and a Light, both, as it opens our
Eyes, and detects our Sin and Danger; and also, as it serves to direct our Feet
in the Way of Peace. So that, I say, it is necessary for you to be acquainted,
that the Law of God reaches to all Persons, to all Times, and all Cases; and
that there is much required, and much forbidden, in every Commandment; and that
it obliges the whole Man, viz. every Power and Member of Soul and Body; as
also, that every Precept carries Life and Death in it: That is, offers and
secures Life to the Obedient, and threatens Death to the Disobedient. -- I tell
you again, it is absolutely necessary, that you have a right Understanding of
this Matter; and this, that so, you may be led to bewail both the Plague of
your Hearts, and the Transgressions of your Lives; as also, that you may, for
the future, keep your Hearts with all Diligence, as well as regulate your
outward Conversation.

But, this may suffice for the third Direction.

Dir. 4. Set God always before you.

Remember, wheresoever you go, that God is nigh you. The Eyes of the Lord run
to and fro through the whole Earth, 2 Chronicles. 16.9. Not only, in Time of divine
Service, but also, at other Times, the Lord's Eye is upon you, and you may not
forget it; yea, when at your Play, the Lord sees and observes you; you must, at
that Time, therefore, take care what you say, and what you do "Do not contend
with one another; let your Play be in Love; divert, but do not devour, one
another; Also, let your Plays be honest and modest Recreations, harmless and
inoffensive Diversions: Let there be no playing the Fool, nor playing the
Wanton: Have no Play, but that which you are willing should be seen in the
Streets; no Play that seeks Corners" Also, be afraid of speaking naughty
Words; such as, taking the Name of God in vain, or calling your Play mates by
soul Names, or mocking at any for their De^^cts in Body or Mind* Remember, that
two She-Bears tare in Pieces forty and two Children* who mocked the Lord's
Prophet for his bald Head.

In a Word; learn to fear God betimes, and that is the Way to make Conscience of
keeping his Commandments. -- O my Children, let it be said of you, that you
fear the Lord from your Childhood

Dir 5. Be much in Prayer

Pray twice in the Day at least. Never forget your Savior's Commandment, in
Mat. 6.6 When thou prayest, enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut the
Door, pray to thy Father, who is in secret --. It is recorded (as I before
observed) of that good King Josiah, that while he was yet y^ung, he began to
seek after the God of David his Father, 2 Chronicles. 34.3. And you have great
Reason to expect Audience and Accep^ance, if you will also seek the Lord; for,
He never said to the Seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain, Isai. 45 19

And here I shall direct you, in a few Words, how you are to pray --,

You must, in that Duty, acknowledge God, as your Maker, Benefactor, and Father
in Heaven; and confess before him, with bitter Sorrow, both your original and
actual Sin, and entreat his Pardon with your whole Heart; as also, that you may
be born again and be sanctified throughout, in Spirit, Soul, and Body; and have
Grace sufficient for doing the Duties incumbent on you, with respect to God
himself, your Parents, one another, and all Men Moreover, you must beg for
daily Protection, and Provision; but more especially, that you may be delivered
from the Wrath to come, and be finally received to Glory. -- And in your
Prayers, you may plead, that the Lord would have Mercy on you, for the Honor
of his Name, saying, as the Psalmist, in Psalm 25 11. For thy Name's sake, O
Lord, pardon mine Iniquity, for it is great. Also, plead with him his gracious
Promises; such as that, in Prove 8.17. They that seek me early shall find me.
And that, in Mat. 7.7 Ask, and you shall receive; seek, and you shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you You may also, in the most humble Manner,
make mention of your covenant Relation to God, as he, in Psalm 86.16. Save the
Son of thine Handmaid. But above all, make Mention of the LORD JESUS CHRIST,
and beg for Mercy in his Name, and on the Account of his Merit, and
Intercessi^n. And lastly, give Thanks for JESUS CHRIST, and for all the
Favors, which, through him, you enjoy.

In such wise, pray and faint not: Don't neglect Prayer once; for, if you
should, you will be in Danger of neglecting it again, and then again, until,
you finally apostatise. But then, I shall further inform you, that although you
must pray, yet, you may not depend upon your Prayers to commend you to God;
neither expect Blessings for the sake of them; but let your whole Dependence be
upon free Grace in Christ Jesus -- And be not discouraged, my Children, because
you have not that Gift in Prayer, which you observe in others; for you shall
nevertheless be accepted, provided, you are sincere in your Addresses; and
moreover, the Way to excel in this Gift of Prayer, is, to begin betimes, and
to inure yourselves much to the Duty

Dir. 6. Acquaint yourselves with the Lives of such Children, as have behaved
themselves soberly and piously in the World.

Some such are upon Record, not only in the holy BIBLE, but also, in other good
Books; and more especially in Mr. Janeway's Token for Children, before
mentioned; which Book was published for this End, that so, other Children might
be excited and encou^ag'd, to seek FIRST the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness That same little Book, I advise all of you, to entreat your
Parents to procure for you; and when you have got it, do you frequently read in
it: And not only read it, but also, consider with yourselves, after this
Manner; Why may not we also go and do, as these Children have done? They were
as bad by Nature as we; and the Grace of God is offered as freely to us, as it
was to them; and it will be our own Fault, if we miss of it; because, the Lord
Jesus Christ has said, and he will be as good as his Word, Him that comes unto
Me, I will in no wise cast out, and again, They that seek Me early, shall find
Me. Wherefore, be persuaded, to stir up yourselves, to imitate those good
Children; and be ye Followers of them, as they have been of Christ Jesus. They
denied themselves many childish Vanities; and do you do so too: They were
dutiful to their Parents, and lived in Love with their Brethren and Sisters,
and did pray to God, and read in the holy Scriptures daily; and do you go and
do likewise. O, let not one Day pass, without reading some Portion of the holy
Scriptures, that so, from Children, you may like Timothy, be acquainted with
the Will of God --. And I would advise you, in particular, to read often the
Book of Psalms, and the Book of Proverbs the former to excite your Devotion,
and the latter to direct your Conversation --. And I solemnly charge you, to
have nothing to do with such Books, or Papers as tend to inflame Lust, and to
furnish with Matter for evil Communication, which always corrupts good Manners.

Dir. 7 Carefully regard the Instructions and Directions of your Teachers, in
Public; and of your Parents, Masters, and Mistresses, in Private.

Attend Catechizing, as there shall be Opportunity, both ministerial and
parental. Submit also to family Government: Thankfully acc^pt of Reproofs, when
you are faulty; and humble your selv^^ for your Faults, when reproved, or
correct^^, also reform what has been amiss, left (...) to perish as the Sons of
Eli. of (...) is said, in 1 Samuel 2 25. They heark^^ (...) Vice of their Father,
because the Lord would slay them. Never answer again, after a saucy, unseemly,
Manner; neither go about to extenuate a Fault, or, to cover it with a Lie; for,
this will be, to add Sin to Sin, than which nothing can be more heinous. -- In
a Word; See that you pay a due Respect to your Parents, and your other
Superiors, both to their Persons, and to their Commandments; otherwise, you
will, by your Folly and Stubbornness, occasion Grief to your Father, and
Bitterness to her that bare you: Prove. 17 25 And I would have you remember,
That if you heedfully regard the good Instructions given you, in Public, and
Private, then you will hearken to the Voice of GOD himself; for, it is He, who
speaks to you by Ministers, and by your Parents, and therefore, you ought to
attend, and to be obedient.

And, you must not only, attend to the Voice of God in his Word, but also in
his Providence, whether in a Way of Mercy or of Judgment. -- God is the Author
of all your Mercies, and his Voice to you, in and by them, is, Remember your
Benefactor, and present yourselves living Sacrifices, holy and acceptable unto
God, which is your reasonable Service, Rom 12.1. -- All Afflictions are also
dispensed by his Hand; there is no Evil of this Kind, in the City or Family,
which the Lord has not sent. And his Voice, at such a Time, is that, Hear ye
the Rod, and him that has appointed is; and turn to God who smites you. -- My
Children, whenever you feel your selves under any Disorder of Body; and so,
whenever you receive a Wound, by a Fall, or any other Way; you must, without
fall, eye the Hand of God, and remember, that, thereby, He calls upon you to be
good Children: And this Call is still continued, yea, repeated, when it
pleases God, to cure you of your Illness, or to heal your Wounds: Then, I say,
you must be very thankful, and take Care to lead such Lives, as may testify
your Gratitude to the God of your Lives, and of all your Mercies.

And now I am speaking of the Voice of Providence, I shall take the Opportunity
to put you in Mind of that fatal Malady, called the THROAT-DISTEMPER, by which
many of you, were much surprised, and have been awakened, I trust, to a
Consideration of your Guilt, and Danger, and to seek the Face of God, by
Prayer, and in some other Ways of his Appointment; and you have thus far done
well; but, O, beware, lest you forget the Works of the Lord, and the Operations
of his Hand, and so return again to Folly; for then, it will be much worse with
you, than it was before See therefore, that you press forward, and be constant
and diligent in the Discharge of the whole of your Duty, toward God, and Man,
viz. Your Superiors, Inferiors, and Equals; and toward your selves. -- Do not
forget, that you are still in the Hands of God, and that he is able to do with
you, as it pleases him; and therefore, it is most certainly your Wisdom and
Interest, as well as Duty, to observe his Commandments to do them,

Dir. 8. Learn to be humble, and modest, betimes.

There Is very great Danger, my Children, of your being puffed up, and
conceited; therefore, you have need to watch against Pride: It has already
proved the Ruin of many; yea, some have observed, that this Lust has ruined
more young People, than any other beside: Some, it seems, swell with Pride on
one Account, and some on another; some, because of their Beauty; others, their
Strength; others, their intellectual Powers; some, because of their gay
Apparel; others, their Pedigree or Parentage; yea, and some, (which is sad to
think of) because of their being in Reputation among Men, for Virtue and Piety;
and by this very Means, Satan gets great Advantage against them; yea, hereby,
Person's Meat becomes their Poison; and that which should prepare them for
Heaven, does, by being made the Object of Pride, set them at a greater Distance
from it: For, it is certain, that such as are lifted up with the good Opinion
of Others, concerning them; and are puffed up with a vain Conceit of their own
Performances, are an Offense to Heaven: God resists the Proud, but gives
Grace to the Humble. Wherefore, I say again, labor to get, and maintain, low
and mean Thoughts, both of your selves, and of your own Performances --. It is
true indeed, you ought to be very thankful to God, for all that Good, which is
wrought in you, and which you may be, from Time to Time, enabled to do; but,
you may not be puffed up with Self-conceit, as though you were better by Nature
than others; or, as though you could profit the Almighty, by your Acts of Piety;
for, you are Children of Wrath by Nature, even as others; and your Goodness
extends not to God, neither is he profited by you, although you could make your
Ways perfect. It becomes you, as well as others, to acknowledge, after all you
can do, that you are unprofitable Servants. -- And as you would preserve and
maintain a mean Opinion of yourselves, you must, betimes my Children, learn to
contemn and despise humane Applause, as so much Vanity: Indeed, you ought to be
thankful for a good Name, because, thereby, you will have the greater Opportunity
of doing Service in your Generation; but be not fond of Honor, for Honor
sake, for this would be Vanity indeed; and if any should* from such a View, be
excited to profess the Christian Religion, and to make a fair Show of it, they
would certainly find their Religion to be in vain, and themselves to be finally
abhorred of the Lord. -- These Things considered, I insist upon it, that you
learn to be humble, and modest, betimes.

Dir. 9. Endeavor to keep in Mind your Baptism; and the Engagements, which you
are thereby laid under, to be the Lord's.

You are not your own, but his; and that, not only, by Right of Creation and
Preservation, but also, of Dedication: Your Parents had full Power to devote
you to the Service of the glorious Trinity; and they having done it, you do,
therefore, now stand bound and obliged to adorn the Doctrine of God your
Savior, in all Things, and at all Times. -- Remember it, I say, and answer the
Intention of your Baptism, as you would not be found chargeable with the Breach
of the everlasting Covenant.

Dir. 10. Let the Male Children, as soon as capable of such Service, meet
together, on the Sabbath Evenings, for the Duties and Exercises of PRAYER and
PRAISE.

Not only, attend with Reverence and Devotion, the Worship of God, in Public,
and in the Family, and Closet; but moreover, have your private Meetings, that
so, you may call on the Name of the Lord, hear his Word, and sing his Praise
together. This will render you amiable Children indeed, if you make it your
Care to honor God; and if Hosanna to the Son of David, who is also the Son of
GOD, be sung by you, with Grace in your Hearts, not only, in Public, but also
in Private -- But here, I must again caution you against Pride, and Self
conceit. I charge you, to take Care, that an ambitious Spirit do not prompt you
to the Duties of Religion; but maintain a Sense, that you are wretched,
miserable, poor, blind, and naked; and that no other than the Spirit, and
Posture of Beggars, does become you. -- And truly, this humble Spirit and
Behavior will quickly bring you into Favor, both, with God, and Man

Dir. 11. Shun Idleness, and learn to work betimes: And, let your End herein
be, not only, that you may take Delight in Business, and be the more ready and
expert in it, for your own future Advantage; but especially, that you may do
the more Good, and be the more serviceable, in your Generation.

Dir. 12. Resist and repel Temptations to Sin Suppress the first Motions to
Sin, which arise in your own Breasts, lest they become too hard for you: And
moreover, withstand and gainsay all Temptations from without; make a Covenant
with your Eyes; and if Sinners entice you, do not consent: Be strong, and
overcome the wicked One. -- The Way of Sin, as I have often said, is Down-Hill;
and if you gratify the Devil once, you will find it exceeding difficult to
withstand his next Assault; therefore, watch and pray lest you enter into
Temptation: I say, not only watch, but also, by humble and fervent Prayer,
engage the Presence of CHRIST with you; for, he is stronger than the strong Man
armed, and through him strengthening you, you can do all Things; but without him,
you can do nothing. -- And this leads me to another Direction.

Dir. 13. Fail not to eye CHRIST in all that you do, and especially, in your
PRAYERS and PRAISES.

Let HIM, O my Children, be even the Desire and Delight of your Souls: Choose
and embrace HIM, as your Prophet, Priest, and King: Acknowledge HIM, as the
Lord your Righteousness, and your Strength; and humbly resolve to lie at his
Foot; and that if you perish, you will perish there.

More particularly,

1. Take his Word for your Direction in Prayer; and especially observe that
Pattern, commonly called, THE LORD'S PRAYER. And,

2 Look to him for Strength and Grace, to enable you to the Discharge of your
Duties: And in particular, beg of him, to teach you by his Spirit, to PRAY: You
have, my Children, very great Encouragement given you, to hope, that he will do
it, if you ask it of him; for, it is written, The Lord never said to the Seed
of Jacob, seek ye me in vain: And again, it is said, If any of you lack Wisdom,
let him ask of GOD, who gives to all Men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it
shall be given him And moreover, the SPIRIT of Grace and Supplication is One of
the precious Promises of the new Covenant, --.

3. Have your Eye to him for Acceptance also: Rely, in the most humble Manner,
on his Merit and Intercession, for the Acceptance, both, of your Persons, and
Services; freely acknowledging, that your own Righteousness is as filthy Rags.

4. Make the Advancement of his Kingdom your highest Aim and End. Seek not your
own Glory, but the Glory of CHRIST, when you sing Hosanna to the Son of David,
who is the Son of God; as also, at all other Times: For, this is the Will of
GOD, that all Men honor the SON, even as they honor the FATHER. In a Word;

Learn betimes to be serious in all the Parts of Worship; remembering, that the
Eye of GOD is upon you. -- There is scarce a greater Token for Good, than for
Children to be devout, and serious, in the immediate Service of GOD -- Labor
to bear in Mind that Instance in the Text, viz. of the Children's crying
Hosanna to the Sea of David, in the Temple; and how pleasing it was to CHRIST,
that they did so; and do you maintain the like devout Frame, in all your
Addresses to GOD, in public, private and secret.

And, When you have obtained the Knowledge of Christ, and of the Covenant, and
understand the Nature, End, and Use of the Sacraments, and find within
yourselves, an ardent Love to Christ, and that you do delight in your Duty,
then, proceed to make a personal Dedication of yourselves to the LORD JEHOVAH;
desiring, and resolving, by the Help of his Grace, to walk in all his
Ordinances, and Commandments, blameless. -- Be not rash with your Mouths,
neither let your Hearts be hasty, to utter any Thing before God. Count the Cost
of Religion, before you oblige yourselves to comply with the Laws of it,
otherwise, there is very little Likelihood of your being steadfast in the same:
And if you should draw back, then your Condition will be worse than before.

Finally;

Be not discouraged from Well-doing, either by the Words, or Works, of vain
People, whether elder, or younger. Seriously meditate on that Text of
Scripture, in Mar. 8 last, Whosoever therefore, shall be ashamed of me, and of
my Words, in this adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son
of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the holy
Angels. And follow the good Example set you by Moses, of whom you read, in Heb.
11.25, 26. That, he chose rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God,
than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season; and, that he esteemed the
Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures in Egypt, for he had
Respect to the Recompense of the Reward.

And, I must tell you, that as you may not be discouraged from the good Way of
the Lord, by any thing which you see or hear, done, or said, by others; so,
neither may any of you go about to discourage Others, from walking in that good
Way: For, if you should, you will therein act directly contrary to the LORD
JESUS CHRIST, who came, as he tells us, himself, to seek and save that which is
lost: And you may be sure, that he will be very angry with you, for opposing
his Interest, and seeking to frustrate and disappoint the End of his coming
into the World.

Your Duty, my Children, is, in the first Place, to seek the Kingdom of God and
his Righteousness, yourselves; and then to endeavor to persuade others to do
the like: Let your Light so shine before others, that they seeing your good
Works, may glorify your Father, who is in Heaven. And exhort one another daily,
while it is called to Day, lest any be hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin:
For, he that converteth a Sinner from the Error of his Ways, shall save a Soul
from Death, and hide a Multitude of Sins

And to conclude what I have to offer to you, at present; Be advised, to make
Choice of the WORD of GOD for the Rule of your Lives, and as the Man of your
Counsel, at all Times; and so acknowledge and submit to God, as the Guide of
your Childhood and Youth. -- O! Walk not in the Ways of your Hearts, and after
the Sight of your Eyes; but, order your Steps in God's Word, and let no
Iniquity of any kind, have Dominion over you.

Thus, my Children, I have shown you, what Things you must observe and do --
And if you thus seek the Lord, he will be found of you; but, if you forsake
him, and refuse to submit to the Government, and Conduct, of his Word and
Spirit, then, he will cast you off forever.

Wherefore, as says the wise Man, in Prove. 8.10, 11. Receive my Instruction
and not Silver, and Knowledge rather than choice Gold; for Wisdom is better
than Rubies; and all the Things that may be desired, are not to be compared to
it.

I proceed now to the other Branch of the Exhortation, viz

II TO PARENTS, and ALL OTHERS, who have the Care of Children committed to them.
And my Exhortation to you, is this, seeing Christ is pleased with the
Children's Hosannahs, be persuaded, to do all that in you lies that so, those
who are in their Childhood, may praise the Name of the Lord.

And here, I shall offer you something by Way of Motive, and then a few
Directions, and so conclude this my Discourse.

1. Let the Things which follow be seriously considered, by Way of MOTIVE; viz.

That your Children stand in absolute need of Help; being born, not only
destitute of the true Knowledge of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, and the
Way to Life by him; but also, full of Enmity against the Lord, and against his
Christ. -- They need, I say, to be instructed in, and to be excited to, their
Duty, being, by Nature, both, blind, and obstinate; wherefore, have Compassion
on them, and help them

Moreover, the Word of God obliges us, as we have Opportunity to do Good to
all, and especially to the Household of Faith; of which Household your Children
are. -- But then, besides this, Parents are expressly commanded to train up
their Children in the Way they ought to go; and to bring them up in the Nurture
and Admonition of the Lord; and consequently, to use their utmost Endeavor, to
lead them unto Christ, and to promote their serving of him, in an active Way --
And truly, Parents are, not only, obliged hereunto by the Commandment of God,
but also, by Virtue of their covenanting with the Lord; for, in the Face of the
Congregation, we have solemnly promised to bring them up for him. -- And I may
add, that the Relation, which we bear to our Children, as Parents, is a very
strong Obligation upon us, to lead them unto Christ -- How can we be said to do
the Part of Parents toward them; or, to answer the Character of Father and
Mother, unless, we labor to promote the Welfare of their immortal Souls? It
cannot be: For, surely, it is not enough to provide them with Meat, Drink, and
Clothing; No; this is the least and the easiest Part of our Duty: We ought,
especially, to have at Heart, their spiritual and eternal Interest: Which, if
we have, we shall certainly endeavor to lead them unto CHRIST; and shall teach
them to eye, and submit to him, as their Lord and Ruler, as well as their
Savior.

Furthermore, consider, that they soon begin to be capable of receiving some
Instruction in the Things of God Indeed, if they were destitute of a Capacity
to receive Light and Knowledge, then, we might be justified in our Neglect; but
the Case is not so; and therefore, we can never answer it, either to God, or
our own Consciences; no, nor indeed, to our Children themselves, if we shall
disregard their spiritual and eternal Welfare. Know we not, that if we neglect
to promote the same, and our Children should die in their Iniquity, then God
will require their Blood at our Hands: But, on the other Side, if we discharge
our Duty toward them, then, we shall deliver our own Souls; yea,
notwithstanding they continue impenitent, and die in their Sins. -- And it may,
possibly, be of Service, and for our quickening, seriously to consider after
this Manner, viz. Suppose a Child of our's, come to Years of Understanding, and
whose Soul we have neglected to take Care of, should be taken away from us by
Death; How could we, at such a Time, bear up under such a Thought as this, viz.
I was the Instrument of this Child's Being, and the next Cause of it is natural
Guilt and Pollution, and yet, have not taken due Care, that so, it might become
a Servant of Christ, and see the Salvation of God? -- Certainly, such a
Reflection as this would be very grievous indeed, and as a Sword in your Bones.
-- Wherefore, let us be prevailed with, to endeavor, that there may not be any
Occasion for it.

And now, is there any Need that I put you in mind of the Ex^mples of good Men,
which are upon Record, in the holy Scriptures, in order to excite you to this
your Duty? As that of Abraham, in Genesis 18.19. and of Joshua, in Josh. 24 15 and
of David, in Psalm. 101. etc.

In a Word; The best Good of our Children loudly calls upon us, to do our
utmost, to bring them to serve the LORD JESUS CHRIST. -- And seeing, he is
honored by, and pleased with, such Children, as are religiously disposed,
certainly, it becomes and concerns us, to, and if we have any Ingenuity in us,
we shall, endeavor, that they may be early devoted to him.

I come now to offer you a few Words, by Way of Counsel and DIRECTION, viz.

1. Let them be well taught. Care ought, without fail, to be taken, that they
may learn to Read betimes, that so, they may be in a Capacity, to peruse the
holy Scriptures, themselves; in order to know, and do, the Will of God. A very
melancholy Sight this, to behold a Person come to Years of Understanding, not
able to read. -- It is very necessary, that Schools be set up, and encouraged,
for this End, that Children may be taught to read, and that they may be early
instructed in the Principles of our holy Religion. -- And if any Children are
not sent to School, by Reason of their Parent's Poverty; or, if some Parents
send their Children to School, who cannot well pay for their Schooling, it
would be highly commendable in others, and an Act of Charity, to disburse Money
to defray the Charge for them. When the Psalmist, in Psalm 34 11. invited
Children to come, and hearken to him, and promised to teach them the Fear of
the Lord* Perhaps, says One, he intended especially, those Children, whose
Parents neglected to instruct and catechize them: And truly, it is as great a
Piece of Charity to put those Children to School, whose Parents are not in a
Capacity to teach them, as to feed those Children, whose Parents have not Bread
for them to eat. -- And I may add, that this Thing, if done with an Eye to the
Honor of Christ, and to the Welfare of such Children, and of the rising and
risen Generations, will be Fruit abounding to our Account. This is to lay up in
store against the Time to come: It is to put out Money to one of the best of
Uses. -- Thanks be to God, that he has inclined many Persons, in some Parts of
the World, to dispose of some of their Incomes, to serve this good Intention,
viz To support CHARITY SCHOOLS, for the sake of poor Children: And through the
Favor of Heaven, we, in this Land, are not wholly destitute of such Instances
of Goodness and Kindness: And, in an especial Manner, some good People in the
Towns of BOSTON and SALEM, are said to be exemplary for expending Money for
such an Use: What they have done this Way is come abroad, and spoken of to
their very great Honor, as also, to the Honor of our holy Religion, which
has had such Effect upon them, as to move them to so good a Work. The LORD
think upon all such for Good, who have encouraged and promoted this good Thing,
and have from Time to Time contributed on this good Design! May they be
inclined to go on! And will the LORD be pleased to bless their Persons, their
Offspring, and their Substance; and may they live to see the good Effect of
their Charity, with Respect to those poor Children, on whom their Money has
been, or may be, expended.

But then, I would say further, that Care ought to be taken, not only, that
Children may be taught to read, but also, that they do read in the BIBLE, every
Day. Let Parents and Masters allow them Time for it and oblige them to observe
it: Yea, and hear them read yourselves, at least, before your Family Prayers.
And moreover, whenever they meet with a divine Sentence, which does, more
especially, relate to their Age, Station, or Condition, it may be of singular
Advantage, to observe it to them, and to call upon them, to keep it in Mind.

And not only so, but you must provide them with some good Catechism, that,
they may be instructed in the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and the
fundamental Articles of our holy Religion. That of the Assembly of Divines I
should most incline to recommend to you. And I beseech you frequently to
examine, what Progress they make in their Learning: Not only, on Saturday
Evenings, and on the Lords Days; but also, at other Times, when you it in the
House with them, propose a few Questions to them out of the Catechism, or, such
as border upon, and may be easily deduced from the same,, and if there be need
of it, help them to an Answer. -- And for your Encouragement and Quickening,
remember, that the sooner your Children are acquainted with, and do embrace the
Principles of Religion, the more likely it is, that they will retain them, and
the less Danger there will be, of their being led astray by evil Men, and
Seducers -- And furthermore, not only, catechize them yourselves, but also,
oblige them to attend ministerial Catechizing, at the appointed Seasons for it
-- And I would just suggest to you, that it is a very proper Thing, not only
for Ministers, but also for Parents, Masters and Mistresses, to put Children
frequently in Mind, of that solemn Dedication, which has been made of them, in
their Baptism, unto the glorious Trinity; and to endeavor, that they may,
betimes, understand, and comply with, the Design and Intent of it Show them,
that they are laid under Engagements to be the Lord's; and that, if they answer
those Engagements, then, they may expect that God will confer upon them all the
Blessings of Goodness; but otherwise not -- And I would, moreover, recommend it
to you, as a Thing highly necessary, viz. To set before them the Evil of Sin in
general, in that, it is committed against the infinite and eternal GOD, who is
their Creator, and Benefactor: And, in particular, to discover to them the
Corruption of Nature, and how that they a^^ prone to Evil, and are averse to
that which is good, and unable, of themselves, to do any Thing, which may be
acceptable unto the most High; and that they, therefore, do stand in absolute
need of such an one for their Savior, on whom they may safely rely and depend,
both for Strength and Righteousness. -- And then, proceed to display before
them, the unparalled Excellencies of the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and to show them,
that he is both God and Man in one Person; and also, what the Offices are,
which he executes, as our Redeemer; and that they must, of necessity, close
with him, in all those Offices; and must give all Diligence, that so, they may
be found walking in all his Ordinances and Commandments blameless. --.

2. Charge them to do well.

Not only, show 'em their Duty, with Respect to God, their Parents,
Magistrates, Ministers, their Neighbors, and one another; but moreover,
command them to keep the Way of the Lord. -- Labor, all you can, to prevent
their speaking, either foul or idle Words; as also, their doing any evil Deeds;
and for this Reason, suffer them not to keep C^mpany with such Children, as are
addicted to use bad Language, lest they learn their Way, and so get a Snare to
their Souls. Give them all necessary Counsel, Caution, and Reproof* Set before
them the Promises and Threatenings of God's holy Word: The Threatenings to
prevent their going astray from their Duty; and the Promises, to animate and
encourage them to do well; and so, as it were, constrain them to be Followers
of God, as dear Children. -- Moreover, it may be very proper for you, to let
them know, what they may expect as a Reward from you, if they do well; and
also, what by Way of Punishment, if they refuse to be obedient. -- And if
Counsels, Reproofs, Promises, and Threatenings, do not avail, then, you must
proceed to correct them; but labor to do it in the Fear of God, and with an
Eye to him, to make the Rod of Correction, a M^an of Reformation. But then, I
would further add, that if they do accept of your Counsel, and need not the
Rod, let them see and know, that you observe it, and do not withold the
promised Reward, but rather add to it, than diminish ought of it; for verily,
it is much more eligible to draw, than to drive them, to their Duty.

3. Set a good Example before them: For, otherwise, all your Labor and Pains
will, probably, be lost.

Precepts teach, but Examples move. We are all of us inclined to imitate those,
whom we converse with, and especially, those with whom we dwell, and who have
the Charge over us. -- In Consideration of which, I say it highly concerns all
Superiors, to set a good Example before their Inferiors; and above all, Heads
of Families should do so. And agreably, the holy Psalmist took up this
Resolution, in Psalm. 101.2 I will behave my self wisely in a perfect Way; -- I
will walk within my House with a perfect Heart.

4. Pray with and for them.

Not only, pray in secret, but keep up Family Prayer, as you would escape the
Curse, and obtain the Blessing of Heaven. -- Also, oblige your Children and
Servants, constantly to give their diligent Attendance. And let them learn, by
your Example, to be serious and devout in the Worship of God. And let them know
what you mean by your Family Service, namely, that you intend thereby to pay
Homage to him, who is both your and their great Creator, and bountiful
Benefactor. Inform them, as well as you can, of his Greatness, and also of his
Holiness, and his Omniscience; and let them know from you, that they must both
love him, and fear before him. Put them in mind, once and again, that the all
seeing Eye of the glorious God is continually upon them, and that, therefore,
they must take Care to please him, at all Times; and in a peculiar Manner, must
be serious in his immediate Service, whether in public private, or secret. --
And moreover you must watch over them on every Lord's Day, and take care, as
much as is possible, that they sanctify the same, not only at Home, but also at
Meeting, and between Meetings; and so, as they come unto, and return from the
House of God.

4. Teach and exhort them to pray for themselves.

As they come to Years of Understanding, let them know, that it is both their
Duty, and will be for their Interest, to pray; and that it will be highly
pleasing to the LORD JESUS, to behold them, every Morning and Evening, on their
Knees, in secret; as appears by that Word of Encouragement upon Reccord, in
Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me, and they that seek me early shall find
me. And that also in Matthew. 6.6.

Furthermore, put Words into their Mouths, and teach them how to pray: Thus,
mind them of their Sins original and actual, and that they must both confess
and bewail the same before the Lord, and humbly entreat him to pardon them, on
Christ's Account. -- Also inform them of their need of renewing Grace, being
Enemies to God in their Hearts, and that they must earnestly beg of God to
create them anew in Christ Jesus, and to enable them to do the Duties incumbent
upon them, toward God, their Parents, one another, and all whom they may
converse with, or become related unto. -- Moreover, teach them to pray for
daily Protection and Provision; but especially, that they may be kept in the
Fear of the Lord, all the Day long, and be delivered from the Wrath to come,
and finally received to Glory. -- And fail not to labor to impress upon their
Minds, the absolute Necessity of their praying for these Things, and whatsoever
else they stand in need of, in the Name, or for the Sake of our LORD JESUS
CHRIST: As also, that they may not omit to give Thanks for CHRIST, and for
those innumerable and undeserved Favors, which, through him, they are made the
Subjects of.

Thus, I say, Pains should be taken with Children, to lead them to CHRIST; and
you may not suffer any Thing to divert you from it. -- Those Children spoken of
in my Text, without doubt, heard some others make use of these Words, before
they themselves cried in the Temple, Hosanna to the Son of David: And, in like
Manner, Children Nowadays, must be taught the Way in which they ought to go,
and the Words which they ought to speak, especially, in their Addresses to the
Throne of Grace. --

But now,

Lest some Parents should be defective in this Article of their Duty, it is
though it best to transcribe a Form of Prayer (written by M. H.) for the use of
Children.

Not with a Design ^o confine them to a Form, but, that having such an Help
before their Eyes, and which may easily be learnt by Heart, they may be
encouraged to engage in the Practice of this Duty, without Delay.

It is as follows, viz.

O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee.

Thou art my God, and I will praise thee; my Father's God, and I will extol
thee^

Who is a God like unto thee, glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing
Wonders?

Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth that I may desire
in Comparison with thee. When my Flesh and my Heart fail, thou art the Strength
of my Heart, and my Portion forever.

Thou made me for thyself, to show forth thy Praise.

But I am a Sinner; I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive
me.

O God, be merciful to me a Sinner.

O deliver me from the Wrath to come through Jesus Christ, who dyed for me, and
rose again.

Lord, give me a new Nature. Let Jesus Christ be formed in my Soul, that to me
to live may be Christ, and to dye may be Gain.

Lord, I was in my Baptism given up to thee; receive me graciously, and love me
freely.

Lord Jesus, thou have encouraged little Children to come to thee, and have
said, that of such is the Kingdom of God; I come to thee; O make me a faithful
Subject of thy Kingdom, take me up in thy Arms, put thy Hands upon me, and
bless me.

O give me Grace to redeem me from all Iniquity, and particularly, from the
Vanities which Childhood and Y^uth is subject to

Lord, give me a wise and an understanding Heart, that I may know and do thy
Will in every thing, and may in nothing sin against thee.

Lord, grant that from my Childhood I may know the holy Scriptures, and may
continue in the good Things that I have learned.

Remove from me the way of lying, and grant me thy Law graciously

Lord, be thou a Father to me; teach me, and guide me; provide for me, and
protect me; and bless me, even me, O my Father.

Bless all my Relations [Father, Mother, Brothers, Sisters,] and give me Grace
to do my Duty to them in every Thing.

Lord, prepare me for Death, and give me wisely to consider my latter End.

O Lord, I thank thee for all thy Mercies to me; for Life and Health, Food and
Raiment, and for my Education; for my Creation, Preservation, and all the
Blessings of this Life; but above all, for thine inestimable Love, in the
Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus Christ, for the Means of Grace, and
the Hopes of Glory.

Thanks be to God for his unspeakable Gift: Blessed be God for JESUS CHRIST.
None but Christ, none but Christ for me, in whose Name alone, I offer up this
Prayer and Praise unto God in the Heavens.

Now to God, the Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost, that great Name into which I
was baptized, be Honor, and Glory, Dominion, and Praise, for ever and ever,
AMEN.

I shall, in the last Place, annex a few Divine Songs (taken out of Dr Watts)
for the Use of CHILDREN, in their showing forth the Praises of God.

SONG, I. A general Song of Praise to GOD.
HOW glorious is our heavenly King,
Who reigns above the Sky!
How shall a Child presume to sing,
His dreadful Majesty?
How great his Power is none can tell,
nor think how large his Grace;
Not Men below, nor Saints that dwell
On high before his Face.
Not Angels that stand round the Lord
Can search his secret Will;
But they perform his heavenly Word,
And sing his Praises still.
Then let me join this holy Train,
And my first Offerings bring;
The eternal God will not disdain
To heat an Infant sing.
My Heart resolves, my Tongue obeys,
And Angels shall rejoice,
To hear their mighty Maker's Praise
Sung from a feeble Voice.
SONG, XI. Heaven and Hell.
THere is beyond the Sky
A Heaven of Joy and Love,
And holy Children when they die,
Go to that World above,
There is a dreadful Hell,
And everlasting Pains,
There Sinners must with Devils dwell
In Darkness, Fire, and Chains^
Can such a Wretch as I
Escape this cursed End?
And may I hope whenever I die
I shall to Heaven ascend?
Then will I read and pray
While I have Life and Breath?
Lest I should be cut off to Day,
And sent to eternal Death.
SONG, XII. The Advantages of early Religion.
HAppy's the Child whose youngest Years
Receive Instruction well;
Who hates the Sinners Path, and fears
The Road that leads to Hell.
When we devote our Youth to God
It Is pleasing in his Eyes;
A Flower when offered in the Bud
Is no vain Sacrifice.
It Is easier Work if we begin
To fear the Lord betimes;
While Sinners that grow old in Sin
Are hardened in their Crimes.
'Twill save us from a thousand Snares
To mind Religion young;
Grace will preserve our following Years
And make our Virtue strong.
To thee, almighty God, to thee
Our Childhood we resign;
'Twill please us to look back and see
That our whole Lives were thine.
Let the sweet Work of Prayer and Praise,
Employ my youngest Breath;
Thus I Am prepared for longer Days,
Or fit for early Death.
SONG, XIII. The Danger of Delay.
WHY should I say, It Is yet too soon
To seek for Heaven, or think of Death?
A Flower may fade before it is Noon,
And I this Day may lose my Breath.
If this rebellious Heart of mine,
Despise the gracious Calls of Heaven;
I may be hardened in my Sin,
And never have Repentance given.
What if the Lord grow wroth, and swear,
While I refuse to read and pray,
That he will refuse to lend an Ear
To all my Groans another Day?
What if his dreadful Anger burn,
While I refuse his offered Grace,
And all his Love to Fury turn,
And strike me dead upon the Place?
It Is dangerous to provoke a God;
His Power and Vengeance none can tell:
One Stroke of his almighty Rod
Shall send young Sinners quick to Hell.
Then 'twill for ever be in vain,
To cry for Pardon and for Grace,
To wish I had my Time again,
Or hope to see my Maker's Face.
SONG, XIV. Examples of early Piety.
WHAT blessed Examples do we find,
Writ in the Word of Truth;
Of Children that began to mind
Religion in their Youth.
Jesus who reigns above the Sky,
And keeps the World in awe,
Was once a Child as young as I,
And kept his Father's Law.
At twelve Years old he talked with Men,
(The Jews all wondering stand)
Yet he obeyed his Mother then,
And came at her Command.
Children a sweet Hosanna sung,
And blessed their Savior's Name;
And gave him Honor with their Tongue
While Scribes and Priests blaspheme.
Samuel the Child was weaned and brought
To wait upon the Lord:
Young Timothy betimes was taught
To know his holy Word.
Then why should I so long delay
What others learn so soon?
I would not pass another Day
Without this Work begun.
SONG, XXIV. The Child's Complaint.
WHY should I love my Sport so well?
So constant at my Play?
And lose the Thoughts of Heaven and Hell?
And then forget to pray?
What do I read my Bible for?
But, Lord, to learn thy Will?
And shall I daily know thee more,
And less obey thee still?
How senseless is my Heart, and wild?
How vain is all my Thoughts?
Pity the Weakness of a Child,
And pardon all my Faults.
Make me thy heavenly Voice to hear,
And let me love to pray,
Since God will lend a gracious Ear,
To what a Child can say.
SONG, XXV. A Morning Song.
MY GOD, who make the Sun to know,
His proper Hour to rise,
And to give Light to all below,
Do send him round the Skies.
When from the Chambers of the East
His morning Race begins,
He never tires, nor stops to rest,
But round the World he shines.
So like the Sun would I fulfill
The Business of the Day;
Begin my Work betimes, and still
March on my heavenly Way!
Give me, O Lord, thine early Grace,
Nor let my Soul complain;
That the young Morning of my Days
Has all been spent in vain.
SONG, XXVI. An Evening Song.
AND now another Day is gone,
I Will sing my Maker's Praise;
My Comforts every Hour make known
His Providence and Grace.
But how my Childhood runs to waste!
My Sins how great their Sum?
Lord, give me Pardon for the past,
And Strength for Days to come.
I lay my Body down to sleep,
Let Angels guard my Head;
And through the Hours of Darkness keep
Their Watch around my Bed.
With cheerful Heart I close my Eyes,
Since thou will not remove;
And in the Morning let me rise,
Rejoicing in thy Love.
SONG, XXVII. For the Lord's Day Morning.
THIS is the Day when Christ arose
So early from the Dead:
Why should I keep my Eyelids closed,
And waste my Hours on Bed?
This is the Day when Jesus broke
The Powers of Death and Hell,
And shall I still wear Satan's Yoke,
And love my Sins so well?
Today with Pleasure Christians meet,
To pray, and hear thy Word:
And I would go with cheerful Feet,
To learn thy Will, O Lord.
I Will leave my Sport to read and pray,
And so prepare for Heaven:
O may I love this blessed Day
The best of all the seven.
SONG, XXVIII. For the Lord's Day Evening.
LORD, how delightful it is to see
A whole Assembly worship thee?
At once they sing, at once they pray,
They hear of Heaven, and learn the Way.
I have been there and still would go;
It Is like a little Heaven below.
Not all my Pleasures and my Play
Shall tempt me to forget the Day.
O write upon my Memory Lord,
The Text and Doctrines of thy Word;
That I may break thy Laws no more,
But love thee better than before.
With Thoughts of Christ and Things divine
Fill up this foolish Heart of mine;
That hoping Pardon through his Blood,
I may lie down, and wake with God.
The Sum of the Commandments out of the New Testament.
MATT. 22.37. WITH all thy Soul love God above,
And as thy self thy Neighbor love,
The HOSANNA; or Salvation ascribed to CHRIST.
Long Meter.
HOSANNA to King David's Son,
Who reigns on a superior Throne;
Webless the Prince of heavenly Birth,
Who brings Salvation down to Earth.
Let every Nation, every Age
In this delightful Work engage;
Old Men and Babes in Sion sing
The growing Glories of her King.
Common Meter.
HOSANNA to the Prince of Grace;
Sion behold thy King;
Proclaim the Son of David's Race,
And teach the Babes to sing.
Hosanna to the eternal Word
Who from the Father came;
Ascribe Salvation to the Lord
With Blessings on his Name.
Short Meter.
HOSANNA to the Son
Of David, and of GOD,
Who brought the News of Pardon down,
And bought it with his Blood.
To Christ the anointed King
Be endless Blessings given.
Let the whole Earth his Glory sing.
Who made our Peace with Heaven.
Glory to the Father and to the Son, etc.
TO God the Father, God the Son,
And God the Spirit, Three in One,
Be Honor, Praise, and Glory giv'^
By all on Earth, and all in Heaven.
AMEN.
ERRATUM.
In the Preface Page 6. l. 2. dele a.


