THE DUTY OF ALL Christians, URGED, In a Discourse On I Cor. XV. 58. Delivered
in a Congregation at NEWPORT, On Rhode Island.

By NATHANAEL CLAP.

I These. iv. 1. Further more then we beseech you, Brethren, and exhort you the
Lord JESUS, that as ye have received of us how we ought to walk, and to please
GOD, so you would Abound more and more.

NEW PORT: Re printed by the Widow Franklin.

To those who Desired the Publication of the following Discourse.
My Christian Friends,
BY Desiring to Read what you had Heard, About the work of the Lord, you lay
your Selves under Farther Obligation To Abound in that Work.

Let all see that you Do so, both in your Conversation and in your Preparation
for all the Institutions of CHRIT.

This will Rejoice your sure Friend,

July 12.1720. N. CLAP.

The Duty of all Christians URGED.
I Corinthians XV. 58. -- Always Abounding in the Work of the LORD.


BY Perusing this Chapter, you may, Find, The Holy Apostle Paul is Therein,
Propounding and Confirming that. Great Article of the Christian Religion, The
Doctrine of the Resurrection From the Dead.

Among the Coronthians were some People, that had so Indulged themselves in
their Abominable Sensualities, that they had exceedingly Extinguished all
Profitable Apprehensions, about unseen Eternal Things. They had wonderfully
Stupefied their Consciences, by Gratifying their Sensual Appetites; and were
become in a manner mere Sensitive Creatures.

THEY had sunk almost below the Exercise of Reason: So that they laid aside all
suitable Notions, about Natural Religion: Therefore, No wonder, if they
Suppressed all Thoughts about Revealed Religion. They would say, Let us Eat and
Drink, for tomorrow we shall Die. As if they had said, This Life is the only
time, for us, to take our Pleasure in. After this Life, there will be nothing
for us, to Enjoy. And we know not how soon this Life will end, therefore let us
take as much Pleasure, as we can, while we Live.

THENCE, It is no wonder, if there were abundance of Disorders among them: And
abundance of Pernicious Practices with Erroneous Opiniens.

AMONG other things, the Doctrine of the Resurrection from the Dead was not
only Doubted or Scrupled, but was Denied and Renounced by some of them: Some
said, There is no Resurrection of the Dead.

THEREFORE the Apostle spends the greatest part of a long Chapter, to prove the
Resurrection of the Dead: And one of his chief Arguments to prove it, is, The
Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. And of this he could Produce the
clearest and fullest and most incontestible Evidences. For He was seen not only
by one or two, but by all the eleven Apostles, and by five hundred People at
once, and a great part of them were Living then, to Declare what they had seen.
Yea, He himself could say, that he had seen the Lord Jesus Christ; And
therefore it was Undeniable that He was Risen from the Dead.

BUT inasmuch as the Lord Jesus Christ was Risen from the Dead, and had sent
His Ministers to Preach, that He was Risen from the Dead, and that People
should Believe in Him for Eternal Salvation, and for Deliverance from the power
of the Grave, it was therefore unreasonable, to Question, whether there would
be a Resurrection from the Dead: unless all their Preaching were Vain.

BUT having Proved, that there would be a Resurrection from the Dead, and a Day
of Judgment, wherein there would be a Reward given to all according to their
Works, He Improves, in our Text, what he had Proved.

THEREFORE, That is, for as much as, there will be as Resurrection of the Dead;
and Consequently, a time of Retribution for all the Godly; They shall be
Graciously and Gloriously Recompensed;

BE Steadfast; That is, be fully settled in the Belief of the Truth of the
Gospel, and particularly, in the Doctrine of the Resurrection, which is a
Principal Article of Christianity.

BE immovable, That is, be firmly fixed against all Opposition, from any of
the Cavils and Assaults, that may be endeavored by Wicked Sinners, to shake
your Faith, in this great Doctrine of Religion.

THEN it Follows,

BE always Abounding in the Work of the Lord, That is, constantly strive to do
and to grow better and better. And be more and more Diligent about the Work
Prescribed and Accepted by the Lord.

FOR as much as ye know that your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. That
is, the Lord will Certainly, Graciously and Gloriously Reward all your Sincere
endeavors, about His Work, at the Great and the Last Day. For so far will the
Saints of God be, from finding that they have Labored in Vain, while they have
been about the Work of God, that they that have Labored Abundantly shall be
Rewarded Abundantly. The Recompenses of their Endeavors will be Wonderful as
well as Eternal. The Lord will take Effectual Care that they shall not lose
their Labor.

WE need only further consider, that the things in this Epistle are Directed
unto all Christians; For so is the Epistle Directed in Chap. 1. Ver. 2. -- To
all that in every Place, call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord.

AND then the Doctrine to be Considered by us all, must be this,

DOCTRINE. IT is the Duty of all Christians always to Abound in the Work of the
Lord.
NO doubt, but all of us would be Accounted Christians. God knows what all of
us are.

THIS Doctrine tells what is our Duty, if we be Real Christians.

THE Doctrine must be Explained, that our Duty may be understood. Our Duty must
be understood, that it may be Practiced, there is no regular Practice without
suitable Knowledge. Therefore we must know our Duty that we may do it well. To
help us, to know our Duty, the Explanation of the Doctrine may in the Fear of
God, by the Help of Christ, be Endeavored under several Propositions. Hear
then that your Souls may Live.

PROP. I. THERE is a Work of the Lord Incumbent on all Christians. All
Christians have a Work belonging to them, that may be Styled, The Work of the
Lord.

NO Christian may Live without some Work. It is a great Wickedness for any
person to Live in Idleness. For Idleness and Christianity are altogether
Inconsistent. It you say, An Idle Christian, you utter a Contradiction. Idle
Persons are no Christians. Whatever they think, about themselves, and whatever
others may think about them, God will not own them for Christians, if they
don't Repent of their Idleness, and beg Pardon of God. for that, as well as for
all their other Wickedness, for the Sake of Christ, who always Pleased God,
went about doing Good and was never idle.

IF Persons are Born to great Estates and spend their Time, in Idleness and
wast away their Estates, they will have a dreadful Account to give: They will
not be found among Christians at the Last Day, unless they Repent.

IF Persons Live upon the Labors of others, and spend their Time in Idleness,
without any Employment, for the Benefit of others, they cannot be numbered among
Christians.

YEA, If Persons Labor, to get great Estates, with this design, chiefly, that
they and theirs may live in Idleness: They cannot be Acknowledged for
Christians.

BE sure then, they that use Ungodly Methods, to get Riches, that they might
Live in Idleness must for ever be Excluded from the Number of Christians.

THEIR Consciences, if Enlightened, must fly in their Faces, while they Pretend
to Christianity, but Desire to Live in Idleness.

FOR all Christians have some Work Incumbent on them. And this work may be
justly called, The Work of the Lord, Because it is Required by the Lord, and it
will be Rewarded by the Lord. But should it be Inquited,

Quest. WHAT is Implied in the Work of the Lord which is Incumbent on all
Christians?

HEREUNTO it might be Answered, in General.

Answ. THE Work of the Lord Injoined on all Christians, comprehends all the
Duties of Christianity; All the Exercises of a Christian Conversation, or a
Conversation according to the Gospel of Christ.

ALL Duties of Piety, and Religion toward God, All Duties of Charity and
Righteousness toward Man, all Duties of our General Calling, or such as are
Common to all Christians, belonging to them as Christians, all Duties of our
Personal Calling, or such as are Special to Christians, in their several Orders
and Stations in the World; these belong to the Work of the Lord.

THEY are Sum'd up, in the Old Testament, in Micah 6.8. The Lord has showed
thee, O Man, what is good, what does the Lord Require of thee, but to do
Justly, to love Mercy and to walk Humbly with thy God?

THEY are Sum'd up, in the New Testament, in 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the Form of
sound words in Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus.

BRIEFLY, The Great work of all Christians, it is, To maintain such a Union
with the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith, as to receive constant Supplies of Grace
from Him, continualy to bear a Testimony for the Truths and Ways of God, before
the World, for the Glory of God, in this World, and to make Preparation for
Glory with God in the Heavenly World, for ever.

THIS is the Work of the Lord; a Work Propounded by the Lord, a Work Well
pleasing to the Lord.

BUT more Particularly,

[I.] BELIEVING on Christ, With a firm Faith, for Eternal Salvation, Living by
Faith on the Son of God, is the Work of the Lord. So are we told, in John 6.29.
This is the Work of God, that you Believe on Him whom He has sent. That is, on
Jesus Christ, the only Savior of Sinners. (1 John 3.23.)

THEREFORE must we be so sensible of our Sinfulness and Misery, as to be made
willing, to Repair to the Lord Jesus Christ, for the Salvation of our Souls
Commiting and Resigning our selves to Him, as the Author of Eternal Salvation
to all, that Obey Him; And Applying our selves to Him, as our Prophet, for
Instruction, as our Priest, for Atonement, as our King, for Government;
Relying on His Righteousness, for Justification, Complying with His Spirit for
Sanctification; Trusting in Him, to work, in us, all that is Well pleasing in
His Sight; Waiting on Him, to fit us for, and bring us to Eternal Glory, by His
Rich and Free Grace, and His Sovereign Almighty Power.

SO to Believe in the Eternal Redeemer, is the Work of God. And if we do
nothing about this Work, our Souls must be, for ever Undone. We must lie down
in Eternal Sorrow, if we Neglect this Work of Faith. We shall do nothing well,
about any other Work, until we begin to Believe in Christ.

BUT if we attend this Work of God, to Believe on the Name of His Son Jesus
Christ, with all our Hearts, then shall we be Prepared, for other things,
belonging to the Work of God.

THEREFORE must we be persuaded, to Accept of that Invitation of our Lord, in
Mat. 11.28. Where He says, Come to me all ye, that Labor and are Heavy Laden,
and I will give you Rest. Rest not without coming to Christ, but come to
Christ, and He will give Rest. Rest from Sin, Rest, from Grief, and Rest from
Fear: But not Rest from Work. There will be more Work still. For says our Lord,
Take] my Yoke upon you, Learn of me. So, True Believers on Christ have Work, to
do, after they have Believed. They are, to draw in the Yoke of Christ, and
therein, to attend the Work of the Lord.

INDEED, at Death will the Saints of God Rest from their Labors, according to
what we Read in, Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the Dead, who Die in the Lord, they
Rest from their Labors, and their Works follow them. Yet they do not Rest from
the Work of Praising the Lord. For we Read in Rev. 4.8. With Reference to the
Saints, in the Church Triumphant, as well as, in the Church Militant, They
Rest, not Night nor Day, from saying, Holy, Holy. Holy Lord God Almighty, which
was and is, and is to come. The Saints of God, in Heaven will be Praising the
Lord, their Creator and Redeemer and Sanctifier, for ever. But, be sure, in
this World, they must not cease from Work, as long as they Live in this World.
Though they have Believed, their Believing in Christ will not Release them from
other Parts of the Work of the Lord.

AND, to mention some other parts of that Work, we may now go on, to Affirm,

[II.] REPENTING of Sin, With Unfeigned Repentance and Maintaining the Life of
such Repentance belongs to the Work of the Lord. So are we told in Act. 17.30.
God Commands all men every where, to Repent. Repentance of Sin is Commanded
to God, and may be reckoned part of the Work of the Lord, the Work, which the
Lord has Obliged His People to attend, while they Live in this World. They
must be so Convinced of their Sinfulness by Nature and Practice, their
Sinfulness of Soul and Life, their Sins of Omission and Commission, their Sins
against the Law, and against the Gospel, as to be Humbled before the Lord for
all their Deviations from, and Violations of the Rules, that He has set before
them, and Confess and Bewail them all, with Grief and Shame, and Beg Pardon for
them all, for the sake of Christ, with Sincere Desires, and Serious Purposes,
and Earnest Endeavors, to Turn from all Sin, to God in Jesus Christ, and to
Live more and more Exactly according to the Rules of the Gospel, every Day.

SUCH a Repentance belongs to the work of the Lord. Therefore must we be
Persuaded to Comply with that Proposal in Prove. 28.13. He that Confesses and
Forsakes His sin, shall have mercy. There will be the mercy of Pardon of Sin,
the mercy of Power over and against Sin, the mercy of Peace and Reconciliation
with God, the mercy of Quietness and Easiness of Conscience, to them that
Heartily Confess and Forsake their Sins, with Sorrow for Sin, with Hatred to
Sin, with Resolution, by the Grace of God, in Christ Jesus, to live more
according to the Doctrines of Godliness.

AND this work of Repentance must be continued all our Days, we must Never
leave off the work of Repentance, while we live in this world. They that
Pretend they have Repented enough, Declare, they have not Repented at all. They
show a certain Token that they know not what belongs to Repentance. They have
not so much as begun to Repent, if they think they may leave off to Repent, If
they think, they are so Perfect and Righteous, that they need no Repentance, it
is very sure, that they have lived impenitently ever since they lived. And
however they mock and scoff at maintaining of our Christian Warfare, During
Life. It is very sure they must lose their Souls forever unless they change
their minds about their State, and see their Need of Repentance, and begin the
Work of Unfeigned Repentance. They must Repent and Turn from all their
Transgressions, and from their False and Vain Opinions, or their Iniquities
will be their Ruin.

YEA, Christians must not only Repent every Day, for their Daily Sins, but they
must also strive, to be more Sorry, for their former Sins. For many times God
may Chastize and Afflict His Children, after their Believing in Christ, for
their former Sins, that they committed before their Conversion, as well as, for
their falls into Sin, after their Conversion because they have not been so
sorry, as they should have been for their former Sins. He may let them fall so,
as, to open their former Wounds, to make them Bleed afresh, that they may
Repent, with a more bitter Sorrow, for their former Sins.

BUT they that have spent or lost, the most of their Time in their Unregenracy,
and have not begun the work of Repentance, until their Old Age, must be very
Diligent, about this Work of the Lord; To call their Sins to Remembrance; To
Confess and Bewail them; To Lament their Condition, before the Lord, so as to
be Quickened, yet more Fervently to Beg for the sense of the Pardon of them.
They should be more concerned, about such things, than most People are
Accustomed to be, or things will Appear to be very sad with their Souls.

AND, be sure, the work of Repentance must be Continued by Repenting Sinners,
until they are Perfectly Delivered from Sin, upon the Separation of their
Spirits from their Bodies, by Death. Repentance must Live, until we Die. And we
must Attend the Work of Repentance, all the time, that we Live, in this World
of Sin. We must Live Repenting; yea, we must Die Repenting; And looking to the
Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, for Life Eternal.

AND if this Work of the Lord he well Attended, then we shall Attend another
Exercise, in that Work.

[III.] FOLLOWING and Perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God, all the Day long,
and all their Life long, belongs to the Work of the Lord, that is Incumbent on
all Christians. For so are we Advised, in 2 Cor. 7. 1. Let us cleanse or selves
from all Filthiness of Flesh and of Spirit, Perfecting Holiness, in the Fear of
God.

WE should be daily considering what our Sinful Defilements are, and upon the
sight of any Sinful Pollution, Appearing on our Souls, Immediately Repair unto
the Fountain opened for Sin and for Uncleaness. We must Apply our selves unto
the Purifying Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that our Souls may be more and
more Purified from all our Sinful Impurities. And we should not be willing to
Sleep, as long as we Apprehend our Souls under any spot or stain of Sin, for
the Removal of which, we have not Expressly Addressed our selves unto the
Pardoning, Purging Blood of Je-Christ.

WE are to Pray for Purity, in Heart, in Lip, and in Life, and Labor for
Holiness, in all manner of Conversation; Striving to be Holy, as He that has
called us, is Holy, And Improve all Merciful things with which God is Favoring
us, and all Sorrowful things, with which God is Chastening us that we may
thereby be made more Partakers of an Holiness Resembling the Holiness of the
Infinitely Holy God.

AND whereas we may all find Abundance wanting, as to Perfection of Holiness,
we may find Abundance to be done by us all in following of Holiness, we must
take abundance of Pains, to be more Holy. And therefore must we strive, to have
our Faith every Day Exercised on the Lord Jesus Christ, for the Deriving of
Grace from Him, our Faith must go forth unto Him, to fetch in constant Supplies
of New Grace, from that Fountain of all Grace; to be Advancing in Holiness:
That our Hearts being Purified by Faith, our ways may be daily growing more and
more Pure, so that we may be continually making our selves more and more meet,
to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in light, and fitting for the
Blessed-making Vision of the Lord.

WE know, from Heb. 12.14. Without Holiness, none shall see the Lord; And from
Mat. 5.8. The Pure in Heart shall be Blessed with seeing of God. Therefore
Endeavors, to Attain Perfection of Holiness, belong to the Work of the Lord,
Incumbent on all Christians.

BUT neither be these all the things, Belonging to that Work; For,

[IV.] PREPARING for, and Improving of, all the Holy Ordinances of God, for
their Growth in Grace, and their Advancement in Holiness, belongs to the Work
of the Lord, Incumbent on all Christians. For we Read about certain Persons,
that were attending the Work of the Lord, in Luke 1.6. They were both Righteous
before God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord,
blameless. When it is said, They were both Righteous before God, walking in all
the Commandments of the Lord. It implies, that if, they had not Regarded all
the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, they could not have been Accounted
Righteous before God, nor Blameless: Therefore if Christians will Attend all
the Work of the Lord Incumbent on them, they must have a Regard unto all the
Ordinances of God, all the Institutions of Christ, in His Ecclesiastical
Kingdorn in this World.

AND among the Ordinances, to be Regarded by Christians, that would Attend all
the Work of the Lord, there is, not only Praying to God, in Secret, in Private
and in Public; on Ordinary and Extraordinary occasions: All Christians must
attend these Kinds of Prayer, in their Seasons, if they will attend all the
Work of the Lord, or indeed any Part of that Work, well; Not only Reading and
Hearing the World of God; Christians, Be sure, must attend this, or they will
Neglect some part of the Work of the Lord and are in the way, to Neglect all
the Rest, that they should attend; If they will not Heart what the Lord says
unto them, in the Public Dispensation of his Word, by the Ministry of His
Ambassadors, it is no wonder that other things be Neglected: But there be also
the special Sealing Ordinances of the Covenant of Grace, Baptism and the Supper
of the Lord, that are to be Attended and Improved.

ALL Christians, that are Able, Truly to say, that they Desire and Labor, to
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, for Eternal Salvation, should seek for
Baptism, for Themselves, and their Children, if they have not been Baptized.
But if any Professing of Christianity, are not willing to Repent of their Sins,
Confessing them, and Professing a willingness to Forsake them, and look to
Christ, for the Pardon of them, that they may be Baptized, it is very sure,
that they Neglect some part of the Work of the Lord, that they should Attend.
For the Lord has commanded His Ministers, in Mat. 28.19. Go, Teach all Nations,
Baptizing them, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Spirit, Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have Commanded you.

THEN they that would be Acknowledged for the Disciples of Christ, are to fit,
and seek for Baptism; Nor may they expect to Enjoy it, until they do, by some
way or other discover a willingness, to be the Disciples of Christ, if they are
Up grown. For that Ordinance of God is called the Baptism of Repentance; and
therefore no Apparently Impenitent Sinner may be Baptized. John the Baptist
would Baptize none, that Appeared unwilling, to manifest Repentance. Persons,
that have not been Baptized, should Repent of their Sins, and manifest, by all
proper ways, that they have truly Repented, that they may be Baptized. And
being Baptized, they should Labor, to Improve their Baptism, to Promote their
Holiness, if they would attend all the Work of the Lord. Unto a Repenting
Sinner, it may be Advised as, in Act. 22.16. Arise, and be Baptized, and wash
away thy Sins, calling on the Name of the Lord. Otherwise, there would some of
the Work of the Lord be Neglected.

AND then, those up grown Christians, that are capable of Examining themselves,
concerning their Knowledge, to Discern the Lords Body; and concerning their
Faith, to Feed upon Him; and concerning their Love to God and Christ, and the
Saints, because of their Holiness; and to all their Neighbors to Desire their
Benefit; and concerning their Unfeigned Repentance; and their Desires and
Labors about their New Obedience; They should Repair to the Table of the Lord;
And they should Improve the Supper of the Lord, to Excite and Assist their
Holy, Humble, Thankful, Delightful, Believing and Penitent Remembrance of their
Lord, and of His Love to their Souls, that they may Grow in their Grace, Joy,
Comfort and Preparation for the Enjoyment of their Lord, in His Heavenly
Glories. This they must do, if they would attend all the Work of the Lord. For
so is it expressly Commanded, in 1 Cor. 11.28. Let a man Examine himself, and
Eat of that Bread, and Drink of that Cup. And about Eating and Drinking the
Sacramental Bread and Wine, our Lord says to His Disciples, This do, in
Remembrance of me.

BUT Christians may not content themselves in the Enjoyment of these Ordinances
of God, but they must be careful, to Improve them, for the ends, for which God
has Appointed them; to Promote their Faith, Repentance, Holiness and Meetness
for Heaven. For it is not the Enjoyment, but the Improvement of Privileges,
that will do Good.

NOR may Persons pretend, that they would Improve the Ordinances of God, if
they might Enjoy them, while they are not Prepared for them. If they are unfit
for the Holy Ordinances of God, they cannot safely Attend them. It would be a
Dangerous thing for Persons to Attend the Sealing Ordinances of God, while they
Know themselves, to be in the gall of Bitterness and in the bond of Wickedness;
or under the Power of any Reigning Sin.

FOR if Persons are Baptized, while they know themselves to be Resolved
Sinners, it is no wonder, if their Baptism Seal them up under their Impiety,
forever: No wonder, if, like Simon Magus, they are given over to Ungodliness,
and are more Ungodly after their Baptism than ever they were before.

AND then, be sure, if Persons Venture unto the Table of the Lord, while they
Know themselves to be Resolved Sinners, It is no wonder, if they are, by that
Ordinance, Confirmed in their Iniquity. No wonder, if Satan do Enter into them,
as into Judas, after he had Received the Sop, that might be offered to him,
after the Administration of the Passover. Wonder not, if such Woeful Sinners
become such Hardened Sinners, that they cannot Repent, They will not Repent;
They will never be Renewed again to Repentance.

THE Ministers of the Lord Jesus Christ may not Administer these Holy
Ordinances to any that appear to be Wicked Sinners and continue Impenitent in
their Wickedness; This would be a Profanation of those Holy Ordinances. But
they must not be Profanely Prostituted unto the Ungodly Lusts of wicked
Sinners. This would be highly Displeasing to the Holy Lord.

THESE things are not mentioned for the Discouragement of any Serious Pious
Persons, that may be Weak in Grace and may be under Doubts and Fears: For such
will desire to attend the Work of the Lord with suitable Preparation: They will
endeavor that their Hopes may overcome their Fears. And are willing to give a
reason of their Hope, that they are Prepared for these Holy Ordinances.

AND if Persons Hope, they are Prepared for the Sealing Ordinances of the
Covenant of Grace, they should beware lest they become chargeable with that
Crime charged on some, in Mal. 3.7. Ye are gone away from mine Ordinances,
says the Lord. For if they are Guilty of such a Crime, they must Repent of it,
with bitter Humiliation, before the Lord, and before the World, if they would
attend all the work of the Lord. For Preparing our selves to Improve all the
Ordinances of the House of the Lord, belongs to the Work of the Lord which
Christians must not willingly Neglect, if they would keep clear from Rebellion
against the Lord, who has Commanded that Work for all Christians.

But we have still something more, to Add,

[V.] PROMOTING and Furthering the best Good of all about them, and especially
of those that are any way Related to them, and peculiarly of those, that are
under their Care and Charge, belongs to the Work of the Lord, that is Incumlent
on all Christians. For so are we Advised in Gal. 6.10. As we have Opportunity,
let us do good unto all, especially to them, who are of the Household of Faith.

IT is not enough, that we seek our own Welfare and Comfort, and the Welfare
and Comfort of those, that be related unto us: But we should strive, to Benefit
all sorts of Persons, both Friends and Foes; Imitating our Heavenly Father, who
causes His Sun to Shine and His Rain to Fall on the Just and the Unjust, on
the Good and the Evil. And we must Pray for them that Persecure us, and that
Despitefully use us. These are some things belonging to the Work of the Lord,
Commanded by our Lord, in Mat. 5.44. I say unto you, Love your Enemies, Bless
them, that Curse you, and Pray for them, that Despitefully use you and
Persecute you, that you may (Appear to) be the Children of your Father which is
in Heaven.

BUT we must in a peculiar manner be concerned for all the People of God, all
that call on the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ and Love Him in Sincerity. These
are of the Household of Faith; and to these (and to others) we must do Good, not
only, by our Prayers and by our Counsels, and by our Giving to them, if they
Need, and by our Forgiving of them, if they Offend, but also By setting before
them, the Example of a Good Conversation, that they may see our Good Works, and
Glorify our Heavenly Father. This belongs to the Work of the Lord.

AND most particulatly should we be Concerned for those, that be Related unto
us and are under our Care and Charge, if we desire to attend all the Work of
the Lord. For as True as well as Old is the Assertion, If Really Good then
Relatively Good.

THEY that be most nearly Related should often think, How Know thou, O Man,
but thou may save thy Wife! And how Know thou, O Woman, but thou may
save thy Husband! They should strive to Live, as Heirs together of the Grace of
Life, that they may Help one another in the way to Blessedness. If they would
show that they Sincerely mind the Work of the Lord.

AND Pious Parents, must Teach their Children about Christianlty, and Charge
them, to mind Good Things and Warn them to shun Bad Things, and Pray daily for
them and with them, and bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.

AND Godly Children must Honor their Parents and Obey them and strive to
Please them and Comfort and Rejoice them, and make their Souls Glad, by letting
them see, that they Love to Walk in the Truth, if they Attend the Work of the
Lord as it should be attended.

AND all Superious have Duties Incumbent on them, toward their Inferiors, that
must be Attended by them that will do the Work of the Lord. And,

[VI.] DILIGENCE and Faithfulness in their Particular Calling, belong to the
Work of the Lord that is Incumbent on all Christians. For so are they Advised,
in 1 These. 4.11. Study to be Quiet and to do your own Business, Working with
your Hands, that you may Walk Honestly toward them, that are without, and that
ye may have need of nothing.

IT is plain, that they do not Walk Honestly, that have no Business of their
own to mind. Then they do not mind the Work of the Lord. Therefore Christians
must have some Business of their own to mind. Their Bones, or their Brains, or
both must be Employed in some Good Business, whereby their Neighbors may be
Adtaged, in their Souls, or Bodies, or Estates, or some of their Desirable
Interests; otherwise, they will not mind the Work of the Lord.

THE Apostle Advises in Tit. 3.8. I will that thou constantly Affirm, that
they who Profess to have Believed in God, be careful to maintain Good Works.
Part of the meaning is this; Professors of Christianity must have some Honest
Employment, that may be Good, Useful and Profitable, not only to themselves,
but also to others: For else they do not attend all the Work of the Lord.

YEA, Christians must be Diligent in their Callings, they must not think to
Live without some Work, of some sort, or other. They are sorty Christians if
they Deserve the Name of Christians, who would attend no Business if they had
wherewithal to Live in the World, without any Business. They that have no Work
of their own, to mind, he sure, they do not mind the Work of the Lord. Persons
may be Diligent about their Business, without being real Christians, but they
cannot be Real Christians, that have no care about their Business.

HAVE not some of us known those, that would Pretend, that if they had less
Business about their Callings, they would Spend more Time in the Exercises of
Religion? But what Exercises of Religion have some such People Attended, when
they have had less, to do, or have done less, than they used to do, about their
Particular Callings! Their Drinking, or Gaming, or Smoking away of their
Precious Time, has not been to spend their Time in the Work of the Lord.
Spending their Time in Vain Talk, in Backbiting and Reviling, it Censuring and
Slandering of their Neighbors has not been to Spend it in the Work of the
Lord. Nor has it been the Work of the Lord, which those People have Attended,
who have spent Abundance of Time, in Laboring, to Entice and Seduce their
Neighbors from the Means of Grace, or to Prejndice their Minds against the
Ordinances of God, or the Ambassadors of Christ, and so to Harden their Hearts
in the Ways of Ungodliness. These have not been the Works of the Lord. But some
Sinners have Attended such Works. But when will they Repent and give Glory to
God, by giving any Evidence of their Unfeigned Repentance for their Wicked
Works! Oh! That they would consider, whose Works these be, and what will be the
Wages for such Works! And would be Excited unto Works Meet for Repentance.

BUT still, they that would Attend the Work of the Lord, must be Diligent about
the Works of their Particular Callings, and Faithful in them, as well as
Diligent.

CHRISTIANS must be Faithful in their Particular Callings, by doing all in
Obedience to God, with Dependence on Christ, for Assistance and Acceptance, in
all that they do; with design for the Glory of God, Relying on Him for Grace,
to do all in such Order and Season, after such manner, as may best Promore the
great End of their Being.

NOR have we yet mentioned all: But to Sum up all in one Article more, we may
now say,

[VII.] CONTINUANCE and Perseverance about the Work of their Souls, To work out
their Salvation, to make sure of their Salvation, belong to the Work of the
Lord, Incumbent on all Christians. For so Advised the Apostle Paul, in Romans
2.7. To them, who by Patient continuance in well-Doing, seek for Glory and
Honor and Immortallity, God will render Eternal Life. And in Phil. 2.12. Work
out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, for it is God, which works in
you, to will and to do, of His good Pleasure. And so Advised the Apostle Peter,
in 2. Epist. 1.10. Give Diligence, to make your Calling and Election sure. And
the Apostle to the Hebrews Advises, Chap. 6.12. We desire that every one of you
show the same Diligence (that is the same Diligence, that you have showed, and
see that you continue Diligent:) unto the full Assurance of Hope, unto the End.
To this agrees the Advice of our Savior, in Mat. 10.22. He that endures to
the End, shall be Saved. And in Rev. 2.10. Be thou Faithful to the Death, and I
will give thee a Crown of Life. All these Advices Prove that a continued
Patience and a persevering Diligence must be maintained by them that do the
Work of the Lord; And they should strive, to maintain such a Walk with God, as
to Enjoy the constant Shines of His Countenance upon their Souls, that they
might see know and be fully Assured, that He has Loved them with an
Everlasting Love, and that nothing shall separate them from the Love of God in
Christ Jesus,

INDEED These are not the Common Seize of the Generality of Christians:
But all Christians, are obliged to be concerned for such Desirable Seize.

FOR though the Work of the Holy Spirit of God, in Sealing the Souls of Believers
on Christ, and giving to them a certain Assurance, that they are the Children
of God, be an Arbitrary Operation of that Almighty and Eternal Spirit; He has
not bound Himself to attend our Endeavors; yet seeing we may not Expect the
Impressions of the Holy Spirit by His Power on our Souls, without our serious
Endeavors, Therefore should we be Diligent, in the use of all Means, that we
may use, to come to know, that we are the Children of God; that we are born
again, that we have passed from Death unto Life: And that we have Believed in
the Lord Jesus Christ; And that we are in the Favor of God, and have our Sins
Pardoned, and are daily Advancing in our meetness to partake of the Heavenly
Inheritance, and that we shall safely Arrive, at last, in the Kingdom of Glory,
to be ever with the Lord.

THESE are some Things belonging to the Work of the Lord, that is Incumbent on
all Christians.

BUT now,

PROP. II. ALL Christians must Abound in this Work of the Lord. No Christians
are Exempted from being Concerned in this Work of the Lord. The Things
mentioned belong to the Work of the Lord, which all Christians must, in their
several Places attend.

SOME of the Things mentioned are Absolutely Necessary to Salvation; there can
be no Salvation without Believing on Christ, Repenting of Sin, Following of
Holiness.

OTHERS of the Things, that have been Mentioned, are Necessary to our
Consolation, in this World, and our Preparation for the Glories of the Heavenly
World: We must Attend the Ordinances of God; we must Benefit our Neighbors,
and we must be Diligent about our Particular Callings; and we must Work out our
Salvation, giving Diligence, to make our Calling and Election Sure, if we will
have Solid Comfort in this World, or Lasting Glory in the World to come. There
can be no Well grounded Hope, nor Comfortable Satisfaction, for us, that we are
in a Good Way, and shall come to a Good End, as long as we are Careless or
Negligent about the Things mentioned.

NOR is it enough, that we do a little about these Things, but there is great
and abundant Reason, that we should Abound in them. And if it be now Inquired,

Quest. BY what Motives, are we to be Excited, to Abound in the Work of the
Lord?

We might Answer,

Answ. COMPREHENDING the Motive in our Text.

I. THE Glorious GOD, who is FATHER, SON and HOLY SPIRIT, has done Abundance,
and is doing Abundance, and will do Abundance, for all Christians; and
therefore should They all do Abundance in the Work of the Lord. And here, we
might Consider,

WHAT has the Glorious GOD done for all Christians?

1. GOD the FATHER has Freely Loved them, from Everlasting and Chosen them,
from Everlasting, to be Objects of His Everlasting Love; and has given them to
His Eternally Beloved Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Eternal Covenant of
Redemption; to Save them with Eternal Salvation, to bring them to Eternal Glory.

FOR unto every Sincere Christian may the Almighty God say, as in Jer. 31.3. I
have Loved thee with an Everlasting Love, therefore with loving Kindness have I
drawn thee.

AND about all Real Christians might our Lord Jesus Christ own, before His
Eternal Father, as in Joh. 17.6. I have manifested thy Name unto them that thou
gave me out of the World: Thine they were and thou gave them unto me, end
they have kept thy Words.

GOD the Father has had Eternal Purposes of Grace about His Chosen, whom He
has Given to His Son Jesus Christ, in the Eternal Covenant, wherein He has
Engaged, to bring them unto Eternal Blessedness.

EVEN, before the Foundation of the World, in the Days of Eternity, the Eternal
God intended Good things for His Chosen. He Promised these Good things unto the
Lord Jesus Christ, (See 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1.2.) And He Created the World, and
Brought them into the World, and Ordered the Means of Grace, for their Benefit,
that they might be brought unto Salvation by the Lord Jesus Christ. For He has
so Loved the World, that He has sent His only Begotten Son into the World,
that whosoever Believes in Him should not Perish, but have Everlasting Life.
And

2. GOD the SAVIOR has Loved the Chosen of God, so as to Accept of the Offer
of them, by God the Father, in the Covenant of Redemption, He has undertaken
for their Salvation. He Promised, To come into the World, To become a Man, To
be made under the Law, To Die and Suffer for the Sins of His People, To Satisfy
the Justice of God and to Deliver the Chosen of God from that Eternal Wrath,
which they deserved by Sin. He Promised, To bring them our of their Misery and
to bring them to Glory for Ever. And according to His Promise, He did, in the
Fullness of time, at the Time appointed, come into the World to Save them, and
to Die for them, that He might Save them. Answering all the Demands of the Law,
He Obeyed all the Commands of the Law for them, and He has Engaged that, He
will not leave them, until He has brought them unto His Glory.

HIS Design is declared, in 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a Faithful saying and worthy
of all Acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners (And
in John 6.37, 38.9.40.)

HIS Desire is Declared in John 17.24. Father, I will that they, whom thou have
given me, be with me, where I am, that they may behold my Glory, which thou
have given me, for thou have Loved me before the Foundation of the World. (And
in Rev. 3.21.)

HE is become the Author of Eternal Salvation to all that Obey Him. He has
provided Eternal Blessedness for them, He has bought them out of the Hands of
Divine Justice, with His own most Precious Blood, and brought them out of the
Kingdom of Satan, from under his Bondage, by His own Almighty Power, that they
might be His willing Servants, To be improved for His Glory. And He has Bought
Heaven for their Eternal Possession. He had a Right unto Heaven, as He was the
Eternal Son of God. But by His Obedience to God, His Father, He Purchased a
Right unto Heaven, for all the Children of God. And He makes over this Right
unto them, that they may have it for their Everlasting Inheritance. Having
Spent His Life, He shed His Blood for them, He Died for them, and Rose again
from the Dead for them, and Ascended up into Heaven, to Take and Keep
Possession of Heaven for them, until He brings them into the Possession of
Heaven.

3. GOD the HOLY SPIRIT has brought home the Benefits of Redemption, to all
that are indeed Christians, who begin to Enjoy the Salvation, that is Purposed,
by God the Father for them and Purchased for them, by God their Savior.

THE Eternal Spirit of God Awakens them, Inlightens them, Convinces them; and
makes them Concerned, about their Eternal Affairs. And Excites and Quickens
them, to mind the Things, of their Souls; He Inclines and Assisteth them to
Receive the Lord Jesus Christ, for their Prophet, their Priest and their King,
with all that Wisdom and Righteousness and Holiness and Redemption, that He
has Procured for them: And He Persuades them, to Accept and Embrace the Son of
God for their Eternal Savior, as He is offered in the Gospel. And He Comforts
them, and Supports them and Strengthens them, and carries them through all
Duties and Trials, to the Glory of God.

AND God, who is Father Son and Spirit, Raises up, and Accomplishes and
Authorizes, and Encourages and Sends forth and Prospers and Succeeds the
Faithful Ministers of the Gospel, To Preach the Word of God, where His Chosen
are scattered in the World; so that they may Hear the Call of the Gospel and be
Invited to Accept of Salvation, offered in the Gospel.

YEA, that God, who is Father, Son and Spirit, sends His Holy Angels to
Attend, to Defend, to Assist and to Comfort His Holy People, as long as they
live in this World. And to receive their Spirits, at their Death and to convey
them safely into the Regions of Glory. [As, in Psalm. 34.7. Psalm. 91.11. Heb.
1.14. Mat. 18.10. Luke 16.22.]

YEA, All the Providence of God, as well as all His Ordinances, are intended
and managed for the Benefit of the Faithful Children of God. The whole World
being made for the Glorious Messiah, it is Preserved in its Being and in some
Order, for His Glory, and for the Benefit of those, whom God the Father has
given to Him. And God will keep all things, in the whole World in such an
Order, that all His Elect shall have Time, to be Prepared for Admission into
His Kingdom of Glory.

THENCE it comes to pass, that sometimes Great Nations and Kingdoms, though very
Sinful, are Preserved, for several Generations, for the sake of some of the
Chosen of God, that are to be Born among those Nations, under those Kingdoms.
Rahab the Harlot is an Instance of such a Thing. Several Nations and Kingdoms,
notwithstanding all their Wickedness were Preserve for several Hundreds of
Years, until she was Born, brought up and come to Years of Understanding so as
to have the offer of Salvation, that she might Believe and be Saved.

AND sometimes, the God of heaven puts mighty Empires into Terrible Confusions,
for the sake of some few of His Chosen, that Reside in those Empires, that they
may be brought unto the Knowledge of the way of Salvation. Was nothing like
this Effected by the Taxing ordered at the time of the Birth of our Savior?

YEA, the Gospel may be Preached a long time, in diverse Places without very
much Apparent Benefit, unto the People, that now Live in those Places. But God
may have designs of Planting and Settling His Gospel there, for the Benefit of
great Numbers of Souls, in after Generations.

HOWEVER, certain it is, that all the great things, that are Performed, by the
Alwise God, in the World, from time to time, are Designed and Ordered, for His
Glory, in the Eternal Salvation of His Chosen.

THEN, be sure, as God has done, so He is doing Abundance for all Christians.

HE looks after them all their Life, Day and Night, continually. He gives His
Holy Angels Chang concerning them. He keeps the Celestial Bodies, from Age to
Age, in their Places and Motions, for their Benefit. He Orders the Seasons of
the Year for their Good. He Manages every thing upon the Earth, so as will, at
last, be for their Welfare. And they will see and have cause, to own, the most
High has Performed all things well for them.

CERTAINLY then He has done Abundance for them, and is doing Abundance for
them; Therefore should they Abound in the Work of the Lord. They are under
Everlasting Obligations, to do so. If there were no more done for them, than
what God has already done for them and is doing daily for them, while they
Live in this World.

BUT besides all that God has done for them and is doing for them, all the
time, that they Live here, there is more, Abundance more, that God will do for
them, to all Eternity.

FOR the Eternal God has Reserved the chief Recompenses of Christians, for the
Heavenly World. There He will show what He can do, to make them Inexpressibly
Blessed, Inconceiveably Happy: To Fill and Please their Souls with Everlasting
Satisfaction, so that they shall Desire no more, than they Enjoy.

ALL that God is doing for His People, here in this World, though it be
Abundance, yet it is nothing to be Compared, with what God will do for His
People in the World to come.

OH! How great is the Good, that God has laid up, for them that Fear and Trust
in Him, in this World, to be laid out upon them in the other World.

EYE has not seen, Ear has not Heard, nor has it Entered into the Heart of
Man to conceive, what God Will Do for His People hereafter, in the World of
Eternal Glory.

HE will not only Receive their Spirits into unutterable Glories, in the
Heavenly Paradise, to Dwell in His Presence before the Lord Jesus Christ, until
the Resurrection, But Then, He will Raise their Bodies, and make them Glorious,
like the Body of the Lord Jesus Christ, and will set them on Thrones, and set
Crowns on them, and make them higher than ever were any of the Kings of the
Earth, in this World. And He will Honor them, in the great Day of Judgment
before all the World: And when that Day is finished, He will Receive them, both
Body and Soul, into the Glories of His Heavenly Kingdom, where they shall be,
For ever Beholding His Face in Righteousness and Satisfied with His Likeness;
Drinking of Rivers of Delights and Swimming in an Eternal Ocean of Admirable,
Spiritual and Soulsatisfying Pleasures.

THEY shall be continually Praising, Honoring, and Glorifying their Ever
Glorious Creator and Redeemer and Sanctifier, before the Holy Angels of God:
And Perpetually accompanying of those Blessed Spirits, in saying, Blessing and
Honor and Glory and Power be unto Him that Sittethon the Throne and unto the
Lamb for ever and ever.

THEY will be for ever with Joyful Wonders, Contemplating on the Glorious and
Excellent Perfections of the Eternal GOD. They will see His Wonderful Power and
Wisdom and Goodness, Displayed in the Works of Creation; They will see further
Displays of these Attributes, in the Works of Providence, wherein they will see
also the Righteousness and Holiness and Faithfulness of God manifested. And
further Manifestations of all these Eternal Excellencies will appear in the
Works of Redemption, wherein likewise they will see Glorious Appearances of the
Grace, and Mercy and Compassion of God, in the Exercises of His Loving Kindness
toward Unworthy Miserable Sinners, for their Salvation by the Lord Jesus
Christ. And these Contemplations will Excite them unto Everlasting Hallelujahs.
They will never be weary of Praising the Lord. But will say, Blessed be the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has Loved us from Everlasting and
given us to His own Son, to Save us; And Blessed be the Lamb of God, that has
Loved us and Washed us from our Sins, with his own Blood; And Blessed be the
Holy and Eternal Spirit of God, for His Applying to us all the Benefits of
Redemption, and bringing us unto the Possession of all the Happiness, purposed
for us by God the Father and purchased for us, by God our Savior.

AND they will find themselves Compassed with, and Confirmed in the Love of God
Eternally. And will be so Satisfied as to wish for no more.

BUT all Words are dark things, to Describe or Declare the Happiness of the
Saints of God in Heaven, or to show what God will do for all real Christians,
in the Heavenly World.

HOWEVER, this we may say; none of their Labors in the Work of the Lord will
be in Vain, they will be Abundantly Recompensed, with a far more exceeding and
Eternal Weight of Glory.

THIS is part of what the Apostle intends, when he says, Your Labor shall not
be invain in the Lord. And, by such Considerations he would have Christians, to
be Excited, to Abound in the Work of the Lord. And we should be all moved, to
Abound in the Work of the Lord, by considerations, about what God has done, is
doing and will do Abundantly for His People. He is Able, to do Exceeding
Abundantly, above all that we can Ask or Think. And He will Glorify His Power
in doing Abundantly for all that Love and Fear Him.

THE Apostle considering this, would Labor more Abundantly than others, and
would have Christians to consider, what God has done, in Shedding the Holy
Spirit Abundantly on them that they may be Quickened to Good Works. And He
considers the Exceeding Abundant Grace of the Lord Jesus unto Him, and thinks,
if Grace has much more Abounded, where Sin has Abounded, and God has
Pardoned Abundantly, where Sinners have Sinned Abundantly, then they should
strive to Abound in the Work of the Lord. They that are Forgiven much are to
Love much, and to do much for God, and never grow weary of well doing. But,

II. WICKED Sinners do Abound in Bad Works. And Commit abundance of Wickedness
in Sinning against the Lord: Therefore should the Children of God show their
Love unto their Heavenly Father, by their Abounding in Good Works, doing
Abundance for the Glory of God.

THE. Days Foretold in the Book of Daniel, seem to be coming Apace, when, The
Wicked will do Wickedly. There is no Help for it. There is no Hindering of it.

YOUNG People Resolve to keep their Course, in the Ways of Ungodliness,
though-the Word of God and His Judgments lesser and greater warn them, and they
see their Companions going into Eternity, leaving them under Awful
Apprehensions about them; And though Parents warn them, they will not hearken
to their Counsels. And though Plagues come and God pours out the Vials of His
Indignation, yet Sinners will go on in the ways of Wickedness. And is there not
Danger that the World will still grow more Wicked and more Woeful than ever
since the Days of Noah! Don't the Sins of Sodom Abound? Is there not Abundance
of Idleness? If so, Then Abundance of other Wickedness will be. No wonder, If
there be Abundance of Uncleaness, Injustice, Oppression, Extortion, Impiety,
Prophanity; and if all manner of Iniquity Abound.

BUT the more Sinners do against God, the more should Christians do for God.
They should be Studious to be Able to give a good Answer, to that Demand, Mat.
5.47. What do you more than others? They should strive to Excel in Goodness; to
be Exceeding Good; and Contrive to do Abundance of Good Remembering what our
Lord says, in Joh. 15.8. Herein is my Father Glorified, that you bear much
Fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples.

III HAVE not we our selves done Abundance against God? The Saints of God would
own as, in Tit. 3.3. We our selves were sometimes Disobedient, serving diverse
Lusts and Pleasures. And this consideration is mentioned, to Excite them to be
ready to every good Work. Then should we be Quickened, to Abound in the Work of
the Lord, by considering we have done Abundance against the Lord.

PROP. III. IT is the Duty of all Christians to Abound Always in the Work of
the Lord. Not only while they are Young, but also when they are Old: And
therefore they should begin betimes to do Abundance of Good, and continue to
bring forth Fruit, in Old Age. Not only in times of Prosperity, but also in
times of Adversity, they should Abound in the Work of the Lord. As God is
Always at Work for them, so they should be always at Work for God.

Quest. BY what Methods are we to be Assisted in Abounding Always in the Work
of the Lord?

Answ. I LAY a good Foundation, for well doing, by getting a Good Principle in
your Souls. Therefore,

1. GET a good Knowledge of the Truths of God, in your Souls. It is not good,
that the Soul be without Knowledge. This might Solomon Learn of his Father
David, who Charged him, in 1. Chron. 28.9. To know the God of His Father, and
serve Him, with a Perfect Heart and a Willing Mind. There can be no right
Service of God without good Knowledge. But if we Know the Truths of God, then
Happy are we if we do them. What Goodness without Know ledge? Therefore should
we Labor, to Know the Truths of God; That there is a Glorious God; That there
are Three Persons in the God head, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit:
That God Made and Rules the World; That Man was Made Holy; but by Sin, Fell in
to a Miserable Condition, from whence he could not, by any Strength or Worth of
his own, Recover himself; That the Lord Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God,
becoming a Man, so being God and Man, in two Distinct Natures, in one Person
for ever; is the only Savior of Sinners; That He is a Prophet, a Priest and a
King. for their Salvation; That He is Able and Willing to Save them, that come
to Him; that there is no Salvation without Faith in Christ; That this Faith is
the Gift of God; That God Gives it, in Answer to Prayer, to them that use the
Means Appointed, to be Attended, by them, that will Enjoy the Influences of the
Holy Spirit, for the Working of Faith in their Souls; That Saving Faith will be
Accompanied with, and Evidenced by, Good Works; That there is an Heaven for the
Godly and an Hell for the Wicked; That our Souls are Immortal, and there will
be a Resurrection of our Bodies and a Day of Judgment, wherein all must be
Ordered unto their Eternal State; That our Life Time is the only Time of
Probation, for us, to make Preparation for Eternity.

2. FIRMLY Believe these Truths of God. He that comes to God must Believe that
He is, and that He is a Rewarder of them that Seek Him Diligently. And so must
he that Works the Work of the Lord. Be not Satisfied, that you seem, to
Assent to the Truths of God. But see, that you so Firmly Believe them, that you
can Venture your Lives and your Souls upon the Truths of God, which you Profess
to Believe And then,

3. MAKE sure about a real Union with the Lord Jesus Christ. Believe in Him,
with a true Faith. For nothing will be well done, about the Work of the Lord,
until you begin about, the Work of Faith in the Lord. He says, Joh. 15.5.
Without me, you can do nothing. There will be no Abounding in the Work of the
Lord, by them that are out of Christ. Therefore get into Christ: And Exercise
Faith in Him, to Receive Strength from Him, to do the Work of God.

4. PENITENTLY Beg the Pardon of all Sin, for the Sake of Christ. The Guilt of
Sin, like a Chain, Binds the Soul, and like a Weight, Clogs the Soul, so as, to
hinder it from Good. If the Soul be Overwhelmed with Guilt, how can it run the
Ways of the Commandments of God? Or Abound in the Work of the Lord? Therefore
Cry to God, that, for the Sake of Christ, He would Pardon all Sin, both
Original and Actual, as well of Omission, as of Commission, against the Law and
against the Gospel, Secret as well as Open. Confess and Bewail every Sin, that
you can Remember. Leave it, Loath it and Loath your self for it, and say as
Romans 7.24. O Wretched one that I am, who shall Deliver me!

LAY your Foundation Deep, in Penitential Humiliation for Sin past and for
Indwelling Corruption, while you are Endeavoring, to Abound in the Work of the
Lord. You must cease to do Evil, and Beg Pardon for doing Evil, that you may
begin to learn to do well, or you will never Persevere in doing well. And be
sure to look to the Righteousness of Christ, for the Forgiveness of Sin. They
that think, to Satisfy for their Bad Works, by doing of Good Works, will not
Abound in the Work of the Lord. You must get Pardon for ill doing, before you
will do well.

THEREFORE Exercise Repentance and Evidence Repentance. Let it be seen, that
you do Repent. This indeed is part of the Work of the Lord, but such a Part,
that it must be done, or no part of that Work will be well done. The Life of a
Christian Abounding in the Work of the Lord, must be a Life of Repentance.

5. A Work of Grace must be wrought in the Soul, by the Spirit of God; or there
will be no Abounding in the Work of the Lord. For in, Ephesians. 2.10. We are told,
that We are His Workmarship Created in Christ Jesus, unto good Works, which God
has before Ordained, that we should Walk in them. Until a good Work of Grace
be wrought in the Soul, by the Spirit of God, there will be no good Work done
by the Soul. God must say to the Soul Live; or it will not Work any good Work;
and then be sure it will nor Abound in the Work of the Lord.

THEREFORE must there be Prayer to God, for the Regenerating influences of the
Spirit of God, before we shall begin, to do Well. People may not Indulge
themselves, in Sloth and say we must wait, until God will please to Change our
Hearts, and make us willing to do well: But they must Pray, to God, to work, in
them, to will and to do that they may do well.

REGENERATION, by which the Soul passes out of a state of Spiritual Death,
into a state of Spiritual Life, is Absolutely Necessary, for Beginning, and
Abounding in the Work of the Lord: And Supplication to the Lord is to be
Attended by them, that would Experience a work of Regeneration.

WHILE Souls are in the Kingdom and under the Power of Satan, they will not do
the Work of the Lord: Therefore must People Pray to God, that being Delivered
out of the Hands of their Enemies, and from the Power of Darkness, and
Translated into the Kingdom of Christ, and having a New Heart put into them and
the Spirit of Life given to them, they may Serve the Lord, and Abound in the
Work of the Lord, without any Sinful Fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before
Him, all the Days of their Life.

II. TAKE heed of Mistaking, about the Affairs of your Souls. Be not Deceived,
in Thinking that you are in a Good State, if you are not really turned from
Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God, and have not Received
the Forgiveness of Sin, through Faith in Christ.

IF you don't lay a good Foundation, upon the Rock, Jesus Christ, by a True
Faith in a Sound Repentance, with a Good Knowledge of, and a Firm Assent to the
Truths of God, you may seem to do Well for a while, and Abound in Good things,
But there is Danger, that you will Decay and your Leaves may Wither and Fall.
Therefore Search and Try, that you may Know Yourselves. It is Advised, in 2
Cor. 13.5. Examine Yourselves. Thousands Perish by Presumption. They Think that
things are well with their Souls. And they Hope, that they are well. But they
will not Examine themselves, to Know certainly how things are: And so they are
Undone for ever. They hope that they have Believed and Repented and are in a
safe State: But are not willing to be at the Pains for an Impartial,
Penetrating Self. Examination, so as to Know thoroughly the State of their Souls,
and so they Spend their Days under the Influence of their Vain Hopes, until
they lie down in Eternal Sorrow. Therefore be wise, to make a through Trial: And
be not Satisfied until you are Certified that Christ is yours and you are His.
And if you be really in Christ, then He will Strengthen you with Strength in
your Soul to Abound in the Work of the Lord.

III. SET about the Work of God now; in this present time: Seek first the
Kingdom of God. Make haste, without delay, to keep the Commandments of the
Lord. Young People should begin Presently: Now while they are Young, to do the
Work of God. And all People should be Careful, to Improve the Present time, or
they will not as they should Abound in the Work of the Lord.

IV. BE Sincere in all you Endeavors about Religion. Hypocrites Frequently
turn Apostates. Pray to God, that your Hearts may be Sound in the Statutes of
the Lord, and Right in the Sight of God. If you will Abound in His Work. Be not
Careless about the Secret Duties of Christianity. Let the Holy Angels of God
see that you Fray in Secret unto God, as your Heavenly Father constantly every
Day. Be not Satisfied with a Name, to Live, nor with a Form of Godliness. But
be thoroughly Religious.

V. THINK often, how Dreadful, to miss of Happiness, at last, by leaving the
Work of God. And Remember, how it has been with others. The Inhabitants of
Capernaum, they did not as those of Nazareth, rise up, and thrust Christ out of
their City, nor like the Gadarenes desire Him, to be gone out of their Coasts:
But they Heard Him, every Sabbath Day, and seemed, to Delight in Hearing Him:
And yet says He to them, in Mat. 11.25. Thou Capernaum, which art Exalted to
Heaven, shall be brought down to Hell. It is not enough, to Attend Sermons, to
Commend Sermons, but you must Practice them, or they will Condemn you. Be Doers
of the Word and not Hearers only, Deceiving your own selves. And Reallize to
your selves, that Persons may do much, and go far, and yet after all fall short
of Heaven, because they have not the Root of the Matter in them, and so they
grow weary of the Work of God and will not Abound in that Work, but turn aside
unto Crooked Ways and are led forth with the Workers of Iniquity.

VI. DREAD being Ruined by the Trinity of this World; The Lust of the Flesh,
the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life. They that are engaged in pursuing
the Pleasures, the Treasures, and the Honors of this World, will not Abound in
the Work of the Lord. Therefore is it Advised, in 1 Pet. 2.12. Abstain from
Fleshly Lusts, that war against the Soul. And in 1 John 2.15. Love not the
World, neither the things in the World. If any Man Love the World, the Love of
the Father is not in him. And in Joh. 5.44. How can you Believe, that Receive
Honor, one of another, and Seek not the Honor that comes from God only? By
these Admonitions it plainly Appears, that Sensuality, Covetousness and
Ambition must be Abandoned by them that will Abound in the Work of the Lord.

VII. BEGIN Well and Conclude Well, every Day and every Week and every
particular Undertaking; if you would Abound in the Work of the Lord. Therefore,

LET some of your first Thoughts in the Morning and some of your last Thoughts
in the Evening, be about God and Christ and your Souls and Heavenly and Eternal
Things. And in the Morning, think, What have I to Do this Day? And, how shall I
Spend this Day for the Glory of God and the Salvation of my own Soul and the
Souls of those, for whose Welfare, I should be Concerned? And if it should be
my last Day, how would I have it Spent? Wish and Pray that you may Spend the
Day Well, so as to be Able to give a Good Account before God, about your
Improving of the Day. And in the Evening think, what have I done this Day,
about the great Work of my Life? And Beg Pardon for the Sake of Christ, for all
that has been Amiss, before you Venture to lie down to Sleep. And try to Sleep
in the Love of God. An Heathen would Condemn the Christian, that should Neglect
all this Work of an Evening SelfExamination.

BUT all the Lords Day should be Spent in the Secret, Private and Public
Duties of Religion, except what the Works of Necessity and Compassion Require:
And they should be Attended with such Holy Frames of Souls that we may be going
toward Heaven, while we are Attending those Works. And the little Spaces of
Time, that bye between the Stated Exercises of Religion should be filled with
Useful Thoughts, about Spiritual and Eternal Things, that we may be in the
Spirit all the Lords Day and Finish the Day with God.

AND upon every Particular and Remarkable Undertaking, we should Think, will
this be for the Glory of God? And how may it be best Managed for His Glory? And
when it is Finished and we Review our Managements of the Undertaking, we should
Beg Pardon of God for all that Appears Faulty in our Managements. This might
Help, to do Better for time to come.

AND if Christians did at the Conclusion of the Week, look over the Affairs of
the Week past, and Ask Forgiveness from God, for what has been Irregular, and
Ask for Grace to Walk more Agreeably to Rule, in the next Week, it would Help
them, to Abound in the Work of the Lord.

VIII. ALWAYS Repair to, and Rely on the Lord Jesus Christ, for Constant
Supplies of New Grace, for every Exercise. Venture upon nothing, without
looking to Christ, for New Grace to Help through all.

NEVER Imagine that you can do any thing without the Grace of Christ Helping.
Strive to be Able to say as He could in Phil. 4.13. I can do all things,
through Christ Enabling me.

WHEN a Duty is to be Performed, look to Christ for Grace, to Perform the Duty,
when a Mercy is to be Improved, look to Christ, for Grace to Improve the Mercy.

WHEN a Trial is to be Endured, look to Christ for Grace to Endure it well.

WHEN a Corruption is to be Conquered, look to Christ, for Grace to overcome
the Corruption.

SO when a Temptation is to be Resisted, look to Christ, for Succor and for
Assistance to Encounter the Temptation well and to Maintain Humility, after the
Victory over the Temptation. So do all in the Name of Christ.

ACKNOWLEDGE that all Grace must come from the Everlasting Love of God the
Father, as Purchased, by the Blood of Jesus Christ and Applied by the Holy
Spirit, unto your Souls, most freely; both Inherent Grace and Assisting Grace;
Directing Grace and Exciting Grace; Preventing, Upholding and Accepting Grace.

WHILE you Preserve your Union with Christ, by a Living Faith, Maintain your
Communion with Christ, by a Working Faith, Deriving Grace from Christ, to Live
to God and Work for God. So Live by Faith on the Son of God: Then will you
Abound in the Work of the Lord, and be coming nearer and nearer unto the
Happiness of always Abounding in that Desire-able Work. But,

IX. PRAYING always with all Prayer and Supplication Watching thereunto with
all Perseverance, must be Remembered by them that would be so Happy as always to
Abound in the Work of the Lord.

PRAYER is a great part of our Work, and it must be Attended, or no part of our
Work will be well Attended: But there is other Work to be Attended besides
Prayer: Therefore when we are Advised, to be Praying always (and to Pray
continually, and to continue in Prayer:) It cannot intend, that we have nothing
to do, But to Pray: But the meaning is, that we should always keep a Frame, for
Prayer, and always mind the Time for Prayer; and be very often at the Work of
Prayer. Abound in that Work.

ALL the Children of God should Wait on their Heavenly Father Night and Day
with Prayer, in their Secret Places.

ALL the Servants of God should wait on the Lord, with Prayer, Morning and
Evening, in their Private Families.

ALL the People of God should wait on the Lord, with Prayer, on the Lords Day,
in their Public Assemblies.

THESE are the Ordinary Prayers, that they should Attend, that would Abound in
the Work of the Lord. But Extraordinary Prayers must not be Neglected: They
should be Attended many times in a Year: Nor must Ejaculatory Prayers be
Neglected. They should be Attended many times in an Hour, by them that always
Abound in the Work of the Lord.

AND Watching must be joined with our Praying. We must Watch before Duty, Watch
in Duty and Watch after Duty. Watch, To discern what we may do for the Glory of
God, and Watch, To defear the Devices of our Foes, and Watch against all the
Beginnings of, or Tendencies to Apostasy from God. And Watchfully Observe and
Improve all Opportunities to do Good, as well as Watch in Prayer. And after all
Watch against all Pride, on Account of our Doing any thing, that we may through
Grace, hope is well done. For,

X. SELF-denial and Humility must not be forgotten, by them that would Abound
Always in the Work of the Lord. When our Lord was giving Lessons for them that
would Engage in His Work, He said in Mat. 16.24. If any Man will come after me,
let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me.

SINFUL Self must be Denied Absolutely. We must Deny all Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, Hate every False way, hate vain Thoughts, They must not lodge in
our Souls. We must be for Perfection of Holiness, before God.

THEN Righteous Self must be Denied Respectively; In point of Justification we
must Renounce all Reliance on our own Righteousness. And while we go on, about
the Work of the Lord, in the Strength of the Lord, make mention of His
Righteousness and that alone; saying, in the Lord have I Righteousness and
Strength.

AND Relative Self must be Denied Comparatively, so that we must be ready to
Forsake all Relations rather than leave the Work of the Lord.

YEA, Natural Self must be Denied Conditionally, so that we must be willing to
part with Ease, Health and Life, rather than to Neglect the Work of the Lord.

BUT then, Be sure all, Unnecessary, Unprofitable Familiarity with Ungodly
Company must be Abandoned, by them that would Abound in the Work of the Lord:
They that will keep the Commandments of God, must say, Depart from me, ye
workers of Iniquity. They must deny themselves of the Company not only of
Profane Transgressors, but also of Formal Professors; for both will hinder
from Always Abounding in the Work of the Lord.

AND they must take up their Cross, in their Expectation of Trouble and in
their Preparation for Trouble, before it comes, and in their Humble and Patient
Sustentation of Trouble, when God brings Trouble upon them; yea, though the
Trouble may come, on Account of their doing well, and because they Abound in
the Work of God.

SO must they Follow the Lord Jesus Christ, both by Obedience to Him, and by
Imitation of Him and they must Imitate Him in His Meekness, Lowliness, Humility
and Patience. And let Patience have her Perfect Work, that they may be Perfect
and Entire wanting nothing.

THEN after all these things, they that would always Abound in the Work of the
Lord, must Renounce all Apprehensions or Imaginations, that they have Deserved
any thing of Good, at the Hands of God, by any of the Good Works that they have
done, though they have been a long time, Striving, every Day, to do Abundance
for God and for His Glory. For that is Part of the Lesson, that they must
always Remember, in Luke 17.10. When ye shall have done all those things, which
are Commanded you, say, we are Unprofitable Servants: We have done that which
was our Duty to do. We Deserve nothing, but have reason to be Thankful to God,
that He will Accept and Improve us in His Service. It is a great Favor, an
high Honor, that the Glorious and Eternal King of the World, will give us
Leave, to do any Work for Him, and will give Grace to us, to do His Work so,
that we may be Accepted, for the Sake of Jesus Christ.

AND therefore, though we may have a Respect unto the Recompense of the Reward,
in the Heavenly World for the Encouragement of our Souls in the Work of God,
yet we must not think, that we Deserve any of that Reward, by any of our Works,
though we Abound never so much in Good Works. But after all our Abounding in
the Work of God, we must look for Mercy. And the Reward must be Freely
Bestowed, by the Free Grace of God.

AND though we seem, to Labor in Vain, and Spend our Strength for Naught and
in Vain, as to any Success of our most Conscientious and Laborious Endeavors
to do Good, in our working for God, all our Days: And our Day may seem dark,
like the Night, and we may say, We have been Toiling all the Night and have
taken nothing yet we must not think, that God is dealing Hardly with us, in His
Denying of Success unto our Endeavors. But we must for ever Justify the Lord,
and say, He is Righteous in all His Ways and Holy in all His Works.

THE Lord is not Indebted unto Us, by our Abounding in His Work, but we are
Indebted unto His free Grace, for Assisting us in His Work. And therefore we
must not Murmur, nor Complain at any of His Dispensations about us. But be
willing, Humbly to deny our selves, and own that we deserve nothing of Good, by
all that we have done, how much and how well soever we have done; But have
reason to Lament and be Ashamed, that we have done no more nor better, and be
Contented, whatever God will do with us, and submit unto His Sovereign Will in
all things.

MOSES may take many Thousands of weary Steps, toward the Promised Land, with
Hopes, at length, to arrive there; And yet after all must be contented without
ever setting his Foot on the Desired Land.

ISAIAH may Preach a long Time to an hardHearted People, and may deliver
Thousands of Sermons in their Audience, and yet after all, may see the
Generality of an whole Generation of Sinners, Perishing in their impenitence,
without ever getting any good, by his Preaching; but he must be satisfied with
the Sovereignty of the most High God.

SO must the Servants of God be willing to Deny themselves, that they may
always be Abounding in the Work of the Lord.

THESE are some Rules to help Christians to be always Abounding in that Work,
wherein they shall find at last, that they have not Labored in Vain.

BUT if it be Demanded, Who can Attend all these Rules?

It might be readily Replied, None but Real Christians will follow the Rules
that have been mentioned.

THEREFORE the Conclusion of all, must be, with Two Advices.

FOR it may be supposed, that, as in most Congregations, where the Gospel has
been Preached Faithfully for any considerable Time, so in this Congregation,
there be two sorts of People to whom the Preceding things have been Proposed.
And both sorts must be Advised and Exhorted, to Accept of, Comply with and
Conform to, the Proposals.

MAY it not he feared that there be those, that have Lived all their Days, in
their Miserable Unregenracy, and are still going astray in the Greatness of
their Folly, and so have not begun to strike one stroke, about the Work of the
Lord, and are far from Abounding in that (...) They Abound in the Work of Sin,
but not in the Work of God. They are the Companions of Fools, that must be
destroyed, if they don't Repent, they show their Ungodliness by choosing the
Company of the Ungodly. And of these commonly is the biggest Number of most
Congregations. But,

MAY it not be Hoped, that there be some, at least, a small number, that are
Converted unto God in Christ, and show their Godliness, by chasing them that
Fear God, for their Companions. Both sorts must be Addressed.

First, LET them that Fear, that they are not become Real Christians, and so
have not so much as begun the Work of the Lord, now become real Christians and
begin that Work Immediately without any longer Delay.

DON'T Reject the Advice, with saying, We cannot Convert our selves and
therefore must lie still until God will Please to Convert us.

BUT O Mourn, that all your Days have Rolled away under the Anger of God, and
you have lost all your Time hitherto, and are in continual Danger of dropping
down into Everlasting Burnings, because of your Unfruitfulness under the Means
of Grace; and give Thanks to God, that you have yet a Space to Repent and a
Time to Cry (...) pardoning Mercy, and any room to Hope, that (...) Cry may be
Heard. And Cry mightily to (...), for His Mercy, for the Sake of the Lord Jesus
Christ; And Beg that He would Bestow Converting Grace, on your Souls, and Pray
for His Holy Spirit, to take Possession of your Souls and Work Saving Grace in
your Hearts and bring you into a Real Union with Christ, and try to Give your
selves to Christ, Commit and Resign your Souls into His Saving Hands, Comply
with the first and the least Motions of His Holy Spirit, that are always
Agreeable unto the Doctrines of the Holy Scripture: Break off your Sinful
Courses, Forsake your Ungodly Companions, Think on your Ways and Turn your
Feet into the Testimonies of the Lord, make haste without Delay about these
Things.

YOU are not Urged to do any Part of the Work of God, by your own Strength, but
to Pray to God for His Grace and look, to Christ, for Strength, to Help you to
Turn to God and to Believe in Christ, that you may do the Work of the Lord, and
Abound always in that Work. The Lord Graciously Help you to do so.

Secondly, LET them that Hope, that they are become Real Christians, and have
begun the Work of God, go on with that Work as Becomes Real Christians. Be
Humbled for all Infirmities and Imperfections. Beg Pardon for all that has
been Amiss, for the Sake of Christ, be Thankful for all the Grace and Help that
you have Received. Strive, in the (...) of Christ and with a constant Reliance
on Him for Grace, to (...) forward. Be not Discouraged by any Diffculties,
(...) look at the Crown of Life and Glory and (...), that Fades not away; and
look unto Christ on a Throne of Glory, calling to you and saying, be faithful
and you shall not Lose your Labor; and I am Ready, to Help you at all Times,
Therefore don't Fear. So press toward the Mark for the Prize of the High
Calling of God in Christ Jesus.

FINIS.

