A JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE FROM GIBRALTAR to GEORGIA.

BY Geo. Whitefield, A. B. Of Pembroke-College, Oxford.

CONTAINING Many curious OBSERVATIONS, and Edifying REFLECTIONS, on the several
Occurrences that happened in the Voyage.

PHILADELPHIA, (...) and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, in Market-Street, 1739.

JOURNAL of a VOYAGE FROM Gibraltar to Georgia.
My dear Friends,
THOUGH I know no Reason why you should be solicitous about any Thing that
happens to such a worthless Creature as I am, yet as your Love (Oh unmerited
Kindness!) abounds exceedingly toward me, and I am positive you will give
Thanks unto our good GOD, for all the Mercies he has conferred upon me; I have
sent you as full and particular an Account of the Remainder of my Voyage, as
the little Leisure I have had from my Ministerial Offices would permit me to
give.

Monday, February 20, 1737. Spent the Morning on Board, in writing Letters to
my dear Friends in England, to acquaint them of my safe Arrival. Went in the
Afternoon on shore to Gibraltar, and was unspeakably delighted with the
Prospect of the Place. My Friend H. and I, dined at an Inn, and went afterward
with Capt. W. and some other Company, to view one Side of the Fort; which to us
seemed impregnable, and at the Sight of which I could scarce avoid crying out,
-- Who is so great a GOD, as our GOD!

The seeing Persons of all Nations and Languages, gave me great Pleasure, and
the Difference of the Value of their Money and ours, gave me Occasion to
reflect on the Stupidity of those, who place their Happiness in that which has
no intrinsic Worth in itself, but only so much as we arbitrarily put upon it.

Went into a Romish Chapel; wherein were the Relics of a vast deal of
Pageantry, and se^veral Images of the Virgin Mary, dressed up not like a poor
Galilean, but in her Silks and Damasks. O, thought I, who has bewitch^^ this
People, that they should thus depart from the Simplicity of CHRIST, and go a
Whoring after their own Inventions! Surely, was the great St. Paul to rise from
the Dead, and come and view the Romish Church, his Spirit would be stirred
within him, as it was at Athens, to see them thus wholly given to Idolatry.

Tuesday, Feb. 21. After having read Prayers and wrote some religious Letters,
to my Friends in England, went again to Gibraltar, to pay my Respects to
Governor S. being told by Capt. M. that he expected to see me. -- The worthy
old Gentleman received me with the utmost Candor, and gave me a general
Invitation to come and dine with him every Day, during my Stay at Gibraltar. I
thanked him for his Kindness, had about a quarter of an Hour's Conversation
with him, and took my Leave for that Time.

At one o'Clock I r^turn'd to dine with him, ac^^^ding to his Appointment, and
was well ple^s^d with the ^eg^lar Behavior of the Officers a^ T^ble. We had
what the Epicurean would call. Coena Dubia -- super omnia Vultus accessere
b^ni, -- At Three I took my Leave, and walked about with Capt. W. and other
Friends, to take a ^econd View of the Fort. Went on Board about Five. Read
Prayers, and began expounding the Creed, in the Cabin. Wrote some more
religious Letters, and went to Bed very thankful to GOD, for sending me abroad.

Wednesday, Feb. 22. This Day I intended to stay on Board to write Letters; but
GOD being pleased to show me, it was not his Will, I went on Shore again, and
paid both the Ministers of Gibraltar a Visit; who received me very
affectionately, and offered me the Use of the Pulpit. O, what a blessed Thing
is it for the Clergy to dwell together in Unity!

At Eleven, went to public Prayers; and was much pleased to see many Officers
and Soldiers attend the General to Church. Methinks Religion looks doubly
amiable in Soldiers! After Prayers, dined again with the General; who gave me
an Invitation, as I went out of the Church. He treated me with uncommon
Civility, and desired me to preach the following. Sunday, which I promised to
do. We had an elegant Entertainment, but my Thoughts were mostly employed in
pitying the Unhappiness of great Men, who are in such continual Danger of
having their Table become a Snare unto them. I had an Opportunity of sending a
Packet of Letters, with my Journal, to my dear Friends in England; May the good
Lord give them his Blessing!

Went in the Afternoon to visit a Deserter, who had sent me a Letter, desiring
me to intercede for him with the Governor, he being apprehensive he should die
for Desertion, I intended to answer his Request, but the Governor was so
merciful, that he ordered him to be whipped only, which I thought Punishment
little enough. O Sin! What Mischief do thou make in the World!

In the Evening, I returned as usual on Board. Read Prayers, and expounded in
the great Cabin. Buried a Child; made an Exhortation to the Soldiers, proper
for the Occasion. Wrote to some Friends at Deal, and went to Bed, with unusual
Thoughts, and Convictions, that GOD would do some great Things at Gibraltar. O
that I was a pure Vessel, fit for my Master's Use!

Thursday, Feb. 23. Continued all this Day on Board; did my usual Duty in the
Ship; and put my dear Friend B -- 's Sermon into the Hands of two Officers at
Gibraltar, who came to dine on Board with Lieutenant D. They behaved very much
like Gentlemen, and seemed pleased with serious Conversation. May the GOD whom
I serve, add the Christian to the Gentleman!

Friday, Feb. 24. Blessed be God, who this Day has shown me, that he has heard
my Prayer, and not taken his Loving Kindness from me! -- Before I reached
Gibraltar, I prayed that God would open an effectual Door, at the Place whither
we were going, and direct me where I should lodge; and lo! this Day he has
answered me! About Ten in the Morning Capt. M. came on Board, telling me that
one Major S. a Person I never saw, had provided me a convenient Lodging, at one
Merchant B -- 's, and desired that I would come on Shore. I looking on this as
a Call from Providence, received it with all Thankfulness, and went with Friend
H. on Shore; but not without first praying GOD would direct us how to behave.

About the middle of the Town Major S. gave us the Meeting; conducted us to our
new Lodgings, which were very commodious, and engaged us to dine with him, and
Capt. M. When I sent you without Scrip, or Shoe, lacked ye any Thing? they said
unto Him, Nothing, Lord.

About Eleven was introduced by Dr. C. to General C. who was very desirous of
seeing me: He received me exceeding kindly; and after a little serious
Conversation, we went to Governor S -- 's, and from thence to public Prayers;
and was highly pleased to see so many Officers attending on the Generals to
Church. Dr. C. told me, he had not known Governor S. absent himself from
Prayers once these seven Years; except when he was hindered by real Sickness. O
that all others would let their Light so shine before Men!

Retired in the Evening to our Lodgings. Had Family Prayer. Wrote some few
Religious Letters. Spent near half an Hour in serious Conversation with the
People of the House. Gave Thanks for the Blessings of the Day, and was soon
convinced that God had sent me hither of a Truth. Be careful for nothing; but
in every, -- even the minutest Thing, make your Wants known unto God; -- for he
cares for you.

Saturday, Feb. 25. About Six this Morning went with H. to the Church, to pray
with some devout Soldiers, who I heard used to meet there at that Time, and
with whom my Soul was knit immediately. -- For all my Delight is in the Saints
that are in the Earth, and in those that excel in Virtue.

After we had finished our Devotions, I made Inquiry into their State; and
found that their Society had been subsisting about twelve Years; and that one
Sergeant B. (a devout Soldier indeed) now among them, was the first Beginner of
it. At first (they told me) they used to meet in Dens, and Mountains, and Caves
in the Rocks; but afterward, on their applying for Leave to build a little
Place to retire in, Dr. C. and Governor S. gave them the free Use of the
Church, where they constantly meet three times in a Day; and pray, read, and
sing Psalms; and at any other Season when they please. -- They have met with
much Contempt; and are now in Derision, called, THE NEW LIGHTS; and glorious
Lights they are indeed! For I conversed closely with several of them, and they
made me quite ashamed of my little Proficiency in the School of Christ. Many
have joined with them for a Time, but a servile Fear of Man (that Bane of
Christianity!) made them draw back. However, some continued steadfast and
unmovable, and though despised by the World, are, no Doubt, highly favored of
GOD. Governor S. countenances them much; and has spoke of them often to me with
much Respect. Blessed be GOD, even the Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, who
has not left himself without Witness at any Place; but has some everywhere
who serve him, and work Righteousness!

The Sunday before we came hither, I was telling my Friend H. that I had Reason
to think, by what had happened to me, that GOD had some Work for me to do at
Gibraltar. He answered, there could not be much Good expected from among
Soldiers. -- I replied, No Doubt but God has some secret ones in all Places,
who tremble at his Word. And, lo! he has this Day brought me to them. By this I
know thou favourest me, O Lord, Thou King of Saints!

There is also another Society of the Scotch Church, who in Contempt are called
DARK LANTHORNS: It has subsisted about a Year, and is made up of many serious
Christians, as I was informed. I did not think it proper to visit them; but I
sent to them, as well as to the other Society, some proper Books. Had Religious
Talk with several of them, and endeavored to unite both Societies together. O
when will that Time come, when all Differences about Externals shall be taken
away, and we all with one Heart, and one Mouth, glorify our Lord JESUS CHRIST?

About Eight, returned to my Lodgings; and after having wrote some Religious
Letters, went on Board the Amy (having first advised with Col. C.) to marry a
Couple, who sent to me Yesterday, to come and celebrate their Nuptials. I took
that Opportunity of exhorting them all to take Heed to the Things that belong
to their Peace. Some, I believe, were affected; but the Generality of them
behaved so careless, that I could not see a Difference between those that have
a Minister among them, and those that have not.

About Twelve, went on Board my own Ship* Dined. Did some necessary Business.
Read Prayers. Gave my Flo^k a warm Exhortation, and returned about Five on
Shore; where I spent near two Hours with the Devout Soldiers in the Church.
Many of them conversed most Spiritually; and seemed well acquainted with the
Pangs of the New Birth. May God perfect the good Work begun in their Hearts! O
how amiable are thy Servants, O Lord of Hosts! How would the World admire them,
did they see their Beauties! But Satan does now, as formerly, -- dress them up
in Bear-skins, in order to have them baited.

Sunday, Feb. 26. Between Five and Six in the Morning, went with Mr. H. and
(which I did all the while I was at Gibraltar) sung Psalms; prayed, and
expounded the Lessons to the devout Soldiers in the Church, and was much
enlarged. Thanks be given unto Thee, O Lord!

Intended to go and preach to my People. Was prevented by the Violence of the
Wind; but (...) pleased to hear of some Gibraltar Officers, who dined that Day
on Board the Whitaker, that some of my Flock had the Courage to read Prayers,
and sing Psalms themselves; and, as I found afterward, continued to do so,
during my Absence from them. Blessed be God! I hope I shall have some that dare
to be singularly good, and will not be kept out by the Press!

Preached in the Morning at Gibraltar, before such a Congregation of Officers
and Soldiers, as I never before saw. The Church, though very large, was quite
thronged; and GOD was pleased to show me, that he had given extraordinary
Success to my Sermon. O how is the Divine Strength magnified in my Weakness! O
God! why do thou choose to work by so unfit an Instrument! O grant I may, like
a pure Crystal, transmit all the Light thou pourest on me, and never claim as
my own, what is thy sole Property!

Dined, with Friend H. at Governor S -- 's, who sent most kindly to invite us.
The Law at his Table, was the same with that of Ahasuerus. No one was
compelled; and all the Officers behaved in such a decent, innocent manner,
every Time I dined there, that they surpised me. Surely some Fear of God is in
this Place!

After Evening Prayers, (for there are none in the Afternoon) I went and
expounded, prayed, and sung Psalms with the Society, and had near thirty
Hearers. May the Good Lord give it his Blessing!

At Night had some devout Conversation with my Host and Hostess; who seem to
love me as their own Son. Prayed for absent Friends; and went to Bed, ashamed I
had done so little for GOD, on the Sabbath Day. But when we cannot do as we
would, we must do as we can.

Monday, February 27. Went to the Society, and did as Yesterday; and was
visited afterward by two of the Nonconforming Society, who seemed to be
Israelites indeed. I exhorted them to Love and Unity, and not to let a little
Difference about a few Externals occasion any Narrow-Spiritedness to arise in
their Hearts. I advised them to come and hear me expound in the Church, which
they did; and providentially the Lesson was the 4th of the Ephesians; from
whence I took Occasion to urge on them, the Necessity of loving one another,
with a catholic, disinterested Love; to be of one Heart, and of one Mind, and
to join, without having Respect to Persons, in hastening the Kingdom of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST. I hope GOD gave a Blessing to what was said; for I observed
they came constantly afterward; and I was told, there was a perfect Harmony
between them. What infinite Mischief have needless Divisions occasioned in the
Christian World! DIVIDE ET IMPERA, is the Devil's Motto.

Dined and Supped at General C's, with Mr. H. and was received most
cou^teous^y. The Lord reward him in that Day! The Officers seemed studious to
oblige me; and to be sollicitous for my stay at Gibraltar. -- But my Face is
set to go toward GEORGIA; the Lord direct my going, in his Way!

Tuesday, Feb. 28. Expounded in the Church as usual. Went on Board. Read
Prayers. Expounded to my own Flock. Dined with Friend H. at Governor S.'s, who
sent to invite us. Expounded to a large Number of Soldiers, in the Evening, at
Church.

Was asked by Dr. C. in the Name of the Governor; Colonel C. etc. to preach
every Prayer-day, while I stai^ (...) Gibraltar; which I promised to do; and
perceived the Word of God to run very swiftly. Many of the Inhabitants pressed
me to stay with them, and were exceedingly kind to those that were with me, --
for my sake. Blessed be GOD, for thus giving me Favor in his People's Sight!
Lord! What am I! or what is in me, that thou should so highly honor me!
Grant, O Lord, the more thou exaltest me, the more I may abase myself, and
always be looking to the Rock, from whence I was h^wn!

Conversed with one of the devout Soldiers, who was under strong Spiritual
Trials, and GOD was pleased to give him Comfort. I find it necessary, more and
more every Day, that Ministers should be tempted, in all Things like unto their
Brethren, that they may be able experimentally to succor those that are
tempted.

Wednesday, March 1. Expounded in the Morning; and was highly pleased, at my
Entrance into the Church, to see several Soldie^s, kneeling in several Parts of
the House of GOD, at their private Devotions. -- O happy Gibraltar! that has
such a set of praying Men! Some I hear come in, by two of Clock in the Morning,
to pour out their Hearts unto GOD. The Lord perform all their Petitions!

Preached according to my Promise, to a numerous and affected Audience of
Officers; and of the Honorable Women, -- not a few. -- O that they may with
Meekness receive the ingrafted Word! And that it may be a Means of saving their
Souls!

Thursday, March 2. Spent Part of the Day in writing religious Letters. Dined
and Supped at Mr. A.'s, chief Civil Magistrate in Gibraltar; and was
entertained with uncommon Love and Affection.

Expounded twice in the Church, as usual; and at Night had above three hundred
Hearers. Among whom were many Officers, Ladies, and Doctor C. the Minister of
the Church, himself; who would have had me went up into the Reading Desk, that
I might have the greater Command of the People. But I declined it that Night.
-- GOD be praised, for sending me abroad, and prospering the Work of his Hands
upon me!

When all thy Mercies, O my God!
My rising Soul surveys,
Transported with thy Love, I Am l^st
In Wonder, Love and Praise!
Friday, March 3. Still GOD lets me see greater Things than before. O that my
Thanks may increase proportionably!

This Morning, besides a great Number of Soldiers, near, if not more than a
Dozen of the Town's People, came to Church, to hear me expound. Afterward we
breakfasted with a Gentlewoman, who sent by Major S. to invite us, and most
gladly received us, into her House. About Ten, I preached my Sermon against
Swearing, and made a Farewell Application to the Soldiers that were going over
to Georgia, out of that Garrison. The Governor had that Morning reviewed them.
I desired they might be ordered to come to Church, that I might have an
Opportunity of telling them how to behave, in that Land, which they were going
over the Sea to protect. The Colonel and Governor most readily consented, and
there was a most thronged Audience. GOD was pleased to set his Seal to my
Sermon. Many Officers and Soldiers wept sorely; and a visible Alteration was
observed in the Garrison, for some Days afterward. O that their Convictions may
end in their Conversion, and that they may bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit!

Bought some Wine* with the Money I had collected for the Use of the sick Poor
in Georgia. The Parsonage House ought to be -- the Poor's Storehouse.

Had above five hundred to hear me expound this Evening; and went up into the
Desk, with the Advice of Dr. C. who now constantly makes one of my Hearers.
After this we supped at Mr. B -- 's, and returned Home with Joy and great
Gladness of Heart. Who can express the loving Kindness of the Lord, or show
forth all his Praise!

Saturday, March 4. Expounded in the Morning; more Hearers than ever, some of
which wept. -- Dined and Supped at General C -- 's, who sent last Night to
invite me and my Friend; treated us with particular Respect.

I went in the Afternoon to the Jewish Synagogue, and was surprised to see one
of the Head of them come from the further End, and put me into one of their
chief Seats. But afterward he told me, he had heard my Sermon yesterday
against Swearing, and thanked me for it. Not unto me, not unto me, O Lord! but
unto thy Name, be all the Thanks and Glory.

I continued with them their whole Service; and spent most of my Time in secret
Prayer to GOD, that the Veil might be taken from their Hearts; and that blessed
Time might come, when his chosen People should again be ingrafted into their
own Olive Tree, and all Israel be saved!

Visited an unhappy Man in Prison; who last Night, in a drunken Fit, murdered a
Fellow Soldier. I providentially met him just as he was apprehended, and laid
before him the Terrors of the Lord. At first he seemed unconcerned; but in a
short Time he was pricked to the Heart; desired me to come and see him, and
today trembled, and wept bitterly. O Drunkenness! what Mischief have thou
done! Thy Name is Legion; for, behold! a Troop of Sins comes along with thee.

In the Evening, I had near, if not more than a thousand Hearers; and I took
Occasion from the poor Man's Wickedness and Misfortune, to warn the Soldiery,
not to be drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess. A Sin that easily bes^ts the Men
of Gibraltar! May they hear and fear, and sin no more presumptuously!

I had a great Hoarseness upon me, but notwithstanding, GOD enabled me to speak
with Power. When we are weak, then are we strong! What Mercies has GOD shown
me this last Week! O that my Friends, when they hear of it, may praise Him! For
surely, GOD has hearkened to my Prayer! --

Sunday, March 5. After Morning Exposition in the Church, went and saw the
Roman Catholics at High Mass; and shall only make this Remark; -- That there
needs no other Argument against Popery, than to see the Pageantry,
Superstition, and Idolatry of their Worship.

About Ten, went to the Church belonging to the Garrison. Preached to a most
thronged Audience, and received what my Soul longed after, -- the Sacrament of
CHRIST'S most blessed Body and Blood. Both the Generals were there, and near
fifty more Communicants. The Weekly Collection for the Poor was larger than
ever was known; and Dr. C. was so affected, that he wished himself a despised
METHODIST. We are not fit for GOD to work by, till we are despised by Men; that
the Excellency and Power of Preaching may be seen to be from GOD only.

Dined at Governor S -- 's; and at the Request of the Inhabitants and
Gentlemen of the Garrison, preached a searching Sermon in the Afternoon.
Expounded in the Evening, to above a thousand Hearers, of all Denominations.
Supped with General C. and went Home betimes, full of unspeakable Comfort. -- I
am never better, than when I am on the full Stretch for GOD. Grant that I may
not, like Jehu, drive furiously at first, and afterward fall back; but,
forgetting those Things which are behind, may I reach out to those Things which
are before, and press forward toward the Mark, for the Prize of my high Calling
in CHRIST JESUS. Methinks I hear my dear Friends say, silently, AMEN; and may
the Great GOD say so too!

Monday, March 6. Had near, if not more than a Thousand, at Morning Exposition;
and it being the last Day of my Sojourning at Gibraltar, many came to me
weeping, telling me what God had done for their Souls; desiring my Prayers, and
promising me theirs in Return. Others both gave and sent me Tokens of their
Love, -- as Cake, Figs, Wine, Eggs, and other Necessari^s for my Voyage; and
seemed to want Words to express their Affection. -- Surely they would have
plucked out their own Eyes to have given me. -- The good Lord note their
Kindness in his Book, and reward them a thousand-fold!

About Twelve, went to the Church, according to Appointment; and made a farewell
Exhortation, as GOD gave me Utterance, to a great Number of weeping Soldiers,
Women, etc. Then kneeled down, and having recommended each other to the Care of
GOD, I left them; went out and took my Leave of the two Generals. Visited the
confined Prisoner. Dined at a Gentlewoman's House in the Town. Left near fifty
Letters to be sent to England, and about Four went on Board; accompanied to the
Seaside with near 200 Soldiers, Women, Officers, etc. who all sorrow'd at my
Departure, and wished me good Luck, in the Name of the Lord. Surely I may now
expect greater Success abroad, having such an Addition of Intercessors on my
Behalf! O Lord, put their Tears into thy Bottle: and let their Cry come unto
Thee!

Samson's Riddle has been fulfilled at Gibraltar; out of the Eater came forth
Meat, out of the Strong came forth Sweetness. Who more unlikely to be wrought
upon, than Soldiers! -- And yet, among any Set of People I have been, where has
GOD made his Power more to be known! Many that were quite stark Blind, have
received their Sight; many that have fallen back, have relented, and turned
unto the Lord again; many that were ashamed to own CHRIST openly, have waxen
bold; and many that were Saints, have had their Hearts filled with Joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory. This is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous
in our Eyes! May he give a Blessing to the Books dispersed among them, and
perfect the good Work begun in their Hearts, till the Day of the Lord JESUS!
May they be my Joy and Crown of Rejoicing at the last Day! And may GOD 's
Mercies to me in every Place make me more humble, more zealous, more thankful,
and more ready to do, or suffer, whatever my dear Redeemer has allotted for me.
Into his Hands I commend my Spirit, as into the Hands of an all-powerful
Preserver.

About Five, came on Board, and was most gladly received by my Flock; whom I
hope to love better, for being a little absent from them. Interceeded, and gave
Thanks (as usual) at Night upon Deck; and was pleased that I was again retired
from the World. It rained much, but that made as the more fervent. Water us, O
Lord, we beseech thee, with the Dew of thy heavenly Benediction!

Tuesday, March 7. Went and conversed with, and dispersed some proper Books
among the Soldiers that we took from Gibraltar. Three of them belonged to one
of the Societies. and desired, with some others, to sail in our Ship. GOD
sanctify my Ministry unto them! Most of them are of the Scotch Church, but
seemed very willing to conform. What a Pity is it, CHRIST 's seamless Coat
should be rent in pieces on Account of Things, in themselves purely indifferent!

At Dinner we were like to be struck against, by the Man of War. I saw it
coming, and composed my self for Death; but GOD had Mercy on us* commanded the
Wind to shift about, and delivered us out of so great a Danger. O that we may
show forth our Thankfulness, not only with our Lips, but in our Lives! How
ought Creatures to live, who are every Moment liable to be called by Death to
Judgment!

This Day set sail from Gibraltar; at first the Wind was fair, but afterward
blew contrary; which made both me and many others sick. I should have wondered
if GOD had not sent me a Thorn in the Flesh, after such abundant Success. May I
learn to SUFFER, as well as (...), thy Will, O GOD.

Had useful Conference with Capt. M. who was an Instrument (under God) of
introducing me at Gibraltar, and who, I trust, will make a devout Centurion.
Grant this, heavenly Father, for thy dear Son's sake.

Finished my Exposition on the Creed, in the great Cabin, and did my other Duty
in the Ship as usual. The Wind blew hard, and GOD sent abroad his Lightnings
great Part of the Day. J. D. my Friend H. and my self also, were sick, but not
so, as to prevent our Intercession for absent Friends. Whatever befalls me, O
Lord, may I never forget their Works and Labor of Love; as yet, blessed be
GOD! they are always on my Mind, and I bear them on my Heart, whenever I go
in, and from before the Lord. And nothing does and will support me more, under
all Crosses, than the Hopes of seeing them grown in Grace, when I return to
England. O GOD, prepare me for so great a Blessing!

Gave my self (as much as my Indisposition of Body would give me Leave) to the
Word of GOD, and Prayer; and was much affected with what is said of Hezekiah,
that because he was not thankful enough, for the great Things GOD had done for
him, he was permitted to fall, through the Pride of his Heart. Alas! What Danger
am I in of sharing the same Fate! O my Friends, cry mightily to GOD, that no
such Evil come upon me!

Married a Couple on Deck; Capt. M. Capt. W. etc. attended very orderly. I
endeavored to give them a suitable Exhortation, after the Solemnity was over;
and hope this Couple did call CHRIST to their Marriage. It Is through a Neglect
of this, that we have so few happy Matches.

The contrary Wind still continuing, my Sea-Sickness increased most bravely, so
that I was obliged to omit reading Prayers to the Soldiers, and to go to Bed
sooner than usual. I find this Sickness will purge my Body, and hope, through
Grace, it will purify my Soul. -- Every Branch that bears Fruit, says Christ,
my Father purges it, that it may bring forth more Fruit. May that Scripture be
fulfilled in my Heart!

My bodily Indisposition still increased. There was a great Storm without; but,
blessed be GOD! a Calm within. Sometimes indeed my Will would inwardly rebel,
which plainly showed me, what a Distance I was from GOD; but I hope through
inward, and outward Sufferings, I shall at length be able to say in all Things,
-- Fat^er, not my Will, but thine be done.

Did my usual Duty in the great Cabin; and began expounding the ten
Commandments. Interceded for Friends on Deck; and went to Bed, full of a Sense
of my own Unworthiness. O that I could always see my self in my proper Colors!
I believe I should have little Reason to fall down and worship myself. -- God
be merciful to me, a Sinner!

Saturday, March 11. Blessed be God, the Storm this Morning began to blow over,
and Light broke in upon my Soul. Was enabled to read Prayers, and expound both
in the Cabin, and to the Soldiers, with more Vigor than I have since I left
Gibraltar. Had Reason to think that Capt. M. grew in Grace, and that my late
Indisposition had been sanctified unto me. Suffering Times are Christians best
improving Times; for they break the Will; wean us from the Creature; prove the
Heart; and by them God teaches his Children, as Gideon, by Thorns and Briars,
taught the Men of Succoth.

All the Time of my Indisposition, my dear Friend H. mourned over me like a
Dove. Blessed be God, Familiarity does not breed Contempt between us; but our
Love to each other increases daily. JESUS CHRIST is the only Rock, whereon true
Friendship can be built.

Sunday, March 12. Expounded with more Enlargement than usual; and gave my
People Notice, that I intended to speak to them, one by one; to see what
Account they could give of their Faith. -- I have not ceased warning every one
of you, says the Apostle. -- May I follow his Steps!

Preached the Sermon (GOD enabled me to make, in the Storm, before we came to
Gibraltar) in the great Cabin, and GOD was pleased to set his Seal to it. Had
some close Conversation with some of my Companions, about their Interior.
Interceded for absent Friends, and have Reason to hope, my weak Efforts had not
been in vain in the Lord. May God give me a thankful Heart!

Blessed be God, this is the most comfortable Day I have had since I came last
on Board. Slept better than usual. Was enabled to compose freely. Perceived my
Appetite to return. Was enlarged more, in Intercession, and found I had Reason
to give Thanks for my late Indisposition. -- O, how gently does my gracious
Master deal with me! Though Sorrow may endure for a Night, yet Joy comes in the
Morning. Lord, grant that I may spend that Health thou have now restored to me,
to thy Honor and Service. It Is good for me, that I have been a little
chastised; for who knows but that I might otherwise have perished, by being
lifted up above Measure with my late Success! Lord, give me Humility, though it
be by Sufferings; so shall thy Blessings never prove my Ruin!

Tuesday, March 14. Began to put in Execution what I proposed on Sunday.
Inquired into the Faith of those committed to my Charge; and though all of them
were not so great Proficients as I could wish, yet I find they know enough to
save them, if they put what they know into Practice. So that they cannot charge
GOD, if they miscarry. O that the Lord may give them all his Blessing!

Had much of the Presence of GOD with me; and felt such a fervent Love for my
Christian Friends, that I feared how I should behave, was GOD to call any of
them from me. But I trust, sufficient for such an Hour would be the Strength
thereof.

Wednesday, March 15. Was pleased much with my present Situation; and had
Reason to bless GOD for some farther visible Effects of my Ministry. Was highly
delighted in seeing Friend H. active in teaching the Lambs of my Flock. He has
now got a regular School, and the Children begin to come to it, at regular and
set Hours. Several also of the Soldiers learned to write and read; so that my
Friend is likely to make a useful Man. GOD make him more and more so every Day.

Thursday, March 16. Preached this Afternoon my Sermon against Swearing; at
which several of the Soldiers wept. Blessed be God, that Sin is much abated
among us; and I think a visible Reformation may be perceived through the whole
Ship. Not unto me, not unto me, but unto thy Name be the Glory, O Lord!

Was much strengthened in my present Undertaking, by reading the Story of Ezra;
and joined in Intercession with those, who set apart this Day, as a Day of
Fasting and Prayer, for the Sins of the Nation to which we belong. May they
prove as effectual as those, which Moses put up for the Children of Israel.

The Sick increased today. Visited near ^ Dozen. May I, by thus frequent
visiting Sick-beds, learn to improve my Time of Health. For, alas! what can be
done in Time of Sickness! I find but few that are able with any tolerable
Patience to sustain their bodily Infirmities; but to have a wounded Spirit at
the same Time, -- Good GOD! who can bear it!

Friday, March 17. Last Night God sent us a fair Wind, and we began to sail
more pleasantly. I was comforted on every side, and enabled to intercede
fervently for all Mankind. O that the Love of GOD and Man was shed abroad in my
Heart!

Saturday, March 18. The Weather being exceeding fair, and the Sea calm, I went
with Capt. W. on board the Lightfoot, and dined with the Gentlemen belonging to
the Ship, and Col. C. who came on board to pay them a Visit. Married a Couple.
Dispersed Bibles, Testaments, Soldier's Monitors, among the Men. Exchanged some
Books for some Cards, which I threw overboard. Preached a Sermon against
Drunkenness, which GOD enabled me to finish Yesterday; and returned in the
Evening, highly delighted with seeing the Porpusses roll about the great Deep.
O Lord! the Sea is full of thy Riches! Mavelous are thy Works, and that my
Soul knows right well! O that I may live to praise thee for them! What
Mercies have I received this Week! They are more in Number than the Hairs of my
Head! O that my Friends would give Thanks for me!

Sunday, March 19. Went on board the Amy* Read Prayers, and preached to above
200 Hearers, and married a Couple, which did not behave so well as I could
wish. The Bridegroom laughed several Times, in the midst of the Solemnity; on
which I shut up the Book; but he showing his Repentance by Weeping, I then
proceeded, and gave to him and the Bride a Bible, as the best Present I could
make them, and exhorted all to Holiness of Life. GOD give them a hearing Ear,
and an obedient Heart!

Dined with Col. C. who treated us with the utmost Civility; and took Care to
dispose of some Books I brought with me, to proper Persons.

About Three we returned to the Whitaker. Read Prayers, and preached my Sermon
against Drunkenness. After which, Capt. M. made a useful Speech to the Men; and
exhorted them to give Heed to the Things which had been spoken. Religion is
likely to go on well, when both the Civil and Ecclesiastical Powers are engaged
in keeping up the Purity of it. But, Lord, unless thou assist us, all our
Endeavors are but in vain. Vouchsafe then, we beseech thee, to give us thy
Blessing.

Had above an Hour's close Conversation with my Companions, concerning their
Interior, and walked with Friend H. upon Deck, till Twelve at Night, admiring
GOD's Wonders in the Deep. Blessed be GOD, for sending us abroad!

Monday, March 20. Today Col. C. came to dine with us; and in the midst of our
Meal we were entertained with a most agreeable Sight. It (...) a Shark, about
the Length of a Man, who followed our Ship, attended with five little Fishes,
called the Pilot-Fish; much like unto a Mackarel, but larger. These (I am told)
always keep the Shark Company; and, what is more surprising, though the Shark is
so ravenous a Creature, yet, let him be ever so hungry, he never touches one of
them, nor are they less faithful to him; for if at any time the Shark is
hooked, these little Creatures will not forsake him, but cleave close to his
Fins, and are often taken up with him. -- Go to the Pilot-Fish, thou that
forsakest a Friend in Adversity; consider his Ways, and be abashed. -- This
single Sight (one would think) is sufficient to confute any Atheist, if there
be such a Fool as a speculative Atheist in the World.

After Dinner I read Prayers, and expounded to my own People, and then went on
board the Amy, with kind Col. C. who used me with uncommon Civility. Married a
Couple, and came back to the Whitaker, rejoicing to see the Works of the Lord
in the Beauty of the great Deep. Who would but come abroad!

Had near two Hours close Conversation with Capt. M. in whom appeared many
Marks of the New Birth. Surely he will prove a devout Centurion. How shall I be
constrained, 'till it be accomplished!

Tuesday, March 21. Had fresh Reason to be thankful. Capt. M. made me a kind
Present. The Weather exceeding pleasant, and, what was the greatest Blessing of
all, -- GOD's holy Spirit seemed to be moving on the Faces (...) of the Souls
in the Ship. The Weather growing warmer, Friend H. had some Cloths hung over to
cover his School. His Children come very regularly both to learn, and to say
their Prayers at Night. Capt. W. takes great Delight in them. Capt. M. much
encourages the Soldiers to learn to read and write; so that we begin to live as
regular now, as we could wish to do on Shore. Blessed be GOD, for thus making
his Power to be known!

Though GOD gives me so much Comfort, yet my dear England-Friends are seldom out
of my Mind. Though absent in Body, I am present with them in Spirit. The Lord
direct my Way unto them, and grant, if ever I return, it may be in the Fullness
of the Blessing of the Gospel of Peace.

Wednesday, March 22. Saw a large Grampus rolling and spouting out Water, for a
long while* at a short Distance from our Ship. It put me in mind of the
Behemoth, spoken of by holy Job; and of the Leviathan mentioned by the Royal
Psalmist. O GOD! who is like unto thee!

Thursday, March 23. This Morning began to have Prayers at Six of Clock, and
the Drum beat to call the People. Methinks we grow more and more regular every
Day. GOD be praised!

Was very fervent in Intercession for absent Friends, and all Mankind. O!
Intercession is a most delightful Exercise! How does it sweeten and purify the
Heart!

Visited near twelve or fourteen sick Persons, and yet such is GOD's Mercy to
me, that though the Place where they lie, is much confined, and they catch the
Fever one of another, yet GOD keeps me from Infection. The Way of Duty is the
Way of Safety. Now God has sent his Visitation abroad among us, I hope we
shall learn Righteousness!

Friday, March 24. Today the Sick still increased, and Friend H. very ready to
assist and carry Things to them. Nothing more useful than the visiting
Sick-Beds. How are those to be pitied, who barbarously shun such improving
Sights!

Had still fresh Reason to bless GOD for the Success of my Ministry, -- Not
unto me, not unto me, but unto thy Name, be all the Glory! We begin now to live
so happy on Shipboard, that I believe we shall part from each other with
Regret. By this may all Men know that we are CHRIST 's Disciples, that we love
one another.

Saturday, March 25. Sailed 154 Miles the last 24 Hours. Was much delighted in
seeing many Porpusses playing about the Ship; one of which Capt. W. caught,
and Part of its Liver we had dressed for Dinner. It had a Head much like a Pig,
and about six Feet long. The Works of the Lord are exceeding great and to be
admired of all them that have a Delight in Him.

Church'd a Woman, who lately was delivered of a dead Child; and afterward
gave her an Exhortation applicable to her Circumstances. GOD grant she may
apply it to her Heart!

Sunday, March 26. This Day I hope GOD magnified his Power, in the Conversion
of a young Gentleman on Board, whom he had been pleased to visit with a Fever.
His Convictions were strong; and, as far as I could find, a thorough Renovation
begun in his Heart. The good Lord perfect it, till the Day of his Dissolution!
Now GOD begins to show me wherefore He has sent me. O that I was humble! that
I might be fit for the HIGH and LOFTY ONE, which inhabiteth Eternity, to work
by!

Preached a Sermon in the Afternoon, on Luke iii.14. And the Soldiers likewise
came unto Him, and demanded, saying, And what must we do? And he said unto
them, Do Violence to no Man, neither accuse any Man falsely, and be content with
your Wages. I made it at the Request of Capt. M. who seems in earnest about the
great Work of his Salvation. He has read Arnd^^s True Christianity, and is now
reading Law's Christian Perfection; Books worth their Weight in Gold, and which
GOD has blessed to the Conversion of many. But what are Books without thy
Spirit, O Lord! Do thou bless them unto him, and they shall be blessed.

Exchanged some bad Books that were on Board, (which I threw immediately into
the Sea) for some good ones. Blessed be GOD! all I have found them with, (as
yet) have been ready to surrender them up; and I find it by daily Experience
more and more, that People who are thoroughly awakened to a Sense of the divine
Life, cannot bear to read any thing trifling; but throw away their useless
Books, as those did the Books of Divination and curious Arts, which we read of
in the Acts, who were converted by St. Paul.

Monday, March 27. Last Night GOD was pleased to take away a black Boy of Capt.
Wh -- 's, after he had been ill of a violent Fever for some Days. -- He was
never baptized, but I had a Commission from his Master (who seemed much
affected at his Death) to instruct and baptize him, if it pleased GOD he should
recover; but GOD saw fit to order it otherwise: His holy Will be done! --

About Ten in the Morning, he was wrapped up in a Hammock, and thrown into the
Sea. I could not read the Office over him, being unbaptized; but Capt. M.
ordered the Drum to beat, and I exhorted all the Soldiers, Sailors, etc. as GOD
gave me Utterance, to remember their CREATOR in the Days of their Youth, and
prepare for the Time when the Sea should give up its Dead, and all Nations be
called together, to appear before the SON of GOD. O that they may be made wise
by it! that they may lay to Heart what has been said, and practically consider
their latter End!

Had our blessed Savior been here, I believe he would have wept to see what
Havoc Sin has made among us. Do thou, Lord, teach us so to number our Days,
that we may apply our Hearts to Wisdom.

This Day Capt. M. began to come at Six in the Morning, and join in Prayers on
Deck, instead of having Prayers in the great Cabin. Surely our Soldiers will be
without Excuse, since their Captain leads so good an Example. Blessed be GOD, I
have no Reason to complain of them, for they come very regularly twice a Day to
Prayers; and an Oath seems to be a strange Thing among them. Many Marks of a
sound Conversion appear in several on Board; and we live in perfect Harmony and
Peace, loving and beloved by one another. Surely, my Friends* your Prayers are
heard; continue instant in them, and you shall see greater Things than these;
for GOD delights in the Prosperity of his Servants.

Wednesday, March 29. Sail near 160 Miles every 24 Hours, for several Days.
Most delightful pleasant Weather, and much of God's Presence among us.

Heaven is, dear Lord, wherever thou art;
O! never, then, from us depart:
For to my Soul, it is Hell to be,
But for one Moment, void of thee.
Thursday, March 30. Still more Fruits of a true Conversion being wrought in
some in the Ship. I hope many of us shall have Reason to to bless GOD, for
coming on Board the Whitaker. GOD grant, while I preach to others, I myself may
not be a Castaway. But God is Love; and he will not, if my Eye be single, let
his Blessings destroy me. He preserved young David from Spiritual Pride, when
the People cried out, Saul has slain his Thousands, but David his Ten
Thousands; and let the same Power be exerted in preserving me also, O my
SAVIOR!

I.
Renew thy Likeness, LORD, in me;
Lovely and gentle may I be!
No Charms but these to thee are dear,
No Anger may thou ever find,
No Pride in my unruffled Mind,
But Faith and Heaven-born Peace be there.
II.
A patient and victorious Mind,
A Life that all things casts behind,
Brings forth, obedient to thy Call;
A Heart that no Desire can move,
But still to adore, to praise and love,
Give me, my Lord, my Life, my All.
Friday, March 31. This being the Crucifixion of our blessed Lord, I preached a
Sermon on the penitent Thief; and I hope God gave it his Blessing. We began
Prayers later than usual; so, before I had done, Darkness came upon us, which
put me in Mind of that Darkness which overwhelmed the World, when the GOD of
Nature suffered. O that our Hearts may rend like the Rocks, and our Souls arise
from the Death of Sin, as the Bodies of those did from their Graves, to appear
to many in the holy City, after our LORD's Resurrection!

Had a good Instance of the Benefit of breaking Children's Wills betimes. Last
Night, going between Decks, as I do every Night, to visit the Sick, and examine
my People, I asked one of the Women to bid her little Boy, that stood by her,
say his Prayers: She answered, his elder Sister would, but she could not make
him. Upon this, I bid the Child kneel down before me, but he would not, till I
took hold of his Feet, and forced him down. I then bid him say the Lord's
Prayer, being informed by his Mother, he could say it if he would; but he
obstinately refused, till at last, after I had given him several Blows, he said
his Prayers as well as I could expect. I gave him some Figs for a Reward, and
lo! this same Child, though not above four Years of Age, came tonight upon Deck,
when the other Children came to say their Prayers, to my Friend H. and he burst
out into a Flood of Tears, and would not go away till he had said his too.

I mention this as a Proof of the Necessity of early Correction. Children are
sensible of it sooner than Parents imagine; and if they would but have
Resolution to break their Wills thoroughly when young, the Work of Conversion
would be much easier, and they would not be so troubled with perverse Children
when they are old.

Saturday, April 1. Wonderful pleasant Sailing still; but, what was entirely
better, had Reason to think several went forward in the great Work of their
Salvation. O that we may be buried with CHRIST in Baptism, and rise with him to
Newness of Life!

Sunday, April 2. Rose early this Morning, and joined in Spirit with my dear
absent Friends, who were receiving the Holy Eucharist, and celebrating our
blessed Lord's Resurrection. I find my not being in Priest's Orders is a great
Hindrance to my Ministry; which will oblige me to return to England as soon as
possible. The good Lord prepare me for that second Imposition of Hands.

Preached a Sermon in the Afternoon on Philippians ii.10. That I may know him,
and the Power of his Resurrection. O that we may all experience it in our
Hearts! for without it, Christ, as to us, is dead in vain.

Monday, April 3. Had some further Conversation with the young Gentleman, whose
Conversion I mentioned before, and who, I hope, is quickened from above. He
told me, he used to wonder to hear me talk, that all our Thoughts, Words and
Actions, ought to be dedicated unto God; but now he perceived what I said to be
true. How does the new Nature give us new Notions! It seems a difficult Task to
the natural Man, to turn his whole Life into one continued Sacrifice; but the
Spiritual Man does it with Ease. He feels a Divine Attraction in his Soul,
which as sensibly draws his Heart toward God, as the Lodestone attracts the
Needle. Draw us then, O GOD, and our Affections will ascend up after thee!

About Eleven went on Board the Lightfoot. Prayed with a sick Man. Preached my
Sermon on the penitent Thief. Afterward went on Board the Amy. Catechized the
Children. Dined of a Dolphin. Preached to the Soldiers. Returned about Six.
Read Prayers. Visited the Sick. Interceded for Friends, and went to Bed
blessing and praising God.

April 7. Great Enlargement of Heart has been given me for these four Days last
past; particularly today, in which God has vouchsafed me much of his
Presence, and assisting Grace. Observed still strong Signs of a thorough
Conversion being wrought in some on Board. Had most delightful Sailing, and
every Thing that is pleasant, as this vain World can afford. These are
Preparatives for future Trials. Welcome in the Name of God! He will uphold me,
if it be not for the Corruptions of my own Heart, which are continually
creeping up. What have I to disturb my Peace? But as long as those Amalekites
remain in my Soul, I shall never be perfectly at Ease. LORD, keep me but
striving, and I shall at last be more than Conqueror, through JESUS CHRIST that
loved me.

April 8. Went on Board the Lightfoot, and Amy; and preached to the Soldiers of
each Ship. Dined with Colonel C. who continues extremely civil; and at my
Return, found the Sick increase on my Hands. But few of the Ship escape! The
good Lord make all their Beds in their Sickness! Had much of God with me today.
The Heat uncommonly temperate, as it has been for some time. The Ship sailed
all Day, as though she was carried on the Wings of the Wind. Preached two
Sermons, besides my Exposition at Six in the Morning, and I hope God set his
Seal to them. Was well pleased to hear by my Friend H. (who is very active in
carrying Things to the Sick) that the poor People between Decks prayed heartily
for me and Capt. M. who seems to improve every Day. And now indeed we live more
comfortably in the great Cabin, than can easily be imagined. We talk of little
else but GOD and CHRIST. GOD has greatly blessed -- the Country Parson's Advice
to his Parishioners, to Capt. W. and scarce a Word is to be heard among us,
when we are together, but what has reference to our Fall, in the First, and our
new Birth in the second Adam, -- the LORD from Heaven. So that we all (I trust)
are ^^solved to put my Afternoon's Text into Practice, and are determined not
to know any Thing, save JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified. Grant this, O Father,
for thy dear SON 's sake! O that I knew how to be thankful! O that* Heaven and
Earth would join with us, in praising God! For,

I would not, LORD, alone
Thy Praises celebrate;
I Would call the blessed Angels down,
I Would move the World's united State,
Till they in Fervence, all
Thy gracious Acts relate.
April 10, and 11. Spent good Part of these two Days in mending my Nets. Had
exceeding pleasant Weather. Some more of the Sailors were convinced of Sin; and
others send Notes to be prayed for, and give T^anks as regularly as in any
Parish. Blessed be God, we live very comfortably!

Today Capt. Wh -- caught a Dolphin, which was most beautiful when drawn out
of the Water, but his Colors soon change. Just so is Man: He flourishes for a
little while, but when once Death comes, how quickly is his Beauty gone! A
Christian may learn a Lesson of Instruction from every Thing he meets with.

April 14. Today I could have wished for some young Prodigal aboard the
Whitaker, to see one of our Soldiers dying. Alas! How did his Breast heave, his
Heart pant, and great Drops of Sweat trickle down his Face! His Eyes looked
ghastly, and the whole Man was in a bitter Agony! Capt. Wh -- went down between
Decks with me once or twice to see him, and I used the last Prayer over him
several times. About Nine at Night he expired, I fear, without Hope; for he
killed himself with drinking. O that all Drunkards would learn from him, to be
wise in Time, and practically consider their latter End!

April 15. This Morning I buried the dead Soldier, in Time of public Prayers.
Chose proper Lessons, and gave the Soldiers a suitable Exhortation. But I was
so affected with a Sense of the Misery of fallen Man, that I could not speak
with my usual Vigor. JESUS wept!

Today was called in a Hurry to pray by one of the devout Soldiers, who came
from Gibraltar, and who was supposed to be expiring. I came; I saw; I rejoiced
in Spirit, for his Soul seemed full of GOD. Instead of being affrighted at the
Approach of the King of Terrors, he welcomed it, and said he was going to his
dear Redeemer. Then he fell, as it were, into a Trance, and poured out his
Heart in repeating some very applicable Verses out of the Psalms, on which we
thought he would have died. But lo! GOD brought him from the nethermost Hell!
for that Instant the Fever left him, and he recovered. O what Difference is
there between him that fears GOD, and him that fears him not, in their last
Hours! LORD, let me die the Death of the Righteous, and let my future State be
like his.

Exercised a little Discipline this Evening on a Boy, whom Capt. M. had taken
Notice of above a Week agone, for behaving ill at Church; and said he would
deliver him up to me. I therefore, by the Advice of his Master, ordered him to
be tied, 'till he could repeat the 51st Psalm, which he repeated tonight very
solemnly, in the midst of the Congregation. May it be a Warning to him for the
future!

April 16. Read Prayers. Expounded at Six in the Morning, and preached at Ten
to my own People. Then went and preached on board the Lightfoot, and afterward
dined. Read Prayers, and preached on board the Amy. Returned about Five in the
Evening to the Whitaker. Read Prayers and preached. Visited the Sick, and went
to Bed, blessing GOD for the Strength of the Day. -- All the Officers continue
extremely kind; and some, studious to oblige me all they can. -- The Good Lord
reward them a thousand-fold!

This Evening I was sent for by a Sailor, who had been the most remarkable
Swearer on board, and whom I in an especial manner warned about two Days agone;
telling him, I believed GOD would remarkably visit him, as well as the others.
He laughed and said, he hoped not. But tonight he sent for me trembling, and
burning with a scorching Fever; told me what grievous Sins he had been guilty
of, and prayed most fervently for Repentance. -- Two or three of the same Stamp
have been taken in the like manner. God grant they may flee from the Wrath to
come! Sinner^ must either bend or break.

April 18. Greatly delighted in seeing two Water Spouts. One of which ran along
for several Miles, and, by the especial Providence of GOD, escaped us. We saw
it coming, and were surprised to observe a sudden Calm for about six Minutes
round the Whitaker, when the other Parts of the Sea boiled like a Pot. But
surely the everlasting I AM said unto the Sea at that Instant, Let there be a
Calm in that Place. For by that means our Ship was immediately stopped in her
Course, and so the Water Spout passed by, before we came up to it; otherwise it
would have torn our Sails in Pieces. GOD's Hand was so visible in this, that
several said, they never beheld the like before. O how does Providence wa^h
over us, when we think nothing of it! Who would but live well, to be under the
immediate Protection of such an overruling Power?

After this several Squalls came upon us, which afforded me glorious Matter for
adoring that great GOD, whom Winds and Storms obey. -- The Sailors were in
great Hurry and Confusion, but, to my Comfort, not one single Oath was heard
all the while. -- A Proof this, that Sailors may pull the Ropes, without
swearing; and that the Words spoken to them, have not altogether fallen to the
Ground. -- Blessed be God!

April 22. Fled, as it were, on the Wings of the Wind, for some Days past.
Sometimes 170, sometimes 178 Miles in 24 Hours. I find GOD generally sends us
the strongest Winds, when nearest our Port. May I learn from hence a Lesson of
Instruction; and the nearer I come to my Haven of eternal Rest, the quicker may
I move!

Spent most of this Day in writing Letters to my dear Friends in England. In
particular, Supplication for Direction how to act, in the Land whither I am
going. The Thoughts of my own Weakness, and the Greatness of those Trials,
which I must necessarily expect, fill me with an holy Dread. But wherefore do I
fear? The Eternal, Almighty, I AM, has sent me, and will, no Doubt, protect me.

April 23. Preached twice today to my People, and spent most of the rest of
the Day in earnest Prayer for the Divine Assistance, in my present Undertaking;
being, as we imagined, near the Haven where we would be. The Morning Lessons
were exceeding applicable, so that we could not help taking Notice of it. By
this I know GOD favors me.

May 1. This Morning went out on Deck; after being confined to my Bed for a
Week by a violent Fever, with which all, except three or four in the Ship, have
been visited. I was blooded thrice; vomited once, and blister'd; and, blessed
be GOD, can say, it is good for me that I have been afflicted; for as Affliction
abounded, Consolation much more abounded, and God enabled me to rejoice with
Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. Satan desired to have me, to sift me as
Wheat; but JESUS CHRIST prayed for me, and my Faith failed not.

I have all the Conveniences I could have on Shore. Capt. W. turned out of his
own Bed for me. J. D. and Mr. H. sat up with me every Night, and nothing was
wanting to make my Sickness comfortable and easy. Blessed be GOD, for these
abundant Mercies in CHRIST JESUS!

I hope I shall now experimentally sympathize with those that are sick; and
learn to be more tenderhearted to my Fellow Christians. I am now made whole.
May I sin no more, but be more fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, lest a
worse Evil befall me.

May 5. About Ten of Clock this Morning, buried the Cook of the Ship, who
expired last Night. I could have wished for a thousand Tongues, to have sounded
a loud Alarm to my People; but the Sight of the Corpse, and the Weakness of my
Body, would but just permit me to read out the Office. Lord what is Man! O! why
are others taken, and I left, but that GOD 's Long-suffering should lead me to
Repentance! Grant it, O Lord, for thy dear SON 's sake.

In the Afternoon privately, I baptized a newborn Infant. Thus it is; some
coming into the World, others going out of it continually. Good God, who can
desire to live here always.

After having lain about the Coast for a Week, this Afternoon we saw Savannah
River, and sent off for a Pilot. O what Joy appeared in every one's
Countenance! How infinitely more joyful will the Children of GOD be, when
having passed through the Waves of this troublesome World, they arrive at the
Haven of eternal Rest! Hasten, O LORD, that blessed Time, and let thy Kingdom
come!

Sunday, May 7. Last Night, by the Blessing of GOD, we cast Anchor near Tibby
Island, about 24 Miles off Savannah; and today GOD gave me Strength to preach
my Farewell Sermon; which I have not sent you, and at which many wept. After
this I took Boat with my Friend H. and arrived safe at Savannah (having a most
pleasant Passage) about seven in the Evening; and how GOD is pleased to deal
with me, I will endeavor to inform you hereafter.

In the mean Time, fail not to give Thanks for all the Mercies I have received,
though we had a long, yet it was an exceeding pleasant Passage. GOD in Compassion
to my Weakness has sent me but a few Trials, and sanctified those he has sent
me. I am now getting forth among Wolves; but he that protected Abram, when he
went out, not knowing whither he went, will also guide and protect me; and
therefore I cannot close this Part of my Journal better, than with Mr. Addis^n's
Translation of the 23d Psalm*

THE Lord my Pasture shall prepare,
And feed me with a Shepherd's Care;
His Presence shall my Wants supply,
And guard me with a watchful Eye:
My Noonday Walks he shall attend,
And all my Midnight Hours desend.
When in the sultry Glebe I faint,
Or on the thirsty Mountain pant;
To fertile Vales, and dewy Meads,
My weary wandering Steps he leads,
Where peaceful Rivers, soft and slow,
Amid the verdant Landscape flow.
Though in the Paths of Death I tread,
With gloomy Horrors overspread;
My steadfast Heart shall fear no Ill;
For thou, O Lord, art with me still;
Thy friendly Crook shall give me Aid,
And guide me through the dreadful Shade.
Though in a bare and rugged Way,
Through devious lonely Wilds I stray;
Thy Bounty shall my Pains beguile,
The barren Wilderness shall smile,
With sudden Greens and Herbage crowned*
And Streams shall murmur all around.
FINIS.
CONTINUATION Of the Reverend Mr. Whitefield's JOURNAL FROM His Arrival at
SAVANNAH, TO His Return to LONDON.

PHILADELPHIA, Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, in Market-Street, 1739.

THE PREFACE.
THOUGH the Journals already published, were printed without my Knowledge, yet
as GOD has been pleased to let me see, by Letters sent to me, that he has
greatly blessed them, I now upon the Importunity of Friends, consent to the
publishing a Continuation of them, that those pious Persons who have interceded
in my behalf, may see what GOD, in ansver to their Prayers, has done for my
Soul.

I am sensible that this, as well as every Thing else of such a Nature, must
necessarily meet with great Contempt from natural Men, who are Strangers to the
Influences of the HOLY GHOST upon the Heart. But what have I to do with them?
If any of GOD's Children receive the ^ast Consolation from my Experiences, Let
almost, formal Christians be offended, and the Scoffers of these last Days mock
on. -- I rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.

A CONTINUATION OF Mr. Whitefield's JOURNAL, etc.
SUNDAY, May 7. Arrived at Savannah Town about seven this Evening, and joined
in Prayer, and a Psalm of Thanksgiving with Mr. Delamotte, and some pious Souls
that were rejoiced at my Arrival: The good LORD sanctify our meeting to his
Glory, and his People's Welfare.

Spent the remainder of the Evening in taking sweet Counsel with Mr. Delamotte,
who seems providentially left behind at Savannah against my coming. How sweetly
does Providence order Things for us! Oh may I constantly follow it as the wise
Men did the Star in the East.

Monday, May 8. Begun to read publi^^ ^rayers and expound the second Lesson at
Fiv^ (...) Morning to seventeen Adults and twenty (...) Children. May GOD open
their Hearts, tha^ (...) may attend to the Things that were spoken.

In the Afternoon Mr. Causton sent Word that he and the Magistrates would wait
upon me, but I chose rather to wait upon them. I was received with great
Civility, and our chief Conversation ran upon the Place of my Settlement; at
last it was resolved that I should have a House and Tabernacle built at
Frederica, and serve at Savannah, when, and as long as I pleased. I find there
are many Divisions amongst the Inhabitants, but GOD, I hope, will make me an
Instrument of composing them: Grant this, O LORD, for thy dear Son's sake.

Sunday, May 14. After another Week's Confinement, by the Return of my Fever,
under which GOD showed me great Mercies, and which went off with a Fit of the
Ague, I attempted to read Prayers, but was so exceeding ^aint and weak, that I
was obliged to leave off before I began the second Service. Oh that my Friends
had seen me at that Hour, they then might have learnt not to have any Man's
Person in Admiration, and not to think more highly of me than they ought to
think.

Tuesday, May 16. Having by the Blessing of GOD gotten a little Strength, I
went to see To^^ Chachi, who, I heard, was near expiring at a Neighbor's
House. He lay on a Blanket thin and meagre, and little else but Skin and Bones.
Senauki sat by fanning him with some Indian Feathers. There was no Body that
could talk English, so I could only shake Hands and leave him.

Friday, May 19. GOD still strengthening me more and more, I went this Morning
to two little Villages, Hampstead and Highgate, about Five Miles off Savannah:
The former consists of three Families, making in all eleven Souls, one Man a
Jew; two Men, one Woman and seven Children Swissers. I was much delighted with
seeing the Improvements a few pair of Hands had made in their respective
Plantations, and was surprised to see what Industry will do. Surely they speak
not Truth, who say that the Georgia People have been idle; for I never saw more
laborious People than are in these Villages. They live exceeding hard, but with
a little Assistance may do very well. I was at a Loss, because I could not talk
French, but however I resolved, under GOD, to follow my worthy Predecessor's
Example, and to visit them once a Week, and read Prayers to as ^^ny as could
understand me. I also enquired into the State of their Children, and found
there were many who might prove useful Members of the Colony, if there was a
proper Place provided for their Maintenance and Education. Nothing can effect
this but an Orphan-House, which might easily be erected at Savannah, would some
of those that are rich in this World's Good contribute toward it. May GOD, in
his due Time, stir up the Wills of his faithful People to be ready to
distribute, and willing to communicate on this commendable Occasion.

Saturday, May 20. Went once more to (...) To^^ Chachi, hearing his Nephew
(...) who was there, who could talk English. I desired of him to enquire of his
Uncle, Whether he thought he should die; who answered, He could not tell: I
then asked where he thought he should go after Death? He replied, to Heaven.
But alas, how can a Drunkard enter there! I then exhorted Tooanoowee (who is a
tall proper Youth) not to get drunk, telling him, he understood English, and
therefore would be punished the more if he did not live better. I then asked
him, Whether he believed a Heaven? He answered, Yes. I then asked, Whether he
believed a Hell? and described it by pointing to the Fire, he replied, No. From
whence we may easily gather how natural it is to all Mankind to believe there
is a Place of Happiness, because they wish it may be so, and on the contrary,
how ^verse they are to believe a Place of Torment, because they wish it may not
be so. But GOD is true and just, and as surely as the Good shall go into
everlasting Happiness, so the Wicked shall go into everlasting Punishment.

Wednesday, May 24. Went to Day to Thunderbolt, a Village about six Miles off
Savannah, situated very pleasantly near the River, and consisting of three
Families, four Men and two Women, and ten Servants; I was kindly received,
expounded a Chapter, used a few Collects, called on a Family or two that lay
near our Way, and returned home to Savannah very comfortably, with my Friend
Delamotte, about six o'Clock in the Evening. Blessed be GOD for strengthening
my weak ^ody.

Friday, June 2. This Evening parted with kind Captain Whiting and my dear
Friend Delamotte, who embarked for England about seven at Night. The poor
People lamented the Loss of him, and went to the Waterside to take a last
Farewell. And good Reason had they to do so: For he has been indefatigable in
feeding CHRIST's Lambs with the sincere Milk of the Word, and many of them
(Blessed be GOD) have grown thereby. Surely I must labor most heartily, since
I come after such worthy Predecessors. The Good that Mr. John Wesly has done in
America, under GOD, is inexpressible* His Name is very precious among the
People; and he has laid such a Foundation, that I hope neither Men nor Devils
^ill ever be able to shake. Oh that I may ^llow him, as he has Christ.

Monday, June 5. Had a Conference with a certain Person of the Parish, who, I
heard last Night, had been broaching many heretical Doctrines to one of my
Friends, particularly in denying the Eternity of Hell Torments. I therefore
invited him this Morning to Breakfast; and after imploring God's Assistance in
the Spirit of Meekness, I asked him, Whether he believed the Eternity of
Hell Torments? He answered frankly, No. I replied, What do you mean, Sir, when
you repeat the 12 th Article of our Creed? He said, he believed wicked Men were
to be annihilated. I then read Pearson's Exposition of the last Article, but he
(...) all* said he thought himself in the (...) believed it his Duty to inform
Mankind, that they were to be annihilated. Upon which I repeated to him that
Passage out of the Revelations. If any Man sball take away from or add unto
Words that are written in this Book, GOD shall take away his Name out of the
Book of Life, and add unto him all the Plagues that are written in this Book.
This he said he believed. Afterward we discoursed afresh, but finding him
resolute to propagate his Principles, I then told him with the utmost Calmness
that I was sorry that I gave him the (...) at the Sacrament; but for the futu^^
(...) pardon me if I refused ever to give (...). This staggered him a little,
but (...) it pretty patiently, yet thought me unc^a^table. But I told him I
should meet him at the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, and then he would see upon what
Principles I acted. May GOD give me Grace not to regard the Faces of Men, but
with an humble well guided Zeal and Courage to watch the Flock over which the
Holy Ghost has made me Overseer.

Saturday, June 10. Placed one that came with me, at Highgate, to teach the
Children English, that belong to that Village and Hampstead. They are about
Twenty in all, of French Extraction, but some few of them are able to speak a
little in our vulgar Tongue. I thought placing a Master there would be of great
Consequence. First, Because I cannot think Children will ever be naturalized to
the Colony, till (...) talk our Language. Secondly, Because the present
Generation will soon wear off, and these Children being well instructed in
ours, will make them forget their own Tongue* and should they marry and have
Children, they would naturally teach their Children the same; so that at Length
we shall all be of one Speech. Thirdly, As they are but few in Number, and no
likelihood of any French Minister to come amongst them; I or my Successors
shall be unable to catechize or bring them to hear the Word of GOD at our
Church, unless they are acquainted with the English Tongue.

Monday, June 11, Opened a School to Day for the Girls of Savannah, a Friend,
whose Heart GOD was pleased to touch on Board the Ship, having at my Request
undertaken to teach them. The Work is for my Master, and therefore I doubt not
of being supplied some Way or another with a sufficient Fund for the Support of
it. May GOD enable him who is set over them to feed them with the sincere Milk
of the Word, and give them Grace to grow thereby?

Thursday, June 22. Was taken (as all about me thought for Death) with a
violent Purging and Vomiting, which in the Space of five Hou^e quite exhausted
my Spirits, and brought me in Appearance, almost to the Point of Death. But God
supported me by his inward Comforts, caused me to rejoice in it; and cast me
into a deep Sleep, out of which I awoke perfectly well, to the Surprise of all
about me. O (...) can express the loving Kindness of the (...) or show forth
all his Praise! My Parishioners in general showed they loved me; for they
seemed most sollicitous for my Welfare. For their Sake, as well as for my own,
I hope GOD has so suddenly restored me. GOD grant I may now begin to be active
in my Master's Service, that whenever he shall call I may be found so doing.

Friday, June 24. To the great Surprise of myself and People, was enabled to
read Prayers and preach with Power before the Free-Masons, with whom I
afterward dined, and was used with the utmost Civility. May GOD make them
Servants of CHRIST, and then and not till then will they be free indeed.

Friday, July 7. Being the Anniversary for opening the Court, I preached in the
Morning at the Magistrate's Request, and endeavored with all Plainness and
Humility to show both them and the People, what they ought to do to promote
their Temporal and Eternal Welfare. O GOD, do thou bless it, and it shall be
blessed through JESUS CHRIST.

Tuesday, July 11. Returned this Evening from Ebenezer (whither I went
Yesterday) the Place where the Salizburghers are settled; and was wonderfully
pleased with their Order and Industry. Their Lands are improved surprisingly
for the Time they have been there, and I believe they have far the best Crop of
any in the Colony. -- They are blessed with two such pious Ministers as I have
not often seen; They have no (...) of Judicature, but all little Differences
are immediately and implicitly decided by their Ministers, whom they look upon
and love as their Fathers. They have likewise an Orphan-House, in which are
seventeen Children, and one Widow, and I was much delighted to see the
Regularity wherewith it is managed. -- O that GOD may stir up the Hearts of his
Servants to contribute toward that and another which we hope to have erected
at Savannah. -- Mr. Bo^zius, one of their Ministers, being with me on Saturday,
I gave him some of my Poor's Store for his Orphans, and when I came to
Ebenezer, he called them all before him, catechized and exhorted them to give
GOD Thanks for his good Providence toward them; then prayed with them, and
made them pray after him; then sung a Psalm, and afterward the little Lambs
came and shook me by the Hand one by one, and so we parted, and I scarce was
ever better pleased in my Life. -- Surely whoever contributes to the Relief of
the Saltzburghers, will perform an acceptable Sacrifice to our Blessed Master.
They are very poor; but with a little Assistance might live comfortably and
well. They want a Place for Public Worship, and Money to buy Cattle and other
Necessaries for the Orphan-House and People. May the great GOD raise up
Instruments to assist and relieve them; for surely they are worthy.

Tuesday, July 18. About Ten of Clock this Evening returned to Savannah, having
set out from thence Yesterday to visit four or five Families that live at some
of the outward Settlement, about twelve Miles off. -- Their Beginnings as yet
are but small, but I cannot help thinking there are Foundations laying for
great temporal and spiritual Blessings in Georgia, when the Inhabitants are
found worthy. -- Blessed be GOD, in Savannah they will hear the Word gladly,
and People every where receive me with the utmost Civility, and are not angry
when I reprove them. -- May GOD keep them always thus minded, and prepare me
for whatever Sufferings he shall permit to fall upon me for doing my Duty.

Tuesday, July 25. I am now waiting for the Scout-Boat which Mr. Horton has
sent to take me to Frederica, to preach the Gospel there also. For therefore am
I sent. -- I should part with regret from the People of Savannah, did I not
know GOD called me from them. For they seem to have a sincere Affection for me,
and flock (especially every Evening) to hear the Word of GOD. -- I have
endeavored to let my Gentleness be known amongst them, because they consist of
different Nations and Opinions. -- And I have strove to draw them by the Cords
of Love, because the Obedience resulting from that Principle I take to be most
genuine and lasting. My ordinary Way of dividing my ministerial Labors has
been as follows, --

On Sunday Morning at Five of Clock, I publicly expound the second Lesson for
the Morning or Evening Service as I see most suited to the People's
Edification; at Ten I preach and read Prayers, at Three in the Aftern^on I do
the same, and at Seven expound Part of the Church Catechism, at which great
Numbers are usually present. I visit from House to House* read public Prayers
and expound twice* and catechize (unless something extraordinary happens) visit
the Sick every Day, and read to as many of my Parishioners as will come thrice
a Week, -- and blessed be GOD, my Labors have not been altogether vain in the
LORD. For he has been pleased to set his Seal to my Ministry in a Manner, I
could not, I dared not, in America expect. Not unto me, O LORD, not unto me,
but unto thy Name be the Glory.

At FREDERICA.
Tuesday, August 8. After a pleasant Passage of five or six Days arrived at
Frederica, a Town situated southwardly above an hundred Miles from Savannah,
and consisting of about an hundred and twenty Inhabitants. The People received
me most gladly, having had a Famine of the Word for a long Season. May GOD give
a Blessing to my coming amongst them.

In the Evening we had public Prayers, and expounding of the second Lesson
under a large Tree, and many more present than could be expected. Blessed be
GOD.

Wednesday, August 9. Began to Day visiting from House to House, and found the
People in Appearance, desirous of being fed with the sincere Milk of the Word,
and sollicitous for my Continuance amongst them. Poor Creatures! my Heart^ached
for them, because I saw the^ and their Children scattered abroad as Sheep
having no Shepherd. LORD in thy due Time send forth some Labourer, in this Part
of thy Vineyard.

This Evening had Prayers in a House which Mr. Horton hired for us during my
Stay, and most of the Inhabitants, I believe, were present. Blessed be GOD,
Timber is sawing for the erecting a more commodious Place for public Worship,
'till a Church can be built. GOD grant we may always worship him in Spirit and
in Truth, and then we may be assured that at all Times and in all Places he
will hear us.

Friday, August 11. Went in the Morning to, and returned in the Evening from
the Darien, a Settlement about twenty Miles off from Frederica, whither I went
to see Mr. Macloud a worthy Minister of the Scotch Church, and GOD gave me a
most pleasant Passage.

Saturday, August 12. This Afternoon was alarmed with the News of a Family
Disaster. My dear Friend ^.'s Brother going to find a Horse that was lost in
the Woods, was lost himself, and many Guns shot after him for several Days, but
in vain. I endeavored to give Thanks to GOD for this and every Thing that
befalls me, because it is his Will, and resolved to set out for Savannah
immediately, knowing what Concern my dear Friend H. must be in at so sudden a
Loss. Blessed be God, for this and all Crosses. Father thy Will be done in, by,
and upon me for Time and for Eternity.

In the Evening, because I was to go about Midnight, I ^ave Notice I would
preach as well as expound, as which almost all the Inhabitants were present;
for many were obliged to stand without the Door. The Lesson was very applicable
to my Circumstances. It was the first of St. James, wherein the Apostle bids us
rejoice when we fall into diverse Temptations. GOD enabled me to enlarge on it
pretty much. I told the People that GOD called me and I must away, at which
some wept. Oh GOD how do thou follow me with thy Blessings wherever thou
sendest me! I looked for Persecution, but lo! I am received as an Angel of God.
Not unto me, O LORD, not unto me, but unto thy Name be the Glory!

Sunday, August 13. Being disappointed of going by the Boat last Night, I read
Prayers and preached to my dear little Flock twice, which caused great Joy
among them. Mr. Horton was extremely civil and did every Thing he could to
oblige me. This Afternoon after Sermon intended to go with him to preach to the
Soldiers at the Fort of St. Simon's, and then the next Day to go to St.
Andrew's, but Lord thou call me elsewhere. Oh grant I may have no Will of my
own, but whenever or wherever thou shall be pleased to call me, may I without
the least Reluctance say, lo I come! Had an Alarm brought to Frederica, that
the Spaniards had taken Possession of Fort St. George, and fired at one of our
Boats: But this was quickly found to be entirely groundless.

About Two in the Afternoon having first read Prayers, and preached, most of
the Inhabitants accompanied me to the Bluff, and took their Leaves of me in an
affectionate Manner, and laded me with Things convenient for my Journey. The
good Lord reward them ten thousand fold, and make me thankful for his unmerited
Mercies!

At SAVANNAH.
Wednesday, August 16. Arrived this Day at Savannah, and had the Pleasure of
meeting my Friend who had been lost, he was from Tuesday 'till Friday, roving
about the Woods, during which Time the great Guns were fired according to
Custom, and the People showed what a great Respect they had for me and my
Friends. Many of them going out all Day and Night after him. -- As Soon as I had
refreshed myself I went and visited my Parishioners from House to House to
return them Thanks for their Kindness to my Friends. An unusual Joy appeared in
their Faces at my unexpected Return, and they were ready to say, How beautiful
are the Feet of him that brings the glad Tidings of Salvation! At Evening
Prayers (and a very large Congregation was present) I returned my dear Hearers
hearty Thanks for the late Instance of their sincere Affection, I publicly
exhorted my Friend that was lost to show forth his Thankfulness not only with
his Lips but with his Life, and desired their Prayers to GOD for me that I
might now more and more devote myself to my Blessed Master's Service, and study
daily to purify my corrupt Nature, that I might be made an Instrument under
him, of winning their Souls to GOD.

Wednesday, August 23. A Necessity was laid on me to Day to express my
Resentment against Infidelity by refusing to read the Burial Office over the
most professed Unbeliever I ever yet met with. -- GOD was pleased to visit him
with a lingering Illness, in which Time I went to see him frequently. --
Particularly about five Weeks agone, I asked him what Religion he was of, he
answered, " Religion was divided into so many Sects he knew not which to
choose." -- Another Time I offered to pray with him, but he would not accept it,
upon which I resolved to go see him no more; -- But being told two Days before
he dyed, that he had an Inclination to see me, I went to him again, and after a
little Conversation, I put to him the following Questions. " Do you believe
JESUS CHRIST to be GOD, the one Mediator between God and Man?" He said, " I
believe Christ was a good Man." -- " Do you believe the Holy Scriptures?" I
believe, replied he, something of the Old Testament, the New I do not believe
at all. -- Do you believe, Sir, a Judgment to come? He turned himself about and
replied, I know not what to say to that. -- Alas, said I, Sir, if all these
Things should be true. -- Which Words I believe, gave him Concern, for he
seemed after to be very uneasy, grew delirious, and departed in a Day or two.
-- Unhappy Man, how quickly was he convinced that all I said was true. Now he
and I are of one Mind. The Day after his Decease he was carried to the Ground,
and I refused to read the Office over him, but went to the Grave and told the
People what had passed between him and me, warned them against Infidelity, and
asked them whether I could safely say, " as our Hope is this our Brother does,"
upon which I believe they were thoroughly satisfied that I had done right. --
GOD grant this may be a Warning to surviving Unbelievers.

Thursday, Aug. 24. This Day went to Highgate with a Friend or two more, and
read Prayers, preached and baptized a Child, and and catechized in a House
lately erected by the Inhabitants. For upon my sending a Master to teach their
Children, one offered to give me a part of his Lot, and the rest to give their
Labor. Accordingly I accepted of it, found Materials, and to Day it was sit to
preach in, and be made a School-House of. The Children though Foreigners answered
admirably well, which gave me great Hopes that the other foreign Children of
the Colony may also learn our English Tongue when a proper Master is provided.
-- After Service we refreshed ourselves together, thanked our good GOD, and eat
our Bread with Gladness of Heart.

Sunday, August 27. GOD having now shown both me and my Friends that it was his
Will I should return for awhile to England: This Afternoon I preached my
Farewell Sermon, to the great Grief of my dear Parishioners, for their Hearts I
found were very full as well as mine, which they expressed by shedding many
Tears. But a sensible Alteration appeared in their Countenances, when I
promised them solemnly before GOD to return as soon as possible. May GOD enable
me to perform my Promise and prepare my Way before me.

The Weather was exceeding hot, and the Greatness of the Congregation made it
still hotter, but GOD enabled me to preach with Power. Thanks be to GOD for the
Strength he gives me through JESUS CHRIST.

Monday August 28. This being the Day of my Departure, it was mostly spent in
taking Leave of my Flock, who expressed their Affection now more than ever. For
they came to me from the Morning to the Time I left them with Tears in their
Eyes, wishing me a prosperous Voyage and safe Return, and gave me other Tokens
of their Love. For they brought me Wine, Ale, Cake, Coffee, Tea, and other
Things proper for my Passage, and their Love seemed without Dissimulation.

About Four in the Afternoon I went into the Boat provided for me by Mr.
Causton, who with the Recorder came to my House and took their Leave. A great
Number of People came to the Bluff and wished me a good Voyage with all their
Souls, and a speedy Return; I thanked them, and having desired their Prayers,
blessed them in the Name of GOD and took my Leave.

My Heart was full and I took the first Opportunity of venting it by Prayers
and (...)* I think I never parted from a Place with more Regret; for America in
my Opinion is an excellent School to learn CHRIST in; and I have great Hopes
some good will come out of Savannah, because the longer I continued there, the
larger the Congregations grew. And I scarce know a Night, though we had Divine
Service twice a Day, when the Church-House has not been near full. -- A Proof,
this, I hope, that GOD has yet Spiritual and Temporal Blessings in store for
them. Hasten, O LORD that blessed Time.

At CHARLESTOWN.
Sunday, September 3. Arrived last Night here, and preached twice to Day, I
hope with some good Effect. The Bishop of London's Commissary, the Rev. Mr.
Garden, a good Soldier of JESUS CHRIST, received me in a most Christian Manner.
He and several others offered me a Lodging, and were more than civil to me. How
does GOD raise me up Friends wherever I go! Who is so good a GOD as our GOD?

Was much pleased with the Neatness of the Buildings, and the Largeness of the
Place. The Church is very beautiful, and the Inhabitants seem to be excellently
well settled. GOD's Judgments have been late abroad amongst them by the
Spreading of the Smallpox, I hope they will learn Righteousness!

Monday, September 4. Was much delighted with a Packet of Letters I received
from Savannah, not only as they were a Proof of the Writer's Affection for me,
but also that the Holy Ghost was effectually moving on their Souls.

Saturday, Sept. 9. Received another comfortable Packet of Letters from
Savannah Friends, and was soon hurried on Board, the Wind being fair for
sailing. Great Kindness has been shown me at Charlestown, some Presents made
me, and there was a general and earnest Expectation of my Preaching on Sunday.
But GOD sees not as Man sees. Father thy Will be done!

On Board the Mary, Captain Coc, Commander, bound from Charlestown to England.
Saturday, Sept. 9. About Noon came on Board with great Composure of Mind, and
thought of my absent Friends, settled my Things, wrote my Journal, and finished
some other Matters. The Wind being fair, weighed Anchor, and set sail about
five in the Evening. The LORD send us a prosperous Voyage, and bring us in his
appointed Time to the Haven where we would be!

Saturday, Sept. 16. Had contrary Winds all the Week, and got but a few Leagues
from Charlestown, yet GOD showed me great Mercies: For he enabled me to write
several Things, and correct others. I have been but a little Sea-sick; and
though I have not had my Clothes off, and lay upon Deck or on a Chest every
Night, yet the Goodness of GOD keeps me healthy and strong, and gives me a
feeling Possession of his Holy Spirit. My Sphere of Action is now contracted
into a narrow Compass. There are but few Souls on Board, and all that I can do
is to read public Prayers, and add a Word of Exhortation twice every Day, and
catechize those I brought with me. The Captain and all are very civil, my
Christian Friends have been much upon my Heart, and caused me some Dejections,
but GOD was my Comforter.

Had I my own Will, I could wish myself a speedy Passage, that I may return the
sooner to those few Sheep I have left at Savannah; but GOD knows best, and this
Retirement, I hope will break my Will, purify my Heart, and fit me for the
great Work that lies before me. Even so Lord JESUS, Amen, and Amen.

Saturday, Sept. 23. Still GOD is pleased to send us contrary Winds, except one
Night about the Middle of the Week. -- However he enables me to give Thanks --
and great Reason have I so to do. -- For the Holy Spirit has been with me of a
Truth!

I have observed, that before GOD calls me to a public Work, he always sends me
into some Retirement, but never to so great a one as now. -- A Sign this, I
hope, that a greater Work is yet behind. Lord fit and prepare me for it.

My Mind, blessed be GOD, has been composed and easy. Only the Absence of my
Friends, now and then struck a Damp upon my Spirits. -- But the Friend of all
is with and in me, and he by his Spirit I trust, will supply the Want of their
dear Company. -- Amen, Lord JESUS, Amen.

Sunday, 24. Monday, Sept. 25. Was oppressed much in Spirit these two Days. The
Wind was contrary, and the Sea wrought and was tempestuous; but blessed be GOD,
he enabled me to be resigned ^o his Will, this outward and inward Trial being
only what was to be expected after my late Assistances. We must not always be
upon the Mount in this Life.

Ever since Monday Evening, GOD has been pleased to send us fair Winds,
particularly to Day, when our Ship has sailed seven Miles an Hour, Blessed be
GOD.

I have been chiefly busied about writing Letters, to engage more Laborers,
and to ge^ Contributions for my poor Flock.

Blessed be GOD! he has made me frequently rejoice in Spirit, and now quite
reconciles me to my present Retirement. When shall I have no Will but GOD 's!

Sunday, October. 1. Had very little sleep all Night, and was like to fall off
the Chest whereon I lay several Times, the Sea being very rough, and the
Wind-turning in an Instant directly contrary. Oh that I could learn from Winds
and Storms to obey my Master!

Buried a young Man that came from Georgia, and died this Morning. LORD, What
is Man? He solaced himself with the Thoughts of seeing his Friends in England.
But GOD saw fit to prevent it by shortning his Days. LORD, thy Judgments are
like the great Deep!

When I buried him, I could (...) say much, because of the rolling of the Ship*
but at Evening-Prayer I took occasion from the Lesson which providentially was
the 15th Chap. of the first of Corinthians) to exhort all my Shipmates to
consider so, as to prepare for their latter End. I believe my Words came with
Power. GOD grant they may have a due Effect. Amen, LORD JESUS, Amen!

Friday, October. 6. Before I left Savannah, the Lesson appointed for the
Morning, was St. Paul's Shipwreck, out of the Acts, and before I left
Charlestown, the Lesson was the first of Jonah, both which made such a deep
Impression upon me, that I wrote to my Friend Habersham, to acquaint him I was
apprehensive we should have a dangerous Voyage: Since I have been on Board,
what St. Paul said to his Companions, That he perceived their Voyage would be
to their great Damage, has frequently been pressed upon my Heart; and GOD has
now shown me wherefore he gave me these previous Notices. -- For on Tuesday
Night last, after we had sailed 150 Miles, the last twenty-four Hours, about
Eleven o'Clock arose a sudden violent East Wind, which continued till about
Four in the Morning, and put all the Sailors to their Wits End. -- Most of them
declared they never had seen the like before. The main Sail was slit in several
Pieces, and several of the other Sails, and much of the Tackling all to
Tatters; not a dry Place was to be found in all the Ship: The Captain's
Hammock, in the great Cabin, was half filled with Water; and though I lay in
the most dry Part of the Ship, yet the Waves broke in upon me twice or thrice.
In short, all was Terror and Confusion, Men's Hearts failing them for fear, and
the Wind and the Sea raging most horribly. But GOD ( for ever be adored his
unmerited Goodness) was exceeding gracious unto me. For I felt a sweet
Complacency in my Will, in Submission to his. Many particular Promises GOD has
made me from his Word, that I should return in Peace, flowed in upon my Heart.
And he enabled me greatly to rejoice. -- This is the first Day we have ventured
to pull down any of our dead Lights, which put me in Mind of the long Night the
Egyptians once saw. But I spent my Time in reading, and fervent Intercession
for absent Friends, and comforted myself much with the Remembrance of them;
most of fresh Provisions are washed over Board, and our Tackling much out of
order, so that we have a Prospect but of an indifferent Voyage. But blessed be
GOD, the Prospect pleases me. For now I shall learn, I trust, how to want as
well as how to abound, and how to endure Hardship like a good Soldier of JESUS
CHRIST. O LORD let thy Strength be magnified in my Weakness, say unto my Soul,
It is I, be not afraid, and then let Storms and Tempests do their worst.

Saturday, October. 7. This has been a Week, blessed be GOD, though not of much
Action, yet full of Opportunities of exercising my passive Graces! To Day,
adored be the Divine Goodness, the Weather has cleared up more and more, and
our Ship has sailed directly before the Wind, at the Rate of four or five Miles
an Hour.

A Desire to see my Friends in England, to dispatch my Business, and to return
to my poor Flock, prompt me secretly to wish for a Continuance of this
prosperous Gale. But LORD I know not what to pray for as I ought. Do with me as
seems good in thy Sight. Only I beseech thee to sanctify my present
Retirement; that the longer I am upon the Sea, the more zealous I may be in thy
Service, when I come upon dry Land.

Saw a Jamaica Ship* Captain Philips, who has been out nine Weeks. What Reason
have we to be (...)!

Having (...) ^pportunity before, since the Storm, of getting many of our
People together, gave a Word or two of Exhortation to my Ship-Mates, to bless
GOD for our late Deliverance, and to sin no more lest a worse Storm should
befall us.

Saturday, October 14. Sailed this Week about 600 Miles; but Yesterday GOD was
pleased to send us a contrary Wind, which still continues. Father, thy Will be
done.

A few Days agone I flattered myself we should be soon at our desired Port, but
GOD is pleased to defer the Accomplishment of my Hopes: However, blessed be his
Name, He enables me to give Thanks.

Most of this Week has been spent in searching the Scriptures; and particular
Retirements for Direction and Assistance in the Work before me. -- GOD has been
pleased to send me many inward Trials. And now my fresh Provisions are gone,
and the People are put to the Allowance of a Quart of Water each Man for a Day*
So that I hope now the spiritual Man will grow, having so little for the
natural Man to feed on. Amen, Lord JESUS. -- Blessed be GOD, I can by his Grace
say that I rejoice in Necessities, and do in every Thing give Thanks. Keep me
thus minded, O Dear Redeemer, till thou perfect thy Work in my Soul.

Had this Sentence out of Henry much pressed upon my Heart to comfort me in my
Retirement. -- The Mower looses no Time whilst he is whetting his Scythe. --
Thus shall all Christians be taught of GOD.

Sunday, October 15. The Weather being calm, and I being kindly invited
Yesterday, went on board the Constant, Capt. Philips, bound from Jamaica, who
now sails in Company with us, and was kindly received both by the Captain and
his Passengers, and not only so, but they spared me what they could of their
Provisions* A most providential Supply; for ours was quite out. But our
Extremity is GOD's Opportunity. Blessed be his Name for thus strengthening our
Faith. May this be looked upon as a Pledge that He will never leave or forsake
us.

Our chief Discourse was about Georgia; and staying a little longer than was
thought, my Shipmates were very suspicious I should be detained on board. But
though there was Provision for the Flesh, yet I like my own Situation best,
because here are greater Opportunities of denying myself, and consequently of
making farther Improvement in the Spirit. O that I may always walk by this Rule!

Saturday, October 21. Made but slow Advances in our Voyage, having had but one
or two Days of fair Wind. But notwithstanding, I believe we shall now soon
reach Shore; for GOD has been pleased to visit me all the Week with variety of
inward Trials, which is a Sign to me that I shall experience yet more and more
of his Mercies. How good is GOD thus to prepare me by Sufferings, that so his
Blessings may be my Ruin; these Things to the natural Man ar^ not joyous, but
grievous, but GOD enables me to take Comfort only in him, to thank him
sincerely for his loving Correction, and therefore when I am sufficiently
exercised thereby, I hope it will bring forth in me the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness. Amen.

Sunday, October 22. At the Desire of the Captain preached my Sermon on rash
Anger, having hitherto used to expound only. In the Lesson were these
remarkable Words, Return to thy own House, and show how great Things God has
done unto thee. And again, It came to pass that when Jesus was returned, the
People gladly received him, for they were all waiting for him. These last Words
were remarkably pressed upon me at Savannah, when I was consulting GOD by
Prayer, whether it was his Will that I should go to England. Thus GOD 's Word
is in particular Cases as well as in general, a Light unto our Feet and a
Lanthorn unto our Paths.

Thursday, October 25. Was much comforted this Evening, in reading the 33d and
34th Chapters of Ezekiel, wherein I could not but observe many Circumstances of
GOD's dealing with him corresponding with what I have experienced in myself:
The following Verses in particular were set home to my Heart, -- Also thou Son
of Man, the Children of thy People are still talking (...) by the Wall and in
the Doors of the (...) saying, Come I pray (...) what Word comes from the
LORD. -- And they came unto thee as the People comes, and they hear thy Words,
but they will not do them, for with their Mouth they show much Love, but their
Heart goes after Covetousness. And lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely
Song of one that has a pleasant Voice, and can play well on an Instru^ent: for
they hear thy Words but do them not. -- Who that knows how GOD has dealt with
me since I have been in the Ministry, sees not that this Passage answers to my
Circumstances, as Face answers to Face in the Water? However this I know, what
I have spoken from GOD will come to pass (lo it will come) and then shall these
Scoffers and Despisers know, that a Minister of CHRIST has been amongst them. O
that I may never be brought forth as a swift Witness against any; but we must
all appear before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST.

Saturday, October 28. Sailed about 300 Miles the four first Days of this Week:
Had a little Storm on Wednesday Night, and a great Calm ever since. We are now
within 150 Leagues of Land, and our Provisions and Water very scanty, and our
Ship very weak; but the Hour of our Arrival is not yet come. Lord, teach me to
be resigned and thankful, and then deal with me as seems good in thy Sight.

Blessed be GOD! he has this Week enlarged my Heart, and filled me with great
Comfort, after great inward Conflicts. Is not all this to prepare me for
further Trials we are yet to endure ever we get to England? LORD, thy Grace I
know will be sufficient for me, and therefore I rejoice in the Prospect of
enduring Tribulation.

Had Reason to believe one on board was offended at my enlarging one Night on
the Sin of Drunkenness. -- I always endeavor to speak with the Meekness and
Gentleness of CHRIST. -- But if People will account me their Enemy, because out
of Love, I tell them the Truth, I cannot help that. Lo I have delivered my Soul.

Monday, October 30. Still GOD is pleased (...) the Wind, what there is of it,
should be ^^^trary, and our Ship's Company are now ^rought into great
Streights. Their Allowance of Water is a Quart a Day, and our constant Food for
some Time has been on Salt Beef and Water Dumplins, which do not agree with the
Stomachs of some amongst us. But GOD enables me to rejoice in that and all
other our Necessities, yea, He so comforts me that many I believe are surprised
at my Cheerfulness. But when we are destitute of outward Comforts, then does
GOD more comfort our Souls. This Morning when I awoke, the Faith of Abraham was
greatly pressed upon me; and the Example of Daniel and the three Children, who
were fat and well favored, notwithstanding they were fed with Pulse and Pease,
is continually before my Eyes. Some say we are within a hundred Leagues of
Land. But what does that signify, if GOD says, Hitherto shall you go, and no
further. LORD, in thy due Time let that which now lets be taken away, but
not before this Trial has done what it was sent for, though it make us smart.

I warm myself by smiling on, and exhorting them, and this Afternoon we joined
in solemn Prayers suitable to our present Circumstances. LORD, let our Cry come
unto thee. I know it will, and that we shall be answered, if it be best. But
great Blessings await me (...) Shore, and great Trials must precede. Oh that I
may by these small, be prepared for greater Suffering^* Amen, Lord JESUS.

Monday, October 30. Was comforted to Night in my present Circumstances, by
these Verses out of this Evening's Lesson, -- I have learnt in whatsoever State
I am, therewith to be content. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to
abound; every where, and in all Things I am instructed, both to the full and to
be hungry, both to abound and to suffer Need. I can do all through Christ which
strengthens me. Even so come, Lord JESUS. Amen and Amen.

Reading afterward in the Book of Maccabees, and thinking of my present
Situation, this Verse was pressed with unspeakable Comfort upon my Soul, --
After this they went Home, and sung a Song of Thanksgiving, and praised the
LORD in Heaven; because it is good, because his Mercy endures forever. I hope
my Friends will take care to fulfill this when we meet together on Shore.

Wednesday, November 1. This Afternoon, about four o'Clock, as I was in Secret,
humbling my Soul before GOD, interceding for my Friends, and had been praying
for a fair Wind, and Assistance in the great Work lying before me, News were
brought that the Wind was fair; which put me in Mind of the Angel's being sent
to Daniel, to tell him his Prayer was heard, when he was humbling his Soul with
Fasting, and praying for the Peace and Restoration of Jerusalem. Indeed I
cannot say I have purposely, for these three Weeks, eat no pleasant Food, or
fasted, as he did; but our Food is so salt, that I dare eat but little, so that
I am now literally in Fastings often. O that I may improve this blessed Season
for Humiliation and extraordinary Acts of Devotion, that I may be duly prepared
to approve myself a faithful Minister of JESUS CHRIST, whether by Honor or
Dishonor, by evil Report or good Report.

As soon as we found the Wind fair, we joined in Thanksgiving, and in singing
the first Part of the 34th Psalm (new Version) which was very applicable to our
Circumstances. For they tell me they have not above three Days Water on Board,
allowing a Quart to each Man a Day. But he, that at one Time, at the Request of
his Disciples, considered the Multitude, and worked a Miracle for their Relief;
and at another Time, at the Intercession of Moses, gave Water to the wandering
Israelites, I trust, now, has heard our Prayers, and sent this Wind with a
Commission to bring us where he will supply all our Wants. If not, O Blessed
JESU, thy Will be done. Give me Grace, I most humbly beseech thee, to hold out
my three Watches, and at the fourth Watch I know thou will come. Even so come
Lord JESUS.

Thursday, Nov. 4. For these two Days last past, GOD has been pleased greatly
to humble my Soul, and bring me low by Spiritual Desertions. And to Day he has
thought proper again to send us a contrary Wind, blessed be his Name. Our
Allowance of Water now is but a Pint a Day; so that we dare not eat much Beef.
Our Sails are exceeding thin; some more of them were split last Night, and no
one knows where we are; but GOD does, and that is sufficient.

Last Night He lifted up the Light of his blessed Countenance upon me, and to
Day fills me with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory; so that though I have
little to eat, yet I inwardly possess all Things. I am sometime afraid lest
continued Abstinence may occasion a bodily Sickness. But wherefore do I fear?
If it does, that and every Thing else I know will work for my Good. -- What I
most dread, is lest any on Board should charge GOD foolishly; but I check the
first Motions I discern arising in any one's Heart, and endeavor to justify
our good GOD, in all the Evil that he has brought upon us. I put before them
the Example of the Widow of Sarepta, and caution them against murmuring like
the Israelites at the Waters of Meribah, And thus I endeavor to comfort and
support them with the Comforts wherewith I myself am comforted of GOD.

This is now the eighth Week I have been Aboard. If my Friends ask me, why I
arrived no sooner, I may truly answer, Satan hindered us. For I believe it is
he who is permitted to do this; but this still gives me greater Hopes, that a
more effectual Door than ever, will be be opened in England, for preaching the
everlasting Gospel. O Satan, Satan, I defy thee to do thy worst; thou may
toss me up and down, and bring me into Jeopardy on every Side; but JESUS CHRIST
is praying for me on the Mount. And when the Time appointed by the Father is
come, and my Soul hereby prepared, he whom Winds and Storms obey, will speak
the Word; and then I shall have a happy meeting with my dear Friends!

Sunday, Nov. 5. This Day we rejoiced with trembling. For though we thereon
commemorated our Deliverance from the Gunpowder-Plot, yet as our Circumstances
called for Acts of Humiliation, I used Part of the Office of Commination,
(besides solemn Prayer and Psalms three Times) and enlarged on these Words of
St. James, My Brethren, count it all Joy, when ye fall into diverse
Temptations; knowing this, that the trying of your Faith works Patience: But
let Patience have her perfect Work. I hope this had a good Effect upon my
Hearers Hearts, and calmed their Spirits. For indeed we are brought very low:
But I can say with the penitent Thief, That I suffer justly, and do not receive
the ten thousandth Part of the Reward due to my Crimes. LORD, remember me now
thou art in thy Kingdom!

Monday, Nov. 6. Last Night, about seven o'Clock, GOD was pleased to suffer a
violent Wind to arise, which would not permit me to rise till this Afternoon,
about which Time it began in some measure to abate. Blessed be GOD through the
Precaution used by our Ship-Mates, we shipped but little Water, only we were
driven some Leagues back. The Weather was pretty cold, and a little Cake or two
baked on the Coals, and a very little Salt-Beef was all my Provision for the
Day; but thus Elijah lived for a long while, and why not I? Nay, he fasted
forty Days and forty Nights. And though I dare not presume to do so, yet if GOD
still brings me into greater Wants, I doubt not, but I shall find that Man
lives not by Bread alone, but by every Word that proceeds out of the Mouth
of GOD. LORD, I desire not to be exempted from sufferings, but to be supported
under them. If thy Glory can be promoted by my Trials, lo, here I am, scourge
me, try me as it seems good in thy Sight!

Wednesday, November 8. Perceived my self Yesterday and this Morning, inwardly
weak and fainting, and unable to read scarce any Thing. But blessed be GOD!
though he kill me, yet will I put my Trust in him.

When my Spirits are gone, I then find my Faith, as it were, less lively; But I
trust that is only owing to the Frame of my Body. For at all other Times I have
great Confidence in God! And was he now to put it to my Choice, whether this
Trial should continue, or he should send us a fair Wind, I should humbly refer
it to him again. For I know not what is best for me!

Most in the great Cabin now begin to be weak and look hollow-Ey'd, yet a
little while, and we shall come to Extremities; and then God's Arm will bring
us Salvation. May we patiently tarry the LORD's Leisure! Amen, Amen.

Great Part of this Day I lay down, being weak and much oppressed in my Head;
but at Night when some doubted what the End of this Visitation would be, the
following Verses were with great Comfort pressed upon my Soul. For I am in a
strait between two, having a Desire to be dissolved and to be with CHRIST,
which is far better. Nevertheless to abide in the Flesh is more needful for
you. And having this Confidence, I know that I shall abide and continue with
you all, for your furtherance and joy of Faith: That your rejoicing may be more
abundant in JESUS CHRIST for me, by my coming to y^u again. Thus Christians
have Meat to eat, which the World knows not.

In confidence of this, and such like Texts, that have been from time to time
applied to my Soul, I still (as often as my Strength will permit) contine to
write Letters ready to send when I come on Shore. Which reminds me of
Jeremiah's being commanded to buy Land, when his whole Country was about to be
carried into Captivity. Blessed are they that walk by Faith, and not by Sight.

Though one in his haste the other Day cried out, "What Jonah have we here on
Board?" And I answered, I am he; yet many now, I believe, bless GOD, that I am
with them. For, say they, How should we have been blaming and cursing one
another, had not Mr. W -- d been amongst us? Blessed be GOD, if my Ministry or
Presence can be instrumental to preven^ Sin against thee, O LORD, toss me on
the Ocean as long as it pleases thee! O my dear LORD, I desire to be resigned!

Thursday, Nov. 9, Enjoyed great Peace of Mind to Day, and was stronger in Body
than usual. Blessed be the LORD! We are now making for Ireland, and are
advanced some Leagues toward it. Whether we shall arrive there or not, GOD
only knows. I find all uneasiness arises from having a Will of my own. And
therefore I simply desire to will what GOD wills. Oh, when will this once be?

Friday, Nov. 10. Was much strengthened in our present Distress by the second
Lesson for the Day. It was our Savior's turning the Water into Wine at the
Marriage of Cana. We have applied to him as the Holy Virgin did and told him in
Prayer, that, we have but very little Water? At present he seems to turn away
his Face, and to say, What have I to do with you? But this is only because the
the Hour of Extremity is not yet come. When it is, I doubt not but he will now
as richly supply our Wants, as he did theirs then. May we in Patience possess
our Souls!

Saturday, Nov. 11. Still we are floating about, not knowing where we are. But
our People seem yet to have hopes of seeing Ireland. I know not whether I am
out in my Conjecture, but I imagine some of those Ships we have seen, are
arrived at England before us. Upon which, perhaps, my Friends will expect me,
pray for me, and at last give me up for lost. And then GOD will restore me to
them.

The Weather now begins to be cold, so that I can say with the Apostle. I am in
Hungrings and Thirstings, Cold and Fastings often. Hereafter, perhaps, I may
add moreover in Bonds and Imprisonments. But I trust the Sufferings of this
Life will not move me. For they are not worthy to be compared with the Glory
that shall be revealed in us.

My outward Man sensibly decays, but the Spiritual Man I trust, is renewed
Day by Day. I have besought the LORD many times to send us a fair Wind: But now
I see he does not think fit to answer me, I am wholly resigned, knowing that
his Grace will be sufficient for me, and that his Time is best.

Our Ship is much out of repair, and our Food by no means, enough to support
Nature in an ordinary Way, and that of the most indifferent Kind too: An Ounce
or two of Salt-Beef, a Pint of Water, and a Cake made of Flower and Skimmings
of the Pot. But I think often on him who preserved Moses in the Ark of
Bulrushes. And so long as I look upwards my Faith will not fail.

Blessed be Go^ for these Things, I rejoice in them daily. They are no more
than I expected, and I know they are Preparatives for future Mercies. GOD of
his infinite Mercy humble and try me, till I am rightly disposed to receive
them. Amen, LORD JESUS, Amen.

It pities me often to see my Brethren, lying in the Dust, as they have done
these many Weeks, and exposed to such Streights: For GOD knows both their Souls
and Bodies are dear unto me. But thanks be to GOD, they bear up well, and I
hope we shall all now learn to endure Hardships, like good Soldiers of JESUS
CHRIST.

Sunday, Nov. 12. This Morning the Doctor of our Ship took up the Common Prayer
Book, and observed that he opened upon these Words, Blessed be the LORD GOD of
Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his People. And so indeed he has, for
about 8 o'Clock this Morning News were brought, that our Men saw Land, and I
went and was a joyful Spectator of it myself. The Air was clear, and the Sun
arising in full Strength, so that it is the most pleasant Day I have seen these
many Weeks. Now know I that the LORD will not always be chiding, neither
keeps he his Anger forever. For these two or three Days last past, I have
enjoyed an uncommon Serenity of Soul, and given up my Will to GOD. And now he
has brought us Deliverance. -- From whence I infer, that a Calmness of Mind,
and entire Resignation to the Divine Will, is the best Preparative for
receiving Divine Mercies. LORD evermore make me thus minded!

As soon as I had taken a View of the Land, we joined together in a Prayer and
Psalm of Thanksgiving, and already began to reflect with Pleasure on our late
Streights. Thus it will be hereafter, the Storms and Tempests of this
troublesome World will serve to render our Haven of eternal Rest doubly
agreeable. -- I fear now nothing so much as the Treachery of my Heart, lest
like the ungrateful Lepers, I should not turn to GOD and give Thanks by leading
a Holy Life. But all Things are possible with GOD, on whose rich Mercies and
free Grace in JESUS CHRIST, I alone depend for Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption.

Spent a good Part of this Afternoon in walking upon Deck, and blessing GOD for
the Prospect I saw all around me. His good Providence has been pleased to bring
us into a fine large Bay, surrounded on each Side with high Lands and Hommocks,
much like those near Gibraltar, and a large Light-House on the Fore-Land, from
which in the Evening was shown a Light. It lies on the North-West of Ireland,
and most suppose we are near Limerick, but are not certain, only one of our Men
having been here before. There are no Soundings till you come very near the
Land. The Wind being against us (that little that was of it) we could not get
much forward: But GOD in his due Time will bring us on Shore. Blessed be his
Name, the Weather is exceeding clear, and this is the most comfortable Day I
have seen a long Time. LORD make me mindful of these thy Mercies all the Days
of my Life!

Tuesday, Nov. 14. Let this Day, my Soul, be noted in thy Book, for GOD has
visited thee with his Salvation, -- On Monday midnight, as I was lying on my
Bed, my Sleep departed from me, and I had no rest in my Spirit, because
although the Weather was so exceeding calm, and we in so great Distress, yet no
Boat was sent to fetch us Provisions. Upon this I spoke to the Captain, and he
to the Mate, who in the Morning went with a Boat, and about Noon this Day
returned loaded with Provisions and Water, and not only so, but told us, he was
kindly entreated, by the People he met with, especially by a great Country
Gentleman, who came from his Seat at Midnight, on purpose to relieve him and
his Companions; furnished them with a fresh Boat and other Necessaries, most
kindly invited me, though unknown, to his House, to stay as long as I pleased;
and has ordered Horses to wait ready to take me thither.

Who is so great, so good a GOD, as our GOD! Our Hour of Extremity was indeed
come: For we had but half a Pint of Water left, and my Stomach was exceeding
weak, through my long Abstinence; but now his Almighty Arm has brought us
Salvation.

Through all the changing Scenes of Life,
In Trouble and in Joy,
The Praises of my GOD shall still
My Heart and Tongue employ,
Of his Deliverance I will boast,
Till all that are distressed;
From my Example Comfort take
And charm their Griefs to rest.
Fear him, ye Saints, and you will then
Have nothing else to fear;
Make you his Service your Delight,
Your Wants shall be his Care.
As soon as the Provisions came, we kneeled down and returned hearty Thanks to
our good GOD who has heard our Prayers, and sent his Angel before us, to
prepare our Way.

Therefore my Life's remaining Years,
Which GOD to me shall lend,
Will I in Praises to his Name,
And in his Service spend.
A little before our Provision came, I had been noting in my Diary, that I
believed Deliverance was at Hand; for last Night and this Morning, I had the
most violent Conflict within my self that I have had at all. Thus GOD always
prepares me for his Mercies. O that this may strengthen my Faith, and make me
willing to follow the Lamb wheresoever he shall be pleased to lead me. Amen,
Lord JESUS, Amen!

Still greater Mercies GOD confers on his unworthy Servant. For after our
Provisions were brought aboard, the Wind still continued fair, and by six at
Night blew us to a little Place on Karrigholt Island, before which we cast
Anchor. Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his holy
Name!

Ever since we have been on Board the Mary, these Words, "Howbeit we must be
cast upon a certain Island" (which were Part of the Lesson I read last at
Savannah) have been continually pressed upon my Heart, so that I have often
mentioned it to one of my Companions. Behold they are now fulfilled. O how
unsearchable are thy Doings, O LORD, and thy Ways past finding out*

Why GOD deals thus with me, I know not now, but I shall know hereafter.
However this I know, that this Voyage has been greatly for my Good. -- For I
have had a glorious Opportunity of searching the Scriptures, composing
Discourses, writing Letters, and communing with my own Heart. -- We have been
on Board just nine Weeks and three Days. -- A long and perilous, but profitable
Voyage to my Soul: For I hope it has learnt me, in some measure, to endure
Hardships as becomes a Minister of CHRIST. My Clothes have not been off
(except to change me) all the Passage: Part of the Time I lay on open Deck,
Part on a Chest, and the Remainder on a Bed-stead covered with my Buffaloe's
Skin. These Things, though little in themselves, yet are great in their
Consequences; and whoever despises small Acts of bodily Discipline, it is to
be feared, will insensibly lose his spiritual Life by little and little. --
Many inward Trials also GOD has been pleased to send me, which I believe, he
has sanctified to my great Good. I am now going on Shore, to the House of a
wealthy Gentleman, whom GOD has commanded to receive me. I may yet be exposed
to many Perils by Land ever I see my dear Friends: But his Grace who has
preserved me from so many Perils by Water, will also be sufficient for me on
dry Land. Whilst I continue on this side Eternity, I never expect to be free
from Trials, only to change them: For it is necessary to heal the Pride of my
Heart, that such should come: With a particular fear and trembling, I think of
going to London. But he that preserved Daniel, in the Den of Lions, and the
three Children in the fiery Furnace, will, I hope, preserve me from the fiery
Trial of Popularity, and from the misguided Zeal of those, who without Cause,
are my Enemies. Father, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit. Magnify still thy
free Grace in me. Guide me by thy unerring Wisdom, receive, O receive me for
thy infinite Mercies sake, in CHRIST JESUS, into Glory hereafter!

As for the Success of my Ministry, whilst on Board, I shall only say, That I
hope much Sin has been prevented, and one I hope effectually converted, who is
to be my Fellow Traveller to England. LORD if I can but be made instrumental to
save one Soul, I care not if I am tossed on the Ocean through my whole Life.
Glory be to GOD on High!

It is observable, that just as we had cast Anchor, a violent Wind rose, which
(had it happened sooner) must have greatly hurt us. Mavelous are thy Works, O
LORD, and that my Soul knows right well!

About seven at Night I dressed myself and went on Shore, and was received into
a strong Castle belonging to Mr. Mac Mahon, the Gentleman who sent me an
Invitation. He himself was not at home, having went some Miles up to meet me;
but his Maid Servant kindly received us; I asked for Water, and she gave me
Milk, and brought forth Butter in a lordly Dish: And never did I eat a more
comfortable Meal: About ten the Gentleman (having missed of me at the Place
appointed) came through the Rain, and entertained us most hospitably, and about
One we went to Bed; I hope with Hearts full of a Sense of the Divine Love. My
Song shall henceforward be always of the loving Kindness of the LORD. I will
make mention of his Righteousness and Truth, in the Assemblies of his Saints.
Now our Water is turned into Wine!

KILRUSH in IRELAND.
This Morning about 11 o'Clock, after being most hospitably entertained by Mr.
Mac Mahon, and furnished with three Horses, I and my Servant, and my new
Convert set out for Dublin, and reached Kilrush, a little Town, about eight
Irish Miles from Karrigholt, about two in the Afternoon, where we were sweetly
refreshed, and tarried the Remainder of the Day with Capt. Coc, who last Night
with his whole Crew was like to be Shipwrecked; but this Morning, by the good
Providence of GOD, was brought hither on Shore, Surely my Ship-mates will, of
all Men, be most miserable, if they continue impenitent, having such loud and
repeated Calls from GOD.

As I rode along, and observed the Meanness of the poor People's living in
these Parts, I said, if my Parishioners at Georgia, complain to me of
Hardships, I must tell them how the Irish live; for their Habitations are far
more despicable, and their Living as hard, I believe, as to Food; and yet, no
doubt, Content dwells in many of these low Huts. A Man's Life does not consist
in the Abundance of the Things which he possesses.

At my first coming into our Inn, we kneeled down and prayed; and again at
Night sung Psalms, and prayed with the Captain and several of my Ship-mates. --
The first Time I believe the Room was ever put to such a Use by a Ship's Crew
and their Chaplain.

FOURTHFAPGUS.
Friday, Nov. 17. Had a very pleasant ride, over a fine fruitful Country to
Fourthfargus, a Village as was reckoned only ten, but at a moderate Computation
thirty English Miles from Kilrush: But this is not the first Piece of Irish I
have met with. -- Their innocent Blunders often extort Smiles from me.

As I stopped to have my Horses shoe'd, I went into one of the poor People's
Cabbins, as they call them, but it may as well be called a Stye, a Barn, or a
Poultry Coop. It was about twenty Feet long, and twelve broad, the Walls built
with Turf and Mud. In it, was a Man threshing Corn, two Swine feeding; two
Dogs, several Geese, a Man, his Wife, three Children, and a great Fire. --
Georgia Huts are Palaces to it. -- Indeed the People live very poorly in this
Part, some walk barefoot with their Shoes in their Hands to save them from
wearing out, others out of Necessity. And I observed many of their Feet to be
much swelled, and ready to gush out with Blood, through Extremity of Cold. --
LORD, Why is my Lot cast into a fairer Ground? Thy free Grace alone has made
the Difference!

Whilst I was in the Cabin, as they call their little Irish Huts, I talked with
the Woman in the House, and found she was a Roman Catholic: And indeed the
whole Commo^^lty almost, are of the Romish Profession, and seem to be so very
ignorant, that they may well be termed the Wild Irish. No Wonder, when the Key
of Knowledge is taken from them. Woe unto their blind Guides. I can think of no
likelier Means to convert them from their erroneous Principles, than to get the
Bible translated into their own native Language, to have it put in their
Houses, and Charity-Schools erected for their Children, as Mr. Jones has done
in Wales, which would insensibly weaken the Romish Interest: For when once they
could be convinced that they were imposed upon, they would no longer suffer
themselves to be misled. O that some Man, in whom is the Spirit of the Holy
GOD, would undertake this!

LIMERICK.
Saturday, Nov. 19. Presuming the People where I lay last Night, were Roman
Catholics, I neglected to call them in to join in Prayer, but to my great
Grief found afterward that some were Protestants, and expected Prayers from
me. Oh base Ingratitude! Is this my Zeal for my late signal Deliverance? Oh
treacherous Heart! Fie upon thee, fie upon thee. GOD be merciful to me a Sinner!

About two this Afternoon we reached Limerick, a large Garrison Town, with a
Cathedral in it, about twenty one English Miles from Fourthfargus. The Roads,
as we came along, grew better; but the People much more subtle and designing.
Here are also many Beggars, which I impute to the Want of Parish Provisions for
them. -- At Evening Prayer we went to the Cathedral, and returned public Thanks
for our safe Arrival. The Remainder of the Night was spent in necessary
Business, refreshing our Bodies, religious Conversation, and in writing some
Things I stood in need of.

Good GOD! Where was I last Saturday? In Hunger, Cold and Thirsting; but now I
enjoy fullness of Bread, and all Things convenient for me, GOD grant, I may
not, Jeshurun like, wax fat and kick. Perhaps it is more difficult to know how
to abound, than how to want. But I endeavor to receive both with Thanksgiving.

Sunday, Nov. 20. Having sent last Night to inform Dr. Burscough, Bishop of
Limerick, that I was lately arrived: At his Lordship's Appointment, I waited on
him this Morning, and was received with the utmost Candor and Civility. At his
Lordship's Request, I preached in the Morning at the Cathedral, to a very
numerous Audience, who seemed universally affected, and full of Expectation
that I would preach in the Afternoon; but Providence did not seem to open a
Door. But why should not a strange Minister always offer his Service? I think
it is a wrong Piece of Modesty not to do it. For a Sermon from a Stranger, may
do more good than many from those the People are constantly used to.

After Sermon the Mayor sent twice to invite me, but I was pre-engaged to the
Bishop, who kindly invited both me and my Friend, thanked me for my Sermon, and
offered me the free Use of his Palace, and would have insisted on my accepting
of it, had I not told his Lordship I was to leave Limerick in the Morning: Oh
into what a wealthy Place has my good GOD brought me? How does he every where
command some or other to receive me? As I was eating at Dinner, I was
meditating on the Divine Goodness in spreading such a Table for me, when last
Sunday I was in Danger almost of perishing with Hunger. But I thought at the
same Time, if this was so great a Blessing, what an infinitely greater one will
it be, after the Troubles of this Life, to sit down and eat Bread in the
Kingdom of GOD. O that I may be accounted worthy of that heavenly Banquet!

TULLER-BRIDGE.
Monday, Nov. 20. Went about Limerick Town this Morning, to dispatch some
necessary Business. And found the good Seed sown yesterday, had received a
Blessing from above. For all the Inhabitants seemed alarmed, and looked most
wishfully at me, as I passed along. One substantial Tradesman in particular
even compelled me to come in, and showed me and my Friend uncommon Civilities,
and told me how sollicitous the People were for my staying longer. -- Another
came to my Inn, and begged me to come and see him, which I did. -- And the good
Bishop, when I went to take leave of his Lordship, kissed me, and said these
Words, Mr. Whitefield, GOD bless you, I wish you Success abroad. Had you staid
in Town, this House should have been your Home.

About four in the Afternoon, against much Persuasion to the Contrary, we left
Limerick, and reached Tuller-Bridge, about six Miles distant from thence, by
six o'Clock, where I and my Friend were agreeably refreshed, and spent the
Remainder of the Evening in writing to some at Limerick, and strengthening one
another, and blessing GOD for these fresh Instances of his unmerited Mercies.
Who knows what a great Matter this little Fire may kindle? This I am assured
of, GOD did not send me to Ireland for nothing.

BURRASS and OSSERY.
Tuesday, Nov. 21. Went on journeying before Day, and came about five in the
Evening to Burrass and Ossery, twenty-five Miles from Tuller-Bridge.

In my Way I had a short Conference with a Roman Catholic, who seemed more
knowing than the Generality of those of that Persuasion, but sadly misguided.
My main Drift was to convince him he was imposed upon. Am I? says he, with
great Earnestness, did I know that, I would follow him, i. e. the Priest, no
longer.

As far as I can find by all I converse with, they place Religion in being of
the Protestant or Roman Catholic Communion, and are quite ignorant of the
Nature of inward Purity and Holiness of Heart. -- Lord, the Christian World is
cast into a deep sleep, send forth, I beseech thee, some faithful and true
Pastors to awaken them out of it.

DUBLIN.
Thursday, Nov. 23. Came forwards last Night, to a Place called Neas, thirty
three Miles from Burrass and Ossery, and reached Dublin about Noon, without the
least Fatigue or Weariness. Blessed be GOD, he causes me to renew my Strength,
or otherwise it would not be thus with me.

Two Things I can remark much for the Credit of Ireland, that the Roads,
especially to Dublin, are surprizingly good, and Provisions exceeding ^heap. A
Person may travel without much Expense.

Friday, Nov. 24. Went to Day with Mr. Bradford, Brother to Mr. Bradford of
Georgia, to visit Doctor Delany, who most kindly received me, and invited me to
dine with him on Sunday. Some other Part of the Day I was necessarily obliged
to go and see the busy Part of Dublin: But the more I see of the World, the
more I grow sick of it every Day. GOD grant this Sickness may increase?

Sunday, Nov. 26. Preached twice to Day at the Churches of Waborough and St.
Andrew's* I believe with Success; for GOD enabled me to speak with Power. And
the People, as it were, not only hung upon me to hear me in the Morning, but
also flocked to the Church where I preached in the Afternoon; so that it was
like a London Congregation. Great good might be done in Dublin, by preaching
Charity Sermons for the establishing Protestant Schools.

Tuesday, Nov. 28. By the Advice, and through the Introduction of Dr. Delany, I
waited on Dr. Rundle, Bishop of Londonderry, and on his Grace the Archbishop
of Armagh, Lord ^^imate of all Ireland; the former engaged me to dine with him
on the Morrow if I staid in Town; the latter to dine with him at three in the
Afternoon, at which Time I waited on his Grace, and was courteously received
both by him and his Clergy. Having heard of me, as the Bishop of Derry told me,
from some Friend at Gibraltar.

Now GOD begins to show me why he so visited me in the Ship. Sweetest JESUS
give me Humility, and I shall see yet greater Things than these.

ENGLAND. PARK-GATE.
Thursday, November 30. After near twelve Months Absence from London, three
Months from Georgia, and a pleasant Passage of twenty four Hours from Dublin,
to my inexpressible Comfort, GOD brought me to Park-Gate, and so fulfilled a
Promise which was pressed upon my Heart last Innocents-Day, in Hampshire, when
I was under a great Concern what my Mother would say to the Resolution I had
then made to go to Georgia. -- Rachel weeping for her Children* refused to be
comforted for her Children, because they were not. Thus says the LORD, Refrain
thy Voice from Weeping, and thine Eyes from Tears; for thy Work shall be
rewarded. And there is Hope in thine End, says the LORD, that thy Children
shall come again to their own Border. Jer. xxxi.15, 16, 17. Many other Promises
there are which I have laid up in my Heart. I pray GOD I may be so blessed as
to believe: For there certainly will be a fulfilling of those Things which GOD
by his Spirit has spoken unto my Soul.

NANTWICH.
Friday, Dec. 1. Rode from Park-Gate to Nantwich, in hopes of seeing my old
Friend Mr. Salmon, but GOD was pleased to disappoint me. However he enlarged my
Heart, and enabled me to write several Letters to Friends at Dublin; and I now,
as I have often done before, make this Remark, That GOD never disappoints us
one Way, but he opens a Door to do good in another.

MANCHESTER.
Saturday, Dec. 2. Reached Manchester by four this Afternoon, and was much
edified by dear Mr. Clayton's judicious Christian Conversation, for the Benefit
of which, I came so far out of my Way.

Sunday, December 3. Preached twice at Mr. Clayton's Chapel to a thronged and
very attentive Audience, especially in the Afternoon, assisted with six more
Ministers in administering the blessed Sacrament to three Hundred Communicants.
Never did I see a Table more richly spread, nor a greater Order and Decency
observed. -- Blessed be God for my coming to Manchester, I hope it has greatly
benefited and strengthened my Soul. -- This has been a Sabbath indeed! May it
prepare me for that eternal Rest which awaits the Children of GOD!

STONE.
Monday, December 4. Set out at Daybreak and got to Stone, thirty four Miles
from Manchester, by five in the Evening, was a little fatigued; but quite
refreshed by the Morning. -- Blessed be GOD for these Conveniences. Oh that I
may always look upon myself as a Stranger and a Sojourner upon Earth!

Friday, December 8. After having rode thirty six Miles on Tuesday, and twenty
four on Wednesday, on Thursday about three in the Afternoon reached St.
Alban's. -- In the Morning I set out for London, and was agreeably surpised
with the Sight of some of my Christian Friends, on the Road, who were coming to
meet me, which put me in Mind of St. Paul's Friends, meeting him at the three
Taverns, and I like him, was not a little comforted. O that I may, like him,
also be willing to follow my Master wheresoever he shall be pleased to call me,
not counting even my Life dear unto myself, so that I may finish my Course with
Joy!

I.
Shall I for fear of feeble Man,
Thy Spirit's Course in me restrain?
Or ^^dismay'd in Deed and Word,
Be a true Witness to my Lord?
II.
Awed by a Mortal's Frown, shall I
Conceal the Word of GOD most High?
How then before thee shall I dare
To stand, or how thy Anger bear?
III.
No; let Man rage! since thou will spread
Thy shadowing Wings around my Head:
Since in all Pain thy tender Love
Will still my sweet Refreshment prove.
IV.
Savior of Men! thy searching Eye
Does all my inmost Thoughts descry:
Does ought on Earth my Wishes raise?
Or the World's Favor, or its Praise?
V.
The Love of Christ does me constrain,
To seek the wandering Souls of Men:
With Cries, Entreaties, Tears to save,
To snatch them from the gaping Grave.
VI.
For this let Men revile my Name,
No Cross I shun, I fear no Shame:
All hail Reproach, and welcome Pain!
Only thy T^^rors, LORD, restrain.
VII.
My Life, My Blood I here present,
If for thy Truth they may be spent.
Fulfill thy Sovereign Counsel LORD:
Thy Will be done! thy Name adored!
VIII.
Give me thy Strength, O GOD of Power*
Then let Winds blow, or Thunders roar,
Thy faithful Witness will I be --
It Is fixed! I can do all through Thee!
A CONTINUATION Of the Reverend Mr. Whitefield's JOURNAL FROM His Arrival at
LONDON, TO His Departure from thence, on His Way to GEORGIA.

PHILADELPHIA, Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, in Market-Street, 1739.

To the Reverend Mr. GEORGE WHITEFIELD.
I.
BROTHER in CHRIST, and well-belov'd.
Attend, and add thy Prayer to mine;
As AARON called, yet inly moved,
To minister in Things divine.
II.
Faithful, and often owned of GOD,
Vessel of Grace, by JESUS used;
Stir up the Gift on thee bestowed,
The Gift by hallowed Hands transfused.
III.
Fully thy heavenly Mission prove,
And make thy own Election sure;
Rooted in Faith, and Hope, and Love,
Active to work, and firm to endure.
IV.
Scorn to contend with Flesh and Blood,
And trample on so mean a Foe;
By stronger Fiends in vain withstood,
Dauntless to nobler Conquests go.
V.
Go where the darkest Tempest low'rs,
Thy Foes, triumphant Wrestler foil;
Thrones, Principalities, and Powers,
Engage, overcome, and take the Spoil.
VI.
The Weapons of thy Warfare take,
With Truth and Meekness armed ride on;
Mighty, through GOD, Hell's Kingdom shake,
Satan's strong Holds, through GOD, pull down.
VII.
Humble each vain aspiring Boast,
Intensely for GOD's Glory burn;
Strongly declare the Sinner lost,
Self-Righteousness o'erturn, o'erturn.
VII.
Tear the bright Idol from his Shrine*
Nor suffer him on Earth to dwell;
T'usurp the Place of Blood Divine,
But chase him to his native Hell.
IX.
Be all into Subjection brought,
The Pride of Man let Faith abase;
And captivate his every Thought,
And force him to be saved by Grace.
CHARLES WESLEY.

A CONTINUATION OF Mr. Whitefield's JOURNAL, etc.
LONDON.
FRIDAY, December 8. About Noon I reached London, was received with much Joy by
my Christian Friends, and joined with them in Psalms and Thanksgiving for my
safe Arrival. My Heart was greatly enlarged hereby.

In the Evening went to a truly Christian Society in Fetter-Lane, and perceived
God had greatly watered the Seed sown by my Ministry, when last at London. The
Lord increase it more and more.

Saturday, Dec. 9. Waited this Morning on the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Bishop of London, and met with a favorable Reception.

Sunday, December 10. When I was on Board the Mary, those particular Parts of
the Book of Jeremiah, which relate to the Opposition he met with from the False
Prophets, were deeply impressed upon my Soul. And now I begin to see the Wisdom
of God in it. For five Churches have been already denied me, and some of the
Clergy, if possible, would oblige me to depart out of these Coasts. But I
rejoice in this Opposition, it being a certain Sign that a more effectual Door
will be opened, since there are so many Adversaries.

However, I had an Opportunity of preaching in the Morning at St. Helen's, and
at Is^^ngton in the Afternoon, to large Congregations indeed, with great
Demonstrations of the Spirit, and with Power.

Here seems to be a great pouring out of the Spirit; and many, who were
awakened by my Preaching a Year ago, are now grown strong Men in CHRIST, by the
Ministrations of my dear Friends and Fellow Laborers, John and Charles W^sley.
Blessed be God, I rejoice in the Coming of the Kingdom of his dear Son.

The old Doctrine about Justification by Faith only, I found much revived, and
many Letters had been sent concerning it to me, all which, I providentially
missed of. For now, I come unprejudiced, and can the more easily see who is in
the Right. And who dares assert that we are not ju^tified in the Sight of GOD,
merely by an Act of Faith in JESUS CHRIST, without any Regar^ to Works past,
present, or to come?

In the Evening I went to Fetter-lane Society, where we had (what might not
improperly be called) a Love-Feast, eating a little Bread and Water, and
spending about two Hours in Sing^^g and Prayers, and I found my Heart greatly
united with the Brethren. Surely a primitive Spirit is reviving amongst us. May
God ^^it my Heart to theirs more and more!

Sunday, December 24. Preached twice, and went in the Evening to Crooked-lane
Society, where GOD enabled me to withstand several* Persons, who cavilled
against the Doctrine of the New Birth. But the Passion, wherewith they oppose,
is a Demonstration, that they themselves have not experienced it. LORD make
them Partakers of it, for thy dear SON 's sake.

After I left Crooked-lane, I went and expounded to a Company at Mr. B -- 's,
in Little^Britain* then I went to another Love-Feast at Fetter-lane; and, it
being Christmas-Eve, continued till near Four in the Morning in Prayer, Psalms,
and Thanksgiving, with many truly Christian Brethren; and my Heart was much
enlarged, and full of Love. -- GOD gave me a great Spirit of Supplication.
Adored be his free Grace in CHRIST JESUS, Amen and Amen.

Monday, December. 25. About Four went and prayed, and expounded to another
Society in Red^ross-street, consisting of near two or three hundred People, and
the Room was exceeding hot. I had been watching unto Prayer all Night, yet GOD
vouchsafed so to fill me with his Blessed Spirit, that I spoke with as great
Power as ever I did in my Life. My Body was weak, but I found a supernatural
Strength, and the Truth of that saying, When I am weak, then I am strong.

At Six I went to Crutched Fryar's Society, and expounded as well as I could,
but perceived myself a little oppressed with Drowsiness. How does the
corruptible Body weigh down the Soul! When shall I be delivered from the Burden
of this Flesh?

Preached thrice, and assisted in administering the Sacrament the same Day
without going to sleep. GOD will make his Power to be known in me. -- This Day
24 Years, was I baptized, LORD! to what little Purpose have I lived? However, I
sealed my Baptismal Covenant with my dear Savior's most blessed Body and
Blood, and trust in his Strength I shall keep and perform it. Amen, Amen.

Saturday, December 30. Preached nine Times this Week, and expounded near 18
Times, with great Power and Enlargement. -- Blessed be GOD! I am every Moment
employed from Morning 'till Midnight. -- There Is no End of People's coming and
sending to me, and they seem more and more desirous, like Newborn Babes, to b^
fed with the sincere Milk of the Word. -- What a great Work has been wrought in
the Hears of many within this Twelvemonth! Now know I^ that though Thousands
might come at first out of Curiosity, yet GOD has prevented and quickened them
by his free Grace. -- Oh that I could be humble and thankful.

Glory be to GOD that be fills me continually, not only with Peace, but also
Joy in the HOLY GHOST. -- Before my Arrival, I thought I should envy my
Brethren's Success in the Ministry; but Blessed be GOD* I rejoice in it, and am
glad to see CHRIST's Kingdom come, whatsoever Instruments GOD shall make Use of
to bring it about. -- Sometimes ^ perceive my self deserted for a little While,
and much oppressed, especially before preaching, but Comfort soon after flows
in. -- The Kingdom of GOD is within me. O free Grace in CHRIST!

Sunday, December 31. Preached twice to large Congregations, especially in the
Afternoon, at Spittlefields. -- I had a great Hoarseness upon me, and was
deserted before I went up into the Pulpit; but GOD strengthened me to speak, so
as to be heard by all.

After I left Spittlefields, my Cold being very great, I despaired of speaking
much more that Night. -- But GOD enabled me to expound to two Companies in
Southwark, and I was never more enlarged in Prayer in my whole Life. -- These
Words, And the Power of the Lord was present to heal them, were much pressed
upon my Soul, and indeed I believe it was. For many were pricked to the Heart,
and felt themselves to be Sinners. O that all the World knew and felt that!

Monday, January 1. Received the Holy Sacrament, preached twice, and expounded
twice, and found this to be the happiest New Year's Day that I ever yet saw.
Oh! What Mercies has the Lord shown me since this Time Twelvemonth! And yet I
shall see greater Things than these. O that my Heart may be prepared to see
them! O that my old Things may pass away, and all Things become new!

Had a Love-Feast with our Brethren at Fetter-lane, and spent the whole Night
in close Prayer. Psalms, and Thanksgivings. -- GOD supported me without Sleep,
Oh that our Despisers were Partakers of our Joys!

Tuesday, January 2. Staid at Home o^ purpose to receive those, who wanted to
consult me. -- Blessed be GOD, from seven in the Morning, till three in the
Afternoon, People came, some telling me what GOD had done for their Souls, and
others crying out, What shall we do to be saved? Being obliged to go out after
this, I referred several 'till Thursday. -- GOD enabled me to give them Answers
of Peace! How does God work by my unworthy Hands! His Mercies melt me down, O
that I was thankful!

Thursday, January 4. Though my Cold continued, and I feared it would prevent
my speaking, yet GOD enabled me to expound with extraordinary Power in a
private Society; and then to preach at Wapping-Chappel, so that the Word
pierced the Hearers Souls; and afterward I expounded and prayed for an Hour
and an Half with great Power and Demonstration of the Spirit, and my Heart was
full of GOD. How immediately does JESUS CHRIST reward me for my poor Services!
As Soon as my daily Work is done, he says, Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord,
He commands, and it is done.

Friday, January 5. Held a Conference at Islington, concerning several Things
of very great Importance, with seven true Ministers of JESUS CHRIST, despised
Methodists, whom GOD has brought together from the East and the West, the North
and the South. -- What we were in doubt about, after Prayer, we determined by
Lot, and every Thing else was carried on with great Love, Meekness and
Devotion. -- We continued in Fasting and Prayer 'till three of Clock, and then
parted with a full Conviction that GOD was going to do great Things among us. O
that we may be any way instrumental to his Glory! That he would make us Vessels
pure and holy, meet for our Master's Use!

Expounded twice afterward in London with great Power, and then was much
enlarged for near an Hour in Prayer, in Fetter-lane Society. -- The Spirit of
Supplication increases in my Heart daily. -- May it increase ever more and more!

Did not find the Pity I ought, upon seeing a Brother full of Self-love. Lord
enlarge my narrow Heart, and give me that Charity which rejoices not in
Iniquity, but in the Truth. -- Perceived something a little bordering on Envy
toward my Brother H. -- I find more and more, that true Humility consists in
being submissive to those, who are a little above, or a little below us. -- Oh
when shall I come to rejoice in others Gifts and Graces as much as in my own! I
am resolved to wrestle with JESUS CHRIST, by Faith and Prayer 'till he thus
blesses me.

Saturday, January 6. Preached six Times this Week, and should have preached a
seventh Time, but one Minister would not permit me; which caused me to pray for
him most earnestly, Blessed be God, I can say, I love mine Enemies.

Expounded twice or thrice every Night this Week. The Holy Ghost so powerfully
worked upon my Hearers, pricking their Hearts, and melting them into such
Floods of Tears, that a spiritual Man said, He never saw the like before. --
GOD is with me of a Truth. Adored be his unmerited Goodness, I find his Grace
quickening me more and more every Day. My Understanding is more enlightened, my
Affections more enflamed, and my Heart full of Love toward GOD and Man. -- Oh!
that the Scoffers of these last Days were not only almost, but altogether such
as I am, except these indwelling Corruptions!

Sunday, January 7. Preached twice to Day, and expounded with great Power to
three Societies, one of which I never visited before. -- GOD grant I may pursue
the Method of expounding and praying extempore. I find God blesses it more and
more.

Had another Love-Feast, and spent the whole Night in Prayer and Thanksgiving
at Fetter-lane. -- There was a great pouring out of the Spirit amongst the
Brethren; but I cannot say I was so full of Joy as the last Night we spent
together.

Monday, January 8. Though I sat up all Night* yet GOD carried me through the
Work of the Day with about an Hour's Sleep. -- Expounded in the Evening, and
confuted a virulent Opposer of the Doctrine of the New Birth, and Justification
by Faith only. -- But what can be said to those that will not be convinced?
Lord, open thou their Hearts and Eyes.

Spent the Remainder of the Evening with our Bands, which are little
Combinations of six or more Christians meeting together to compare their
Experiences. Build ye up one another, even as also ye do. -- Confess your
Faults one to another, and pray for one another, that ye may be healed.

Tuesday, January 10. Stayed at home again to day, to talk with those that came
to consult me, and found that GOD has awakened several, and excited in them a
Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness by my Sermon on the Power of CHRIST 's
Resurrection, and Have ye received the Holy Ghost? Every Day I hear of somebody
or another quickened to a Sense of the divine Life. -- Oh what abundant Reason
have I to be thankful.

This Evening I preached a Sermon at Great St. Helens, for erecting a Church
for the Salt^burghers, and collected Thirty-three Pounds! Blessed be GOD! The
People gave most readily, many wishing they had more to give; for which we
afterward prayed and gave Thanks.

OXFORD.
Wednesday, January 11. Slept about three Hours, rose at five, set out at ten,
and reached Oxford by five in the Evening. As I entered the City, I called to
mind the Mercies I had received since I left it. They are more than I am able
to express. Oh that my Heart may be melted down by a Sense of them, Amen, Lord
JESUS! -- Spent the Remainder of the Evening very agreeably with several
Christian Friends. -- May GOD sanctify our Meeting!

Friday, January 12. Breakfasted with sixteen or seventeen Christian Brethren;
expounded and read Prayers at the Castle, to many devout Souls. Afterward I
waited on the Bishop of Gloucester, who received me very kindly. -- Waited on
the Master of Pembroke? afterward on the Archdeacon. -- Went to public
Worship at Pembroke. -- Supped, prayed, and sung Psalms with a Room full of
Brethren at Mr. F -- 's; then adjourned to Corpus Christi College, where GOD
assisted me to talk clearly of the New Birth, and Justification by Faith alone,
with one that opposed it. -- Lord, open thou our Eyes, that we may prove what
is that acceptable and perfect Will of God! -- Received the Holy Sacrament at
St. Mary's, expounded with great Power at Mr. F -- 's, went with the other
Candidates for Holy Orders to subscribe to the Articles, and secretly prayed
that we all might have our Names written in the Book of Life. -- Drank Tea with
a well-disposed Gentleman Commoner, and had close Conversation with many others
at Corpus Christi College. -- I enjoyed great Tranquillity of Soul, and had much
Reason to bless GOD for sending me to the University. Oh! that I may be
prepared for receiving the HOLY GHOST to Morrow by the Imposition of Hands.
Amen, Lord JESUS, Amen.

Sunday, January 14. This, blessed be GOD, has been a Day of fat Things. --
Rose in the Morning, and prayed and sung Psalms lustily, and with a good
Courage; and afterward was ordained Priest at Christ's Church. Before, I was a
little dissipated, but at Imposition of Hands, my Mind was in an humble Frame,
and I received Grace in the Holy Sacrament. -- That I might begin to make Proof
of my Ministry, I preached, and administered the Sacrament at the Castle; and
preached in the Afternoon at St. Albans to a crowded Congregation. -- The
Church was surrounded with Gowns-men of all Degrees, who, contrary to their
Custom, stood attentive at the Windows during my Sermon. -- GOD enabled me to
preach with the Demonstration of the Spirit, and with Power, and quite took
away my Hoarseness, so that I could lift up my Voice like a Trumpet. -- After
Sermon, I joined in giving Thanks to our good GOD for all the Mercies he had
conferred upon me; then I read Prayers at Carfax, expounded to a large and
devout Company both of Men and Women at a private House, and spent the
Remainder of the Evening with thirteen more, where GOD gave me great
Cheerfulness of Spirit.

LONDON.
Monday, January 15. Took a most affectionate Leave of my dear Oxon Brethren,
set out at Seven, reached London by Five, spent the Evening in answering some
Letters, especially one from Howel Harris, an Instrument, under GOD, of doing
much good in Wales. -- Read a Pamphlet wrote against me by a Clergyman, I bless
GOD, without any Emotion; prayed most heartily for the Author; opened the
Corruptions of my Heart to my Brethren in Bands, and felt great Peace
consequent thereupon.

Tuesday, January 16. After much Opposition, read Prayers, and preached to a
thronged and affected Audience at St. Helens. -- After this, I expounded twice
to two Companies, and prayed by Name for the Author of the Pamphlet; left my
Auditors in Tears, and went home full of Love, and Joy, and Peace, which
passes all Understanding. -- Oh that he felt what I do! Happy, unspeakably
happy, would he then be!

Wednesday, January 17. Dined with and convinced several that were prejudiced
against extempore Prayer. -- Waited on the Trustees, and was most kindly
received. -- Afterward much assisted in expounding twice at Mr. C -- 's. --
The more I am opposed, the more GOD enlightens my Understanding. So it was
formerly, so it is now. -- Spent the Remainder of the Evening at Fetter-lane
Society; and GOD enabled me to tell of some Experiences, which I hope comforted
their Hearts.

Thursday, January 18. Perceived myself much disordered, so that I was obliged
to lie down to sleep. But afterward GOD greatly enlarged my Heart, and enabled
me to expound to two Societies. I made a Collection for two poor Housekeepers,
-- I find Action is the best Way to take all Oppression off the Spirits. God
w^ll meet and bless us when doing his Work.

Friday, Jan. 19. Did some necessary Business for Georgia, and spent the
Afternoon in visiting some dissenting Brethren, who are Christians indeed. But,
as such, I acknowledge all who love our Lord JESUS in Sincerity and Truth.

Saturday, Jan. 20. Preached three Times this Week, and expounded to about
sixteen thronged Companies, wherein GOD gave me great Power and Success. -- Had
many Contributions sent me in for the Orphan-house.

Sunday, January 21. Went this Morning and received the Sacrament at the Hands
of the Minister who wrote against me. Blessed be GOD, I do not feel the least
Resentment against, but a Love for him; for I believe he has a Zeal for GOD,
though, in my Opinion, not according to Knowledge. Oh that I could do him any
Good!

Preached twice with great Power and Cleaness in my Voice to two thronged
Congregations, especially in the Afternoon, when I believe near a thousand
People were in the Churchyard, and hundreds more returned Home that could not
come in. Thus GOD magnifies his Power, most when most opposed.

Expounded twice afterward, where the People pressed most vehemently to hear
the Word. -- GOD enabled me to speak with the Demonstration of the Spirit, and
with Power, and the Remainder of the Evening, filled me with a humble Sense of
his infinite Mercies. I think I am never more humble than when exalted. -- By
the Grace of GOD I am what I am. Oh that I could be thankful!

Monday, January 22. Spent all the Day in necessary Business for my poor Flock,
and in going about doing good. In the Evening I expounded to three several
Societies, one of which was the most polite I ever yet saw; but GOD enabled me
to speak upon the Doctrine of the New Birth; and however some might mock, yet
others, I believe, were affected, especially three Quakers, who afterward came
and paid me a visit, and glorified GOD on my Behalf. -- Oh how thankful, how
humble ought I to be! -- GOD fills me with Love, Peace and Joy in the Holy
Ghost. -- Such is his Free Grace in CHRIST JESUS!

Tuesday, January 23. Staid at Home to Day as usual, to receive People, and
still had the Comfort of hearing many coming to me, who have been awakened to a
Sense of the New Birth. What Reason have I to bless GOD for sending me to
England! How does he daily set his Seal to my Ministry! Praise him all the Host
of his, let every Thing that has Breath praise the LORD.

Received a Packet of Letters from my dear Friend H -- m, by which I find the
infinite Wisdom of GOD more and more, in sending me to England. -- The poor
People of Savannah love me still most affectionately. But the Colony seems to
be at a low Ebb. -- Poor Georgia! When thou art universally d^spis^d, and quite
despairest of human Help, then will God manifest his mighty Arm in thy
Salvation.

Read Prayers and preached at St. Helens, with great Power to a crowded and
attentive Audience. -- Was enabled to expound to two Companies, and collected
above Forty Shillings for the Orphan-house of Georgia. I could wish to have it
built with Mites. -- Oh how does the Holy Ghost cause me to joy in GOD! How
does he bring me acquainted more and more with his faithful Servants! Not unto
me, O LORD, not unto me, but to thy Name be the Glory!

Wednesday, January 24. Preached a Charity Sermon, went to Newington to see Dr.
Watts, and returned in the Evening and expounded with Power to two Companies.
-- Wrote several Letters to my Friends at Savannah, and was filled with the
Holy Ghost; and Oh that all that deny the Promise of the Father, might thus
receive it themselves!

Thursday, January 25. Received the Sacrament at Bow, where four of my Opposers
administered; one of whom was the Person that wrote the self-answering Pamphlet
against me. At first a Thought darted into my Mind that they were of a
persecuting Spirit, but I soon checked it, and was filled with Love toward
them. GOD grant they may be like minded toward me.

At two in the Afternoon read Prayers and preached at Christ Church,
Spittlefields, for the Orphan-house. -- The Congregation was not so large as
might be expected, and that of the poorest Sort, so that I began to doubt. But
wherefore did I fear? For GOD enabled (...) to preach with Power, and
twenty-five Po^nds were collected, to our great Surprise, and to the Glory of
our great and good ^OD; for which we kneeled down and gave most hearty Thanks.

This done, I went and gave a Word or two of Exhortation, and prayed to a
Comp^ny that waited for me. Then ^ expounded with uncommon Power to another
Society in Leadenhall-street, and collected very near five Pounds for the
Orphan-house. Blessed be God through Christ.

About Eight I went to another Society, after Nine to a third, at both which I
spoke with the Demonstration of the Spirit, and made Collections for the
Orphan-house, and was filled with the Holy Ghost, which very much strengthened
my Body, and make my Feet like Hart's Feet. The Strength GOD gives me would
surprise me, did I not know what a gracious Master I serve.

Received a Letter from Edinburgh, from a truly pious Gentlemen, who tells me
his Heart was knit to me most strongly, upon the reading of my Journal. How
many are there, whom I know not, praying for me in secret! Surely GOD intends
to bring mighty Things to pass. -- Is not his Strength made perfect in Weakness?

Friday, January 26. Waited upon an opposing Clergyman, and had a Conference
with him of near two Hours. His grand Objection was against our private
Societies, and using extempore Prayer, which he grounded on the Authority of
the Canons, and the Act of Charles II. In Answer, I showed that that Act was
entirely levelled against seditious schismatical Meetings, contrary to the
Church of England, which confines us to a Form in public Worship only. He
replied, that ours was public Worship; but this I deny; for ours were Societies
never intended to be set up in Opposition to the public Worship, by Law
established; but only in imitation of the primitive Christians, who continued
daily with one Accord in the Temple, and yet in Fello^ship building up one
another, and exhorting one another from House to House. -- Went with Mr. Seward
to Bexly, about ten Miles off London, where I preached to a large Congregation,
to their great Comfort, and afterward spent the Evening most delightfully in
religious Conversation, and in singing Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs
with Mr. Delamot's Family, who seem almost with one Accord, ready to receive
JESUS CHRIST. A happier Household have I seldom found, or one that more
resembles that of Martha, Mary, and their Brother Lazarus.

Saturday, January 27. Slept but little to Night, as well as the Night before,
but was much strengthened without it by the Holy Spirit. Rose about Five, spent
above an Hour most agreeably in Prayer, singing and reading the Scriptures with
the Church in Mr. Delamot's House; some of whom, after the Example of their
Lord, passed the whole Night in the same delightful Employment.

Came to London about Nine in the Morning, and expounded twice in Beech-lane,
where I believe near seven hundred People were present; collected five Pounds
for the Orphan-house.

Had extraordinary Comforts this Week, heard much of what GOD has done abroad
for me in other Places, where I am not known in the Flesh, and desired greatly
to be humble and thankful*

Received the Sacrament at Crooked-Lane, but was a little dissipated; however I
found I received CHRIST, and fed on him in my Heart, by Faith with
Thanksgiving. Afterward went and preached at Ironmongers Almshouses at St.
Catherine's in the Afternoon; afterward expounded to two large Companies in
the Min^ri^s, with such Demonstration of the Spirit, as I never spoke with
before. -- I offered JESUS CHRIST freely to Sinners, and many, I believe, were
truly pricked to the Heart. Now, my Friends, your Prayers are heard, GOD has
given me a double Portion of his Spirit indeed. Oh free Grace in CHRIST JESUS.
With what Love, Peace, and Joy does GOD fill this Soul of mine! LORD I am not
worthy, but thy Mercie^ in Christ Jesus are infinite.

Monday* Jan. 29. Expounded twice, and sat up till near One in the Morning,
with my honored Brother and Fellow Laborer, John Wesley, in Conference with
two Clergymen of the Church of England, and some other strong Opposers of the
Doctrine of the New Birth. -- GOD enabled me with great Simplicity to declare
what he had done for my Soul, which made them look upon me as a Madman. We
speak what we do know, and testify that we have seen, and they receive not our
Witness. Now therefore I am fully convinced ^here is a fundamental Difference
between us and them. They believe only an outward CHRIST, we farther believe
that he must be inwardly formed in our Hearts also. But the natural Man
receives not the Things of the Spirit of GOD, for they are Foolishness unto
him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.

Tuesday, Jan. 30. Preached at Duke's-Place and St. Helens, to crowded
Audiences, and afterward expounded twice on Dowgate-hill, where the People
pressed mightily to come in. The Minister of the Parish threatens the Master of
the House with a Prosecution, though it will be hard for him to prove such
Societies any ways contrary to the Laws either of GOD or Man.

GRAVESEND.
Wednesday, January 31. Slept about two Hours, rose at Three in the Morning,
and went with some Christian Friends in a Boat to Gravesend, where I have been
long expected. -- GOD inclined the Ministers Hearts to let me have the Use of
both the Pulpits, and I preached and read Prayers at Three in the Afternoon at
the Church without the Town; and did the same at the Church in the Town, and
the People, as elsewhere, hung upon me to hear the Word of GOD. -- God is with
me wherever I go.

Thursday, Feb. 1. Read Prayers and expounded on the third of St. John;
expounded at a private House in the Afternoon, and read Prayers and expounded a
third Time on the Conversion of St. Paul, in the Evening. -- I had great
Freedom of Speech, was filled with exceeding great Joy, at the Consideration of
what great Things GOD yet continues to do for my Soul; and yet I shall see
greater Things than these.

I spent the Remainder of the Evening in singing Hymns, and religious
Conversation; took Boat about Eleven, spoke warmly to the Passengers, and came
to London rejoicing about Five in the Morning. The Lord preserve my going out,
and my coming in, from this Time forth for evermore.

LONDON.
Friday, Febr. 2. Slept about two Hours, rose and went and preached at
Islington, and collected twenty-two Pounds for my Orphan-house.

Had a great Number of Communicants, and was told my preaching was attended
with uncommon Power. This is the first Time I have preached without Notes, (for
when I preached at Deptford and Gravesend, I only repeated a written Sermon)
but I find myself now, as it were, constrained to do it.

Expounded in the Evening, and collected three Pounds for the Orphan-house, at
Mr. Abbot's; preached extempore with great Freedom at Wapping-Chappel, then
expounded to another Society, and returned Home without Fatigue or Weariness.
How does GOD deal with me! He gives me a Heaven upon Earth, and makes my Heart
leap for Joy almost continually. -- Oh that all who now oppose it, were
partakers of this Joy!

Saturday, February 3. Staid at Home this Day on purpose to settle my private
Affairs; and, blessed be GOD, did it greatly to my Satisfaction. -- Was very
much composed in Spirit, began a new Society at the House of Mr. M -- n; and
was much assisted in expounding twice at Beech-lane to two Companies, making in
all near a thousand People. -- Visited a sick Brother, came home full of Peace,
and Love, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

Near nine Times has GOD enabled me to preach this Week, and to expound 12 or
14 Times; near forty Pounds, I believe, have been collected for the
Orphan-house. -- I find I gain greater Light and Knowledge, by preaching
extempore. -- So that I fear I should quench the Spirit, did I not go on to
speak as he gives me Utterance.

Sunday, February 4. Had a comfortable Night's Rest* was warmed much by ta^king
to an almost Christian, that came to ask me certain Questions. -- Preached in
the Morning at St. George's in the East, collected eighteen Pounds for the
Orphan-house, and had, I believe, 600 Communicants, which highly offended the
officiating Curate. Poor Man, I pitied and prayed for him sincerely.

Preached again at Christ-Church, Spittlefields, gave Thanks, and sung Psalms
at a private House: Went thenc^ to St. Margaret's, Westminster; but something
breaking belonging to the Coach, could not get thither 'till the middle of
Prayers. -- Went through the People to the Minister's Pew, but finding it
locked, I returned to the Vestry till the Sexton could be found. Being there
informed that another Minister intended to preach, I desired several Times that
I might go Home: My Friends would by no Means consent, telling me I was
appointed by the Trustees to preach, and that if I did not, the People would go
out of the Church; at my Request, some went to the Trustees, Churchwardens,
and Minister; and whilst I was waiting for an Answer, and the last Psalm
singing, a Man came with a Wand in his Hand, whom I took for the proper
Church Officer, and told me I was to preach; I not doubting but the Minister
was satisfied, followed him to the Pulpit: And GOD enabled me to preach with
greater Power than I had done all the Day before.

After this, prayed with, and gave a Word or two of Exhortation to a Company
that waited for me, then took a little bodily Refreshment, and then went to a
Love-Feast in Fetter-lane, where I spent the whole Night in watching unto
Prayer, and discussing several important Points with many truly Christian
Friends. About Four in the Morning we went all together and broke Bread at a
poor sick Sister's Room, and so we parted, I hope, in a Spirit not unlike that
of the primitive Christians.

This has been a Sabbath indeed! How has GOD owned me before near Twelve
thousand People this Day. -- How has he strengthened my Body! How has he filled
and satisfied my Soul. Now know I, that I did receive the Holy Ghost at
Imposition of Hands. -- For, I feel it as much as Elisha did, when Elijah
dropped his Mantle. Nay, others see it also; and my Opposers, would they but
speak, cannot but confess that GOD is with me of a Truth. Wherefore then do
they fight against GOD?

Monday, February 5. Went about gathering for my poor Flock, had a little Time
to write my Journal, was somewhat weak part of the Day, but grew strong by
expounding to four Companies at Night. I always get Strength by working. What
great Things has GOD d^ne for my Soul! Oh that I could praise him with my whole
Heart!.

Tuesday, February 6. Was refreshed much this Morning, and found that the Sleep
of a laboring Man was sweet. -- Waited on the Bishop of Gloucester with
Brother John Wesley, and received his Lordship's liberal Benefaction for
Georgia.

Went to St. Helen's, where Satan withstood me grea^y. For on a sudden I was
des^rted* and my Strength went from me. -- But I thought it was the Devil's
doing, and therefore was resolved to r^sist him steadfast in the Fait^*
Accordingly, though I was exceeding sick in reading the Prayers, and almost
unable to speak when I entered the Pulpit, yet GOD gave me Courage to begin,
and before I had done I waxed warm and strong in Spirit, and offered JESUS
CHRIST freely to all that would lay hold on him by Faith. Many, I believe, were
touched to the Quick: For they seemed to feel what was spoken, and said hearty
and loud Amens to my Sentences. The Church was greatly thronged, and after I
had done, Prayers were put up on all sides for my safe Journey and return. --
Surely these are not curious Hearers! If they are, why do they follow more and
mo^e for such a Continuance? No, many Conversions have bee^ wrought in their
Hearts. GOD has set his Seal to my Minist^y, and I trust they will be my Joy
and Crown of Rejoicing in the Day of the Lord JESUS. -- Oh the Riches of GOD's
free Grace in CHRIST, to the Chief of Sinners! Oh that I fully felt the Sense
of these Words!

After this the People waited in great Companies to see and follow me; but I
got from them by going out at a back Door. Perhaps hereafter I may be let out
in the same Manner to escape the Fury of mine Enemies. As my good GOD pleases.

In coming along I perceived myself more and more strengthened, and was much
comforted in reading a Letter sent me by an excellent Saint, who loves me in
the Bowels of JESUS CHRIST. About Nine at Night I expounded with great
Enlargement at Dowgate-hill to a most crowded Audience. Tongue cannot express
what Power GOD ^ave me, or how the Hearts of the poor P^^^le were affected.
They sighed and mourned, and wept sorely, when I mentioned my Departure from
t^em, though but for a Season. I exhorted ^^em particularly not to forsake the
assembling themselves toget^^^ notwithstanding the People of the House had been
threatened with a Prosecution. -- But so far as our Opposers are permitted to
go, shall they go, but no farther. I never was more opposed, never met with so
great Success, never was filled with such a Portion of GOD's holy Spirit. -- My
dear Christian ^riends waited, at my coming Home, to salu^^ ^e. -- GOD filled
me with Love and Joy, and I waxed stronger and stronger in Spirit, to their and
my own unspeakable Comfort in CHRIST JESUS our LORD. All Love, all Glory be to
the ever blessed Trinity, now and for evermore. Amen.

Wednesday, February 7. Spent the Morning in providing Things for my Journey,
and taking leave of my dear Christian Friends, whom I love as my own Soul. --
Had several Presents made me by such as GOD had worked upon by my Ministry; and
after having prayed and sung Psalms in several Christian Houses, about Two I
set out for Windsor, desiring to be thankful for those mavelous great
Kindnesses GOD had shown me in this City. I perceived my Heart so nearly knit
to my dear Friends, that was it the Divine Will, I should gladly continue here.
But I must go into every Place and City where I have been already, for
therefore am I sent. LORD, send thy Angel before me to prepare my Way. But
wherefore should I doubt, since so many thousands are continually praying for
me? The good Lord pour down upon them the choicest of his Blessings!

WINDSOR.
Got hither about Six in the Evening, and was joyfully received by several
Christian Friends, who were waiting for me. -- About Seven I was taken very ill
indeed, but GOD strengthened me to go out, and I expounded with great Freedom
and Power in the School-house to a great Num^^^ of People, who were apprised of
my comi^^ and, I believe, felt what I spoke; for some wept, and many expressed
their Thankfulness for my Exposition. Not unto me, O LORD, not unto me, but
unto thy Name be ^all the Glory.

Being much refreshed by talking for GOD, I spent the Remainder of the Evening
in writing to some dear Christian Friends, and in singing, praying, and
conversing with others, as likewise with the People of the Inn where we lodged.

Thursday, Feb. 8. Breakfasted, prayed, and sung a Hymn at the House of Mr. D
-- 's, who kindly invited both me and my Friends. -- Some other Persons sent
for me to their Houses, and I believe, much Good might be done here. But I must
not stay by the Way. LORD, ^o I come: Only I beseech thee open an effectual
Door for preaching thy Gospel, whither soever thou shall send me. Even so Lord
JESUS, Amen.

I find much Service might be done to Religion on Journeys, if we have but
Courage to show ourselves Christians in all Places: Others sing Songs in
Publick-Houses; why should not we sing Psalms? And when we give the Servants
Money, why may we not with that give them a little Book, and some good Advice?
I know by Experience it is very beneficial. -- GOD grant this may be always my
Practice?

BASINGSTOKE.
Left Windsor about Ten in the Morning, dined at Bagshot, and reached
Basingstoke at Five in the Evening. -- Not meeting with our Friends, who were
to come from Dummer, I wrote to some Christian Brethren I had left behind me,
and afterward was agreeably surprised by several who came uninvited to see me.
-- After a little Conversation, I perceived they were desirous to hear the Word
of GOD, and being in a large Dining Room in the Public House, I gave Notice I
would expound to as many as would come. In a short Time I had above a Hundred
very attentive Hearers, to whom I expounded for above an Hour, for which they
were very thankful. Blessed be GOD for this Opportunity. I hope I shall learn
more and more every Day, that no Place is amiss for preaching the Gospel. --
GOD forbid that the Word of GOD should be bound, because some out of a
misguided Zeal deny the Use of their Churches. For though they bid me no more
speak to the People in this Way, yet I cannot but speak the Things that I have
seen and felt in my own Soul. The more I am bid to hold my Peace, the more
earnestly will I lift up my Voice like a Trumpet, and tell the People what must
be done in them before they can be finally saved by JESUS CHRIST.

Friday, Febr. 9. After Breakfast and Prayer with the Family where we lodged, I
set out for Dummer (a Parish once for a little while under my Care) and met
with near a Dozen Christian Brethren, with whom we took exceeding sweet
Counsel, prayed, and sung Psalms, and eat our Bread with Gladness and
Singleness of Heart. I wish all knew how cheerful we, that are Beginning to be
Christians, live! And if the Beginning be so sweet, What must the End of
Believing be? Oh the Goodness of GOD in thus bringing me back to the Places
where I have been already! LORD melt down my frozen Heart with a Sense of thy
unmerited Love. Amen, Amen.

After having wrote several Letters, I returned with my Friends to Basingstoke,
where I had appointed to expound. Accordingly, in the Evening I went to a large
Room prepared for that Purpose, and expounded for an Hour. -- The Place was
very much thronged, many were very noisy, and others did us the Honor of
throwing up Stones at the Windows. But I spoke so much the louder; being
convinced some Good must come out from a Place where Opposition is. I should
doubt whether I was a true Minister of CHRIST, was I not opposed. And I find it
does me much Good. For it drives me nearer to my LORD and Master, JESUS CHRIST,
with whom I long to dwell.

After Exposition, near Twenty Friends came to visit me, and Two young Men in
particular, (once Leaders of the religious Society, but since fallen back.)
They came, I believe, with a Design to puzzle me about the Doctrine of
Regeneration; But alas, they soon showed what Strangers they were to it. -- For
one was so full of Zeal, that he could not keep his Seat; and both were
entirely ignorant of the Indwelling of the Spirit. One Thing they took Care to
show as much as possible, viz. That they had read the Fathers, (I suppose the
English Translations) but at the same Time denied Experience in Religion. Poor
Men! I pitied and told them, how they rested in Learning, falsely so called,
while they were Strangers to the Power of Godliness in their Hearts. At last,
finding no Probability of convincing them, and being called away to Supper, I
and my Friends took our Leave in Love, with true Concern to see what an unhappy
Spirit our Opposers are of. Afterward we prayed for them, and endeavored to
bless GOD for making us to Triumph, through his dear SON, in every Place.

Saturday, Febr. 10. Breakfasted with some Friends; and after Family Prayer,
went with my dear Brethren, Mr. Kinchin and Mr. Hutchi^ to Dummer, where I
spent most of the Day in visiting that poor Flock from House to House, who
rejoiced exceedingly at the Sight of me, and had not forgotten their former
Love. -- Their Simplicity delighted me and my Friend Seward much, and GOD
enlarged my Heart greatly to praise him, and to pray for my dear absent
Brethren. -- Indeed I love them in the Bowels of JESUS CHRIST.

About Four in the Afternoon we returned to Basingstoke, in order to expound.
And near Three large Rooms were filled. -- We expected ill Treatment ere we
returned home, and some did begin to interrupt me: But GOD enabled me to speak
with such irresistible Power, that they were quite struck dumb and confounded.
-- Many said, We will never oppose again. Others said they would follow me
whithersoever I should go; and the Hearts of GOD's Children, as well as my own,
were filled with Joy unspeakable. -- This Night, I hope, Salvation is come to
this Place.

After Exposition, many Christian Friends came to see me in a most affectionate
Manner, and about Nine at Night we set out for Dummer. But no one can tell what
Enlargement of Heart GOD gave me. -- My Soul was full of ineffable Comfort and
Joy in the Holy Ghost. -- I poured out my Heart before the Throne of Grace as I
rode by the Way, and felt the Spirit of GOD working in me mightily, and
enabling me to intercede most earnestly for my dear Friends. LORD hear my
Prayers, and let my Cry come unto thee. -- In a short Time we reached Dummer,
and after having taken a little Refreshment, I went to Bed full of Love, and
rejoicing for the great Things GOD had done for my Soul.

Sunday, Febr. 11. Rose full of Love and Joy, but afterward on a sudden was
deserted, and then taken very ill in Body. -- I struggled just like one in his
last Agonies, and longed to stretch myself into GOD. -- After having vomited
several Times, I was obliged to go to Bed; and it would have melted any one
down to see my dear Friends (especially my dearest Mr. H -- s) weeping and
praying around me. -- Oh how did I long to be dissolved, and be with JESUS
CHRIST! How did I wish for the Wings of an Eagle, that I might fly away to
Heaven! But that happy Hour is not yet come. There are many Promises to be
fulfilled in me, many Souls to be called, many Sufferings to be endured, before
I go hence. -- Father, thy Will be done.

After having fallen asleep for a short Time, I arose and went to public
Worship, and preached and administered the Sacrament, but without any Life or
Power.

My Sickness still continuing after Service, I went to Bed again full of Peace,
but weak in Body, oppressed much in my Head, and quite shut up till near Five
at Night: At which Time, by the Advic^ of my Brother Seward, I took Courage;
and though it rained hard, rode with my dear Friends to Basingstoke, where
above five Hundred were waiting to hear me expound; but my Indisposition
continuing, Brother Kinchin expounded in my Stead. -- After this my Spirits
revived, my Body was s^rengthened, and GOD gave me Utterance, so that I spoke
freely to near Twenty People, that came to converse with me, and to hear the
Word of GOD. -- How thankful ought I to be to my dear Master for sending me
hither! -- A most beneficial and comfortable Meeting have I had with my dear
Christian Friends; and many, I hope, will have Reason to bless GOD for what
they have seen and heard. -- A Vestry, I find, was called to stop my
Proceedings, and I hear I am to be presented to the Diocesan. -- Several Lies
have been told in the News about my Preaching at St. Margaret's last Sunday. --
Blessed be GOD that I can rejoice in these lower Marks of my Discipleship. --
Wherever I go, GOD causes me to triumph, knits the Hearts of his People most
closely to me, and makes me more than Conqueror through his Love. -- The
Comforts I enjoy within are inexpressible; they have a great Effect upon my
outward Man, and make me of a cheerful Countenance; which recommends my
Master's Service much. -- Oh Free Grace in CHRIST JESUS.

SALISBURY.
Monday, Febr. 12. Perceived myself perfectly recovered, and was much refreshed
by the coming of many dear Friends, with whom after I had breakfasted and
prayed, I took a most affectionate Leave; called at Dummer, sung a Hymn,
prayed, and gave a Word of Exhortation to certain Disciples that were there,
and reached Salisbury with my Companion in Travel Mr. Seward about Six in the
Evening. -- Here I wrote several Letters to my London and Basingstoke Friends,
and sent for Mr. Chubb, in order to have a Conference with him concerning his
late Book, but he happened not to be at home. -- Oh that that unhappy Man was
turned from his erroneous Principles! For I fear, like Simon Magus he has
bewitched many about Salisbury with his false Doctrines. -- LORD, suffer not
thy People to believe a Lie, though they have held the Truth in
Unrighteousness. Raise up, I beseech thee, some true Pastors amongst them, who
may accquaint them with the Nature and Necessity of the New Birth, and point
out to them the blessed Spirit, whereby they may have that Repentance wrought
in their Souls, which the self-righteous Mr. Chubb falsely asserts may be
wrought in them by a moral Persuasion.

STAPLEASHWIN, WILTS.
Tuesday, February 13. Thought when I rose to abide at Salisbury a few Days,
but finding it quite inconsistent with my other Business, I left that Place
(after public Worship, and paying a Visit to an old Disciple, my Brother
Wesley's Mother) and reached Stapleashwin about Six at Night. -- After having
refreshed ourselves, we intended to set forward toward Bath; but finding the
People, at whose House we put up, were worthy, we altered our Resolution. And
our Hostess having called in many of her Neighbors, I prayed, conversed and
sung Psalms with them for a considerable Time, wrote some Letters, and went to
Bed, not doubting but the Lord would cause me to dwell in Safety. -- Who knows
but some good may have been d^ne here this Night? But what have I (...) with
that? I am only to follow ^y Lord, who, wheresoever he came, talked of the one
Thing needful.

BATH and BRISTOL.
Wednesday, February 14. After Family Prayer, and giving a Word of Exhortation,
I set out for Bath, and was greatly comforted there with some Christian
Brethren. -- I then waited on Dr. C -- y, desiring I might have the Use of the
Abbey Church to preach for the Orphan-house, the Trustees having obtained ^eave
of the Bishop before I went to Georgia. But he was pleased to give me an
absolute Refusal to preach either on that, or any other Occasion, without a
positive Order from the King or Bishop. I asked him his Reasons. He said, he
was not obliged to give me any. Upon which, I took my leave, and retired with
my Friends, and prayed for him most fervently. -- The Time will come, says our
LORD, when they shall thrust you out of their Synagogues.

After Dinner, other Circumstances concurring, we thought GOD called us to
Bristol. And with Cheerfulness of Heart, we reached that Place about Seven in
the Evening. -- But who can express the Joy with which I was received? To add
to my Comfort, many Letters came to my Hands from London Friends, which
rejoiced me exceedingly. And what was the chiefest Pleasure, somebody or other
thought me considerable enough to write a Letter in the Weekly Miscellany
against me, and with several Untruths, about my preaching at St. Margaret's
Westminster. -- Thou shall answer for me, my LORD and my GOD. Yet a little
while and we shall appear at the Judgment Seat of CHRIST. Then shall my
Innocence be made clear as the Light, and my just Dealings as the Noon day.

BRISTOL.
Thursday, February 15. Sat up till past one in the Morning answering my dear
Friends Letters, having no Time otherwise. -- Received a Letter from a dear
Christian Brother, wherein were these Words,

I was told that Mr. B -- n said to Mr. C -- h, I believe the Devil in Hell is
in you all. Whitefield has set the Town on Fire, and now he is gone to kindle a
Flame in the Country. Shocking Language for one who calls himself a Minister of
the Gospel! But, my dear Friend, I trust this will not move you, unless it is
to pity him, and pray the more earnestly that he may experience the Power of
those Truths he is now opposing, and have the same Fire kindled in his Breast,
against which he is now so much enraged. For I trust, I am persuaded, it is not
a Fire of the Devil's kindling, but an holy Fire that has proceeded from the
Holy and Blessed Spirit. Oh that such a Fire may not only be kindled, but blow
up into a Flame all England, and all the World over!


After having breakfasted and prayed with some religious Friends, I went with
Mr. Seward ^o public Worship: from thence to the Rev. Mr. G -- s, Minister of
St. Mary, Ratcliff, who, as I was informed, had promised to lend me his Church
to preach in for the Orphan-house. But he, in effect, gave me a Refusal,
telling me, that he could not lend his Church without a special Order from the
Chancellor. -- Upon this, I immediately waited on the Chancellor, to whom I had
sent the Night before. -- But he told me frankly, that he would not give any
positive Leave, neither would he prohibit any one that should lend me a Church;
but he would advise me to withdraw to some other Place till he had heard from
the Bishop, and not preach on that or any other Occasion. I asked him his
Reasons. He answered, Why will you press so hard upon me? The Thing has given a
general Dislike. -- I replied, Not the Design of the Orphan-house, -- Even
those that disagree with me in other Particulars, approve of that. And as for
the Gospel, when was it preached without Dislike?" Soon after this, I took my
leave, and waited upon the Reverend the Dean, who received me with great
Civility. When I had shown him my Georgia Accounts, and answered him a Question
or two about the Colony, I asked him, Whether there could be any just Objection
against my preaching in Churches for the Orphan-house?" -- After a Pause for a
considerable Time, he answered, "He could not tell." But somebody knocking at
the Door, he replied, Mr. Whitefield, I will give you an Answer some other
Time; now I expect Company. Will you be pleased to fix any, Sir? said I. I will
send to you says the Dean. O Christian Simplicity, whither art thou fled! Why
do not the Clergy speak the Truth, that it is not against the Orphan-house but
against me and my Doctrine, that their Enmity is levelled. Had another came in
his own Name, him they would have received. -- But do thou, O LORD, behold
their Enmity, and grant unto me, and all thy despised Servants, that with all
Boldness we may speak thy Word.

About three in the Afternoon, GOD having given me great Favor in the Jaylor's
Eyes, I preached a Sermon on the Penitent Thief to the poor Prisoners in
Newgate, and collected fifteen Shillings for them. -- Many seemed much
affected, and I hope the Power of the LORD was present to awaken them.

At seven I expounded for an Hour with very great Power to a young Society,
which GOD has caused to be established since I was in Bristol last: And many, I
heard afterward, were pricked to the Heart, which was manifest enough by the
Tears that were shed by almost all that heard me. -- Blessed be GOD the good
Seed sown by my Ministry, though but as a Grain of Mustard Seed, is now, being
watered by the Dew of Heaven, beginning to grow into a great Tree. LORD this is
thy doing, and it is mavelous in our Eyes.

The Lessons were very remarkable, and the People made an Application for me.
-- The first was the Opposition mad^ against Aaron'^ Priesthood, and GOD's
determining who was in the right, by causing his Rod to blossom when the other
Rods produced nothing. So let it happen, O LORD, to me thy unworthy Servant. --
The second was the Eleventh Chapter of St. Paul's 2d Epistle to the
Corinthians, where the Apostle recounted his Sufferings for CHRIST, against the
Insinuations of the false Apostles. Blessed be GOD, in most of the Things there
recorded, I have, in some small Degree, had F^llowship with the Apostle, and
before I die, I doubt not but I shall sympathize with him in most other
Articles. -- While I was reading it, I could not forbear blushing much. The
People were intent upon me, their Eyes bespoke the Language of their Hearts:
Each seemed to say, Thou art the Man. Suffering is the best Preferment.

Friday, Feb. 16. Begun this Morning to settle a daily Exposition, and reading
Prayers to the Prisoners in Newgate. I opened it by enlarging on the Conversion
of the Jailor, and I trust the same good Work will be experienced in this
Prison before I leave it.

Dined with a religious Family, spent a considerable Time in singing Hymns, and
Prayer, visited and prayed with two choice Servants of our blessed LORD, and
expounded from Five 'till near Nine, to two thronged Societies, one of which
chiefly consisted of young Men whom GOD seems to have called to shine as Lights
in the World, in a crooked and perverse Generation. -- Oh how thankful ought I
to be, for seeing these Frui^s of my poor (...)!

Saturday, February 17. Read Prayers and expounded the Parable of the Prodigal
Son at Newgate, to a great Number of People; and afterward was much refreshed
by the coming of a dear London Friend, and the Receipt of several Letters; for
the Writers of which, I with many others immediately kneeled down and gave
Thanks. One Thing affected me much in their Letters, viz. Their News of a great
Opposer's being given over by the Physicians. -- Alas poor Man! We all prayed
most heartily for him, knowing how shortly he must give an Account of what he
had most unjustly said and wrote against me and many true Servants of JESUS
CHRIST. Father lay not this Sin to his Charge.

About One in the Afternoon I went with my Brother Seward, and another Friend,
to Kingswood, and was most delightfully entertained by an old Disciple of the
Lord. -- My Bowels have long since yearned toward the poor Colliers, who, as
far as I can find, are very numerous, and yet are as Sheep, having no Shepherd.
-- After Dinner therefore, I went upon a Mount and spoke to as many People as
came unto me. They were upwards of two Hundred. -- Blessed be GOD, that I have
now broke the Ice; I belie^e I never was more acceptable to my Master than when
I was standing to teach those Heare^s in the open Fields. -- Some may censure
me. -- But if I thus pleased Men, I should not be the Servant of CHRIST.

About five, we returned full of Joy; and I wrote to the Bishop of Bristol (as
I had done before to the Bishop of Bath and Wells) for Leave to preach in his
Lordship's Churches, for the Benefit of the Orphan-house. May GOD incline him
to send me an Answer of Peace!

At seven, I went to expound to a Society of young Men for near two Hours, and
then came home with my Friends, blessing and praising GOD.

Sunday, February 18. Arose this Morning about six, being called up by near
fifty young Persons, whom I appointed to meet me at my Sister's House, and with
whom I spent above an Hour in Prayer, Psalm-singing, and a warm Exhortation. --
Soon after this, I read Prayers, and preached at Newgate to a large and very
attentive Congregation. At Ten, I preached at St. Warburgh's with great
Freedom, and to a large Audience. -- Blessed be GOD, I thought yesterday I
should not have the Use of any Pulpit; but GOD, who has the Hearts of all Men
in his Hands, disposed the Reverend Mr. Penrose to lend me his, who thanked me
for my Sermon; and the Reverend Mr. Gibbs sent to me, and offered me the Use
both of St. Thomas and St. Mary Ratcliff. -- The latter of these I accepted of,
and preached to such a Congregation as my Eyes never yet saw, with great
Liberty and Demonstration of the Spirit. -- Many went away for want of room;
and Mr. Gibbs and his Lady were exceeding civil both to me and Mr. Seward. --
The LORD reward them for this their Love.

After Sermon, and taking a little Refreshment, I hasted to a Society in
Baldwin-street, where many Hundreds were assembled to hear me, so that the
Stairs and Court below, besides the Room itself, were crowded. -- Here I
continued expounding for near two Hours. And then expounded for as long a Time
at another Society in Nicholas-street, equally thronged, but with much greater
Power. Surely, that same JESUS that came to his Disciples, the Doors being
shut, when they assembled together, was with us of a Truth: For great Numbers
were quite melted down, and GOD so caused me to renew my Strength, that I was
better when I returned home, than when I began to exhort my young
Fellow Soldiers at six in the Morning. I could not do this, except JESUS CHRIST
did strengthen me. By his free Grace alone, I am what I am* Not unto me, but
unto thy Name, O LORD, alone be all the Glory.

Monday, February 19. Read P^ayers and expounded as usual at Newgate, and
preached in the Afternoon to a great Multitude at the Parish Church of St.
Philip and Jacob, and collected Eighteen Pounds for the Orphan-house. --
Thousands went away, because there was no room for them within; and GOD enabled
me to read Prayers and preach with great Boldness. -- See ye not, ye opposers,
how you prevail nothing? Why do you not believe that it would not be thus,
unless GOD was with me? LORD, open thou their Eyes, that they may see that this
is thy doing.

About Six in the Evening I went to a new Society greatly thronged, and was
enabled, notwithstanding I had exerted myself so much at St. Philip's, to
expound with great Freedom of Spirit for above an Hour. -- Thence I went and
expounded for near the space of two Hours to another Society in Baldwin-street,
and much Power from above was amongst us. This done, I returned home full of
Joy, which was kept up by conversing, singing and praying with many Christian
Brethren. -- We parted, rejoicing that GOD caused us to go on from conquering,
and to conquer.

Amongst the Letters I received from religiou^ Correspondents, one writes to me
thus, -- Mr. --, who wrote that Letter in the Miscellany, died yesterday. He is
now gone to give an Account of the many hard Speeches contained therein. -- And
is convinced that Orthodoxy in Notions is not the whole of Religion. -- In
another Part of his Letter he writes thus, We had such a remarkable and
sensible Presence of GOD with us at Beech-lane this Evening, as my Eyes and
Ears were never such Witnesses of before. In the midst of Mr. John Wesley's
Exposition, a Woman present had such Convictions of her lost Estate by Nature,
and such a sense of Sin, that she could not forbear crying out aloud; upon
which Mr. Wesley, breaking off, went to her, who earnestly desired him to pray
for her, which he did in the Presence of 2 or 300 People, hardly one of whom, I
think, could forbear Tears, upon which she had Comfort. Blessed be GOD, the
more we are despised, the more he shows that we are Teachers sent by him. For
no one could do these Things, except GOD was with him.

Tuesday, Feb. 20. This Day my Master honored me more (...) ever he did yet.
-- About Ten in the Morning, in Compliance with a Summons received from the
Apparator yesterday, I waited upon the Rev. Mr. R -- l, the Chancellor of
Bristol, who now plainly told me, he intended to stop my Proceedings. -- I have
sent for the Register here, Sir, says he, to take down your Answer. Upon which
he asked me by what Authority I preached in the Diocese of Bristol, without a
License. I answered, I thought that Custom was grown obsolete: And why, pray
Sir, replied I, did not you ask the Irish Clergyman this Question, who preached
for you last Thursday? He said that was nothing to me. -- He then read over
Part of the Ordination-Office, and those Canons that forbid any Minister
preaching in a private House, etc. -- And then he asked me what I said to them?
I answered, that I apprehended those Canons did not belong to professed
Ministers of the Church of England. -- But he said they did. -- There is also a
Canon, said I, Sir, forbidding all Clergyman to frequent Taverns and play at
Cards; why is not that put in Execution? Why does not somebody complain of
them, says he, and then it would. -- When I asked him why I was thus taken
particular Notice of, (referring to my printed Discourses for my Principles) He
said, I preached false Doctrine. Upon which I answered him not a Word, but told
him, notwithstanding those Canons, I could not but speak the Things that I
knew, and was resolved to proceed as usual. -- Observe his Answer then, sa^^
he, Mr. Register. -- And turning to me, added, I am resolved, Sir, if you
preach or expound any where in this Diocese, till you have a License, I will
first suspend, and then excommunicate you. -- I then took my leave. -- He
waited upon me very civilly to the Door, and told me, What he did was in the
Name of the Clergy and Laity of the City of Bristol. -- And so we parted.

Being taken ill, just before I went to the Chancellor, in my Return home, I
found I had not so much Joy as Peace. But however, I did not perceive the least
Motion of Resentment to arise in my Heart. And to show how little I regarded
such Threatenings, after I had joined in Prayer for the Chancellor, I
immediately went and expounded at Newgate as usual; where GOD gave me great
Joy, and wonderously pricked many to the Heart, as though he would say, This is
the Way, walk in it. -- After this we dined with several Christian Friends with
the kind Keeper of the Prison, and rejoiced exceedingly at the Thoughts, that
we should one Day or other sing together in such a Place as Paul and Silas did.
-- GOD prepare us for that Hour. For I believe it will come. I shall be
exalted, I must be humbled.

At four there was a general Expectation of my preaching at St. Nicholas;
thousands were to hear me. -- But the Lecturer sent Word, that Orders were
given by Mr. B -- r, that I should not preach in his Church; which rejoiced me
greatly. Lord, why do thou thus honor me?

At five I went and expounded on the first of St. James, to a Christian
Assembly indeed, who were much affected. -- And afterward I hasted to
Nicholas-street, where was a great Crowd waiting for me upon the Stairs, Yard
and Entry of the House, as well as in the Room itself. -- I expounded the ninth
of St. John, exhorted all to imitate the poor Beggar, and not to fear the Face
of Men. -- GOD was pleased to fill me with unspeakable Joy and Power. -- All
were wonderously touched, and when after my Exposition I prayed particularly
for the Chancellor, the whole Company was drowned in Tears, and said most
earnest Amens to all the Petitions I put up for him. -- It is remarkable, we
have not had such a continued Presence of GOD amongst us, as we have had since
I was threatened to be excommunicated. But thus it was formerly, so it will be
now. When we are cast out, CHRIST will more clearly reveal himself to us.

Wednesday, Feb. 21. Had several come to me this Morning, to enquire about the
State of their Souls, amongst whom was a little Girl of thirteen Years of Age,
who told me in great Simplicity, She was pricked through and through with the
Power of the Word. And indeed a good Work, I believe, has been wrought in her
Heart. Out of the Mouths of Babes and Sucklings have thou perfected Praise.

Preached at Newgate with uncommon Freedom and Power, and observed the Audience
to be quite melted down, After this I made a Collection for the poor Prisoners,
and at my Return home was much comforted by another gracious Soul, whom GOD
brought unto me, and who was willing to follow me not only to Georgia, but also
to Prison and to Death.

At three in the Afternoon, according to my Appointment, I went to Kingswood
amongst the Colliers. GOD highly favored us in sending a fine Day, and near
two Thousand People were assembled on that Occasion. I preached on John chapter
iii. ver. 3. and enlarged for near an Hour, I hope, to the Comfort and
Edification of those that heard me. GOD grant the Seed sown may not fall on
stony or thorny, but on good Ground.

About six in the Evening, I expounded to a Society without Lawford's Gate, and
afterward to another in Baldwin-street; both were exceedingly crowded and
attentive. At first I could not speak so strongly, because I had exerted myself
so much upon the Mount; but afterward GOD gave me a fresh Supply of Grace, and
I was enabled to go through my Work cheerfully. Lo! I am with you always, even
unto the End of the World.

BATH.
Thursday, February 22. Observing Providence called me, this Morning I went,
with some Christian Friends, to Bath; where I was much comforted by meeting
with several that love our Lord JESUS in Sincerity. -- More especially, I was
edified by the pious Conversation of the Rev. Mr. Griffith Jones, whom I have
desired to see of a long Season. His Words came with Power, and the Account he
gave me of the many Obstructions he had met with in his Ministry, convinced me
that I was but a young Soldier, just entering the Field. Good GOD, prepare me
manfully to fight whatsoever Battles thou have appointed for me. I can do all
Things through thee strengthening me.

BRISTOL.
Friday, February 23. Returned hither about Ten this Morning. About Eleven,
went, as usual, and preached a written Sermon at Newgate, and collected two
Pounds five Shillings for the Prisoners. Many, I believe, were much affected.
To GOD be all the Glory.

After Dinner, I was taken very ill, so that I was obliged to lie upon the Bed;
but, looking upon it only as a Thorn in the Flesh, at three I went, according
to Appointment, and preached to near four or five Thousand People, from a Mount
in Kingswood, with great Power. The Sun shone very bright, and the People
standing in such an awful Manner round the Mount, in the profoundest Silence,
filled me with an holy Admiration. Blessed be GOD, for such a plentiful
Harvest. LORD, d^ thou send forth more Laborers into thy Harvest.

This done, GOD strengthened me to expound to a Society without Lawford's Gate,
and afterward to another in the City, and afterward to a third. And I spoke
with more Freedom the last Time than at the first. When I am weak, then am I
strong.

Saturday, Feb. 24. About Ten in the Morning I waited on the Chancellor, and
showed a Letter I had received from the Lord Bishop of Bristol. My Master gave
me great Boldness of Speech, and I asked the Chancellor why he did not write to
the Bishop according to his Promise? And, I think, he answered, he was to
bl^me. I then insisted on his proving I had preached false Doctrine, and
reminded him of his threatening to excommunicate me in the Name of the Clergy
and Laity of the City of Bristol. But he would have me think that he had said
no such Thing; and confessed, at this Time, that he had neither heard me
preach, nor read any of my Writings. I asked him his Reasons for prohibiting my
collecting for the Orphan-house. He answered, It would hinder the People's
Benefactions to the Bristol Clergy. I replied, It would by ^o Means hinder
their Contributions, and that the Clergy ought first to subscribe themselves
for Example's Sake. -- After much Conversation on this Subject, I, with all
Meekness, told him, I was resolved to go on preaching, and that if Collections
were not made here for the poor Georgians, I would lay it entirely upon him;
adding withal, I would not be one that should hinder such a Design for the
Universe.

After I left the Chancellor, I went and preached at Newgate; and at three in
the Afternoon, went to a Poor-house without Lawford's Gate; but the Room and
Yard being full, I stood upon the Steps going up to the House, and preached to
them from thence. Many that were passing along the Road on Horseback, stood
still to hear me; and, I hope, many were bettered by what was spoken.

This Evening I declined going to any Society, that I might have a little Time
to write Letters; amongst which, I wrote the following one to the Bishop of
Bristol.

My Lord, Bristol, Feb. 14, 1738, 9.
I humbly thank your Lordship for the Favor of your Lordship's Letter. It gave
abundant Satisfaction to me, and many others, who have not failed to pray in a
particular Manner for your Lordship's Temporal and Eternal Welfare. -- To day I
showed your Lorship's Letter to the Chancellor, who (notwithstanding he
promised not to prohibit my preaching for the Orphan-house, if your Lordship
was only neuter in the Affair) has influenced most of the Clergy to deny me
their Pulpits, either on that or any other Occasion. Last Week he was pleased
to charge me with false Doctrine, To day he has forgot that he said so. -- He
also threatened to excommunicate me for preaching in your Lordship's Diocese. I
offered to take a License, but was denied. -- If your Lordship should ask, What
Evil I have done? I answer* None, save that I visit the Religious Societies,
preach to the Prisoners in Newgate, and to the poor Colliers in Kingswood, who
they tell me, are little better than Heathens. -- I am charged with being a
Dissenter; though many are brought to the Church by my preaching, not one taken
from it. -- Indeed the Chancellor is pleased to tell me my Conduct is contrary
to the Canons; but I told him those Canons which he produced were not intended
against such Meetings as mine are, where his Majesty is constantly prayed for,
and every one is free to see what is done. I am sorry to give your Lo^dship
this Trouble; but I thought proper to mention these Particulars, that I might
know of your Lordship wherein my Conduct is exceptionable. I heartily thank
your Lordship for your intended Benefaction. -- I think the Design is truly
good, and will meet with Success, because so much opposed. GOD knows my Heart,
I desire only to promote his Glory. If I am spoken evil of for his sake I
rejoice in it. My Master was long since spoken evil of before me. -- But I
intrude on your Lordship's Patience. -- I am, with all possible Thanks,

My Lord, Your Lordship's dutiful Son and Servant, G. W.


Sunday, Feb. 25. What Mercies has my good GOD shown me this Day! When I arose
in the Morning, I thought I should be able to do nothing; but the divine
Strength was greatly magnified in my Weakness. -- About Six in the Morning I
prayed, sung with, and exhorted my young Morning Visiters, as I did last Lord's
Day. -- At Eight I read Prayers, and preached to a very thronged Congregation
at Newgate, and from thence I rode to Bussleton, a Village about two Miles from
Bristol, where was such a vast Congregation, that after I had read Prayers in
the Church, I thought proper to go and preach in the Churchyard, that none
might be sent em^ty away. -- The People were exceedingly at^^ntive, and GOD
gave me great Utterance; and what was best of all, by the Leave of the
Minister, who invited me thither, we had a S^crament; and, I hope, it was a
Communion of Saints indeed. All Things, I find, happen to the Furtherance of
the Gospel; Why then should I fear what Man can do unto me?

At four I hasted to Kingswood. -- At a moderate Computation, there were above
ten Thousand People to hear me. The Trees and Hedges were full. All was hush
when I began; the Sun shone bright, and GOD enabled me to preach for an Hour
with great Power, and so loud, that all (I was told) could hear me. Blessed be
GOD, Mr. B -- n spoke right. The Fire is kindled in the Country; and, I know,
all the Devils in Hell shall not be able to quench it.

Finding myself strengthened from above, I went and expounded at Baldwin-street
Society. when above five Pounds were collected for the Orphan-house. --
Afterward I went to another; and about Nine at Night came home, rejoicing at
the great Things GOD had done for my Soul. This Day I have been exalted, I must
expect now to be humbled- Any Thing is welcome to me that GOD sends.

Monday, Feb. 26. This Morning I wrote the following Letter to the Chancellor.

Reverend Sir,
The enclosed is a Letter I sent on Saturday to the Bishop of Bristol; be
pleased to peruse it, and see if any Thing contrary to Truth is there related
by,

Reverend Sir, Your very humble Servant. G. W.
Bristol, Feb 28 1738, 9.

Pre^ched at (...) -- was refreshed by the Conversation of some whom GOD had
wrought upon by my Ministry; -- answered my religious Friends Letters, and
expounded twice in the Evening to two large Societies. Blessed be GOD, I find
myself much refreshed in Spirit, and a new supply of Strength given me. Thus
shall it be done to the Man whom GOD delights to honor. Oh free Grace in
CHRIST JESUS!

Tuesday, Feb. 27. Expounded at Newgate, with more Power than ever; had Success
in my Collections for the Orphan-house, and expounded twice, as usual, and was
greatly strengthened with Might in the Inner Man. This is to prepare me for
some fresh Opposition. I wonder I meet with so little. But GOD will lay upon me
no more than I am able to bear. Forever adored be his unmerited Love, through
CHRIST.

Wednesday, Feb. 28. Preached at Newgate, and expounded to the Societies, as
usual; and intended to go and preach upon the Mount in Kingswood; but was
dissuaded from it, by a Report that the Waters were out. However, many, as I
was told afterward, came from far to hear me; so that it repented me that I
went not. When People are willing to hear, it is a Pity that any Minister
should be slow to preach.

Thursday, March 1. Amongst my other Letters by this Day^s Post, I received the
following one from the Rev. Mr. John W^^s^ey.

My dear Brother, Feb. 20.
Our Lord's Hand is not shortened amongst us. Yesterday I preached at St.
Katharines, and at Is^ington, where the Church was almost as hot as some of the
Society Rooms used to be. I think I never was so much strengthened before. The
Fields, after Service, were white with People praising GOD. About three Hundred
were present at Mr. S -- s; thence I went to Mr. B -- s, then to Fetter-lane,
and at nine to Mr. B -- s; where also we only wanted room. -- Today I expound
in the Minories at four, at Mrs. W -- s at six, and to a large Company of poor
Sinners in Gravel-lane (Bishopsgate) at eight. The Society at Mr. Crouch's does
not meet till eight; so that I expound before I go to him near St. James's
Square; where one young Woman has been lately filled with the Holy Ghost, and
overflows with Joy and Love. On Wednesday at six, we have a noble Company of
Women, not adorned with Gold or costly Apparel, but with a meek and quiet
Spirit, and good Works. -- At the Savoy, on Thursday Evening, we have usually
two or three hundred, most of them, at least, thoroughly awakened. Mr. A -- 's
Parlour is more than filled on Friday, as is Mr. P -- 's Room twice over;
where, I think, I have commonly had more Power given me than at any other
Place. A Week or two ago a Note was given me there, as near as I can remember
in these Words, Your Prayere are desired for a sick Child that is lunatic, and
sore vexed Day and Night, that our Lord would heal him, as he did those in the
Days of his Flesh; and that he would give his Parents Faith and Patience till
his Time is come.

On Saturday Se^ennight, a middle aged, well dressed Woman at Beech-lane,
(where I expound usually to five or six Hundred before I go to Mr. E -- 's
Society) was seized, as it appeared to several about her, with little less than
the Agonies of Death. We prayed that GOD, who had brought her to the Birth,
would give her Strength to bring forth, and That he would work speedily, that
all might see it, and fear, and put their Trust in the LORD. Five Days she
travailed and groaned, being in Bondage. On Thursday Evening our Lord got
himself the Victory; and, from that Moment, she has been full of Love and Joy,
which she openly declared at the same Place, on Saturday last; so that
Thanksgivings also were given to GOD by many on her Account. It is to be
observed, her Friends have accounted her mad for these three Years; and
accordingly bled, bliste^ed her, and what not. Come and let us praise the LORD,
and magnify his Name together.


The following Paragraph was likewise in a Letter I received from my dear
Brother Kinchin of Oxon.

GOD has greatly blessed us at Oxford of late. We have reason to think, that
four, within this Fortnight, have been born of GOD. The People crowd to the
Societies on Sunday Nights, several Gownsmen among the rest. GOD has much
assisted me. Last Night we had a thronged Society, and about forty Gownsmen.


Blessed be GOD, I hope the Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST will now come with Power,
and that a Remnant of despised Methodists will still be left at Oxford, which
shall take Root downwards, and bear Fruit upwards.

The Weather being fair, after I had preached and collected Thirty seven
Shillings at Newgate, I went on the Mount at Kingswood; where, about fifteen
hundred Colliers and Country People were gathered together, and were very
attentive to hear me. Blessed be GOD I preached with Power, and have reason to
believe, by what I have heard, that my Words have not altogether fallen to the
Ground. Some of the Colliers, I find, have been much affected. Blessed be GOD.

BATH.
Friday, March 2. Went to Bath this Morning to see the Rev. Mr. T -- n, who
came from Cornwall to see me. In the Afternoon I read Prayers at the Hospital;
the Lessons were exceeding applicable, and g^ve is Comfort. I spent the Evening
in taking sweet Counsel with some pious honorable Women, Mr. Griff^^h Jones,
and other good Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST. Blessed be GOD, there are yet some
left who are true followers of the Lamb.

BRISTOL.
Saturday, March 3. Returned before ten to Bristol, was greatly refreshed by a
Packet of Letters from London. Expounded with great Power at Newgate, and
preached in the Afternoon on the Steps before the Poor-house without Lawford's
Gate, and perceived my Audience much increased since last Saturday. Blessed be
GOD, many went affected away.

Sunday, March 4. Rose much refreshed in Spirit, and gave my early Attendants a
warm Exhortation as usual. Went to Newgate, and preached with great Power to an
exceedingly thronged Congregation. Then hasted to Hannam Mount, three Miles
from the City, where the Colliers live altogether. GOD highly favored us in
the Weather. Above four Thousand were ready to hear me; and GOD enabled me to
preach with the Demonstration of the Spirit. The Ground not being high enough,
I stood upon a Table, and the Sight of the People covered the green Fields, and
their deep Attention pleased me much. I hope that same LORD who fed so many
Thousands with bodily Bread, will feed all their Souls with that Bread which
comes down from Heaven: For many came from far.

At four in the Afternoon, I we^^ to the Mount on Rose-green, and preached to
above fourteen Thousand Souls; and so good was my GOD, that all could hear. I
think it was worth while to come many Miles to see such a Sight. -- I spoke,
blessed be GOD, with great Freedom; but thought all the while) as I do
continually when I ascend the Mount, That hereafter I shall suffer as well as
speak for my Master's Sake. LORD, strengthen me against that Hour. LORD, I
believe (O help my Unbelief! that thy Grace will be more than sufficient for me.

In the Evening I expounded at Baldwin-street Society, but could not get up to
the Room without the utmost Difficulty, the Entry and Court were so much
thronged. Blessed be GOD, the Number of Hearers much increases; and as my Day
is, so is my Strength. To Night I returned home much more refreshed in my
Spirits than in the Morning when I went out. I was full of Joy, and longed to
be dissolved, and to be with JESUS CHRIST; but I have a a Baptism first to be
baptized with. Father, thy Will be done. This has been a Sabbath indeed to my
Soul!

Monday, March 5. Had the Pleasure of having many, whom GOD has touched by my
Ministry, come to me, enquiring about the New Birth. At eleven, I preached with
uncommon Freedom and Power at Newgate, and collected Thirty-nine Shillings for
the poor Prisoners; and being invited by many Colliers, at three in the
Afternoon I went to a Place called the Fishponds, on another Side of Kingswood,
where about two Thousand were gathered together. The Sight pleased me much; and
having no better Place to stand upon, the Wall was my Pulpit, and, I think, I
never spoke with greater Power. My preaching in the Fields may displease some
timorous bigoted Men; but I am thoroughly persuaded it pleases GOD, and why
should I fear any Thing else.

At my Return home, I was much refreshed with the Sight of two pious Friends.
After some Conversation, they went with me to a Society, where I prayed and
expounded for above an Hour, and then spent the Remainder of the Evening with
them and many other Christian Brethren, in warming one another Hearts by
mutual Exhortation, and singing of Psalms. Oh that Sensualists knew the
Pleasure of a religious Conversation! I am sure they would no longer eat Husks
with Swine, but return home to feed on the fatted Calf.

NEW PASSAGE.
Tuesday, March 9. Having left my dear Brother Hutchins, whom I sent to for
that Purpose, to supply my Place during my Absence; after many kind
Salutations, Psalms and Prayers on both Sides, Mr. Seward, myself, and another
Brother, took Leave of our Bristol Friends, and got to the New Passage in a
short Time. Here we staid and refreshed ourselves, and endeavored to go off in
the Boat about Noon; but the Wind not permitting us, we took this Opportunity
of writing to many of our Christian Friends, and exhorting them to lay hold on
JESUS CHRIST by Faith.

At the Inn where we put up there was an unhappy Clergyman, who (so far had his
Corruptions dominion over him) would not go over in the Passage-Boat because I
went in it. Alas! thought I, this very Temper would make Heaven itself
unpleasant to that Man, if he save me there. I was likewise told, that in the
public Kitchen, he charged me with being a Dissenter; when a little after, as
I passed by, I saw him shaking his Elbows over a Gaming-table. I heartily wish
those who charge me causelessly with Schism, and being righteous overmuch,
would consider that the Canon of our Church forbids our Clergy to frequent
Taverns, to play at Cards or Dice, or any other unlawful Games. Their indulging
themselves in these Things, is a stumbling Block to Thousands.

After Supper, in the Evening, I called the Family of the Inn together, and was
pleased to see near twenty come to hear the Word. GOD enabled me to speak and
pray with Power, and having dispersed some Extracts from our Church Homilies
amongst them, I and my Friends went early to Bed, being apprized that we were
to be called up betimes. Blessed be GOD, for any Opportunity of doing good.

CARDIFF.
Wednesday, March 8. Arose before twelve (...) Night, sung Psalms, and prayed;
and the Wind being fair, we had a speedy Passage over (...) the Welsh Shore.
Our Business being in ^aste, GOD having of his good Providence, sent (...) to
guide us, we rode all Night, stopped at Newport to refresh ourselves, where we
met with two Friends, and reached Cardiff about eleven. in the Morning.

The Town, I soon found, was apprehensive of my coming; and therefore, whilst I
was giving a Word of Exhortation to some poor People at the Inn, who hanged
upon me to hear the Word, Mr. Seward went to ask for the Pulpit? but being
denied, we pitched on the Town Hall, which Mr. Seward got by his Interest; and
at four in the Afternoon, I preached from the Judges Seat to about four hundred
Hearers. Most were very attentive; but some mocked: However, I offered JESUS
CHRIST freely even to them, and should have rejoiced if they would have
accepted of him; but their foolish Hearts were hardened. LORD, make them
Monuments of thy free Grace.

After I came from the Seat, I was much refreshed with the Sight of my dear
Brother Howel Harris; whom, though I knew not in Person, I have long since
loved in the Bowels of JESUS CHRIST, and have often felt my Soul drawn out in
Prayer in his Behalf.

A burning and shining Light has he been in those Parts; a Barrier against
Profaneness and Immorality, and an indefatigable Promoter of the true Gospel
of JESUS CHRIST. About three or four Years GOD has inclined him to go about
doing good. He is now above Twenty five Years of Age. Twice he has applied
(being every Way qualified) for holy Orders; but was refused, under a false
Pretense, that he was not of Age, though he was then Twenty-two Years and six
Months. About a Month ago he offered himself again, but was put off. Upon this,
he was, and is still resolved to go on in his Work; and indefatigable Zeal has
he shown in his Master's Service. For these three Years (as he told me from his
own Mouth) he has discoursed almost twice every Day for three or four Hours
together; not authoritatively, as a Minister; but as a private Person,
exhorting his Christian Brethren. He has been, I think, in seven Counties, and
has made it his Business to go to Wakes, etc. to turn People from such lying
Vanities. Many Alehouse People, Fiddlers, Harpers, etc. (Demetrius like) sadly
cry out against him for spoiling their Business. He has been made the Subject
of Numbers of Sermons, has been threatened with public Prosecutions, and had
Constables sent to apprehend him. But GOD has blessed him with inflexible
Courage: Instantaneous Strength has been communicated to him from above; and he
still continues to go on from conquering to conquer. He is of a most Catholic
Spirit, loves all that love our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and therefore he is styled
by Bigots, a Dissenter. He is contemned by all that are Lovers of Pleasure more
than Lovers of GOD* but GOD has greatly blessed his pious Endeav^^rs. Many
call, and own him as their spiritual Father, and, I believe, would lay down
their Lives for his Sake. He discourses generally in a Field; but at other
Times in a House, from a Wall, a Table, or any Thing else. He has established
near thirty Societies in South Wales, and still his Sphere of Action is
enlarged daily. He is full of Faith, and the Holy Ghost.

When I first saw him, my Heart was knit closely to him. I wanted to catch some
of his Fire, and gave him the right Hand of Fellowship with my whole Heart.
After I had saluted him, and given a warm Exhortation to a great Number of
People, who followed me to the Inn, we spent the Remainder of the Evening in
taking sweet Counsel together, and telling one another what GOD had done for
our Souls. My Heart was still drawn out toward him more and more. A divine and
strong Sympathy seemed to be between us, and I was resolved to promote his
Interest with all my Might. Accordingly we took an Account of the several
Societies, and agreed on such Measures as seemed most conducive to promote the
common Interest of our Lord. Blessed be GOD, there seems to be a noble Spirit
gone out into Wales; and I believe, ever long there will be more visible Fruits
of it. What inclines me strongly to think so is, that the Partition Wall of
Bigotry and Party Zeal is broken down, and Ministers and Teachers of different
Communions, join with one Heart and one Mind to carry on the Kingdom of JESUS
CHRIST. -- The LORD make all the Christian World thus minded. For till this is
done, I fear, we must despair of any great Reformation in the Church of GOD. --
After much comfortable and encouraging Discourse with each other, we kneeled
down and prayed, and great Enlargement of Heart GOD was pleased to give me in
that Duty.

This done, we eat a little Supper, and then, after singing a Hymn, we went to
Bed, praising and blessing GOD, for bringing us Face to Face. I doubt not but
Satan envied our Happiness. But, I hope, by the Help of GOD we shall make his
Kingdom shake. GOD loves to do great Things by weak Instruments, that the Power
may be of GOD, and not of Man.

Thursday, March 9. Was much refreshed by last Night's Rest, and spent the
Beginning of the Morning in Prayer and private Discourse with the Members of
the Religious Society. About ten, according to Appointment, I went to the
Town Hall, and preached for about an Hour and a Half to a large Assembly of
People. My dear Brother Howel Harris sat close by me. I did not observe any
S^off^rs within; but without, some were pleased to honor me so (...), as to
trail a dead Fox, and hunt it about the Hall. -- But, blessed be GOD my Voice
prevailed. GOD gave me great Strength, and I could have have heartily wished
all such Scoffers had been present, that I might have offered them Salvation
through JESUS CHRIST. This being done, I went, with many of my Hearers, amongst
whom were two worthy dissenting Ministers, and my Brother Howel Harris, to
public Worship; and in the second Lesson were these remarkable Words, And the
High Priests, and the Scribes, and the Chief of the People sought to destroy
him, but they could not find what they might do to him: For all the People were
attentive to hear him.

In the Afternoon, about four of the Clock* I preached again to the People
without any Scoffing or Disturbance. And at six in the Evening, I talked for
above an Hour and a half, and prayed with the religious Society, whose Room was
quite thronged. Indeed GOD was with us of a Truth. I think I never spoke with
greater Freedom and Power, and never saw a Congregation more melted down. The
Love of JESUS CHRIST touched them to the quick; most of them were dissolved
into Tears, and seemed to have their Hearts perfectly knit toward me.
Afterward, they came to me weeping, bidding me farew^l, and wishing I was to
continue with them longer. -- Indeed their L^^e and undissembled Simplicity
affected me much. My Bowels yearned toward them; I wres^led with GOD in Prayer
for them, and blessed (...) holy Name for sending me into Wales. I hope these
are the first Fruits of a greater Harvest, if ever it should please GOD to
bring me back from Georgia. Father, thy Will be done.

NEWPORT in WALES.
Friday, March 9. Left Cardiff about six in the Morning, and reached Newport
about ten, where many came from Pontypo^l, and other Parts, on purpose to hear
me. The Minister being asked, and readily granting us the Pulpit, I preached
with great Power to about a thousand People; and then, with my Brother H^wel
Harris, Seward, etc. we went rejoicing, and blessing GOD for opening an
effectual Door by the Way. I think Wales is excellently well prepared for the
Gospel of Christ. They have many burning and shining Lights both among the
Dissenting and Church Ministers, amongst whom Mr. Griffith Jones shines in
particular. No less than fifty Charity Schools have been erected by his Means,
without any settled visible Fund, and fresh ones are setting up every Day.
People make nothing of coming twenty Miles to h^^r a Sermon, and great Numbers
there are who have not only been Hearers, but Doers also of ^he Word; so that
there is a most comfortable Prospect of the spreading of the Gospel in Wales. I
really believe there are some now living, which shall not taste of Death till
they see the Kingdom of GOD come with Power.

BRISTOL.
Saturday; March 10. Got safe to Bristol with my dear Fellow Travelers about
eleven at Night. Preached in the Morning at Newgat^, and in the Afternoon on
the Poor-house Steps. The Hearers were much affected, and melted into Tears.

Sunday, March 11. Had a whole Room full of People come to hear me at six in
the Morning, with whom I prayed and sung Psalms for, (...) an Hour. Then I read
Prayers, and preached at Newgate. Afterward went to Ha^^am Mount, where was
near a third Part as many again as last Sunday; and at four in the Afternoon,
preached, as usual, on the Mount at Rose-green. The Congregation was not quite
so large as before, on account of the Coldness of the Weather* but GOD was
pleased to withhold the (...) and Hail whilst I was speaking, and we collected
Ten Pounds for the Orphan-house. Blessed be GOD my Strength increases. Satan
has been very quiet this Week past, and GOD has poured much Comfort into my
Soul; so that I must prepare for fresh Trials. O my dear (...) that I may put
on the whole (...) of GO^, that I may withstand all the (...) of the Devil.

BATH.
Monday, March 12. Went in Company with seven more dear Friend^, to Bath, and
had the Comfort of meeting with some true Followers of JESUS CHRIST, whom I
knew not before. Received News of the wonderful Progress of the Gospel in
Yorkshire, under the Ministry of my dear Brother Ingham. -- Had the Pleasure of
hearing that the Mayor and the Sheriffs of (...) had absolutely forbid the
Keeper of (...) me pr^^ch there any longer, (...) I (...) upon the Necessity of
our New Birth. -- The Keeper was much concerned, and told them, I preached
agreeable to Scripture; but they were offended at him. They answered and said
unto him, Thou art altogether born in Sin, and do thou teach us? John ix.34.

Finding many in Bath were desirous to hear me, having given a short Notice,
about five in the Evening I preached out on the Town-Common, to a much larger
Audience than could reasonably be expected. -- It snowed good Part of the Time;
but the ^^ople staid very contentedly. Indeed (...) (as I heard afterward)
that I spoke Bla^^^^my; but the People of GOD were much rejoiced; and some, I
hope, effectually wrought upon. Praised be GOD for opening such an effectual
Door here. Many Adversaries must be expected in so polite a Place as Bath. But
GOD is with me, and I fear neither Men or Devils.

After Sermon, I returned to our Inn, and spent the Remainder of the Evening in
sweet Conversation with a great Number of experienced Christians. My Heart was
much enlarged in Prayer; and I can say, the Love of GOD was shed abroad
abundantly therein. For ever adored be the Riches of his free Mercy.

Tuesday, March 13. Preached again at the Fish Ponds with great Power, and
observed all to behave exceeding orderly.

Had extraordinary Power given me at the Society in Nicholas-street, and
exhorted them with all possible Earnestness, not to let ^igotry, or Party Zeal,
be so much as mentioned among them. For I despair of seeing CHRIST 's Kingdom
come, till we are all thus minded.

Wednesday, March 14. Being forbid preaching in the Prison, and, withal, being
resolved not to give place to my Adversaries, no not for an Hour, I preached at
Baptist-Mills, a Place very near the City, to three or four Thousand People,
from these Words, "What think you of Christ?" Blessed be GOD, all Things happen
for the Furtherance of the Gospel. I now preach to ten Times more People than I
shou^^ if I had been confined to the Churches. (...) Devil is blind, and so are
his Emissaries, ^^herwise they would not thus confound themselves. Every Day I
am invited to fresh Pla^s. I will, by the Divine Assistance, go to as many as I
can; the rest I must leave unvisited, till it shall please GOD to bring me back
from Georgia.

Thursday, March 15. It snowing all Day, I could not go to Sison to preach, as
I proposed, but spent the Day in religious Discourse, writing Letters, and
expounding; in which GOD was pleased to give me unspeakable Comfort, Received a
strong Invitation to come to Cardiff once more, and to preach at Landaff; but
Business will not permit. Blessed be GOD, that People are ready to hear his
Word. Surely the Lord will fulfill the Desires of them that fear him.

Friday, March 16. Being much entreated by the People, and Horses being sent
for me, I went and preached at Elberton, a Village about nine Miles off
Bristol. The Clergyman denied me the Pulpit; so I preached on a little Ascent
on which the May Pole was fixed. The Weather being cold, and the adjacent
Villages having but little Notice, I had not above two Hundred Hearers. But
after Dinner, I hasted to Thornbury, where I was invited also, and preached
with uncommon Power to a great Part of my Morning Congregation, and many
hundreds besides. Mr. Willis, the Incumbent, lent me the Church, and used me
with great Civility, as did two other Clergymen who were there present. The
People were very desirous to have me stay; but I had promised to lie at
Wintenburn, at a Quaker's House, where three more of their Friends met us, and
with whom we had agreeable Conversation. But I cannot say their Arguments for
omitting the outward Signs of Baptism, and the Lord's Supper, and for having no
outward Call to the Ministry, were at all convincing: However, they wished me
good Luck in the Name of the LORD, and we parted from each other very lovingly.
GOD grant I may be always of a Catholic Spirit.

BRISTOL.
Saturday, March 17. Returned to Bristol about eight in the Morning, and had
the Pleasure of hearing that Mr. Mayor, etc. had engaged a Clergyman to preach
to the poor Prisoners at Newgate, rather than to agree to a Petition they had
presented to have me. Some preach Christ out of Contention, supposing to add
Affliction to my Bonds, and others of good Will: However, Christ is preached,
and I therein rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.

Had the Honor of seeing another Letter, intended against me, put in Print;
and GOD rewarded me for it, by giving me such extraordinary Power at the
Poor-house this Afternoon, that great Numbers were quite melted, and dissolved
into Tears. The Enemies of GOD's Church undesignedly do GOD's Work. I never am
so much assisted, as when Persons endeavor to blacken me; and I find the
Number of my Hearers so increase by Opposition, as well as my own inward Peace,
and Love, and Joy, that I only fear a Calm. But the Enmity that is in the Heart
of every natural Man against GOD, will not suffer them to be quiet long. I only
say, I would send my Adversaries to School to Gamaliel. If this Work be not of
God, says he, it will come to naught; but if it be, ye cannot overthrow it;
lest happily ye be found to fight against God.

Sunday, March 18. Had the Pleasure of seeing my Morning Audience so much
increased, that above an Hundred were obliged to stand without in the Street.
-- Was taken ill for about two Hours; but, notwithstanding, was enabled to go
and preach at Hannam to many more than were there last Sunday. And in the
Afternoon, I really believe no less than twenty Thousand were present at
Rose-Green. Blessed are the Eyes which see the Things which we see. Surely GOD
is with us of a Truth. To behold such Crowds stand about us in such an awful
Silence, and to hear the Echo of their singing run from one End of them to the
other, is very solemn and surprising. -- My Discourse continued for near an
Hour and a Half; and at both Places, above fourteen Pounds were collected for
the Orphan-house; and it pleased me to see with what Cheerfulness the Colliers
and poor People threw in their Mites. -- Contrary to my Expectation, having a
Cold upon me, GOD enabled me afterward to expound for above an Hour to a
crowded Society, with great Freedom and Plainness of Speech. And I came home
full of Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. What a Mystery is the divine Life! Oh
that all were Partakers of it!

BATH.
Monday, March 19. After having refreshed myself and Friends, by reading a
Packet of Letters from London, and dispatched some other Business, according to
Appointment, I set out for Bath, and got thither about three in the Afternoon.
Dinner being ended, through great Weakness of (...), and Sickness in my
Stomach, I was obliged (...) lie down upon the Bed; but the Hour being come for
my preaching, I (...), weak and l^nguid as I was, depending on the Divine
Strength, and, I think, scarce ever preached with greater Power. There were
about 4 or 5000, of High and Low, Rich and Poor, to hear. As I went along, I
observed many Scoffers; and when I got upon the Table to preach, many laughed;
but before I had finished my Prayer, all was hushed and silent; and ^'^r I had
concluded my Discourse, GOD, by his Wor^, seemed to impress a great Awe upon
their Mind; for all were deeply attentive, and seemed much affected with what
had been spoken. Men may scoff for a little while, but there is something in
this Foolishness of Preaching which will make the most stubborn Heart to bend
or break. Is not my Word like Fire, says the Lord, and like a Hammer that
breaks the Rock in pieces?

Tuesday, March 20. Had the Pleasure of hearing of the Success of my Discourse
yesterday upon many Souls, especially upon two little Children, who were
observed to come home crying, and to retire to Prayers. -- Spent the Morning in
writing Letters, and visiting some few righteous Souls that live in this Sodom.
-- GOD has a Remnant every where. -- At eleven of Clock I read Prayers at the
Hospital, and was greatly comforted by the second Lesson* which was the 7th of
St. John. After Dinner I was taken ill again; but notwithstanding, GOD
strengthened me to preach to about as great a Congregation as yesterday, (...),
I believe, with great Success; ^or some (...), and all seemed much affected,
and were very silent. -- The Remainder of the Evening I spent with many
gracious Souls, who came to my Lodgings, with whom I took sweet Counsel, and
went to Bed full of Comfort and unspeakable Joy. Blessed be GOD, I can say, The
Life which I now live in the Flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of GOD, who
loved me, and gave himself for me.

Wednesday, March 21. Breakfasted this Morning with one Mr. M -- r, who kindly
invited me and my Friends. -- Perceived a great Freedom in my Spirit, and
afterward went to a private House, where many were assembled to hear the Word.
-- But GOD only can ^^ll how their Hearts were melted down. -- Oh! how did the
poor Souls weep over me! How did they pray that I would come amongst them
again! Surely, I might have said with St. Paul on another Occasion, What mean
you to weep, and to break my Heart? -- But I could do no more than pray that
GOD would send them some faithful Labourer. Having dispersed among them some of
my Sermons on the Marks of the New Birth, I at length took my leave, and
retired to my Lodgings. -- Every Time I look upon the Bath, I think on the Pool
of Bethesda. O blessed JESU, look down with Compassion on it; and as thou have
cured many impotent Persons by these healing Waters, heal, I beseech thee, the
Diseases of their sin-sick Souls, by the Power of thy all-quickening
strengthening Grace. -- Even so, Lord JESUS! Amen.

KEINSHAM.
Dined with one Mr. M --, an eminent Quaker in Bath, who entertained me and my
Friends in a most Christian Manner. -- About three we left Bath, and though it
was a wet Day, were agreeably surprised by meeting great Numbers of Horsemen,
etc. from Bristol, besides several Thousands from the neighboring Villages,
who came to hear me, according to Appointment. -- The Church being refused, I
preached on a Mount. -- Our Master being with us, I preached with Power. -- We
came on our Way rejoicing* and reached Bristol, about Seven at Night, and went
immediately and expounded the 7th of St. John to Bald^in-street Society, where
we also gave Thanks for the great Things we had seen and heard since we met
together l^st.

(...), March 22. Received unspea^^ble Pleasure from a L^tter of this Day'^
Pos^, which brought me word of the flourishing of the Gospel at O^ford. -- Had
many gracious Souls* came to consult me in spiritual Cases, and could not but
rejoice to see how (...) and irresistibly the Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST is
carried on, in spite of all Opposition. -- In the Afternoon I preached again at
Baptist Mills, where somebody was so (...) as to put some Turf together for me
to stand upon. I perceived a great Freedom of Speech, and ins^sted much on
Original Sin, because there are many in this City, who, I (...), have imbibed
the Principles of that polite Preacher Mr. F --. But Woe be to them that (...)
that they are born in Sin. Surely, they must (...) f^^ling. W^e be to them that
d^^y the LORD that bought them: For it s^ps the very Foundation of the
Christian Religion. And as for my own Part, did I not firmly believe that JESUS
CHRIST was t^^ly and properly GOD, I never would preach the Gospel again.
Whosoever preaches any otherwise, let him he accursed. Had great Power amongst
us at the Society in the Evening. -- The People throng more and more. -- A good
Sign that all do not come out of Curiosity, but with a Desire to know and do
their Duty.

Friday, March 23. Dined with many Quakers at French-hay, who entertained me
and my Friends with much Christian Love; but we could by no means agree about
the Disuse of the two outward Signs in the Sacrament, nor of their absolute
refusing to pay Tithes. -- But I think their Notions about walking and being
led by the Spirit are right and good. I should rejoice to find all Quakers thus
minded. Much Sincerity and Simplicity seems to be amongst them. -- But I think,
at the same Time, they insist so much upon the inward Life, they place too much
Religion in their not using Externals.

After Dinner, I went and preached at the Fish Ponds, as usual, where were many
Coaches, and about as great a Number of People as before. GOD gave me great
Freedom and Power. I was longer than common both in my Prayers and Sermon. --
Many, I believe, were affected. -- After I came home, I visited two Societies,
where GOD was pleased to give us great Tokens of his Presence; and the Way up
to the last Room was so exceedingly thronged that I was obliged to go up by a
Ladder through the Window.

Saturday, March 24. Received glad Tidings of great Joy from my religious
Correspondents* -- Spent the Morning in answering their kind Letters, -- and
preached in the Afternoon at the Poor-house, where both the Number of the
People, and my Strength were greatly increased. -- After Sermon* I collected
for the Orphan-house, and the poor People so loaded my Hat with their Mites,
that I wanted somebody to hold up my Hands. -- The Cheerfulness with which they
gave is inexpressible, and the many Prayers they joined with their Alms, I
hope, will lay a good Foundation for the House intended to be built. -- After
this, GOD brought me to some more of his own dear Children, and I spent the
Remainder of the Evening in expounding to a Society, where almost all were
drowned in Tears, when I mentioned my Departure to them. -- The good LORD, send
somebody amongst them to water what his own Right Hand has planted. Even so,
come Lord JESUS, come quickly.

Sunday, March 25. GOD will work, and who shall hinder? I am shut out of the
Prison, and my Sister's Room was not large enough to contain a fourth part of
the People who came to me on a Sunday Morning. But GOD put it into the Hearts
of some Gentlemen to lend me a large Bowling-Green, where I preached to about
five Thousand People, and made a Collection for my poor Orphans, till my Hands
were quite weary. -- Blessed be GOD, that the Bowling-Green is turned into a
Preaching-place. This, I hope, is a Token that Assembly-rooms and Play Houses
will soon be put to the same Use. O may the Word of GOD be mighty to the
pulling down of these strong Holds of the Devil! All that love our Lord JESUS,
I am sure, will say, Amen.

Preached at Hannam to a larger Congregation than ever, and preached again in
the Afternoon to upwards (as was computed) of 23000 People. I was afterward
told, that those who stood farthest off could hear me very plainly. Oh may GOD
speak to them by his Spirit, at the same Time that he enables me to lift up my
Voice like a Trumpet!

About eight I went to the Society in Nicholas-street, I with great Difficulty,
at last got up into the Room, which was extremely hot. GOD enabled me to speak
with much Freedom and Power; and at the Close of my Exhortation, I recommended
a Charity-school, which was opened by this Society today. I collected at the
Door myself, and few passed by without throwing in their Mites. -- Yet a little
while, and I hope Bristol will be as famous for Charity schools as London. We
must not despise the Day of small Things. Blessed be GOD, for the Strength of
this Day. The Lord make me humbly thankful.

Monday, March 26. Still GOD has pleased to give me fresh Tokens of his Love.
Letters are sent me, and People come to me continually, telling me what GOD had
done for their Souls by my unworthy Ministry.

At four in the Afternoon, I preached again at the Bowling-Green, to, I
believe, seven or eight Thousand People. The Sun shone bright, and the Windows
and Balconies of the adjoining Houses were filled with H^arers. I was
uncommonly enlarged in Prayer, and so carried out beyond myself in preaching,
especially when I came to talk of the Love and free Grace of JESUS CHRIST, that
I heartily wished it was in my Power that Moment to place all my Enemies at the
Right Hand of GOD. The Concern the People were in is inexpressible. -- An
hearty Groan goes through them all when any Thing affecting is spoken; and I am
sure, that Thousands come not out of Curiosity, but a sincere Desire of being
fed with the Milk of the Word -- Afterward, I again collected for the
Orphan-house, and it was near an Hour and a half before the People could go
out. Many were very faint because of the Throng, which was so exceeding great,
that they trod one upon another.

At eight I hasted to Weavers Hall, in Temple-street, which was procured me
because the Society Rooms were too little. I was almost faint before I could
get in through the Crowd; but GOD enabled me to speak with uncommon Freedom,
and was with us of a Truth. -- I believe there might be a thousand Hearers. --
Well may the Devil and his Servants rage horribly. Their Kingdom is in Danger.

After I had done, I went to a Christian House, where many waited for me; and,
(...) my Return home, my Master paid me my Wages: For my Soul was filled with
an Intenseness of Love, and I knew what it is not only to have Righteousness
and Peace, but Joy in the Holy Ghost. This is my continual Food.

Tuesday, March 27. At four this Afternoon, being invited several Times, I
preached in a Yard belonging to the Glass-Houses, where many dwell, who (as I
was informed) neither feared GOD, nor regarded Man. The Congregation consisted
of many Thousands, and GOD enabled me to lay before them his Threatenings and
Promises; so that none might either despair or presume. O that I may be t^ught
of GOD rightly to divide the Word of Truth!

Whilst I was preaching, I heard many People behind me, hollowing and making a
Noise, and supposed they were set on by somebody on purpose to disturb me. -- I
bless GOD I was not in the least moved, but rather increased the more in
Strength; but when I had done, and enquired the Cause of that Noise, I was
informed, tha^ Gentleman (being drunk) had taken the Liberty to call me Dog,
and say, That I ought to be whipped at the Cart's Tail, and offered Money to
any that would pelt me. Instead of that, the Boys and People near him began to
cast Stones and Dirt at him. -- I knew nothing of it till afterward, when I
expressed my Dislike of their Behavior, but could not help observing, what
sorry Wages the Devil gives his Servants.

In the Evening I expounded again in Weavers Hall, to a most crowded and
attentive Assembly. -- People follow more and more. -- There is a divine
Attraction in the Word of GOD -- Still draw us, O LORD, and we shall still come
after thee.

Wednesday, March 28. Had the Pleasure of hearing, that above an Hundred People
set apart a Day for Prayer, in Behalf of me and my dear Brother Howel Harris,
etc. While our Friends thus continue to hold up their Hands, our spiritual
Amaleck will never prevail against us.

Preached in the Afternoon at Publow, a Village about five Miles from Bristol,
to severa^ thousands of People. -- The Church was offered; but being not
sufficient to contain a third Part of the Audience, by the Advice of Friends I
preached in the Fields; which put me in mind of our Lord's saying, Go out into
the Highways and Hedges and compel them to come in.

Was blessed with two excellent Letters. Found out some more of God's secret
ones. -- Received some temporal Mercies, expounded to a Society in
Baldwin-Street, and went to a Friend's House, where we eat (...) Bread with
Gladness and Singleness of Heart. Oh the Comforts of a spiritual Life!

Thursday, March 29. Blessed be God, I hope a good Work is begun to Day. --
Having had several Notices that the Colliers of Kingswood were willing to
subscribe, I went to Dinner with them near a Place called Two Mile Hill, and
collected about twenty Pounds in Money, and got above Forty Pounds in
Subscriptions toward building them a Charity-School. -- It was surprising to
see with what Cheerfulness they parted with their Money on this Occasion. --
Was I to continue here, I would endeavor to settle Schools all over the Wood,
as also in other Places, as Mr. Griffith Jones has done in Wales. -- But I have
but just Time to set it on Foot. -- I hope God will bless the Ministry of my
honored ^riend Mr. John Wesley, and enable him to ^^ing it to good Effect. --
It is a Pity so many little ones as there are in Kingswood, should perish for
Lack of Knowledge. -- Stir^up thy Power, O Lord, and come amongst them, for the
Sake of JESUS CHRIST.

After Dinner I preached a farewell Sermon, and recommended the Charity-School
to their Consideration; and they all seemed willing to assist either by their
Money or their Labor, and to offer such Things as they had, I doubt not but
the Lord will prosper this Work of my Hands upon me.

As Soon as I came to Town, I took my leave of a Society in Castle-street; --
but Tongue ^^nnot express the Sorrow they were in at the mention of my
Departure. -- After this, I did the same at a Society in Nicholas-street; and,
I believe, for near an Hour, they wept aloud and sorely all over the Room, as
though they were mourning for the Death of their Firstborn. -- Oh how close
are their Hearts knit to me! Blessed be God, there is one coming after me, who,
I hope, will cherish the Spark of divine Love now kindled in their Hearts, till
it grows into a Flame. Amen, LORD JESUS.

Friday, March 30. Preached this Afternoon near Colepit Heath, seven Miles from
Bristol, a Place to which I was earnestly invited, and where great Numbers of
Colliers live. -- I believe there were above two thousand People assembled on
this Occasion. -- The Weather was exceeding fair, the Hearers behaved very
well, and the Place where I preached being near the Maypole, I took Occasion to
warn them of mispending their Time in ^evelling and dancing. Oh that all such^
^ntertainments were put a s^op to! I see no other Way to effect it, but by
going boldly, and calling People from such lying Vanities in the Name of JESUS
CHRIST. -- That Reformation which is brought about by a coercive Power, will be
only outward and superficial; but that which is done by the Force of God's
Word, will be i^ward and lasting. Lord make me meet by thy Grace for such a
Work, and then send me. Lo! I come to do thy Will.

About seven I returned to Bristol, and took Leave of the Society without
Lawford's Gate; but there were so many People, that I was obl^ged to stand and
expound at the Window, that those in the Yard (which was full) might hear also.
-- Their Hearts were ready to burst with Grief; but I hope my dear Master will
come and comfort them.

Saturday, March 31. Went this Morning, and visited the poor Man who was
misused at the Glass Houses. He seemed much concerned for what he had done, and
confessed he knew not what he did: Upon which, I took Occasion to dissuade him
from the Sin of Drunkenness, and parted from him very friendly.

At eleven, I went and gave the Prisoners a farewell Exhortation, and left
Orders concerning the Distribution of the Money that had been collected for
them. -- At four I preached, as usual, at the Poor-house, where was a greater
Congregation than ever, and very near nine Pounds gathered for the
Orphan-house. -- Blessed be God, the longer I stay, the more my Hearers
increase.

(...) my return home, I was much refreshed with the Sight of my honored
Friend Mr. John Wes^^y, whom God's Providence has sent to Bris^ol. -- Lord now
let^est thou thy Servant depart in Peace.

Saturday, April 1. Preached at the Bowling-Green, Hannam, and Rose-Green; at
all which Places, the Congregations were much enlarged, especially at the
latter. There were Twenty-four Coaches, and an exceeding great Number of other
People, both on Foot and Horseback. The Wind was not so well set to carry the
Voice as usual; but however, I was strengthened to cry aloud, and take my last
Farewell. -- As I was returning home, it comforted me exceedingly, to hear
almost every one blessing me, and wishing me a good Voyage in the Name of the
Lord. -- And indeed my Heart is so knit to Bristol People, that I could not
with so much Submission leave (...) did I not know dear Mr. Wesley was left
(...) to teach them the Way of God more perfectly. Pr^sper, O Lord, the Works
of his Hands upon ^im.

At seven, I went and took my Leave of Baldwin-street Society; but the Yard,
and ^ntry le^ding to it, was so exceeding^y crowded, that I was obliged to
climb up by a Ladder, and go over the T^ing of another House near adjoining,
before I could get to the Door.

^onday, April 2. Spent a good Part of the Morning in talking with those who
came to take their Leave, and Tongue c^nnot express what a sorrowful parting we
had. (...) of Tears flowed plentifully; and my Heart was so melted down, that I
prayed for them with strong Cryings, and many Tears. -- The Scene was very
affecting, and, I think, must have made an Impression upon the most hardened
Heart.

About one, I was obliged to force myself away. -- Crowds were waiting at the
Door to give me a last F^rewel, and near twenty Friends accompanied me on
Horseback. Blessed be God for the mavelous great Kindness he has shown me in
this City. Many Sinners I believe, has been effectually converted. It is
unknown what Numbers have come to me under Convictions, and all the Children of
God have been exceedingly comforted. -- Various Presents were sent me as Tokens
of their Love. -- Several thousands of little Books have been dispersed among
the People; about two hundred Pounds collected for the Orphan-house, and many
poor Families relieved by the Bounty of my Friend Mr. Seward. -- And what gives
me the greater Comfort, is the Consideration, that my dear and honored Friend
Mr. Wesly is left behind to confirm those that are awakened; so that when I
return from Georgia, I hope to see many bold Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST. Grant
this, O Lord, for the same thy dear Son's Sake.

KINGSWOOD.
Having taken my Leave, and passed through the People of Bristol, who poured
out many Blessings upon me, I came about two to Kingswood, where the Colliers,
unknown to me, had prepared an hospitable Entertainment, and were very forward
for me to lay the first Stone of their School. At length I complied, and a Man
giving me a Piece of Ground, in case Mr. C -- should refuse to grant them any;
I laid a Stone, and then kneeled down on it, and prayed GOD that the Gates of
Hell might not prevail against our Design. The Colliers said a hearty Amen; and
after I had given them a Word of Exhortation suitable to the Occasion, I took
my Leave, promising that I would come amongst them again, if ever GOD should
bring me back to England. They seemed much pleased at this; and indeed they
seem to have such an uncommon Affection for me, that I hope a Reformation will
be carried on amongst them. And as for my own Part, I had rather preach the
Gospel to the unprejudiced ignorant Colliers, than to the bigoted,
self-righteous formal Christians. The Colliers will enter into the Kingdom of
GOD before them.

THORNBURY.
About five, I and my Friends got safe to Thornbury; where I had appointed to
preach as on this Day, when I was there last. -- The Minister, I find, was
offended at my Doctrine, and therefore would not lend me the Pulpit again. --
However, there being above a thousand People waiting to hear the Word, I stood
upon a Table, and taught in the Street. All was solemn and awful around us;
every one behaved with Gravity; and GOD gave me Freedom of Speech. -- The
Remainder of the Evening was spent delightfully in singing Psalms and Hymns
with my dear Companions; and had not the parting with my Bristol Friends cast a
little Damp upon my Heart, no one could have laid down his Head to sleep with
greater Pleasure than I did. I find I never undertake a new Thing for my
Master, but he gives me new Manifestations of Joy and Comfort. Who would but
work for JESUS CHRIST?

OLD-PASSAGE, CHEAPSTOW.
Tuesday, April 3. Came to the Old-Passage by nine in the Morning, and,
according to Appointment, preached from some Steps to many People who came to
hear me. -- Then I exhorted, and sung with as many as the Room would contain
above in the Inn; and having providentially l^st our Passage, about three in
the Afternoon I preached a second Time from the Steps, at which many were much
aff^cted. The Remainder of the Day I spent in writing and praying with my
Friends, and having taken a last Farewell, we p^ssed over to Be^chly abo^t
seven, and get so far as Cheaps^ow, where the People, I (...), expected to hear
me; but it being late, I could only sing, and pray, and preach to about forty
that came to the Inn, and gave a Promise, if possible* that I would come and
preach in their Church before I left Wales. Every Day do I see the Benefit more
and more ^f this public Way ^f ^^^ting.

Wednesday, April 4. Came hither before ten, and was much refreshed with the
Sight of my dear Brother Howel Harris, and several Christian Friends, who came
from Cardiff, and other Places, to give me the Meeting. -- The Pulpit being
denied, I preached upon a Table under a large Tree to some hundreds, and GOD
was with us of a Truth. After Dinner, with near forty on Horseback, I set out
for Po^^^pool, five Welsh Miles from Husk, and in the Way was informed, by a
Man that heard it, that Mr. C -- H-ry did me the Honor, at the l^st Mo^mouth
Assizes, to make a public Motion to Judge P -- d, to stop me and Brother Howel
Harris, from going about ^eaching the People. Poor Man! he put me in mind of
Tertullus in the Acts. -- But the Hour is not ye^ ^ome; I have scarce begun my
Testimony: For my finishing it, my Enemies may have Power over me from above.
LORD, prepare me for that Hour. -- About five we got to Pontypool, and several
Thousands were ready to hear me. -- The Curate being very solicitous for it, I
preached first (he having read Prayer.) in the Church; but their being great
Numbers that could not come in, I went afterward and preached to all the
People in the Field. -- My own Heart was much enlarged, and the divine Presence
was much amon^st us; and indeed, I always find I have most (...) when I speak
in the open Air. A Proof (...) to me, that GOD is pleased with this Way o^
Preaching* -- After Sermon, we went, and joined in Prayer at the Gentlewoman's
House that owned the Field, and then we returned to the House of Mr. G -- s of
Pontyp^ol; where, after taking a little Supper, and expounding the third
Chapter of Genesis to two Rooms full of People, I prayed, and betook myself to
Rest, and was full of such unutterable Love, as no one can conceive but those
who feel it. -- GOD be praised for my coming hither. -- Here are many gracious
Souls, and their Hearts are knit to me in Christian Love. LORD, what am I?

ABERGAVENNY and COMIHOY.
Thursday, April 5. Spent some Time very comfortably with my dear Friends at
Pontypool, in singing, praying, and religious Conferences; and then, in Company
with about thirty on Horseback, I came to Abergavenny, ten Miles from
Pontypool, by eleven in the Morning. -- All the Way as we journeyed, GOD
strengthened me mightily in the inner Man, and I could think of nothing so much
as Joshua going from City to City, and subduing the devoted Nations. -- Here I
expected much Opposition, having been informed, that many intended to disturb
me.

But GOD impressed a divine Awe upon all; so that though there were many
Opposers present when I preached, yet not any dared to utter a Word. -- GOD
caused me to speak with extraordinary Authority, and I did not spare the polite
Scoffers in the least. Oh that they may come to the Knowledge of the Truth, and
be saved! The Place I preached from, was the Backside of a Garden, belonging to
one Mr. W -- s, who invited me to Abergavenny, and erected a Place very
commodious for my standing upon; so that the People, (in Number about two
Thousand) could all hear very well. Afterward we retired, and sung a Hymn; and
some Ladies having the Curiosity to come and hear us, I took that Opportunity
of dissuading them against Ball^ and Assemblies, and all other polite
Entertainments. I hope GOD intended them good: For afterward, I heard they
were the chief Mistresses of the Assembly in Abergavenny. Oh the polite World!
How are they led away by lying Vanities.

After Dinner, I went, according to Appointment, with about forty on Horseback,
to Comihoy, five Miles from Abergavenny, and found the Minister of the Church
to be a hearty Friend, and two or three others like minded with him. This
rejoiced me exceedingly; and to see how loving the poor People were to me, much
increased my Joy. -- The Church not being quite large enough to hold half the
Congregation, I preached from the Cross in the Churchyard. -- The Word came
with Power. -- Did not GOD call me elsewhere, I could spend some Months in
Wales very profitably: The longer I am in it, the more I like it. To me they
seem a People sweetly disposed to receive the Gospel. -- They are simple and
artless. They have left Bigotry more than the Generality of our Englishmen;
and, through the Exhortations of Howel Harris, and the Ministry of others, they
are hungring and thirsting after the Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST. -- When I
had done, I hasted back with my Friends to Abergavenny, where we were kindly
entertained; and, after having written a Letter or two, and expounded to three
Rooms full of People, I went to Bed, rejoicing that my Eyes every Day saw the
Salvation of GOD.

CARLEON and TRELEK.
Friday, April 6. Set out about eight in the Morning from Abergavenny, with
near a dozen Friends on Horseback; and soon after near fifty or sixty more
joined us; most of whom, I hope, had been effectually called by the Grace of
GOD. About Noon we reached Carleon, fifteen Miles from Abergavenny, a Town
famous for having thirty British Kings buried in it, and producing three noble
Christian Martyrs. I chose particularly to go hither, because when my Brother
Howel Harris was there last, some of the baser Sort beat a Drum, and huzza'd
around him, on purpose to disturb him. -- But GOD suffered them not to move a
Tongue now, though I preached from the very same Place, and prayed for him by
Name, as I have in every Place where I have preached in Wales. GOD forbid I
should be ashamed either of my Master or his Servants. -- Many Thousands were
there from all Parts to hear me, and GOD gave me such extraordinary Assistance,
that I was carried out beyond myself; and I believe the Scoffers felt me to
some Purpose. Oh that the Love of CHRIST may melt them down.

After Dinner, we parted with some of our Friends, who were obliged to return
home, because they came from far. And it gave ^e great Pleasure to see how
affectionately the poor People came, with Tears in their Eyes, blessing GOD for
my Ministry, shaking me by the Hand, and praying for my speedy Return amongst
them. -- Surely Godliness has the Promise of the Life that now is, as well as
that which is to come. The Numbers of my Enemies are inconsiderable; but my
Friends cannot be numbered. And what gives me more Satisfaction, is, that they
are Friends of GOD's making, not of the World's, who follow not only for
Interest, but such as love me for the Sake of JESUS CHRIST, and who, I believe,
would go with me to Prison, or to Death.

At three in the Afternoon we set out for Trelek, ten Welsh Miles from Carleon;
but the Miles being very long, we could not reach thither till it was almost
dark; so that most of the People who had been waiting for me, were returned
home: However, the Church being denied, I stood upon the Horse-block before the
Inn, and preached from thence for about three Quarters* of an Hour to those
that were le^t behind; but I could not speak with such Power as usual: For,
though the Spirit was willing, the Flesh was weak through the Fatigue of the
past Day. LORD, when shall I be delivered from the Burden of this Flesh.

CHEAPSTOW.
Saturday, April 7. Found myself but weak in Body when I rose in the Morning,
and it being a very rainy Day, I resolved to stay at Cheapstow (which we
reached by eleven of the Clock.) Great Numbers that came from the Countries
round about, were ready to hear; but the Minister being unwilling to lend the
Pulpit on a Week Day, I only exhorted the People in the Dining Room where I
lodged. I believe GOD was with us. Oh how swiftly has this Week passed off! To
me it has been but as one Day. How do I pity those polite ones, who complain
that Time hangs heavy upon their Hands! Let them but love CHRIST, and spend
their whole Time in his Service, and they will find no dull melancholl^ Hours.
Want of the Love of GOD I take to be the chief Cause of Indolence and Vapors.
O that our Gentry would up and be doing for JESUS CHRIST! They would not
complain then for the Want of Spirits.

Sunday, April 8. Arose much refreshed, and highly pleased with the last
Afternoon's Retirement; read Prayers, and preached twice at Cheapstow Church to
very attentive Congregations, many of whom came from far. After Sermon, I gave
a Word of Exhortation, and prayed with several that came to the Inn, and GOD
was pleased to give it his Blessing. -- About five, I set out, with my Friends,
to Colford, eight Miles from Cheapstow, and went and visited the religious
Society, which has met with much Opposition. Good GOD! wherever I go, People
are ready to perish for Lack of Knowledge, and are as ignorant of JESUS CHRIST,
as the Papists. My Heart within me is broken because of the Prophets. Jer. 23.

At Night, I was pleased with the Company of several Friends, who came from
Pontypool to see me once more. -- We spent the Evening very agreeably in
singing Psalms, Prayer and Conversation, and, I hope, edified one another in
Love.

COLFORD and GLOUCESTER.
Monday, April 9. Preached this Morning in the Market-house to about one
hundred People, and afterward talked with Effect to some Scoffers at the Inn.
After this, I set out for, and reached Gloucester about Noon; where I was
refreshed by a great Packet of Letters, giving me an Account of the Success of
the Gospel in different Parts. GOD grant I may see it come as powerfully
amongst my own Countrymen.

GLOUCESTER.
Tuesday, April 10. Visited the religious Society last Night, preached at four
in the Afternoon, to a great Congregation at St. Michael's Church, visited a
Society near the West-gate-Street at seven, and another at eight; the last of
which was very much cr^uded. Oh what unspeakable Pleasure does it give me, to
see my own Townsmen receive the Word with Joy!

Wednesday, April 11. Was treated this Day as I expected, and as I told my
Friends I should be used, when I first entered the City. -- The Minister of St.
Michael's was pleased to lend me his Church yesterday and to day, but some
wealthy Demetrius's being offended at the Greatness of the Congregations, and
alleging that it kept People from their Business, he was influenced by some of
them to deny the Use of his Pulpit any more on a Week Day. Alas! what an Enmity
there is in the natural Man against the Success of the Gospel! How fond are
they of Ph^raoh 's Objection, Ye are idle, ye are idle; therefore ye say, Let
us go worship the LORD.

About four I set out for Painswick, a Town four Miles distant from Gloucester,
where the Pulpit being denied, I preached to a very large Congregation from the
Stairs belonging to the School-house, in one of the Streets. Many were
solicitous for me to come and preach at other neighboring Places also. -- At
my Return to Gloucester, my Heart was much refreshed by the Reception of near
thirty Letters from Bristol; all, I hope, from Persons whose Hearts GOD has
been pleased to touch, and powerfully convince of Self-righteousness. -- LORD,
not unto me, but unto thy Name be all the Glory.

Thursday, April 12. Spent the Morning in answering some of my dear
Correspondents, and preached in the Evening to near three Thousand Hearers in a
Field belonging to my Brother. Cry out who will against his my Forwardness, I
cannot see my dear C^untrymen and Fellow Christians every where ready to perish
through Ignorance and Unbelief, and not endeavor to convince them of both.

Those who forbid me to speak to these poor baptized Heathens, that they may be
saved, upon them I call to give a Reason for their so doing; a Reason which may
satisfy not Man only, but GOD. And accordingly, I here cite them to answer it
to our common Master. What their real Reason is, whether Envy, or Master, in so
doing thou reproachest us; or ought else, shall, one Day, be manifested to Men
and Angels.

I am, and prosess myself a Member of the Church of England. I have received no
Prohibition from any of the Bishops; and having had no Fault sound by them with
my Life or Doctrine, have the same general License to preach, which the Rectors
are willing to think sufficient for their Curates; nor can any of them produce
one Instance of their having refused the Assistance of a Stranger Clergyman,
because he had not a written License. -- And have their Lordships, the Bishops,
insisted that no Person shall ever preach occasionally without such special
License? Is not our producing our Letters of Orders always judged sufficient?
Have not some of us been allowed ^o preach in Georgia, and other Places, by no
other than our general Commission? Take thou Authority to, etc. nay, and
therefore ordained that we might preach in Georgia? -- His Lordship of London
allowed of my preaching there, even when I had only received Deacon's Orders;
and I have never been charged by his Lordship with teaching or living otherwise
than as a true Minister, and true Son of the Church of England. I keep close to
her Articles and Homilies; which, if my Opposers did, we should not have so
many Dissenters from her. But it is most notorious, that for the moralizing
Iniquity of the Priests, the Land mourns. We have preached and lived many
sincere Persons out of our Communion. -- I have now conversed with several of
the best of all Denominations; many of them solemnly protest that they went
from the Church, because they could not find Food for their Souls; they stayed
among us till they were starved out.

I know this Declaration will expose me to the Illwill, not of all my Brethren,
but of all my indolent, earthly-minded, Pleasure-taking Brethren. But was I not
to speak, the very Stones would cry out against them. Speak therefore I must,
and will, and will not spare. GOD look to the Event. Whatever becomes of the
Pastors who feed themselves, and not the Flock, I have born my Testimony, I
have delivered my own Soul.

After Sermon, I visited two crowded Societies; many received the Word with
Gladness; and to day I felt such an intense Love, that I could have almost
wished myself accursed for my Brethren according to the Flesh. Oh that they
experimentally knew the Things that belong to their Peace before they are
everlastingly bid from their Eyes!

Friday, April 19. Was much delighted with some more Letters I received from
some young Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST. -- Redeemed what Time I could to answer
some of them; preached at Noon to a much larger Congregation than yesterday in
the Field; took a little Refreshment, and went, upon Invitation to Chafford,
eight Miles from Gloucester, where I preached with great Power to above 3000
Souls, all which behaved with great Decency, and like newborn Babes, seemed
desirous to be fed with the sincere Milk of the Word. It rejoices me much to
find that my Countrymen also receive the Gospel. Oh that it may take deep Root
in their Hearts!

Saturday, April 14. Lay at Stroud, about three Miles from Chafford, preached
in the Fields belonging to the Inn, at Nine in the Morning, to about 600
People; went to Stonehouse to pay my dear Flock a Visit there; and being
entreated most earnestly, as I passed through the Town yesterday, at three I
preached again at Painswick, to double the Number I preached to before. And GOD
was with us of a Truth. As Soon as I had done, I hasted to Gloucester, according
to Appointment, and preached in the Boothall to, I believe, near 5000 People.
Extraordinary Power GOD was pleased to give me. I was uncommonly enlarged in
Prayer; and though I had preached twice, and rode some Miles, yet I think I
never spoke with greater Demonstration of the Spirit. GOD will work, and who
shall hinder?

After this, I received another Packet of Letters from Bris^ol People, and was
comforted by the coming of some more Friends, with whom I took sweet Counsel,
and praised GOD lustily, and with a good Courage. How are his Mercies showered
down upon me! What Enlargements of Heart have I experienced this Night! Oh that
I had a thousand Tongues wherewith to praise my GOD! About three Days ago I was
much humbled, now am I exalted. Yet a little while and I shall be humbled
again. Thus GOD acts according as he sees best for our Souls.

Sunday, April 15. Preached by eight in the Morning to a larger Congregation
than ever in my Brother's Field; went to the Cathedral Service at Ten; and
after Dinner went to Stonehouse, being invited thither by the Minister, as well
as People. -- It rained all the Way going thither; but notwithstanding that, I
believe 3000 Souls were ready to hear me, and behaved with great Decency and
Devotion whilst I was speaking to them. The Church not being large enough to
contain a third part of the Auditory, I preached from a very commodious Place
on the Outside; and though it rained the whole Time, yet I did not observe one
Person leave the Place before I had done. -- Afterward many of the Children of
GOD came to me. rejoicing that Free Grace in CHRIST had been preached unto
them, telling me, it was Food to their Souls, and what they had experienced for
some Years. -- The other People also behaved most affectionately, and would
have constrained me to abide with them all Night; but being engaged to return
back to Gloucester, I hasted thither through the Rain, and expounded in the
Boothall to above 5000 People. They behaved excellently well, and hung upon me
to hear the Word. -- All was hushed and solemn. -- And my delivering the Word
from a Place just before where the Judges sit rendered it very awful. -- Oh
that I could plead the Cause of my Lord and King, even JESUS CHRIST, with
greater Power!

Monday, April 16. Preached with an extraordinary Presence of GOD amongst us at
my Brother's Field about ten in the Morning. -- Received a most comfortable
Packet of Letters, giving me an Account of the Success of the Gospel; --
visited the Prison, took a little Refreshment, preached to near a Thousand at
Oxnell, seven Miles from Gloucester. being invited thither by the Reverend Mr.
Paunce^oot, a worthy Minister of JESUS CHRIST; then returned, and preached my
Farewell Discourse to more People than ever in the Boothall, and afterward
found my Strength renewed, and my Soul filled with divine Love and Joy in the
Holy Ghost. Oh what a Mystery is the hidden Life of a Christian!

Had many merciful Deliverances in going to, and returning from Newent. Praise
the LORD, O my Soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy Name.

Received Letters from Abergavenny, acquainting me how many had been convinced
since I was there. -- Heard of one that had received the Holy Ghost immediately
upon my preaching CHRIST. Received a Letter from one under strong Convictions;
and, indeed, there is scarce a Day passes over my Head, but GOD shows me that
he works effectually upon the Hearts of many by my Ministry. A Proof this, I am
sure, that the Word preached is not my own, but GOD's. May he always own it in
this Manner. Even so Lord JESUS.

Tuesday, April 17. Spent this Morning in visiting a private Society, and
conversing with many religious Friends, who came from far to take their Leave.
-- About eleven, by the Bishop's Permission, I baptized, at the Church of St.
Mary de Crypt, Mr. Thomas W -- d, a professed Quaker, about sixty Years of Age,
who was convinced of the Necessity of being born again of Water as well as the
Spirit. Many of CHRIST's faithful Servants a^^ended on the Prayers around him;
and, I believe, the Holy Ghost was with us of a Truth. -- After the Solemnity
was over, I gave a Word of Exhortation from the Font; and it being the Place
where I myself not long since had been baptized, it gave me an Opportunity of
reflecting on my own frequent Breaches of my baptismal Vow, and proving the
Necessity of the New Birth from the Office of our Church. GOD, I believe, gave
it his Blessing.

After this, we returned, and gave private Thanks; and having dined, prayed
with, and taken Leave of my weeping Friends, and dispersed a great many of my
Sermons amongst the Poor, I took Horse. But, Oh what Love did the People
express for me! How many came to me weeping, and telling me what GOD had done
for their Souls by my Ministry! Oh how did they pray for my Return amongst
them! LORD, I dared not expect such Success among my own Countrymen. When I
came to the City, I found the Devil had painted me in most horrible Colors:
For it was currently reported, that I was really mad; that I had said, I was
the Holy Ghost, and that I had walked bareheaded through Bristol Streets
singing Psalms. -- But GOD was pleased to show them that the Devil was a Liar,
and that the Words that I spoke were not those of a Madman, but the Words of
Soberness and Truth. -- It often pleases me to think how GOD makes Way for me
into the Hearts of his People; nay, even of his Enemies, wherever I go. -- My
first asking Leave for the Pulpit, and preaching in the Fields, notwithstanding
they are denied, puts me in mind of the Children of Israel first entreating
Leave of Og, Sihon, etc. To go quietly through their Land; but fighting their
Way through, when Leave was denied. Like them, by the Strength of my Divine
Leader, I shall, at last, be more than Conqueror over all the Canaanites, and
carnal Teachers among the Israel of GOD.

CHELTENHAM, 7 Miles from Gloucester.
Being earnestly invited by several of the Inhabitants, I came hither, attended
with about a dozen Friends, by five of the Clock; and the Use of the Pulpit
being refused me, I preached on the Bowling-green belonging to the Plough-Inn.
-- When I came in, the Town, I perceived, was alarmed, by the People standing
at their Doors. At the first, I found my self quite shut up. -- My Heart and
Head were dead as a Stone; but when I came to the Inn, my Soul began to be
enlarged. I felt a Freedom in my Spirit, and was enabled to preach with
extraordinary Power, to near two Thousand People. Many were convicted. One was
drowned in Tears, because she had said I was crazy; and some were so filled
with the Holy Ghost, that they were almost unable to support themselves under
it. This, I know, is Foolishness to the natural and Letter-learned Men; but I
write this for the Comfort of GOD's Children. They know what these Things mean.

Wednesday, April 8. Preached this Morning with Power, to a much larger
Congregation than we had last Night. Several Servants of GOD said, they never
saw the like before. -- Whilst I was preaching, I saw the People melted into
Tears, and, by their Looks, showed that the Divine Presence was amongst them.
-- We shall see greater Things than these: For almost every Day Persons of all
Denominations come unto me, telling how they interceed in my Behalf. And it
shall now be my particular Business, wherever I go, to bring all the Children
of GOD, notwithstanding their Differences, to rejoice together. How dare we not
converse with those that have received the Holy Ghost as well as we?

EVESHAM in Worcestershire, twelve Miles from Cheltenham.
Continued at Cheltenham, for the Sake of a little Retirement, and some private
Business, till after Dinner, and got safe to Evesham, (where Mr. Seward's
Relations live) about seven at Night. -- I found there had been much Talk about
my coming, GOD wisely ordering it to engage and excite the People's Attention.
-- Several Persons came to see me, amongst whom was Mr. Benjamin Seward, whom
GOD has been pleased to call by his free Grace very lately. -- Both his
Circumstances before, and in Conversion, much resemble those of St. Paul. For
he was bred up at the Feet of Gamaliel, being at Cambridge for some Years. As
touching the Law, so far as outward Morality went, he was blameless; concerning
Zeal, opposing the Church. My Proceedings he could not like, and he had once a
Mind, he said, to write against Mr. Law's Enthusiastic Notions in his Christian
Perfection. -- But lately it has pleased GOD to reveal his dear Son in him, and
to cast him down to the Earth, as he did Saul, by eight Days Sickness; in which
Time he scarce ever eat, or drank, or slept, and underwent great inward Agonies
and Tortures. -- After this, the Scales fell more and more from the Eyes of his
Mind. -- GOD sent a poor traveling Woman, that came to ^ell Straw Toys, to
instruct him in the Nature of our second Birth, and now he is resolved to
prepare for Holy Orders, and to preach CHRIST and those Truths straightway in
every Synagogue, which once he endeavored to destroy. -- He is a Gentleman of
a very large Fortune, which he has now devoted to GOD. And I write this, to
show how far a Man may go, and yet know nothing of JESUS CHRIST. -- Behold,
here was one who constantly attended on the Means of Grace, exact in his
Morals, humane and courteous in his Conversation, who gave much in Alms, was
frequent in private Duties; and yet, till about six Weeks ago, as destitute of
any saving experimental Knowledge of JESUS CHRIST, as those on whom his Name
was never called, and who still sit in Darkness, and the Shadow of Death.
Blessed be GOD, that although not many rich, not many mighty, not many noble
are called, yet some are. -- Who would but be accounted a Fool for CHRIST 's
sake? How often has my Companion and honored Friend Mr. William Seward been
deemed a Madman even by this very Brother, for going to Georgia? But lo! GOD
now has made him an Instrument of converting his Brother. This more and more
convinces me, that we must be despised, ever we can be Vessels fit for GOD 's
Use. As for my own Part, I find, by happy Experience, the more I am contemned,
the more GOD delights to honor me, in bringing home Souls to CHRIST. -- And I
write this for the Encouragement of my fellow Laborers, who have all Manner of
Evil spoken against them falsely for CHRIST's Sake. Let them not be afraid, but
rejoice and be exceeding glad: For the Spirit of God, and of Glory, shall rest
upon their Souls.

Thursday, April 19. Went to Badsey, about two Miles from Evesham, where Mr.
Seward's eldest Brother lives. -- We were most kindly received, and, I hope, a
true Christian Church will be in their House. -- About four in the Evening, the
Churches both at Evesham, Bengeworth, and Badsey, being denied, I preached from
the Cross, in the Middle of Evesham-street. to a great Congregation, and went
to Badsey, and preached in Mr. Seward's Brother's Yard to a great Number of
People, many of which came from Evesham to hear me again. -- GOD grant it may
strike home to their Hearts.

Friday, April 20. Preached about nine in the Morning at the Cross, went to
public Worship, and received the Sacrament. -- Preached at Badsey at five in
the Evening, and returned and expounded in the Town Hall; which, though very
large, was quite thronged. -- The Recorder himself procured the Keys for us,
and great Numbers of People were truly affected. The standing in the Judge's
Place, and speaking from thence, gave me awful Thoughts of GOD; and the
Consideration that I was speaking in the Name of our great High Priest and
Judge, animated me very much. Oh that I had a thousand Tongues, they should all
be employed in his Service.

OXON.
Saturday, April 21. Preached in the Morning at Badsey, to a weeping Audience,
joined in Prayer, and set out for Oxon, which I reached about Ten at Night. I
had been much pressed in Spirit to hasten hither, and now I found the Reason
for it. For alas! the Enemy had got great Advantage over three of our Christian
Brethren, and driven them to deny CHRIST's visible Church upon Earth. They had
so far influenced and deluded Mr. Kinchin, a sincere and humble Minister of
JESUS CHRIST, that I found, through their Persuasion, he had actually quitted
his Fellowship, and intended to resign his Living. -- This, I must needs
confess, gave me a great Shock: For I knew what dreadful Consequences would
attend a needless Separation from the established Church. -- As for my own
Part, I can see no Reason for my leaving the Church, however I am treated by
the corrupt Members and Ministers of it: For I judge of the State of a Church,
not from the Practice of its Members, but its primitive and public
Constitutions. -- And so long as I think the Articles of the Church of England
are agreeable to Scripture, I am resolved to preach them up without either
Bigotry or Party Zeal. -- For I love all that love the LORD JESUS.

Sunday, April 22. Being much concerned about Mr. K -- 's Conduct, this Morning
I wrote him the following Letter.

Dearest Mr. K -- Oxon, April 22. 1739.
Just now have I received the blessed Sacrament, and have been praying for you.
Let me exhort you, by the Mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, not to resign your
Parsonage till you have consulted your Friends at London. It is undoubtedly
true, that all is not right when we are afraid to be open to our dear Brethren.
Satan has desired to sift you as Wheat: He is dealing with you as he did with
me some Years ago, when he kept me in my Closet near six Weeks, because I could
not do any Thing with a single Intention; so he would have you no^ preach till
you have received the Holy Ghost in the full Assurance of it, and that is the
Way never to have it at all: For GOD will be found in the Use of Means, and our
LORD sent out his Disciples to preach before they had received the Holy Ghost
in that most plentiful Manner at the Day of Pentecost. Besides, consider, my
dear Brother, what Confusion your separating from the Church will occasion. The
Prison Doors are already shut, one Society stopped, and most afraid almost to
converse with us. -- I can assure you, that my being a Minister of the Church
of England, and preaching its Articles, is a Means, under GOD, of drawing so
many after me. -- As for objecting about the Habits, etc. good GOD! I thought
we long since knew, that the Kingdom of GOD did not consist in any Externals,
but in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Oh! my dear
Brother, I travel in Pain for you. -- Never was I more shocked at any Thing
than at your Proceedings. I doubt not but you will pray to GOD that you may be
kept from Delusion at the reading of this: For I am not ignorant of Satan's
Devices, and I know he never more successfully tempts us, than when he turns
himself into an Angel of Light. Oh! my dearest Mr. K -- do nothing rashly. --
Consult your Friends, and do not break the Heart of

Your most affectionate, though unworthy Brother in Christ. G. W.


Visited two Societies (...) the first of which many Gownsmen did me the Honor
of coming to hear. -- Before I began, I desired them to behave like Gentlemen
and Christians. -- I also prayed particularly for them, and applied myself in
Meekness and Love to them at the End of my Discourse. I bless GOD, an Awe was
impressed upon their Minds, and they behaved quietly; -- but afterward they
followed me to my Inn, and came uninvited up into my Room. -- However, I took
that Opportunity of giving them a second Exhortation. -- I found great Freedom
and Sweetness in my Spirit; and though some, no doubt, mocked, yet I believe
some will remember what was said. -- Oh how is the faithful City become an
Harlot! O that my Head was Water, and my Eyes Fountains of Tears, that I might
weep Day and Night for the Members of this University! LORD send forth thy
Light, and thy Truth, and make them Scribes ready instructed to thy heavenly
Kingdom.

Blessed be GOD for sending me hither. -- I find now it was his Divine Will. --
For our dear Brother K -- falling into such an Error, has given such a Shock,
that unless I had come, in all Probability the Brethren would have been
scattered abroad like Sheep having no Shepherd. But GOD, I hope, will always
have a Remnant here left, which may take Root downward, and bear Fruit upward.
-- Let all that love the Lord JESUS, say, Amen.

Tuesday, April 24. Perceived myself much strengthened yesterday and this
Morning, and told my Friends how these Words were impressed upon me, And more
than meet the gathering Storm. -- About Nine of the Clock, after I had exhorted
the Brethren, and pretty well established them in the Faith, the
Vice Chancellor came in Person to the House where we were assembled, having
threatened to do so some Time ago, if they continued to build up one another in
that Manner. -- He sent for me down Stairs, being informed that I was in the
House. -- When I first saw him, I perceived he was in a Passion, which he soon
expressed in such Language as this; Have you, Sir, says he, a Name in any Book
here? Yes, Sir, said I,; but I intend to take it out soon. -- Yes, and you had
best take yourself out too, replied he, or otherwise I will lay you by the
Heels. What do you mean, continued he, by going about, and alienating the
People's Affections from their proper Pastors? Your Works are full of Vanity
and Nonsense, you pretend to Inspiration. If you ever come again in this Manner
among these People, I will lay you first by the Heels, and these shall follow.
Upon this, he turned his Back, and went away. -- I desired the Brethren to join
in Prayer for him. -- Took my Leave, being just going to set out as the
Vice Chancellor came in. I soon found by the Comforts GOD gave me, how glorious
it was to suffer any Thing for the Sake of JESUS CHRIST. -- However, I must not
forget mentioning, that I exhorted all the Brethren not to forsake the
assembling themselves together, though no Pastor should be permitted to come
amongst them; For so long as they continued steadfast in the Communion of the
established Church, I told them no Power on Earth could justify hindering them
from continuing in Fellowship, as the primitive Christians did, in order to
build up each other in the Knowledge and Fear of GOD. Oh what Advantage has
Satan gained over us, by our Brother K -- 's putting off his Gown! However,
though he is permitted to bruise our Heel, yet we shall, in the End, bruise his
Head. -- The Gates of Hell shall never prevail against the Church of JESUS
CHRIST, either visible or invisible.

About Eight at Night, I, and my Friends, reached Uxbridge, where we were
greatly refreshed by the coming of several Brethren, and the Receipt of some
Letters from Savannah. Blessed be GOD, all is well; and I shall now thing the
Time long till I embark for Georgia. LORD, let that People be precious in thy
Sight.

LONDON.
Wednesday, April 25. Reached London with my dear Friends about Ten in the
Morning; was received most tenderly by my dear Brethren. Received a Letter from
Gibral^^r, giving an Account of the Success of my Labors in that Garrison. --
Expounded to a Society of holy Women, and afterward spent about two Hours in
close Conference at Fetter-lane Society. Thanks be to GOD, we talked with great
Sweetness and Christian Love, and unanimously declared against the Principles
of our three Brethren, who lately made such Confusion in Oxford. There must be
Heresies amongst you, that they which are approved may be made manifest.

Thursday, April 26. Assisted in administering the blessed Sacrament at
Islington: where the Vicar, in Conformity to the Rubric, takes Care to observe
the Octaves of Easter. -- After this, I expounded to a large Room full of
People, and with such Power and Demonstration of the Spirit, as I never saw
before. Surely the Hearers Hearts were quite melted down by the preaching of
the free Grace of GOD in CHRIST JESUS to poor Sinners. Floods of loving Tears
flowed from their Eyes. -- In the Evening I expounded to a Society at St.
Mary's Hill, and then retired to Bed, wishing that all felt the Comforts GOD
was then pleased to communicate to my Soul. Indeed I can say, that the LORD is
gracious.

Friday, April 27. Went this Morning to Islington to preach, according to the
Appointment of my dear Brother in CHRIST, the Rev. Mr. Stonehouse; -- but in
the midst of the Prayers, the Churchwarden came, demanding me to produce my
License, or otherwise he forbad my preaching in that Pulpit. I believe I might
have insisted upon my Right to preach, being in Priest's Orders, and having the
Presentation of the Living at Savannah, which is in the Bishop of London's
Diocese, a stronger License than that implicit one, by which Hundreds of the
inferior Clergy are by his Lordship permitted to preach: However, for Peace
Sake, I declined preaching in the Church; but after the Communion Service was
over, I preached in the Churchyard; being assured my Master now called me out
here, as well as in Bristol. -- The second Lesson was Acts the xxiv. which
contained the plausible Speech Tertullus made against Paul, a Ringleader of the
Sect of the Nazarenes, which GOD applied closely to my Heart. And he was
pleased so to assist me in preaching, and so wonderfully to affect the Hearers,
that I believe we could have went singing of Hymns to Prison. Let not the
Adversaries say, I have thrust myself out of their Synagogues: No; they have
thrust me out. And since the Self-righteous Men of this Generation count
themselves unworthy, I go out into the Highways and Hedges, and compel Harlots,
Publicans and Sinners to come in, that my Master's House may be filled. They
who are sincere, will follow after me to bear the Word of GOD.

Expounded at Night to a very large Society in Wapping, with great Power, and
perceived that the London People were much improved since I left them; indeed
their Hearts seem to be quite broken, and I believe they would pluck out their
Eyes if it were possible to serve me. LORD* sanctify my coming to them, and
grant that they may receive a second Benefit.

Saturday, April 28. Preached this Morning again in Islington Churchyard, and,
blessed be GOD, the Congregation was near as large again as Yesterday, and the
Word was attended with extraordinary Power. The second Lesson was very
applicable, being Acts xxv. I can say with St. Paul, Neither against the
Temple, nor against Caesar have I done any Thing, and yet I am put out of their
Synagogues, and reviled as an evil Doer; but the Scriptures must be fulfilled,
If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you.

About six I expounded to a thronged Society of Women at Fetter-lane, and at
eight on St. Mary's Hill. The Portion of Scripture that Providence directed me
to, was the Nineteenth of Genesis, which was very applicable to what happened:
For some wicked Men, Men of Belial, came and pressed, and broke down the Door;
but GOD was pleased to give me such Power at the last, that they were forced
into an awful Silence, and, I believe they really felt the Weight of GOD's
Word. The Fierceness of Men shall turn to thy Praise, and the Fierceness of
them shall thou restrain.

Sunday, April 29. Preached in the Morning at Moorfields, to an exceeding great
Multitude. -- At Ten, went to Christ-Church, and heard Dr. Trapp preach most
virulently against me and my Friends, upon these Words, Be not righteous
^ver-much, why should thou destroy thy self? GOD gave me great Serenity of
Mind; but alas! the Preacher was not so calm as I wished him. His Sermon was
sounded upon wrong Suppositions, (the necessary Consequence of his hearing with
other Men's Ears) not to say there were many direct Untruths in it. -- And he
argued so strenuously against all inward Feelings, that he plainly proved, that
with all his Learning, he knew nothing yet as he ought to know. I pray GOD
rebuke his Spirit, and grant that that Sermon may never rise up in Judgment
against him.

Being weakened by my Morning's preaching, in the Afternoon I refreshed myself
by a little Sleep, and at five went and preached at Kennington Common, about
two Miles from London, where no less than thirty Thousand People were supposed
to be present; the Wind being for me, it carried the Voice to the extremest
Part of the Audience.

All stood attentive, and joined in the Psalm and Lord's Prayer most regularly,
-- and I scarce ever preached more quietly in any Church. -- The Word came with
Power. -- The People were much affected* and expressed their Love to me many
Ways. -- All agreed it was never seen on this wise before. Oh what need have
all GOD's People to rejoice and give Thanks! I hope a good Inroad has been made
into the Devil's Kingdom this Day. LORD, not unto me, but to thy Name be all
the Glory.

Monday, April 30. Declined preaching to Day, that I might have Leisure to
write to some of my Correspondents, and make Preparations for my poor Orphans
at Georgia. -- Received Letters this Evening from thence, telling me of the
Affairs of that Colony. -- At present they have but a melancholy Aspect; but
our Extremity is GOD's Opportunity. -- LORD, thou calledst me; lo! I come to do
thy Will. -- Heard also that Mr. K -- n had got over his Scruples, and of the
wonderful Success of my honored Friend Mr. John Wesley's Ministry in Bristol,
and of much Opposition at Oxon. Certainly GOD is about to bring mighty Things
to pass.

Tuesday, May 1. Preached after public Service in Islington Churchyard, to a
greater Congregation than ever. And in the Evening went to expound on Dowgate
Hill, the House of Mr. C -- (...) but when I came to the Door, no less than two
or three Thousand People were gathered round it; so that to avoid a Noise, I
was obliged to stand up in the Fore-street Window, and preach to them in the
Street. -- And I think they behaved well; and they would have behaved much
better, had they not been disturbed. Now know I more and more, that the LORD
calls me into the Fields: For no House or Street is able to contain half the
People that come to hear the Word. -- This is a Time for doing; yet a little
while, and a suffering Time will come. I cannot follow him now; but I shall
follow him afterward.

Wednesday, May 2. Preached this Evening again to above ten Thousand at
Kennington Common, and spent the Remainder of the Evening in Conference with
our Brethren in Fetter-lane Society. -- I hope we do build up one another in
our most holy Faith. -- Our Brethren that have fallen into Errors, have left us
voluntarily. And now the old Leaven is purged out, we walk in the Comforts of
the Holy Ghost, and are edified.

Thursday, May 3. Was fully employed all Day in making Preparations for my
Voyage, and preached at six in the Evening (a Time I choose that People may not
be drawn away from their Business) at Kennington, and great Power was amongst
us* -- The Audience was more numerous and silent than yesterday, the Evening
calm, and many went affected away. Glory be to GOD, I begin to find an
Alteration i^ the People's Behavior ^^^eady. GOD grant it may increase more
and more.

Saturday, May 5. Preached Yesterday and to Day, as usual, at Kennington
Common, to about twenty Thousand Hearers, who were very much affected. -- The
Remainder of my Time I spent in preparing Things for Georgia. -- I am not
usually so much engaged in Seculars; but I as readily do this as preach, when
it is the Will of GOD. -- It is a great Mistake that some run into, to suppose
Religion consists only in saying our Prayers* but I think a Man is no further
holy, than he is relatively holy. And he only will adorn the Gospel of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST in all Things, who is careful to perform all the civil Offices of
Life, whether Servant, Master, or Mistress, with a single Eye to GOD's Glory,
and from a Principle of a lively Faith in JESUS CHRIST our Savior. -- This is
the Morality which I preach, and which shall stand as long as the Rock on which
it is founded; while all Morality set up in Opposition to this, shall sink,
with its Professors, into Hell.

Sunday, May 6. Preached this Morning in Moorfields, to about twenty Thousand
People, who were very quiet and attentive, and much affected. -- Went to
public Worship Morning and Evening; and at six preached at Kennington -- But
such a Sight never were my Eyes blessed with before. -- I believe there were no
less than fifty Thousand People, near fourscore Coaches, besides great Numbers
of Horses, and what is most remarkable, there was such an awful Silence amongst
them, and the Word of GOD came with such Power, that all, I believe, were
pleasingly surprised. GOD gave me great Enlargement of Heart. I continued my
Discourse for an Hour and a Half; and when I returned home, I was filled with
such Love, Peace and Joy, that I cannot express it. -- I believe this was
partly owing to some Opposition I met with Yesterday. It is hard for Men to
kick against the Pricks. -- The more they oppose, the more shall JESUS CHRIST
be exalted. Our Adversaries seem to be come to an Extremity, while for want of
Arguments to convince, they are obliged to call out to the civil Magistrate to
compel me to be silent; but I believe it will be difficult to prove our
Assemblies in the Fields to be either disorderly or illegal. But they that are
born after the Flesh, must persecute those that are born after the Spirit. --
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.

Monday, May 7. Had full Employment again to Day in preparing for my Voyage;
did not preach, only expounded in a private House, where ten Pounds were
collected for the Orpha^^ Though I kept it as secret as possible, yet Numbers
of People crowded round the Door; so that I find myself more and more under a
Necessity of going out into the Fields.

Received several Letters of the Fruits of my Ministry in several Places, and
had diverse come to me awakened, under GOD, by my preaching in the Fields.

Tuesday, May 8. Preached in the Evening, as usual, on Kennington Common. --
Some considerable Time before I se^ out from Town, it rained very hard, so that
once I thought of not going; but several pious Friends joined in hearty Prayer
that GOD would be pleased to withhold the Rain, which was done immediately. --
To my great Suprize, when I came to the Common, I saw above twenty Thousand
People. -- All the while, except for a few Moments, the Sun shone out upon us;
and, I trust, the Sun of Righteousness arose on some with healing in his Wings.
For the People were melted down very much at the preaching of the Word, and put
up hearty Prayers for my temporal and eternal Welfare. Oh that they may enter
into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath!

Wednesday, May 9. Waited at Noon upon the honorable Trustees for Georgia. --
They received me with the utmost Civility, agreed to every Thing I asked, and
gave me a Grant of Five Hundred Acres of Land, to me and my Successors for
ever, for the Use of the Orphan-House. -- My Friend H -- also writes me Word to
Day from Georgia, that the General and Officers are very kind to him upon my
Account; so that, blessed be GOD, there is a comfortable Prospect of all Things
going on as I could wish.

About Four in the Afternoon I was taken ill and deserted, which I always look
upon as a certain Preparative for some approaching Mercy. -- And so this was;
for after GOD had enabled me to preach to about Twenty Thousand for above an
Hour at Kennington, he inclined the Hearers Hearts to contribute most
cheerfully and liberally toward the Orphan-House. -- I was one of the
Collectors, -- and it would have delighted any one to have seen with what
Eagerness and Cheerfulness the People came up both Sides the Eminence on which
I stood, and afterward to the Coach Doors to throw in their Mites. -- Surely
GOD must have touched their Hearts: -- For when we came home, we found we had
collected above Forty Seven Pounds, amongst which were Sixteen Pounds in
Halfpence; for which we endeavored to give hearty thanks. -- GOD was pleased
to pour into my Soul a great Spirit of Supplication, and a Sense of his free
distinguishing Mercies so filled me with Love, Humility, and Joy, and holy
Confusion, that I could at last only pour out my Heart before him in an awful
Silence. -- It was so full, that I could not well speak. Oh the Happiness of a
Communion with GOD!

Thursday, May 10. Preached at Kennington; but it rained most Part of the Day.
There were not above Ten Thousand People, and Thirty Coaches. -- However, GOD
was pleased so visibly to interpose in causing the Weather to clear up, and the
Sun to shine out just as I began, that I could not avoid taking Notice of it to
the People in my Discourse. Our minute Philosophers, nay, and our Christians,
falsely so called, laugh at the Notion of a particular Providence. But to
suppose a general, without holding a particular Providence, is as absurd, as to
imagine there can be a Chain without being composed of Links. -- Search the
Scriptures, and we shall find, That not a Sparrow can fall to the Ground
without our heavenly Father, and that the very Hairs of our Head are numbered.

Friday, May 11. Preached at Kennington to a larger Audience than the last
Night, and collected Twenty Six Pounds Fifteen Shillings and Sixpence, for the
Orphan-House. -- The Readiness wherewith the People gave is inexpressible. --
Indeed I can say they offered willingly. -- They could not have taken more
Pains, or expressed more Earnestness, had they all been to have received an
Alms from me. A Sign this, that the Word of God has taken hold of their Hearts.
I found great Sweetness of Soul in myself; and being upon the Publican and
Pharisee, I was very earnest in endeavoring to convince the Self-righteous
Pharisees of this Generation, and offering JESUS CHRIST freely to all, who,
with the hum^le Publican, feelingly and experimentally could cry out, GOD be
merciful to me a Sinner.

Saturday, May 12. Agreed to Day for myself, and E^even more, to go on Board
the Elizabeth, Captain Allan, to Pennsylvania; where I design, GOD willing, to
preach the Gospel in my Way to Georgia, and buy Provisions for my Orphan-House.
LORD send thy Angel before me to prepare my Way.

Had many come to me this Morning, acquainting me what GOD had done for their
Souls by my preaching in the Fields. -- And in the Evening preached to about
Twenty Thousand People at Kennington as usual, the Weather continuing
remarkably fair whilst I was delivering my Master's Message. -- Though I was
full of Matter, yet I found a Restraint upon my Spirits, which prevented my
speaking with my wonted Freedom: However, I offered JESUS CHRIST to all that
would apply him to their Hearts by Faith. Oh that all would embrace him! The
LORD make them willing in the Day of his Power.

Sunday, May 13. Preached this Morning to a prodigious Number of People in
Moorfields, and collected for the Orphans Fifty Two Pounds Nineteen Shillings
and Sixpence, above Twenty Pounds of which was in Halfpence. -- Indeed they
almost wearied me in receiving their Mites; and they were more than one Man
could carry home. -- Thus will GOD make his Power to be known. -- Went to
public Worship twice, and preached in the Evening to near Sixty Thousand
People. -- Many went away because they could not hear; but GOD enabled me to
speak, so that the best Part of them could understand me well; and it is very
remarkable what a deep Silence is preserved whilst I am speaking. -- After
Sermon, I made another Collection of Twenty Nine Pounds Seventeen Shillings and
Eightpence, and came home deeply humbled with a Sense of what God had done for
my Soul. -- I doubt not but many self-righteous Bigots, when they see me
spreading out my Hands to offer JESUS CHRIST freely to all, are ready to cry
out, How glorious did the Reverend Mr. Whitefield look to Day, when, neglecting
the Dignity of a Clergyman, he stood venting his Enthusiastic Ravings in a
Gown and Cassock upon a Common, and collecting Mites from the poor People? But
if this be to be vile, LORD grant that I may be more vile. -- I know this
Foolishness of preaching is made instrumental to the Conversion and Edification
of Numbers. Ye Pharisees mock on, I rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.

Monday, May 14. Spent most of this Day in visiting some Friends, and settling
my Georgia Affairs. Spent the Evening very agreeably with several Quakers at
the House of Mr. Hy -- m. How much Comfort do those lose who converse with none
but such as are of their own Communion!

Tuesday, May 15. Preached this Evening at Kennington, and GOD was pleased to
send us a ^ittle Rain. -- But it rejoiced me greatly: -- For the People,
notwithstanding, stood very attentive; and as soon as the Rain came, I received
uncommon Strength from above. The good LORD water us all with the Dew of his
heavenly Blessing.

Wednesday, May 16. Sent a Quaker, whom GOD was pleased to convince, to be
baptized by my dear Brother Mr. Stonehouse. Waited upon the honorable
Trustees, who still treated me with the utmost Civility. -- Dined with some
more serious Quakers, and preached at Kennington, and have Reason to bless GOD
more and more for the Order and Devotion of those that come to hear the Word.
-- Indeed they behave as though they believed GOD was standing at their
Right Hand.

Thursday, May 17. Preached, after several Invitations thither, at
Hampstead-heath, about five Miles from London. -- The Audience was of the
politer Sort, and I preached very near the Horse-course, which gave me Occasion
to speak home to their Souls concerning our spiritual Race -- Most were
attentive, but some mocked. Thus the Word of GOD is either a Savor of Life
unto Life, or of Death unto Death. GOD 's Spirit blows when, and where it
lists.

Friday, May 18. Dined with several of the Moravian Church, and could not avoid
admiring their great Simplicity, and deep Experience in the inward Life. -- At
six, I preached in a very large open Place in Shadwell, being much pressed by
many to go thither. -- I believe there were upwards of twenty Thousand People.
-- At first, through the Greatness of the Throng, there was a little Hurry; but
afterward, all was hushed and silent. -- I perceived a divine Power come upon
me from above. -- The Word, I believe, made its Way into their Hearts, and very
near twenty Pounds were collected for the Orphan-house. -- Blessed be GOD, we
now begin to surround this great City. As the Walls of Jericho once fell down
at the Sound of a few Rams Horns; so I hope even this Foolishness of Preaching,
under GOD, will be a Means of pulling down the Devil's strong Holds, which are
in and about the City of London.

Received several excellent Letters, amongst which was one from Mr. Ralph
Erskine, a Field-Preacher of the Scots Church, a noble Soldier of the Lord
JESUS CHRIST. Oh that all that were truly zealous knew one another! It must
greatly strengthen each (...) Hands.

Saturday, May 19. Had the Pleasure of being an Inst^ument, under GOD, with Mr.
Seward, of bringing a young Man out of Bethlehem, who was lately put into that
Place for being, as they term it, Methodically Mad. -- The Way I came to be
acquainted with him, was by his sending me the following Letter.

To the Rev. Mr^ Whitefield, these, Dear Sir,
I have read your Sermon upon the New-^^^th, and hope I (...) always have a due
Sense of my dear Redeemer's Goodness to me, that has so infinitely extended his
Mercy to me, which Sense be pleased to confirm in me by your Prayers; and may
Almighty GOD bless and preserve you, and prosper your ministerial Function. I
wish, Sir, I could have some explanatory Notes upon the New Testament, to
enlighten the Darkness of my Understanding, to make me capable of becoming a
good Soldier of JESUS CHRIST; but, above all, should be glad to see you. I am,

Dear Sir, Yours affectionately with my whole Heart, Joseph Periam.
Bethlehem Hospital, No. 50.

According to his Request I paid him a Visit, and found him in perfect Health
both in Body and Mind. A Day or two after, I and Mr. Seward went and talked
with his Sister, who gave me the three following Sy^^tons of his being mad.
First, That he fasted for near a Fortnight. Secondly, That he prayed so as to
be heard four Story high. Thirdly, That he had sold his Clo^^hs, and given them
to the Poor. -- This the young Man himself explained to me before; and
ingeniously confessed, that under his first Awakenings, he was one Day reading
the Story of the young Man whom our LORD commanded to sell all, and give to the
Poor, and thinking it must be taken in the literal Sense, out of Love to JESUS
CHRIST he sold his Clothes, and gave the Money to the Poor. -- This is nothing
but what is common to Persons at their first setting out in the spiritual Life.
Satan will, if possible, drive them to Extremes. -- And if such young Converts
were left to GOD, or had some experienced Person to consult with, they would
soon come into the Liberties of the Gospel, But how should those who have not
been tempted like unto their Brethren, be able to succor those that are
tempted?

May the 5 th I received a second Letter from him.

Query 1. If Repentance does not include a Cessation from Sin, and turning to
Virtue; and though notwithstanding I want that deep Contrition mentioned by
some Divines, yet as I live not wilfully in any known Sin, and firmly believe
the Gospel of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, may I not thereby be entitled to the
Benefits of CHRIST's Death and Resurrection, in the Perseverance of Knowledge,
and Practice of my Duty?

Query 2. If I am in Prison, whether I may not, without Offense to GOD, make
use of Endeavors to be discharged, by which I may be enabled to get into a
pious Christian Family, and consequently be grounded and firmly settled in the
Love of GOD, it being my Desire; for I am surrounded with nothing but
Profaneness and Wickedness?

Query 3. If my Objections to being imprisoned are inconsistent or wicked,
which are, that I am obliged to submit to the Rules of the House, in going to
my Cell at seven or eight of the Clock at Night, and not let out till six or
seven in the Morning, by which I am debarred the Use of Candle, and
consequently Books; so that all that Time, except what is spent in Prayer and
Meditation, is lost. Which Exercises, though good, are, by so constant
Repetition, and for want of Change, deaden'd?

Query 4. If I should, by the Goodness of GOD, be discharged, whether I may,
without Offense to the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, follow the Business of an
Attorney at Law, to which I was put as a Clerk; and by a conscientious
Discharge of that Duty, be thereby entitled to a heavenly Inheritance; my Fear
in this Point arising from our Lord's Advice about going to Law, Matthew v.40.

Query 5. If I cannot be discharged by proper Application, (which Application
pray be pleased to let me have) how can I best spend my Time to the Glory of
GOD, myself and Brethren's Welfare? And please to give me Rules for the same.

Worthy Sir,

These Questions, whether momentary or not, I leave to your Judgment. If you
think they deserve an Answer, should be glad to have them solved; for as I am
sensible of the Power of my Adversary the Devil, surely I cannot but act with
the utmost Circumspection, which gives me Occasion to trouble you herewith; and
I hope, Sir, the Circumstance of the Place I am in, may excuse the Manner in
which I have wrote to you, and count it not an Affront; for GOD is Witness how
I love and esteem the Ministers of JESUS CHRIST; for whose dear Sake, may the
GOD of infinite Love and Goodness, stablish and confirm you in the daily
Success of your ministerial Labors, which are the daily Prayers of

Your most unworthy, but faithful humble Servant, Joseph Periam.
Bethlehem, No. 50. May 5. 1739. P S. I am afraid, Sir, I misbehaved myself
when you so kindly came to see me; but if I did in any Measure, your Christian
Love and Charity will excuse it; for not being warned of your coming, the
Surprise, though pleasant, so fluttered my Spirits, that I was overburdened
with Joy.

O how pleased should I be to see you!




To this I sent the following Answer.

Dear Sir, May 7. 1739.
The Way to Salvation is by JESUS CHRIST, who is the Way, the Truth, and the
Life. -- The Way to CHRIST is by Faith. Whosoever lives and believes in me,
says our LORD, though he were dead, yet shall be live. But this Faith, if it is
a saving Faith, will work by Love Come then to JESUS CHRIST as a poor Sinner,
and he will make you a rich Saint. This, I think, serves as an Answer to your
first Query.

It is, no doubt, your Duty, whilst you are in the House, to submit to the
Rules of it; but then you may use all lawful Means to get yourself out. I have
just now been with your Sister, and will see what can be done farther, Watch
and pray.

As for the Business of an Attorney, I think it unlawful for a Christian, at
least exceeding dangerous. Avoid it therefore, and glorify GOD in some other
Station. I am,

Dear Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Servant. G. W.


A Day or two after I received a third Letter, which is as follows.

Worthy Sir,
I received your Letter, which was a full Answer to my Queries, and give you my
hearty Thanks for the Trouble you have taken upon you (the only Gratitude I can
at present pay) but he, whom I have perfectly at Heart, will supply the
Deficiency to you, and will not suffer a meritorious Act to go unrewarded. O
how do I daily experience the Love of CHRIST toward me, who am so vile, base
and unworthy! I pray GOD I may always be thankful, and both ready to do and
suffer his most gracious Will, which I trust, through your Prayers and GOD's
Grace, I shall at all Times submit to.

My Father was with me last Night, when I showed him your Letter. I told him, I
utterly renounced the Business of an Attorney. He then asked what Profession I
chose, which I submitted to him, on Condition it might prove agreeable to the
Will of GOD. He was pleased to say, he thought me not mad, but very well in my
Senses, and would take me out, on Condition Doctor Monro and the Committee were
of his Opinion. Then he varied again, and thought it convenient for me to stay
the Summer, and so to take Physic twice a Week, fearing a Relapse. I told him,
as a Father, he should be wholly obeyed; but when at parting he ^entioned my
leaving Religion (or Words to that Purpose, at which I was somewhat stirred in
Spirit) I told him, nothing should prevail upon me to leave JESUS CHRIST; upon
which he left me. This is the Substance of what passed between us, which* I
hope, is not amiss to let you know of, as you have been so kind as to plead for
my Liberty.

Upon the whole of the Matter, Sir, GOD gives me perfect Resignation, and I
trust when he shall see fit, will discharge me; and as I find his Love daily
more and more shed abroad in my Heart, all Things will work together for my
good. Pray, Sir, be thankful for me, and if Opportunity will let you, I should
be sincerely glad to see you before you set out for America. And may Almighty
GOD, in his infinite Goodness, prosper, guide and protect you, through this
transitory Life, and hereafter receive you triumphantly into the heavenly
Jerusalem, there to converse with, and see the ever blessed JESUS, that dear
Lamb of GOD; to which that you may attain, are the hearty and fervent Wishes of

Your loving and sincere Friend, Joseph Periam*
Wednesday, May, 9. 1739, I am ashamed to trouble you thus, but my Heart is
full of you.




Upon reading this, I was sensibly touched with a Fellow-feeling of his Misery;
and, at my Request, Mr. Seward, and two more Friends, waited upon the
Committee. But alas! they esteemed my Friends as much mad as the young Man, and
frankly told them, both I and my Followers, in their Opinion, were really
besides themselves. My Friend Seward urged the Example of the young Persons,
who called the Prophet that was sent to anoint Jehu King, a mad Fellow; -- of
our LORD, whom his own Relations, and the Scribes and Pharisees, took to be
mad, and besides himself; -- and Festus's Opinion of St. Paul. -- He further
urged, that when young People were under their first Awakenings, they were
usually tempted by the Devil to run into some Extremes. But all such Language
confirmed the Gentlemen more and more, that Mr. Seward was mad also. And to
prove that the young Man was certainly mad, they called one of the Attendants,
who said, when Mr. Periam first came into the Place, he stripped himself to his
Shirt, and prayed. -- The Reason of this, as Mr. Periam said afterward, was,
that he might i^^ure himself to Hardship at once: For being brought from
Bethnall Green, where he was taken great Care of, into a cold Place without
Windows, and a damp Cellar under him, he thought it best to season himself at
first, that he might learn to endure Hardness as a good Soldier of JESUS
CHRIST. In the midst of the Conference, some Way or other, they mentioned his
going to Georgia, and said, if I would take him with me, they would engage that
his Father should give Leave to have him released. -- A Day or two after, Mr.
Seward waited upon his Father, who gave his Son an excellent Character, and
consented to his going abroad. -- After this, he waited upon the Doctor, who
pronounced him well. -- And to Day he waited again upon the Committee, who
behaved very civilly, and gave the young Man a Discharge.

He is now with me, and I hope will be an Instrument of doing good. -- The
Hardships he has endured at Bethlehem, will, I hope, prepare him for what he
must undergo abroad. -- And being now not ignorant of Satan's Devices, he will
be better qualified to prevent his getting an Advantage over others. Before I
leave my Account of him, I cannot help telling what Usage he met with at his
first coming into Bethlehem. -- Being sensible within himself, that he wanted
no bodily Physic, he was unwilling at first to take it; upon which, four or
five took hold of him, cursed him most heartily, put a Key into his Mouth,
threw him upon the Bed, and said (though I had then never seen or heard of him)
you are one of Whitefield's Gang, and so drenched him. -- I hear also, that
there was an Order given, that neither I, or any of my Friends, should be
permitted to come unto him. Good GOD! how shortly will that Day come when these
unhappy Men shall be heard to cry out, We Fools counted their Lives Madness,
and their Ends to be without Honor! How are they numbered among the Children of
GOD! How is their Lot among the Saints!

Dined at Clapham with Mr. B -- n, a Quaker. Preached in the Evening at
Kennington Common to about 15000 People, who were very attentive and affected.
Afterward I spent two Hours in at Fetter-lane Society, where we had a most
useful Conference concerning the Necessity every Christian lay under to have
some particular Calling, whereby he may be a useful Member of the Society to
which he belongs. -- We all agreed to this unanimously; as for my own Part, I
think, if a Man will not labor, neither ought he to eat. To be so intent on
pursuing the one Thing needful, as to neglect providing for those of our own
Households, in my Opinion, is to be Righteous overmuch.

Sunday, May 20. Went with our Brethren of Fetter-lane Society to St. Paul's,
and received the holy Sacrament, as a Testimony that we adhered to the Church
of England.

Preached at Moorfields and Kennington Common, and at both Places collected
very near fifty Pounds for the Orphan-house. A visible Alteration is made in
the People's Behavior: -- For though there were near fifteen Thousand in the
Morning, and double the Number in the Afternoon, yet they were as quiet during
my Sermon* as though there had not been above fifty Person^ present. -- I did
not meet with a Moment's Interruption. I could say of the Assembly, a^ Jacob
did on another Occasion, Surely GOD (...) this Place.

HERTFORD.
Monday, May 21. Was fully engaged all the Morning in settling my Georgi^
Affairs. Left London about Three, -- called and prayed at a House or two in the
Way, and reached Hertford between eight and nine at Night. -- I never saw a
Town so much alarmed. -- The Streets were every where crowded; and by the
Behavior of some, I thought we should have had many Scoffers. -- But, blessed
be GOD, I never preached to a more quiet Congregation. -- The Hearers were in
Number about Four or Five Thousand, and the Place I preached in was a Common
near the Town. Afterward a certain Gentlewom^n, Lydia like, constrained both
me and my Friends* if we judged her worthy, to come and abide in her House that
Night, which we did to our great Comfort. The LORD reward her a Thousand-fold.

HERTFORD and OULNEY in Buckingham^^^re.
Tuesday, May 22. Preached about seven in the Morning from the same Place, and
to near as large a Congregation as I did last Night. -- GOD gave me uncommon
Power, and all, I hope, went away convinced that my Doctrine was of GOD.
Breakfasted with Mr. S -- ds, a Dissenting Minister, who kindly invited and
received me and my Friends. Dined at Hitchen. Promised, at the Request of many,
to preach to them, GOD willing, on Friday Morning, and reached Oulney about Ten
at Night, where I long since promised to come. Here also GOD had prepared a
Table for us; and here I was not a little comforted with meeting with the Rev.
Mr. Rogers of Bedford, who, like me, has lately been thrust out of the
Synagogues, for speaking of Justification by Faith, and the New Birth, and has
commenced a Field-Preacher. Once he was shut in Prison for a short Time, but
Thousands flock to hear him, and GOD blesses him more and more. I believe we
are the first professed Ministers of the Church of England, that were so (...),
and without Cause, excluded every Pulpit. Whether (...) Brethren can justify
such a Conduct, the Last Day will determine.

Wednesday, May 23. Being denied the Pulpit, I preached this Morning in a Field
near the Town, to about two Thousand People, with much Freedom and Power. They
were very attentive, and I could have continued my Discourse much longer; but
the Bells ringing for Prayers, I adjourned my Hearers to public Worship, where
many of them went, and GOD was pleased to speak to us much in the second
Lesson. -- How powerfully does the Word of GOD come to our Hearts, when we
experience it (...) Otherwise, it is a dead Letter.

NORTHAMPTON.
Reached Northampton about Five in the Evening, and was most courteously
received by Dr. Dodridge, Master of the Academy there.

At seven, according to Appointment, I preached to about three Thousand Hearers
on a Common near the Town, from the Starting-post. -- Great Power, I believe
was amongst us, and I preached with wonderful Pleasure; because I thought I had
then actual Possession of one of the Devil's strong Holds. Oh that we may all
run so as to obtain the Crown of Life, which GOD the righteous Judge, will
give, at the last Day, to all that love our LORD JESUS in Sincerity.

Thursday, May 24. Preached again at the same Place at about Eight in the
Morning, but to a much larger Audience. Breakfasted with some pious Friends.
Was greatly comforted by several choice Children of GOD, who came to me from
different Parts, and left Northampton about eleven, rejoicing with my Friends
at the mighty Things GOD had already done, and was yet about to do for us. Many
righteous Souls live in and about Northampton; and nothing confirms me more in
my Opinion, that GOD intends to work a great Work upon the Earth, than to find
how his Children of all Denominations every where wrestle in Prayer for me.

OULNEY.
Being much solicited thereto, after Sermon yesterday, I hastened, in Company
with near a dozen Friends, to Oulney, eight long Miles from Northampton, and
got thither about Ten of the Clock. Great Numbers were assembled together; but
on account of its being a rainy Day it was judged inconvenient to preach in the
Fields. I therefore stood upon (...) Eminence in the Street, and preached from
thence with such Power as I have not for some Time experienced. Though it (...)
all the Time, yet the People stood very attentive and patient. All, I really
believe, felt, as well as heard the Word, and one was so p^icked to the Heart,
and convinced of Sin, that I scarce ever saw the like Instance. The Word of GOD
is quick and powerful, and sharper than a two-edged Sword.

Hasted away as fast as possible from Oulney to Bedford, where I had promised,
GOD willing, to preach to Night. About seven we got thither, and found the Town
fully alarmed. -- About eight, I preached from the Stairs of a Windmill (the
Pulpit of my dear Brother and Fellow Labourer Mr. Rogers) to about three
Thousand People; and GOD was pleased to give me such extraordinary Assistance,
that I believe few, if any, were able to resist the Power wherewith GOD enabled
me to speak. My Heart was full of GOD, and I spoke as one having Authority. GOD
caused me to renew my Strength, and gave me such inward Support, that my
Journey did not affect me. As my Day is, so shall my Strength be.

Friday, May 25. Preached at Seven in the Morning with great Power, and rather
a larger Congregation than before. -- Took an affectionate Leave of many
gracious Souls, and reached Hitchin, ten Miles from Bedford, about one of the
Clock at Noon. -- The Town, I perceived, was much alarmed, and many devout
Souls came from far to hear me. -- About two, I got upon a Table in the
Marketplace, near the Church; but some were pleased to ring the Bells in order
to disturb us. Upon this, not having begun, we removed into a most commodious
Place in the Fields; but being a little fatigued with my Ride, and the Sun
beating most intensely upon my Head, I was obliged, in a sho^^ Time, to break
off, being exceeding sick and weak. -- A kind Gentlewoman offered me her House,
where I went, and lay down for about two Hours, and then came and preached near
the same Place, and GOD was with us. -- It was surprising to see how the Hearts
of the People were knit to me. -- I could have continued longer with them; but
being under an Engagement to go to St. Albans, I hastened thither, but could not
preach on account of my coming in so late. Great Numbers had been there
expecting me; and it grieved me to think how little I could do for CHRIST. For
he is a gracious Master, and had I a Thousand Lives, they should be spent in
his Service.

St. ALBANS and LONDON.
Saturday, May 26. Had a comfortable Night's Rest, which much refreshed me.
Preached at seven in the Morning to about Fifteen hundred People in a Field
near the Town with great Power, and got safe to London by two in the Afternoon.
-- Blessed be GOD, this has been a Week of fat Things. -- Many further Inroads
have been made into Satan's Kingdom. -- Many Sinners convicted, and many Saints
much comforted and established in their most holy Faith. I find there are some
Thousand secret ones yet living amongst us, that have not bowed the Knee to
Baal, and this public Way of acting brings them out. It much comforts me,
wherever I go, to see so many of GOD's Children, of all Communions, come and
wish me good Luck in the Name of the LORD. I perceive People would be every
where willing to hear, if the Ministers were ready to teach the Truth as it is
in JESUS. LORD, do thou spirit up more of my dear Friends and Fellow Laborers
to go out into the Highways and Hedges, to compel poor Sinners to come in. Amen.

Received an excellent Letter from the Rev. Mr. Ebenezer Erskine of Scotland,
Brother to Mr. Ralph Erskine, acquainting me of his preaching last Week to
Fourteen Thousand People. Blessed be GOD, there are more Field-Preachers in the
World besides myself. The LORD furnish us all with spiritual Food wherewith to
feed so great Multitudes.

Preached in the Evening at Kennington Common to about Fifteen Thousand People,
and we had an extraordinary Presence of GOD amongst us. Oh! that all who object
against this Way of Preaching, would come and see, -- all sincere Persons must
go convicted away.

Sunday, May 27. Preached this Morning at Moorfields to about Twenty Thousand,
and GOD manifested himself still more and more. My Discourse was near two Hours
long. My Heart was full of Love; and People were so melted down on every Side,
that the greatest Scoffer must have owned that this was the Finger of GOD. Went
twice to public Worship, received the blessed Sacrament, and preached, as
usual, in the Evening at Kennington Common, to about the same Number of People
as I did last Lord's Day. Perceived I was a little hoarse; but GOD strengthened
me to speak so as not only to be heard, but felt by most that stood near me.
Glory be to GOD on high.

Monday, May 28. Preached, after earnest and frequent Invitation, at Hackney,
in a Field belonging to one Mr. Rudge, to about Ten Thousand People. -- I
insisted much upon the Reasonableness of the Doctrine of the New Birth, and the
Necessity of our receiving the Holy Ghost in its sanctifying Gifts and Graces,
as well now as formerly. GOD was pleased to impress it most deeply upon the
Hearers. Great Numbers were drowned in Tears; and I could not help exposing the
Impiety of those Letter-learned Teachers, who say, We are not now to receive
the Holy Ghost, and count the Doctrine of the New Birth, ENTHUSIASM. Out of
your own Mouths will I condemn you, you wicked and blind Guides. Did you not,
at the Time of Ordination, tell the Bishop, that you were inwardly moved by the
Holy Ghost, to take upon you the Administration of the Church? Surely, at that
Time, you acted the Crime of Ananias and Sapphir^ (...) You lied not unto Man,
but unto GOD.

Tuesday, May 29. Went to public Service at Westminster Abbey. Afterward
dispatched Business for my Orphans, and preached at Kennington to a most devout
Auditory with much Sweetness and Power. The Subject I treated of, was our
LORD's Miracle of the Loaves and Fishes; and I hope he who fed so many
Thousands with bodily Bread, did feed my Hearers Souls with the Bread of Life
which comes down from Heaven.

Wednesday, May 30. Waited upon the Bishop of Bristol (who treated me with the
utmost Civility) and received his Lordship's Benefaction for Georgia. At the
Request of many, I preached in the Evening at Newington Common, to about
fifteen Thousand People. A most commodious Place was erected for me to preach
from. The Word came with Power; and seeing a great Multitude, I thought proper
to collect for the Orphan-house. Sixteen Pounds nine Shillings and four Pence
were gathered on that Occasion. Blessed be the Lord for thus prospering the
Work of my Hands upon me.

Thursday, May 31. Was taken very ill this Afternoon; but GOD was pleased to
strengthen me to go to Kennington, where I preached to my usual Congregation;
and three of my Brethren in the Ministry were pleased to accompany me, which
filled the People with exceeding great Joy. Thou LORD of the Harvest, send
forth, we beseech Thee, more Laborers into thy Harvest.

Friday, June 1. Dined at Oldford, -- gave a short Exhortation to a few People
in a Field, and preached in the Evening at a Place called Mayfair, near
Hyde-Park Corner. -- The Congregation, I believe, consisted of near Eighty
Thousand People. -- It was, by far, the largest I ever preached to yet. -- In
the Time of my Prayer there was a little Noise? but they kept a deep Silence
during my whole Discourse. An high and very commodious Scaffold was erected for
me to stand upon; and though I was weak in myself, yet GOD strengthened me to
speak so loud that most could hear, and so powerfully, that most, I believe,
could feel. All Love, all Glory be to God, through CHRIST.

So weak, so frail an Instrument,
If thou, my GOD, vouchsafe to use;
It Is Praise enough to be employed,
Reward enough, if thou excuse.
If thou excuse, then work thy Will
By so unfit an Instrument;
It will at once thy Goodness show,
And prove thy Power Omnipotent.
Saturday, June 2. Sent another Quaker to be baptized by Mr. Stonehouse.
Collected by private Contributions, near Fifty Pounds for the Orphans, and
preached in the Evening to about Ten Thousand at Hackney, where twenty Pounds
twelve Shillings and four Pence were gathered on the same Occasion. Before I
went out to preach, I was very sick and weak; but such Power was given me from
above, that I continued preaching for an Hour and an Half, and was so assisted,
that the People were dissolved into Tears, and wept most bitterly. It rained
some considerable Time, but almost all were unmoved; and I was so enlarged, by
talking of the Love and Free Grace of JESUS CHRIST, that I could have continued
my Discourse till Midnight. This Promise, They that wait on the Lord shall
renew their Strength, is fulfilled in me daily. Oh (...) Grace in CHRIST JESUS
our LORD.

Sunday, June 3. Preached at Moorfields to a larger Congregation than ever, and
collected Twenty Nine Pounds Seventeen Shillings and Nine Pence for the
Orphan-House; went twice to public Worship, received the Sacrament, and
preached in the Evening at Kennington Common, to the most numerous Audience I
ever yet saw in that Place, and collected Thirty Four Pounds five Shillings.
When I mentioned my Departure from them, they were melted into Tears. --
Thousands of Ejaculations and fervent Prayers were poured out to GOD on my
Behalf, which gave me abundant Reason to be thankful to my dear Master. Oh what
mavelous great Kindness has GOD shown me in this great City! Indeed I have
seen the Kingdom of GOD come with Power, and cannot but say, Blessed are the
Eyes which see the Things that we see, and hear the Things which we hear; for
many righteous Souls have desired to see the Things which we see, and to hear
the Things which we hear, and have not heard them. I now go, I trust, under the
Conduct of GOD's Holy Spirit, to Pennsylvania and Virginia, and from thence to
Georgia, knowing not what will befall me, save that the Holy Ghost witnesses in
every Place, that Labors, Afflictions, and Trials of all Kinds abide me. O my
dear Friends, pray that none of these Things may move me, and that I may not
count even my Life dear unto myself, so that I may finish my Course with Joy,
and the Minis^ry which I have received of the LORD JESUS. Into his Hands I
commend my whole Spirit, Soul and Body; his Will be done in me, by me, and upon
me, for Time, and for Eternity. Let me do or suffer just as seems good in his
Sight. Only do thou, O LORD, give me that Wisdom which dwells with Prudence,
that I may never suffer for my own Misconduct, but only for Righteousness Sake.
-- Reward, O LORD, my dear Friends for all their Works of Faith, and Labors of
Love. -- Forgive my Enemies; and grant we may all effectually be called by thy
Free Grace, and after Death be translated to sit on thy Right Hand. -- Prepare
me for the fiery Trial wherewith I must be tried, and make me faithful to the
Trust committed to my Charge. May I carefully watch the Flock over which the
Holy Ghost has made me Overseer, and may I, in all Things, behave (...) a good
Steward of the manifold Gifts of GOD. -- May the past Mercies make me humble
and truly thankful, and may I be prepared for these greater Things which I am
yet to see. -- May the Soul of all to whom I have preached be precious in thy
Sight, and may we all meet to be one another's Joy, and Crown of rejoicing in
the Day of the LORD JESUS; though absent in Body, may we be present in Spirit,
and always have Reason to tri^^ph because of the Truth. May we go on from
conquering to conquer, and see Satan, like Lightning, fall from Heaven. May GOD
pour into our Hearts a Spirit of Prayer and Supplication, and may our Prayers
ascend up as an acceptable Sacrifice, through JESUS CHRIST. To whom with Thee,
O FATHER, and Thee, O HOLY GHOST, three Persons, and one GOD, be all Glory,
Might, Majesty, and Dominion, now, and for evermore. Amen.

Captain of my Salvation, hear!
Stir up thy Strength, and bow the Skies;
Be Thou the GOD of Battles near;
In all thy Majesty arise!
The Day, the dreadful Day's at Hand!
In Battle cover thou my Head:
Past is thy Word: I here demand,
And confident expect thine Aid.
Now arm me for the threatening Fight,
Now let thy Power descend from high,
Triumphant in thy Spirit's Might,
So shall I every Foe defy.
I ask thy Help; by Thee sent forth
Thy glorious Gospel to proclaim,
Be Thou my Mouth, and shake the Earth,
And spread by me thy awful Name.
Steel me to Shame, Reproach, Disgrace,
Arm me with all thy Armor now,
Set like a Flint my steady Face,
Harden to Adamant my Brow.
Bold may I wax, exceeding bold,
My high Commission to perform,
No^ shrink thy harshest Truths to unfold,
But more than meet the gathering Storm.
Adverse to Earth's rebellious ^hrong
Still may I turn my fearless Face,
Stand as an Iron Pillar strong,
And steadfast as a Wall of Brass.
Give me thy Might, thou GOD of Power;
Then let or Men or Fiends assail!
Strong in thy S^rength, I Will stand a Tower
Impregnable to Earth or Hell.
The End of the First Volume.

