A Call to the Weary and heavy Laden to come unto Christ for Rest.

A SERMON Preached at Connecticut Farms in Elizabeth-Town, Dec. 23. 1739.
Published at the desire of the Hearers.

By JONATHAN DICKINSON, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Elizabeth-Town in
New-Iersey.

Isa. lxi.V.i The Spirit of the Lord God is upon Me, because the Lord has
anointed me to Preach Good Tidings unto the Meek, he has sent me to bind up
the broken hearted, to Proclaim Liberty to the Captives, and the opening the
Prison to them that are bound.

NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by William Bradford 1740.

A Call to the Weary and heavy Laden to come unto CHRIST.
Matthew. xi.v.28. Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you Rest.


THe Apostasy of our first Parents has plunged all their miserable Offspring
into a gulf of Woe; and brought upon them a dreadful Weight of Distress and
Misery. By this are we universally polluted and defiled, all the Members of our
Bodies, and all the Faculties of our Souls are Wounds and Bruises* and
putrefying Sores, that we are loathsome and abominable in the Sight of that God
with whom we have to do: By this, we are brought under the Power and Dominion
of our Lusts, Sin reigns in our mortal Bodies; and we obey it in the Lusts
thereof: and what an astonishing Prospect have we of the terrible Effects of a
Life of Sin and Guilt. By this we are brought under the Empire of Satan, and
led Captive by him at his Pleasure; and how awful is the Thought of being for
ever the Slaves and Companions of the Devil. We are by this Means also become
Enemies to God, and the Children of his Wrath; and how terrible must ou^ State
be, while we have Omnipotent Vengeance engaged against us: This being our
dreadful Condition, wh^^h ^r shall we flee for Help? If we call all creat^d
Power to our Relief, we shall yet pine away in our Iniquities; and how shall we
then live? If we resolve upon a new Li^e, th^reby to recommend our selves to
the divine Favor, we cannot bring a clean Thing out of an unclean: we can as
soon create a new World as a new Heart. If we go to God by Prayers, Tears,
Reformations, o^ any Thing else within our Power, he is a consuming Fire to all
unsanctified Sinner. We h^ve therefore n^thing before u^ while in our natural
State, bu^ Death and eternal Destruction. This View of our Case must needs fill
the Soul of every convinced Sinner with Perplexity and Confusion; and m^ke him
groan being burdened, for how can Sinners in Zion help being afraid surprised
with Fearfulness, to think of dwelling with devouring Fire, and everlasting
Burnings* This View of our Case may also well fill us with admiring and adoring
Apprehensions of the unspeakable Love of God, in giving his Son to save us, of
the unspeakable Love of our glorious Redeemer, who in due Time, when we were
yet without Strength, died for the ungod^y; and who is graciously proclaiming
^o poor distressed Sinners the glad Tid^ngs now read to you. Come unto me, all
ye that labor and ar^ heavy laden; and I will give you rest. In speaking to
these Words, I shall endeavor to consider,

1. Who are these Weary and heavy Laden, that are the meet Subjects of the Rest
here prom^^^d.

2. What is employed in Coming to Christ, that we may have Rest*

3. What is that Rest which the Lord Jesus Christ will bestow upon those Weary
and heavy Laden, that come unto him for it. And then conclude with some
Improvement.

I am first to show, Who are those Weary and heavy Laden, that are the meet
Subjects of the Rest here promised.

1. Those who are thus weary and heavy laden, must be thoroughly convinced of
their Sin and Guil^, Misery and Danger. The most of the World of Mankind are
asleep in carnal Security, ignorant of their guilt, insensible of their
miserable undone Estate. Hence it is, that they can so boldly rush upon the
thick Bosses of God's Buckler, and venture upon Damnation, without Care or Fear
These feel no Burden from their Sins, have no Sense of the Weight of Gods
Displeasure, no affecting Prosp^ct of the Horrors of etern^l Perdi^^on; and
therefore no Solicitude to flee from the Wrath to come.

These conten^ themselves with a general Hope, and with being in as good a
St^^e as others: or if they have any Checks of Conscience and slight
Apprehensions of ^a^ger, they can st^ll the Tumult in their Breasts, and quiet
their Minds, with their good Purposes o^ Performances

These can see no Necessity of Christ, they cannot be in earnest seeking an
Interest in (...) nor can they place all their D^p^n^a^ce upon him, as the
Author of their eternal Salvation; for the whole ^eed not the Physician: but
they that are sick. From whence it is apparent, that such as these are not
qualified to receive Rest from Christ, who are at re^t without him; and see no
Form nor Comeliness in him, that they should desire him.

Sinners will never come to Christ; nor Obta^n any ^aving Advantage from him,
until they are first brough^ to an awakening Sense of their Sin and Guilt, and
of their undone pershing Condition, while Enemies to God and Heirs of Hell.
They must see their Danger before they will fly from it.

Whatever Hope any may entertain of Salvation, while continuing in an Estate of
carnal Security, their Hopes will be cut off; and their Expectations perish.
They must be convinced of their present m^serable Estate, either by the
gracious Influences of the Spirit of God, or by a dreadful Experience of his
eternal Wrath.

Conviction of Sin is the first Operation of the Spirit of God, in Order to a
Sinners ^aving Conversion to him. Accordingly our blessed Lord promises to send
the Comforter, to convince the World of Sin, Joh. xvi.8. and this is
exemplified to us, in all the Conversions we have a particular Account of in
the New Testament. Thus St. Peter's Hearers, from an awakening Sense of their
Danger, are pricked in their Heart, and cried out to the Apostles, Men and
Brethren, what shall we do? Acts. ii.37. Thus the Jailer from like Distress an^
Terror* came trembling, and fell down before Pau^ and Silas, saying, Sirs, What
shall I do to be saved* And thus Saul trembling and astonished, said, Lord What
will thou have me to do? Acts. ix.6 -- Suc^ Convictions are sometimes begun in
the Soul by the Means of some awakening Providence, sometimes by Christian
Conferences* sometimes by public, and sometimes by private Ordinances; and
even sometimes by the immediate Influences of the Spirit of God, without any
known Means or outward Occasion whatsoever: But the Means which God, is most
usually pleased to bless unto this End, is the Ministry of the Gospel. It has
pleased God, by the Foolishness of Preaching to save those that believe, 1 Cor.
1.21.

These Convictions of which I speak, are ordinarily begun in the Soul, from a
view of some more gross Pollutions and more aggravated Impieties and
Enormities, that the guilty Sinner sees himself chargeable with. These stare
him in the Face, lay just hold on his Conscience; and set before him, a fearful
Prospect of that fiery Indignation, that is like to consume him. These lie down
and rise with him, and follow him wherever he goes, and whatever he does, till
his Soul is filled with Terror and Amazement. But then, if these Conviction^
have any good Effect upon the Soul, they will not stop here, until the Sinner is
brought to see, that in^umerable Evils have compassed him about, that his
Iniquities have taken hold upon him, that he cannot look up; that they are more
than the Hairs of his Head; and therefore, hi^ Heart fails him* according to
that in in Psalm. xl.12. He must be brou^ht to see, that his Sins are vastly
numerous and greatly aggravated, that every Station, every Relation,
Circumstance and Capacity of his Life, are filled up with Sin, ti^l he is even
b^ought to admire the Patience and long-suffering of God; that such a Guilty
Wretch as he should be out of Hell. From this dreadful view of his Case will he
be brought to look to the Sin of his Nature, the Cursed Source and Fountain of
all these Swarms of Lust that have thus acted th^n Part in his Heart and Life,
until he cry out with the Psalmist, Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin
did my Mother Conceive me. Psalm. L^.8. And with the Apostle, I am Carnal, sold
under Sin, Romans vii.14. O what a hard Heart, what vile Affections, what Enmity
to God and (...) that is Good, will a Sinner discover in himself, when once his
Conscience is thoroughly awakened, and he is brought to see his C^se as it is --
Thus if the Poor Guilty Soul re^^^ct* upon his Past-Life, he sees nothing but
^ultiplied and aggarva^ed Sins that fill him with ^^n^usion; if he looks into
himself, he finds nothing but a Fountain of Pollution and De^^^ment; if he
looks forward, he has nothing in View but Destruction and Death. No Wonder,
therefore; if we see such as these Meditating no^h^ing but Terror, afraid of
the shaking of every Leaf, and even afraid to lie down to sleep, lest they
awake in Hell. No Wonder, if the^^ have some Times Occasion to exclaim with the
Psalmist, While I suffer thy (...), I am Distracted.

There is indeed a great* Difference in the manner, Degree, and Duration of
these Convi^^ions, even in those upon whom they have a saving Effect, Some are
more suddenly surprised with a Sight of their undone Estate* others more
gradually brought to a Sense of it. Some are more sorely broken with
distressing and distracting Terrors from an afrighting View of the Weight of
their Guilt, of the Wrath of an incensed God; and of the dreadful Damnation
they have in Prospect; others in their greatest Distresses, have stronger Hopes
to Support them from Sinking under such unutterable Anguish. Some for a long
Time agonize under these Horrors of Conscience; and are for Years together kept
under a Spirit of Bondage; others are quickly brought to the Footstool of
God's Mercy, to Rest with Comfort in an absolute Dependence upon Christ alone
for Justification and Life. But how different soever these Convictions may be,
none will ever be brought to Christ, till they are convinced that they are
undone, helpless, and hopeless in themselves, and until they are brought to an
utter Despair of Salvation, from any Thing they do or can do for their own
Relief.

Thus I have set in your View one Thing Necessarily implied in ^^ing Weary and
Heavy Laden; and I have no hope that any of you will ever come to Christ for
Rest; until you have had some Experience of this in your own Souls.

I would more^ver put you in Mind, that though this be necessary, it is not a
sufficient Preparation for your coming to Christ for Rest.

You may pass through the greatest degrees of Conviction; and yet return like a
Dog to his Vomit; and the Sow that is Washed to her Wallowing in the Mire. I
therefore add, 2 dly They who are Weary and Heavy Laden in the Sense of our
Text, are so greatly burdened with the Weight of their Sin and Guilt; as to
earnestly groan after Freedom and Deliverance from it. When Convictions Work to
Purpose, they Represent our Sins as an intolerable Burden; and our State most
dreadfully Miserable, by no Means to be continued in. This Effect they had upon
the Psalmist: There is (says he) no Soundness in my Flesh, because of thine
Anger; neither is there any Rest in my Bones, because of my Sin. For mine
Iniquities are gone over mine Head as an Heavy Burden, they are too Heavy for
me. Psalm. xxxviii.3, 4. This d^scovery puts the Distressed Soul upon most
Anxious Solicitude after some Methods of R^lief; and some Means of Deliverance
from this Insupportable Burden: This is exemplified in the Instances before
proposed to you. When St. Peter's Hearers were Pricked in their Hearts, they
Cry out with Amaz^ment, MEN and BRETHREN, what shall we do? The Trembling
Iaylor immediately meditates some Way of Escape from ^he Wrath to come; and
exclaims with Agony of Soul, Sirs, What shall I do to be saved? In like Manner
St. Paul with Trembling and Astonishment Cries out, LORD, What will thou have me
to do? These we see were willing to do any Thing, be any Thing, bear any Thing,
so they might but obtain the Favor of God, and an Interest in his Salvation.
This Effect must Convictions have upon all of us, in Order to our being
prepared by them to come to Christ for Rest. Those of us that could before
commit Sin with Greediness, and roll the sweet Morsel under our Tongues, must
now be brought to tremble at the Apprehension of Sinning against God. Those of
us that could before quietly live in the Neglect of known Duty; and slothfully
turn our Backs upon the Public or private Ordinances of God, shall not now
dare to neglect any Occasion of Divine Worship; but shall be Constant at
Public Ordinances, at Family Worship, and Closet Duties, Constant in our
reading the Word of God, and other good Books; in Meditatin^ upon, and
conversing about the Great Things of our Eternal Peace. Those of us that before
could content ourselves with a formal and slothful Performance of Religious
Duties, with dead lifeless* and perfunctory Devotions, shall now be awakened to
most Serious, Affectionate, and solemn Application in our Approaches to God,
and bear upon our Hearts the Deadness of our Affections, and Wandering of our
Thoughts in God's Worship, as our continual Burden.

If we have once a due Impression upon our Hearts, of our Miserable Perishing
Circumstances, we shall no longer dispute the Terms of our Deliverance; no
longer retain any Reserves in our Obedience; nor desire to hide any (...) with.
We shall no longer ridicule the Power of Godliness, as unnecessary Preciseness;
nor be Perjudiced against a Life of Vital Piety, as too strict to be complied
with. Our Complaints will not be against the strictness of Religion, but
against the Hardness of our own Hearts; and our own deadness and deficiency in
a Religious Life. -- In a Word, we shall be born down with the Burden of our
Sin and Guilt. We shall earnestly desire, seriously enquire after, and
dilligently pursue, ^ome M^thod of Deliverance from those Distresses which we
both Feel and Fear.

This is to be WEARY and Heavy LADEN; and this is what my Hearers must all
Ex^erience, if ever they are Qualified for the Rest ^ere Promised.

You may perhaps think this is a hard saying, (...) you cannot bear. But I am
in Faithfulness ^^lig'd to propose what is still harder to you, which is, if
that you have Experienced all this, you (...) not yet be Prepared to come to
Christ. ^ou may be but a Self-Righteous Hypocrite; ^^^ugh you could boast with
the Apostle in his ^nconverted State, that you are as touching the
^^^hteousness which is in the Law Blameless. ^ ^^^refore further add, 3 dly,
They who are Wear^ (...) Heavy Laden, are deeply sensible of their (...) and
utter Inability to help themselves* (...) once a Sinner is thoroughly awakened
(...) his Carnal Security, he cannot help but (...) enquire, What he shall do
to be saved? (...) ^bserv'd to you before. But how common si it for such as
these to seek Peace to their Souls from their own Performances; and to rest in
what they do, or Propose to do, as what will make up the Breach between God and
them; and entitle them to his Favor. They see the Greatness and Agravation of
their Sins, and especially of some of them which threaten them with Ruin and
Perdition. This brings them to Resolve upon a Reformation. They will not indulge
their Lusts as they have done, they will be more Careful and Watchful, they
will keep out of the Way of Temptation; and Endeavor a new Life. -- They see
the Dreadful Defects of their Duties, which they have either wholly omitted or
most carelessly performed. This fills 'em with Awful Apprehensions; and awakens
in 'em most Solemn Resolutions to greater Diligence in a Religious Life. They
will be more Constant in their Closets, more careful of their Family Worship,
more devout in their Attendance upon Public Ordinances. and more watchful over
their ^^art^ and Affections in all their Approaches to God. Thus perhaps their
Consciences will be quieted, and they settled upon their Lee^ in a graceless
Christless State. They have now Balanced their Accounts with GOD; and like the
Jews in Jer. vii.10. come and stand before him, and say, We are delivered to do
all those Abominations. They now Hope from the Mercies of GOD, and the Merits
of CHRIST; that they who are so much reformed, and who lead such a Religious
Life, shall be accepted and saved. Thus they compass themselves about with
Receive at the Hands of God shall be, to lie down in Sorrow.

This being the sad Case of too many, who think themselves Something, when they
are Nothing; and Deceive themselves, it concerns me to show you, That all your
own Righteousness is Filthy R^gs, That all you do, or can do, is so far from
answering the Demands of Justice, that the Iniqui^y of your Holy Things might
justly damn you. Inde^d, My Brethren; if God have saving Me^cy upon your Souls,
He will make you deeply sensible, that you cannot change your own Hearts and
Affections, that you cannot per^orm the Duties of Religion in any suitable and
acceptable M^nner, that you cannot perfo^m your Purposes and Resolutions; nor
believe in Christ, and depend upon him for Salvation. There Is none of you will
ever come to Christ for Salvation, till you are ^^rst sensibly convinced, that
you are utterly unable to help yourselves or to believe in him that you might
have Life. -- This has been the Experience of all those that have had a saving
Change wrought in their Souls. They have found, that it was in vain to depend
upon their good Purposes, Promises, Reformations or Duties. They have found,
that they were lost and undon^, and could not help themselves. They have found,
that it was in vain to fly from Mountain to Hill; that the more they pretend^d
to strive in their own Strength, the more Imperf^ction they discovered in their
Duties, and the more Corrup^ions in their Hear^s* free Grace; and the Merits of
the Great Redeemer, and they have therefore committed their Souls to him, to do
all in them, all with them, and all for them.

This Experience we must every one of us attain to, or we are undone for ever.
We must be thus humbled, and brought off from all Confidence in ourselves, and
from all seize of our own that we either have, or hope for, before we can
have any Interest in the Gracious Promise before us. To this I will add once
more.

4ly, They who are Weary and Heavy Laden, are brought to a lively Sense of
their utter Unworthiness that God should show them any Mercy. What I have said
already gives us some View of the great Distress of an awakened humbled Sinner;
they have found all their Refuges fail, all their Cisterns drawn dry; and all
their Props knocked from under them. And whither shall they flee for help?
Could they with the careless World, flatter themselves from the Riches of God's
Mercy and the Merits of Christ, without an Interest in either of them, that
would ease them of their Burden; and lull 'em asleep in Security. But alas!
they are pressed down with a Weight of Guilt, which challenges the Justice of a
provoked God. They see that they deserve nothing but Wrath, that they have no
Claim to Mercy; and that they can do nothing which will entitle 'em to it. They
see that God may justly take the Forfeiture at their Hands, and glorify himself
in their Eternal Ruin; and thence are ready to Wonder at the Patience and
Long-Suffering of God toward such henious, hard hearted Sinners as they are.

There is indeed a great Difference in the humbling Views of their own
Unworthiness, which these Weary and Heavy Laden Sinners entertain. Some of them
have such a Sense of their Guilt and just exposedness to the Divine Wrath, that
they are Troubled, they are bow's down greatly, and go Mourning all the Day
long. They see that God may justly reject them; and they don't know but he
will, and how dreadful does their Case appear, while they see but a mere
Possibility of escaping his eternal Vengeance! Some of them find such Powerful
Corruptions, such deadness in Duty; and such hardness of Heart, that they are
ready to fear that they are given up of God, that they have Sinned away their
Day of Grace, and that the Things of their Peace are hidden from their Eyes.
These from such a distressing Prospect of their State, and from the Powerful
Temptations of Satan setting in with it, are some Times ready to give up the
Case, and to conclude that God's Mercies are clean gone forever; and that he
has in Anger shut up his tender Mercies. Others will be more comfortably
Supported in their greatest Darkness and Fears, with some Hopes of undeserved
Mercy, they will still hope (how dark soever their Case appears) that the Rich
and free Grace of God, which has been so often Glorified in the Salvation of
the greatest Sinners, may extend even to them also, and that ever they may be
made Partakers of the Redemption of Christ, which has been so dearly purchased,
and is so freely offered. And how glori^us and astonishing will this free Grace
and Love of God in Christ appear to them, when they can entertain, any
satifying Prospect of it.

I cannot pretend at Present to set before you all the various Operations of the
Spirit of Grace in a humbled heavy laden Soul. But this is their united
Character; and what is always found in every one that is prepared to come to
Christ for Rest, that they absolutely despair of all their own Strength or
Ability to help themseves, that they altogether give up all Hope, from any
Thing else but the free, forfeited* and undeserved Grace, and Mercy of God* and
the infinite Merit, and inexhaustible Fullness and Sufficiency of the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Thus I have briefly, though but imperfectly described to you the Weary and Heavy
Laden Soul. I have shown you what Convictions of Sin, what a Burden under the
Weight of it, what solicitous enquiries after the Way of Salvation, and what a
deep Impression of our own Impotency and Unworthiness of Mercy, are ne^essary
Preparations for our coming to Christ. And don't (I beseech you) imagine that
these ^re peculiar and extraordinary Qualifications, (...) the Fruits of
Darkness, Melancholy, or (...) Temptations, that you are not concerned in but
consider them as of last necessity to ev^ry Soul of you, that would stand on
the Right Hand of your Judge, at his Appearing and Kingdom. These are Eternal
Truths, that they are the Poor in Spirit, who are entitled to the Kingdom of
Heaven; that they are those that Mourn, who shall be comforted* that when the
Hungry are filled with good Things, the Rich shall be sent empty away; that
when God gives, a new Heart and a new Spirit, he ca^^^es the Sinner to Remember
his own evil Ways and Doings, and to loath himself in his own sight for his
Iniquities and Abominations, that we must esteem allour own Seize to be
Loss and Dung for Christ, if ever we are found in him, and that it must be to
the Praise of the Glory of God's Grace, if ever we are accepted in the Beloved.

If any of you are prejudiced against these Doctrines, and think I have carried
the Point too far; the Power of Divine Grace, if you are so happy as to obtain
it, will remove your Prejudices, and give you an experimental Conviction of
their Truths.

If any of you are surprised at what you have heard, as being Strangers to all
these Things; the Lord set home the Surprise to Purpose, till you have attained
to the happy Experience, that you may not perish for ever with Unconverted
Sinners.

If any of you have found these Characters of the Weary and Heavy Laden, in
your own Souls, you are the Subjects of the Gracious Invitation in the Text.
Come unto Christ and he will give you Rest. And for your Assistance in so doing
I shall Endeavor to point out the Way by showing you.

I^ What is implied in coming to Christ, that we may have Rest.

Upon this I shall observe in general, that coming to Christ implies the same
Thing, with believing on him. Thus it is explained Ioh. vi.35. He that comes
to me shall never Hunger, and he that believes on me shall never Thirst. To
come to Christ is therefore to give such a hearty Assent to the Truths of the
Gospel, as to be fully confirmed in them, and to have them Powerfully impressed
on our Minds. It is readily to consent with our whole Hearts to the Proposals
of the Gospel, and to Receive the Lord Jesus Christ upon his own Terms. It is
to Place all our Confidence upon him as the Lord our Righteousness, and as the
Fountain of Grace and Life, that he may be all in all to us. Or in other Words,
it is to choose him for our Portion, to give up ourselves wholly to him, and to
trust in him alone as the Author of our Eternal Salvation. This is to come to
Christ; and this the only Terms by which we can be entitled to the Rest here
promised.

Sinners are ready to flatter themselves with safety, and to quiet their
Consciences in a State of Sin and Impenitence, from such Gracious Encouragement
as this in our Text. It is but c^ming to Christ, and they shall obtain
Salvation As though this were in their own Power; and as though they could by
this Means at their Pleasure obtain a Deliverance from Sin and Guilt, and a
Title to Heaven. But what do they understand by coming to Christ? No more
perhaps, than Praying to him, and attending some of the Ordinances of the
Gospel, as if this were sufficient to make up the Breach between God and their
Souls. But I beseech you, my Brethren, to receive this for an established
truth, that you are never to hope for an Interest in Christ and his Salvation,
until you are brought to receive a whole Christ with your whole Hearts, and to
be united to him by a vital Faith. There is no Rest to be obtained from Christ,
until you place all your Rest in him; and have all your Dependence upon him.
Without Faith its impossible to please God, Heb. xi*6 He that believes not
shall be damned, Mark xvi.16, Some of you may perhaps, be startled at this
Doctrine, as what robs you of all the Comfort you had taken from the Text. For
if this be coming to Christ, you are no more able to come to him by your own
Power, than to create a New World. Faith is the Gift of God, and what Flesh and
Blood cannot reveal, you are therefore plunged into Distress; and what can you
do?

That I may obviate this Difficulty, I would further observe to you, that if
you would come to Christ, you must repair to him, and rely upon him for Grace
to receive him. He is the Authoo and Finisher of our Faith, Heb. xii.2. It is
of his Fullness that we all receive, and even Grace for Grace, Joh. i.16. We
cannot indeed come to Christ and believe in him, without the Supernatural
Assistances of Divine Grace. But cannot we endeavor to lie at his Footstool,
in Order to obtain those Gracious Influences, whereby we may receive him, and
have Power to become the Children of Go^? We cannot, it is true; ever do this,
so (...) g^ve us a Claim to those Divine Assistances, as being any Way due to
the best of our defective Performances or Endeavors; yet we can Endeavor to
do it as well as we can. It is more than possible for such humbled Souls as
have been described, to Endeavor to cast themselves at the Footstool of the
Lord Jesus Christ; to have the Work of Faith with Power, wrought in theiro Suls
And in that Way they have all possible Encouragement, that if they thus seek
they shall find.

We must therefore Endeavor a most serious and solemn Attendance upon all the
Ordinances of Divine Wors^^^, and especially to Pray with all Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit; and in that Way, seek for the Blessing promised to
those the Watch at his Gate; and wait at the Posts of his Doors.

We must be Constant and diligent in our Attendance upon all the Means of
Grace; and be not slothful in Business; but fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord.

We must be importunate in our Suits for Mercy, and with Jacob wrestle with him
for (...) saving Influences of his Spirit and Grace, ^esolving not to let him
go until he bless us.

We must persevere in thi^ Course of most active Diligence, whether we see any
present Returns or not. If we are forced to walk in the Dark, we must yet
follow on to seek the Lord, and resolve if he slay us, we will yet trust in
him. If the comfortable Effects of our Endeavors seem to tarry, we must wait
for them, for they will come and will not tarry.

We must after all, prostrate both our Persons and Services at his Foot, deeply
sensible that he may justly reject them both, making mention of his
Righteousness and that only; and pleading only the Riches of his free,
unmerited, Sovereign Grace and Love.

Thus I have set before you the only Terms, upon which you may hope for Rest
from Christ. Those of you whose Consciences tell you, that you are yet
Strangers to these Qualifications, have Cause to be awakened from a Sense of
your Miserable undone Condition, and of the Necessity of your flying for your
Lives to this City of Refuge, before the Avenger of Blood overtake you. Those
of you that have good Hopes through Grace, that you have thus come to Christ,
are now to have the Comforts of Rest proposed to you. In Order to this I shall
consider.

III. What that Rest is, which the Lord Jesus Christ will bestow upon those
Weary and Heavy Laden Souls, that come to him for it.

The Rest here promised does in general imply a Freedom and Deliverance from
all the Miserable and deadly Effects of our fallen apostate S^ate. These being
a heavy and unsupportable Burden, to an awakened humbled Soul, a Freedom from
the W^ight of that Burden, may be fitly called Rest. And such a Freedom has
the Lord Jesus Christ purchased and tendered to all those that will come to him
for it. That as Sin has reigned unto Death, even so might Grace reign through
Righteousness, unto Eternal Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans v.21.

Here is Rest and Deliverance promised from the Guilt and damning Power of Sin.
Though every Christless Sinner be condemned already and the Wrath of God abides
on him, Joh. iii, 36. Yet if he will come to Christ, the Sentence of Death,
will be reversed; the Curse of the Law taken off, and the Guilty Soul
reconciled to God through the Death of the Cross. There is no Condemnation to
them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh; but after the
Spirit, Romans viii.1.

Here is Rest also promised from the Dominion of Sin. Though every Unbeliever
is in a Miserable Vassalage and Thraldom to his Lusts; and led Captive by them
at their Pleasure, yet if they will come to Christ, the Son will make them
free, and they well be free indeed. There will yet be Remainders of their
Corruptions: but they shall Reign no more* The Flesh will yet lust against the
Spirit; and many Imperfections accompany their highest Seize: but with
the Mind they will serve the Law of God, though with the Flesh the Law of Sin.
Though they must yet keep on their Harness, they are sure of a Victory. Sin
shall no more have Dominion over them; for they are not under the Law, but
under Grace. Romans vi.14.

Here is Rest and Freedom likewise promised from the Tyranny of Satan. though
Satan has an absolu^e Dominion over, and a full Propriety in unsanct^fied
Sinners, that they are guided by his Directions, acted by his Influences; and
hurried headlong by his Temptations in the Paths of Destruction and Death; and
though they are all of their Father the Devil, and the Lusts of their Father
they will do; yet if they will come to Christ, he will strengthen them against
Satan's Temptations; and with the Temptation make a Way for their Escape, he
will Support them under his fiercest Assaults, and enable them to stand against
the Wiles of the Devil, and to quench all his Fiery Darts; he will bruise Satan
under their Feet shortly, Romans xvi.20.

Here is moreover Rest promised from the Damnation of Hell* Though every
Unconverted Sinner is under a Sentence of Eternal Damnation; and there is but a
Step between them and the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, which is the second
Death; yet if they will come to Christ he will disarm Hell of all its Terrors,
free them from the dreadful Danger, and prepare them for an Eternal Triumph
over it, while others are weltering in the Flaming Vengeance, and Weeping and
Wa^ling and Gnashing of their Teeth for ever. For he that believes on him,
shall not come into Condemnation* Joh. v.24.

Here is also Eternal Rest, promised to all those that come to Christ. These
shall be kept by the Power of God, through Faith to Salvation. They shall be
guided by his Counsel; and afterward brought to Glory. They shall in the
Conclusion be Eternally free from all their Fears, Darkness, Temptations and
Tribulations; and be possessed of the Joy of their Lord, where they shall enjoy
what Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard; neither has entered into the Heart of Man;
where they shall Eternally tune their Harps to the Praise of him, who has loved
them, and washed them from their Sins in his own Blood, and made them Kings and
Priests, to God and his Father. This is the Rest which remains for the People
of God, Heb..iv.9.

Thus I have set before you a Rest, worthy of your Choice and Pursuit. How
intollerably Miserable must all those be, that come short of it. How
inconceivably happy will they be, that enter into this Rest. And why then will
any of you be so mad, as to forego this blessed Prospect for the Gratification
of your base and sordid Lusts and Pleasures? Why are not all of you most
actively solicitous, to lay hold on this Hope, that is set before you?

But its Time to make some particular Application of what you have heard. And

1. This Teaches us the Dangerous and Miserable Condition of all those, that
remain careless and carnally secure, in a State of Unbelief. It is an awful
Thing to consider, how the greatest Part of our People a^e at ease and quiet
under the Guilt of Sin, the Curse of the Law; and the Wrath of God. Though they
are upon the Brink of the bottomless P^t; and lia^le every Moment to be plunged
into an Estate of Eternal Perdition; yet they neither feel their Misery, nor
see their Danger, they Eat and Drink and Sleep in quiet; and pursue the World
and their Lusts, without F^ar or Care of the dreadful event. But is it not T^me
for such of you to consider, that you are without an Interest in Christ,
without any C^aim to the Gracious Promise here made to the Weary and Heavy
Laden; or inde^d to any Promise in the whole Book of God; and that you are
without Possibility of Salvation, while you remain in this Security? Is it not
Time for you to stop your daring Progress in the Paths of Destruction, before
your Case is remediless for ever? Would any of you keep your Beds, and say, a
little more sleep, a little more slumber, a little more folding of their Hands
to sleep, if you were warned that your House were on Fire; and you just ready
to be consumed in the devouring Flame? Indeed, my dear Brethren, this is your
Case, the dreadful Flames of God's burning Vengeance are as it were flashing
about your Ears, sleep but a little longer, and you are fixed for ever in that
Fore that shall never be quenched. And can you quietly bea^ this terrible
Thought? Can you be content to roar out a dreadful Eternity, under the Agonie^
of intolerable Torments and E^dles^ despair? Had you rather have your Lot with
Devils and Damned Spirits, than forsake your Lusts and fly to Christ for Mercy?
But you hope, perhaps, for better Things, you hope it will never come to thi^,
but that you shall some Way or other escape this dreadful Destruction. But what
Grounds have you for this Hope? Can you hope that God will violate his Word for
your Sake; and sacrifice his Truth and Justice to your Lusts? Can you hope that
God will make new Terms of Salvation for you, that were never proposed to any
in the World; and that you shall be saved in a Way contrary to his Nature, to
his Law, and to the whole Tenor of the Gospel Covenant? O how vain is that
Hope, how likely to End in amazing Disappointment, and to leave you for ever
ashamed of it! I testify to you in the Name of the Lord; that there is no Hope
for you, nothing but Eternal Destruction to be expected by you, unless you
awake from your Sleep, and arise from the Dead, that Christ may give you Light.

Its probable that some of you will be ready to complain of this Address, and
say, what need of all this Terror? Must we hear of nothing but Hell and
Damnation? But in Answer to this, I assure you, that it is not from any Delight
in your Disquie^ o^ uneasiness, that I set these awful Truth before you. I
would leave you in an undisturbed Tranquillity, if your precious Souls were not
in D^ng^r. But it is from a Sen^e of Duty to God, its from Compassion to your
Perishing Souls, that I thus Warn you of your approaching Ruin. I am bound
(...) ^ffice, I am excited by Pity to your Souls, to endeavor to awaken you
out of this fatal Lethargy, lest you should Sleep on in your Security until
your Opportunity is lost forever. And Oh that I could stir up any of you to see
your Danger; and in earnest to meditate on Escape from it! But I am afraid that
this Sermon will have no better Success, than the many others of the like
Nature, which you have heard before, and that you will yet securely go on in
the same Ways of Sin and Death; until dreadful Experience convince you, that it
is a fearful Thing to fall into the Hands of the living God. If it must be so,
I cannot help it, God is Witness; and you are Witnesses against your selves,
that I have once more faithfully warned you. And thus I must leave those that
will not regard me; to Sleep on and take their Rest, and return to the more
delightful Part of a Ministers Employment.

2. Here is Matter of greatest Encouragement to Poor doub^ing distressed Souls,
whatever Darkness and Discouragements, Trials or Temptations, they may be
exercised with. You may perhaps fear, that your Case is desperate. You may be
troubled and bowed down greatly; and go Mourning all the Day long, and your
Bones may wax Old, through your roaring all the Day. But how D^rk soever your
Case may appear, there is Hope in Israel concerning this Matter. The great
Red^emer has Purchased Peace and Pardon for you; and is this Day calling upon
you to come unto him; and he will give you Rest.

Though your Sins are never so many and never so great, you may hope for
Acceptance with God, through the Lord Jesus Christ* It is not the Number nor
the Aggravation of their Sin^ that makes the C^se of Sinners desperate; but
their impenitent continuance in them. The Blood of Christ is sufficient to
cleanse from many Sins, as well as from few; from great Sins as well as from
small ones. Repair therefore to that Fountain that is set open for Sin and
Uncleanness; and though your Sins are as Crimson and Scarlet, they shall become
like Wool and Snow; though they are Written with a Pen of Iron, and engraven with
the Point of a Diamond, they shall be all blotted out against the Times of
refreshing, shall come from the Presence of the Lord. For this is a Faithful
saying, and worthy of all Acceptance, that Jesus Christ came to save Sinners,
the chief of Sinners. 1 Timothy i.15. The Blood of Jesus Christ, God's Son,
cleanses from all Sin. 1 John i.7.

Though you have long continued in a State of Sin and Guilt, there is yet an
accepted Time and a Day of Salvation for you. It is indeed a Wonder of God's
Patience and forbearing Goodness, that you have not before now been cut down in
the Act of Sinning, and sent to Hell. But blessed be his Name, he is yet
waiting upon you to be Gracious, he is yet calling upon you, to Day after so
long a Time, to hearken to his Voice; and not harden your Hearts, Heb. iv.7.
And if you will at last comply with the Inv^^ation and come to Christ, you
shall in no wise be cast out. You may make sure to your selves that your Day of
Grace is not past; if you will improve your remaining Season, in giving up your
selves to Christ and living to him. For if you have a Heart to do this, its
certain you are not yet given up to a hard Heart, and a reprobate Mind* Though
it is always too la^e to delay our R^pentance, and put off the Things of our
Peace to future Opportunity; and though the^ that ^enture upon it, Run the
dreadful Hazard of losing all Opportunity and P^ssibility of Mercy* Yet it is
never too late on this Side Hell, sincerely to Repent of our Sins; and come to
Christ for Grace and Salvation.

Though you have long Sinned against Gospel Grace and Love, against Christ; his
Ordinances and Gracious Offers of Mercy, there is yet Encouragement even for
such Sinners as you, to come unto Christ for Life. It must indeed be confessed,
That Gospel Sinners are p^culiarly heinous in the sight of God. Their Rejection
of Christ, their Contempt of his Ordinanc^s; and Abuse of his Love, add as
dreadful Weight to their Guilt, and exposes them to a more ^errible Damnation.
It is indeed a Wonder that any such as these, who reject the Lord that bought
them; and set light by the infinite Merits of his Blood, should ever obtain
Mercy. But such are the boundless R^ches of his Grace and Love, that some of
those Guilty Wretches, who with Wicked Hands had Crucified and slain the Lord
of Life, had the Promise of Salvation made unto them and to their Children,
Acts. ii 23, 39. And the same Promise is made unto you also, if you will attend
the Directions given to them. He that saved P^ul, a Blasphemer, a Persecutor
and Injuriou^, for this Cause bestowed Mercy upon him, that in him first Jesus
Christ might show forth all Long-Suffering, for a Pattern to them which should
hereafter believe on him, to Life everlasting. 1 Timothy 1.13.16. And why may not
you depend upon and hope in that Infinite Grace and Love of Christ, which
bestowed Salvation upon Peter* who denied his Lord with an Oath, and cu^s'd and
swore that he did not know him.

I may add to all this, Though you find Cause to complain of great hardness of
Heart; Stupidity, and Insensibility; yet you are invited to come to Christ for
Relief in this Case also. You may perhaps imagine your selves exempted from all
the Gracious Encouragements that have been set before you, since you are
altogether incapable to comply with the Terms whereon they are proposed. Could
you but come to Christ, you are sensible there would be Hope. But alas! you are
a Poor hard hearted graceless Sinner; and what Hope can there be for you? Your
Affections are dead and dull, that you can have no lively Impression of the
Things that are unseen and Eternal. Your Duties are formal and superficial; and
your Hearts crowded with sinful and wandering Thoughts in your nearest
Approaches to God; which you are ready to fear renders your Case remediless.
These and such like Complaints are commonly made by convinced and humbled
Sinners; and are the common Occasion of their greatest Darkness and Distress.
But were their Complaints just, and their Heart as hard and graceless as they
suppose, their desperate Conclusions would no ways follow from thence. The
infinite Mercy of the great Redeemer does as well extend to such Weary and
Heavy Laden Sinners, as to others. Such as you (if any such there be amongst my
Hearers) who are burdened with a Sense of the hardness of your Hearts; and are
groaning after Deliverance from it, have all the Encouragement you can desire,
to depend upon Gods gracious Promise, that he will take away the Heart of Stone
out of your Flesh; and give you a Heart of Flesh, Ezekiel. xxxvi.26. You have
sufficient Encouragement to lie at his Footstool in the best Manner you are
capable of, for the sanctifying and quickening Influences of his blessed Spirit.
His Grace will be sufficient for you* 2 Cor. xii.9. He will quicken you, though
dead in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians..ii.1. Of his Fullness you shall receive, and
even Grace for Grace, John i.16. Do but perservere in a Diligent and humble
Endeavor to seek Grace, and Strength from him; and he will Work in you both to
will and to do. Phil. ii.13. He will carry you from Grace to Grace, and from
Strength to Strength. He will enliven your Affections, give you Enlargement in
your Duties, and Comfort you with the happy Experience, that his Ways are
indeed Ways of Pleasantness; and all his Paths Peace. They that thus wait upon
the Lord shall renew their Strength, they shall mount up with Wings as Eagles,
they shall run and not be Weary, they shall walk and not Faint, Isay. XL 31.

And now, what can stand in the Way of your Salvation, but your own Obstinacy
and Stupidity? What can hinder your obt^ining an Interest in Christ and all the
Benefits of his Redemption, but your care^ess neglect and Rejection of him?
Though the Case of secure Sinners be indeed as dreadful as can be imagined; yet
the Comforts given by our Lord Jesus Christ to Poor awakened and distressed
Souls, are as great as they themselves could desire, were they to state their
ow^ Terms of acceptance with God. All the Danger in this Case, is a
Misapplication of these Preci^us Consolations. That those who have no Part nor
Lot in this Matter, will ^ull themselves still faster asleep by these Gracious
Encour^gements, while those that are of a humble and contrite Spirit, and
tremble at God's Word, will doubt their Claim to this Comfort; and continue in
their Darkness and Distress. I therefore proceed,

3. To put you upon an Examination of your selves, whether you have been thus
Weary and Heavy Laden; and whether the Burden of your sinful and Miserable
State has brought you to Christ. This is an Affair of unutterable Importance.
Your Soul, your Eterni^y depend upon it. If you are deceived in thi^ matter,
you are undone forever. Your false hopes will stand you in no stead at the Bar
of your Ommiscient and impartial Judge. It will stand you in no stead at that
awful Tribunal, to plead your Privileges, your Moralities, your good Purposes;
or any of your Seize. If you have not been thus Weary and Heavy Laden, if
you have not come to Christ, all such Pleas will be silenced; and you rejected,
with I t^ll you I know you not whence you are; d^part from me all ye Workers of
Iniquity, Luke xiii.37. Be therefore entreated to be most serious, solemn, and
impartial in this Enquiry. Don't take up with a general Hope; or any slight
Grounds of Satisfaction; but make a daily Business of looking into your Hearts,
and into your State. Be afraid of being deceived, and cry to God that he will
search you and know your Hearts, try you and know your Thoughts, and see if
there be any Wicked Way in you, and lead you in the Way everlasting. That I may
assist you in your self Examination, let me Propose a few Thing to you.

1. Have you ever had a lively Affect^ng Sense of the dreadful Displeasure of
God, that your Sins have brought you under? You have heard what Convictions and
awakening Discoveries of your undone Miserable State, are necessary
Preparations to your coming to Christ; and have you experienced this in your
selves? Have you been rouzed out of your Security by a sight of your numerous
aggravated Sins? Have you been terrified with a Sense of the Wrath of God
incensed against you; and the dreadful Destruction ready to over^ake your
Guilty Souls? Have these Convictions had a lasting Impression upon you, have
they embittered your Sins to you, made you afraid of Sinning against God; and
put you upon a most awful Concern, about a Deliverance from these Perishing
Circumstances? Has this Concern been fixed upon your Minds, that you could not
shake it off by any Worldly Amusements or se^sual Pursuits? Has God's Arrow
stuck fast in you; and his Hand pressed you sore, that there was no S^undness
in your Flesh because of his Anger; nor Rest in your Bones because of your Sin?
What Answer do your Consciences make to these Demands? If you have Expe^ienced
these Things, God's Spirit has begun a Good W^rk in your Souls. Take heed, that
you don't wear off these Impressions, quench the Spirit of God, provoke him to
withdraw his Influences; and leave you to your former Security, if not to
final Obduracy and Impenitence. If you have not Experienced these Things, you
have not yet taken the very first Step toward your Salvation. And can yo^ be
quiet in such a Condition? The Lord taken you before it is too late! 2. Have you
^ver been most earnestly solicitous to get out of your Miserable Perishing
Condition; and to escape deserved Damnation? What Effect have your Convictions
had upon you? Have they left you in an un^ctive despairing Frame, Concluding
that if y^u Pine away in your Iniquities, how shall you then live, and that
it is in vain to strive; or have they so worn off, that you are fallen fast
asleep again in your f^rmer Sloth and Negligence? If either of ^hese be your
Case, your latter End is like to be wo^se than your Beginning. -- But on the
other Hand, are there none of you, that have been pu^ upon a most earnest and
hearty Concern about what you should do to escape the Danger of an un^anctified
S^ate; and upon a most Dilig^n^ Endeavor to comply with all the Metho^s of
Salvation Proposed in the Gospel? Have you constan^ly and ferven^ly addressed
the Thr^ne of Grace, in your Closets and Fam^ies? H^ve you conscienciously
attended upon all the Ordinances of Christ? Have studied to know all yo^^ Duty;
and without reserve endeavored to Practice (...)? Have you been striving to
enter in at the straight Gate; and pressing toward the Mark for the Prize of
the High Calling of God, in Christ Jesus our Lord? Have you been not slothful
in Business; but fervent in Spirit serving the Lord, Though such a Life of
Diligence Merits no Favor from God, yet this is the Way, Walk ye in it.

3. Have you committed your Souls to the free Grace of God, depending upon the
Righteousness of Christ, and that only, for your Acceptance with him? Have you
seen the D^^^ct and Imperfection of your own Duties and of all your own
Righteousness; and how justly God might Damn both you and them? Have you ever
seen that if God ever bestowed Salvation upon you, it must be such a Display of
fr^^ Grace as deserves your Eternal Admiration and Pra^se? Have you seen that
if ever you ob^^^n Salvation, it must be only upon Christ's Account upon the
Account of what Christ h^s done and su^^e^ed ^or you, and not on Account of
what you have done, or what you can do or suffer for him. Has this
Consideration made the Lord Jesus Christ appear exceeding precious to you, that
you could be rather con^ent to want any Thing else, than to want an Interest in
Christ? Have you most ardently desired to have Christ Reign in your Hearts; and
to bring all your Powers and Faculties into Subjection to him? Have you
committed your Souls to him, and Resolved to Rest only upon him, that he might
be unto you Wisd^m, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption? And has this
not only been found in your Souls, upon some sudden Heat of your Affections;
but your habitual Experience? If you can give a comfortable Answer to these
Enquiries; and don't deceive your serves, you may depend upon Rest from Christ.

4. Have you the Evidences of an Interest in Christ by the Blessed Fruits and
Consequences of an Union to him? If you believe in Christ, you are Careful to
maintain Good Works, for Faith without Works is dead. If you have a true Fait^
it i^ Operative, it Works by Love, by Love to God, Love to the Lord J^^us
Christ; Love to Holiness, Love to God's Ordinances, and Love to one another.
Now, have you had Experience of this? Have you had this Charge in your Hearts
and Affections, as well as in your Lives and Conversations? In a Word, have you
Experienced the Fruits of the Blessed Spirit in your Soul? This as much as any
Thing is a Distinguishing Mark of a Child of God. For if any Man have not the
Spirit of Christ (with his Fruits and Graces,) he is none of his, Romans viii.9.
It concerns you therefore, seriously to examine your selves by this Rule, and
to consider whether you have these Fruits in your hearts and Lives, according
as they are descr^bed, Gal. v.22, 23. The Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy,
Peace, Long-Suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. -- I
wish you could all stand this Trial; but there is too great cause to fear, that
some of you have not these Graces of the Spirit; or at least that you have them
not in Exercise. What else mean these Divisions and Confusion, these Aspersions
and Reproaches, this Judging and censuring one another, that is so much
complained of among you? Are not these Things as directly contrary to the
Fruits of the Spirit here enumerated, as they possibly can be? How then can any
Men pretend to be led by the Spirit of God, into such Practices as these* --
You may, perhaps, answer to this, that those whom you reproach and vil^fy, and
whom you thus severely judge and censure, are indeed formal Hypocrites; and it
is your Duty both to God and them, to tell them of it, and to awaken them to a
Sense of their Danger; that the Society in general being such Formalists, ought
to be broken up, that it may be settled upon a better Foundation. Such like
Pleas have (I perceive) been made for your Church-Dividing Practices; and for
your Uncharitable Censoriousness. But I would enquire of those, how they come
to know that they who are Professors of Religion, sound in their Faith, Regular
in their Conversations, Friends to vital Piety, forward in Promoting Religious
Duties; and constant in attending upon them, are but formal Hypocrites. They
may be such it is true; but it is the Prerogative of him who searches the Hearts
and the Reins, to determine whether they are such or not; And whence have any
of you Authority to invade his Prerogative? Would you but View your Conduct in
the Glass of God's Word, it might justly fill you with Surprise. There you are
directed not to Judge, least you are Judged, Mat. vii.1. There the Apostle
expostulates with you, as I have now been doing. Who art thou that judge
another Man's Servant? To his own Master he Stands or Falls. Why do thou
judge thy Brother, or why do thou set at naught thy Brother; for we shall all
stand before the Iudgment-Seat of Christ? Let us not therefore judge one
another any more, Rom, xiv.4.10, 13. And the same Apostle warns you, to judge
Nothing before the Time, until the Lord come, 1 Cor. iv.5. In that Blessed Book
you are directed, to do Nothing through strife and Vainglory; but in lowliness
of Mind, each to esteem other better than themselves* Phil. ii.3. And you are
there assured, that if you had all Faith so that you could remove. Mountains,
and have no Charity, you are Nothing, Cor. xiii.2. You are there repeatedly
warned of the Sinfulness of Divisions and Confusions, and of God's great
Displeasure against the Authors of them, You are there told, that this Wisdom
descends not from above, but is earthly sensual devilish, Jam. iii.15. Now
what must your Character appear, if you are tried by these Oracles of God? I
don't say it is impossible that you can have the Truth of Grace, this were to
imitate your Censoriousness, but I am bold to say, that these Practices are
directly opposi^e to the exercise of Grace, and therefore to be heartily
repented of, and speedily reformed, if you would have a clear Evidence of your
good Estate. It Is not improbable that I shall be severely censured for this
Address. But my Dear Brethren, have I not proved the Sinfulness of these
Practices by that Word, by which you and I must be judged at the last Day? If I
have, take heed what you do; for it is hard to kick against the Pricks. God
will first or last Vindicate the Truth of his Word, whoever oppose it. If I
have not proved this from the Word of God, challenge no Regard to any Thing I
have said, I don't desire you to receive any Thing upon my Authority. I
therefore leave this to the Determination of your own Consciences; and Pray God
that they may direct you to such Methods now, as will prove most Comfortable to
you in the Day of Christ. I shall add no more upon this Subject; but that I
have in the Fear of God born my Testimony against these uncharitable Practices,
and have delivered my Soul. If any of you will still persist in them, your
Blood be upon your own Heads, I am clear from your Guilt. -- There needs no
Apoligy for my insisting so long upon this Matter, you all know the Case, I
shall therefore leave it with you, and return to summon your Attention to those
Rules of Trial that have been proposed. Review what you have heard, and
consider it. Do your Consciences bear Testimony for you, that you have been
thoroughly awakened from your Carnal Security; and deeply affected with a Sense
of your Sin and Guilt, and of the Wrath of God, to which you are thereby
exposed? Do your Consciences testify for you, that you have been constant,
diligent and earnest in all known Me^hods of fleeing from the Wrath to come? Do
they upon an impartial Examination bear you Testimony, that you have renounced
all Confidence in your selves, that you commit your Souls to Christ, and depend
upon him only, as the Author of your Eternal Salvation? And have you found the
Fruits of the Blessed Spirit in your Souls, Mortifying your Lusts, Purifying
your Hearts, and quickening you in the Ways of God and Godliness? Have you
according to the Apostles Direction, Col. iii.14 15. Above all Things put on
Charity; which is the Bond of Perfectness? And has the Peace of God Ruled in
your Hearts, to which also ye are called in one Body. If these Things be in
yoa^ and abound, they make you, that ye shall be neither Barren nor Unfruitful
in the Knowledge of Our Lord Jesus Christ.

4 I would conclude this Address, with an earnest Exhortation to every one, to
come weary and heavy laden to Christ for Rest -- This is an Affair of the
greatest Consequence that was eve^ proposed to any of the Children of Men; and
every one of your Precious Souls are like to be Unconceivably happy and
Glorious; or Unspeakably and Intollerably Miserable, through all Eternity;
according as you comply with or rej^ct this Exhortation. And what a Tho^sa^d
P^ti^s it is, that any of you should fa^l of the Grace of God; and come short
of th^s Rest, when the Lord Jesus Christ is with such Bowels of tender
Compassion inviting you to come to him for it. What a Thousand Pities; that all
your Opportunities and Off^rs of Mercy, and this Sermon among the rest, should
increase your future Misery; and make the Flames of God's Eternal Wrath hotter
and more intolerable. O that I could therefore prevail with some of you at
least, to accept of this off^red Salvation! I can with greater sincerity
Address you in the Apostles Language, Romans x.1. Brethren, my Hearts desire and
Prayer for you is, that you might be saved. Though I have not so immediate a
Relation to you, as I formerly had: Yet, I cannot forget to be concerned for the
Welfare of your Souls. I should yet esteem it Matter of greatest Thankfulness,
if God would make me an Instrument of saving but one of you from Eternal Ruin.
Allow me therefore, to press this Exhortation upon you with greatest
Importunity; and I entreat you, not to give me a Denial.

I would more particularly apply my self to the Young People of this
Congregation; and Endeavor to prevail with them to come to Christ. I have more
hope of them than of others, for it has been a constant Observation, that the
most that are ever brought to a saving Interest in Christ, are converted in
their youth. Will you then, my dear Children, be persuaded to renounce your
youthful Lust^ and Pleasures, to consider your Danger and Misery, and betake
your selves to the Lord Jesus christ for Mercy, now while you have such a
Precious Opportunity; while God is waiting upon you to be Gracious, while
Christ is invi^ng you* Minist^rs persuading you, the Spirit striv^n^ wi^h you,
and the Arms of M^rcy open to receive you. Now is your Time. How soon all these
Advantages will be irrecoverably past forever, God only knows.

I must also direct this Exhortation to those of more advanced years, that have
longer stood it out against the Calls of the Gospel; and the striving of the
bl^ssed Spirit. Though the^^ is less h^p^ of prevailing with such a^ these; yet
I dare not despair even of their C^se. The Mercy of God, and ^he Redemption of
Christ, are sufficient for the Oldest and most enormous S^^ner of them all, if
they would but come to him for it. I would therefore most earnestly entreat, I
would most ^olemnly War^ such as these, to improve the rem^ining Sands of their
Glass, in this Infinite concern. You have lost Time enough. You h^ve run the
dre^dful Venture too long already. O then hea^k^n to this Exhortation, To Day
while it is cal^ed to (...)

I entreat all of you both Young and Old most seriously to Medita^^ upon the
dreadful Misery of your Condi^ion, while in an Unsanctified State. Solemnly and
d^liberately c^nsider what you are by Nature; Chil^^^n of Wrath, and Heirs of
Destructi^n. Consid^r what you are by Practice, most aggravatedly Guilty in the
Sight of God. Con^ider what Perdition and Eternal Ruin is ready to ^vertake
you, a thought that makes even the Devils tremble. The Law of God Condemns you;
and how terrible are the Curses of that broken Law. God himself is Angry with
you every D^y, and how astonishing ^s the Wrath of the Eternal God! Who can
stand before him, when once he is Angry? Hell opens its Mouth (...) you, there
is but a Step between you and Eternal Damnation. O Meditate upon these Things
till your Consciences are awakened; and you convinced that there is no resting
any longer in this Condition.

Consider likewise in a most serious and deliberate Manner, that there is no
Remedy for you, but in Christ only. D^n't fly to any carnal Refuges for Help in
your Distres^'d State, but impress it upon your Minds, that you must Ob^ain an
Interest in Christ; or perish without Remedy. Let this Considera^ion so aff^ct
your Souls, that you can rest quietly no longer in a Christless State.

And to conclude, Resolve to cast your So^ls upon his infinit^ Grace and Love,
what^ver be the ^ssue. Confess to God your Sin and (...), your utter
Unworthiness, and Inability to help your selves. Plead before him the boundless
Riches of his infinite Grace, and the Merits and Passion of his Son, for your
Acceptance with him: Be importunate with him, for the Graces of his Spirit, for
Faith to receive a tendered Savior upon his own Terms, to depend upon him, and
to live to him Endeavor to come to Christ as you are; and don't pretend to
prepare your selves for his Accep^^^ce. Though you cannot believe in him, (...)
^ou are first Weary and Heavy Laden, yet he alone mu^^ give you these
Qualifications. He must (...) you your Necessities of an Interest in him an^
en^ble you to receive him. Strive therefore to bring your dead, dull, lifeless,
and Sin^^l Heart^ to Christ, that he may begin and carry on the Good Pleasure
of his Goodness in you. Be constant and earnest in thus doing as for your
Lives. If you will thus be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the Work
of the Lord, your Labor shall not be in Vain in the LORD.


