THE DANGER OF AN UNCONVERTED MINISTRY, CONSIDERED IN A SERMON On MARK VI. 34.
Preached at NOTTINGHAM, in Pennsylvania, March 8. ANNO 1739, 40.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. And Minister of the Gospel in New-Brunswick,
New Jersey.

JEREM. V. 30, 31. A wonderful and horrible Thing is committed in the Land: The
Prophets prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear Rule by their Means, and my
People love to have it so; and what will they do in the End thereof?

The Second EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, In Market-Street, 1740.

To the People of Nottingham, The Epistle Dedicatory.
Dear FRIENDS!
I Thought it proper to dedicate to you the following Sermon, which I delivered
among you, as a Testimony of my Regard for you; and desire that you might be
directed in the Choice of a Minister, that so that important Affair might be
managed to your spiritual and immortal Benefit.

If any should object against the Style, and say, That it is too pointed; I
answer, That it is not keener than the Reflections of Christ himself against
the old Pharisees. So far as I know my Heart, it is Grief for the Injuries that
have been done to the Church of God by natural Ministers, that has extorted
such Acrimony from my Pen.

If there be any Rule of any Church, that seems to contradict what is offered
in the following Discourse, it ought to be considered, that there is a great
Difference between the flourishing and declining State of the Church, and that
Every general Rule admits of Exceptions.

May the LORD scourge Hirelings out of his Temple, and supply you with a
faithful Minister, according to His own Heart, that may feed you with Knowledge
and Understanding. I remain

Your hearty Well-wisher and humble Servant, G. TENNENT.

MARK VI. 34. And Jesus, when he came out, saw much People, and was moved with
Compassion toward them, because they were as Sheep not having a Shepherd.


AS a faithful Ministry is a great Ornament, Blessing, and Comfort, to the
Church of GOD; even the Feet of such Messengers are beautiful: So on the
contrary, an ungodly Ministry is a great Curse and Judgment: These Caterpillars
labor to devour every green Thing.

THERE is nothing that may more justly call forth our saddest Sorrows, and make
all our Powers and Passions mourn, in the most doleful Accents, the most
incessant, insatiable, and deploring Agonies; than the melancholy Case of such,
who have no faithful Ministry! This Truth is set before our Minds in a strong
Light, in the Words that I have chosen now to insist upon; in which we have an
Account of our LORD's Grief with the Causes of it.

WE are informed, That our dear Redeemer was moved with Compassion toward
them. The Original Word signifies the strongest and most vehement Pity, issuing
from the innermost Bowels.

BUT what was the Cause of this great and compassionate Commotion in the Heart
of Christ? It was because he saw much People as Sheep having no Shepherd. Why,
had the People then no Teachers? O yes! they had Heaps of Pharisee-Teachers,
that came out, no doubt after they had been at the Feet of Gamaliel the usual
Time, and according to the Acts, Canons, and Traditions of the Jewish Church.
But notwithstanding of the great Crowds of these Orthodox, Letter-learned and
regular Pharisees, our Lord laments the unhappy Case of that great Number of
People, who, in the Days of his Flesh, had no better Guides: Because that those
were as good as none (in many Respects) in our Savior's Judgment. For all
them, the People were as Sheep without a Shepherd.

FROM the Words of our Text, the following Proposition offers itself to our
Consideration, viz.

That the Case of such is much to be pitied, who have no other but
Pharisee-Shepherds, or unconverted Teachers.

IN discoursing upon this Subject, I would I. Enquire into the Characters of
the Old Pharisee-Teachers. II. Show, why the Case of such People, who have no
better, should be pitied. And III. Show, how Pity should be expressed upon this
mournful Occasion!
And

FIRST I am to enquire into the Characters of the Old Pharisee-Teachers. Now, I
think the most notorious Branches of their Character, were these, viz. Pride,
Policy, Malice, Ignorance, Covetousness, and Bigotry to human Inventions in
religious Matters.

THE old Pharisees were very proud and conceity; the loved the uppermost Seats
in the Synagogues, and to be called Rabbi, Rabbi; they were masterly and
positive in their Assertions, as if forsooth Knowledge must die with them; they
looked upon others that differed from them, and the common People, with an Air
of Disdian; and especially any who had a Respect for JESUS and his Doctrine,
and disliked them; they judged such accursed.

THE old Pharisee-Shepherds were as crafty as Foxes; they tried by all Means to
ensnare our Lord by their captious Questions, and to expose him to the
Displeasure of the State; while in the mean Time, by sly and sneaking Methods,
they tried to secure for themselves the Favor of the Grandees, and the
People's Applause; and this they obtained to their Satisfaction. Joh. 7.48.

BUT while they exerted the Craft of Foxes, they did not forget to breath forth
the Cruelty of Wolves, in a malicious Aspersing the Person of Christ, and in a
violent Opposing of the Truths, People, and Power of his Religion. Yea, the
most stern and strict of them were the Ringleaders of the Party: Witness
Readiness Journey to Damascus, with Letters from the Chief Priest, to bring bound
to Jerusalem all that he could find of that Way. It Is true the Pharisees did
not proceed to violent Measures with our Savior and his Disciples just at
first; but that was not owing to their good Nature, but their Policy; for they
feared the People. They must keep the People in their Interests: Ay, that was
the main Chance, the Compass that directed all their Proceedings; and therefore
such sly cautious Methods must be pursued as might consist herewith. They
wanted to root vital Religion out of the World; but they found it beyond their
Thumb.

ALTHOUGH some of the old Pharisee-Shepherds had a very fair and strict
Outside; yet were they ignorant of the New Birth: Witness Rabbi Nicodemus, who
talked like a Fool about it. Hear how our LORD cursed those plastered
Hypocrites, Mat. 23.27, 28. Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for
ye are like whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are
within full of dead Bones, and of all Uncleanness. Even so ye also appear
righteous unto Men, but within ye are full of Hypocrisy and Iniquity. Ay, if
they had but a little of the Learning then in Fashion, and a fair Outside, they
were presently put into the Priest's Office, though they had no Experience of
the New Birth. O sad!

THE old Pharisees, for all their long Prayers and other pious Pretenses, had
their Eyes, with Judas, fixed upon the Bag. Why, they came into the Priests
Office for a Piece of Bread; they took it up as a Trade, and therefore
endeavored to make the best Market of it they could. O Shame!

IT may be further observed, That the Pharisee-Teachers in Christ's Time, were
great Bigots to small Matters in Religion. Mat. 23.23. Woe unto you, Scribes and
Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye pay Tyth of Mint, and Anise, and Cumin, and have
omitted the weightier Matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith. The
Pharisees were fired with a Party-Zeal; they compassed Sea and Land to make a
Proselyte; and yet when he was made, they made him twofold more the Child of
Hell than themselves. They were also bigoted to human Inventions in religious
Matters: Paul himself, while he was a natural Man, was wonderful zealous for
the Traditions of the Fathers: Ay, those poor blind Guides, as our LORD
testifies, strained at a Gnat, and swallowed a Camel.

AND what a mighty Respect had they for the Sabbath Day forsooth! in so much
that Christ and his Disciples must be charged with the Breach thereof, for
doing Works of Mercy and Necessity. Ah the Rottenness of these Hypocrites! It
was not so much Respect to the Sabbath, as Malice against Christ, that was the
Occasion of the Charge; they wanted some plausible Pretense to offer against
him, in order to blacken his Character.

AND what a great Love had they in Pretense to those pious Prophets, who were
dead before they were born? while in the mean Time they were persecuting the
Prince of Prophets! Hear how the King of the Church speaks to them, upon this
Head: Matthew. 23.29 -- 33. Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites;
because ye build the Tombs of the Prophets, and garnish the Sepulchers of the
Righteous; and say, If we had been in the Days of our Fathers, we would not
have been Partakers with them in the Blood of the Prophets. Ye Serpents, ye
Generation of Vipers, how can ye escape the Damnation of Hell? The

SECOND GENERAL HEAD of Discourse, is to show, Why such People, who have no
better than the Old Pharisee-Teachers, are to be pitied? And

1. Natural Men have no Call of GOD to the Ministerial Work, under the
Gospel Dispensation. Is Not it a principal Part of the ordinary Call of GOD to
the Ministerial Work, to aim at the Glory of GOD, and, in Subordination
thereto, the Good of Souls, as their chief Marks in their Undertaking that
Work? And can any natural Man on Earth do this? No! no! Every Skin of them has
an evil Eye; for no Cause can produce Effects above its own Power. Are not
wicked Men forbid to meddle in Things sacred? Ps. 50.16. But unto the Wicked,
GOD says, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that thou should
take my Covenant in thy Mouth? Now, are not all unconverted Men wicked Men?
does not the Lord JESUS inform us, John 10.1. That he who enters not by the
Door into the Sheep-sold, but climbeth up some other Way, the same is a Thief
and a Robber? In the 9th v. Christ tells us, That He is the Door; and that if
any Man enter in by him, he shall be saved, by him, i. e. By Faith in him,
(says Henry.) Hence we read of a Doer of Faith, being opened to the Gentiles
Acts 24. 27. It confirms this Gloss, that Salvation is anrexed to the Entrance
before-mentionen. Remarkable is that Saying of our Savior, Matthew. 4.19. Follow
me, and I will make you Fishers of Men. See, our LORD will not make Men
Ministers, 'til they follow him. Men that do not follow Christ, may fish
faithfully for a good Name, and for worldly Pelf; but not for the Conversion of
Sinners to God. Is it reasonable to suppose, that they will be earnestly
concerned for others Salvation, when they slight their own? Our LORD reproved
Nicodemus for taking upon him the Office of instructing others, while he
himself was a Stranger to the New Birth, Joh. 3.10. Art thou a Master of
Israel, and know not these Things? The Apostle Paul (in 1 Timothy 1.12.) thanks
GOD for counting him faithful, and putting him into the Ministry; which plainly
supposes, That GOD Almighty does not send Pharisees and natural Men into the
Ministry: For how can these Men be faithful, that have no Faith? It Is true Men
may put them into the Ministry, through Unfaithfulness, or Mistake; or Credit
and Money may draw them, and the Devil may drive them into it, knowing by long
Experience, of what special Service they may be to his Kingdom in that Office:
But GOD sends not such hypocritical Varlets. Hence Timothy was directed by the
Apostle Paul, to commit the ministerial Work to faithful Men. 2 Timothy 2.2. And
do not these Qualisications, necessary for Church Officers, specified 1 Timothy
3.7.8, 9, 11. and Tit. 1.7, 8. plainly suppose converting Grace? How else can
they avoid being greedy of filthy Lucre? How else can they hold the Mystery of
Faith in a pure Conscience, and be faithful in all Things? How else can they be
Lovers of Good, sober, just, holy, temperate?

2. The Ministry of natural Men is uncomfortable to gracious Souls.

The Enmity that is put between the Seed of the Woman and the Seed of the
Serpent, will now and then be creating Jarrs: And no wonder; for as it was of
old, so it is now, He that was born after the Flesh, persecuted him that was
born after the Spirit. This Enmity is not one Grain less, in unconverted
Ministers, that in others; though possibly it may be better polished with Wit and
Rhetoric, and gilded with the specious Names of Zeal, Fidelity, Peace, good
Order, and Unity.

Natural Men, not having true Love to Christ and the Souls of their
Fellow Creatures, hence their Discourses are cold and sapless, and as it were
freeze between their Lips. And not being sent of GOD, they want that divine
Authority, with which the faithful Ambassadors of CHRIST are clothed, who
herein resemble their blessed Master, of whom it is said, That He taught as one
having Authority, and not as the Scribes. Matthew. 7.29.

And Pharisee-Teachers, having no Experience of a special Work of the Holy
Ghost, upon their own Souls, are therefore neither inclined to, nor fitted for
Discoursing, frequently, clearly, and pathetically, upon such important
Subjects. The Application of their Discourses, is either short, or indistinct
and general. They difference not the precious from the vile, and divide not to
every Man his Portion, according to the Apostolical Direction to Timethy. No!
they carelessly offer a common Mess to their People, and leave it to them, to
divide it among themselves, as they see fit. This is indeed their general
Practice, which is bad enough: But sometimes they do worse, by misapplying the
Word, through Ignorance, or Anger. They often strengthen the Hands of the
Wicked, by promising him Life. They comfort People, before they convince them;
sow before they plow, and are busy in raising a Fabric, before they lay a
Foundation. These foolish Builders do but strengthen Men's carnal Security, by
their soft, selfish, cowardly Discourses. They have not the Courage, or
Honesty, to thrust the Nail of Terror into sleeping Souls; nay, sometimes they
strive with all their Might, to fasten Terror into the Hearts of the Righteous,
and so to make those sad, whom GOD would not have made sad! And this happens,
when pious People begin to suspect their Hypocrisy, for which they have good
Reason. I may add, That inasmuch as Pharisee-Teachers seek after Righteousness
as it were by the Works of the Law themselves, they therefore do not
distinguish, as they ought, between Law and Gospel, in their Discourses to
others. They keep Driving, Driving, to Duty, Duty, under this Notion, That it
will recommend natural Men to the Favor of GOD, or entitle them to the
Promises of Grace and Salvation: and thus those blind Guides six a deluded
World upon the false Foundation of their own Righteousness; and so exclude them
from the dear Redeemer. All the Doings of unconverted Men, not proceeding from
the Principles of Faith, Love, and a new Nature, nor being directed to the
divine Glory as their highest End, but flowing from, and tending to Self, as
their Principle and End; are doubtless damnably wicked in their Manner of
Performance, and do deserve the Wrath and Curse of a Sin-avenging GOD; neither
can any other Encouragement be justly given them, but this, That in the Way of
Duty, there is a Peradventure or Probability of obtaining Mercy.

And natural Men, wanting the Experience of those spiritual Difficulties, which
pious Souls are exposed to, in this Vale of Tears; they know not how to speak a
Word to the Weary in Season. Their Prayers are also cold; little child-like
Love to God or Pity to poor perishing Souls, runs through their Veins. Their
Conversation has nothing of the Savor of Christ, neither is it perfumed with
the Spices of Heaven. They seem to make as little Distinction in their Practice
as Preaching. They love those Unbelievers that are kind to them, better than
many Christians, and choose them for Companions; contrary to Ps. 15. 4. Ps.
119.115., and Gal. 6.10. Poor Christians are stunted and starved, who are put
to seed on such bare Pastures, and such dry Nurses; as the Rev. Mr. Hildersham
justly calls them. It Is only when the wise Virgins sleep, that they can bear
with those dead Dogs, that cannot bark; but when the LORD revives his People,
they cannot but abhor them. O! it is ready to break their very Hearts with
Grief, to see how lukewarm those Pharisee-Teachers are in their public
Discourses, while Sinners are sinking into Damnation, in Multitudes! But

3. The Ministry of natural Men, is for the most part unprositable; which is
confirmed by a threefold Evidence, viz. of Scripture, Reason, and Experience,
Such as the LORD sends not he himself assures us, shall not prosit the People
at all. Jer. 23.32. Mr. Pool justly glosseth upon this Passage of sacred
Scripture, thus, viz. That none can expect GOD's Blessing upon their Ministry,
that are not called and sent of GOD into the Ministry. And right Reason will
inform us, how unfit Instruments they are to negotiate that Work they pretend
to. Is a blind Man sit to be a Guide in a very dangerous Way? Is a dead Man sit
to bring others to Life? a mad Man sit to give Counsel in a Matter of Life and
Death? Is a possessed Man sit to cast out Devils? a Rebel, an Enerny to GOD,
sit to be sent on an Embassy of Peace, to bring Rebels into a State of
Friendship with GOD? a Captive bound in the Massy Chains of Darkness and Guilt,
a proper Person to set others at Liberty? a Leper, or one that has Plague-fores
upon him, sit to be a good Physician? Is an ignorant Rustic, that has never
been at Sea in his Life, sit to be a Pilot, to keep Vessels from being dashed
to Pieces upon Rocks and Sand-banks? Is Not an unconverted Minister like a Man
who would learn others to swim, before he has learned it himself, and so is
drowned in the Act, and dies like a Fool?

I may add, That sad Experience verifies what has been now observed, concerning
the Unprositableness of the Ministry of unconverted Men. Look into the
Congregations of unconverted Ministers, and see what a sad Security reigns
there; not a Soul convinced that can be heard of, for many Years together: and
yet the Ministers are easy; for they say they do their Duty! Ay, a small Matter
will satisfy us in the Want of that, which we have no great Desire after. But
when Persons have their Eyes opened, and their Hearts set upon the Work of God;
they are not so soon satisfied with their Doings, and with Want of Success for
a Time. O! they mourn with Micah, that they are as those that gather the
Summer-Fruits, as the Grape-gleaning of the Vintage. -- Mr. Baxter justly
observes, That those who speak about their Doings in the aforesaid Manner, are
like to do little Good to the Church of God? But many Ministers (as Mr. Bracel
observes) think the Gospel flourishes among them when the People are in Peace,
and many come to hear the Word, and to the Sacrament. If with the other they
get their Salaries well paid; O then it is fine Times indeed! in their Opinion.
O sad! And they are full of Hopes, that they do good, though they know nothing
about it. But what Comfort can a conscientious Man, who travels in Birth, that
Christ may be formed in his Hearers Hearts, take from what he knows not? Will a
hungry Stomach be satisfied with Dreams about Meat? I believe not; though I
confess a full one may.

What if some Instances could be shown, of unconverted Ministers being
Instrumental, in convincing Persons of their lost State? The Thing is very
rare, and extraordinary. And for what I know, as many Instances may be given,
of Satan's convincing Persons, by his Temptations. Indeed it is a kind of
Chance-medly, both in respect of the Father; and his Children; when any such
Event happens. And is not this tho Reason, why a Work of Conviction and
Conversion has been so rarely heard of, for a long Time, in the Churches, till
of late, viz. That the Bulk of her spiritual Guides, were stone-blind, and
stone-dead?

4. The Ministry of natural Men is dangerous, both in respect of the Doctrines,
and Practice of Piety. The Doctrines of Originol Sin, Justisication by Faith
alone, and the other Points of Calvinism, are very cross to the Grain of
unrenew'd Nature. And though Men, by the Insluence of a good Education, and Hopes
of Preferment, may have the Edge of their natural Enmity against them blunted;
yet it is far from being broken or removed: It Is only the saving Grace of God,
that can give us a true Relish for those Nature-humbling Doctrines; and so
effectually secure us from being infected by the contrary. Is not the Carnality
of the Ministry, one great Cause of the general Spread of Arminianism.
Socinianism, Arianism, and Deism, at this Day through the World?

And alas! what poor Guides are natural Ministers to those, who are under
spiritual Trouble? they either slight such Distress altogether, and call it
Melancholy, or Madness, or dawb those that are under it, with untemper'd
Mortar. Our LORD assures us, That the Salt which has lost its Savor, is good
for nothing; some say, 'It genders Worns and Vermin. Now, what Savor have
Pharisee-Ministers? In Truth, a very stinking One, both in the Nostrils of God
and good Men. Be these Moral Negroes never so white in the Mouth, (as One
expresses is) yet will they hinder, instead of helping others, in at the
strait Gate. Hence is that Threatening of our LORD, agamst them, Mat. 23.13. We
unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye shut up the Kingdom of
Heaven against Men; for ye neither go in yourselves, nor suffer those that are
entering, to go in. Pharisee-Teachers will with the utmost Hate oppose the very
Work of God's Spirit, upon the Souls of Men; and labor by all Means to blacken
it, as well as the Instruments, which the Almighty improves to promote the
same; if it comes near their Borders, and interferes with their Credit or
Interest. Thus did the Pharisees deal with our Savior.

If it be objected against what has been offered, under this General Head of
Discourse, That Judas was sent by Christ; I answer, (1) That Judas's Ministry
was partly Legal, inasmuch as during that Period, the Disciples were subject to
Jewish Observances, and sent only to the House of Israel, Matthew. 10.5, 6. And
in that they waited after Christ's Resurrection, for another Mission, Acts 1.4.
which we find they obtained, and that different from the former. Matthew. 28.19.
(2) Judas's Ministry was extraordinary necessary, in order to fulfill some
ancient Prophesies concerning him. Acts 1.16, 17, 18, 20. Joh. 13.18. I fear
that the Abuse of this Intance, has brought many Judases into the Ministry,
whose chief Desire, like their great Grandfather, is to singer the Pence, and
carry the Bag. But let such hireling murderous Hypocrites take Care, that they
don't feel the Force of a Halter in this World, and an aggravated Damnation in
the next.


Again, if it be objected, That Paul rejoiced, that the Gospel was preached,
though of Contention, and not sincerely; I answer, The Expression signifies the
Apostle's great Self-denial. Some labored to eclipse his Fame and Character,
by contentious Preaching, thinking thereby to afflict him; but they were
mistaken; as to that, he was easy: For he had long before learned, to die to
his own Reputation. The Apostle's Rejoicing was comparative only: He would
rather that Christ should be preached out of Envy, than not at all. Especially
considering the gross Ignorance of the Doctrinal Knowledge of the Gospel, which
prevailed almost universally in that Age of the World. Besides the Apostle knew
that that Trial should be sanctified to him, to promote his spiritual Progress
in Goodness, and perhaps prove a Mean of procuring his temporal Freedom; and
therefore he would rejoice. It is certain, we may both rejoice and mourn, in
relation to the same Thing, upon different Accounts, without any Contradiction.
But the

THIRD GENERAL HEAD, was to show, How Pity should be expressed upon this
mournful Occasion!

My Brethren, we should mourn over those, that are destitute of faithful
Ministers, and sympathize with them. Our Bowels should be moved with the most
compassionate Tenderness, over those dear fainting Souls, that are as Sheep
having no Shepherd; and that after the Example of our blessed LORD.

Dear Sirs! we should also most earnestly pray for them, that the compassionate
Savior may preserve them, by his mighty Power, through Faith unto Salvation;
support their sinking Spirits, under the melancholy Uneasinesses of a dead
Ministry: sanctify and sweeten to them the dry Morsels they get under such
blind Men, when they have none better to repair to.

And more especially, my Brethren, we should pray to the LORD of the Harvest,
to send forth faithful Laborers into his Harvest; seeing that the Harvest
truly is plenteous, but the Laborers are few. And O Sirs! how humble,
believing, and importunate should we be in this Petition! O! let us follow the
LORD, Day and Night, with Cries, Tears, Pleadings, and Groanings upon this
Account! For GOD knows, there is great Necessity of it. O! thou Fountain of
Merey, and Father of Pity, pour forth upon thy poor Children a Spirit of
Prayer, for the Obtaining this important Mercy! Help, help, O Eternal GOD and
Father, for Christ's sake!

And indeed, my Brethren, we should join our Endravoure to our Prayers. The
most likely Method to stock the Church with a faithful Ministry in the present
Situation of Things, the public Academies being so much corrupted and abused
generally, is, To encourage private Schools, or Seminaries of Learning, which
are under the Care of skilful and experienced Christians; in which those only
should be admitted, who upon strict Examination, have in the Judgment of a
reasonable Charity, the plain Evidences of experimental Religion. Pious and
experienced Youths, who have a good natural Capacity, and great Desires after
the Ministerial Work, from good Motives, might be sought for, and found up and
down in the Country, and put to Private Schools of the Prophets; especially in
such Places, where the Public ones are not. This Method, in my Opinion, has a
noble Tendency, to build up the Church of God. And those who have any Love to
Christ, or Desive after the Coming of his Kingdom, should be ready, according
to their Ability, to give somewhat, from time to time, for the Support of such
poor Youths, who have nothing of their own. And truly, Brethren, this Charity
to the Souls of Men, is the most noble kind of Charity. O! if the Love of God
be in you, it will constrain you to do something, to promote so noble and
necessary a Work. It looks Hypocrite-like to go no further, when other Things
are required, than cheap Prayer. Don't think it much, if the Pharisees should
be offended at such a Proposal; these subtle selfish Hypocrites are wont to be
scared about their Credit, and their Kingdom; and truly they are both little
worth, for all the Bustle they make about them. If they could help it, they
would not let one faithful Man come into the Ministry; and therefore their
Opposition is an encouraging Sign. Let all the Followers of the Lamb stand up
and act for GOD against all Opposers: Who is upon GOD's Side? who?

THE IMPROVEMENT of this Subject remains. And,

1. If it be so, That the Case of those, who have no other, or no better than
Pharisee-Teachers, is to be pitied: Then what a Scrole and Scene of Mourning,
and Lamentation, and Woe, is opened! because of the Swarms of Locusts, the
Crowds of Pharisees, that have as covetously as cruelly, crept into the
Ministry, in this adulterous Generation! who as nearly resemble the Character
given of the old Pharisees, in the Doctrinal Part of this Discourse, as one
Crow's Egg does another. It is true some of the modern Pharisees have learned
to prate a little more orthodoxly about the New Birth, than their Predecessor
Nicodemus, who are, in the mean Time, as great Strangers to the feeling
Experience of it, as he. They are blind who see not this to be the Case of the
Body of the Clergy, of this Generation. And O! that our Heads were Waters, and
our Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that we could Day and Night lament, with the
atmost Bitterness, the doleful Case of the poor Church of God, upon this
account.

2. From what has been said, we may learn, That such who are contented under a
dead Ministry, have not in them the Temper of that Savior they profess. It Is
an awful Sign, that they are as blind as Moles, and as dead as Stones, without
any spiritual Taste and Relish. And alas! is not this the Case of Multitudes? If
they can get one, that has the Name of a Minister, with a Band, and a Black
Coat or Gown to carry on a Sabbath Days among them, although never so coldly,
and insuccessfully; if he is free from gross Crimes in Practice, and takes good
Care to keep at a due Distance from their Consciences, and is never troubled
about his Insuccessfulness; O! think the poor Fools, that is a fine Man indeed;
our Minister is a prudent charitable Man, he is not always harping upon Terror,
and sounding Damnation in our Ears, like some rash-headed Preachers, who by
their uncharitable Methods, are ready to put poor People out of their Wits, or
to run them into Despair; O! how terrible a Thing is that Despair! Ay, our
Minister, honest Man, gives us good Caution against it. Poor silly Souls!
consider seriously these Passages, of the Prophet Jeremiah, c. 5.30, 31.

3. We may learn, the Mercy and Duty of those that enjoy a faithful Ministry.
Let such glorify GOD, for so distinguishing a Privilege, and labor to walk
worthy of it, to all Well-pleasing; lest for their Abuse thereof, they be
exposed to a greater Damnation.

4. If the Ministry of natural Men be as it has been represented; Then it is
both lawful and expedient to go from them to hear Godly Persons; yea, it is so
far from being sinful to do this, that one who lives under a pious Minister of
lesser Gifts after having honestly endeavored to get Benefit by his Ministry,
and yet gets little or none, but does find real Benefit and more Benefit
elsewhere; I say, he may lawfully go, and that frequently, where he gets most
Good to his precious Soul, after regular Application to the Pastor where he
lives, for his Consent, and proposing the Reasons thereof; when this is done in
the Spirit of Love and Meekness, without Contempt of any, as also without rash
Anger, or vain Curiosity.

Natural Reason will inform us, that Good is desirable for its own sake. Now,
as Dr. Voetius observes, Good added to Good, makes it a greater Good, and so
more desirable; and therefore Evil as Evil, or a lesser Good, which is
comparatively Evil, cannot be the Object of Desire.

There is a natural Instinct put even into the irrational Creatures, by the
Author of their Being, to seek after the greater natural Good, as far as they
know it. Hence the Birds of the Air fly to the warmer Climaets, in order to
shun the Winter-Cold, and also doubtless to get better Food; For where the
Carcass is, there the Eagles will be gathered together. The Beasts of the Field
seek the best Pastures, and the Fishes of the Ocean seek after the Food they
like best.

But the written Word of God confirms the aforesaid Proposition, while God by
it enjoins us, to covet earnestly the best Gifts; as also to prove all Things,
and hold fast that which is good. 1 Cor. 12.31. 1 Thessalonians. 5.2. And is it not the
Command of God, that we should grow in Grace? 2 Pet. 3.18. and 1 Pet. 2.2. Now,
does not every positive Command enjoin the Use of such Means, as have the
directest Tendency to answer the End designed? namely, The Duty commanded. If
there be a Variety of Means, is not the best to be chosen? else how can the
Choice be called rational, and becoming an intelligent Creature? To choose
otherwise knowingly, is it not contrary to common Sense, as well as Religion,
and daily confuted by the common Practice of all the rational Creation, about
Things of far less Moment and Consequence?

That there is a Difference and Variety in Preachers Gifts and Graces, is
undeniably evident, from the united Testimony of Scripture and Reason.

And that there is a great Difference in the Degrees of Hearers Edification,
under the Hearing of these different Gifts, is as evident to the Feeling of
experienced Christians, as any Thing can be to Sight.

It is also an unquestionable Truth, that ordinarily GOD blesses most the best
Gifts, for the Hearers Edification, as by the best Food he gives the best
Nourishment. Otherwise the best Gifts would not be desirable, and GOD Almighty
in the ordinary Course of his Providence, by not acting according to the Nature
of Things, would be carrying on a Series of unnecessary Miracles; which to
suppose, is unreasonable. The following Places of holy Scripture, confirm what
has been last observed. 1 Cor. 14.12 1 Timothy 4.14, 15, 16. 2 Timothy 1.6. and Act.
11.24.

If God's People have a Right to the Gifts of all God's Ministers, pray, why
may not they use them, as they have Opportunity? And if they should go a few
Miles farther than ordinary, to enjoy those, which they profit most by; who do
they wrong? Now, our LORD does inform his People, 1 Cor. 3.22. That whether
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas; all was theirs.

But the Example of our Dear Redeemer, will give farther Light in this
Argument. Though many of the Hearers, not only of the Pharisees, but of John the
Baptist, came to hear our Savior, and that not only upon Weekdays, but upon
Sabbathdays, and that in great Numbers, and from very distant Places; yet he
reproved them not: And did not our Lord love the Apostle John more than the
rest, and took him with him, before others, with Peter and James, to Mount
Tabor, and Gethsemany? Matthew. 17. and c. 26.

To bind Men to a particular Minister, against their Judgment and Inclinations,
when they are more edified elsewhere, is carnal with a Witness; a cruel
Oppression of tender Consciences, a Compelling of Men to Sin: For he that
doubts, is damned if he eat; and whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin.

Besides it is an unscriptural Infringment on Christian Liberty; 1 Cor. 3.22.
It Is a Yoke worse than that of Rome itself. Dr. Voetius asserts, That even
among the Papists, as to Hearing of Sermons, the People are not deprived of the
Liberty of Choice. It Is a Yoke like that of Egypt, which cruel Pharaoh formed
for the Necks of the oppressed Israelites, when he obliged them to make up
their stated Task of Brick, but allowed them no Straw. So we must grow in Grace
and Knowledge; but in the mean time, according to the Notion of some, we are
confined from using the likeliest Means, to attain that End.

If the great Ends of Hearing may be attained as well, and better, by Hearing
of another Minister than our own; then I see not, why we should be under a
fatal Necessity of hearing him, I mean our Parish-Minister, perpetually, or
generally. Now, what are, or ought to be, the Ends of Hearing, but the Getting
of Grace, and Growing in it? Romans 10.14.1 Pot. 2.2. As Babes desire the sincere
Milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby. (Poor Babes like not dry Breasts,
and living Men like not dead Pools.) Well then, and may not these Ends be
obtained out of our Parish-line? Faith is said to come by Hearing, Romans 10. But
the Apostle does not add, Your Parish-Minister. Is Not the same Word preached out
of our Parish? and is there any Restriction in the Promises of blessing the
Word to those only, who keep within their Parish-line ordinarily? If there be,
I have not yet met with it; yea, I can affirm, that so far as Knowledge can be
had in such Cases, I have known Persons to get saving Good to their Souls, by
Hearing over their Parish-line; and this makes me earnest in Defense of it.

That which ought to be the main Motive of Hearing any, viz. our Souls Good, or
greater Good, will excite us, if we regard our own eternal Interest, to hear
there, where we attain it; and he that hears with less Views, acts like a Fool,
and a Hypocrite.

Now, if it be lawful to withdraw from the Ministry of a pious Man, in the Case
aforesaid; how much more, from the Ministry of a natural Man? Surely, it is
both lawful and expedient, for the Reasons offered in the Doctrinal Part of
this Discourse: To which let me add a few Words more.

To trust the Care of our Souls to those who have little or no Care for their
own, to those who are both unskilful and unfaithful, is contrary to the common
Practice of considerate Mankind, relating to the Affairs of their Bodies and
Estates; and would signify, that we set light by our Souls, and did not care
what became of them. For if the Blind lead the Blind, will they not both fall
into the Ditch?

Is it a strange Thing to think, that GOD does not ordinarily use the Ministry
of his Enemies, to turn others to be his Friends, seeing he works by suitable
Means?

I cannot think, that GOD has given any Promise, that he will be with, and
bless the Labors of natural Ministers: For if he had, he would be surely as
good as his Word. But I can neither see, nor hear of any Blessing upon these
Men's Labors; unless it be a rare and wonderful Instance of Chancemedly!
whereas the Ministry of faithful Men blossoms and bears Fruit, as the Rod of
Aaron. Jer. 23. 22. But if they had stood in my Counsel, and had caused my
People to hear my Words, then they should have turned them from their evil Way,
and from the Evil of their Doings.

From such as have a Form of Godliness, and deny the Power thereof, we are
enjoined to turn away, 2 Timothy 3.5. And are there not many such?

Our LORD advised his Disciples, to beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, Mat.
16.6. by which he shows that he meant their Doctrine and Hypocrisy, Mark 8.15.
Luke 12.1. which were both sour enough.

Memorable is the Answer of our LORD to his Disciples, Mat. 15.12.13, 14. Then
came his Disciples and said unto him, Know thou, that the Pharisees were
offended? -- And he answered and said, Every Plant which my Heavenly Father
has not planted, shall be rooted up: Let them alone; they be blind Leaders of
the Blind: And if the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall into the Ditch.

If it is objected, That we are bid to go to hear those, that sit in Moses'
Chair, Mat. 23.2, 3. I would answer this, in the Words of a Body of dissenting
Ministers, viz. That Sitting in Moses' Chair, signifies a Succeeding of Moses
in the ordinary Part of his Office and Authority; so did Joshua, and the 70
Elders, Exodus 18.21-26, Now, Moses was no Priest, (say they) though of Levi's
Tribe, but King in Jeshurun, a civil Ruler and Judge, chosen by God. Exodus
18.13. Therefore no more is meant by the Scripture in the Objection, but that
it is the Duty of People to hear and obey the lawful Commands of the Civil
Magistrate, according to Romans 13.5.

If it be opposed to the preceding Reasonings, That such an Opinion and
Practice would be apt to cause Heats and Contentions among People;

I answer, That the aforesaid Practice, accompanied with Love, Meekness, and
Humility, is not the proper Cause of those Divisions, but the Occasion only, or
the Cause by Accident, and not by itself. If a Person exercising Modesty and
Love in his Carriage to his Minister and Neighbors, through Uprightness of
Heart, designing nothing but his own greater Good, repairs there frequently
where he attains it; is this any reasonable Cause of Anger? will any be
offended with him, because he loves his Soul, and seeks the greater Good
thereof, and is not like a senseless Stone, without Choice, Sense, and Taste?
Pray, must we leave off every Duty, that is the Occasion of Contention or
Division? Then we must quit powerful Religion altogether. For he that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution. And particularly we must
carefully avoid faithful Preaching: For that is wont to occasion Disturbances
and Divisions, especially when accompanied with divine Power. 1 Thessalonians. 1.5, 6.
Our Gospol came not unto you in Word only, but in Power: And then it is added,
That they received the Word in much Affliction. And the Apostle Paul informs
us, 1 Cor. 16.9. That a great Door and effectual was opened unto him, and that
there were many Adversaries. Blessed Paul was accounted a common Disturber of
the Peace, as well as Elijah long before him: And yet he left not off Prenching
for all that. Yea, our blessed LORD informs us, That he came not to send Peace
on Earth, but rather a Sword, Variance, Fire, and Division, and that even among
Relations. Matthew. 10.34, 35, 36. Luke 12.49, 51, 52, 53. As also, That while
the strong Man armed keeps the House, all the Goods are in Peace. It is true
the Power the Gospel is not the proper Cause of those Divisions, but the
innocent Occasion only: No; the proper Cause of sinful Divisions, is that
Enmity against GOD, and Holiness, which is in the Hearts of natural Men, of
every Order; being stirred up by the Devil, and their own proud and selfish
Lusts. And very often natural Men, who are the proper Causes of the Divisions
aforesaid, are wont to deal with God's Servants, as Potiphar's Wife did by
Joseph; they lay all the Blame of their own Wickedness at their Doors, and make
a loud Cry!

Such as confine Opposition and Division, as following upon living Godliness
and successful Preaching, to the first Ages of Christianity; it is much to be
feared neither know themselves, nor the Gospel of Christ. For surely the nature
of true Religion, as well as of Men and Devils, is the same in every Age.

Is not the visible Church composed of Persons of the most contrary Characters?
While some are sincere Servants of God, are not many Servants of Satan, under a
religious Mask? and have not these a fixed Enmity against the other? How is it
then possible, that a Harmony should subsist between such, till their Nature be
changed? Can Light dwell with Darkness?

Undoubtedly it is a great Duty, to avoid giving just Cause of Offense to any;
and it is also highly necessary, that pious Souls should maintain Union and
Harmony among themselves; notwithstanding of their different Opinions in lesser
Things. And no doubt this is the Drift of the many Exhortations which we have
to Peace and Unity in Scripture.

Surely, it cannot be reasonably supposed, that we are exhorted to a Unity in
any Thing that is wicked, or inconsistent with the Good, or greater Good of our
poor Souls: For that would be like the Unity of the Devils, a Logion of which
dwelt peaceably in one Man: Or like the Unity of Ahab's false Prophets; all
these four Hundred Daubers were very peaceable and much united, and all harped
on the pleasing String: Ay, they were moderate Men, and had the Majority on
their Side.

But possibly some may again object against Persons going to hear others,
besides their own Ministers; the Scripture about Paul and Apollos, 1 Cor. 1.12.
and say, that it is carnal. Dr. Voetius answers the aforesaid Objection, as
follows: The Apostle reproves (says he) such as made Sects, saying, I am of
Paul, and I of Apollos -- and we with him reprove them. But this is far from
being against the Choice, which one has of Sermons and Preachers; seeing at
one time we cannot hear all, neither does the Explication and Application of
all, equally suit such a Person, in such a Time, or Condition, or equally
quicken, and subserve the Increase of Knowledge. Thus far he.

Because that the Apostle, in the aforesaid Place, reproves an excessive Love
to, or Admiration of particular Ministers, accompanied with a sinful
Contention, Slighting and Disdaining of others, who are truly godly, and with
Sect-making: To say that from hence it necessarily follows, That we must make
no Difference in our Choice, or in the Degrees of our Esteem of different
Ministers, according to their different Gifts and Graces; is an Argument of as
great Force, as to say, Because Gluttony and Drunkenness are forbidden,
therefore we must neither eat nor drink, or make any Choice in Drinks or
Victuals, let our Constitution be what it will.

Surely the very Nature of Christian Love inclines those that are possessed of
it, to love others chiefly for their Goodness, and therefore in Proportion,
thereto. Now, seeing the Inference in the Objection is secretly built upon this
Supposition, That we should love all good Men alike; it strikes at the
Foundations of that Love to the Brethren, which is laid down in Scripture, as a
Mark of true Christianity, x Job. 5. and so is carnal, with a Witness.

Again it may be objected, That the aforesaid Practice tends to grieve our
Parish-Minister, and to break Congregations in Pieces.

I answer, If our Parish-Minister be grieved at our greater Good, or prefers
his Credit before it; then he has good Cause to grieve over his own Rottenness
and Hypocrisy. And as for Breaking of Congregations to Pieces, upon the
Account of People's Going from Place to Place, to hear the Word, with a View to
get greater Good; that spiritual Blindness and Death, that so generally
prevails, will put this out of Danger. It is but a very few, that have got any
spiritual Relish; the most will venture their Souls with any Formalist, and be
well satisfied with the sapless Discourses of such dead Drones.

Well, does not the Apostle assert, That Paul and Apollos are nothing? Yes, it
is true, they and all others are nothing as Efficient Causes; they could not
change Men's Hearts. But were they nothing as Instruments? The Objection
insinuates one of these two Things, either that there is no Difference in
Means, as to their Suitableness; or that there is no Reason to expect a greater
Blessing upon the most suitable Means: Both which are equally absurd, and
before confuted.

But it may be further objected, with great Appearance of Zeal, That what has
been said about People's Getting of Good, or greater Good, over their
Parish-line, is a mere Fiction; for they are out of God's Way.

I answer, That there are Three monstrous Ingredients in the Objection, namely,
A Begging of the Question in Debate, rash Judging, and Limiting of God.

It is a mean Thing in Reasoning, to beg or suppose that, which should be
proved, and then to reason from it. Let it be proved, that they are out of
God's Way; and then I will freely yield: But till this be done, bold Saysoes
will not have much Weight with any but Dupes or Dunces. And for such who cry
out against others for Uncharitableness, to be guilty of it themselves in the
mean time in a very great Degree, is very inconsistent. Is Not it rash to judge
of Things they have never heard? But those that have received Benefit, and are
sensible of their own Uprightness, they will think it a light Thing, to be
judged of Man's Judgment. Let Tertullus ascend the Theater, and gild the
Objection with the most mellifluous Ciceronean Eloquence; it will no more
persuade them, that what they have felt is but a Fancy (unless they be under
strong Temptations of Satan, orscared out of their Wits by frightful
Expressions) than to tell a Man, in proper Language, that sees, That it is but
a Notion, he does not see: Or to tell a Man that feels Pleasure or Pain, That
it is but a deluded Fancy; they are quite mistaken.

Besides there is a Limiting the Holy One of Israel, in the aforesaid
Objection, which sinful Sin the Hebrews were reproved for. It is a Piece of
daring Presumption, to pretend by our finite Line, to fathom the infinite
Depths that are in the Being and Works of God. The Query of Zophar is just and
reasonable, Job 11.7, 8. Can thou by Searching find out GOD? -- The humble
Apostle with Astonishment acknowledged, that the Ways of GOD were past finding
out. Romans 11.33. Surely the Wind blows where it lists, and we cannot tell
whence it comes, nor whither it goes. Does Not JEHOVAH ride upon a gloomy
Cloud? and make Darkness his Pavilion? and is not his Path in the great Waters?
Ps. 18. Ps. 77.19.

I would conclude my present Meditations upon this Subject, by Exhorting

All those who enjoy a faithful Ministry, to a speedy and sincere Improvement
of so rare and valuable a Privilege; lest by their foolish Ingratitude the
Righteous GOD be provoked, to remove the Means they enjoy, or his Blessing from
them, and so at last to expose them in another State to Enduring and greater
Miseries. For surely, these Sins which are committed against greater Light and
Mercy, are more presumptuous, ungrateful, and inexcusable; there is in them a
greater Contempt of GOD's Authority, and Slight of his Mercy; those Evils do
awfully violate the Conscience, and declare a Love to Sin as Sin; such
Transgressors do rush upon the Bosses of GOD's Buckler, they court Destruction
without a Covering, and embrace their own Ruin with open Arms. And therefore
according to the Nature of Justice, which proportions Sinners Pains, according
to the Number and Heinousness of their Crimes, and the Declaration of divine
Truth, you must expect an enslamed Damnation: Surely, it shall be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, in the Day of the LORD, than for you, except
ye repent.

And let gracious Souls be exhorted, to express the most tender Pity over such
as have none but Pharisee-Teachers; and that in the Manner before described: To
which let the Example of our LORD in the Text before us, be an inducing and
effectual Incitement; as well as the gracious and immense Rewards, which follow
upon so generous and noble a Charity, in this and the next State.

And let those who live under the Ministry of dead Men, whether they have got
the Form of Religion or not, repair to the Living, where they may be edified.
Let who will, oppose it. What famous Mr. Jenner observes upon this Head, is
most just, That if there be any godly Soul, or any that desires the Salvation
of his Soul, and lives under a blind Guide, he cannot go out (of his Parish
without giving very great Offense; it will be though it a Giddiness, and a
Slighting of his own Minister at home. -- When People came out of every Parish
round about, to John, no Question but this bred Heart-burning against John, ay,
and Ill Will against those People, that would not be satisfied with that
Teaching they had in their own Synagogues. Thus far he. But though your
Neighbors growl against you, and reproach you for doing your Duty, in seeking
your Souls Good; bear their unjust Censures with Christian Meekness, and
persevere; as knowing that Suffering is the Lot of Christ's Followers, and that
spiritual Benefits do infinitely overbalance all temporal Difficulties.

And O! that vacant Congregations would take due Care in the Choice of their
Ministers! Here indeed they should hasten slowly. The Church of Ephesus is
commended, for Trying them which said they were Apostles, and were not; and for
finding them Liars. Hypocrites are against all Knowing of others, and Judging,
in order to hide their own Filthiness; like Thieves they flee a Search, because
of their stolen Goods. But the more they endeavor to hide, the more they
expose their Shame. Does (...) the spiritual Man judge all Things? Though he
cannot know the States of subtle Hypocrites infallibly; yet may he not give a
near Guess, who are the Sons of Sceva, by their Manner of Praying, Preaching,
and Living? Many Pharisee-Teachers have got a long fine String of Prayer by
Heart, so that they are never at a Loss about it; their Prayers and Preachings
are generally of a Length, and both as dead as a Stone, and without all Savor.
I beseech you, my dear Brethren, to consider, That there is no Probability of
your getting Good, by the Ministry of Pharisees. For they are no Shepherds (no
faithful ones) in Christ's Account. They are as good as none, nay, worse (...)
none, upon some Accounts. For take them first and last, and they generally do
more Hurt than Good. They serve to keep better out of the Places where they
live; nay, when the Life of Piety comes near their Quarters, they rise up in
Arms against it, consult, contrive and combine in their Conclaves against it,
as a common Enemy, that discovers and condemns their Craft and Hypocrisy. And
with what Art, Rhetoric, and Appearances of Piety, will they varnish their
Opposition of Christ's Kingdom? As the Magicians imitated the Works of Moses,
so do false Apostles, and deceitful Workers, the Apostles of Christ.

I shall conclude this Discourse with the Words of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor.
11.14, 15.

And no Marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light:
Therefore it is no great Thing if his Ministers also be transformed as the
Ministers of Righteousness; whose End shall be according to their Works.


