A Letter from a Country Gentleman at Boston, To his Friends in the Country.

A Letter, etc.
Boston, June 10 th 1740. My very good Friends and Neighbors,
WHEN, by you made Choice of to go down to Boston, and examine into the public
Justice and Advantage of a Scheme called the Land or Manufactury Bank, as well
for your Conduct, as that of my own in that Affair, you are sensible I declined
that Trust as unequal to it; however when you observed to me the Difficulty of
procuring a Correspondent at Boston free from Prejudice and Affection, and no
way influenced by private Interest, to make a fair and just Representation of
this Projection, I engaged in your Service with a full Resolution diligently
and impartially to scan the same; and which I solemnly declare I have done to
the utmost of my Capacity, assisted with all the Knowledge I could get by the
closest Application

When I got to Boston, I judged it most prudent to introduce myself into
variety of Company, and strictly to take No^ice how they handled this new
Discovery of a Medium. I could not be at a Loss in bringing it on the ^^rpe^,
for it was the general Topic of Conversation. Then I perceived your
Observation to be just; for in all my Conversation I plainly discovered it was
treated by Persons according to their respective Affections, Prejudices, and
Interests; the most noisy on both Sides, most ignorant of the intrinsic Worth
of it, and Strangers to the right Notion of a Medium or Currency in a
Community. Others there were who appeared to me to be more intelligent and
cool; undertaking to point out Objections to several material Parts of its
Constitution, and to the Mode of its Regulation: I must take Notice I could
never hear this Class of Gentlemen open in the Hearing of any of its Advocates,
and therefore once took the Liberty of asking if they had at any Time attended
the Committee according to their Advertisements, and had there raised such
their Objections? They replied, they had not, with such an Air as convinced me
they judged they were unanswerable, or at least, so by the Gentlemen of the
Committee, whose Abilities and Substance, they had not much in Esteem. I
therefore thought this Method alone could not possibly settle in me an equal
and impartial State of the Affair, so as to form a satisfactory Judgment.
However I carefully minuted down all the Objections worthy of Notice, and by
whom made, that I might know whether private Interest was not in some Measure
at the Bottom; and these Objectors turned out to be principal Merchants,
Factors, and rich Usurers; but notwithstanding I was resolved to weigh the
Objections themselves, and give them their just Consideration, and that the
Riches of those Gentlemen might not give them any additional Weight, I opposed
thereto their private Interests, which may engage them on that Side.

My next Pursuit of Light in a Case of so great Consequence and so differently
represented, was to hear how the Gentlemen of the Committee maintained the
public Justice and Advantage of this their Scheme; and accordingly I waited on
them, and though a Stranger, their Advertisement I observed, was my Introduction,
and opened to them the End of my Attendance. They expressed themselves ready to
afford me all the Light and Satisfaction they could, and wished for the Peace
and Harmony of the Community If such as decryed the Scheme had acted the like
ingenious Part, it probably might have prevented many of the Invectives against
it. As I was then the only Inquirer present to be satisfied, they judged it
most fair that one of them only should maintain the public Justice and
Advantage of the Projection; the Gentleman ^o assigned premised something by
Way of Introduction.

First, That some Medium or Currency of Acceptance must be susisting in all
Communities, which being a Principal not to be brought into Question, he
proceeded.

Secondly, To demonstrate the Want of it in this Province, from these
Particulars; First, That all the Bills of Credit of this Province, that by Law
ought now to be outstanding, equally divided would not amount to Five Shillings
a Head, and as the greatest Part of them were hoarded up by rich Men, there are
not in Circulation what would amount to Six Pence a Head. So that in Fact this
Province is at present dependant on the neighboring Governments for much the
greatest Part of such Bills of public Credit as are in Currency among us And
Secondly that all fall greatly short of the present Exigency plainly appears,
from a pernicious Practice and cheating Method of substituting Drafts on Shops
in the Place of a Medium, to pay Artificers and poor Laborers. Herein the
Gentleman mentioned a few shocking Instances, which for brevity I shall not
mention. Thirdly, The want of this Medium is further evidenced from the
Necessity we were drove to, in being obliged to catch at Rhode Island last
Emssion, and that in open Defiance of a standing Law of this Province, and now
glibly received by all our Merchants, notwithstanding their most solemn
Declarations to the contrary; and Lastly, to show what Necessity will drive Men
to, he declared that he had it credibly reported, that the Counterfeited Five
Pound Bills pass at the Eastward as current as the true Bills, though known to be
Counterfeits.

The Gentleman, Thirdly, after thus proving the want of a Medium, proceeded to
observe the same cannot be obtained from the Legislature, during the
continuation of His Majesty's Instructions to his Governor* and for that
referred himself to the Proceeding of the last General Court. And finally these
were the Motives that animated the Committee (to use his own Words) to
enterprise a Design of so grand Importance, the Usefulness and Justice of
which, was now the Subject Matter of my Inquiry. The Projection said he, is
termed the Land Bank, from the Foundation of it on real Estates, the most
permanent Security that can be given, and also called the Manufactury Bank,
from its Production, and that it is real Security at Bottom is superior to that
of any other Paper Emission, is obvious; for the Subscriber's Estate to be
Mortgaged is to be apprized by skilful Persons under Oath to be equal and one
half more in Value than the Subscription Money amounts to. The Subscribers are
to pay annually, Interest at the Rate of three per Cent. and one twentieth Part
of the Principal, which annually renders the Security better; whereas in all
other Emissions of Paper Bills upon Land Security, its true, they were apprized
by Persons under Oath, and too often by Neighbors playing into one another's
Hands, were over valued, the Mortgagors keeping in Possession for many Years,
without paying Principal or Interest, cutting the Wood, and wearing out the
Land, at last left the Province a slender Security indeed. Besides here every
Subscriber in Case of any Jealousy that the Security given is scanty, is
enjoined by the Constitution, to give fresh or additional Security, which is
such a strengthening, as is wanting in all other Paper Emissions; so that he
asserted, no Bank in Europe, no Emission of Paper Currency in America, is or
can be established upon a better or more unexceptionable a Foundation* He
further added, that besides the View the Committee had in corroborating the
Security annually, by obliging a twentieth Part of the Principal to be so paid,
it also forced the Subscriber yearly to be industrious, and he had it not in
his Power to postpone the evil Day; which has been too frequently the Case
between the Public and Borrower i^ former Paper Emissions, to the Injury of
the one, and the (...) Ruin of the other.

As to its Production, from whence it is sometimes called the Manufact^ry Bank;
its true, it is not calculated to render Silver or Gold an immediate Medium
among us, the Bills themselves being emitted on unquestionable Security, must
therefore carry with them indisputable Credit, and consequently be a constant
Medium, ever circulating, and as paid in, placed out again on lawful Interest;
for if all is to be called in at a certain Period of Time, then the Medium is
lost. All Payments are to be made to the Company in their Bills, or in the
enumerated Manufactures ad Valorem, according to the Denomination of the Bill.
And as One Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds in these Bills will in the Run of
twenty Years, still be but One Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds in Bills, then
it follows, the Interest of them multiplied all the Time, must be paid in the
enumerated Manufactures, which of Necessity must greatly promote Industry, sink
Import, and raise Export; and certainly, when Import and Export with us are
upon a Par, Silver and Gold will then stay with us, mix with the Manufactury
Bills, and become a joint Medium among us; But at this Time a Day, when the
Glut of English Goods, like Weeds choke our growing Manufactures, and our
Import from thence so vastly exceeds our Export, to pretend to make Silver or
Gold a Medium in Circulation among us, or by the best concerted Schemes to
render it so, must surpass the Reach of all Mankind, saving a very few, who
give themselves the addition of Merchants, whose Riches he said when he beheld,
he was surprised at their Understa^ding, and when he surveyed their
Understanding, was equally surprised at their Riches; and therefore to supplant
a wild Scheme, called a Silver Bank gilded with an assurance of introducing
Silver and Gold among us, under our present Circumstances, but virtually
calculated to take away the addition of Yeoman in the Country, and impose on
them the additions of H^sbandmen, Laborers and Tenants, greatly contributed to
the forming this Land and Manufactury Bank.

He urged further that this Set of Gentlemen were not content themselves to
express severe Things of the Committee, but had inlisted a Writer, to treat
them in Print with more Indecency. But that unguarded Gentleman happened to
over-act his Part, by publishing a Pamphlet, whereby he prescribed PURGING the
Province of all Paper Currency, and dances the Reader over the several States
in Europe, and in all showing by Experience the pernicious Tendency of Paper
Currency; but as that Gentleman has been sufficiently handled by a Gentleman of
much more Knowledge in that Subject and Manners, he should not say any Thing
further, than observe in reading his Treatise, I should find upon the least
Reflection, that those States were free and absolute Powers, made such
Emissions on Exigencies, and some of them with unjust Views; and as often as
they came justly to themselves, they had absolute Power to redress those
Grievances; whereas this Province, is a dependant Plantation, on their Mother
Country, cannot make sumptuary Laws, or such as may extricate them out of their
present Difficulties, nor use Spunges to wipe away old Debts. And further
remarked that the Author in drawing out of the Province, all this corrupted
Blood, meaning Paper Currency, does not inject better in the room. It Is easy to
say Silver and Gold will be the Medium, but he does not inform the Public how
to effect it.

He finally observed to me, that however the Author professed himself in his
Writing to have the real Interest of this Province at Heart, he had also at the
same Time a little of his own, for he had several Mortgages and Bonds to be
paid in Silver, or Province Bills, and if no Province Bills remain, then he
receives Silver for a Loan perhaps of Rhode Island, New Hampshire, and
Connecticut Bills of Credit.

The Gentleman having finished what he had to say on that Head, proceeded to
show a further Instance of public Use and Justice that must result from the
aforesaid Projection, which was to screen the industrious who wanted a Medium
to go to Work, from being eat up by the griping Usurer: and what exorbitant
Interest is daily taken; the Gentleman was pleased to mention several
Instances; and also one of a new Cut, where a very considerable Merchant in
Boston, upon the Emissions of Merchants Notes (so called) ^ent a Gentleman a
Sum in Paper Currency of the several Governments, and had the Borrower's Estate
mortgaged to him, redeemable upon paying the like Sum in Merchants Notes, or
Silver at nineteen Shillings per Ounce: and withal said, there might be
enumerated several such devouring Instances; whereas the ninth Article of the
Manufactury Scheme, will be annually rooting out this pernicious Weed, till the
Public will be effectually cleared of it.

Upon the whole, the Gentleman took Notice, the Design of the Committee was
laudable, and not base, as by some branded. And as he had accounted for the
public Justice and Usefulness of the Design he would not entertain me with a
Vindication of the Regulations prescribed for the establishing and governing of
the Company most of them being such as are in the Frame of other Companys,
therefore would patiently wait to hear and answer such Objections as I should
raise, either against the essential or material Parts of the Projection, or the
Rules prescribed for the Government thereof. I thanked the Cammittee for their
candid and ingenious Treatment, and observed in Justice to my Principals, and
to the Weight of the Design, I must take a reasonable Time to consider and
digest what I had heard, which may give rise to Objections that now do not
occur, and accordingly took my Leave of them, with an Assurance of attending
them once more before I wrote to my Employers.

I must acknowledge I was pleased with this Interview, and the Gentleman's
Address and Reasoning seemed to gain prodigiously on me, but still jealous of
Imposition, I though it it advisable to resort back to my Minutes o^ Objections, I
had before taken, consider them, and such others as may appear to me proper,
with what I had heard from the Committee; and after a few Days devoted for this
special Purpose, and having methodized all the material Objections, I waited
again on the Committee, who were pleased to assign another of them to hear and
answer me

And first, I observed, in my Opinion the Scheme oug^^ to comprehend in their
enumerated Commodities, Por^ and Grain, Oil and Whalebone.

To this the Gentleman heartily acknowledged Oil and Whalebone escaped them;
Pork and Grain the Committee thought of, but being perishable and wasting
Commodities, they thought proper not to enumerate them; however, if agreeable
to the Public the Enumeration shall take them in; for to be sure they will
considerably contribute to the Credit and Circulation of the Company's Bills.

A further Objection I made, that these Bills will not gain a Currency,
especially when opposed by almost all the trading Part of the Province, and the
Gentlemen of the Committee without any Reflection, cannot by their Situation in
Life afford any additional Weight to them, and the generality of the
Subscribers are Persons that carry on little other Business than that of
Husbandry, and consequently incapacitated to force a Currency of them.

To which the Gentleman answered, that there were some Traders and Persons that
carry on a considerable Stroke of Business, that had already subscribed, and in
Case the Great and General Court should decline any Interposition, a great
Number of such will subscribe; neither are the Subscribers so insignificant and
impotent as a Set of Gentlemen would represent them. It Is supposed there will
be about One Thousand Subscribers, who in their Station of Life must have an
Intercourse of Business or Dealing interwoven with Ten Thousand more; and such
a Society of Men in the intercourse of their Business, will of necessity give
Bills emitted, on Security superior to that of all others, a Circulation; and
such have already subscribed and will subscribe, who are by their Situation
and Mode of Living, better qualified to give these Manufactury Bills Credit,
than even those Merchants, who pretend not to receive them; for the Province
would perhaps subsist as well, if not better, if all those Merchants deserted
it, and the Towns sent the Production of their Industry to foreign Markets
themselves. Marblehead has herein shown an Example worthy an Imitation, and a
few more such free spirited Towns, will humble those Gentlemen who vainly think
there cannot be a Medium without their particular Fiat. Besides, the enumerated
Commodities as brought into the Treasury, being to be Sold for the Company
Bills, and no other Payments to be received, and such Bills as are daily paid
into the Treasury, being again let out at 6 per Cent to such as are not of the
Company, must of necessity still promote the Circulation.

He further added, that if I would inquire how and by whom Rhode Island last
Emission, in defiance of this Government, and maugre all these Merchants could
do, gained a Currency; and what Trumpery now passes at the Eastward; and then
judge, whether these Bills so well founded and productive of such Manufactures,
at this Time can possibly fail of Credit; and why these Merchants should refuse
receiving these Bills, is surprising. Is not the Bottom of the one much better
than the other? Is not the certainty of the Payment of one, to the Possessor
surer than the other? Who knows what that Government may do, when pressed,
either by protracting Payment ad infinitum, or making an Act like a Sponge to
wipe them all away? Surely these protesting Merchants must have in View that
the People of this Province, of necessity must resort to neighboring Colonies
for a Medium, which is to the great Scandal and Ruin of the Province, or
embrace Schemes by them projected, not for the good of the People, but of
themselves and their Employers at Home; and is no more than what might be
fairly collected from their own Words. And he affirmed in Case of an Emission,
these Merchants who are always governed by their Interest, will gladly take
them. For it is notoriously known there are for the generality, as few Bills of
any Emission, in their Compting-Houses, as in the Houses of several of the
Subscribers.

From this I proceeded to give the Gentleman a further Objection, by asking
him, as a twentieth Part of the Principal was annually paid in, why the Company
did not pay to the Possessor a twentieth Part of the Bills?

The Answer to it was shortly this; There was no Necessity for that, when the
Possessor (as the Bills are in Credit) may daily purchase the Commodities he
wants with them, and finally the Promise on the Face of the Bills, after the
Expiration of twenty Years, obliges the Company to pay the Possessor for the
same in the enumerated Commodities as cheap as if purchased with Silver at 6s.
and 8d per Ounce, Penny for Penny. And besides, what anual Payments are made to
the Possessor by the Public on any of the public Bills of Credit?

Another Objection I thought worthy of the Committee's Observation was. That
the printed Scheme had not assigned certain particular Times, annually for the
fixing or regulating the Prizes of such of the enumerated Manufactures, as
shall be brought to the Company's Treasury, but seemed absolutely to leave it
in the Power of the Directors and Treasurer, to have the Countryman's Goods at
their own Price, or not at all.

In Answer to which it was said, that it would be exceeding dangerous at
certain particular Times annually to ascertain the Prizes of such Manufactures,
for all Commodities rise and fall, according to the Scarcity or Glut of them,
and as they are in Demand. And if the Prices should be regulated for a certain
time, till the Time for regulating them comes again, it may frequently so
happen in the interspace of Time, that the Scarcity or Plenty of the Commodity,
and the Demand of it, may vastly alter the Price from such Regulation; however,
what fully silences this Objection, the Committee have agreed also to alter
their Sheme in this Particular, namely for encouraging the Industrious Man, to
bring his Manufactures to the Company's Treasury, the Treasurer shall give one
per Cent. more than the Market Price for them; and that the Buyer may be
induced to deal with the Company, the Treasurer is to sell the same at one per
Cent. less than the Market Price, and the said Loss of two per Cent. to be born
by the Company. This Emendation I acknowledge greatly pleased me, being
persuaded it will be no small additional Credit and Reputation to the Company.

And now thus satisfied with the public Usefulness and Justice of the
Projection, and the indispensible Necessity in our present Circumstances, of
some immediate Expedient: I informed the Committee I should not take up any
more of their Time, about the Consideration of the Rules prescribed for the
governing the Company, taking for granted they are in general such as are
established in the Government of other Banks, as far as the Nature of the Case
will admit; but I should at large write to my Employers, and give them an
impartial Account of all my Proceedings in Respect to the Trust they reposed in
me; and to convince the Committee of the Sense I have of their public Service,
they might depend my Friends and my Self will be Subscribers as soon as the
present injunction of the General Court is removed.

And thus my good Friends I hope from this Narration, my Conduct will be
satisfactory; and that as an Evidence of your Approbation, you will on your
Part make good my Engagement to the Committee, and promote so laudable an
Undertaking.

I am, etc.


