(...)two W^^^^ At Portsmouth, December. 27. 1739.

The Faith and Prayer of a dying Malefactor. A SERMON Preached December 27.
1739. On Occasion of the Execution of two Criminals, Namely, Sarah Simpson and
Penelope Kenny. And in the Hearing of the Former.

By William Shurtleff, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Portsmouth, New-Hamp^^^^^.

To which is annexed a brief Narrative concerning the said Criminals: And a
PREFACE by the Reverend Mr. FITCH.

BOSTON: Printed by J. DRAPER, for D. HENCHMAN, in Cornhill. 1740.

TO THE Christian Reader.
THE Women, that were lately executed at Portsmouth, were condemned by a Law,
which I think proper to recite, omitting the Preamble, that it may be better
known in all Families that shall have the following Sermon.

An Act to prevent the destroying and murdering of Bastard Children.
Be it enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives convened in
General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That if any Woman be
delivered of any Issue of her Body, Male or Female, which if it were born
alive, should by Law be a Bastard, and that she endeavor privately, either by
drowning or secret burying thereof, or any other Way, either by herself, or by
the procuring of others so to conceal the Death thereof, that it may not come
to Light, whether it were born alive or not, but be concealed; in every such
Case the Mother so offending shall suffer Death, as in Case of Murder; except
such Mother can make Proof, by one Witness at the least, the Child, whose Death
was by her so intended to be concealed, was born Dead.

The Execution of the said Women drew together a vast Concourse of People, and
probably the greater, because these were the first Executions that ever were
seen in this Province: For, although this Province, in some Part of it, has been
inhabited as long as any of the neighboring Provinces yet never any Person,
before these unhappy women, was legally convicted of any capital Crime among us.

Now, though Curiosity might move many Persons to come to behold those sad
Objects, I would charitably hope that many came from a better Principle; with
Minds disposed to reflect on the Vileness and Corruption of their own Nature,
which would have betrayed them into the worst of Crimes, had it not been for
the restraining Grace of God, to whose Name alone belongs the Praise, that any
of us have been withheld from the grossest and most horrid Acts of Wickedness*
And, while they adored the Justice of God in leaving those Criminals to die
before their Time, I hope they were disposed to take Warning by them, agreeable
to the Advice of the wise Man, Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish;
for why should thou die before thy Time? And, as the Punishment of Crimes
committed, is designed in Terrorem, for the Prevention of the like; it is to be
hoped, that all others, who hear of it, will fear and do no more any such
Wickedness.

And, whereas Secrecy is a strong Temptation to many Sins, the strange
Discovery of the secret Crimes of these poor Women may well abate the Force of
that Temptation. All our Iniquities are before God, and our secret Sins in the
Light of his Countenance, who can when he pleases bring to Light the hidden
Things of Darkness; as is remarkably evident in the present Case; for an
Infant, that was found in a Well at the Entrance into the Town* occasioned a
Search for the Mother of it; whereby it was found that the said Women had
lately been delivered of Children: Now each of them denied, that the Child in
the Well was theirs; and one of them declared, where she had buried her Child,
which was accordingly found; but the other affirmed, that she cast her Child
into the River; which has never been found: And she steadfastly affirmed to the
last, that she knew nothing of the Child in the Well: So that it looks very
probable, that a Woman equally (and perhaps more heinously) guilty than either
of these, was the Mother of it* and has yet escaped Discovery: But, if she will
not take Warning and give Glory to GOD by timely Repentance, she will sooner or
later find herself in a doleful Case; and her Condition may be worse than if
she had been detected with the other Women: For these were awakened to consider
their Ways; and, as they had a Space of Repentance allowed them, they showed a
Concern to make a due Improvement thereof; gratefully accepting the good Advice
that was given them from Time to Time, and seriously joining in the Prayers
that were put up for them in Prison, and devoutly attending on the public
Worship: And they so behaved both in Prison and on the Day of their Execution,
that it is charitably hoped they had made their Peace with GOD. One of them had
been brought up in gross Ignorance; but she seemed willing to be instructed in
the Essentials of Christianity: Both of them greatly lamented their past Life,
and acknowledged the Justice of GOD in leaving them to be brought to such an
untimely End, because they had been great Sinners: Though they denied that they
laid violent Hands on their Children; one affirming that her Child was dead
born; and the other, that hers died soon after it was born: But both seemed
sensible of their Neglect of taking due Care to preserve the Life of their
Children: So that they though it themselves guilty of the Breach of the sixth
Commandment by Omission, if not by Commission.

The numerous Spectators seemed earnestly concerned for them, that they might
be true Penitents* and O! that they may all be duly concerned for themselves,
that they do not live and die without sincere Repentance!

And O! that the sad End of these Women may be a Warning to all others, to take
Heed of the Sin of Uncleanness, which is a Sin peculiarly opposite to God's
unspotted Purity, and shall not escape his righteous Judgment: Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge: And this Sin has doubtless often betrayed Persons
into the crimson Sin of Murder, for the Concealment thereof; as the Monk's
Fish Ponds sadly testified in the Beginning of the Reformation; and there have
been many sad Instances thereof besides in (...).

Happy is the Man that fears always; but he that hardens his Heart, falls
into Mischief. We have all need to beg of God, that he would keep us back from
presumptuous Sins, that they may not have Dominion over us; for then shall we
be upright and innocent from the great Transgression.

The Sermon preached by the Reverend Mr. Shurtleff on the Execution Day, being
well adapted to the Occasion, was very acceptable to all the Auditors, and is
published at the Desire of sundry of them: And, that the Blessing of Heaven may
accompany it to all the Readers, is the sincere Desire

Of their unfeigned Friend and Servant, Jabez Fitch.

THE Faith and Prayer Of a dying MALEFACTOR.
LUKE xxiii.42. And he said unto JESUS, Lord, remember me when thou come into
thy Kingdom.


THAT which has occasioned this mighty Concourse, and bro't us in such a
Multitude to the House of God, will without Doubt be acknowledged to be a very
awful and affecting Providence.

And, it being thought proper while we have this mournful Spectacle before us,
and are beholding One that has received the Sentence of Death, is just now
going to suffer according to it, that something should be offered in this
public Way, as well for the Benefit of the whole Audience, as for the
Assistance of the condemned Person Herself in these her last Hours; and it
being my Lot to have the difficult Task devolved upon me, I have thought of the
Passage read to you, as that which may suggest something that is proper and
pertinent to the sad and sorrowful Occasion.

The Words, you are sensible, were spoken by a dying Malefactor to his dying
Savior. The prefixed Period of laying open the most bloody and dismal Scene
that was ever beheld under the Sun, viz* the Crucifixion of the blessed Jesus,
being now arrived; among other Circumstances that attended it, we are told in
the preceding Parts of the Chapter, (agreeable to what was long before
predicted, that he should be numbered with the Transgressors) that there were
two Malefactors led forth with him to be put to Death; who were accordingly
crucified with him, the one on his right Hand, and the other on his left: And
in the Text, and the immediately foregoing Verses, we have an Account in what
Manner these Malefactors conducted themselves.

One of them, says the Evangelist Ver. 39, railed on him, saying, If thou be
the CHRIST, save thy self and us: But the other rebuked him, and discovers
himself to be a sincere and real Penitent. It is indeed said in the two
preceding Evangelists, that the Thieves that were crucified with him, reviled
him: And accordingly some suppose, that they both did so at first, 'till the
Heart of one of them was wonderfully and suddenly changed. But it is the more
general, and, I think, much more probable Opinion, that it was but one of them
that reviled, as is here related by St. Luke: And, as to its being elsewhere
affirmed of both; it is observed to be usual with the Evangelists, and common in
the Jewish Style, to ascribe that to many, that agrees only to one Nay, so far
are some from allowing that he, who approved himself penitent, at first railed
with the other, that they conceive he began his Repentance before: But,
whenever it first began, whether in the Prison, or upon the Cross,
considering the extraordinary Circumstances of the Case, it can give no just
Encouragement to the Sinner to put off this Work to the last. But as I may have
Occasion to say something further to the Point, before I finish my Discourse, I
shall wave is for the present, and only say that from what Period soever we
suppose the Repentance of this dying Malefactor to bear Date, it was doubtless
genuine and true: And this what he here says to his Fellow-Sufferer, seems
plainly to show: He rebuked him, saying, Do not thou fear God, seeing thou
art in the same Condemnation? and we indeed justly; for we receive the due
Reward of our Deeds: But this Man has done nothing amiss. And then we are told
that he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom.
These are the Words I am now to speak to. And could I upon the Warning I have
had, have redeemed so much Time from my other necessary Employments, as to have
prepared a just and full Discourse upon the Subject, I could not have had Time
allowed me for the Delivery of it. I must therefore content myself with a few
Hints.

And all, that I shall attempt at present, shall be as follows, I. To consider
some great and weighty Truths, of which this dying Person was, and which we all
may be in the firm Belief and Persuasion. II. To consider the Prayer, which he
put up; and which all ought to put up consequent upon such a belief, especially
if in the like Circumstances: III. To consider the Manner in which he puts up
this Prayer, and in which it becomes every one to do it in the like Time and
Case; if he would hope for the Success he met with:


And then to make some suitable Application of the whole.

I. Then, I am here to consider some great and weighty Truths, in which this
dying Person was, and which all may be in the firm Belief and Persuasion.

And in the

1st Place, He firmly believed, that, after his Death and Departure out of this
World, he was to exist and live in another State. Otherwise, what would it have
availed him, for his Lord to remember him when he came into his Kingdom? He had
nothing to ask as to this World, being conscious, that he was now taking his
last Leave of it: So that he plainly asks for some Favor beyond it. From
whence it is evident, that he was verily persuaded of a future World. And who,
that is in the Exercise of his Reason, and that does not turn away his Ear from
listening to its Dictates, can possibly doubt of his future Existence?

When we look within ourselves, and take a View of the noble Faculties we are
furnished with, how can we forbear concluding, that in this Body there dwells a
Soul or Spirit that is immaterial, and in its own Nature immortal?

And then, if, from reflecting upon these Faculties, we proceed to the
Consideration of the Brevity of human Life, shall we think it likely, that a
Creature endued with such Powers, capable of such Improvements, and formed with
Expectations, after having continued here for a little Space, should lose his
Existence, and not lay it down for a Certainty, that he was designed for
another State?

Nay, if it were only upon observing the promiscuous Distribution of Events to
good and bad Men in this Life, how should we be puzzled to reconcile it with
the moral Perfections of God, without the Supposition of another life?

But then we are not left to find out this Truth by the bare Light of Reason;
but it is manifest from divine Revelation: And, if we look into the Scriptures,
especially of the New Testament, we shall find not only the Immortality of the
Soul, but the Resurrection of the Body asserted and exemplified to us.

We may then be verily persuaded, that after our Death and Departure out of
this World, we are to exist and live in another State. Indeed the Belief of
this great Truth is such a Trouble and Disturbance to a great many in their
sinful Pursuits, that they would fain get rid of it, and may possibly so far
root it out of their Minds, as to have hardly any Sense and Apprehension of it
in their prosperous Seasons: But, in a Time of Adversity, especially in the
Hour of Death, the Evidences of it ordinarily appear in their full Force: And
they are fully convinced that they are not about to be turned out of Being, but
only to remove from one World to another, and to pass from a State of
Probation, to a State of Retribution.

And hence, by the Way, What a serious and awful Thing is it to die? I may
appeal to the miserable Object I have now before me, whether she does not find
it to be so? Yea, I may appeal to all of you, whether it would not appear to be
so to you in the like Case? And whether it be not Matter of Surprise, even at
an uncertain Distance, to think seriously of passing the dark Entry of
Eternity, through which, as you go right or wrong, you are made, or undone for
ever? To think of putting off this fleshly Tabernacle; of your Spirits
appearing seperately before your great LORD, and of being fixed in an
everlasting State?

But I proceed to the Consideration of a second great and weighty Truth of
which the dying Person spoken of in the Text, was in the firm Belief, viz.

2. That CHRIST, who was now leaving this World, was going to his Kingdom, and
so would have Authority to dispose of him after Death. And accordingly we may
be verily persuaded, that he is actually gone into his Kingdom; that he is
seated upon his Throne, and has the determining of our future State. Remember
me, says his Thief upon the Cross to his dying LORD, when thou come into thy
Kingdom; which plainly declares his Belief, that he was going into his Kingdom:
And accordingly we find him telling his Disciples after his Resurrection, Mat.
xxviii.18. That all Power was given him in Heaven and Earth. Indeed as God, all
Power was originally in him: In this Sense his Kingdom and Dominion was from
everlasting to everlasting: But the Kingdom, spoken of in the Text, is that,
which as GOD-Man, or Mediator, he is possessed of; which he received partly in
Recompense for what he had done and suffered in the Work of our Redemption.
Agreably we read, Philip. ii.9. That, because he had humbled himself, therefore
God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every Name: That at the
Name of Jesus, or as it may be read, in the Name of JESUS; that is, in the
Acknowledgement of his sovereign Power, every Knee should bow.

We may all then be verily persuaded that he, whom the Text speaks of as going,
is gone into his Kingdom: That he is set down at the right Hand of the Throne
of GOD: That the Government is upon his Shoulders: That all Persons and Things
are put in Subjection to him; and that he has a sovereign Power to dispose of
us at his Pleasure. It is he, that has the ordering of us, and of all Events
that concern us, in this World: It is he also, that determines the Time and
Manner of our going out of this World: And then, when we come into another, it
is he that has the Disposal of us: I, says he, am he that lives, and was dead,
and am alive for evermore, and have the Keys of Hell, that is, of Hades, or the
unseen World, and of Death, Revel, i.18. It is he, that determines the State of
our Souls, and disposes of them in a State of Happiness or Misery, when they
first leave the Body: It is he also, that will have the Decision of our Case,
that will pronounce us either blessed or cursed; that will sentence us either
to inherit a Kingdom, or to go away into everlasting Punishment at the
Resurrection and final Judgment.

And hence, by the Way, How worthy is he to be reverenced and obeyed? Of what
Concernment it to us to yield an entire Subjection to him? And how stupid must
we be to content ourselves till we are in good Terms with him? He is indeed the
most proper Object of our Love, and ought to be incomparably amiable in our
Eyes: But then there is also the utmost Reverence due to him: Shall we not
stand in Awe of him, who has such an absolute Dominion over us, and be afraid
of trampling upon his Laws, who has the Keys of Death and Hell, who has a Right
to dispose of us both here and hereafter, and is at the Head of all
Principalities and Powers? Shall we refuse that he should reign over us, who is
gone into the Heavens, and is at the right Hand of God, Angels, Authorities and
Powers being made subject to him, as 1 Pet. iii.21.

We little know, says One, or can conceive as yet, the several Orders and
Distinctions of the Celestial Inhabitants, and their great and illustrious
Princes and Potentates, Thrones and Dominions, that all pay him a dutiful and
joyful Subjection and Obedience Mr. How Is Redeemer's Dominion over the
invisible World, Page 92.
: And shall we, poor weak and worthless Worms, dispute his Title, and dare to
rebel against him? What Danger is there in such a Case, lest his Wrath be
kindled and we perish by the Way* But, as he is a mighty so he is a merciful
Prince: He invites and courts our Submission; and will readily accept us upon
Condition of it: And there is no other Way, whereby the Sinner can effectually
provide for his own Safety. Oh, then that you would all immediately flee for
Refuge to this powerful and compassionate Savior; that you would entirely
resign and give up your selves to him, and not rest satisfied till you have
good Ground to hope that you have made him your Friend, and are comfortably
assured of being kindly remembered by him.

And so I come to the

II. General Head proposed in speaking to the Words, which was, To consider of
the Prayer the dying Person in the Text puts up, and which all which ought to
put up consequent upon the Belief of the foregoing Truths, especially in the
like Circumstances. Being verily persuaded of his own future Existence, and
that the dying JESUS was about to be exalted at the right Hand of GOD, and to
enter upon the full Possession of his regal Power, and so would have the
disposing of him after Death, He makes this Request, LORD, remember me, when
thou come into thy Kingdom. Remember me, that is, remember me for Good: Or
remember me so as to show Favor to me: He does not prescribe to him, how far,
and in what Degree he should do it: But he dreads the Though It of being utterly
rejected, and begs that he might not wholly fall short of his Mercy. And, as he
prayed to Christ as going, we are to pray to him as gone into his Kingdom; and
as having all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him, that he would remember us
for Good, and show Favor to us in the other World.

And further, to prove that this ought to be the Matter of our Prayer, I need
only put you in Mind, what an inestimable Blessing it is, and how much it must
needs be the Object of our Desire. It is a Thing greatly to be desired, that
CHRIST in his Kingdom would think upon us for Good while we are in this World,
and when we are departing out of it: That, as we are walking through the Valley
of the Shadow of Death, he would take a favorable Notice of us, and let no
needful Supports and Consolations be wanting to us. But it is more especially
to be desired, that we may have his kind Remembrance when we come into the
other World; whether upon our immediate Departure, or at the Resurrection and
final Judgment.

1. It is infinitely worthy of our Desire, and ought therefore to be the Matter
of our Prayer, that we may be thus remembered by CHRIST in his Kingdom
immediately upon our Death and Departure out of this World If he, who is the
Lord of Paradise, and has the Keys of it in his keeping, be not merciful to us,
what will become of us? If we are then excluded from his Favor and Protection,
what can we expect, but that our Souls, as soon as ever they quit their present
Habitations, will fall as a Prey into the Hands of that roaring Lion, who has
always greedily sought to devour them? What, but that they will be carried away
to some or other of those hellish Dens; where, besides the Tortures we shall
receive from those merciless Spirits, to whose Company we shall now be
perpetually confined, we shall undergo infinitely more than we can at present
conceive from our own awakened and enraged Conscience, that biting Worm that
shall never die, and from the Wrath of an omnipotent GOD, that fierce and
flaming Fire that will never be quenched. But, if upon our leaving this World,
our exalted and glorified LORD be pleased to think upon us for Good, and to
dispose of us in a State of Happiness, some of those Angels, that attend upon
him, and pay their cheerful Subjection to him, shall have Charge concerning our
departed Spirits; who shall defend them from the hellish Hosts, that stand
ready to devour them, and conduct them safe to the blissful Habitations
provided for them; where they shall obtain a complete Rest from Sin and Sorrow,
where they shall be like to CHRIST, and see him as he is; where their Faculties
shall be vastly improved; where they shall join the sweet and agreeable Society
of Angels and perfected Spirits, and be perpetually exercised in the most noble
Employments, till the Resurrection and final Judgment. And so I come to say

2. That it is a Thing infinitely worthy of our Desire, that CHRIST, who is
gone into his Kingdom, and will in that Day sit upon the Throne of his Glory,
may so remember us as to show Mercy to us. We have full Assurance that there is
such a Day approaching: A Day, when our blessed LORD, who now sits at the right
Hand of GOD, shall come in his Glory, when he shall descend from Heaven with a
Shout* with the Voice of the Archangel, and the Trump of GOD: When all that
are in their Graves shall hear his Voice and come forth, and when Quick and
Dead shall appear before him. So that, in a Sense, he may then be said to
remember us all, there being no one of the whole Race of Adam that shall escape
his Notice and Regard. But the Thing so much to be desired is, that he would
remember us for Good, and so as to show Mercy to us. Without this, what a
miserable State shall we be in? If we are of the Number of those, to whom he
shall say, I know you not, how dismal will be the Sound? Oh! the hideous
Shrieks and bitter Outcries, that will be heard at the pronouncing of that
dreadful Sentence, Go ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels! Who can conceive the thousandth Part of the Misery and Torment
that is included in it, and which those forlorn Wretches, that fall under it,
must forever endure? But, if our great LORD be then pleased to think upon us
for Good, and we are ranked among his Favorites and Friends, what can we
desire more to complete our Felicity? With what ravishing Pleasures shall our
Minds then abound and overflow to behold our LORD placing us at his right Hand,
and to hear him saying to us, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the Foundation of the World? With what Songs of Joy and
Victory shall we return with him to the City of the living GOD? And how faint,
how imperfect, and inadequate are the most exalted Ideas, we are now able to
form to ourselves of the ineffable Delights we shall uninterruptedly partake of
throughout eternal Ages? Thus you see how worthy it is of our Desire, and
consequently how much it becomes us to make it our Prayer, that CHRIST would
remember us now he is in his Kingdom, and during the Exercise of that royal
Power, with which, as Mediator, he is invested: We are to pray, that he would
remember us at Death, and that he would remember us at the Resurrection; that
he, who has the Decision of our Case, would show us Mercy, and determine us to
a State of Happiness: We are to be often making this Prayer in the Time of our
Life and Health: But it is especially proper in the Time of our Death: And it
very well becomes those that die, as did the Malefactor spoken of in the Text.
And so I come to the

III. Thing proposed, which was, To consider the Manner in which he puts up
this Prayer, and in which it becomes every one to do it in the like Time and
Case, if he would hope for the Success he met with. That the Prayer of this
dying Malefactor was prevalent and effectual, we may learn from the Verse
immediately following our Text. Having said unto JESUS, LORD, remember me, when
thou come into thy Kingdom; we are told, that JESUS said unto him, Verily I
say unto thee, To Day shall thou be with me in Paradise. And the Manner, in
which he puts up this Prayer, and in which it becomes all in the like Time and
Case, to put up the same, may be learned from the Text and the preceding Verses.

And here, I shall instance in a few Things, which deserve to be more fully
insisted on, than the Time will allow of at present. And

1. The Person here spoken of, makes this Prayer in the Exercise of a strong
and active Faith; and so must every one in the like Case, that expects to be
heard, accepted and blessed. The Faith of this dying Malefactor, is in some
Measure evident from what has been already said: And what is related in the
Context is abundantly expressive of it: He professes his Belief concerning
JESUS, that he had done nothing amiss; and consequently that, in suffering as
an Imposter, he suffered wrongfully, that he was the very Person he professed
himself to be, even a Prophet sent from GOD: And then, being convinced that he
was perfectly innocent, and had no Sin to suffer for of his own, he was
doubtless persuaded, that he suffered for the Sins of others: That he was cut
off to make Reconciliation for Iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
Righteousness, and therefore trusted to the Merit of his Sacrifice: Thus he
implicitly acknowledges him as Prophet and Priest; and expressly owns him as
Lord and King, and submits himself to him as such: And all this he does at a
Time, when he was in the very Depth of Disgrace: Such was the Faith that he was
in the Exercise of -- And, with something of the like Belief in CHRIST, of the
like Reliance upon him, and entire Resignation to him, does it become all in
the like Circumstances to make the foregoing Prayer, as they would hope for
Success.

Again,

2. The dying Person spoken of in the Text, puts up the Prayer here recorded,
in the Exercise of a sincere and fervent Love. -- And so must every one in the
like Case, if he expects the like gracious Answer that he met with. His Love to
GOD and CHRIST is evident, in that he could not forbear manifesting his Dislike
of the Irreverence and Disrespect that were shown to them by his
Fellow-Sufferer: And his Love to his Neighbor is evident, from the Rebuke he
administers to him and the Concern he expresses for him: And, in the Exercise
of the like Love to GOD and CHRIST, and the like charitable Disposition toward
Men, are we all, while living, but especially when dying, to put up this
Request, That CHRIST would remember us now he is in his Kingdom; even with
Minds free from all manner of Ill Will to those, who, we conceive, have been
injurious to us, or we cannot expect to prevail.

Again;

3. It was in the Exercise of a deep Repentance, that the condemned and dying
Person here spoken of, makes this Prayer: And in the like penitent Frame must
every one put up this Request, if he hopes to succeed, as he did. He was fully
apprehensive how unworthily he had behaved toward GOD, and how ill he had
deserved at his Hands: Do not thou fear GOD, says he to his Fellow, seeing
thou art in the same Condemnation; and we indeed justly, for we receive the
Reward of our Deeds. Yea he doubtless saw himself worthy not only of Death, but
of Hell; was suitably affected with the Consideration of it, and sensible that
nothing but infinite Mercy could rescue him from it. And in the same Manner
ought all dying Persons, especially all dying Malefactors, to make this Prayer
to their exalted LORD and Savior, if they expect that it should be prevalent
and effectual, viz. That he would remember them now he is in his Kingdom: They
must see their Sins, as being odious and offensive to GOD, and as laying them
open to his Vengeance: They must take Notice of the Hand of God in what has
befallen them and own that it is but the just Recompense of their Doings: Yea,
they must be sensible that they have exposed themselves to greater Miseries
than have befallen them, or that can befall them, in this World, and that they
might justly be punished with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the
LORD, and from the Glory of his Power: They are therefore to cast themselves
down at his Feet, and to place their only Hope in his free and sovereign Grace,
looking for the Mercy of our LORD JESUS CHRIST unto eternal Life. And then,
once more,

It is with the utmost Fervency, that the dying Person, whom the Text speaks
of, makes this Prayer; and in the same Manner must every one put up this
Request to his LORD and Savior, if he hopes for the Success he met with. His
Words, as One notes, carry an Air of Importunity in them: When he says, LORD,
remember me; he as it were breathes out his very Soul in his Prayer. It is as
if he had said, LORD, do but remember me, and I have enough; I desire no more;
into thy Hands I commit my Case Mr. Henry.
. And thus does it become every one when he makes this Prayer in the like Case,
if he would do it to any Purpose, to do it with the utmost Earnestness and
Fervor of Soul: He must pray with the Importunity that the vast Importance of
the Thing requires: He must plead with his great LORD, as one that is pleading
for Life, even an immortal Life, and must strive and agonize in his Prayer, as
one that cannot tell how to be denied.

Thus I have as briefly as possible considered some great Truths in which this
dying Person was, and which all may be in the firm Belief and Persuasion; as
also the Prayer which he put up, and all ought to put up in Consequence of such
a Belief: And the Manner in which he put up this Prayer, and in which it
concerns every one to do it, if he would hope for the like Success that he had.

All then, that remains, is to make some suitable Application of what has been
said: And here,

1. With the tenderest Bowels of Compassion, and the deepest Concern of Soul, I
would apply myself to the poor Prisoner, whose miserable Case has occasioned
this vast and numerous Assembly: And in a few Words let me exhort you, that you
would in a becoming Manner make the Prayer of the condemned and dying Person,
that has been now put into your Mouth.

You are, I trust, verily persuaded of that which you will most certainly find
to be true, that, as you are leaving this, you are going into another World,
and are to exist and live forever in a future State: I take it for granted,
that you are also persuaded that CHRIST, who is gone into his Kingdom, has
Authority to dispose of you; and that accordingly, being by and by, even within
an Hour or two more, to appear before him, he will then determine your State;
and you will be unalterably fixed in a Condition of Happiness or Misery: And,
believing this, how can you forbear breathing out this Request, LORD, remember
me, now thou art in thy Kingdom?

It ought to be, and I trust is, Matter of deep Humiliation to you, and the
great Grief and Burden of your Soul, that you have lived so much in the Neglect
of Prayer, and other religious Duties, in the Time past of your Life, whereby
you have provoked GOD to leave you to a great many Sins, and particularly to
the Sin, that has brought you to this ignominious Death. And, as you have
rejected CHRIST in your prosperous Seasons, when he has called you, you having
one Time after another refused; you must acknowledge, that it would be just
with him, to reject you, and turn a deaf Ear to your Cry now in the Time of
your Calamity and Distress.

But yet don't absolutely despond; but so far encourage yourself as to make
your humble Application to him: And be sure to do it in the Manner that has
been now prescribed.

See to it, that you make this Prayer to CHRIST in the due Exercise of Faith;
with an entire Surrender of yourself to him, and a firm and steadfast Reliance
upon him. Again,

Put up this Prayer in the Exercise of Love to GOD and CHRIST, and of universal
Benevolence and Charity to Men.

Do it also under a penitent Sense of your Sins; sorrowing that you have
offended and dishonored a glorious and gracious GOD. Acknowledge the Equity of
what has befallen you: That you are receiving the Reward of your Doings: Yea,
that you are justly exposed to greater and more amazing Miseries. But yet have
Recourse to sovereign Grace, and let your sole Dependence be upon it.

And then, Let this Prayer be put up to your glorified Lord and Savior, with
all possible Earnestness and Ardour of Soul: Plead your Necessity of an
Interest in him, and the inconceivable Misery you must incur without it: Say, I
am undone, for ever undone, unless thou will think upon me for Good, save me
Lord, or I perish. Plead also his infinite Compassion to poor perishing
Sinners: Say to him, Was it not in Love to the Souls of Men that thou were
pleased to come down from Heaven, to be made Flesh, and to dwell among us? Have
thou not manifested an infinite Concern for their Salvation in thy Life and
Death; and do thou not do the same since thy Resurrection and Ascension? Art
thou not now touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, and affected with our
Miseries? LORD, pity me in this my Time of Need. LORD, remember me, have Mercy
upon me, and receive my Spirit.

And, if you look to him in the Manner you have been now directed to, you may
hope to be heard and accepted of your gracious LORD, and that this Day, you
shall be with him in Paradise.

But, it is Time for me to turn myself to the rest of the Audience.

And, Men and Brethren, let me

1. Bespeak your tender Regards to the Person here before you, and to the other
in the like Case, who have been sentenced, and are just now going, to be cut
off by the Sword of human Justice: They are most certainly fit and proper
Objects of your Pity: Behold them then with a becoming Compassion and Concern:
And let it be our united Cry to our great LORD and Savior, that he would
remember them now he is in his Kingdom.

And then

Nextly, I would address you with a more particular Regard to yourselves, and
exhort you to make it your Endeavor, as well as your Prayer, that your blessed
Savior, who is gone into his Kingdom and is seated upon the Throne of his
Glory, may remember you for Good and show Favor to you, when you come into
another World.

And let the Example of the condemned and dying Person here before you, and the
other under the like Circumstances, serve as a Means to quicken you to it.

It is, you are sensible, the first Instance of the Kind that has occurred in
the Province. And Oh! if it were the Will of GOD, that nothing of the like
Nature might again happen among us! And, as it is the first, and a double
Example, you seem peculiarly called to take Notice of it* And accordingly be
persuaded to behold them with a suitable Frame and Temper of Mind.

And here, as to those of you, that have been in a good Measure preserved from
falling into the like Sins, let me exhort you, when you look upon these
Objects, to do it not with Contempt and Triumph as to them; nor yet with vain
Glory as to yourselves: But consider, who it is that makes you to differ, and
admire and adore his distinguishing Grace.

But are there not those of you, who upon Enquiry may find that you have been
too faulty upon a like Account?

It now seems that there has been one among us, through whose Means these Persons
have been remarkably detected, that is equally and it may be much more
heinously, guilty in the Sight of GOD: And, could I suppose the Person to be
with in Hearing, I would say, Don't encourage yourself from your present
Impunity: Be assured that, though you are as yet concealed from Men, both you
and your Crime are known to GOD, and that, though to serve some wise and good
Purposes, he may suffer you to escape for a while, you may be bro't to Shame
and Misery in this World: Repent therefore, make thy Peace with GOD, and walk
very humbly before him: Or else, if your Sin do not find you out in this World,
you will be exposed to very heavy and distinguishing Punishment in the other
World.

And, as to all such of you as are indulging your selves in any unchaste and
filthy Practices; let me admonish you of the Folly of trusting to the Secrecy
of your Sins. Consider, that the GOD, to whose View they are exposed, may
before you are aware and in a Way you little think of, bring to Light those
hidden Things of Darkness: And you may be brought to Punishment on the Account
of them: Take Heed then, lest the Heavens reveal your Iniquity, and the Earth
rise up against you: And be prevailed with to betake your selves to the
Exercise of a speedy and deep Repentance toward GOD, and to put away the Evil
of your Doings from before his Eyes.

Let me also exhort all such of you as allow yourselves in the Neglect and
Abuse of GOD's Sabbaths; (which the condemned Person here present reflects upon
with so much Regret) and in such like Sins as make Way for others, and very
often lead to Capital Crimes, to beware of persisting in them, lest you also
Mourn at the last, and say* How have we hated Instruction, and our Souls
despised Reproof?

In a Word, Whatever are the Sins of Heart or Life you have any of you hitherto
indulged, be persuaded to give yourselves no Rest till you are effectually
reclaimed and turned from them to GOD; that so you may the more confidently
expect and pray to be remembered for Good, and to obtain Mercy from your great
LORD, when you come into that other World, to which you must quickly and may
suddenly remove.

But here perhaps you may be ready to object, That there is no need of your
making so much Haste to leave your Sins and to return to GOD and your Duty, but
that you may safely put it off to the Close of your Days; that it will suffice
to make this Prayer at the last: And may be apt to bring this Instance of the
Thief upon the Cross as an Evidence of it.

But, if this Person's Conversion was begun during his Imprisonment, which as
it has been hinted to you, is what some have conjectured, the Argument utterly
fails, and there is no Force at all in it.

But, supposing it to be otherwise, and that, to keep Men from absolute
Despair, there should be this one instance in our Bible of one who at the last
Hour was thus heard and accepted in his Prayer: Seeing this is the only one,
and attended with very extraordinary Circumstances, that Man can hardly be
thought to be in his Wits, that should take any great Encouragement from it.
"It was done, says Mr. Chillingworth Chillingworth's Works, Page 385.
, at the Time of CHRIST's Suffering; a Season, wherein GOD, in that one Act of
the Redempti- of his Son, expressed the very utmost of his Mercy. and
discovered unto the World as it were in one entire Sum, all the Riches and
Treasures of his Goodness: If therefore he was pleased at such a Time to Work a
Miracle of Mercy, what Ground can any have from hence to expect it in ordinary
Cases?"

And besides, It is probable, that this Person had never before enjoyed, and
therefore could not abuse the Day and Means of Grace, and so could not incur
the like Guilt that we do, in putting off our Repentance, who live under the
Gospel.

And whosoever is emboldened from this Example to defer it to the last,
presuming that he shall then find Mercy, (should he have the Opportunity to ask
for it, which is too great an Uncertainty for any one to depend upon) will most
probably find himself deceived.

Let none then dare any longer to delay this great and necessary Work: But if
you are yet in Bondage to any of your Lusts; let me entreat you, that you would
not rest satisfied until you are delivered from so base and dangerous a
Servitude, and have in good Earnest subjected your selves to the Yoke and
Government of CHRIST.

In a Word, Let us all cordially embrace and obey his Gospel, and labor more
and more to conduct ourselves as becomes his Disciples: Laying aside every
Weight, and the Sins that do most easily beset us, let us run with Patience the
Race set before us; looking unto JESUS, the Author and Finisher of our Faith;
and be continually aspiring after a nearer Conformity to his Doctrine and
Example, that so, when we are taking Leave of this World, we may with the
greater Confidence pray that he would remember us when we come into the other
World: And he will then be assuredly mindful of us at Death and the
Resurrection, and make us completely and inconceivably happy for ever and ever,
AMEN and AMEN.

A Brief NARRATIVE Concerning the CRIMINALS, Whose Execution was the Occasion
of the preceding Sermon.
IN the Preface to that Discourse, it is suggested, how these Persons came to
be detected, and bro't to Punishment: And, leaving it to the Reader to make
proper and pertinent Reflections upon the remarkable Discovery of their Crimes,
and the Mysteriousness of Divine Providence, in suffering a third Person, as it
now seems probable, one it may be more grossly guilty than themselves, and by
whose Means they have been discovered, as yet to escape: Whether for Mercy or
Judgment to the particular Person, and for what Designs as to others, though
doubtless for wise and good Purposes, must be reserved to the Revelation of the
righteous Judgment of GOD. I shall now give a very short Account of their
Behavior after their Condemnation.

No sooner had they received their Sentence, which was upon the 30th Day of
August last, but seemed to be deeply sensible of their miserable State, and to
apply themselves with a great deal of Care to prepare for their Death. But,
after some Time, a Notion being suggested to them of attempting an Escape and
being persuaded by some indiscreet Persons who came to visit them, that their
Sentence was rigorous and unjust, and that upon due Application they might
obtain a Reprieve so as to be finally excused from suffering: These Things
seemed to have an ill Influence (especially upon one of them) and to divert
their Minds from Things of the greatest Importance for a while. But, for some
Time before their Death, they appeared, to have laid aside these Thoughts, and
to set themselves with all Diligence to work out their Salvation, and to secure
their future well-being.

One of them, viz. Sarah Simpson, a Widow Woman, of about 27 Years of Age, was
born in the Province of New Hampshire, in the Parish of Oyster-River, now the
Town of Durham. She was put out young, and served her Apprenticeship in
Portsmouth. She was one, that had a good Degree of Understanding: And, though she
sadly bewailed her Negligence and Folly, in making no better a Use of the
Opportunities she had enjoyed of acquainting herself with Things of a religious
Nature; yet she was not, when first confined, remarkably ignorant upon that
Account, but made great Proficiency in Knowledge during her imprisonment: The
Ministers of the Town making it their constant Business to instruct her, as
well as pray with her: And being also occasionally visited by some of the
neighboring Ministers and other good People, who offered her all the
Assistance they could. The Way of public Worship to which she had been used,
was the Way practiced by the Churches in this Country: Accordingly she went
every Lord's Day to the Place of Worship, where she had been formerly wont to
attend. And, on the Lord's Day before her Execution, she desired a Paper might
be read, wherein she in a very moving Manner, asked the Prayers of all GOD's
People for her, as it was the last Time she was ever like to have the Benefit
of them upon such a Day: Taking Occasion at the same Time to bewail her Breach
of GOD's Sabbaths, which she declared, lay peculiarly heavy upon her Spirits,
and warned all, more particularly young Persons, to beware of the like.

On the Day of her Execution, she heard the foregoing Sermon seemingly with a
great deal of Attention. She walked from the Prison, to the Place of Execution,
which was not much less than a Mile; being accompanied by the Ministers of the
Congregational Churches in the Town, and some other of the neighboring
Ministers. She all the Way discovered an uncommon Composure of Mind, and gave
very pertinent Answers to the Questions that were put to her.

After she came to the Place of Execution, a Writing, (that was put into one of
the Ministers Hands by the Way, said to be of her dictating, and which she
acknowledged to be so) was publicly read at her Desire; wherein she mentions
several Things that were Matter of Grief and Bitterness to her, as, That she
had been so forgetful of GOD in her Childhood and Youth, and passed away her
early Days in light and wicked Company: To which she ascribes it, that her
riper Years had been a Course of more direct Rebellion against GOD: And she
desires, that Parents, as well as Children, would receive Instruction from.

She here also laments, that she had made no better an Use of GOD 's Sabbaths
and of her Opportunities of hearing the Word: She declares, that, when she went
to hear the Word, she was not governed by right Motives, and gave little, or no
Heed to it: That, though it was sometimes very acceptable, and seemed as the
lovely Song, of one that had a pleasant Voice, etc. yet it made no deep and
lasting Impression upon her Mind: Accordingly she advises young People to keep
their Hearts and Eyes from wandering in the House of GOD, and closely to attend
to that which is their proper Business there: She also mourns, that she had
improved no more by the Opportunities she had had in some Families in which she
had lived, or been conversant, for some little Time after she was grown up;
where the Worship of GOD was upheld, and where she had received many good and
wholesome Instructions. And she mentions it with Regret, that, when she entered
into the Marriage State, it was not with one that took Care to maintain the
Exercise of Family Religion, and advises all when they marry, to make it their
great Care to marry in the LORD: She at the same Time, expresses her
Thankfulness to the Ministers* that had visited her, and that, as she expressed
it, had so often carried her to the Throne of Grace, particularly to the two
who had been most frequent in their Visits: And, declaring her Forgiveness of
all the World, she signifies her own Hope, notwithstanding her great and
manifold Sins, of obtaining Forgiveness and finding Mercy with GOD through the
Blood of JESUS CHRIST his Son.

The other of the Persons executed, viz. Penelope Kenny, a Servant Maid of
about 20 Years of Age, was born in or near Limerick in the Kingdom of Ireland:
She was bro't up in the Romish Religion, and, as might be reasonably expected
in such a Case, stood in need of being taught the first Principles of the
Oracles of GOD. She was indeed very willing to be informed, and diligently
hearkened to such as would take the Pains to instruct her: She attended upon
the Lord's-Days, at an Episcopalian Assembly, that being the only Way of
public Worship at which she had ever been present; except it be that in which
she was educated. But she was privately visited and assisted not only by the
Minister of that Society, but the Ministers of the other Churches: And from the
Pains that had been taken to make her duly sensible of her miserable and
perishing Estate by Reason of Sin, and of the Way to obtain Salvation by JESUS
CHRIST; she seemed at length to have some suitable Apprehensions of them, and
expressed her Repentance for her other Sins, as well as that for which she was
condemned. She heard a Sermon at Church the Morning before her Execution. She
walked to the Place accompanied by the Rev. Mr. Brown, who read Prayers for her
there. She was greatly affected with her Case: And, having spoken a few Words
by Way of Warning to others, and the Rev. Mr. Fitch having commended them both
to the Mercy of GOD in CHRIST, she and the other were executed, according to
the Sentence that had been passed upon them, and left us not without Hopes of
their being delivered from the second Death.

As there was an uncommon Number of Spectators present upon the mournful
Occasion, so an uncommon Concern was visible in them all: And would to GOD,
that the Impressions made upon them may abide, and have an happy Effect; that
not only such as saw, but that all such as hear, may fear: That those, who are
in their younger Years would flee youthful Lusts: That all would be careful to
shun the Sin, which has been the Occasion of bringing these Persons to this
untimely End, and avoid every other evil Work: This is what GOD in his
Providence calls you to: Hear then the Conclusion of the whole Matter: Fear
GOD, and keep his Commandments: For this is the whole of Man: For GOD shall
bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret Thing* whether it be Good, or
whether it be Evil.

FINIS.

