A CONTINUATION OF THE JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE FROM GIBRALTAR TO Savannah in
GEORGIA.

By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, A. B. of Pembroke-College, Oxford.

CONTAINING Many curious OBSERVATIONS, and edifying REFLECTIONS, on the several
Occurrence that happened in the Voyage.

The SIXTH EDITION.

BOSTON. Reprinted by T. Fleet, for Charles Harrison, over against the Brazen
Head in Cornhill, 1740.

Mr. WHITEFIELD's JOURNAL FROM Gibraltar to Savannah in Georgia.
My dear Friends,
THOUGH I know no Reason why you should be sollicitous about any thing that
happens to such a dead Dog as I am, yet as your Love ( Oh unmerited Kindness)
abounds exceedingly toward me, I am positive you will give Thanks unto our
good GOD for all the Mercies he has conferred upon me; therefore have sent you
as full and particular Account of the Remainder of my Voyage, as the little
Leisure I have had from my Ministerial Offices would permit me to give.

Monday, Feb. 20. 1737. Spent the Morning on board, in writing Letters to my
dear Friends in England, to acquaint them of my fate Arrival. Went in the
Afternoon on Shore to Gibraltar, and was unspeakably delighted with the
Prospect of the Place. My Friend H. and I dined at an Inn, and afterward went
with Capt. W. and some other Company, to view one Side of the Fort, which to us
seemed impregnable; and at the Sight of it I could scarce avoid crying out, Who
is so good a GOD as our GOD?

The seeing Persons of all Nations and Languages gave me great Pleasure: And
the Difference of the Value of their Money and ours, gave me Occasion to
reflect on the Stupidity of those who place their Happiness in that which has
no intrinsic Worth in itself, but only so much as we arbitrarily put upon it.

Went into a Romish Chapel, wherein were the Relics of a vast deal of
Pageantry, and several Images of the Virgin Mary, dressed up, not like a poor
Galilean, but in her Silks and Damasks. Oh (thought I) who has bewitched this
People, that they should thus depart from the Simplicity of CHRIST, and go a
whoring after their own Inventions? Surely, Was great St. Paul to rise from the
Dead, and come and view the Romish Church, his Spirits would be stirred up
within him, as it was at Athens, to see them thus wholly given to Idolatry.

Tuesday, Feb. 21. After having read Prayers, and wrote some more Letters to my
Friends in England, went again to Gibraltar, to pay my Respects to Governor S.
being told by Capt. M. that he expected to see me. The worthy old Gentleman,
like Sergus Paulus, received me with the utmost Candor, and gave me a general
Invitation to come and dine with him every Day, during my Stay at Gibraltar. I
thanked him for his Kindness; had about a quarter of an Hour's Conversation
with him, and took my Leave for that Time.

At One o'Clock, I returned to dine with him, according to his Appointment; and
was well pleased with the regular Behavior of the Officers at Table. We had
what an Epicurean would call Caena Dubia. At three I took my Leave, and walked
about with Capt. W. and other Friends, to take a second View of the Fort; went
on board about Five; read Prayers, and began expounding the Creed in the
Cabin; wrote some more Letters, and went to Bed, very thankful to GOD for
sending me abroad.

Wednesday, Feb. 22. This Day I intended to stay on board, to write Letters,
but GOD being pleased to show me it was not his Will, I went again on Shore,
and paid both the Ministers of Gibraltar a Visit, who received me very
affectionately, and offered me the Use of the Pulpit. Oh what a blessed Thing
it is for the Clergy to dwell together in Unity!

At Eleven went to public Prayers, and was much pleased to see many Officers
and Soldiers attend the General to Church. Methinks Religion looks doubly
amiable in a Soldier.

After Prayers, dined again with the General, who gave me another particular
Invitation, as I went out of the Church. He treated me with uncommon Civility,
and desired me to preach the following Sunday.

Had an Opportunity of sending a Packet of Letters with my Journal to my dear
Friends in England. May the good LORD give them his Blessing!

Went in the Afternoon to visit a Deserter, who had sent me a Letter, desiring
me to intercede for him with the Governor, he being apprehensive he should die
for Desertion; I intended to answer his Request, but the Governor was so
merciful that he ordered him to be whipped only, which I thought Punishment
little enough. O Sin, what Mischief do thou make in the World!

In the Evening returned as usual on board, read Prayers and expounded in the
great Cabin, buried a Child, made an Exhortation to the Soldiers proper for
the Occasion, wrote to some Friends at Deal; and went to Bed with unusual
Thoughts and Convictions that GOD would do some great Things at Gibraltar. Oh
that I was a pure Vessel fit for my Master's Use!

Thursday, Febr. 23. Continued all this Day on Board, did my usual Duty in the
Ship, and put my dear Friend Br's Sermon into the Hands of two Officers at
Gibraltar, who came to dine on board with Lieutenant D. They behaved very much
like Gentlemen, and seemed pleased with serious Conversation. May the GOD whom
I serve add the Christian to the Gentleman!

Friday, Feb. 24. Blessed be GOD, who this Day has sh^wn me that he has heard
my Prayer, and not taken his loving Kindness from me! Long before I reached
Gibraltar, I prayed that GOD would open an effectual Door, at the Place whither
we were going, and direct me where I should lodge; and lo! this Day He has
answered me. -- About Ten in the Morning comes Capt. M. on board, telling me
that one Major S. (a Person I never saw) had provided me a convenient Lodging
at one Merchant B's, and desired that I would come on Shore. I looking upon
this as a Call from Providence, received it with all Thankfulness, and went
with Friend H. on Shore, but not without first praying that GOD would direct us
how to behave.

About the middle of the Town Major S. gave us the Meeting, conducted us to our
new Lodgings (which were very commodious) and engaged us to dine with him and
Captain M. When I sent you without Scrip or Shoe, lacked ye any thing? and they
said, Nothing, LORD!

About Eleven was introduced by Doctor C. to General C. who was desirous of
seeing me. He received me exceeding kindly, and after a little serious
Conversation, we went to the Governor S's, from thence to public Prayers; and
I was highly pleased to see so many Officers attending on the Generals to
Church. Doctor C. told me he had not known Governor S. absent himself from
Prayers once these several Years, except when he was hindered by real Sickness.
O that all others would let their Light so shine before Men!

Retired in the Evening to our Lodgings, had Family Prayer, wrote some few
religious Letters, and spent near half an Hour in serious Conversation with the
People of the House, gave Thanks for the Blessings of the Day, and was soon
convinced that GOD had sent me that particular Lodging of a Truth. Be careful
for nothing, but on every (even the minutest) Thing, make your Wants known unto
GOD. For he cares for you.

Saturday, Feb. 25. About Six this Morning went with Friend H. to the Church to
pray with some devout Soldiers, who I heard used to meet there at that Time,
and with whom my Soul was knit immediately. For all my Delight is in the Saints
that are in the Earth, and in those that excel in Virtue.

After we had finished our Devotion, I made an Enquiry into their State, and
found that their Society had been subsisting about twelve Years, and that one
Sergeant B. (a devout Soldier indeed) now amongst them was the first Beginner
of it. At first they told me they used to meet in Dens and Mountains and Caves
in the Rocks; but afterward upon their applying for Leave to build a little
Place to retire in, Doctor C. and Governor S. gave them the free Use of the
Church, where they constantly meet three Times in a Day, to pray, read, and
sing Psalms, and at any other Season when they please. They have met with
Contempt, and are now in Derision called the New Lights. A glorious Light they
are indeed. For I conversed closely with several of them, and they made me
quite ashamed of my little Proficiency in the School of CHRIST. Many have
joined with them for a Time, but a servile Fear of Man, that Bane of
Christianity, made them draw back. However, some continue steadfast and
immovable, and though despised by the World, are no doubt highly favored of
GOD. Governor S. countenances them much, and has spoke of them often to me with
Respect. Blessed be GOD, even the Father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, who has not
left himself without Witness in any Place, but has some every where, who serve
him and work Righteousness.

The Sunday before we came hither, I was telling my Friend H. that I had reason
to think, by what had happened to me, that GOD had some Work for me to do at
Gibraltar; he answered that there could not much Good be expected from among
Soldiers. I replied -- No doubt GOD has some secret ones in all Places, who
tremble at his Word. And lo he has this Day brought me to them. By this I know
thou favourest me, O LORD thou King of Saints.

There is also another Society of the Scotch Church, who in Contempt are called
Dark Lanthorns. It has subsisted about a Year, and is made up of many serious
Christians, as I was informed. I did not think it agreeable to visit them, but
I sent them, as well as the other Society, some proper Books; had religious
Talk with several of them, and endeavored to unite both Societies together. Oh
when will that Time come, when all Difference about Externals shall be taken
away, and we all with one Heart, and one Mouth glorify our LORD JESUS CHRIST!

About Eight returned to my Lodgings, and after having wrote some Letters, went
on board the Amy to marry a Couple who sent to me Yesterday to come and
celebrate their Nuptials. I took that Opportunity of exhorting them all to take
heed to the Things that belong to their Peace. Some, I believe, were affected,
but the Generality of them behaved so careless, that I could not but see a
Difference between those that have a Minister and those that have not.

About Twelve went on board my own Ship, dined, did some necessary Business,
read Prayers, gave my Flock a warm Exhortation, and returned about Five on
Shore, where I spent near two Hours with the devout Soldiers in the Church.
Many of them conversed most spiritually, and seemed well acquainted with the
Pangs of the New Birth. May GOD perfect the good Work begun in their Hearts! O
how amiable are thy Servants, O LORD of Hosts! How would the World admire them
did they see their Beauties! But Satan does now as formerly dress them in Bears
Skins in order to have them baited.

Sunday, Feb. 26. Between Five and Six in the Morning went with Mr. H. (which I
did all the while I was at Gibraltar) and sung Psalms, prayed and expounded the
Lessons to the devout Soldiers in the Church, and was much enlarged. Thanks be
given unto Thee, O LORD.

Intended to go and preach to my People; was prevented by the Violence of the
Wind; but was pleased to hear from some Gibraltar Officers, who dined that Day
on board the Whitaker, that some of my Flock had the Courage to read Prayers
and sing Psalms themselves, and (as I found afterward) continued so to do,
during my Absence from them. Blessed be GOD! I hope I shall have some that dare
be singularly Good, and will not be kept out by the Press.

Preached in the Morning at Gibraltar, before such a Congregation of Officers
and Soldiers as I never before saw: The Church, though very large, was quite
thronged: And GOD was pleased to show me, that he had given extraordinary
Success to my Sermon. O how is the divine Strength magnified in my Weakness! O
grant I may like a pure Crystal transmit all the Light thou pourest upon me;
and never claim as my own what is thy sole Propriety!

Dined with Friend H. at Governor S's, who sent most kindly to invite us. The
Law at his Table was the same with that of Ahasuerus, "No one was compelled:"
And all the Officers behaved in such a decent innocent Manner every Time I
dined there, that they pleased me very much. Surely some Fear of GOD is in that
Place!

After Evening Prayers (for there is no Sermon in the Afternoon) I went and
expounded, prayed and sung Psalms with the Society, and had near thirty
Hearers. May the good LORD give it his Blessing.

At Night had some devout Conversation with my Host and Hostess, who seemed to
love me as their own Soul, prayed for absent Friends, and went to Bed ashamed I
had done so little for GOD on a Sabbath Day. But when we cannot do as we would,
we must do as we can.

Monday, Feb. 27. Went to the Church, and did as Yesterday: and was visited
afterward by two of the Nonconforming Society, who seemed to be Israelites
indeed: I exhorted them to Love and Unity, and not to let a little Difference
about a few Externals occasion any Narrow-spiritedness to arise in their
Hearts. I advised them to come and hear me expound in the Church, which they
did; and providentially the Lesson was the 4th of the Ephesians, from whence I
took Occasion to urge on them the Necessity of loving one another with a
Catholic disinterested Love; to be of one Heart and one Mind, and to join
without Respect of Persons in hastening the Kingdom of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. I
hope GOD gave a Blessing to what was said: For I observed they came constantly
afterward, and was told there was a perfect Harmony between them. What
infinite Mischief have needless Divisions occasioned in the Christian World?
Divide and Impera, is the Devil's Motto.

Dined and supped at General C's with Mr. H. and was received most courteously:
The LORD reward him in that Day! The Officer seemed studious to oblige me, and
to be sollicitous for my Stay at Gibraltar: But my Face was set to go toward
Georgia. The LORD direct my going in his Way.

Tuesday, Feb. 28. Expounded in the Church as usual; went on board, read
Prayers and expounded to my own Flock; dined with Friend H. at Governor S's,
who sent to invite us; and expounded to a large Number of Soldiers, in the
Evening at Church.

Was asked by Dr. C. in the Name of the Governor, Colonel C. to preach every
Prayer Day whilst I stayed at Gibraltar, which I promised to do, and perceived
the Word of GOD to run very swiftly. Many of the Inhabitants pressed me to stay
with them, and were exceeding kind to those who were with me, for my sake.
Blessed be GOD, for thus giving me Favor in his People's Sight! LORD, what am
I, or what is in me, that thou should thus so highly honor me? Grant, O
LORD, the more thou exaltest me, the more I may abase myself, and always be
looking to the Rock from whence I was hewn?

Conversed with one of the devout Soldiers, who was under strong spiritual
Trials; and GOD was pleased to give him Comfort. I find it necessary more and
more every Day, that Ministers should be tempted in all Things like unto their
Brethren, that they may be able experimentally to succor those that are
tempted.

Wednesday, March 1. Expounded in the Morning, and was highly pleased at my
Entrance into the Church, to see several Soldiers kneeling in several Parts of
the House of GOD at their private Devotions. O happy Gibraltar, that have such
a Set of praying Men! Some I hear often come in by Two o'Clock in the Morning,
to pour out their Hearts before GOD. The LORD perform all their Petitions!

Preached, according to my Promise, to a numerous and affected Audience of
Officers, Soldiers, etc. Dined (at his Invitation) at Governor S's, and
expounded at Night to near 200 People, amongst whom were many of the Officers,
and of the honorable Women not a few. O that they may with Meekness receive
the engrafted Work, and that it may be a Means of saving their Souls!

Thursday, March 2. Spent Part of the Day in writing Letters. Dined and supped
at Mr. A's, chief Civil Magistrate in Gibraltar, and was entertained with
uncommon Love and Affection.

Expounded twice in the Church, as usual, and at Night had above three hundred
Hearers; amongst whom were many Officers, Ladies, and Dr. C. the Minister of
the Church himself, who would have had me went up into the Reading D^^k, that I
might have the greater Command of the People; but I declined it that Night. GOD
be praised for sending me abroad, and prospering the Work of his Hands upon me.

When all thy Mercies, O my GOD,
My rising Soul surveys;
Transported with thy Love, I Am lost
In Wonder, Joy and Praise!
Friday, March 3. Still GOD lets me see greater Things than before. O that my
Thanks may increase proportionably!

This Morning, besides a great Number of the Soldiers, near if not more than a
Dozen of the Town's People came to Church to hear me expound. Afterward, we
breakfasted with a Gentlewoman, who sent by Major S. to invite us, and most
gladly received us into her House. About Ten I preached my Sermon against
Swearing, and made a Farewell Application to the Soldiers that were going over
to Georgia out of that Garrison. The Governor had that Morning reviewed them;
and as I could not be in the same Ship with them, I desired they might be
ordered to come to Church, that I might have an Opportunity of telling them how
to behave in that Land which they were going over the Sea to protect. The
Colonel and Governor most readily consented; there was a most thronged
Audience, and GOD was pleased to set his Seal to my Sermon: Many Officers and
Soldiers wept sorely, and a visible Alteration was observed in the Garrison for
some Days after. O that their Convictions may end in their Conversion, and that
they may bring forth the Fruits of the Spirit!

Bought some Wine out of the Money which I had collected for the Use of the
sick Poor in Georgia. The Parsonage-House ought to be the Poor's Storehouse.

Had about five hundred to hear me expound this Evening, and went up into the
Desk, by the Advice of Dr. C. who now constantly makes one of my Hearers. After
this, we supped at Mr. B's of the Victualing-Office, and returned home with Joy
and great Gladness of Heart. Who can express the loving Kindness of the LORD,
or show forth all his Praise?

Saturday, March 4. Expounded in the Morning: More Hearers than ever, some of
which wept. Dined and supped with General C. who sent last Night to invite me
and my Friend, and treated us with particular Respect.

Went in the Afternoon to the Jewish Synagogue, and was surprised to see one of
the Head of them come from the farthest End, and put me in one of their
chiefest Seats: But afterward he told me he had heard my Sermon Yesterday
against Swearing, and thanked me for it. Not unto me, not unto me, O LORD, but
unto thy Name be all the Thanks and Glory! I continued with them their whole
Service, and spent most of my Time there in secret Prayer to GOD, That the Veil
might be taken from their Hearts, and that blessed Time might come when his
chosen People should again be engrafted into their own Olive Tree, and all
Israel be saved.

Visited an unhappy Man in Prison, who last Night, in a drunken Fit, murdered a
Fellow Soldier. I providentially met him just as he was apprehended, and laid
before him the Terrors of the LORD. At first he seemed unconcerned; but in a
short Time he was pricked to the Heart, desired me to come and see him, and
today trembled and wept bitterly. Oh Drunkenness, what Mischief have thou
done? Thy Name is Legion; for behold a Troop of Sins come along with thee.

In the Evening I had near, if not more, than a thousand Hearers; and I took
Occasion, from the poor Man's Example before mentioned, to warn the Soldiery
not to be drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess; a Sin that most easily besets the
Men of Gibraltar. May they hear and fear, and sin no more presumptuously. I had
a great Hoarseness upon me; but notwithstanding, GOD enabled me to speak with
Power. When we are weak, then are we strong. What Mercies has GOD shown me this
last Week! Oh that my Friends, when they hear of it, may praise him! for surely
GOD has hearkened to their Prayer.

Sunday, March 5. After Morning Exposition in the Church, went and saw the
Roman Catholics at their high Mass; and shall only make this Remark: That
there needs no other Argument against Popery, than to see the Pageantry,
Superstition, and Idolatry of their Worship.

About Ten, went to the Church belonging to the Garrison; preached to a most
thronged Audience, and received (what my Soul longed after) the Sacrament of
CHRIST's most blessed Body and Blood: Both the Generals were there, and near
fifty more Communicants. The weekly Collection for the Poor was larger than
ever was known: And ***** was so affected, that he wished himself a despised
Methodist. We are not fit for GOD to work by, 'till we are despised by Men,
that the Excellency and Power of Preaching may be seen to be of GOD only.

Dined at Governor S's, and, at the Request of the Inhabitants and Gentlemen of
the Garrison, preached in the Afternoon. Expounded in the Evening to above a
thousand Hearers, of all Denominations; supped with General C. went home
betimes, full of unspeakable Comfort: I am never better than when I am on the
full Stretch for GOD. GOD grant I may not, like Jehu, drive furiously at first,
and afterward fall back; but, forgetting those Things which are behind, may I
reach out to those Things that are before, and press forwards toward the Mark,
for the Prize of my high Calling in CHRIST JESUS! Methinks I hear my dear
Friends say silently, Amen. And may the great GOD say so too.

Monday, March 6. Had near, if not more than a hundred at Morning Exposition;
and it being the last Day of my sojourning at Gibraltar, many came to me
weeping, telling me what GOD had done for their Souls, desiring my Prayers, and
promising me theirs in Return. Others both gave and sent me Tokens of their
Love, as Cakes, Figs, Wine, Eggs, and other Necessaries for my Voyage, and
seemed to want Words to express their Affection. The good LORD note their
Kindnesses in his Book, and reward them a thousand sold!

About Twelve, went to the Church, according to Appointment, and made a farewell
Exhortation, as GOD gave me Utterance, to a great Number of weeping Soldiers,
Women, etc. after which we kneeled down, and having recommended each other to
the Care of GOD, I left them, went and took my Leave of the two Generals;
visited the confined Prisoner; dined at a Gentlewoman's House of the Town; left
near fifty Letters to be sent to England; and about Four went on board,
accompanied to the Seaside with near two hundred Soldiers, Women, Officers,
etc. who all sorrowed at my Departure, and wished me good Luck in the Name of
the LORD. Surely I may now expect greater Success abroad, having such an
Addition of Intercessors in my Behalf. O LORD, put their Tears into thy Bottle,
and let their Cry come unto Thee.

Sampson's Riddle has been fulfilled at Gibraltar: Out of the Eater came forth
Meat; out of the Strong came forth Sweetness. Who more unlikely to be wrought
upon than Soldiers? And yet I have not been amongst any Set of People, where
GOD has made his Power more to be known. Many that were quite stark blind, have
received their Sight; many that have fallen back, have repented, and turned
unto the LORD again; many that were ashamed to own CHRIST openly, have waxen
bold; and many that were Saints have had their Hearts filled with Joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory. This is the LORD's Doing, and it is mavelous
in our Eyes: May he give a Blessing to the Books dispersed amongst them, and
perfect the good Work begun in their Hearts, till the Day of our Lord JESUS!
May they be my Joy and Crown of Rejoicing at the last Day; and may GOD's
Mercies to me in every Place make me more humble, more zealous, more thankful,
and more steady to do or suffer whatever my dear Redeemer has allotted for me.
Into his Hands I commend my Spirit, as into the Hands of an all powerful
Preserver.

About Five came on board, and was gladly received by my Flock, whom I hope to
love better for being a little absent from them. Interceded and gave Thanks as
usual, at Night on Deck; and was pleased that I was again retired from the
World. It rained much, but that made us the more fervent. Water us, O LORD, we
beseech thee with the Dew of thy heavenly Benediction!

Tuesday, March 7. Went and conversed with, and dispersed some Books amongst
the Soldiers, that we took from Gibraltar. Three of them belonged to one of the
Societies, and desired with some others, to come with me in our Ship. GOD
sanctify my Ministry unto them! Most of the rest are of the Scots Church, but
seem very willing to conform. What a pity it is, CHRIST's seamless Coat should
be rent in Pieces on account of Things in themselves purely indifferent!

At Dinner we were likely to be struck against by the Man of War; but GOD had
Mercy on us, commanded the Wind to shift about, and delivered us out of so
great a Danger. Oh that we may show, forth our Thankfulness, not only with our
Lips, but in our Lives! How ought Creatures to live, who are, every Moment
liable to be hurried away by Death to Judgment!

This Day we set sail from Gibraltar. At first the Wind was fair, but
afterward blew contrary, which made both me and many others sick. I should
have wondered if GOD had not sent me a Thorn in the Flesh, after such abundant
Success. May I learn to suffer, as well as to do, thy Will, O GOD!

Wednesday, March 8. Had a useful Conference with one who was an instrument
under GOD, of introducing me at Gibraltar, and who, I trust, will make a devout
Centurion. Grant this, Holy Father, for thy dear Son's sake!

Finished my Exposition on the Creed in the great Cabin, and did my other Duty
in the Ship, as usual. The Wind blew hard, and GOD sent abroad his Lightning
great Part of the Day. J. D. Friend H. and myself also were sick, but not so as
to prevent our Intercession for absent Friends. Whatever befalls me, O GOD, may
I never forget their Works and Labor of Love. As yet, blessed be GOD, they are
always on my Mind, and I bear them on my Heart whenever I go in and out from
before the LORD. And nothing does and will support me more under all Crosses,
than the Hopes of seeing them grown in Grace when I return to England. O GOD
prepare me for so great a Blessing!

Gave myself, as much as my Indisposition of Body would give me leave, to the
Word of GOD and Prayer; and was much affected with what is said of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. xxxii. 25. that because he rendered not again, was not thankful enough
for the great Things GOD had done for him, he was permitted to fall through the
Pride of his Heart. Alas! what Danger am I in of sharing the same Fate! O my
Friends, cry mightily unto GOD, that no such Evil come upon me.

Thursday, March 9. Married a Couple on Deck. I endeavored to give them a
suitable Exhortation after the Solemnity was over, and hope this Couple will
call CHRIST to their Marriage. It is through a Neglect of this, that we have so
few happy Matches.

The contrary Wind still continuing, my Seasickness increased; so that I was
obliged to omit reading Prayers to the Soldiers, and go to Bed sooner than
usual. I find this Sickness will purge my Body, and hope, through Grace, it
will purify my Soul. Every Branch that bears Fruit, says CHRIST, my Father
purges it, that it may bring forth more Fruit. May that Scripture this Day be
fulfilled in my Heart!

Friday, March 10. My bodily Indisposition still increased; there was a great
Storm without, but, blessed be GOD, a Calm within. Sometimes indeed, my Will
would inwardly rebel, which plainly showed me what a Distance I was from GOD:
But I hope, through inward and outward Sufferings, I shall at length, be able
to say in all Things, Father, not my Will, but thine be done.

Did my usual Duty in the great Cabin, and began expounding the Ten
Commandments; interceded for Friends on Deck, and went to Bed full of a Sense
of my own Unworthiness. Oh that I could always see myself in my proper Colors!
I believe I should have little Reason to fall down and worship myself. GOD be
merciful to me a Sinner.

Saturday, March 11. Blessed be GOD, this Morning the Storm began to blow over,
and Light broke in upon my Soul. Was enabled to read Prayers and expound both
in the Cabin and to the Soldiers, with more Vigor than I have since we left
Gibraltar. Had Reason to think my late Indisposition had been sanctified to me.
Suffering Times are a Christian's best improving Times: For they break the
Will, wean us from the Creature, prove the Heart; and by them GOD teaches his
Children, as Gideon by Thorns and Briars taught the Men of Succoth.

All the Time of my Indisposition, my dear Friend H. mourned over me like a
Dove. Blessed be GOD, Familiarity does not breed Contempt between us, but our
Love to each other increases daily. JESUS CHRIST is the only Rock whereon alone
true Friendship can be built.

Sunday, March 12. Expounded with more Enlargement than usual, and gave my
People Notice that I intended speaking to them one by one, to see what Account
they could give of their Faith. I have not ceased warning every one of you,
says the Apostle. May I follow his Steps!

Preached the Sermon GOD enabled me to make in the Storm before we came to
Gibraltar, in the great Cabin; and GOD was pleased to set his Seal to it. Had
some close Conversation with my Companions about their Interior; interceded for
absent Friends, and had Reason to hope my weak Efforts to promote his Glory had
not been in vain in the LORD. May GOD give me a thankful Heart!

Monday, March 13. Blessed be GOD! this is the most comfortable Day I have had
since I came last abroad, slept better than usual; was enabled to compose
freely; [perceived my Appetite to return] was enlarged much in Intercession,
and found I had Reason to give Thanks for my late Indisposition. O how gently
does my gracious Master deal with me! Though Sorrow may endure for a Night, yet
Joy comes in the Morning. LORD, grant I may spend that Health thou have now
restored to me to thy Honor and Service! It is good for me that I have been a
little chastised; for who knows but I might otherwise have perished by being
lifted up above measure with my last Success? LORD, give me Humility, though it
be through Sufferings! So shall thy Blessings never prove my Ruin.

Tuesday, March 14. Began to put in Execution what I promised on Sunday, --
enquired into the Faith of those committed to my Charge; and though all of them
were not so great Proficients as I could wish, yet I find they know enough to
save them, if they put what they know in practice; so that they cannot charge
GOD, if they miscarry. Oh! that the LORD may give them his Blessing!

Had much of the Presence of GOD with me, and felt such a fervent Love for my
Christian Friends, that I feared how I should behave, was GOD to call any of
them from me. But I trust sufficient for such an Hour will be the Strength
thereof.

Wednesday, March 15. Was much pleased with my present Situation, and had
Reason to bless GOD for some further visible good Effects of my Ministry. Was
highly delighted in seeing Friend H. active in teaching the Lambs of my Flock:
He has now gotten a regular School, and the Children began today to come at
regular set Hours: Several also of the Soldiers learn to write and read; so
that my Friend is like to make an useful Man. GOD make him more and more so
every Day!

Thursday, March 16. Preached this Afternoon my Sermon against Swearing, at
which several of the Soldiers wept. Blessed be GOD! that Sin is much abated
amongst us; and I think a visible Alteration may be perceived through the whole
Ship. Not unto me, not unto me, O LORD, but unto thy Name be the Glory!

Was much strengthened in my present Undertaking, by reading the Story of Ezra,
and joined in Intercession with those who set apart that Day as a Day of
Fasting and Prayer for the Sins of the Nation to which we belong. May they
prove as effectual as those which Moses put up for the Children of Israel!

The Sick increased today; visited near a Dozen. May I by this frequent
visiting sick Beds, learn to improve my Time of Health: For, alas, What can be
done in Time of Sickness? I find but few that are able with any tolerable
Patience to sustain their bodily Infirmities: But to have a wounded Spirit at
the same Time, Good GOD, who can bear it?

Friday, March 17. Last Night GOD sent us a fair Wind; and we began to sail
most pleasantly: I was comforted on every Side, and enabled to interceed
fervently for all Mankind. Oh that the Love of GOD and Man was shed abroad in
my Heart!

Saturday, March 18. The Weather being exceeding fair, and the Sea calm, I went
with Capt. W. on board the Lightfoot, dined with the Gentlemen belonging to the
Ship and Colonel C. who came on board to pay them a Visit: Married a Couple;
dispersed Bibles, Testaments, Soldiers Monitors amongst the Men; exchanged some
Books for some Cards, which I threw overboard; preached a Sermon against
Drunkenness, which GOD enabled me to finish Yesterday; and returned in the
Evening, highly delighted with seeing the Porpoises roll about the great Deep.
O LORD, the Sea is full of thy Riches! mavelous are thy Works, and that my
Soul knows right well. O that I may live to praise thee for them! What
Mercies have I received this Week! they are more in Number than the Hairs of my
Head. Oh that my Friends would give Thanks for me!

Sunday, March 19. Went with Captain W. on board the Amy; read Prayers and
preached to above two hundred and twenty Hearers; and married a Couple, who did
not behave so well as I could wish: The Bridegroom laughed several Times in the
midst of the Solemnity, upon which I shut up my Prayer Book: But he showing his
Concern by weeping, I then proceeded, gave him and the Bride a Bible, as the
best Present I could make them; and exhorted all to Holiness of Life. GOD give
them a hearing Ear, and an obedient Heart!

Dined with Colonel C. who treated me with the utmost Civility, and took care
to dispose or some Books I brought with me to proper Persons.

About Three we returned to the Whitaker, read Prayers and preached my Sermon
against Drunkenness; after which Capt. M. made a useful Speech to the Men, and
exhorted them to give heed to the Things that had been spoken. Religion is
likely to go on well, when both the Civil and Ecclesiastical Powers are engaged
in keeping up the Purity of it. But, LORD, unless thou assist us, all our
Endeavors are but in vain. Vouchsafe then, we ^^seech thee, to give us thy
Blessing!

Had above an Hour's close Conversation with my Companions concerning their
Interior; and walked with Friend H. on Deck 'till Twelve at Night, admiring
GOD's Wonders in the Deep. Blessed be GOD for sending us abroad.

Monday, March 20. Today Colonel C. came to dine with us, and in the midst of
our Meal we were entertained with a most agreeable Sight; it was a Shark about
the Length of a Man, which followed our Ship, attended with five little Fishes,
called the Pilot Fish, much like a Mackarel, but larger. These I am told always
keep the Shark company; and what is most surprising, though the Shark is so
ravenous a Creature, yet let it be never so hungry, it never touches one of
them. Nor are they less faithful to him: For if at any Time the Shark is
hooked, these little Creatures will not forsake him, but cleave close to his
Fins, and are often taken up with him. Go to the Pilot Fish, thou that
forsakest a Friend in Adversity, consider his Ways and be abashed. This simple
Sight one would think sufficient to confute any Atheist (if there be such a
Fool as a speculative Atheist) in the World.

After Dinner I read Prayers and expounded to my own People; and then went
aboard the Amy with Colonel C. who used me with uncommon Civility; married a
Couple; and came back to the Whitaker, rejoicing to see the Works of the LORD,
and the Beauty of the great Deep. Who would but come abroad?

Had near two Hours close Conversation with a Gentleman, in whom appear many
Marks of the New Birth. Surely he will prove a devout Centurion! How shall I be
constrained till it be accomplished!

Tuesday, March 21. Had fresh Reason to be thankful: Captain M. made me a kind
Present; the Weather exceedingly pleasant; and what was the greatest Blessing
of all, GOD's Holy Spirit seemed to be moving on the Faces of some of the Souls
in the Ship.

The Weather growing warmer, Friend H. had some Cloths hung over to cover his
School: His Children come very regular both to learn and say their Prayers at
Night: Capt. W. takes great Delight in them: Capt. M. much encourages the
Soldiers to read and write; so that we begin to live as regular now as we could
wish to do on Shore. Blessed be GOD for thus making his Power to be known!

Though GOD gives me so much Comfort, yet my dear England Friends are seldom
out of my Mind; though absent in Body, I am present with them in Spirit. The
LORD direct my Way unto them, and grant if ever I return it may be in the
Fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel of Peace!

Wednesday, March 22. Saw a large Grampus rolling and spouting out Water for a
long while, at a short Distance from our Ship: It put me in mind of the
Behemoth spoken of by holy Job, and of the Leviathan mentioned by the royal
Psalmist. O GOD, who is like unto thee!

Thursday, March 23. This Morning we began to have Prayers at Six o'Clock, and
the Drum beat to call the People. Methinks we grow more and more regular every
Day. GOD be praised!

Was very fervent in Intercession for absent Friends and all Mankind. Oh,
Intercession is a most delightful Exercise! How does it sweeten and purify the
Heart!

Visited near twelve or fourteen sick Persons; and yet such is GOD's Mercy to
me, that though the Place where they lie is much confined, and they catch the
Fever of one another, yet GOD keeps me from Infection. The Way of Duty is the
Way of Safety. Now GOD has sent his Visitations abroad amongst us, I hope we
shall learn Righteousness.

Friday, March 24. Today the Sick still increased, and Friend H. was very
ready to assist and carry Things to them. Nothing more useful than visiting
sick Beds. How are those to be pitied, who purposely shun such improving Sights!

Had still fresh Reason to bless GOD for the Success of my Ministry: Not unto
me, not unto me, but unto thy Name, O LORD, be all the Glory!

We begin now to live so happy on Shipboard, that I believe we shall part with
each other with Regret. By this may all Men know we are Christ's Disciples,
that we love one another!

Sailed an hundred and fifty four Miles the last twenty four Hours: And was
much delighted in seeing many Porpoises playing about the Ship, one of which
Capt. W. catched, and Part of its Liver we had dressed for Dinner: It had a
Head much like a Pig, and was about six Foot long. The Works of the LORD are
exceeding great, and to be admired of all them that have a Delight therein.

Churched a Woman who lately was delivered of a dead Child, and afterward gave
her an Exhortation applicable to her Circumstances. GOD grant she may apply it
to her Heart!

Sunday, March 26. This Day GOD I trust magnified his Power in the Conversion
of a young Gentleman on board, whom he has been pleased to visit with a Fever.
His Convictions were strong, and, as far as I could find, a thorough Renovation
begun in his Heart: The good LORD perfect it till the Day of his Dissolution.
Now GOD begins to show me wherefore he has sent me: O that I was humble! that
I might be fit for the High and Lofty One, who inhabiteth Eternity, to work by.

Preached a Sermon in the Afternoon, on Luke iii. 14. -- And the Soldiers
likewise came unto him, and demanded, saying, And what must we do? And he said
unto them, Do Violence to no Man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content
with your Wages. I made it at the Request of Capt. M. who seems in earnest
about the great Work of his Salvation: He has read Arndt's True Christianity,
and is now reading Law's Christian Perfection; Books worth their Weight in
Gold, and which GOD has blessed to the Conversion of many. But what are Books
without thy Spirit, O LORD? Do thou bless them unto him, and they shall be
blessed.

Exchanged some bad Books that were on board (which I threw immediately into
the Sea) for some good ones, blessed be GOD; all that I have found them with,
as yet, have been ready to surrender them up. And I find it by daily Experience
more and more that People who are truly awakened to a Sense of the Divine Life,
cannot bear to read any thing trifling; but throw away their useless Book^ as
those did the Books of Divination and curious Arts, whose Conversion we read in
the Acts, Chap. v.

Monday, March 27. Last Night GOD was pleased to take away a black Boy of
Captain (...) after he had been ill of a violent Fever for some Days. -- He was
never baptized, but I had a Commission from his Master, who seemed much
affected at his Death, to instruct, and baptize him, if it had pleased the Most
High that he should recover; but GOD saw fit to order it otherwise. His Holy
Will be done. About Ten in the Morning he was wrapped up in a Hammock and thrown
into the Sea. I could not read the Office over him being unbaptised, but Capt.
W. ordered the Drum to beat, and I exhorted all the Soldiers, Sailors, etc. as
GOD gave me Utterance, to Remember their Creator in the Days of their Youth,
and to prepare for that Time, when the Sea should give up its Dead, and all
Nations be called together to appear before the Son of GOD. Oh that they may be
made wise by it, that they may lay to Heart what has been said, and practically
consider their latter End!

Had our blessed LORD been here, I believe he would have wept to see what
Havoc Sin has made amongst us. Do thou, LORD, teach us so to number our Days,
that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom.

Tuesday, March 28. This Day Capt. M. began to come at Six in the Morning and
join in Prayers on Deck, instead of having Prayers in the great Cabin. Surely
our Soldiers will be without Excuse, since their Captain leads so good an
Example; blessed be GOD, I have no reason to complain of them, for they come
very regularly twice a Day to Prayer, and an Oath seems to be a strange Thing
amongst most of them. Many Marks of a sound Conversation appear in several
aboard, and we live in perfect Harmony, and Peace, loving and beloved of one
another. Surely, my Friends, your Prayers are heard. Continue instant in them,
and you shall see greater Things than these: For GOD delights in the Prosperity
of his Servants.

Wednesday, March 29. Sailed near an hundred and sixty Miles every twenty-four
Hours, for several Days, most delightful pleasant Weather; and had much of
GOD's Presence amongst us.

Heaven is, dear LORD, wherever Thou art.
Oh never then from us depart;
For to my Soul it is Hell to be
But for one Moment void of Thee!
Thursday, March 30. Had still more Proofs of a thorough Conversion being
wrought in some of the Ship. I hope many of us shall have Reason to bless GOD
for coming on board the Whitaker. GOD grant, while I preach to others, I myself
may not be a Castaway. But GOD is Love, and he will not, if my Eye be single,
let his Blessings destroy me. O let thy Power be exerted in preserving me, even
me always, O my Savior!

Renew thy Likeness, LORD, in me,
Lowly and gentle may I be;
No Charms but these to Thee are dear:
No Anger may Thou ever find,
No Pride in my unruffled Mind,
But Faith and Heaven-born Peace be there.
A patient, a victorious Mind,
A Life that all Things cast behind,
Springs forth obedient to thy Call;
A Heart that no Desire can move,
But still to adore, and praise, and love,
Give me, my LORD, my Life, my All!
Friday, March 31. This being the Crucifixion of our blessed LORD, I preached a
Sermon on the Penitent Thief, and I hope GOD gave it his Blessing. We begun
Prayers later than usual, so that before I had done, Darkness came upon us,
which put me in mind of that Darkness which overwhelmed the World, when the GOD
of Nature suffered. Oh that our Hearts may rend like the Rocks, and our Souls
arise from the Death of Sin, as the Bodies of those did from their Graves who
appeared to many in the Holy City, after our LORD's Resurrection!

Had a good Instance of the Benefit of breaking Children's Wills betimes. Last
Night going between Decks (as I do every Night) to visit the Sick and to
examine my People, I asked one of the Women to bid her little Boy that stood by
her, say his Prayers, she answered, His elder Sister would, but she could not
make him. Upon this, I bid the Child kneel down before me, but he would not
'till I took hold of its two Feet and forced it down. I then bid it say the
Lord's Prayer, (being informed by his Mother he could say it if he would) but
he obstinately refused, 'till at last after I had given it several Blows, it
said its Prayers as well as could be expected, and I gave it some Figs for a
Reward. And this same Child, though not above four Years of Age, came to Night on
Deck, when the other Children came to say their Prayers to my Friend H. and
burst out into a Flood of Tears, and would not go away 'till he had said his
too. I mention this as a Proof of the Necessity of early Correction: Children
are sensible of it sooner than Parents imagine. And if they would but have
Resolution to break their Wills thoroughly when young, the Work of Conversion
would be much easier, and they would not be so troubled with perverse Children
when they are old.

Saturday, April I. Wonderful pleasant sailing still, and what was infinitely
better, had Reason to think several went forward in the great Work of their
Salvation. Oh that we may be buried with CHRIST in Baptism, and rise with him
to Newness of Life!

Sunday, April 2. Rose early this Morning, and joined in Spirit with my dear
absent Friends, who were receiving the Holy Eucharist, and celebrating our
Blessed LORD's Resurrection. I find my not being in Priest's Orders is a great
Hindrance to my Ministry, which will oblige me to return to England as soon as
possible. The good LORD prepare me for that second Imposition of Hands!

Preached a Sermon in the Afternoon, on Phil. ii. 10. That I may know Him, and
the Power of his Resurrection. -- Oh that we may all experience it in our
Hearts! for without it, CHRIST as to us is dead in vain.

April 3. Had some farther Conversation with the young Gentleman whose
Conversion I mentioned before, and who I hope is really quickened from Above.
He told me he used to wonder to hear me talk that all our Thoughts, Words and
Actions, ought to be dedicated unto GOD, but now he perceived what I said to be
true. How does the new Nature give us new Notions! It seems a difficult Task to
the natural Man to turn his whole Life into one continued Sacrifice, but the
spiritual Man does it with Ease: He feels a divine Attraction in his Soul,
which as sensibly draws his Heart toward GOD, as the Lodestone attracts the
Needle. Draw us then, O GOD, and our Affections will ascend up after Thee!

About Eleven went on board the Lightfoot, prayed with a sick Man, preached my
Sermon on the Penitent Thief. Afterward went on board the Amy, catechized the
Children, dined on a Dolphin, had some useful Conversation, preached to the
Soldiers, returned home about Six, read Prayers, visited the Sick, interceded
for Friends, and went to Bed praising and blessing GOD.

April 7. Great Enlargement of Heart has been given me for these four Days last
past, particularly today, in which GOD has vouchsafed me much of his Presence
and assisting Grace; observed still stronger Signs of a thorough Conversion
being wrought on some aboard; had most delightful sailing, and every thing as
pleasant as this vain World can afford. These are Preparatives for future
Trails: Welcome in the Name of GOD: He will uphold me. If it was not for the
Corruptions of my own Heart, which are continually stirring, what have I to
disturb my Peace; but as long as those Amalekites remain in my Soul, I shall
never be perfectly at ease. LORD, keep me but striving, and I shall at last be
more than Conqueror, through JESUS CHRIST that loved me.

April 8. Went on board the Lightfoot and Amy, and preached to the Soldiers of
each Ship; dined with Colonel C. who continued extremely civil; and at my
return found the Sick increase upon my Hands. But few in the Ship escape: The
good LORD make all their Beds in their Sickness!

Had much of the Presence of GOD with me today. The Heat uncommonly temperate,
as it has been for some time, and the Ship sailed all Day as though she was
carried on the Wings of the Wind. Preached two Sermons besides my Exposition at
Six in the Morning, and I hope GOD set his Seal to them. Was well pleased to
hear by my Friend H. (who is very active in carrying Things to the Sick) that
the poor People between Decks prayed heartily for me.

And now indeed we live more comfortably in the great Cabin than can easily be
imagined. We talk of little else but GOD and CHRIST. GOD has greatly blessed
the Country Parson's Advice to his Parishioners, that excellent Book; and
scarce a Word is to be heard amongst us when together, but what has Reference
to our Fall in the first, and our New Birth in the second Adam, the LORD from
Heaven; so that we all, I trust are resolved to put my Afternoon's Text into
Practice, and are determined not to know any thing save JESUS CHRIST and him
crucified. Grant this, O Father, for thy dear Son's sake. Oh that I knew how to
be thankful! Oh that Heaven and Earth would join with me in praising GOD!

I would not LORD, alone
Thy Praises celebrate;
I Would call the blessed Angels down,
I Would move the World's united State,
'Till they in fervent Songs thy gracious Acts relate.
April 10, 11. Spent good Part of these two Days in mending my Nets. Had
exceeding pleasant Weather. Some more of the Sailors were convicted of Sin, and
others send Notes to be prayed for, and give Thanks as regularly as in any
Parish. Blessed be GOD, we live very comfortably.

April 12, or 13. Today Captain W. caught a Dolphin, which was most beautiful
when drawn out of the Water, but its Color soon changed. Just so is Man; he
flourishes for a little while; but when once Death comes, how quickly is his
Beauty gone! A Christian may learn a Lesson of Instruction from every thing he
meets with.

April 14. Today I could have wished for some young Prodigals aboard the
Whitaker, to see one of our Soldiers dying. Alas, how did his Breast heave, his
Heart pant, and great Drops of Sweat trickle down his Face! his Eyes looked
ghastly, and the whole Man was in a bitter Agony. Captain W. went down between
Decks once or twice to see him: And I used the last Prayer several Times. About
Nine at Night he expired, I fear without Hope; for he killed himself by
Drinking. Oh that all Drunkards would learn from him to be wise in Time, and
practically consider their latter End!

April 15. This Morning I buried the dead Soldier in time of public Prayers,
chose proper Lessons, and gave the Soldiers a suitable Exhortation; but I was
so affected with a Sense of the Misery of fallen Man, that I could not speak
with my usual Vigor.

Today was called in a Hurry to pray by one of the devout Soldiers who came
from Gibraltar, and who was supposed to be expiring. I came, [I saw] and
rejoiced in Spirit; for his Soul seemed full of GOD. Instead of being
affrighted at the Approach of the King of Terrors, he welcomed it, and said he
was going to his dear Redeemer; then he fell as it were into a Trance, and
poured out his Heart in repeating some very applicable Verses out of the
Psalms. Upon which we thought he would have died: But lo! God brought him from
the nethermost Hell. From that Instant the Fever left him, and he recovered.
Oh, what Difference is there between him that fears GOD, and him that fears
him not, in their last Hours! LORD, let me die the Death of the Righteous, and
let my future State be like his!

Exercised a little Discipline this Evening on a Boy, whom Captain M. took
notice of above a Week ago for behaving ill at Church, and said he would
deliver him up to me: I therefore, by the Advice of his Master, ordered him to
be tied, 'till he could say the 51st Psalm, which he repeated tonight very
solemnly in the midst of the Congregation. May it be a Warning to him for the
future!

Sunday, April 16. Read Prayers and expounded at Six in the Morning, and
preached to my own People: Then went and preached on board the Lightfoot; and
afterward dined, read Prayers, and preached on board the Amy: Returned about
Five in the Evening to the Whitaker; read Prayers and preached, visited the
Sick, and went to Bed blessing GOD for the Strength of the Day. All the
Officers continue extremely kind, and seem studious to oblige me all they can.
The good LORD reward them a thousand fold!

This Evening I was sent for by a Sailor, who has been the most remarkable
Swearer on board; and whom I in an especial Manner warned about two Days ago,
telling him, I believed GOD would remarkably visit him, as well as the others.
He laughed, and said he hoped not. But to night he sent for me, trembling, and
burning with a Fever, told me what grievous Sins he had been guilty of, and
prayed most fervently for Repentance. Two or three of the same Stamp have been
taken in the same Manner. GOD grant they may flee from the Wrath to come!
Sinners must either bend or break.

Tuesday, April 18. Was greatly delighted in seeing two Water-spouts, which ran
along for several Mi^^^, and by the especial Providence of GOD escaped us. We
saw one of them coming, and were surprised to observe a sudden Calm for about
six Minutes round the Whitaker, when the other Parts of the Sea boiled like a
Pot. But surely the Everlasting I AM said to the Sea at that Instant, Let there
be a Calm in that Place: For by that Means our Ship was immediately stopped in
her Course, and so the Water-spout passed by before we came up to it; otherwise
it would have torn our Sails in Pieces. GOD's Hand was so visible in this, that
several said, they never beheld the like before. O how does Providence watch
over us, when we think nothing of it! Who would but live well to be under the
immediate Protection of such an Overruling Power? After this, several Squalls
came upon us, which afforded me glorious Matter for adoring that great good
GOD, whom Winds and Storms obey. The Sailors were in great Hurry and Confusion,
but to my Comfort not one single Oath was heard all the while: A Proof this,
that Sailors may pull their Ropes without Swearing, and that the Words spoken
to them have not altogether fallen to the Ground: Blessed be GOD!

Saturday, April 22. Fled as it were on the Wings of the Wind for three Days
past, sailing sometimes an hundred and seventy, sometimes an hundred and eighty
Miles in twenty-four Hours. I find that GOD generally sends us strongest Winds
when nearest our Port. May I learn from hence a Lesson of Instruction; and the
nearer I come to my Haven of eternal Rest, the quicker may I move!

Spent most of these Days in writing to my dear Friends in England, and in
particular Supplication for Direction how to act in the Land whither I am
going. The Thoughts of my own Weakness, and the Greatness of those Trials which
I must necessarily meet with, fill me with a holy Fear. But wherefore do I
fear? The Eternal Almighty I AM has and will no doubt protect me!

Sunday, April 23. Preached twice to my People today, and spend most of the
rest of the Day in earnest Prayer for the Divine Assistance in my present
Undertaking, being as we imagined near the Haven where we would be. The Morning
Lessons were exceeding applicable, so that we could not help taking Notice of
it. By this I know GOD favors me.

Monday, May 1. This Morning went out upon Deck, after being confined to my Bed
a Week by a violent Fever, with which all except three or four in the Ship have
been visited. I was blooded thrice, and blistered and vomited once, and,
blessed be GOD I can say, It is good for me that I have been afflicted: For as
Afflictions abounded, Consolations much more abounded; and GOD enabled me to
rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. Satan desired to have me to
sift me as Wheat, but JESUS CHRIST prayed for me, and my Faith failed not. I
had all the Conveniences I could have on Shore: Capt. W. resigned his own Bed
to me; J. D. and Friend H. sat up with me every Night; and nothing was wanting
to make my Sickness comfortable and easy. Blessed be GOD for these abundant
Mercies in CHRIST JESUS!

I hope I shall now experimentally sympathise with those that are sick, and
learn to be more tenderhearted to my Fellow Christians. I am now made whole:
May I sin no more, be more fervent in Spirit, serving the LORD! lest a worse
Evil befall me.

Friday, May 5. About Ten o'Clock this Morning buried the Cook of the Ship, who
expired last Night. I could have wished for a hundred Tongues to have sounded a
loud Alarm to the People; but the Sight of the Corpse, and the Weakness of my
Body, would but just permit me to read out the Office. LORD, what is Man? Oh
why are others taken and I left, but that GOD's long Suffering should lead me
to Repentance? Grant it, O LORD, for thy dear Son's sake!

In the Afternoon I privately baptized a newborn Infant. Thus it is, some
coming into the World, others going out of it continually. Good GOD! Who can
desire to live here always?

This Afternoon, after having lain about a Week on this Coast, we saw Savannah
River, and sent off for a Pilot. Oh what Joy appeared in every one's
Countenance! How infinitely more joyful will the Children of GOD be, when
having passed through the Waves of this troublesome World, they arrive at the
Haven of everlasting Rest? Hasten, O LORD, that happy Time, and let thy Kingdom
come!

Sunday, May 7. Last Night, by the Blessing of GOD, we cast Anchor near Tyby
Island, about fourteen Miles off Savannah; and today GOD gave me Strength to
preach my Farewell Sermon, (which I have sent you) at which many wept.

After this, I took Boat with my Friend H. and arrived safe at Savannah, having
a most pleasant Passage, about Seven in the Evening. How GOD is pleased to deal
with me here, I Will endeavor to inform you hereafter.

In the mean while, fail not to give Thanks for the Mercies I have received.
Though we have had a long, yet it has been an exceeding pleasant Voyage. GOD,
in Compassion to my Weakness, has sent me but few Trials; and sanctified those
He has sent me. I am now going forth as a Sheep amongst Wolves; but he that
protected Abraham when he went out not knowing whither he went, will also guide
and protect me; and therefore I cannot close this Part of my Journal better
than with Mr. Addison's Translation of the 23d PSALM: The LORD my Pasture shall
prepare,
And feed me with a Shepherd's Care;
His Presence shall my Wants supply,
And guard me with a watchful Eye:
My Noonday Walks he shall attend,
And all my Midnight Hours defend.
When in the sultry Glebe I faint,
Or on the thirsty Mountain pant,
To fertile Vales and dewy Meads
My weary wandering Steps He leads;
Where peaceful Rivers soft and slow,
Amidst the verdant Landskips flow.
Though in the Paths of Death I tread,
With gloomy Horrors overspread,
My steadfast Heart shall fear no Ill,
For thou, O LORD, art with me still;
Thy friendly Crook shall give me Aid,
And guide me through the dreadful Shade.
Though in a bare and rugged Way,
Through devious lonely Wiles I stray,
Thy Bounty shall my Pains beguile;
The barren Wilderness shall smile,
With sudden Greens and Herbage crowned,
And Streams shall murmur all around.


FINIS.
Advertisement. Now in the Press, And will be speedily published,
FARLY Piety exemplified, in the joyful Life and Death of ELIZABETH BUTCHER,
who was born July 14. 1709. and died June 13. 1718. being just Eight Years and
Eleven Months old. With a Preface by the Rev. Dr. SEWALL. The Fourth Edition.
Sold by CHARLES HARRISON, over against the Brazen Head in Cornhill.

N. B. At the abovesaid Place may be had the First Part of the Rev. Mr.
WHITEFIELD's JOURNAL, from LONDON to GIBLALTAR. With what induced him to leave
his Native Country, and travel into Foreign Parts.

Also, At the abovesaid Place may be had Bibles, Common Prayers, etc. and a
Sortment of pleasant Histories: As also Books neatly Bound, Gilt on the Back or
Lettered, with other Plain Binding, all at a reasonable Price.


