TWO DISCOURSES: THE FIRST, Of Preaching CHRIST; THE SECOND, Of particular and
experimental PREACHING

BY THE LATE REVEREND Mr. JOHN JENNINGS.

With a PREFACE by the REVEREND Dr. ISAAC WATTS.

The FOURTH EDITION.

To which is added, A LETTER concerning the most useful Way of Preaching:
written in the German Language by the late Reverend and Celebrated Dr AUGUSTUS
HERMANNUS FRANCK, Professor of Divinity in the University of Hall in Saxony,
Pastor of a Church, and Director of the charitable FOUNDATIONS there.
Translated into Latin by Order of his Son, the present Professor FRANCK, and
out of the LATIN into English by DAVID JENNINGS.

BOSTON. Printed by J DRAPER, for J. EDWARDS and H. FOSTER in Cornhil. MDCCXL.

TWO DISCOURSES: THE FIRST, Of Preaching CHRIST; THE SECOND, Of particular and
experimental PREACHING.

BY THE LATE REVEREND Mr. JOHN JENNINGS.

1 COR. ii. 2. I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ.

2 TIMOTHY ii. 15. A workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the
word of Truth.

BOSTON: Printed in the YEAR MDCCXL.

TO THE UNITED MINISTERS OF THE SEVERAL CONGREGATIONS OF PROTESTANT DISSENTERS
In the COUNTIES of Leicester, Northampton, Warwick, and Rutland; These
DISCOURSES Are humbly inscribed and submitted By their affectionate Brother,
and Fellow Labourer, JOHN JENNINGS.

TESTIMONIES of the Reverend Dr. BATES and Mr. BAXTER to the Design of these
DISCOURSES.
HE preached Christ crucified our only Wisdom and Righteousness. Sanctification
and Redemption. His Design was to convince Sinners of their absolute Want of
Christ, that with flaming Affections they might come to him, and from his
Fullness receive Divine Grace. This is to water the Tree at the Root, whereby it
becomes flourishing and fruitful; whereas the laying down of moral Rules for
the Exercise of Virtue, and subduing vicious Affections, without directing Men
to derive spiritual Strength by Prayer, and in the Use of divine Ordinances,
from the Mediator the Fountain of all Grace; and without representing his Love
as the most powerful Motive and Obligation to Obedience, is but pure
Philosophy, and the highest Effect of it is but unregenerate Morality.

Dr. BATES, in his Funeral SERMON on Dr. JACOMB. All our Work must be done
spiritually. -- There is in some Men's Preaching a spiritual Strain, which
spiritual Hearers can discern and relish: And in some Men's, this sacred
Tincture is so wanting, that even when they speak of Spiritual Things, the
Manner is such as if they were common Matters.

Mr. BAXTER, in his Gildas Salvianus, c. III. THE PREFACE.
THEN I see a Book well written for the Instruction of Mankind, I always ways
hope it will spread its good Influences as far and wide as it finds Readers.
But when I meet with a valuable Treatise, whose Design is to improve the sacred
Skill of Preaching, I am ready to persuade myself, Surely this will become a
more extensive Benefit; and the good Influences of it will reach as many whole
Assemblies of Men, as there are Ministers who shall happen to read it. For this
Reason I cannot but take a special Satisfaction in recommending these two
Discourses to the World, which, in my Opinion, are founded upon the general
Principles of Christianity, and therefore invite the Perusal of All, being
written without the narrow Spirit of a Party. They seem to be calculated for
the common Good, nor have I observed any Thing in them that can justly give
Disgust, or awaken any reasonable Resentment.

It must be confessed, without Controversy, that there are some Things wherein
several of the Preachers of the present Time have the Advantage of our Learned
and Pious Fathers: But there are other Excellencies in the Sermons of the
Puritanical Age, which I would rejoice to find more studiously revived and
cultivated in our Day. Among these I know none of more eminent Necessity,
Glory, and Usefulness, than those two which are the Subjects of this little
Book; I mean the Evangelical Turn of Thought that should run through our
ministry, and the Experimental Way of Discourse on practical Subjects.

It has been justly observed, that where a great and universal Neglect of
preaching Christ has prevailed in a Christian Nation, it has given a fatal
Occasion to the Growth of Deism and Infidelity; for when Persons have heard the
Sermons of their Clergy, for many Years together, and find little of Christ in
them, they have taken it into their Heads, that Men may be very good Men, and
go safe to Heaven without Christianity; and therefore, though they dwell in a
Land where the Gospel is professed, they imagine there is no Need they should be
Christians. But what a Blot and Reproach would it be to our Ministry, if
Infidels and Heathens should multiply among us, through such a woeful Neglect of
preaching the peculiar Doctrines of Christ?

Besides, let us consider how little has been our Success in comparison of the
Multitudes converted by our Fathers in the Day of their Ministry. Has not this
been Matter of sore Complaint these many Years past? Now it is worth our
Enquiry, whether it may not be ascribed to the Absence of Christ in our
Sermons. And what Reason indeed can we have to expect the Presence and
Influence of the Spirit of Christ, if we leave his Person, his Offices, his
Grace, and his Gospel, out of our Discourses, or give but a slight and casual
Hint at these glorious Subjects, which ought to be our daily Theme? This is
what our Author would put us in mind of in his first Discourse.

And perhaps another Cause of our Want of Success has been this, That we have
too much left off the Way of our Fathers, in distinguishing the Characters of
our Hearers, and dividing the Word aright to Saints and Sinners, to the stupid
and the profane, the awakened and convinced, the mournful and penitent, the
presumptuous and obstinate, the deserted and despairing.

This Method appears eminently in the Labors of the former Age. Those two
great and good Men, Mr. Flavell, and Mr. Baxter, might be divided in their
Sentiments on other Subjects, but you find this Conduct runs through all their
practical Writings, This is a great Part of what the second Discourse here
recommends to us, under the Title of Experimental Preaching.

Our Author indeed assumes not so much to himself, as to address any besides
Students and Younger Ministers. But if in the middle Age of Life we should
examine our Performances by the Light of this Treatise, it is possible we and
our People might be Gainers by it.

Have we not been too often tempted to follow the Modish Way, and speak to our
Hearers in general Terms, as though they were all converted already, and
sufficiently made Christians by a National Profession? Have not some of us
spent our labor to build them up in the Practice of Duties, without teaching
them to search whether the Foundation has been laid in an entire Change and
Renovation of Heart? Do we lead them constantly to enquire into the inward
State of their Souls, the special Tempers and Circumstances of their Spirits,
their peculiar Difficulties, Dangers and Temptations, and give them peculiar
Assistance in all this Variety of the Christian Life?

With how much more Efficacy does the Word of God impress the Conscience, when
every Hearer finds himself described without the Preacher's personal Knowledge
of him? When his own spiritual State is painted to the Life, and (as it were)
set before his Eyes in the Language of the Preacher? When a Word of Conviction,
Advice, or Comfort, is spoken so pertinently to his own Case, that he takes it
as directed to himself. How much more powerful and more penetrating will our
Sermons be, when those who come into our Assemblies shall be convinced and
judged, and have the Secrets of their Hearts made manifest, and confess that
God is in the midst of us of a Truth?

The Perusal of these excellent Discourses in Manuscript has given me so much
Satisfaction, that I take a sensible Pleasure to think that the Press will
communicate them to the World, and then I hope for a further Share of Profit,
by keeping them always at my Right Hand when I am preparing for the Service of
the Sanctuary. May the blessed Spirit of God teach those who enter into the
sacred Office, this holy Skill of winning Souls! May He awaken us all to see
what may be mended in our Ministrations, in order to publish the Gospel of
Christ with more illustrious and divine Success!

LONDON, June 14 1723. I. WATTS.

Advertisement.
THAT excellent Letter concerning the best Method of Preaching, which stands
annexed to this new Edition of Mr. JENNINGS's Discourses, was written in the
German Tongue by that Venerable and Apostolic Man HERMAN AUGUSTUS FRANCK, late
Professor of Divinity at Hall in Saxony, and was communicated to me last Winter
by his worthy Son GOTTHILF AUGUSTUS FRANCK, who happily fills and adorns the
same Post in that University, and seems to be possessed of the same Spirit of
Faith and Love. It Is now turned into English by my valuable Friend Mr. DAVID
JENNINGS, the surviving Brother of the Author, who perfectly agreed with me in
this Sentiment, that it should be made public in our own Language, and printed
together with these two Discourses, as being eminently suited to promote the
same Design of an Experimental and Evangelical way of Preaching. And I persuade
myself that every Reader who could relish and approve of what Mr. JOHN JENNINGS
has written on this Subject, will be very well pleased and entertained with the
Perusal of this small Essay of that great Man, Professor FRANCK, on the same
Argument; and may both be attended with Divine Success.

NEWINGTON, August 28, 1736. I. WATTS.

Boston in New England, April 10. 1740.
WHEN in an Advertisement of this little Book, small in Bulk but great in
Worth, I read the Pleasure which the Reverend Dr. WATTS had expressed on its
Communication to the Churches; even for his own Benefit (as He condescends to
say) "by having it always at his right Hand in his Preparations for the Service
of the Sanctuary, I could not but desire a Sight of it, with a raised
Expectation. And now I have read it, and see how it has been received with
great Esteem in Germany as well as Scotland, I cannot but wish it reprinted
here and put into the Hands of the Pastors of these Churches, as also to get a
Number of them deposited with the Reverend Corporation and Trustees of our
flourishing Academies, both Cambridge and New Haven; entreating the Honored
Heads and Tutors in our Colleges to require of the Students in Divinity, from
time to time, a very serious and deliberate Perusal of the following excellent
Discourses, which come so strongly recommended to them.

The very Name of that most justly admired Man of God, the late Wonder of our
Age, Dr. Augustus Hermannus Franck, is eno' to command a most Reverend
Attention from us to his Letter about the most useful Way of Preaching; and
after Dr. Watts's Preface to the Reverend Mr. Jennings Discourses of preaching
Christ and of experimental preaching, I am sure it is needless for me to add
any Thing.

Only I will take the present Occasion to express my Gratitude to my beloved
and honored Friend Dr. WATTS, who through my Hands has enriched both our
Colleges with his invaluable Works; which contain a Treasure of Grammar, Logic,
Philosophy, Geography, Astronomy, Ethics, Ontology, and above all Divinity in
numerous Treatises; with Volumes of Sermons had in great Honor in the
Universities of Great Britain, as well Oxford and Cambridge, as Edinburgh and
Glasgow; together with his excelling Writings in Divine Poetry, his Horae
Lyricae, his Imitation of David's Psalms, and his Book of Hymns; of which our
Venerable Father STODDARD of Northampton has sometimes said to me; -- that when
tired with severer Studies, upon reading one or two of these raptrous Hymns, he
had returned fresh to his Work.

I trust the immediate Governors and Instructors in our Colleges, will let the
Students know the Price put into their Hands, for their Pleasure as well as
Profit, by these and other generous Benefactions to their Libraries from
England; and that God will requite the Kindness and Bounty shown us in the like
Fruits of Literature and Piety, in Times long to come, from among our selves.

It is by studying CHRIST through the sacred Scriptures of both Testaments, with
Prayer in his Name for the teachings of the HOLY SPIRIT, that the Candidates
for the Evangelical Ministry will be like to find the Heart and Tongue of the
Learned, for the most useful and experimental Way of preaching: And that the
Blessing of CHRIST may accompany the present Dispersion of the following
Discourses among us for this End, is the hearty Prayer, and may probably be the
last piece of dutiful Service to these Churches, from their unto thy Son and
Servant,

BENJAMIN COLMAN.

DISCOURSE I. Of Preaching CHRIST. Addressed to YOUNGER MINISTERS.
Dear Friends and Brethren,
WE profess ourselves Christians, and are, I hope, upon careful and rational
Enquiry satisfied that the Religion of Jesus comes from God; and that it is a
most glorious Dispensation, not only for the sublime Wonders of its Doctrine,
and the Divine Purity of its Precepts, but that it excels all other Religions
in the Strength of its Motives, the Richness of its Promises, and the
Sufficiency of the Divine Aid attending it.

Now in all the peculiar Glories of this Religion, Christ is interwoven, like
Phidias's Name in the Shield, which could not be effaced without destroying the
Shield itself.

The Doctrines concerning Jesus make the Glory and Advantage of his Religion;
and so run through the whole, that preaching Christ, and preaching the Gospel,
are, in Scripture Style, synonymous Terms: As in 1 Cor. i. 23. -- ii. 2. and
innumerable other Places.

The preaching of Christ is our Business, our Charge, and our Glory; but oh!
who is sufficient for these thing? Give me leave then, my dear Brethren and
Friends, to remind my-self and You, what Regard a Minister should have to our
Redeemer in his Preaching and other Administrations.

I. Let us make Christ the Design and End of our Preaching. If we seek
principally to please Men, then are we not the Servants of Christ. If we look
no farther than our own Humor, Reputation, or temporal Advantage, and expend
our Talents to our own private Use, how shall we make up our Accounts to our
Master? and what Reward can we expect from him?

Our ultimate End should be the personal Glory of Christ. That the Glory of
Christ, as God, is the ultimate End of the Gospel, none can doubt: Nay, as a
Creature, he is in his Perfections and Felicity, far superior to the rest of
the Creation; so that it is said of this divine Person, Heb. ii. 10. All things
are for him, as well as by him. Is he not worth ten thousand of us? More worth
than the World? The only begotten Son of God, whom the highest Angels adore?
Now if the Glory of Christ's Person, to the Honor of the Father, be the
principal End in the divine Schemes and Actings, it should also be our highest
View and Design. Nor want we Motives of Gratitude to lead us to this: He is the
Founder of our Religion, to whom all our Hopes are owing: He has honored us,
and well deserved that we should honor him: Nor is there any Danger of
lessening the Honor of God the Father thereby, when we consider him, as the
Scriptures represent him, as one with the Father, the equal Image of the
invisible God, to the Glory of God the Father.

Again, as the Glory of Christ's Person should be our ultimate End; so the
advancing the Kingdom of his Grace amongst Men, is to be the subordinate End.

The Recovery of fallen Creatures to Holiness and Happiness is the immediate
Design of the Gospel. Christ is come into the World to save Sinners, 1 Timothy i.
15. And he sends us to preach his Gospel, that we might promote the same
Salvation, That Men might live soberly, righteously and godly, looking for that
blessed Hope, Tit. ii. 11, 12, 13. To make Men holy, to bring them to the Faith
of Christ, the Imitation of him, and Communion with him, here and hereafter, to
the Glory of the Father through Christ, must be the constant End of our
Preaching. We should not think it enough to inform, to amuse, to please, to
affect, but we must aim farther than this, to bring them to trust in Christ,
and withal, to make them penitent and holy; and every Subject must be managed
with this View: And let it be our great Care, on a more speculative Subject (as
suppose one of the sublime Doctrines of Grace) still to keep the End in view,
and apply it practically, or our Labor is lost.

Let us by all Means endeavor to save precious Souls, but yet aim at a higher
End than this, viz. that we our selves may be a sweet savor of Christ unto
God, 2 Cor. ii. 15. And then, though we miss of our secondary End, and are not,
as we could wish, the savor of life unto life, unto any great Number; yet in
being the savor of death unto death to them that perish, we shall be
Instruments of glorifying the Justice and Long suffering of Christ, and be
Witnesses for God, that there has been a Prophet amongst them; our primary End
is answered, our Labor is with the Lord, and we in the mean time are
supported, though Israel be not gathered, for the word shall not return empty.

Nay farther, it is not enough that the Strain of our Preaching is adapted to
the true Design of the Gospel, but we must at Heart sincerely intend it;
otherwise, though our Discourses be unexceptionable, yet if our Designs be wrong
and base, though others be saved through our Ministry, we shall be cast-aways.

II. Let Christ be the Matter of our Preaching. Let us display the Divine
Dignity and Loveliness of his Person, by the Light of his Word, as God manifest
in the Flesh.

Let us unfold his Mediatorial Office, the Occasion, Design, and Purport of his
great Undertaking.

Let us remind our Hearers of the Particulars of his Incarnation, Life, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension and Intercession.

Let us set forth the Characters he bears, as a Prophet, Priest and King; as a
Shepherd, Captain, Advocate and Judge.

Let us demonstrate and show the Sufficiency of his Satisfaction, the Tenor and
Excellence of the Covenant confirmed with and by him, our Justification by his
Righteousness, Adoption through our Relation to him, Sanctification by his
Spirit, our Union with him as our Head, and safe Conduct by his Providence; and
how Pardon, Grace and Glory accrue to the Elect through his Suretiship and
Sacrifice, and are dispensed by his Hand.

Let us in his Name declare and explain his most holy Laws, and teach the
People whatever Duties he has commanded, to God, our Neighbor, and our Selves.

Let us quicken the Saints to Duty, raise their Hopes, establish and comfort
their Souls, by the exceeding great and precious Promises of his Gospel, which
in him are yea and amen.

I but just give short and imperfect Hints of these Things, and refer to the
Apostolical Writings, which you will find are made up of Discourses on these and
such like Topics.

III. Let the Manner of our Preaching on any Subject, distinguish it from mere
Discourses on Natural Religion, by a continual Regard to Christ.

If we are upon the Perfections of God, let us consider them as shining in his
Son, and exemplified in his Undertaking, who is the brightness of his Father's
glory, and express image of his person, Heb. i. 3.

If we set forth Gospel-Blessings and Promises, let us consider them as
purchased by a Savior's Blood, and distributed by his Bounty; For by his own
blood he has obtained eternal redemption, Heb. ix. 12. And from him the whole
body is supplied, Ephesians. iv. 16.

If we take notice of the Providence of God, let us not forget that all power
is given to Christ, in heaven and in earth, Mat. xxviii 18. And that he is head
over all things for the church, Ephesians. i. 22.

If by the Terrors of the last Judgment we persuade Men, let the wrath of the
Lamb be denounced, and the dreadful Reckoning for abused Grace and a slighted
Savior; for this is the condemnation, John iii. 19.

If we are assisting the Devotions of the People in Confession, Prayer, or
Praise, let their Repentance spring from looking on Christ whom they have
pierced, Zech. xii. 10. Let their Faith in Prayer fix steadily on Jesus, as to
him is owing our Acceptance and Success, and our boldness at the throne of
Grace flows from regarding Christ as our great High Priest, Heb. iv. 14, 16.
And let us teach them to give thanks to God the father through him, to whom it is
owing that God is our Father, Col. iii. 17.

When we are upon the Subject of Duty, Christ is by no means to be forgotten;
for to persuade Men to practical Godliness, is one of the most difficult Parts
of a Minister's Work. Men will hear with a curious Satisfaction a speculative
Discourse; and with some Joy attend to the Displays of God's Grace; nay, a
Felix may tremble when Judgment is preached: Many indeed will bear to hear of
Duty too; but to induce them to practice it, hic labor, hoc opus: Here we had
need call in all Helps, and take all Advantages, which the Gospel as well as
the Light of Nature can furnish. In other Discourses, we are rather attacking
Satan's Outworks, a blind and prejudiced Understanding; in practical Subjects
we assault Satan's strongest Fort, a corrupted Will: We may gain the
Understanding on our Side, and gain some share of the Affections; but to subdue
a perverse Will, and make Men good practical Christians, is not so easy a
Thing, that we can afford to spare any Motive or quickening Consideration. But
here I must be more particular in explaining how we should regard Christ in
preaching Duty.

1. Let us represent Duty as the natural and necessary Fruit of Faith in
Christ, and Love to him. When by Faith we behold a crucified Jesus, do we not
tremble at the Severity of Gods Justice, and regret and hate those Sins that
occasioned his Sorrows? When we farther consider, that by his stripes we are
healed, can we forbear to love him who has first loved us? Shall we not live
to him that died for us? Can we have the Heart to crucify him afresh? No, let
us make his Service our Business, his Sufficience our Confidence, his Life our
Example, and his Blessings our Portion and Choice.

From such Actings of Faith and Outgoings of Love, flows that divine Temper
which constitutes the new Creature, and lays the Foundation of all right
Gospel-Obedience. Thus therefore let us continually trace Gospel Duties up to
their Fountainhead, that the People may learn, it is not outward Reformation
that will stand the Test in the Day of Judgment, but an inward Renewal of the
Soul; that the tree must first be made good, before there can be any good
fruit; and that all must be done for Christ's sake, and flow from faith working
by love, Gal. v. 6.

2. Let us enforce Duties with Motives respecting Christ; as grateful Love to
him should constrain us; as Fear of his Wrath should awe us; as we would
approve our selves the Disciples and Followers of Christ; as we would enjoy
Communion with him; as we would promote his Honor and Interest; and as we
would have Joy, and not Confusion, at his appearing. Not that we should neglect
any Motives which the Light of Nature can furnish, and are level to the
Capacities of the People: We have need enough of all; but if we go no further
than these, our Exhortations will want far the greatest Part of their Weight:
We must beseech and exhort by the Lord Jesus, 1 Thessalonians iv. 1.

3. Let us consider Duties, as to be performed by the Grace of Christ: Telling
the People, that our Fruitfulness depends on our being engrafted into this
Vine; and that a Holy Walk is being led by the Spirit; and when we do good, it
is not we, but the grace of God that is in us; that out of a sense of Weakness,
we must be made strong, and do all things through Christ strengthening us, Phil.
iv. 13.

4. Let us consider all good Works as acceptable through the Merits of Christ;
and remind our Hearers, that could we do all, we were but unprofitable
servants; and that we must seek to be found at last, not having on our own
righteousness, but that which is of God by faith, Phil. iii. 9.

IV. Let us deliver our selves in a Style becoming the Gospel of Christ: Not
with great swelling words of vanity, or in the Style of the Heathen Sophists,
or Words that Man's Wisdom teaches, and may perhaps sound best in our own
Ears; but let us use great plainness of speech, and seek to find out such
acceptable words, as may best reach the Understanding and Affections of the
bulk of an Auditory.

As for the affectionate Part of a Discourse, Brethren, I suppose, upon a View
of ancient and modern Learning, you allow that the Men of the East, and next to
them the ancient Greeks, excelled in Fire, and Works of the Imagination; and
that the Moderns inhabiting milder western Climates, even the French (from whom
upon many Accounts we should expect the most of this Sort) produce but an empty
Flash, in comparison of the solid Heat of the Ancients; and rather amuse us
with little Delicacies, than by masterly Strokes command our whole Souls. Now
the Scriptures are the noblest Remains of what the East has produced, and much
surpass the best of the Greeks in the Force of their Oratory: Let us take the
Spirit and Style of them, and thence borrow bold Figures and Allusions, strong
Descriptions and commanding Address to the Passions. But I Am prevented in all I
would say on this so important Head, by the Archbishop of Cambray's Dialogues
concerning Eloquence, which I Am as little capable of improving upon, as I am of
commending them as they deserve.

And now, Brethren, let me lay before you some Reasons and Motives to back this
friendly Admonition concerning preaching Christ.

(I.) It Is the way to have our Labors accepted of Christ, and to have
Communion with him in our Work: -- Even Paul cries out, Who is sufficient for
these things? With how much more reason have we? Does not our cheerful Progress
in our Work depend on a divine Afflatus, and the Spirit dispensed by Christ?
But if we take no Notice of him in our Preaching, and do not distinguish
ourselves from the moral Philosophers of the Gentiles, how can we expect any
more of this enlivening and encouraging Presence of Christ than they had; nay,
we have less ground to expect it, if we wilfully slight and slur so noble a
Revelation, which they were never favored with.

(II.) It Is the way to win Souls to Christ, and make lively Christians. The
Success of the Gospel is certainly no less owing to the Power of its Motives,
than to the Clearness, Fullness, and Purity of its Precepts. These peculiar
Motives of the Gospel have all such a Respect to Christ, that they are
enervated if he be disregarded: The Gospel Scheme is what God in his Wisdom has
pitched upon to reform Mankind, and save them; and he seems in Honor concerned
to crown it with greater Success than any other Scheme whatsoever; the
preaching of Christ crucified is the power of God, 1 Cor. i. 23, 24 If we maim
the Gospel, and suppress a good Part of it, we can expect but a very defective
Success in the Nature of Things; nay, may we not fear God's Honor is concerned
in such Case to blast us, and we shall be like to labor almost in vain.

Observation agrees with this Theory: The great Masters of Reason, who have
less regard to Christ in their preaching, may, indeed, have a Charm for one of
an hundred, who have a Taste of the Beauties of fine Reasoning, and be of use
to them, whilst the Bulk of an Auditory is asleep: Alas! with what Heart can we
go on, entertaining two or three, to the starving of most of the Souls in an
Auditory. May we not also observe a happier Effect of a Strain prudently
evangelical on Christians themselves; that they who sit under it are more
lively, zealous, ready to every good Work, and heavenly-minded, than those
Christians who have heard less of the Gospel.

(III.) It is a direct Imitation of the Apostles of Christ: Christ himself,
whilst upon Earth, preached the Gospel in Parables, in a concealed Manner,
distantly and with reserve: He could not so fully take the Advantage of his
Resurrection, Satisfaction, Ascension, and the like, not yet done, made or
proved: He had many things to say, which his Disciples could not then bear, but
he declares them afterward by his Spirit in his Apostles: They therefore are
the true Pattern of our preaching, now, after the Mystery of Redemption is
brought to light, and has its full Evidence.

How then did the Apostles preach Christ? It Is endless to attempt a full Detail
of Particulars; any part of the Apostolical Writings is Authority sufficient to
our Purpose; and therefore I Have been sparing in Quotations all along, as
needless, to those who will look into these Writings with this View. And here
we don't desire to allege or insist upon any Passages in their Writings, which
may be supposed to be writ and inserted for Reasons peculiar to that Age and
Country in which the Apostles wrote, and in which perhaps we are not so much
obliged to imitate them in our preaching; for what will remain after all these
are put out of the Account, will, I am satisfied, be as full to our Purpose, as
these that are struck off.

I Will only then, by way of Specimen, select some of the Apostles Discourses on
Duties most moral, where we are aptest to forget a mention of Christ, or
respect to him, that it may at once appear the Apostles shunned not the
pressing such Duties, or a regard to Christ, in the treating on them.

I Cor. vi. 8. Honesty is pressed by these Motives -- the unrighteous thieves
and extortioners, shall not inherit the kingdom of God (which in the Style of
the New Testament is Christ's Kingdom of Grace and Glory.) -- That Christians
are converted by the spirit of Christ, and justified by his righteousness.

I Cor. vi. 15. Chastity is enjoined, as our bodies are members of Christ, as
we are one spirit with him, temples of the Holy Ghost, and bought with a price.

I Cor. viii. and ix. Alms is recommended, as it will bring a large Tribute of
praise to God for our subjection to the Gospel of Christ -- and Christ became
poor for our sakes.

Tit. iii 2 Evil speaking is forbidden, because we were foolish and wicked; but
the grace of God has made the difference; not for our righteousness, but of his
free mercy he has regenerated us, and given us his holy Spirit, through Jesus
Christ, by whom we are justified, and heirs of glory.

Romans xiii. Subjects are commanded to obey Magistrates, because the Gospel-day
is come, and we should put on Christ Jesus.

Ephesians. v. 25. Husbands are charged to love their Wives, as Christ loved the
Church.

Ephesians. v. 22. Wives obedience is urged, because the husband is the head of the
wife, as Christ is the head of the Church.

Tit. ii. 9 Servants are exhorted to their Duty, as they would adorn the
doctrine of Christ -- because grace so teaches, and that we look for Christ's
appearance, who gave himself for us, that we might be holy.

Now what is there in these Motives peculiar to one Age or Nation? Are not all
these as good now as formerly? And are Men so ready in their Duty, that we have
no need of them?

Nay, it is worth Observation, that the Apostles do not confine themselves to
Motives peculiarly adapted to the Duty they are pressing, and which serve to
enforce one Duty rather than another; but, as you may look back and see, when
such proper Motives are not at hand, they take without any scruple common or
general ones, which will equally enforce any Duty whatsoever.

And why should not we introduce the Peculiarities of the Gospel on all
Occasions, as frequently as the Apostles did? If our Schemes of Theology will
not allow us, we have reason to suspect we are in a different Scheme from the
Apostles. Are we afraid Men will make perverse use of such Doctrines as the
Apostles used for Motives? The Apostles chose to venture it, and why should not
we? If we will not dare to preach such a Gospel as may be perverted by Men of
corrupt Minds to their own Injury, we must not expect to be Instruments of any
Good: If we'll be the savor of life to some, we must expect to be the savor
of death to others, or not preach at all.

I confess even the Remonstrant Scheme (which, I think, considerably sinks the
Doctrines of Grace) does allow room to regard Christ abundantly more than most
Preachers of that Set do: I would meet them on their own Principles: What
hinders their frequently inculcating the Merits of Christ, the Depravity of our
Natures, the Necessity of Regeneration, the Aids of Grace, and Union and
Communion with Christ? These Topics, it were to be hoped, might have their
Effect: But alas! how few of the Remonstrants improve to Advantage so much of
the Gospel as they hold and receive: And it makes me less inclined to this
Scheme, that it so generally draws those that embrace it into a Strain of
Preaching, even on practical Subjects, so different from that of the Apostles;
and inclines them, I know not how, to suppress those glorious Motives (which
yet their own Principles might allow) by which the Apostles enforced Gospel
Duties.

(IV) So only shall we deserve the Name of Preachers of Christ -- Only did I
say? I am afraid this may sound too harsh -- Come let us put the Matter as soft
and candid as common Sense will allow us -- So shall we most evidently or best
deserve this honorable Title.

Whilst a Preacher keeps off from the Peculiarities of the Gospel, and says
nothing but what the Light of Nature would also suggest and authorize, give me
leave to say, a Stranger might possibly doubt whether he is a Deist or a
Christian; the Question is like an imperfect Mathematical Problem, which
equally admits of different Solutions.

Suppose the Ghosts of Paul and Seneca to come, mere Strangers, into an
Assembly where one was haranguing the People in this abstracted Manner; I am
apt to think Seneca would claim him as a Philosopher of his own Sect and
Religion. Now if Paul should also make his claim to him as a Minister of
Christ, how could the Question be decided without allowing Seneca to be a
Preacher of Christ also.

On the other Hand, If a Preacher picks out some of the Truths of the Gospel of
Christ, and even the peculiar and glorious Truths of Christianity, but so
unhappily manages them, as not to lead People to Holiness, and the Imitation of
Christ thereby, what is this to the Purpose of Preaching, to the Design of
Christ and the Gospel? Such are quite often that Scheme which is calculated to
destroy the works of the devil, and to teach men sobriety, righteousness, and
godliness: It is not only Christ without us we are to preach, but Christ in us,
and our putting on Christ Jesus by a holy Heart and Life.

If the Apostle James should come again, and make a Visitation to our Churches,
and hear such a Preacher, he would imagine he was got among such People as he
writes against in his Epistle; he would be apt, when the Minister had done, in
his Zeal for Christ, to take the Text in Hand again, and supply what the
Preacher had omitted, viz. the Application; and to say to the Auditors, Know ye
not that faith without works is dead? If the Preacher should here interrupt
him, saying, Hold, spare thy Pains, the Spirit of God will make the
Application, and teach Men Holiness; -- would not James reply, I and the rest
of the Apostles were taught to preach otherwise, and to give particular
Exhortations to Duty; we judged we might as well leave it to the Spirit,
without our Pains, to reveal the Doctrine, as to instruct Men in the Practice
of the Gospel.

Upon the whole, Brethren, let it be our Resolution to study and preach Christ
Jesus: On this Subject, there is room for the strictest Reasoning and most
sublime Philosophy; it deserves, invites and inspires the strongest Fire of the
Orator; in extolling Christ, we cannot shock the most delicate Taste by
overstrained Hyperboles; here the Climax may rise till it is out of Sight; our
Imagery cannot be too strong and rich; and what more moves than an Apostrophe
to Christ? Or what Prosopopoeias more commanding than those in which he is
introduced?

Should our Lord himself appear and give you a Charge at your Entrance ea the
Ministry, would he not say (what indeed he has said already:)

As the Father has sent me, so send I you to preach the kingdom of God; that
every knee may bow to me, and every tongue confess me: -- teach them to observe
all things whatsoever I have commanded you; and tell them, that without me they
can do nothing; that when they have done all, they are unprofitable servants,
and must be found in my righteousness: -- become all things to all men; seek
words which the Holy Ghost teaches; that you may gain souls, and bring in my
sheep for whom I laid down my life; -- If ye love me, feed my sheep: -- I have
called you friends; do all in my name, and to my honor; so I will be with you
always; and if you thus watch for souls, you shall give up your account with
joy at my appearing -- This is the Preaching, which though it seem foolish to
many, shall prove the power of God and wisdom of God: cast forth the net on
this side, and so may you expect to catch many souls: be followers of my
Apostles as they are of me, and in my name shall ye do wonders: If you preach
me, I and mine shall therein rejoice, be not ashamed of my Gospel, and I will
not be ashamed of you.

But to arrive at any tolerable Perfection in Preaching Christ, is a work of
Time, the Result of a careful Perusal of the Scriptures, and studying the
Hearts of Men: It requires the mortifying of the Pride of carnal Reason, a
great Concern for Souls, and humble Dependence on the Spirit of God, with the
lively Exercise of Devotion in our Closets.

As for the Reasoning Part on the more agreed Points of our Religion, a young
Preacher sooner may get to considerable Excellence: but the Christian Orator is
longer in finishing: We may sooner get necessary Truths into our own Minds, and
come at Minds of our own Size and Taste; but by proper Motives and Ways to
reach Souls of different Make and Turn, even the lowest of the Vulgar, is what
very few quickly arrive at: But let us not despair; if we thus regard Christ in
our Ministrations, we may very reasonably expect the Assistance of his Spirit,
and we shall be able to do all this through Christ strengthening us.

DISCOURSE II. Of particular and experimental PREACHING. Addressed to YOUNGER
MINISTERS.
Gentlemen,
RIGHTLY to divide the Word of Truth is the necessary Care of a Minister, if he
would be approved of God, and be a workman that needs not to be ashamed, 2 Timothy ii. 15. And it is a Skill worth studying for, and laboring to attain: Our
Success, and the Good of Souls, depends upon it more than is commonly imagined.

No question you may have heard many honest People express their
Dissatisfaction with many Preachers, in such Terms as these: They go on
constantly in a general Way that does not come close to the Heart, reaches not
my Case and Experience, and I cannot edify by them. -- Their Complaint is not
altogether without Meaning or Reason, as I hope you will be convinced by and by.

To keep a little in view that Passage of Scripture I Have mentioned, the
dividing the Word may mean these four Things.

I. Going through the variety of Gospel Subjects: Declaring the whole Counsel
of God, the Doctrines of Grace, Threatenings, Promises, and Duties of Morality;
and giving each its due Proportion.

Some finding their Thoughts flow most readily and affectionately on the
Doctrines of Grace, and that by these they best command the Affections of the
Hearers, are altogether upon them; and neglect to teach the people to observe
what Christ has commanded them I bear many of them witness they have a zeal for
God, but I wish it were more according to knowledge: They do not sure
sufficiently consider that Holiness is the Design of Christianity; and our
Preaching on other Heads, is in order the better to enforce Duty, and make Men
like to Christ.

I am afraid, from what I Have observed, that this Strain of Preaching will
increase the Number of such Hearers, whom our Savior describes by the stony
Ground in the Parable of the Sower; namely, such who are all Notion and
Affection, with a forward Profession; but have an unsubdued Will, no Root in
themselves, and bring forth no fruit to God. This Strain, I fear, though it
brings many toward Christ, will bring but few safely to him: Many of their
Hearers, with Christ much in their Mouths, will prove but Hypocrites settled on
their Lees, and Slaves to Lust. Nor is this Strain more happy for the uniform
Growth of the sincere Christian: They that fit under it, are too frequently
low, imperfect, and partial in practical Godliness; distempered with Conceit
and preposterous Zeal for Words and Phrases, and Things of little or no
Consequence; perplexed and perplexing others with a thousand groundless
Scruples; children in understanding, and it were happy were they so in Malice
too; but alas! their Narrowness of Mind infects the Heart with uncharitable
Affections to Christians of different Persuasions.

Others having not arrived at the Relish of the Doctrines of Grace themselves,
suppress them in their Preaching, and are altogether on Morality; enforcing it
with no Motives of the Gospel, except some of those addressed to Fear. -- --
These, if they are Masters of much Fire, may convince some; but it fares with
most of their Convicts, as with the Man in the Parable, out of whom the unclean
Spirit went for a while; hut finding his House empty, returned with seven more;
and the latter End of such is worse than the Beginning. -- Or else, the
awakened Hearer takes up with a proud Dependence upon a mistaken, external, and
Pharisaical Righteousness. -- Or else the convinced Sinner, not being by his
Teacher led to Christ, proceeds not, settles not, but abiding long under the
doubtful Concern, is wearied with it, weary of it, and comes to nothing; which
seems to be the thought in Hos. xiii. 13. Ephraim is an unwise son; he should
not stay long in the place of the breaking forth of children. -- Or lastly, if
any are converted under his Ministry, it is very usual that they are forced to
desert it, to find richer and sweeter Pasture for their Souls.

Some of their Hearers may possibly prefer this Strain of Preaching; but it
does not thence follow they are the better for it: And here I Will recite a
Paragraph out of Remarkable Passages in the Life of a private Gentleman.
Spiritual searching Discourses I did not so much savor as mere moral
Doctrines; though God knows too immoral myself. -- The Hopes I had conceived of
the Strength of my good Resolutions rendered them grateful -- Seneca's Morals I
read with great Pleasure -- Mr. Baxter's Saints Rest frighted me, so in reading
a few Pages, I threw it by!

Thus with Regret he tells us what little Profit he had in that Way, of his
Fondness of which he was ashamed, when he came to be of Paul's Mind, to count
all dross and dung that he might gain Christ.

II. The putting of a Thought in several distinct Views and Lights for
different Purposes and Designs. The sacred Writers are herein our Pattern, and
that not by Chance, but for wise Reasons. One View is designed to raise one
Affection, another View, to excite another of a different Sort: And farther,
one of the Views is designed as an Antidote against the Poison, which the
Corruption of Men's Hearts might draw out of the other.

For instance, the Terms and Way of our Justification and Salvation are
frequently stated thus --

That we must be found in Christ, having on the righteousness which is of God
by faith, Phil. iii. 9. and we must be made the righteousness of God in him, 2
Cor. v. 21.

And this View is exquisitely adapted to humble us, to draw forth Love and
Gratitude, and encourage our Hopes and Dependence.

But lest this Phraseology alone made use of, should beget Security, at other
Times we are told --

That by works a man is justified, and not by faith only; and that faith
without works is dead, Jam ii. 24, 26. and that the Enquiry at the last Day
shall be, who has fed the hungry, clothed the naked? etc. Matt. xxv.

And most commonly these two Views are united in the same Paragraph; that one
may prevent the ill Consequences Man's Perverseness would draw from the other:
As Physicians finding some dangerous Effect likely to follow from a Drug of
sovereign Virtue, mix some other with it to prevent the fatal Consequences.

So we are said to be elect according to the foreknowledge of God, through
sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus, 1 Pet. i. 2.

Again we are told, that by grace we are saved through faith, the gift of God,
not of works; for we are his workmanship, created in Christ unto good works,
Ephesians. ii. 8.9, 10.

I may give another Instance, in the different Ways the Scripture speaks of
Power and Duty.

Sometimes we are told, that we cannot come to Christ except the Father draw,
John vi 44. That without Christ we can do nothing, John xv. 5. That if we live,
it is not we, but Christ that lives in us, Gal. ii. 20.

Now these Views tend to hide Pride from Man, to create a Diffidence of
ourselves, and to center our Hopes and Dependence in Christ.

But lest the slothful and wicked Servant should make his Impotence his Excuse;
we are called upon to turn and make us new hearts, exhorted to ask and we shall
receive, and are assured God will give the Spirit to them that ask him, Luke
xi. 9, 13.

And how happily are these two Views united in Phil. ii. 12, 13. Work out your
own salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God that works in you to
will and to do.

Now, less skilful Dividers of the Word deal entirely in one of these Views
only, and neglect the other; and whilst they are laboring to excite one good
Affection, they raise another of a bad Tendency together with it: To this in
part is owing that there are so many low or distempered Christians. Nor is this
Partiality more happy at effecting the real Conversion of Sinners, who
generally under such Management are either left asleep, and settled in a fond
Conceit of their own Righteousness; or else stumble at the rock of offense, (in
a different Manner indeed from what the Jews did) thinking to find by Christ a
Way to Heaven without Holiness or moral Honesty.

III. Distinctly explaining and enforcing particular Duties, and opposing
particular Sins. It is true, the whole Scheme of Gospel Duty is deducible from
the general Heads of Faith and Love; but alas! most Men's Minds are slow,
confused, and erroneous in long Deductions, and it is our Business to lead them
on in every Step, and to show what particular Duties to God, our Neighbor, and
our Selves, will flow from these Principles, and are necessary to make the Man
of God perfect. We must particularly teach them to add to their faith, virtue,
knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly-kindness and charity, if
we would not leave them blind and unfruitful, 2 Pet. i. 7. And we should in a
particular Manner speak of the fruits of the Spirit, as love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, and temperance; and at
proper Seasons explain and enforce each of them, Gal. v. 22, 23 We should apply
the Lamp of the Word to detect and disgrace all the particular works of
darkness, and to make manifest the fruits of the flesh; such as adultery,
lasciviousness, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders,
drunkenness, revellings, and such like, Gal. v. 19, 20, 21.

If I should read to a sick Person a learned Lecture of the Benefit of Health,
and exhort him to take care to recover it; but never enquire into the Nature of
his Disease, or prescribe proper Methods and Medicines for the Cure; he would
hardly acquiesce in me for his Physician, or resign the Care of his bodily
Health to me.

Nor is it a more likely Way to the Soul's Health to rest in general
Exhortations to Holiness only, without distinctly handling the several Branches
thereof, and Sins opposite thereunto.

IV. Particularly applying to the several Cases, Tempers, and Experiences of
the Hearers. Besides many Thoughts suited in general to all Cases, there might
properly arise in the Application of most Subjects, Thoughts distinctly proper
to the Converted and Unconverted, to notional Hypocrite, and mere Moralist, to
Mourners, to Backsliders and lazy Christians, and at several Times to a much
greater Variety of Characters, and Persons.

Now such particular Addresses, when the Case is lively drawn, in the natural
Language of the Sort of Men intended, and judiciously and artfully spoken to,
are the closest, most weighty, and most useful Parts of the Application.

That this is the true Way of addressing an Auditory, viz. to divide them into
several Classes, and distinctly speak to each, will be plain, if we look through
the Apostolical Writings, and I might add the Prophetical also, with this View;
and we shall find that both Prophets and Apostles frequently take Care to
distinguish the holy and the vile, the Converted and the Unconverted. As for
instance, as to their Knowledge and Apprehensions of Things. 1 Cor. ii. 14, 15.
The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit -- they are foolishness
to him -- he cannot know them: But the spiritual judge all things. And also as
to their Obedience to the Law. Romans viii. 7, 8. The carnal mind is enmity
against God -- is not subject to God's law, nor can be subject, or please God.

They particularly rebuke Scoffers, and confute Gainsayers -- behold ye
despisers, and wonder, and perish -- as for Instance, those who denied or
cavilled at the Resurrection. 1 Cor. xv. Thou fool, that which thou sowest, is
not quickened except it die, etc. and also those that were for a Faith without
Works. Jam. ii. Will thou know, vain man, that faith without works is dead? etc.

They address to carnal stupid Sinners in an awful Way; denounce woe to them
that are at ease: As Paul when he made Felix tremble, Acts xxiv. 25. or as
Stephen, Acts vii. 51 -- 54. Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised, etc.

They lead convinced Sinners to Christ; to those that are enquiring they say,
If ye will enquire, enquire ye, return, come, turn to the strong hold; if the
Lord has torn, he will heal: As in Acts ii. 38. Repent and be baptized in the
name of the Lord Jesus for the remission of sins, etc. Acts xxvi. 31. Believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

They reason with the Moralist, and those that trust in themselves that they
are righteous; showing their righteousness is as filthy rags. Rom iii. The law
says, there is none righteous, but all the world are guilty before God;
therefore by the deeds of the law shall no flesh be justified; but the
righteousness of God is manifested, that God might freely justify them that
believe on Jesus; therefore man is justified by faith; boasting is excluded by
the law of faith. And Gal. iii. Ye received the Spirit by the bearing of faith
-- the gospel was before preached to Abraham -- they that are of the works of
the law, are under the curse. But the law could not disannul the covenant
confirmed before, but was a schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we might
be justified by faith; they then that are Christ's, are Abraham's seed, and
heirs according to the promise.

They sharply rebuke and expose pretending Hypocrite, showing them their
Abominations, detecting and confounding the Wretches that delight to know God's
ways, and hear his word, but will not do it: As Peter, Acts viii. 21. Thou have
no part in this matter; thy heart is not right in the sight of God; and James
in chap. ii. Show me thy faith without thy works -- the devils believe and
tremble.

They spirit up Christians that have but a little Strength, and persuade them
to make farther Advances in Religion; that he that is feeble may be as David:
as in Heb. v. at the end, and the beginning of chapter vi. Ye are dull of hearing
-- for the time ye ought to have been teachers -- strong meat belongs to them
that are of full age -- therefore leaving the first principles, let us go on to
perfection.

They deal with the several Sorts of distempered Christians tenderly, and yet
plainly and faithfully; as particularly with those who idolized one Minister,
and despised others; telling them, it is not by might or power of man, but by
God's Spirit, that the Gospel is successful; as in 1 Cor. iii. While one says,
I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal? Who is Paul or
Apollos, but ministers by whom ye believed? It Is God that gives the increase
-- Paul, Apollos, Cephas, all are yours. -- They endeavor to soften those of
too rigid a Temper, exhorting them not to speak to the grief of those whom God
has smitten: as in 2 Cor. ii. 7. Ye ought rather to forgive and comfort him: I
beseech you confirm your love toward him. Gal. vi. 1. If a man be overtaken in
a fault, restore him in the spirit of meekness, considering lest thou also be
(...). -- They talk roundly to those, who are apt to make God the Author of
Sin; who say we unavoidably pine away in our iniquities, and how can we then be
saved? as in Jam. i. 13. etc. Let no man say, I am tempted of God; for God
tempts not any man.

Declining Christians are quickened, awakened, and put in mind of the love of
their espousals: as in Rev. iii. 2. be watchful, and strengthen the things that
remain that are ready to die.

They awfully warn those who are in danger of sinning and falling back to
Perdition; telling them, the righteousness they have done will be remembered no
more, and God's soul will have no pleasure in them: as in Heb. vi 4 etc. It is
impossible for those who were once enlightened, etc. if they fall away, to
renew them again to repentance, seeing they crucify the Son of God afresh.

They encourage the persecuted and afflicted; telling them, when they pass
through fire and water, God will be with them, and that when they are tried they
shall come forth as gold, and be the Lord's in the day that he makes up his
jewels: As in Romans viii. 18. The sufferings of this present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed. And Heb xii. We
are compassed with a cloud of witnesses -- Jesus endured the cross and is set
down at the right hand of the Majesty on high -- whom the Lord loves he
chasteneth, and that for our profit -- chastening yields the peaceable fruits
of righteousness. And more particularly, those that lament Relations dead in
Christ, are told, they shall go to be happy with them, though the dead shall not
return; as in 1 These. iv. 13, 14. Sorrow not as others that have no hope; for
them which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

There are also particular Lessons for strong Christians, viz. to be tender to
the Weak, and to be publick-spirited, that as Ephraim should not envy Judah, so
neither should Judah vex Ephraim: Romans xvi. Him that is weak in the faith
receive -- Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not -- Let none put
a stumbling block in his brother's way -- Let not your good be ill spoken of --
Have thou faith, have it to thy self -- Bear the infirmities of the weak -- Let
every one please his neighbor for his good to edification. And in 1 Cor. viii.
Knowledge puffs up; but charity edifies -- Let not your liberty be a
stumbling block to the weak -- nor through thy knowledge let thy weak brother
perish, for whom Christ died -- If meat make my brother to offend, I Will eat no
flesh whilst the world stands. Again they are told, that a mark is set upon the
men that deplore the Sins of the Times; and a book of remembrance is written
for those who distinguish themselves by their Piety in Times of abounding
Wickedness: as in Rev. iii. 4. Thou have a few names who have not defiled their
garments; and they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy.

You find also a suitable Portion for those who are groaning under Corruption;
who complain they were shapen in iniquity, and their actual errors are past
understanding: in Romans vi. Although I am carnal, sold under sin, and what I would
I do not, and what I hate that I do; in my flesh dwells no good, and to perform
good I find not, yea with the flesh I serve the law of sin (oh wretched man
that I am) yet I consent to God's law, and delight in it after the inner-man;
it is not then I that do this evil, but sin that dwells in me -- I thank God
through Christ, with my mind I serve God's law, and God will deliver me from
the body of this death. And they are told how God has laid on Christ our
iniquities, and he will be the Lord our righteousness and strength: 1 John ii.
1. If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous.

The Humble and Penitent, who are of a contrite spirit, and tremble at God's
word, are comforted, 2 Cor. vii. Ye were sorry indeed, 'twas but for a season
-- 'Twas after a godly manner -- I rejoice in it -- Such sorrow works
repentance not to be repented of -- It wrought in you carefulness, fear,
desire, zeal and revenge; you have approved your selves clear in this matter.

They who want Direction, and cry out, Oh that my ways were directed to keep
thy statutes! are sent to God for Counsel, Jam. i. 5 If any lack wisdom, let
him ask it of God, and it shall be given him.

The deceiver and the deceived, (viz. those of evil Minds, who seduce others,
and those that are misled in the Simplicity of their Hearts) are to be
distinctly and differently treated, Jude 22. On some have compassion, and
others save with fear.

As for those of the House of Israel in Desertion, who mourn after the Lord,
who walk in darkness and see no light, and say, the Lord has forsaken me,
there were, I believe, few, if any, in those Days of the plentiful Effusion of
the Spirit, when the Gospel Church was in its Infancy, and a Nation was to be
born in a Day; but few, I say, who had Doubts about their Sincerity: they had
Persecutions, Distress, and Exercises of another Sort; and those were
sufficient. I am apt to think such Cases were also rare in the Beginning of the
Reformation from Popery: which seems to be the Occasion of some of the first
Reformers confounding Faith with Assurance. However, there are laid up, in the
New Testament, some proper Hints of Counsel, for such as should in aftertimes
labor under the Hidings of God's Face; as, to examine themselves -- For this
to beseech the Lord -- To clear themselves of Sin -- Not to faint in
well-doing; and the like.

Brethren, from your Acquaintance with the Scriptures, you will easily perceive
that I could as happily run this Specimen much farther through the sacred
Writings. And if you peruse the Writings of the most powerful and successful
Preachers, particularly the Puritan Divines, you will see that they herein
imitated the great Leaders of the Christian Profession; and were large in their
particular Application to several Sorts of Persons; suiting their Discourses to
all the Variety of the Hearts of Men, and Sorts and Frames of Christians,
according to the true Precepts of Oratory and Christianity. In this Way they
found their own Hearts warmed, and thus they reached the Hearts of their
Hearers; whilst many were imagining the Minister had been told of their Case,
and made the Sermon for them: and so was verified that Passage in Heb. iv. 12.
The word of God is quick and powerful -- a discerner of thoughts and intents of
the heart.

Now what Success can we reasonably expect, if we do not take into close
Consideration the Case of our several spiritual Patients?

If a Man professing Physic should administer or give out one constant
Medicine for Fevers, and another for Consumptions, and so for other Distempers,
without considering the Age, Constitution, Strength, and Way of Living of his
Patient; and not vary his Method and Medicines as those varied; we should
hardly call this the regular Practice of Physic: Nor can I think this general
and undistinguishing Way will be more safe, or likely to answer its End, in
Divinity than in Medicine.

Now I rest persuaded, Brethren, the thing is so evident you cannot but allow,
it is the best to suit our selves to all the Variety of Tempers and Experience
of the Hearers, if it can be done; and I hope I may successfully offer some
Thoughts upon the Way how this Skill may be attained.

Above all then, carefully study your own Hearts, and preach over the ruder
Sketches of your Sermons to your selves first; by which Means the corresponding
Workings of your own Hearts and Affections may furnish you with proper Thoughts
wherewith to apply closely to all, whose Temper, and Experience, and Case is
like your own: for what is supplied to your imperfect Notes, out of the
applicatory Meditations of your own Minds on the Subject, will very probably,
according to the usual way of the Spirit, happily and powerfully reach those of
the same Make in like Circumstances.

But alas! one Man's Experience falls far short of all the Variety of Men's
Hearts, and of the Spirit's Work; nay, those whose Heads are turned for close
and regular Thought, and whose Time has been spent in Study and Letters, as
they go on more rationally and evenly in Religion, have less variety of
Experience, than many of a different Mold and Way of thinking. Here it will be
needful then to look out of our selves, and take a larger View, in order to be
acquainted with Cases and Tempers different from our own; and with such Methods
of the Spirit's Work, as we our selves have never experienced, but many others
have. Now the best and original Way of getting this Acquaintance with Men, and
with God's Workings in them, (and I may add of Satan's Workings also) is by
conversing freely with the serious People of our Flock.

I know your Thoughts will prevent me with an Objection: You Will say, this is
almost impracticable, especially amongst Persons of Politeness and Figure;
these alas! too rarely will use any such Freedom with us, in laying open their
Hearts, and communicating their Experiences to us, as to give us the needful
Information. -- If we ever do arrive at any Acquaintance with the Experience of
Christians, it is little thanks to such as these; they expect we should preach
suitably to them, and that with as much reason as Nebuchadnezzar demanded of
the Wise Men to interpret a Dream they knew not. The middle and lower Sort of
People indeed, are more unreserved to grave Ministers of Age and Standing; but
will hardly use the same Freedom with young Men.

To help you over this Difficulty, I would observe; that as for the Polite, and
Men of some Thought and Reading, your own Experience, with the Allowances and
Corrections a moderate Skill in Human Nature will enable you to make, may lead
you into happy Conjectures at their Way of Thinking: Besides, in the time of
their Visitation, under some sore Affliction, you shall find them more
communicative; and an Hour's free Discourse, with such as can give a rational
and intelligible Account of themselves, in a Season when they are disposed to
do it, is as valuable and useful, as it is rare and difficult to enter into.

Again, have an Eye upon the serious Youth, whom Nature and Providence has
designed to place in a superior Class; and especially at a Time when the
Impressions of Religion are new to them: You shall find them more open than
elder Persons, if you court their Intimacy, and relieve their Bashfulness: And
if you can see into the Heart of a Youth, then with the proper Allowances for
the Alterations that Age and Business will make, you may pretty well guess at
their Turn of Mind in more advanced Years.

With the Generality of serious and more advanced Christians, there needs not
so much Nicety, to get into such a spiritual Intimacy with them as we desire;
the laying aside Nicety and Ceremony, and getting into such a grave
good-natured Way as our Character requires, is more than halfway to our
Purpose: Where this is insufficient to encourage the People to Freedom, lead
them into it by communicating first, either what your selves have experienced,
under the Name of a third Person (if Modesty or Prudence require) or else what
you have learned from others, without betraying the Confidence they have put in
you: By these Methods we shall seldom fail of drawing serious People on to such
a Freedom, as will be of Use to them and ourselves. -- If we heartily go about
it, we are pretty sure to succeed.

I may farther Hint at a compendious Way for the gaining much Knowledge of
Men's Hearts in a little Time. viz. If you have any tolerable Skill in the
different Tempers and Complexions of Mankind, distribute in your Thoughts your
People into Classes, according to their natural Genius and Temper, and select
one of each Class to be more particularly acquainted with; for amongst those
whom Nature has formed alike, you shall find upon farther Enquiry, a strange
Uniformity in the Spirit's Work and Way of Proceeding with them.

I might recommend a Way of knowing these things at second Hand, viz. from the
most popular and experimental Authors; but this way is far inferior to the
other; and we shall but faintly paint any Phenomenon of the Heart, by copying
another Picture; it is infinitely preferable to do it from the Life. Yet would I
earnestly recommend the Perusal of such Authors, as deal much in an
experimental Strain, and have been very successful in it; but with a different
Design, viz. That we may learn from them, how to describe, in a discreet and
lively Manner, such Cases as we our selves have observed; and how to address
properly to those Cases, with the like Thoughts and Expressions, as have in the
Course of their Preaching happily answered the End.

After all, rightly to divide the Word of Truth, with true Wisdom, is a Matter
of no small Difficulty; but if we carefully and diligently go about it, with a
Zeal for our Master's Interest, and sensible of our own Insufficience, asking
wisdom of God, we know he gives liberally, and will surely make us wise to win
souls, to the Honor of his Name, and our own rejoicing in the day of the Lord
Jesus; to whom with the Father and Holy Spirit, that one God whom we adore, be
paid the highest Honors and Praises to eternal Ages. Amen.

A LETTER To a FRIEND Concerning the most useful WAY of PREACHING.

Written in the German Language by the late Reverend and Celebrated Dr.
AUGUSTUS HERMANNUS FRANCK, Professor of Divinity in the University of Hall in
Saxony, Pastor of a Church, and Director of the charitable FOUNDATIONS there.
Translated into Latin by Order of his SON, the present Professor FRANCK, and
out of the Latin into English by DAVID JENNINGS.

BOSTON: Printed in the YEAR MDCCXL.

THE PREFACE.
THE good Acceptance which the two preceding Discourses met with, when they
were first published by the Author, (a little before his Death) and the speedy
Demand of a second Edition, together with the frequent Enquiries which have
been made for them since they have been out of Print, encourages this
Republication of them. Were it proper for me to add any thing to that
Recommendation which is prefixed to them, I might mention the Acceptance which
they have also met with in Foreign Parts. For, besides a large Edition printed
in Scotland, they have lately been translated and published in the German
Language, by Order of the Reverend Dr. FRANCK, the present worthy Professor of
Divinity in the University of Hall in Saxony. The Reverend Dr. WATTS, who
corresponds with that Professor, sent him these Discourses the last Year; with
which he was so well pleased, as not only to give them a very high Encomium in
his next Letter to the Doctor, but to get them translated into High Dutch, and
inserted in a Collection of Papers, which is published in that Country about
once a Month, for the Advancement of Religion. In return for this Present,
which proved so very acceptable to the good Professor, he soon after sent the
Doctor a Latin Translation of a Letter, which his excellent Father, and
Predecessor in the Divinity Chair at Hall, had published in the German
Language, pretty much on the same Subject; which the Doctor has been so kind as
to communicate to me, and which I have translated into English, and here added
to these Discourses of my Brother's; in hopes that, by the Blessing of God, it
may be a considerable Means of furthering the good Design of them, viz. to form
skilful Laborers for the Lord's Vineyard, and to revive that too much
neglected Strain and Way of preaching, which large Experience has abundantly
proved to be most useful and successful.

The two proceeding Discourses were originally prepared for Academical
Lectures, and were delivered by the Author to a Set of Pupils, who were
training up under his Instruction for the Service of the Sanctuary. In the
Letter, which is now added, we have the Sentiments of one of the most
celebrated Preachers and Divines, and perhaps one of the most truly Apostolic
Men, that some past Ages have known, on the same Subject: A Man whom God did
very uncommonly own, not only as a Preacher and a Tutor, but above all in that
almost miraculous Work (if I need say almost) his building and establishing the
Orphan-House at Glaucha in the Suburbs of Hall; a Work which both in the
Beginning and Progress of it can be attributed to no Means so properly as to
the Power of Faith. A Historical Account of that Affair, wrote by the Professor
himself, as it was laid before Frederick I. King of Prussia, to whose Dominions
Hall belonged, and who in the Year 1700 gave a Commission to four of his Privy
Counselors to examine strictly into it, was afterward published, under the
Title of Pietas Hallensis, and has since been translated into English. I
suppose it will not be unacceptable, to such Persons especially as have not
read that larger Account, to give a brief Abstract of it in this Place.

When the Professor was first settled as a Minister at Glaucha, he, according
to the Custom of charitably disposed Persons in those Parts, appointed one Day
in every Week for the Poor to come to his Door for Alms. Their Miseries, but
especially the gross Ignorance and Wickedness which generally prevails among
that sort of People, very sensibly touched him; and above all to see Numbers of
Children among them growing up in that dissolute Way of Life, was to him a very
affecting and pitiful Sight. This made him resolve on some Attempt for their
spiritual as well as their bodily Relief. Accordingly every Thursday, which was
his Day for distributing Alms, he took all the Poor that came, into his House;
and there, besides giving them Money, he instructed the Children, in the
Presence of the Elder Persons, in the Principles of Religion, and concluded
with Prayer. This Exercise was set up in the beginning of the Year 1694. The
Number of the Poor who came to this Exercise (many of them probably for the
sake of the Alms) soon increasing, and consequently the Charge that attended it
increasing too, obliged the Professor to seek for some Assistance in carrying
on this good Work. For that Purpose therefore he set up an Alms-Box in his
Parlour, with these Words written over it, 1 John iii. 17. Whosoever has this
World's Goods, and sees his Brother have need, and shuts up his Bowels of
Compassion from him, how dwells the Love of God is him? and under it, 2 Cor.
ix. 7. Every Man according as he purposes in his Heart, so let him give, not
grudgingly, or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful Giver. This was intended
aS a tacit Admonition to all that came in, to open their Hearts toward the
Poor. About a quarter of a Year after this Box was set up, a certain Person put
into it at one time, to the value of Eighteen Shillings and Six Pence English.
When the Professor took this Sum into his Hands, he said, in full Assurance of
Faith, This is now a considerable Fund, worthy to be laid out in some important
Undertaking; therefore I will even take this for the Foundation of a
Charity-School. And immediately he laid out eight Shillings of it in Books, and
hired a poor Student to teach the Children two Hours in a Day. When his Stock
was just spent, some Friends who came to visit the Professor, and were much
pleased with his charitable Essay, contributed more; upon which the two Hours
teaching were enlarged to five, and Alms were distributed to the Children three
times a Week, to engage them to come more constantly to School. But after
Matters had gone on in this Way for some time, this Professor but too plainly
saw that all his Endeavors upon those poor Vagrants were like to be
frustrated, by their keeping such bad Company out of School-time. Some of them
ran away with their Books, and returned to School no more. This made him
resolve to choose out twelve of the most hopeful of the Children, and to
venture upon their Maintenance, as well as their Education. At first he put
them out to Persons of known Integrity and Piety, to be educated by them. But
as this little Beginning came to be known abroad, several Persons sent in
Contributions to carry on so good a Design; particularly the Lord put it into
the Heart of a Person of Quality to give a Thousand Crowns, and two other
Persons contributed Four Hundred. Upon which a House was purchased, and
converted into an Hospital for the poor Orphans. This was in the Year 1696.
Afterward Alms were sent in by several other Persons; many of them came from
unknown Hands Accordingly more Children were still admitted into the Hospital,
till the House grew too strait for them; which put the Professor on a Design of
building a large and commodious Hospital; for he clearly foresaw, that the
hiring of more Houses, scattered up and down, would be attended with very great
Inconveniences. One Gentleman had lately sent him five hundred Crowns, with a
Desire that some part of that Sum might be disposed of to poor Students; which
the Professor looked upon as a Call of Providence, to make indigent Scholars a
part of his Care. This enlarged his charitable Design beyond his former
Intention. He now wanted a Building that would hold at least two hundred
Persons; but his Stock of Money was by this time so far spent, that, as he
writes, he had not enough to build a small Cottage. No wonder then that several
of his Friends dissuaded him from so hazardous an Undertaking! But the Lord
strengthened his Faith in so powerful a Manner, and supported him with such a
Presence of Mind, as carried him above all Discouragement. Accordingly July 13.
School. the Foundation of a spacious Hospital was laid, in THE NAME OF GOD,
without any settled Fund, or so much as a Promise from any great Persons to
contribute to the building of it. And now, the Professor writes, I was to wait
upon God, and from Week to Week to receive at his Hand what he would be
graciously pleased to furnish me with for carrying on the Building. It must
also be remembered, that the weekly Expense of maintaining the Poor, which he
had already under his Care, was very considerable; but nothing could discourage
the pious Professor, his Faith kept Pace with his growing Charity, and he had a
firm Trust in Providence for the fulfilling those kind Desires, which he was
confidently persuaded God had put into his Heart. Nor were his Expectations in
this Matter at all disappointed; for the Building was carried on successfully,
and the Poor supported all the time merely by seemingly accidental
Contributions, which were sent in from time to time by charitable Persons,
living not only in Germany, but in most other Protestant Countries in Europe.
So that in the Year 1702 the Hospital was finished, which had cost five
thousand Pounds, and was peopled with above two hundred Poor. The Steps of
Providence in carrying on this Affair were indeed very extraordinary. God
several Times suffered the good Professor's Faith to be tried by very pressing
Necessities; as when the Workmen were to be paid, the Poor to be maintained,
and yet the Stock of Money was quite exhausted, and there was no rational
Prospect of any further Supply. This often happened, but his Recourse was
always to God by Prayer, which as constantly met with a gracious Answer. I will
here set down two or three Passages of this sort, by way of Instance, out of a
great Number that are recorded in the Pietas Hallensis Memorable Instances of
the Power of Faith and Prayer!

At one time, he writes, all Provisions were gone, when the Steward declared
there was a Necessity of buying some Cattle to furnish the Table, and other
Necessaries. Under these pressing Circumstances I found one Comfort, which was
a Presence of Mind in Prayer, joined with a confident Dependence upon the Lord,
who hears the very Cry of the young Ravens. When Prayer was over, I heard
somebody knock at the Door, which when opened there was an Acquaintance of mine
holding in his Hand a Letter, and a Parcel or Money wrapped up, which he
presented to me, and I found therein fifty Crowns, sent a great Way for the
Relief of our Poor.

At another time, there was Want again in every Corner. The Steward brought me
his Book and desired me to defray the Weekly Charges* My Recourse was to God
through Faith. The Expenses were necessary, and I saw not the least Provision,
nor any way to procure it. This made me resolve to retire into my Closet, and
to beg the Lord's Assistance in so pressing a Necessity; but as I was preparing
for Prayer, I received a Letter from a Merchant, intimating that he was ordered
to pay a thousand Crowns to me for the Relief of the Hospital. This put me in
mind of that Saying, Isai. lxv. 24. It shall come to pass, that before they
call, I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear. Nevertheless
I entered into my Closet, but instead of begging and praying, as I had designed,
I praised and extolled the Name of the Lord.

Another time, I stood in need of a great Sum of Money, insomuch that an 100
Crowns would not have served my turn, and yet I saw not the least appearance
how I might be supplied with an hundred Groats. The Steward came and set forth
the Want we were in. I bid him to come again after Dinner, and I resolved to
put up my Prayers to the Lord for his Assistance. When he came again after
Dinner, I was still in the same Want, and so appointed him to come again in the
Evening. In the mean time a Friend of mine came to see me, and with him I
joined in Prayers, and found my self much moved to praise and magnify the Lord
for all his admirable Dealings toward Mankind, even from the beginning of the
World; and the most remarkable Instances came readily to my Remembrance whilst
I was praying. I was so elevated in praising and magnifying God, that I
insisted only on that Exercise of my present Devotions, and found no
Inclination to put up many anxious Petitions to be delivered out of the present
Necessity. At length my Friend taking his leave, I accompanied him to the Door,
where I found the Steward waiting on one Side for the Money he wanted, and on
the other, a Person who brought an Hundred and fifty Crowns for the Support of
the Hospital.

Thus was this famous Hospital, which has since been one of the most
illustrious Ornaments and Supports of the Protestant Interest in Germany, built
without any other Fund but that of Faith. Surely, we must say, This was the
Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our Eyes. Whether it may pass for a
Miracle or no, yet thus much I take for certain, that if any Popish Monastery
had ever been founded in the same Manner, and such remarkable Steps of
Providence had attended the Building of it, as did actually attend this
Protestant Hospital at Hall, the World would have rung with the Noise of the
Miracle, and it had indeed been a much better Miracle than any which the
Papists boast of. But to return to the Story. The Hospital being thus finished,
at least as far as was intended when the Foundation was laid, it was still to
depend immediately on Providence for its future Support and Maintenance Nor for
this did the Professor's Faith fail, nor were his Hopes disappointed; for the
Author of the Preface to the English Translation of Professor FRANCK's Christus
s^crae Scripturae Nucleus, informs us, that in the Year 1706 the State of the
Hospital was as follows.

Ten Schools, in which 988 Children were instructed by 72 Masters. The Number
of Persons lodged and subsisted in the Hospital was 360, and 84 poor Students
of the University had their Diet there. Eight poor Widows were maintained, with
a Chaplain and a Maid Servant, and Provision also was made for the Relief of
casual Poor

The Death of this excellent Professor, which happened in the Year 1727, in the
65th Year of his Age, filled many Persons with Fear, that this good Work of
Charity, now it must be deprived of the Support of his Influence and Prayers,
would languish and die too, but in this their Fears have been happily
disappointed. It was Honor enough for this holy Man to be such an illustrious
Instance of Faith, and to be the Instrument of so great and good a Work: But
the Lord has since made it appear that the Work was his, and that the Residue
of the Spirit is with him. For I find in the before-cited Preface, that at the
Conclusion of the Year 1731, which was four Years after Dr. FRANCK's Death, the
number of the Scholars and Children in the several Schools of the Orphan-House
amounted to 2300, and the number of Students who instructed them to 160. I am
further informed by the Reverend Mr. Zeigenhagen, the present worthy Pastor of
the German Church at St. James's, that the Hospital still continues in a very
flourishing State, and that some further Additions were made to the Buildings,
but about three Years ago.

Many useful Instructions might be deducted from this Narrative. What Arguments
for a Providence, what Encouragement to Prayer, what (...) to Work of Charity,
might it yield us? But I have already swelled this Preface almost beyond all
reasonable Bounds, and therefore must not insist here on these Topics.

I have only to observe further, that the Letter which follows was written by
this great and good Man about two Years before his Death, in which we have his
Opinion and Judgment, ripened by Age and large Experience, concerning the most
useful Way of Preaching. And what Minister, who is in good Earnest concerned to
approve himself faithful in his Work, to advance the Honor of Christ, and do
good to Souls, would not be glad to consult so great and experienced a Master?
And who would not pay some considerable Deference to the Judgment of such an
Apostolic Man, a Man so highly honored of God, as Professor FRANCK was?

The good Professor himself had, it seems, such an Opinion of this little
Piece, as to desire it might be transmitted to Posterity. He therefore inserted
it entire in a Preface to a Quarto Volume of Sermons which he published in the
Year 1726, on purpose, as he there declares, that it might not be lost, as
single Sheets are apt to be; but that Posterity might know his Thoughts upon
this Matter And after the End of it, he declares in a very solemn Manner, as in
the Presence of the Lord, that what he had thus written was the Result of his
own Experience; and that these Rules and Directions which he had given to other
Ministers, were the same that he had constantly followed and practiced upon in
the whole Course of his own Preaching and Ministry.

May this Publication of them in our own Language prove a Means, through the
Blessing of God, of forming many such useful and successful Preachers of the
Gospel, in our Country, as that holy and excellent Man was in his. May many
Ministers be made wise hereby to win Souls to Christ, to save themselves and
them that hear them. So shall this little but valuable Treatise redound through
the Thanksgivings of many to the Glory of God.

LONDON, August 24. 1736. David Jennings.

A LETTER To a FRIEND Concerning the most useful WAY of PREACHING.
Honored and dear Friend,
IN Answer to the Question which you have proposed to me, viz. How a faithful
Minister, who earnestly desires to save and to edify the Souls of his Hearers,
to gain Sinners unto Christ, and to inflame their Hearts with a growing Love to
their Savior, may best adapt his Preaching to these excellent Purposes? I can
only at present suggest a few things briefly; whereas if I had more Leisure, I
should choose to write more copiously on so weighty a Subject.

I. I must take it for granted that a Minister, who sincerely desires and who
is likely to do good by his Preaching, is such a one, both in Heart and in
Life, as St. Paul describes, 2 Timothy i. 13, 14. Who holds fast the form of sound
words (or the pure Apostolic Doctrine) which he has heard, in faith and love
which is in Christ Jesus; and who keeps that good thing which has been
committed to him by the Holy Ghost which dwells in him.

II. It will not a little subserve the good Ends proposed in the Question, for
a Minister, very frequently, to lay down in his Sermons the distinguishing
Marks and Characters both of the Converted and of the Unconverted, and that
with all possible Plainness, that so every one of his Hearers may be able to
judge of his own State, and may know to which of these two Classes he belongs.
But then great Care must be taken that those distinguishing Characters are
justly drawn: For it may easily happen, through a Preacher's Unskilfulness in
this Affair, that the Unconverted, on the one hand, may be deceived into a good
Opinion of their present State, and may grow thereupon more secure and
careless; and that some converted Persons, on the other hand, may be
unreasonably disquieted and filled with groundless and fruitless Fears.
However, a prudent Minister, who has experienced a Work of Grace upon his own
Heart, will have no great Difficulty so to describe it to others, as
sufficiently to guard against the Mistakes on both sides; and to lead both one
and the other, by the unerring Light of Scripture, into the Knowledge of the
true State of their own Souls.

III. For this Purpose also let a Minister carefully and clearly distinguish in
his Preaching, betwixt mere Morality and true Religion; betwixt the moral
honest Man and the sound Believer, who, from a deep Conviction of the Depravity
of his Nature and the Errors of his Life, has learned to hate Sin from his
Heart, and lives by the Faith of the Son of God. For it is hardly credible what
Multitudes of Persons there are, even in Christian Countries, where the Gospel
is publicly and faithfully preached, who, though they are wise enough in other
Matters, yet in this are they grossly ignorant, and thereby miserably deceive
their own Souls.

IV. And, because this kind of Self-Deceit is so very common, it is highly
necessary for a Minister to instruct his Hearers with all possible Plainness,
in the Duty of Self-examination; and very often to exhort them to it: As more
especially to enquire, If ever they were awakened from their natural Sleep in
Sin? If they have escaped out of the Snare of the Devil? If ever they have had
a lively and affecting Sense of the Corruption of their own Hearts, and of the
Misery of their natural State? And, in short, whether they have good and solid
Reasons to conclude that they are regenerate Persons? Whether they can find in
themselves the genuine Marks of a true Conversion to God, and a living Faith in
Christ? etc. Or whether, on the other hand, they do not conclude that they are
true Christians and in a State of Salvation, merely from their being moral
honest Men, and their not living in any gross and scandalous Sin? And, perhaps
too, from their saying Prayers, hearing Sermons, and frequenting the Places of
public Worship, and from their practicing such like outward Duties of Religion?
Or again, whether they do not flatter themselves that their eternal State is
safe, merely because their Lives are not altogether so bad as the Lives of some
others?

V. It would also be of very considerable use for a Minister often to explain,
and to show the Difference betwixt a Legal and an Evangelical Frame and
Principle of Religion; or betwixt that slavish Fear, by which alone it is that
some Persons, even of a serious Turn of Mind, are forced and dragged as it were
to their Duty, and that Evangelical Newness of Spirit, that filial Love to God
and Delight in his Service, which usually grows and flourishes in the Soul
where it is once planted, and which produces a free, unconstrained and
acceptable Religion. This would be an excellent Means, not only of awakening
Sinners out of their carnal Security, but of turning them thoroughly unto God,
to a holy Walk and to a pleasurable Converse with him, even such as becomes his
Children. And for this End it is of very great Moment, that a Minister not only
instruct his Hearers what they must do, and how they ought to act, but that he
also labor fully to apprise and to convince them, by the Evidence of
Scripture, of their own native Weakness and Impotency for all that is
spiritually good; and that he further show them, by the same Word of Truth,
from whence they must look for, and from whom they may hope to receive, all
Grace and Strength, not only to renew their Souls in their first Conversion,
but also afterward to enable them to perform every Duty, as well of outward as
of inward Religion. They must be told that they can do nothing without Christ,
according as he has assured us, John xv. 5. Without me ye can do nothing. And
again, that by the Help of his Grace they may do all things, according as St.
Paul writes, Phil. iv. 13. I can do all things through Christ strengthening me.
Thus should Gospel Ministers constantly make it the Aim and Drift of their
Preaching, to lead their Hearers to Christ, and to his Grace; to Him by whose
stripes we are healed, and whose Blood takes away all the Sins of all that
truly repent and believe, and by whose divine power all things are given to us
that pertain to life and godliness, 2 Pet. i. 3. Thus the Holy Apostles
preached; these were the Topics which they insisted much upon; and if their
Example is not followed in this matter, it will be no wonder if our modern
Preaching comes vastly short of the Success of theirs: And by this means some
of our Hearers will be in danger of sinking into a mere Legal Frame and Spirit
of Bondage, while they are pressed to Duty and Working, but not encouraged by
the Grace of Christ, nor directed where to look for Strength to perform it; and
others of them will take up with a false Peace, a carnal Security, for want of
being directed to Christ, who is the only Foundation of the Sinner's reasonable
Hope and solid Comfort. But on the other hand, when both these Points are well
explained and duly insisted on, no other Means are so powerful to awaken secure
Sinners, to bring them to Christ, and to settle their Souls in solid Peace and
Comfort. Hereby, under the Influence of the Spirit of Christ, they find
themselves transported as it were into a new Life; and now they go on with
Vigor and Pleasure in the Practice of universal Piety.

VI. It would further be useful, and it is highly necessary that Ministers
should not only preach up the Necessity of Conversion, and instruct their
Hearers to depend on the Grace of Christ for it, but also that they should,
very frequently, in their Sermons explain the Nature and the whole Progress of
Conversion, sometimes more largely and distinctly, and at other times more
briefly, endeavoring thereby to lead their Hearers into a true Knowledge of
the State of their Souls; and showing them how they must repent of their Sins,
what they must do to be saved from their natural Misery and Ruin, and, in
short, how they may obtain the full Salvation of the Gospel; that so every one
may be able to give an Answer to that most important Question, What must I do
that I may be a Child of God and inherit eternal Life? For let a Minister
entertain his Hearers with the sublimest Doctrines of Christianity, let him
also declaim against Sin and exhort them to their various Duties in the most
earnest and pathetick manner, and let all be adorned with the finest Beauties
of Wit and Eloquence; yet, after all, if his Sermons are not so contrived and
framed as, at the same time, to inform the Ignorant how they may obtain an
Interest in the Gospel-Salvation for themselves, and what Means and Methods God
has appointed for that Purpose; what will it profit them? No more than a parcel
of Shreds of Cloths, of various Dies, though they were of the finest Thread and
liveliest Colors, would serve the Purpose of a Man who wants a handsome
Garment; whereas a Sermon that informs the ignorant Sinner, not only of the
Necessity of Conversion, but also how that happy Change may certainly be
effected in his own Soul, may not unfitly be compared, in respect to its
Usefulness, to a complete Garment, made all of a Piece, well fitted to the
Man's Shape that wants it, and which he may therefore put on and wear with
Honor and Pleasure.

But now in order to all this, a Minister must take Pains with his own Heart,
as well as in composing his Sermons; he must have a Zeal for Christ, and must
aim at nothing so much as to bring Sinners to him* This should be in some
Measure the Design and Drift of every Sermon that he preaches, that so if a
Person should happen to hear him but once in all his Life, he might, even by
means of that one Sermon, get some Notion of the one thing needful, and be just
entered at least into the Way of Salvation. For this should every Minister
study and strive, and for this should he continually pray that God would fill
his Heart with pious Zeal and holy Wisdom, that so he may divide the Word of
Truth aright, and administer Grace unto Hearers.

VII. It might probably make some good Impressions on the Minds of the People,
was a Minister pretty often to inculcate, with great Plainness and Seriousness,
the Necessity of Prayer; and more particularly what need they have to pray very
earnestly to the God of all Grace that he would set home his Word upon their
Hearts, that he would bring the good Seed to Perfection in their full and
blessed Conformity to himself. And further, so great is the Ignorance of many
Persons concerning the Duty of Prayer, that they seem to have no other Notion
of it than merely a reading some Forms out of a Prayer Book. This makes it to
be as necessary, as it would probably be a useful thing, for a Minister to lead
them, as it were by the Hand, into this Path of their Duty; that is, to explain
it to them in a most easy and familiar manner, to show them that it requires no
great Art and Skill to pray acceptably unto God; for they are to speak to him
as Children to a loving Father, they are to spread before him their Sorrows and
Complaints, they are to tell him of the State and Condition of their Souls,
just as they find and feel it; and they need not be at all sollicitous about
Propriety of Expression and elegant Phrases in their secret Prayers; for God
regards the Sense of the Heart, rather than the Language of the Lips. The
Scriptures themselves furnish us with several Examples of such artless and yet
acceptable Prayers. Let a Minister then diligently instruct his Hearers how
they are, in the first Place, to get their Hearts disposed for Prayer; and it
may be of use too to assist and furnish the more ignorant with Words and sit
Expressions; but at the same time let him inform them that they need not tie
themselves to use those very Words, nor any Form whatever; but that they should
learn to pour out their Hearts unto God, in such Words by which they can best
express the real Sentiments and Affections of their own Souls, according to the
Psalmist, Psalm. lxii. 8. Ye people, pour out your hearts before him.

VIII. It is further extremely necessary that Ministers should very often take
Occasion to explain in their Sermons that Renewing or Change of the Mind, which
is so essential to all true Religion, and which yet, alas! but very few Persons
seem to understand, or indeed to have almost any Notion of. Nor is it enough to
explain that first and mighty Change, which is at once made in a Sinner at his
Conversion, when he comes to love that Good which before he hated, and to hate
that Evil which he before loved, when from being an Unbeliever he becomes a
Believer; or when his false and dead Faith is changed into a true and saving
one: But that further progressive Change should also be much recommended, in
which the Christian must be improving to the very End of his Life, which St.
Paul refers to, 2 Cor. iii. 18. But now (the Veil which was upon the Heart
being taken away, and the Spirit of the Lord having taken up his dwelling in
it, Verses 16, 17.) we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even by the
Spirit of the Lord. Hereby the Mind is more and more renewed, the Christian
grows up in the Spirit and Temper of Christ, and his lovely Image is drawn upon
the Soul in fairer Lines every Day than other.

IX. It is of considerable Moment also that the whole Faith and Duty of a
Christian be represented in its most amiable and attractive Light, that so
Sinners may be won to Religion upon a full Conviction, that if they would do
well for themselves and obtain true Peace and Comfort, the shortest, the
surest, and indeed the only Way is to turn in good earnest from Sin to God and
Holiness; and that Religion is by no means a grievous and melancholy thing,
which any need be afraid of, but full of Pleasure and greatly desirable even
for its own Sake; and though it calls us indeed to a present Combat, and requires
us to sight and strive against Sin; yet this is but in order to Peace and to a
certain Victory, which will much more than recompense the Toils of the War.

X. It were much to be wished that Ministers would not take up more of their
Sermons than needs must in explaining their Text, but rather, after as short an
Explication of it as is sufficient to lead their Hearers into the true Sense
and Meaning, (which must by no means be neglected) hasten to the Application;
and in that, let a Minister address himself to his Hearers with a becoming
Seriousness and Earnestness; let him apply his Subject both to Saints and
Sinners, to the Converted and to the Unconverted, in order to awaken the Secure
and Careless, and to build up true Believers in their Faith and Holiness.
Experience would soon show that this is by far the more profitable Way, than to
spend almost the whole Discourse, as some do, in explaining their Text and
Subject, and then close with a very short Application, because the Time is gone.

XI. It were also greatly to be wished, that those Under-Shepherds of the Flock
of Christ would make it more designedly and zealously the Purpose of their
Preaching to bring Sinners to him, who is the great Shepherd of the Sheep; that
they would strive by the most winning Arguments they can possibly use, and
especially by such as the Grace of the Gospel will naturally suggest, to
persuade and even to compel them to come to him. As the Hen when she lights on
a few Crumbs or Grains of Corn, how earnestly does she invite her Brood to come
and share the Treasure with her! She will by no means be satisfied nor leave
off calling them till they come. Thus did our blessed Savior; how graciously
did he call and invite Sinners to come to him in the Days of his personal
Ministry upon Earth! As Matt. xi. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest, etc. Again John vii. 37, 38. If any man
thirst, let him come to me and drink: He that believes on me, as the scripture
says, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. And much to the same
Purpose we find him speaking in several other Places. Thus also we hear the
Prophet Isaiah, in the Old Testament, inviting Sinners unto Christ, Isai. lv.
1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, etc. and thus St. Paul,
in the New Testament, 2 Cor. v. 11. We beseech you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God. And thus does the Apostle John over and over in his divine
Writings. Remarkable to this Purpose also are those Words of our blessed
Savior concerning Jerusalem, Matt. xxiii. 37. How often would I have gathered
thy children even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wing! Christ called
Sinners to come to himself, as their proper Lord and Master, as their only
Redeemer and Savior; whereas we, says St. Paul, preach not ourselves, but
Christ Jesus the Lord, 2 Cor. iv. 5. and therefore we endeavor to bring
Sinners not to ourselves, but to Him. But now in order to this, and that a
Minister may be thus happily successful in his Preaching, he must not only
sincerely love his People and have an affectionate Concern for their Salvation,
but he must be an ardent Lover of Christ too; he must wish and desire and covet
nothing so much as to bring all that hear him to Christ, to deliver every one
of them, as it were, into his gracious Arms, could he but persuade them to be
so happy; that thus they may learn, even by the Example of their Minister, to
love the Lord Jesus.

XII. For this purpose it is farther requisite that a Minister should very
often take Occasion to display, in the most lively Colors that he can, the
Excellency and Glory of Christ's Person, the Kindness of his Heart and the
exceeding Riches of his Grace both as he is God and Man, as he is now a
glorious triumphant Savior, as well as once he sustained and executed the same
Office in a humbled and suffering State. And that he further inform his Hearers
what excellent Blessings are treasured up in Christ to be bestowed on all his
Friends and People, that so they may be drawn to him by a Principle of Desire
and Love, that they may most willingly give him their Hearts; and that so it
may be the Breathing of their Souls and the Matter of their most earnest Prayer
to Christ, that he would be pleased to manifest his Love to them, that he would
shed it abroad in their heart by his holy Spirit, Romans v. 5, that he would more
and more reveal to them the Glory of his Majesty, that he would impress and
affect their Minds with a lively Sense of it, that so they may yet more and
more love and honor him their heavenly Spouse, by whom it is that they have,
and that they farther hope for Access to and Acceptance with the Father, and
with whom they also hope to dwell for ever and ever.

XIII. The Love of Christ ought to be much more insisted on by Preachers than
what is commonly done; because when we apply to ourselves in a right Manner,
his Passion, Death and Atonement, his Merits, and that Purchase of Salvation
which he has made for us, the Knowledge of his Love to us, and of our Pardon
and Justification through Faith in his Blood, it is the truest Spring and most
powerful Attractive of our Love to him. Now the more we love Christ, and that
for this very Reason, because he first loved us, the better will every other
Branch of our Religion flourish, every other Grace and every Duty will then
flow from its proper Fountain; and therefore the more a Minister endeavors to
instill this Principle of sacred Love into the Hearts of his Hearers, the more
comfortable Success will he probably see of his Labors, in their spiritual
Improvement and growing Obedience to the Gospel.

But especially, and in the first Place, let every Minister look to his own
Heart; and see to it that he himself loves Christ fervently, lest he should be
as the sounding brass and as the tinkling cymbal, which the Apostle speaks of,
1 Cor. xiii. 1. And besides, without a sincere Love to Christ in his own Soul,
there will be little Probability of his recommending him effectually to the
Love of others. It is not enough for him to preach a great many Sermons upon
the Love of Christ, and to exhort his Hearers to love him; for if his own Heart
is not warmed with this sacred Love, his Discourses on that Subject will be apt
to be cold and lifeless, and therefore unprofitable and fruitless. Nothing
could be more pertinently answered in a few Words, to one that asked another,
How he might learn to be a good and a useful Preacher? than this, Si multum
ames Christum, You must learn to be a zealous Lover of Christ.

But then let it be further noted, that sincere Love to Christ will always
express itself not only in Words, but by suitable or correspondent Actions. So
our Savior has taught us, John xv. 14. Ye are my friends, said he, if ye do
whatsoever I command you; i. e. this is the best and most substantial Evidence
of your sincere Friendship, and that you truly love me.

XIV. I reckon also the Duties of Self-denial and Weanedness from the World and
its carnal Pleasures, and, in short, from all the present things of Sense and
Time, to be among those more important and necessary Subjects which Ministers
should often preach upon, oftener indeed than most of them do. These are
Subjects which our Savior Christ, when he was a Preacher upon Earth, very much
insisted upon in his Sermons, as you may see particularly Matt. xvi. 24, 25,
26. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross
and follow me. Luke xiv. 26. If any man come to me, and hate not his father and
mother, etc. yea and his own life also, i. e. in Comparison of me, he cannot be
my disciple. And how needful are these Subjects now? For alas! how many Persons
are there, who can talk well about Christ and Religion, nay who carry a fair
Appearance of Virtue and Godliness, and who perform many outward Duties with
Reputation and Honor, and yet not having learned to deny themselves, their
Love of the World not being sufficiently mortified, they are easily overcome in
a Day of Trial, and sacrifice their Religion and their Souls to their worldly
Interest. Let Self-denial then be earnestly recommended, and that, not merely
as a moral Virtue or philosophical Attainment, I mean not upon such Principles
only as the Heathen Moralists used to insist upon; but let it be recommended
and urged as a Christian Grace, as that which flows chiefly from Love to
Christ, even such a Love as will make us ready to deny ourselves the Pleasures,
Riches and Honors of this World, all manner of sensual Gratifications, and our
very Lives themselves, (...) for his Sake, as Christ not only expects but
requires of us, Matt. xvi. 25.

XV. Though the diligent reading of the Scriptures themselves, even the inspired
Writings of the Prophets and Apostles, and the very Words of our Savior
Christ, should be chiefly recommended, as they are undoubtedly far preferable
to any other Books of mere human Composure; yet besides these a Minister may
very profitably recommend to his Hearers some other good Books of Religion,
both ancient and modern, to be read by them at home in their own Closets or
Families: Such Books I mean as are written in a truly evangelical Strain, and
with a Spirit of lively Devotion and Piety, which would be no inconsiderable
Means, both of preserving and nourishing the Fire of divine Love in their
Hearts. I might mention, by way of Instance, Martin Statius's Lutherus
Redivivus, which is nothing else but an Abridgment of Luther's Works, in which
the most considerable Passages are collected into a narrow Room, and such
Passages more especially, as have the most direct and powerful Tendency to
awaken and to excite the Minds of Men to lively practical Religion. However, I
mention this but as one Instance, out of a great many very excellent and useful
Books which the Providence of God has now furnished his Church withal, and
which we ought to account as a precious Treasure to it. And further, let not
any Minister think that it is the People only who are to be profited in their
Souls by the reading such good Books, while all the use that he is concerned to
make of them for himself, is only to form his Style by reading them, or to
borrow Thoughts from them, or it may be to steal Sermons out of them (which is
shamefully the Practice of too many Preachers) but he should read them, chiefly
and in the first Place, with a View to his own spiritual Edification. He should
endeavor so to use and improve the Gifts which God has bestowed on other Men,
as that his own Soul may be the better for them as well as the Souls of the
People to whom he preaches

XVI. Once more, let faithful Ministers by no means forget to recommend it to
their Hearers, that they would familiarly acquaint themselves and converse with
serious, lively, and growing Christians, and with such more especially as excel
in the Gift and Spirit of Prayer; for as a live Coal kindles another that is
cold and dead, so will the savoury Discourse, the fervent Prayers and the holy
Conversation of warm and lively Christians, be a probable Means of kindling the
same Fire of divine Love in the Souls of dead Sinners; or at least of
nourishing and improving the sacred Flame in the Hearts of their more intimate
Christian Friends. Ministers should therefore do all they can to promote such
Christian Conversation, amongst the more serious part of their Hearers:
Observing however the Rules of necessary Prudence, particularly that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. xiv. 40. Let all things be done decently and in order. They
should exhort them as St. Paul does the Colossians, Col. iii. 16. Let the word
of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one
another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your
hearts unto the Lord; to which pious Purpose that large and rich Treasure of
sacred Hymns, both ancient and modern, with which God has graciously blessed
his Church, is not a little conducive, for which therefore we are bound to
render him immortal Praises.

Thus I have briefly answered your Question, and given you my Thoughts on the
most useful Way of Preaching. May God, for Christ's Sake, attend what I have
written with his effectual Blessing. To him I would now humbly offer up the
following Prayer.

O Lord God! give, I beseech thee, both now and at all times hereafter to thy
Church, Pastors and Teachers after thine own Heart, even such as shall bring
the Sheep of Christ into his Fold, and who, through the Influence of thy good
Spirit, shall feed them with saving Knowledge and Understanding. Make every
Preacher of thy Word to know and always to remember, that neither is he that
planteth any thing, neither he that waters, but thou art all in all, who
alone can give the Increase. Let none of them vainly presume on their own
Skill and Ability to do any good by their preaching, and obtain any good
Success; but let them all humbly wait upon thee, and by fervent daily Prayer
let them seek for and obtain the Aids of thy Grace, to enable them to dispense
the Word of Life, and thy Blessing render their Preaching happily successful to
the Souls of those that hear them. Amen.

MAY 25, 1725.
FINIS.

