THE QUERISTS, The Rev. Mr. Whitefield's ANSWER, The Rev. Mr. Garden's LETTERS,
etc.

NEW YORK, Printed by J. P. Z^nger, 1740.

THE QUERISTS, OR An EXTRACT of sundry Passages taken out of Mr. Whitefield's
printed Sermons, Journals and Letters: TOGETHER WITH Some SCRUPLES proposed in
proper QUERIES raised on each Remark.

By some Church Members of the Presbyterian Persuasion.

2 Timothy i. 13. Hold fast the Form of sound Words. --
Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
NEW YORK. Printed in the Year M,DCC,XL.

To the READERS.
Christian Friends;
THE following Queries and Remarks seem to us to concern Matters of the utmost
Importance. We are represented in Scripture as Pilgrims and Travelers to a
better Country; and as a wrong Choice of the Road may ruin us eternally, we
ought to examine every Step we tread, and take Notice that our Guides be not
blind nor mistaken, lest they lead us astray. None can blame us when our Souls
are in Danger of eternal Ruin, to look to our selves, and to secure the one
Thing needful; nor dare we allow ourselves to fellow the Multitude, if we fear
they go astray; nor regard any Man further than he follows Christ: And we hope
this will justify us in what we have done in the following Pages; for, if all
our Christian Brethren, who may think it worth while to read our Remarks, have
such superior Attainmments as to see clearly, that all that Mr. Whitfield has
printed, is sound and agreeable to the holy Scriptures; yet we hope that their
Christian Charity is so great, that they will not condemn us for applying as we
have done to our Teachers, and by their Advice to Mr. Whitfield himself, to
remove some unhappy Stumbling Blocks out of our Way. We cannot help thinking
for ourselves and judging of Things according to the Light they appear in; and
we promise, that when that Gentleman satisfies us in these Things, we will
believe him; and we cannot do it sooner. But when we reflect, that he is but a
Man; that great and good Men have been mistaken; and that Infalibility (as far
as we know) is entailed neither on him nor his followers, we hope that both he
and they are better Christians than to blame us if we can be the Instruments of
pointing out their Mistakes, if there be any: We believe, that they regard
their Souls, and will look on it as the most eminent Service can be done them,
if by our Means they receive a Kindness that will turn to their Account,
through a boundless Eternity.

We confess, that we are at a Loss to know what to make of some of his
Expressions; if they have any Meaning at all, we fear it is a bad one; and will
rejoice to find ourselves disappointed, if he shows us that they are sound and
good. But if he pretends Hurry or Want of Time, and does not either justify or
condemn them, or give us some Satisfaction, he will constrain us to think, that
he has his own Glory in View more than the Glory of God or the Good of his
Church. He has such high Conceptions of Man, or such low Conceptions of God,
that we fear he has just Conceptions of neither; to say, "That Man was adorned
with all the Perfections of the Deity, That he was the Perfection of the moral
and material World," as he does, Page 17. Vol. 2d. of Sermons, is what we can
neither believe, nor find Ground from Reason nor Revelation to support it. When
our Divines prove the Divinity of our blessed Lord, they sometimes do it (we
think to a good Purpose) by proving, that the Scriptures attribute to him all
the Perfections of the Deity, and of Consequence that he is the eternal God,
equal with the Father and Holy Spirit; but if a mere Man may be adorned with
all these Perfections, we know not what to make of this Argument, 'till he give
us better Light.

Again if Men be baptized into the Nature of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as
he seems to assert, p. 128, vol. 2. is not this to make them, on their
Conversion, Partakers of the Godhead, or someway equal to the Supreme Being?
What shall we think of the Doctrine, that one while finks us into Brutes and
Devils, and again exalts us to be equal to God? This puts us in Mind of some
Antinomian Reveries, of being goded with God, and christed with Christ: And we
hope the Readers will pardon us, though we desire to get Light in these Things,
seeing it is our great Concern to have right Notions of God and ourselves, and
to Act accordingly.

When we hear him tell us, "That the Regenerate washes away the Guilt of Sin by
the Tears of a sincere Repentance, joined with Faith in the Blood of Christ,"
p. 22, 23. vol. 2. we think that it savours of Popery and Arminianism, to join
any Thing with the Blood of Christ to wash away Sin; and hope it will offend
none, that we cannot believe this on his bare Word contrary to many Scripture
Texts, for we abhor an implicit Faith. Is not that Expression of the same
Stamp? Vol. 1, p. 7. Where he says, "That a single Aim at God's Glory, -- alone
can render our Actions acceptable in God's Sight:" If a single Aim at God's
Glory alone can render our Actions acceptable in his Sight, what need is there
for the Blood of Christ? We hope none of our Brethren will be offended, that we
cannot believe this popish Doctrine, till he explain or prove it from Scripture.

He further tells us, p. 128. vol. 2. (if we mistake him not) "That our Lord
commanded his Disciples to baptize Men into the Nature of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost," which is either to convert them, or rather to make them equal with
God: And if he has given Men Ability to do either the one or the other, by
repeating the Words of the Institution; Why may they not as easily change a
Wafer into his Body and Blood? And this smells of Popery, and will support the
Doctrine of Transubstantion. -- When he tells us, "That we must be justified by
the inherent Righteousness of Christ, "if by this he intends our
Sanctification, or good Habits, and good Works performed by the Aid of the
Spirit, does not he here again give another fair Invitation to bring us to
Rome? And we hope we will be excused from setting our Face that Way, till we be
once convinced, that it is the sure Road to eternal Happiness. Are not these
Doctrines full of Arminianism? And it is no Wonder, that we are surprised to
find them in his own Writings, and to hear him continually applaud Mr. Westly,
who (we are informed) is an Arminian, when we find him cry them down in all but
themselves: We detest these Errors in both, and cannot see through this Piece
of Management.

But possibly by inherent Righteousness, in vol. 1. p. 16. he understands the
Righteousness of Christ inherent in us; if so, we hope every one will desire to
know, as well as ourselves, how the infinite Righteousness of Jesus Christ can
inhere in a finite Creature? Unless, as has been already observed, he make the
Believer in some Measure equal with God; but when we compare this with Mr.
Flavel's 2d Appendix, vol. 1. Fol. and find it the seventh Antinomian Error,
that he there condemns, what can we say? When we find Mr. Whitefield
countenancing Mr. Westly's Preface to Halyburton's Memoirs, which is big with
Antinomian Absurdities; when he can applaud that Gentleman, and not discover
the false Divinity, that he has there sent a broad to poison the World; Can we
think that himself is sound? When he tells us in his Letter against the Book,
entitled, The Whole Duty of Man, p. 4, and 5. "That God never made a second
Covenant with Adam himself, nor any of his Posterity; That it is a Promise and
no Covenant; That there are no Terms nor Conditions in it." We cannot take his
bare Word, while we think that above one hundred and Fifty Texts in our Bibles
assert the contrary. How many of our ablest Divines have long since refuted
this wild Antinomian Notion? And among others, Mr. Flavel, Vol. 1. Fol. in his
2d Appendix. where he exposes it as the Ninth of their Errors.

When we find him, vol. 1. p. 7. giving Reasons why Men must be New Creatures,
in order to qualify them to be savingly in Christ, Why does he condemn
Archbishop Tillotson; Letter first against the Archbishop, page the 3d. for
showing the Nature of Regeneration and its Necessity, in order to our
Justification and Salvation? Is not the New Creature in Mr. Whitefield, and the
Regenerate in the Archbishop's Words, of the same Meaning and Import? Is not
being savingly in Christ, as the First expresses it, and obtaining
Justification and Salvation, as the other has it, the very same Thing? Why did
not Mr. Whitefield correct this Error in his own Writings, as well as in the
others? If it be an Error in the one, to say, That we must be regenerate or be
New Creatures, in order to Justification and Salvation, or being savingly in
Christ, is it not so in the other? Or, does Mr. Whitefield's expressing the
same Error in different Words, make it a Gospel Truth? We dislike what looks
like the Arminian in both, and we hope none of his Friends will blame us for
this, when he sometimes does it himself.

If we have dropped any Expressions in our Queries, that may in any wise
displease any other religious Society, we hope they will pardon our Bluntness;
we profess* ^earty Charity and Good Will toward all that hol^ the fundamental
Truths of the Gospel; we claim no Dominion over any Man's Conscience, but
cheerfully allow every one the Liberty we take, to judge for ourselves, to seek
for the best Information he can get in such weighty Concerns, and to adhere to
what Doctrines are most agreeable to the holy Scriptures: But when we find any
Person Profess one Thing, and yet seem to run into another; when any of another
Denomination seem to come nearer to us than others of our Neighbors, when at
the same Time we imagine, that he is at as great or even a greater Distance
than they, we cannot help having a worse Opinion of such Practices, than
theirs, who plainly tell us in what they agree with us, and in what we differ.
If any Weakness or Mistakes be discovered in this, and what follows, by Mr.
Whitefield, or any of our Christian Brethren, and it be pointed out with a
Spirit of Meekness, we gain our End, which is only to be able to find out and
maintain the Truth: And that the Holy Spirit may guide us all in the Ways of
Truth, and preserve us from Errors, is the earnest Prayer of your sincere
Friends,

The Querists.

The ADDRESS of several Persons of the Presbyterian Persuasion, being Members
of several Congregations in our Bounds, to the Presbytery of New Castle, met at
Whiteclay Creek, September the Ninth, 1740.
THE venerable and sacred Character the Reverend Mr. Whitefield bears, as an
incomparable Reformer; and the high Commendations given to his public
Performances and Writings, both from the Pulpit and Press, as well as in
private Conference, and that, by some Ministers and People of our own
Denomination, having raised our Expectations very high, we were induced to
attend his Sermons, and to read and peruse his Books, hoping to receive much
Light and Benefit thereby: But, upon the best Perusal we could make of them,
albeit, we find that great Part of his Writings do answer the Character given
them, as being sound, yet, to our great Surprise, we every now and then stumble
upon something that seems to jar with those sounder Parts, as well as with
other good Books; and, if we be not mistaken, with Scripture and sound Reason.
-- Our Jealousies hereanent, whether Right or Wrong, giving us some Uneasiness,
we were much perplexed what to do: If we should think of going to some of Mr
Whitefield's warm Adherents, we were afraid, by Reason of the Treatment that
others (and it may be some of ourselves) met with, that nothing could be
expected thereby, but incensing them against us, to call us blind and carnal
Men, as usual. Now though Mr. Whitefield himself, by some Part of his Writings,
would seem to be a Man of another Spirit and Sentiments from such warm
inconsiderate Adherents, as appears by many Expressions in his Letters against
Archbishop Tillotson, and the Author of The Whole Duty of Man; particularly by
his taxing the Dissenters for acting very partially, for not speaking so
explicitly as they ought against the Archbishop's Doctrine, when known to be
contrary to the Truth of the Gospel, albeit, the Archbishop was their Friend,
and behaved with much Moderation toward them, whilst he lived; we cannot see,
how be could, consistent with this, tax any of the Lovers of Truth for acting
unchristianly, for enquiring into the Reasons of some of his Assertions, when
we judge that they appear to us as contrary to Truth as some of the said
Archbishop's Doctrines: For, if we mistake not, it is the Duty and privilege
of every doubting Christian, to enquire into the Reasons of the plainest
Scripture Doctrine, when he hesitates about it: But we should not speak
explicitly against any Doctrine, but what upon mature Deliberation we have
found false. But when we consider the Treatment a Neighboring Minister had
from Mr. Whitfield's warm Adherents, and their Cries still against him for
desiring a Conference with Mr. Whitfield, about some Points in his Sermon,
which said Minister was in Doubts about; we do despair of Access to him.

The only Remedy therefore left us, to solve us of our Doubts, as we see, is,
an Address to you our Teachers, now in Presbytery met, and setting our Scruples
in order before you: And we promise, that if you, or any of you, can satisfy us
with Scripture and sound Reason, we shall not only cheerfully submit to the
same, but also return you our most hearty Thanks, as counting the Discovery of
Truth our Gain and Joy. But if you decline, or cannot agree among yourselves,
about solving us herein, we desire your Judgments, whether it be any Breach of
Order, for us, at our own Expenses, and such as shall join with us, to put our
Scruples into Print, that so there may be an Opportunity given to Mr.
Whitefield to clear his Doctrine, if misrepresented or misapprehended by us:
And that we may make a fair Essay to have our Doubts cleared, which for the
present seem to be Bars and Letts to hinder us to join with our Christian
Brethren in Matters of Common Concern, with that Oneness of Mind and Heart,
which is desirable and necessary for our mutual Comfort: For when one Side is
as zealous for, as the other is jealous of a controverted Point, and Assertions
about it in Matters of Conscience, it is well known how Difficult it is to go
Hand in Hand. We find by Experience, that the other side have their
Difficulties to entertain a good Opinion of those Ministers that except against
some of Mr. Whitefield's Expressions as unsound: And we, according to our
present Light, find it hard to entertain a good Opinion of those that proclaim
all his Doctrines sound in the strongest Terms. We have therefore endeavored
to put our Scruples in the most inoffensive Way we could, by not only
transcribing some Paragraphs out of Mr. Whitefield's Printed Writings; but
also, according to our Capacities, we have endeavored to propose our Doubts by
raising proper Queries upon such Paragraphs, as follows.

First, Mr. Whitefield in his Sermon on Acts 19.5. Page. 5. * where speaking of
Man's Creation, he has these Words, viz. He, that is God, breathed into Man the
Breath of spiritual Life, and his Soul became adorned with all the Perfections
of the Deity.

Q. I. Must not that Man have either very diminutive Thoughts of God, or else
monstrously exalted Thoughts of Man, that can think, much more speak and write,
that the Soul of Man in its best State was adorned with all the Perfections of
the Deity! What then is become of the Distinction, that all sound Divines make
between the communicable and incommunicable Attributes of God? Does not
Scripture and Reason support this necessary Distinction? if the Soul of Man was
adorned with all the Perfections of the Deity, without Exception of any, what
is the native and necessary Consequence therefrom, but that the Soul then was
in some s^rt equal to God; which is too horrid to u^er, without a Detestation
of it? Were not Expressions of this Import condemned for Blasphemies in the
Mouths of Fox and Naylor?

II. In the same Sermon, p. 9. [ Vol. II. p. 22, 23.] Mr. Whitefield speaking
of the Regenerate, when fallen into Sin, has these Words: He, i. e. The
Regenerate Person, quickly Rises again, and goes out from the World, and weeps
bitterly, washes away the Guilt of Sin, by the Tears of a sincere Repentance,
joined with Faith in the Blood of Jesus Christ.

Quer. I. Is not the Blood of Christ to be applied by Faith, the sole or only
Laver, to wash away the Guilt of Sin, 1 John 1.7. It Is true, Faith in grown
Believers, to make Application of his Blood to the Soul, must be exercised
thereon: And it is true, that a Believer must renew the Exercises of
Repentance, in order to regain the Sense of Pardon; but still, what solely
obtains the Pardon, and blots out the Guilt, is the Blood of the attoning
Sacrifice. Is it not by our Justification that the Guilt of Sin is washed away?
How then can there be any Room to join our Tears with Faith in the Blood of
Christ, to justify us before God, without we suppose the Satisfaction of the
Cross to be incomplete? By what Art can our Tears be joined with Faith in the
Blood of Christ to cleanse away the Guilt of Sin? What Quantity of the one and
of the other will make a due Composition, without spoiling the whole? Why may
not some Grains of new Obedience be again added to our Tears to make the
Composition more complete; for surely this is Duty, and a necessary Fruit of
Faith as well as godly Sorrow, and as inseparable from it?

Quer. II. How is this consistent with what Mr. Whitefield himself says, in
his Letter against the Book entitled the Whole Duty of Man, p. 6. God's Law
was honorable, Jesus Christ fulfilled it in our steads; and upon account of
that Righteousness imputed to us, and received by Faith, and not on our hearty
Endeavor or Repentance, are we accepted by him?" What is there in our hearty
Endeavor or Repentance, to recommend us to the Favor of God, or render them
worthy of being joined with the Righteousness of Christ; as though that was not
sufficient of itself? Further, Mr. Whitefield adds the Words of pious Bishop
Beveridge to the same purpose, p. 7. who says, Nay I cannot confess my Sins,
but my very Confessions are still Agravations of them: My Repentings need to be
repented of: My Tears need Washing; and the very Washing of my Tears need still
to be washed over again with the Blood of my Redeemer. Now if Mr. Whitefield
speaks right in p. 8. of the same Letter; for there is no Hopes of bringing
People to the right Knowledge of the Gospel, till their favorite though
erroneous Authors, are discountenanced and laid aside: And it is therefore
accounted a becoming Zeal in Mr. Whitefield to write warmly and keenly against
the Writings of others upon this Account; How then can others be blamed for
opposing such Expressions in Whitefield's Books as are as erroneous as those he
condemns in others? Nay, should not Mr. Whitefield, and his warm Adherents, be
as careful in Correcting his own Sermons as the Books of others, if found
faulty in some of the same Points, or other Points as material? if it be said,
that Mr. Whitefield is so busily employed in Preaching, and Writing against
other Men's Writings, that he has no Time to look back upon his former
Writings; may not some of his Adherents assist herein to a good Purpose? Or if
a By-Stander should mark some of those Expressions that look exceptionable; by
what Rule, but that of Contraries, can he be judged an Opposer of God's Work,
or of the Gospel?

III. In the same Sermon, p. 18. [ vol. 2. p. 33.] He says, You have passed
through the Pangs of the New Birth and now rejoice, that the Man Christ Jesus is
spiritually formed in your Hearts. To the same Purpose, if we rightly apprehend
it, is what we find in the Letter aforesaid, p. 5. where paraphrasing upon
those Words, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head; Mr.
Whitefield writes thus, The Seed of the Woman, i. e. Jesus Christ (who in all
Probability was spiritually conceived that instant in the Heart of Eve) shall
bruise the Serpent's Head: Agreeable to which Notion we have in Mr. Whitefield,
Vol. I. of Sermons printed at Philadelphia, p. 53. The many Souls that are
nourished weekly by the Spiritual Body and Blood of Jesus Christ by your Means.

Q. I. Had the Man Christ Jesus a read though a spiritual Being or Conception in
the Days of Eve?

Q. II. What or who was that which was spiritually conceived that Instant in
the Heart of Eve, wherein the Promise was given, but the New Creature, or the
Image of Christ? If so, in what Sense can the New Creature, or Image of Christ
in us, be called the Seed of the Woman, or the Man Christ Jesus? Is the Man
Christ Jesus, and the New Creature in us, one and the same? Are we to believe
in the New Creature, as the Christ held forth in this Promise? How, or when,
did this New Creature, or this spiritual Man Christ Jesus, who then had a
Conception, bruise the Serpent's Head by his Obedience and Sufferings? Had the
Man Christ Jesus, as the Seed of the Woman, any other Conception, besides that
suppernatural One by the Power of the Holy Ghost, in the Womb of the Virgin
Mary? We would be glad to know, where there is any Scripture Ground to support
the spiritual Conception of Christ, as the Seed of the Woman; or the spiritual
Manhood of Christ? Are not these Notions as unintelligible as those of Barclay
in his Apology, p. 135. 136. where he speaks of the Christ within? It is true,
the Apostle speaks of Forming of Christ in us, Gal. 4.19. but are we not to
understand that Place as intending the Image, and not the Person of Christ, as
God-Man? much less, can we understand it of Christ, as the Seed of the Woman,
or as Man. We hope we do (according to our Measure) understand what it is to
feed on a crucified Christ; but yet, we would desire to know what is that
spiritual Body and spiritual Blood, with which Souls are nourished? Is this
spiritual Body and Blood of Christ, Humane or Divine? Are these finite or
infinite? Was it not the natural Body of Christ that suffered for us? Was it
not the natural Blood of Christ that was shed for our Sins? How then can we
feed upon the spiritual Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which never (as we know
of) had a Being in Heaven, nor on Earth? It is true, we own, according to the
Scriptures, that Christ's Soul and Body have undergone a glorious and an
ineffable Change; so that if we speak of Christ's Body, as it now subsists in
an exalted State, it may well be called a spiritual Body: But yet, when we feed
by Faith on a crucified Christ, does not Faith look to Christ's Body as Hanging
on the Cross; and to the real Sufferings of Christ in his humane Nature in a
State of Humiliation, as what attones Justice for us, and as what feeds and
nourishes our Souls?

IV. In the aforesaid written Letter against the Book entitled, The whole Duty
of Man, wherein Mr. Whitefield quotes the 17th Paragraph of the Preface of that
Book, wherein the Author, as Mr. Whitefield observes, talking of the second
Covenant, speaks thus: The second Covenant, says he, was made with Adam, and us
in him, presently after his Fall, and is briefly contained in these Words, Genesis
3.15. where God declares, that the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's
Head: And this was made up, as the First was, of some Mercies to be afforded us
by God, and some Duties to be performed by us." 'Who that is any way
enlightened, cannot but see the false Divinity and fundamental Errors of this
Passage: For how can it be proved, that the second Covenant was made with Adam,
or that God ever entered into any Covenant at all with Man after he had broken
the First? It is true, God the Father did enter into a second Covenant (and
that from all Eternity) with the second Adam, the God-Man Christ Jesus, in our
Stead: But it cannot be proved, that he made any second Covenant at all with
Adam himself, or any of his Posterity.

Before we come to propose Queries on this Head, it will not be amiss to
premise a Word or two, to prevent Mistakes, viz.

1. We freely grant that Christ Jesus is our second Adam, our common Head and
Surity in the second Covenant, and that the first Adam, was only a private
Believer or Person, and so must come in, or enter into Covenant with God by or
through a Mediator, and at a second Hand (if we may so speak) as well as we his
Posterity. And when we read the 16th Paragraph of the Preface of that before
cited Book, we cannot but judge that the Author thereof does fully own this,
when he says, For though by that Sin of Adam, all Mankind were under the
Sentence of eternal Condemnation, yet it pleased God so far to pity our Misery,
as to give us his Son, and in him to make a new Covenant with us, after we had
broken the First. Thus far the Author seems sound enough.

Whether the next Paragraph that Mr. Whitefield condemns may bear a favorable
Construction, we leave you to judge; but we cannot but heartily join with him
in showing our Dislike to whatsoever in any Author may mislead the Weak or
Ignorant, or countenance the Erroneous: Yet, whether this may lay Foundation
for such a hard Censure as that he was not a Real Christian at Heart, or had
not so much as a Head Knowledge of the Gospel of Christ, as Mr. Whitefield
asserts, is what we are at a Loss to determine? How would Mr. Whitefield, or
some of his warm Adherents, like it, if another would take the same Liberty to
censure his Writings, and him for them, to the same Degree? Upon the like
Ground, we must, and do condemn the Author of The whole Duty of Man, for
asserting that the second Covenant was made with Adam, and us in him, if
thereby is meant, his being our public Head and Surety in the second Covenant.
And may we not also condemn Mr. Whitefield for running into another Extreme and
an Error, that seems as dangerous as this, in asserting that God never made any
second Covenant at all with Adam himself, or any of his Posterity? And must beg
Leave to lay before you the following Queries.

Q. I. How can Christ be a Mediator of the new Covenant, if there be no other
Parties in the Covenant, but God the Father, and Christ engaging for us? Must
not the Elect or Believers, be considered as a third Party in the second
Covenant?

Q. II. How can the new Covenant be called a Testament, and Christ the Testator
of it, if there be no Parties in it but the Father and him? He receives all
from the Father as Mediator: On whom then does he bestow Legacies, without
there be a third Party in this Covenant?

Q. III. How is the second Adam, Christ Jesus, a public Head and Surety of his
elect Seed, unless such come under the Bond of the second Covenant; and that
not only virtually, as elect, but also in Time actually as Believers; so that
the Covenant may be truly said to be established and made with them in Christ?

Q. IV. How can any justify Mr. Whitefield's Calling the second Covenant a bare
Promise, and that in a Way of Distinction from and Opposition to its being a
Covenant? when the Apostle calls it, in Respect of the several Editions of it,
the Covenants of Promise, Ephesians. 2.12. Is there any Promise made to the Sinner or
Believer, but what is or may be, yea, must be owned to be a second Covenant
Promise? And are not all that are Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, or out
of the Bond of the second Covenant, without God, without Christ, and without
Hope? How poor then is the Condition of all the Posterity of Adam, if it cannot
be proven, that God did make a second Covenant with any of them? Must not then
all of them be under the Law as a broken Covenant, and under the Curse thereof,
without Remedy?

Q. V. If there be not any second Covenant at all made with Adam himself, or
any of his Posterity; what then can we make of plain Scripture Texts, that
speak of God's covenanting or making a Covenant with Men, Genesis 17.7. Deuteronomy. 5.2.
-- 29.10, 15. 2 Samuel 23.5. 1 Kin. 8.9, 21. Is. 55.3. Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10.
Hos. 2.18, 19. with many more that may be quoted to the same Purpose? Do not we
on the other Hand, read of Men's Covenanting with God, 2 Kin. 23.3. 2 Chronicles.
34.31. 2 Chronicles. 29.10. Neh. 9.38? How can we give up the many Scores of
Scripture Texts, that seem plainly to import that the second Covenant is made
with Believers in Christ Jesus? Would this ^e Reformation? May not we as
rationally give up the whole Bible, as any considerable Part of it? Will it do,
that we believe as Mr. Whitefield speaks or writes contrary to plain Scripture
Texts.

Q. VI. Is it any Thing like a solid Way of Arguing, for Men to say, that there
is a Covenant of Redemption, therefore there is no Covenant of Grace; when the
very Design of the one was to lay a Foundation for the other: Or, because there
is a Covenant made with the Redeemer, therefore there is none made with the
Redeemed Ones, to whom Christ is said to be given as a Covenant of the People?
Is it any Argument, that because there was a Covenant made with Christ as
second Adam and public Head of his elect Seed; therefore there was no Covenant
made with his Seed in Time? Is it any Argument that because there was a Council
of Peace from all Eternity, between the Father and the Son, that therefore
there is no Covenant of Peace and Reconciliation transacted in Time, through the
Mediator, with fallen Sinners? How could the former be of any Use without the
latter follow?

Q. VII. If it be said, that the second Covenant could not be made with Adam,
or any of his Posterity, because it was made primarily with Christ; may not we
as well say, that the first Covenant was not at all made with us, because it
was made primarily with Adam, as our Surety and Covenant Head? Was not the very
making of the first Covenant with Adam, as a public Person, the making of that
Covenant at least virtually with us in him? Was not the making of the second
Covenant with Christ as a public Person, virtualy the making that Covenant
with us? Did not the Consent of our Representative make us Parties in the first
Covenant? Why then will not the Consent of the second Adam make his
Covenant-Seed Parties in his Covenant as well? If the Consent of our
Representative does not make us Parties in the first Covenant, how are we born
under the Guilt of Adam's first Sin? How are Infants in the Womb bereaved of
Original Righteousness and born in Sin? Is not the Original Pollutions of our
Natures the Fruit and Punishment of the first Transgression of Adam? If an
implicit Consent to the Terms of the first Covenant in grown Persons, and
acting accordingly, be a Bond firm enough to keep and hold us Parties in that
Covenant; Why will not an explicit Consent to the Terms of the second Covenant
make us Covenanters with God? Do not Believers, when they come to believe and
profess Faith in Christ, as expressly and explicitly enter under the Bond of
the second Covenant, as any of the Sons of Adam ever entered into the Bond of
the first? Besides, if the Consent of our Head and Surety in the second
Covenant, does not make us Subjects and Parties in the Covenant; How then can
Infants be regenerated and saved?

Q. VIII. If there be not any second Covenant at all made with Men, how can the
Sacraments be called sealing Ordinances? Can they Seal the Covenant to us, if
it be true there is none made with us? Can the Covenant be confirmed to us by
Seals, before, or without it is made with us? And does not Mr. Whitefield seem
to allow, that the Sacraments are sealing Ordinances? when he says in his
Journal, p. 110. This Day 24 Years, was I baptized; Lord! to what little
Purpose have I lived? However, I sealed my baptismal Covenant with my dear
Savior's most blessed Body and Blood, and trust in his Strength I shall keep
and perform it. Now, what Covenant is that, which is transacted over between
God and Believers in all Ages, in the Use of sealing Ordinances, if it be not
the Covenant of Grace, or the second Covenant?

V. In the same Letter, p. 4. Mr. Whitefield further Asks, Where any Covenant
is contained in these Words, "the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's
Head," and how it is "made up of some Mercies to be afforded by God, and some
Duties to be performed by us?" Here is a free Gift and Promise of Salvation
made to Adam, but no Covenant. Here is not a Word of a Condition mentioned. --
No, it was the free Gift of God in Christ. --

Q. I. Was not here (besides a Promise of Salvation through Christ) so also the
Promise of Christ himself to be a Savior and Covenant of the People herein
included and primarily intended?

Q. II. Though we freely grant there is no express Condition mentioned in said
Promise, yet we would again ask does not every Promise in our Bible, in the
Nature fo it, require Faith to believe and embrace it, before we can reap the
Benefit of it, and consequently contain an implicit Condition? besides what are
the both Testaments, but a fuller Explication of this Promise? And is it not
evident, that there are many conditional Promises added to the absolute
Promises, that so we may have a complete View of this Covenant? Can any Man
expect to have a truer View of the second Covenant, as to the complete Nature
of it, in that initial and first Edition of it, than by a fuller View of all
its Edition compared together? Are there not many weighty Truths and Lessons to
be learned from the after Editions thereof, touching the Nature of this
Covenant, which are of absolute Necessity to Salvation, now under the
Dispensations we are under? Is not there more required of those that received
more?

Q. III. Whether it be not as great an Error in Divinity, to deny consequent
Conditions for Duties in the second Covenant, as to assert antecedent
Conditions therein? Does not the one run as far into the Antinomian as the
other runs in the Arminian Scheme; and so leave the true Gospel Doctrine, or
Calvinistical and Lutheran Scheme, in the Middle between these two strained
Extremes? Does not the Law, as a Rule of Life, require Duties of those that are
delivered from under the Law as a Covenant? if there be no Duties required in
the second Covenant, to what Purpose are we so often pressed to the Performance
of them, in the Old and New Testament; and why are the Neglecters of them so
often blamed and reproved?

Q. IV. Whether Mr. Whitefield well agrees with himself or Truth, in seemingly
denying any Condition or Duties in the second Covenant one while, as may be
seen in the forecited Letter, p. 4, 5. when he himself elsewhere presses Men to
perform those easy Conditions prescribed by our Savior, as necessary to
Salvation, and upon Pain of Damnation, as appears by p. 71. and 92. of Vol. 1.
of his Sermons printed at Philadelphia?

VI. Mr. Whitefield, in his Sermon on Joh. 7.37, 38, 39. in his opening or
explaining the Apostle's Commissiion, p. 8, 9. [ Vol. 2. p. 128.] has these
Words, viz. For though we translate these Words, baptizing them in the Name; yet
as the Name of God, in the Lord's Prayer, and several other Places, signifies
his Nature, they might as well be translated thus, baptizing them into the
Nature of the Father, into the Nature of the Son, and into the Nature of the
Holy Ghost.

Q. I. Whether it be not an Error to say, that by God's Name, in the Lord's
Prayer, we are to understand his Nature? Are not we to understand by God's Name
there, his Word, his Works, his Ordinances, especially his Titles, Attributes,
and every Thing whereby God makes himself known, as we are taught by other
Authors?

Q. II. Whereas Mr. Whitefield before acknowledges, that this Commission
authorizes Ministers to baptize the proper Subjects of Baptism in all Ages, we
would ask, in what Age of the New Testament Church, could mere Men fulfill it,
in the Sense Mr. Whitefield gives of it, by baptizing Men into the Nature of
the Father, and into the Nature of the Son, and Holy Ghost? What can be meant
by baptizing Men into the Nature of the Father, etc. unless it be regenerating
Men? If so, can one Man regenerate another? How then could this Commission be
fulfilled? If the Priest can fulfill this Commission in this Sense of it, why
may not he as well turn the Bread and Wine in the other Sacrament, into the
true Body and Blood of Christ? And when Mr. Whitefield, as we have noted
already, speaks elsewhere of the spiritual Body and spiritual Blood of Jesus
Christ, with which Souls are nourished, we would ask, whether this does not
savor something of Transubstantiation? For though we freely own, according to
the Scripture, that God prepared him a natural Body, which he offered once a
Sacrifice for Sin; yet we would know a Creature of whose making is Christ's
spiritual Body and Blood, if it be not a Creature of the Priest's Making?

VII. Q. I. How does Mr. Whitefield agree with himself, when in p. 9. [ Vol. 2.
p. 128] of last cited Sermon, he says, It is evident, that we all must
actually receive the Holy Ghost, ever we can say, that we truly believe in
Jesus Christ, compared with what he says in p. 18. [ Vol. 2. p. 137.] of the
same Sermon, which is as follows, viz. For notwithstanding you are all now sunk
into the Nature of the Beast and the Devil, yet if you truly believe on Jesus
Christ, you shall receive the quickening Spirit promised in the Text, and be
restored to the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God? Does not Mr. Whitefield in
this last Clause seem to make true Faith an antecedent Condition to Men in the
State of Nature, to be performed by them in order to receive the quickening
Spirit? May not a dead Man walk as easy as this? Is not not there better
Divinity in that Paragraph of the Book entitled, The whole Duty of Man,
excepted against, than this, when he says, that the third Thing Christ was to
do for us, was to enable us, or give us Strength, to do what he requires of us?
Now, if we must 'truly believe, ever we receive the quickening Spirit, are we
not left to our own Strength in the first and most difficult Step?

VIII. In the Vol. I. of Whitefield's Sermons printed at Philadelphia, p. 7.
Whether or no Mr. Whitefield's Doctrinal Query or Proposition, which runs thus,
why we must be new Creatures, in order to qualify us for being savingly in
Christ, be not of the same Purport, and amount to as much Heterodoxy, as what
Archbishop Tillotson says, by entituling his Book, On the Nature of
Regeneration, and its Necessity in order to our Justification and Salvation?
And may not the same Consequences be as natively drawn from the former, that
Mr. Whitefield draws from the latter, in his first Letter against the
Archbishop, p 3?

IX. In Vol. I. p. 14. Whether or no Mr. Whitefield's calling Prayer, Fasting,
Hearing, Reading, and the Sacraments, not only Means, but also essential ones
too, be not popish Dialect? We own the Means of Grace and Use of them,
necessary to us, because commanded; but cannot God save Men without them?

X. In Vol. I. p. 16. Mr. Whitefield has these Words, It is to be feared we
shall be found naked at the great Day, and in the Number of those who vainly
depend on their own Righteousness, and not on the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, imputed to and inherent in them, as necessary to their eternal
Salvation.

Q. I. How can the Righteousness of Christ, which is infinite Righteousness,
inhere in any finite Creature? Must not we be equally Righteous with Christ
himself, if his Righteousness inhere in us? If Christ's Righteousness inhere in
us, where should there be any Room for, or Need of the Imputation of it to us?

Q. II. If it be said that Mr. Whitefield intends no more than the Necessity of
inherent Righteousness, as part of our Sanctification, then we would ask, is
this to be depended upon as well as imputed Righteousness? Or, are we to have
and exercise a joint Dependence upon inherent and imputed Righteousness, as
the Righteousness of Christ? Is not this Calvinism and Quakerism mixed together?
Is it not the false Notion that Mr. Whitefield elsewhere seems to entertain of
a real, though a spiritual forming of the Man Christ Jesus in Believers, the
Ground of his Error in this Point?

XI. In Vol. I. p. 79. where Mr. Whitefield speaking of Self denial and a
single Aim at God's Glory, has these Words, It is this, my Brethren, that
distinguishes the true Christian from the mere Moralist and formal Professor,
and which alone can render any of our Actions acceptable in God's Sight.

Quer. I. Whether Men may not aim at God's Glory in those Actions done in a
blind Zeal? And may not some such deny themselves in giving up their own
Understandings and Wills, Believing, and Acting as the Church, or their Guides
do? Are such Actions, contrary to Rule, acceptable merely upon Account of a
good Aim? It is hard to say, but that Uzzah might have a good Aim in stretching
forth his Hand to touch the Ark; but did not the Event prove that the Action
was not acceptable?

Quer. II. Must not all good Actions proceed from a good Principle, be done in
a right and due Manner, and for a good End; and after all, must not the Merits
of Christ be the sole Cause of the Acceptance of such Actions? How Harsh does
it sound in the Ears of all true Protestants, that any Thing in the Action
itself, be proclaimed as the alone Cause or Reason of its being acceptable in
God's Sight?

XII. Mr. Whitefield in his Journal, p. 20. speaking before of the Scotch* and
English Protestants keeping distinct Societies at Gibraltar, makes this Remark,
What a pity it is that Christ's seamless Coat should be rent in Pieces on the
Account of Things in themselves purely indifferent!

Quer. I. What is meant by Christ's seamless Coat that is rent in Pieces by
Men's meeting in different Places to Worship God in a Way that seems to them
most agreeable to God's Word; when in some of those Places, Things in
themselves purely indifferent, and more than that (as has been often shown)
some Things of a more dark and doubtful Nature, at least according to the
Apprehension of the one side, are imposed as necessary Terms of Communion? Does
not Men's Agreements in Fundamentals save the seamless Coat whole, though Men
worship in different Places, because of disagreement in some lesser Point.

Quer. II. Does not Mr. Whitefield's joining cordially (as we suppose) with
both Parties, by conforming to their different Ways and Modes, strengthen the
Hands of the one in imposing, and of the other in separating, and so help to
make the Rent wider? It is true, he may in his Doctrine cry against the one and
the other for Bigotry, etc. But how is this convincing, when his Practice seems
to justify both Sides? May it not be supposed, that Men who are convinced in
their Judgments that the one Side or the other is in the Right, and act
accordingly, do seem to act as honest a Part as Men, and as Christians, as
those who jump in with, and jump out from all Parties in their several
differing Ways and Modes, according as the Gale seems to blow? May it not be
supposed, that he that has Catholicism enough to carry him through the several
differing Sects among Protestants, so as to join cordially with each, is in
great Danger of falling into a perfect Indifferency in some main Points, and so
be prepared to turn Roman at Rome, if a fair Gale drives him there? If
Antinomians, Arminians, and Calvinists, and Lutherans, while each of them
adheres to his different Scheme, should, for some politic End, lay aside their
Jarrs, and join Hands, and agree to make one Community or Church; whether there
may not be just Grounds to fear that such a Church may sooner turn a Babel,
than a Pillar of Truth? Whether it be an advisable Remedy, for Men to swallow
whole Pounds of Babel Bigotry, upon the bare Advice of some hotheaded
Empyrick, to purge out a few Grains of Party Bigotry, till we know that the
former is of a purging Nature? We grant that Unity among all true Protestants
in the Truth, is very desirable, that so upon good Ground all Names of
Distinction might cease; but can any imagine, that that good will be obtained,
by casting a Contempt upon a standing Ministry, and those that in some good
Measure, have given good Proof of their Faithfulness for many Years; and on the
other Hand, by Idolizing raw unstable Novices with their unturned Cakes, so as
to give up fundamental Truths, standing Judicatures, good Constitutions,
Scripture Order and Discipline, as a Sacrifice to obtain a golden Dream of
supposed Union we know not in what? If any Non-conformists are so happy as to
come over their Scruples in the points of Conformity, is it not all Reason,
that Non-conformists should grant a Toleration, as far as their Power reaches,
to their Brethren to act accordingly? Only seeing some of their Brethren are so
weak as to labor under the same Scruples that they once seemed to labor
under, Is it any more but a reasonable Request, that they be not active in
overturning the Constitution, Order and Discipline of the Church of Scotland,
till such a Time as we her poor Sons are either buried, or till we have our
conscientious Scruples removed so that we may be able to follow the Crowd, who
seem for the present to out run us?

XIII. Journal p. 80. Whether or no Mr. Whitefield bidding Defiance to Satan in
these Words, O Satan! Satan! I defy thee to do thy worst, be an Expression that
calls for the Commendation given it in Mr. Finley's Letter?

XIV. Whether or no there be not an Insinuation of a Claim to immediate
Revelation in the Expression Mr. Whitefield drops in his Journal, p. 99.
saying, I pray God, I may be so blessed as to believe; for there will certainly
be a fulfilling of those Things which God by his Spirit has spoken unto my
Soul; compared with p. 137. where he says, 'There are many Promises to be
fulfilled in me, etc.'

XV. What was that religious Concern which the true Ministers of Christ could
or should determine but by Lot, when they remained in Doubt about it after
Prayer, and that upon a Day of Fasting and Prayer, of which Mr. Whitefield
speaks in his Journal, p. 113.? If the Word was silent, what need was there of
determining it? If the Word spoke, why was not the Sentence there given
decisive? What became of the High Degrees of the Spirit, when Men took such a
blind Way to solve their Doubts? Did the Spirit, and the Word disagree; or did
their several Trumpets give a various Sound? Is not the Use of Lots under the
present Dispensation, in religious Concerns, a flying out of the ordinary Road
to try an Extraordinary Expedient? And we would be glad to know how far this
may be safe? And further, we desire to know, how far it may be safe to trust to
such Guides who are so much in the Dark that they are obliged at Seasons to
solve their own Doubts by Lots?

XVI. Mr. Whitefield in his Journal, p. 127. says, I find I gain greater Light
and Knowledge by preaching extempore; so that I fear I should quench the
Spirit, did I not go on to speak as He gives me utterance.

Q. I. If by preaching extempore, be meant preaching without Premeditation or
Studying, we would ask, whether any since the Days of Moses, that were sound in
the Faith, have said that they gained more scripture Light and Knowledge by not
reading and meditating on God's Word, than by so doing? Does not Mr. Whitefield
in this differ in Judgment from Dr. Edwards, as far as the Doctor differed in
other Points from Archbishop Tillotson?

Is it any Way likely, that God should own us the better, because we neglect
plain Duties, than if we perform them? If Mr. Whitefield means any thing else
by preaching extempore, should he not explain himself, that so Quakers and
others may not be misled, to depend on immediate impulses and Revelations by
such Hints;

Q. II. Is there any Grounds of Fear of quenching God's Spirit, whether in his
ordinary or extraordinary Gifts, by performing the plain Duties of Reading of
and meditating on God's Word? Is not here a plain Insinuation of immediate
Impulses, and Dependence thereupon? If Mr. Whitefield will allow us to try the
Spirits, what Spirit is that Mr. Whitefield fears to quench by reading the
Scriptures, or meditating on them? or by reading and studying other good Books,
or by writing his Sermons, and making a moderate Use of his Notes to help his
Memory? yea, would not this be much better than making plain Blunders for want
thereof, if Men's Memories do not serve them without this Care? For though we
own, that we like no Preacher the better for his using Notes, if he has a good
Invention and Memory to do well without them; yet, does not preaching with
Notes, if done to Purpose, require as much, if not more Premeditation and
Study, than when they are not used? For though we own that Confidence and
Assurance may help Men to rub along and a good Utterance may please many who
regard Sound more than Matter; yet, is it not evident, by comparing Mt.
Whitefield's printed Sermons with other good Sermon Books, that some of our old
Scots Divines have more Matter in one Page than he has in several Pages? And
is it not true, that though Mr. Whitefield speaks many sound Truths on some
common Heads of Divinity; yet, we desire to know, what Point in Divinity is
that which some other Divines of our own have not more than trebbled him in
Distinctness, Exactness and Expliciteness? And will any tell us what is the
Reason, that many late Sermons preached by Mr. Whitefield's warm Adherents, are
(if we mistake not) more barren of Matter and Method, than some of their former
Sermons, as being more hung on a common String, if this proceed not from Want
of Studying? (...) Tithes, adds, But I think their Notions about walking or
being led by the Spirit right and good.

Quer. I. Do not Quakers in general cast off the written Word from being a
primary Rule of Faith and Practice, and make it at best but a secondary Rule,
which only some of them will grant; which, in Effect, is to say, that it is
none at all; for if Scripture be only a secondary Rule, then it is no Rule; for
a Rule must be primary in its Kind; for if so, the Scripture is no further a
Rule than thus, if the Spirit, at Seasons, speaks well of any Part, that is
then to be followed; but if the Spirit does prompt to throw off any Part of it,
then it is not to be regarded; for the Spirit is not to be tried by the Rule of
the Scripture, as being a higher Rule? If this be not their Notion, we do not
understand their Writings.

Q. II. How can Mr. Whitefield be thought sound and orthodox in this Point, if
he judges those that pretend to walk by immediate Revelations and Impulses,
have right and good Notions? Is not this different from the professed Judgment
of sound Churchmen and Dissenters in this Point?

Q. III. If it be supposed these Quakers might have different Sentiments from
what their Sect have published to the World; should not Mr. Whitefield then
have told us, what their Notions were? Might not that be instructive to their
Friends, and prevent them from being misled by him, to think their own Notions
good, because Quakers?

XIX. Mr. Whitefield, in his Journal, p. 212. partly speaking and partly
writing to Mr. Kinchin, who, as it would seem, was under some Scruples about
the Habits, and some other Things, probably the Ceremonies and Canons in the
established Church, and so was like to leave the Church and turn Dissenter,
says thus, This, I must needs confess gave me a great Shock: For I knew what
dreadful Consequences would attend a needless Separation from the established
Church. -- As for my own Part, I can see no Reason for leaving the Church,
however I am treated by the corrupt Members and Ministers of it: For I judge
the State of the Church, not from the Practice of its Members but its primitive
and public Constitutions.

Quer. I. Whether a regular orderly Separation from the established Church,
upon the Account of Conscientious Scruples, about the Vestments, Ceremonies,
etc. be a needless Separation? Is it not evident, to those that are any Way
conversant in the late History of the Puritans, that many conscientious
Churchmen suffered severe Penalties, by Exclusions and Imprisonments, for not
conforming to those, before there was a separate Dissenter in England? Did not
many of the Bishops then declare against the Vestments, in plain Terms, who
complied afterward merely in Obedience to their Sovereign, as Head of the
Church? What are the dreadful Consequences that have attended such a
Separation, in conscientious and orthodox Dissenters, who have kept themselves
within the Limitts of the Act of Tolleration? Would not more dreadful
Consequences attend Men's conforming against the Dictates of their own
Consciences? Do not more dreadful Consequences attend Men's making schisms or
Factions in the Church, than by a quiet and peaceable Separation from it? Did
not Dr. Sacheveral, in his Time, make more Disturbance and Uproar, by raising
the Mobs and warming them, than all the Dissenters in England? In what Country
was it, that designing Men, that aimed to draw a Party after them, stopped at
conforming to the Modes and Ceremonies that were most admired by the Vulgar; at
least for a Time?

Q. II. Whether Corruption in Ministers and Members, when incurable, either for
Want of Discipline, or the due Exercise of it, be not a just Cause of
Separation, to every one that judges in Conscience that Ministers and Members
are generally become corrupt? How far can such an one be judged to walk
regularly and conscientiously himself, who judges that Ministers and Members
are become corrupt in a Church, and yet withdraws not from such disorderly
and corrupt Brethren?

Q. III. What Sort of a Reformer can he be, as to Doctrine or practical
Godliness, that judges the State of the Church from its primitive and public
Constitutions, and not from the Practice of its Members? If it be the Practice
of the Ministers to preach corrupt Doctrine, and the Practice of Members to
profess corrupt Principles, and to act accordingly, who can believe the State
of that Church to be good, let their primitive and public Constitutions be
never so good and orthodox? Who can doubt, but that the primitive Constitutions
were good in the Church of Rome? What g^ to obtain^ ^neracies must Men run
into, before they have Courage enough to alter their public Constitutions, who
think after this Manner?

XX. Mr. Whitefield in his Journal p. 216. cries out with some Emphasis, Oh!
what Advantage has Satan gained over us, by our Brother Kinchin putting off his
Gown!

Q. I. What can be the Meaning of this Outcry, if something more than is spoken
be not intended? If the Gown be a Thing entirely indifferent, what Damage could
it be to the main Cause that Mr. Kinchin should put it off upon conscientious
Scruples, as well as Mr. Whitefield does at Seasons in point of Liberty when
among Dissenters? Does not Mr. Whitefield seem to hint in p. 214. That the
Kingdom of God does not consist in Externals? and what, but a Cloak, is more
external than a Gown? If a Catholicism be intended, why might not a good
Dissenter be of use in England as well as America to carry it on? Has not Mr.
Whitefield made the Experiment of praying and preaching without it? and does he
find any more odds then, than when he has it on? Can any of Whitefield's
Opposers think, that he was so mean as to^ed at coat the Gown was any of our
spiritual Armor? Does not Bishop Latimer, at the Time of his being stripped of
the Vestments seem to hint that the main Loss was that he could make no more
Holy Water? and unless that would help somewhat, why may not a Man as well, in
the Strength of Christ, wrestle with the Devil in his Coat?

XXI. Mr. Whitefield in his Journal, p. 234. in Answer to a Query proposed in
p. 233. says," as for the Business of an Attorney, ' I think it unlawful for a
Christian, at least exceeding dangerous: Avoid it therefore, and glorify God in
some other Station.

Quer. I. Why should the Business of an Attorney be thought unlawful, or at
least exceeding dangerous, if conscientiously discharged? Is not the Civil Law,
in its Place, as well as the Divine, still Good, if founded upon Equity, and
lawfully used? How can poor Farmers have the Privilege of the Law, unless they
are brought up to it themselves, without the Help of conscientious Attorneys,
well versed in the Law, to plead for them? What signifies our having good Laws,
without all the Subjects are some how put in a Way to obtain the Privilege of
them in proper Seasons? Is it not more dangerous by far, for Men to trust Lives
and Fortunes in the Hands of unchristian Advocates and Judges? Are not honest
and Christian Attorneys one great Defense, under God and the King, of our
Christian and Civil Privileges? What will engage Men to Faithfulness in such
Places, more than the true Fear of God, and the firm Attachment to true
Christian Principles, and their viewing of the Sacred and Civil Privileges of
others as their own in common with others? Have not even Quakers now adays in
Pennsylvania, come over their Scruples in this Point?

Quer. II. If a Civil Office in the Commonwealth be unlawful, at least
exceeding dangerous, how dangerous and unlawful must a Military-Office be? Must
it not of Consequence follow, that the Office of a General or Capt. in an Army
be unlawful and dangerous with a Witness? And if any English Subject could
convert a great Part of the Fellow Subjects into such Principles as these now
in a Time of War, would it not be a Piece of common Justice for the Crown of
Spain to allow them at least as large a Pension as would maintain an Army equal
to the Number of that converted Party, if not a little larger, and let them
share in the Plunder, in case the Victory be got over the unconverted Party,
who hazard Lives and Fortunes for the public Defense of the Nation?

Thus we have laid before you what now occurs of conscientious Scruples. If we
have misunderstood any Paragraph herein cited, and thereby have been misled to
ask any improper Questions thereupon, we are willing to be set right in what we
are wrong; our Aim being to get right Information in these Points, and a fair
Resolution of our Doubts; hoping you will allow us the Liberty to lay our
Scruples before you in their full Strength, without which we see not how you
can be in a Way to resolve us fully by your Answer. Albeit, we be not accurate
enough in every Point to suit our Queries to your proper Paragraphs, as Men of
Learning might be able to do, by reason of their better Education. We shall now
conclude with a few general Queries upon the whole, and then submit all to your
mature Judgments.

Quer. I. Whether or no Men's high Pretenses to the Spirit, when their
Doctrines appear not to come up to that Degree of Accuracy which other Divines
have attained to, who never pretended to any thing extraordinary, be not liable
to Suspicion?

Quer. II. How can it be supposed, that any regular Reformation can be carried
on by a Combination of Antinomians, Arminians and Calvinists joining Hand in
Hand?

Quer. III. Whether or no the strange Fits, and Convulsions, and the Noise of
Visions and Revelations, that seem to prevail along with this Scheme, be Matter
of Joy and Comfort, or of Grief?

Quer. IV. How could the Oxford Methodists, being at first a company of young
Students in the College, be so liberal in making Alms and Deeds of Charity, so
as to be able to raise their Characters to an high Pitch upon this Account,
while Poor Scholars, unless they had a large public Fund?

Quer. V. How comes it to pass, that many who never appeared to have any Regard
for Religion, nor seem to come nearer to join with any religious Society of any
Denomination, yet are, or seem to be, very zealous for this new Scheme?

Quer. VI. Whether it be any true Sign of Reformation in Men, that when they
pretend to Conversion and high Degrees of spiritual Seize, that they
manifest more Hatred and Rage against their former pious Ministers and Fellow
Members, and declaim worse against them than against the Rabble and Errors of
the Times, if current Reports be true, that many new Converts, as they call
themselves, do so?

These Remarks and Queries were considered by the Presbytery of New Castle, and
it was agreed upon, that Mr. Whitefield being expected soon, to come again into
these Parts; therefore, as he best understands his own Intentions, in these
Expressions that seem to us to have a bad Aspect, we leave it to the People to
print their Remarks, and Mr. Whitefield himself to answer them. Mr. Alex.
Hutchinson, Mr. Sam. Blair, and Mr Charl. Tennant, voted thus, -- Mr.
Whitefield being expected soon to come again into these Parts, and as he best
understands his own Intentions in such Expressions, in said Remarks, as seem to
us to have a bad Aspect, we leave it to the People to print the Remarks, and
Mr. Whitefield himself to answer them. William M'Crea, and John Bravade chose
this last State of the Vote likewise.

A LETTER from the Rev. Mr. Whitefield, to some Church Members of the
Presbyterian Persuasion. In Answer to certain Scruples lately Proposed in
proper Queries raised on each Remark.
My Dear Friends;
I HAVE Received your Queries and Scruples. -- Whether they were compli'd by
Church Members, or Ministers of the Presbyterian Persuasion, I shall not take
upon me to Determine. -- I think I may say with David, on another Occasion,
Joab's Hand is in this. -- If your Ministers were really the Authors, and you
only their Representatives, they have not acted with simplicity, They had
better have spoken out, I should have as readily answered them as you. --
Solomon says," He that hates Reproof is Brutish; and If I know any Thing of my
own Heart, I should think my self obliged to any one that convinces me of any
Errors, either in Principle or Practice. -- I therefore assure you I do not
find the least resentment stirring in my Soul against those (whosoever they be)
that proposed the Queries, or against the Reverend Presbytery that advised you
to send them to me in a Public Manner. -- No, I Rejoice in it, because it
gives me an Opportunity of doing what my Friends know I have, for some Time,
proposed, viz. to correct some Passages in my Printed Sermons. -- I think it no
dishonor to Retract some Expressions that have formerly dropped from my Pen,
before GOD was pleased to give me a more clear Knowledge of the Doctrines of
Grace. -- St. Austin, I think, did so before me. -- The Lords Dealings with me
was somewhat out of the Common Way I can say to the Honor of rich, free,
distinguishing Grace, that I received the Spirit of Adoption before I had
conversed with one Man, or read a single Book on the Doctrine of free
Justification by the imputed Righteousness of JESUS Christ. -- No Wonder then
that I was not so clear at the first setting out in the Ministry. -- Our Lord
was pleased to Enlighten me by degrees, and I desire your Prayers that His
Grace may shine more and more in my Heart, till it breaks forth into perfect
Day.

But to come to the Exceptionable Passages of my Sermons. You blame me for
saying, Page 17. vol. 2. That Adam was adorned with all the Perfection of the
Deity. It Is a wrong Expression, I would correct it thus, All the Moral
Communicable Perfections of the Deity. Again, Man was the Perfection of the
Moral and Materail World. -- Let it stand thus, The Perfection of all the
Visible World.

P. 22. 23. vol. 2. Washes the Guilt of sin away by the Tears of a sincere
Repentance, joined with Faith in the Blood of Jesus Christ.' This is false
Divinity, I would now alter it thus, Recovers his former Peace by renewing his
Acts of Faith on the perfect Righteousness of Jesus Christ.

P. 78. vol. 1. And which alone can render any of our Actions acceptable in
Gods sight, It should be, And without which any of our Actions cannot be
acceptable in Gods sight.

P. 16. vol. 1. Who vainly depend on their own Righteousness, and not on the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ imputed to and inherent in them, as necessary for
their Eternal Salvation.

To avoid all mistakes, I would express myself in this manner, Who have neither
Christ's Righteousness imputed to them for Justification in the sight of God,
nor Holiness wrought in their Souls as the Consequence of that, in order to
make them meet for the Enjoyment of God.

Vol. 1. page 7. To qualify us for being savingly in Christ, Read To qualify
us for living Eternally with Christ.

The seeming Contradiction in my Sermon vol. 2. page 128. compared with vol. 2.
page 137. I think may be reconciled by that Passage of the Apostle, After you
believed, you were sealed by the Spirit of Promise.

I think your arguing on this page 21. Sect. 7. is not quite so clear. Might
you not as reasonably have blamed Jesus Christ for saying to a dead Lazarus,
Come forth? However, instead of Quickening Spirit, vol. 2. page 137. let it be
read Sanctifying Spirit.

Vol. 2. page 33. The Man Christ Jesus is Spiritually formed in your hearts; I
would alter it thus, That Christ is formed within you.

Vol. 1. page 53. The many Souls that are nourished weekly by the spiritual
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ by your Means. -- Let it be altered, for these
Words, Nourished weekly at the Lord's Supper by your Means.

I see no Reason to alter my Explanation of the Words, Baptizing them into the
Nature of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and Christ spiritually conceived in
the Heart of E^e. -- I mean no more by these Expressions than the Apostle when
he says, Know you not that Christ is IN you, except you be Reprobates. And
again, No Man can call Christ Lord but by the Holy Ghost. And again, We are
made Partakers of a Divine Nature.

Vol 2. p. 128. These Words [in the Lord's Prayer] may be left out. Though if the
Word [Name] signifies God's Attributes, (according to your own Confession) why
may it not signify his Essence? What are God's Attributes but God himself?

Vol. 1. p. 14. After Essential ones too, insert, if Persons are capable of
performing them.

These, if I mistake not, are all the Passages in my Sermons which you object
against. And now to convince you, that I am not ashamed to ow^ my Faults, I can
inform you of other Passages as justly exceptionable. In my Sermon on
Justification, I seem to assert universal Redemption, which I now absolutely
deny. -- In my Almost Christian, I talk of Works procuring us so high a Crown.
In my Sermon on the Marks of the new Birth, I say, We shall endure to the End,
if we continue, etc.

These, and perhaps some other Passages, though capable of a candid
Interpretation, I now mislike, and in the next Edition of my Sermons, God
willing, I propose to alter them. -- In the mean while, I shall be thankful to
any that will point out my Errors and I promise, by divine Assistance, they
shall have no Reason to say, that I am one who hates to be reformed. Let the
Righteous smite me, it shall be a Kindness; and let him reprove me, it shall be
an excellent Oil, which shall not break my Head; for yet my Prayer also shall
be in their Calamites.

As for your insinuating, that I countenance Mr. Wesly in his Errors, it is no
such Thing. I prefaced Haly Burton's Memoirs, before I saw what Mr. Wesly
wrote, and since I have seen it, have more than once said, if I ha^ known what
Mr. Wesly had wrote, I would not have prefaced Haly Burton at all. -- I do not
understand Mr. Wesly in his Interpretation of these Words, He that is born
again of God, sins not; and therefore have torn that Part out of several of
those Books which I have given away lately, and have acquainted him of what I
think on this Particular he errs, in sundry Letters.

You wrong me if you think I am an Antinomian: For when I say, God made no
second Covenant with Adam, I mean no more than this, God made no second
Covenant with Adam in his own Person, in behalf of his Posterity. Nor did Man's
Acceptance in the Sight of God, after the Fall, depend either wholly or in Part
on his Works, as before the Fall. Whoever reads the Author of the whole Duty of
Man, will find he thinks otherwise, and I believe your Friends in Scotland will
not thank you for defending the Whole Duty of Man, as you seemingly have done
in the late Queries.

Your Objection concerning my favorable Opinion of some particular Quakers, I
conversed with, and also about some particular Promises, which I think have
been made me; you may be satisfied in my Answer to the Bishop of London's last
Pastoral Letter, and in a Letter sent to the Bishop of Gloucester, and
published in one Part of my Journals.

I am no Friend to casting Lots: But I believe on extraordinary Occasions, when
Things can be determined no other Way, God, if applied to, and waited on by
Prayer and Fasting, will answer by Lots now, as well as formerly.

Do not condemn me for Preaching extempore, and saying, I am helped often
immediately in that Exercise, when Thousands can prove as well as my self, it
has been so. -- Neither should you censure me as one that would lay aside
Reading. I am of Bishop Sanderson's Mind* Study without Prayer is Atheism.
Prayer without Study Presumption. -- Blame me not for the Warmth of some of my
Adherents, as you call them. One of your Ministers knows how sharply I rebuked
one of them for his Warmth at Fogg's Manor. I am for loving as Brethren, and
wish all would copy after the lowly Jesus: But then I cannot discommend those
(supposing they do it in the Spirit of Meekness) who complain against dry
sapless unconverted Ministers. -- Such surely are the Bane of the Christian
Church.

But my other Affairs will not permit me to enlarge. Some of the latter part of
your Queries, for your own, and not for my sake I shall not mention. I hope I
can say with more Sincerity than Hazael, Is your Servant a Dog, that he should
do what you suggest? But I pray God forgive you. He knows my Heart. My own
Design is to bring poor Souls to Jesus Christ. I desire to avoid Extremes, so
as not to be a Bigot on the one Hand, or confound Order and Decency on the
other. And I could heartily wish, the Rev. Presbytery, when they advised you to
publish your Queries, had also cautioned you against dipping your Pen in so
much Gall. Surely your Insinuations are contrary to that Charity, that hops
and believes all Things for the best. And I appeal to your own Hearts, whether
it was right, especially since you heard the constant Tenor of my Preaching in
America, has been Calvinistical, to censure me as a Papist or Arminian, because
a few unguarded Expressions dropped from my Pen just as I came out of the
University of Oxford. Could Archbishop Tillotson or the Author of the whole
Duty of Man say so? But I have done.

The Lord be with you. I am a poor frail Creature, and as such, pray for me,

Your affectionate Friend and Servant, G. Whitefield.
New York, Nov. 1, 1740.
Two LETTERS to the Reverend Mr. WHITEFIELD.
Reverend SIR;
I Have seen your printed Answer to certain Queries lately published, and
observe with great Satisfaction, the Evidence you there give of a truly
Christian Humility. And it is this emboldens me to tell you, That, in my
Opinion, you have not in all Points set Things right; but some of your
Corrections are as liable to Exceptions as the Passages you have corrected. I
will give you a Specimen: Instead of "Adam was adorned with all the Perfections
of the Deity" you correct it, " All the moral communicable Perfections of the
Deity. " -- Was not Man created a little lower than the Angels? And if so, were
there not some moral Perfections communicated to them, which were not
communicated to him? For otherwise in what Sense could he be said to be
inferior to them? And it would be absurd to say, That any Thing could be
communicated that was not communicable. -- I hope I have a true Sense of the
Power and Usefulness of your Ministry, and wish it, from my Soul and Spirit all
the Success it deserves: But at the same Time sincerely wish, that all Errors
may be removed, and every Let and Hinderance taken away. I therefore beg, that
you will furnish me with the means of Answering what may be objected to the
above Passage, by leaving a Letter at Mr. Franklin's, directed to.

Your humble Friend and Servant, Nathanael Lovetruth.

Reverend SIR,
IN your Answer to the Queries you say, That to the Honor of free
distinguishing Grace, you recieved the Spirit of Adoption, before you had
conversed with one Man, or read a single Book, on the Doctrine of Free
Justification by the Imputed Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST; and therefore, no
Wonder that you was not so clear in some Points at your first setting out in
the Ministry." -- This Declaration to me seems clearly to imply, That the
Spirit of Adoption alone, without the Aid of human Conversation or Books, is
not sufficient fully to accomplish a Christian Minister, but that human
Conversation and Books are absolutely necessary, in order further to enlighten
him. -- As I understood you in this Sense, and further," That it is not yet
perfect Day with you," I concluded you would readily retract any of your
Errors, even now, since you are not fully enlightened; and more especially, as
you say in your Answer to the Queries, "That you shall be thankful to any that
shall point out your Errors; and promise, by Divine Assistance, they shall have
no Reason to say, That you are one who hates to be reformed." -- It was the
Strength of this Conclusion, that I thought it proper, not only to pray that
God's Grace might shine more and more in your Heart, but also to trouble you
with my Letter of the 11th Instant.

The high Opinion I had entertained of your great Candor, Sincerity, and Zeal
for Truth, induced me to expect to Answer; and I would still gladly recieve
that Satisfaction. But as I find you have hitherto declined it, and for which I
am at a Loss for a good Reason; I therefore take this Occasion to let you know,
that if you any longer decline doing what every Christian Enquirer has a Right
to demand of you upon such Occasions, I will immediately call upon you in a
public Manner, by printing both this, and my former Letter.

I am Reverend Sir, Yours Nathanael Lovetruth.
Nov. 13, 1740.
Six LETTERS to the Reverend Mr. G. Whitefield. The first, second and third, on
the Subject of Justification. The fourth containing Remarks on a Pamphlet,
entitled, The Case between Mr. Whitefield and Dr. Stebbing stated, etc. The
fifth containing Remarks on Mr. Whitefield 's two Letters concerning Archbishop
Tillotson, and the Book entitled, The whole Duty of Man. The sixth containing
Remarks on Mr. Whitefield's second Letter, concerning Archb Tillotson, and on
his Letter concerning the Negroes. By Alex. Garden, M. A Rector of St. Philip's
Charlestown, and Commissary in South Carolina. Together with Mr. Whitefield's
Answer to the first Letter.

LETTER I. To the Reverend Mr. Whitefield.
SIR;
I Have perused your Sermon, entitled, What think you of Christ; to which you
were pleased to refer me the other Day, in support of your Charge, or rather
railing Accusation against the Clergy of the Church of England in general, and
the present Bishop of London in particular, of their teaching false Doctrine,
contrary to the Gospel, and the Articles of the Church, in explaining that of
Justification by Faith alone, in such a Manner, as including good Works a
necessary Condition. This Sermon of Yours, I say, I have perused, and made some
Observations upon; but of which, I shall at present only Trouble you with the
following single one, on a Parag. P. 18. in which your Words are these: Observe
my dear Brethren the Words of the Article, good Works are the Fruits of Faith,
and follow after Justification. How then can they precede, or be any Ways the
Cause of it? No, our Persons must be justified, before our Performances are
accepted.

Now, Sir, passing over your using the Word Cause for Condition; pray how was
it possible for you, after setting down the Article at large in the next
preceding Page, thus to explain it into a Contrad^ction to your own Doctrine?
As if good Works which are the Fruits of Faith and pleasing to God, did not
precede Justification, but follow after it only. For as a true and lively
Faith, you admit, must precede Justification; so good Works, teaches the
latter Part of this Article, do spring necessarily out of a true and lively
Faith. Now, if good Works do necessarily spring out of a true and lively Faith,
and a true and lively Faith necessarily precedes Justification, the Consequence
is plain that good Works must not only follow after but precede Justification
also. And therefore your explaining the Article so, as to separate a true and
lively Faith from good Works, admitting the one to go before, and the other
only to follow after Justification, is explaining the A^^^cle into a
Contradiction to your own Doctrine.

Please to unite this Knot, if you can, and you may hear further from Sir,

Your very humble Servant, Al. Garden.
Charlestown, March 17, 1739-40.
Mr. WHITEFIELD's Answer. To the Reverend Mr. Garden.
Rev. SIR,
BOTH by your Conversation, Sermon and Letter, I perceive that you are angry
overmuch. Was I never so inclined to dispute, I would stay till the Cool of the
Day. Your Letter more and more confirms me, that my Charge against the Clergy
is just and reasonable. It would be endless to enter into such a private
Debate, as you, Rev. Sir seem desirous of. You have read my Sermon; be pleased
to read it again. And if there be any Thing contrary to sound Doctrine, or the
Articles of the Church of England, be pleased to let the Public know it from
the Press. And then let the World judge, whether you or my Brethren the Clergy
have been rashly slandered by

Rev. Sir, Your very humble Servant, Geo. Whitefield.
Charlestown March, 18. 1739-40.
LETTER II. To the Reverend Mr. Whitefield.
SIR,
I Have received your Letter of this Day but it will not do. The Difficulty I
proposed, is of no small Importance with me, who have not only my own, but the
Souls of many others committed to my Charge, concerned in it.

I firmly believe, and have always taught, that good Works do as necessarily
spring from, and accompany a true and lively Faith, whether before or after
Justification, as Light and Heat do the Sun; or that, as the Body without the
Soul is dead, so Faith without Works, whether before or after Justification, is
dead also. If this be an Error; if in this I Am departed from the Gospel and the
Articles of the Church, will you not endeavor to restore me? Sure, if not the
Precept and Example of our great Master, the common Bowels of Humanity will
induce you to do a Thing, on which so much depends; especially when I assure
you, it is as much the Cool of the Day with me now, as it has been in any Part
of my Life.

I am, SIR, Your very humble Servant, Al. Garden.
Charlestown, March 18. 1739-40.
LETTER III. To the Rev. Mr. Whitefield.
SIR,
You Will excuse the Trouble of this, by Way of Supplement to my former Letters,
and containing also a few Queries concerning your present Behavior as a
Presbyter of the Church of England.

You cannot but know, that to bring a criminal Accusation against any one,
without sufficient Evidence or Proof to support it, is wilful and malicious
Slander: But, this, Sir, you have done against your Brethren of the Church of
England, in your Sermon entitled, What think ye of Christ. In that Sermon ( P.
18.) you have accused them, of not Preaching the Truth as it is in Jesus; of
falling from our established Doctrines; and of preaching only the Law and not
showing the Way of Salvation by Faith in Christ Jesus; that is of preaching
Justification by Works, and not by Faith only. Thus you have accused your
Brethren in that Sermon; but where are the Proofs of your Accusation? What
Evidence have you therein brought to support your Charge? Not the least Shadow
or Appearance of any such Thing throughout the Whole. -- But what Need (you will
say) of Proof in so plain a Case? The Clergy indeed pretend to Preach the true
Doctrine of Justification by Faith only; but in explaining, do they not destroy
it? Do they not explain it, as the present Bishop of London, in his 4th
Pastor^l Letter, hopes they do; viz. That the Faith by which only we are
justified must be true and lively or productive of good Works, and consequently
That good Works are a necessary Condition (included in that Faith) of our being
justified in the Sight of God? And is not this explaining the Doctrine into a
Contradiction? Is it not preaching a new Gospel? Preaching Justification by
Works, and not by Faith only.

Well then, the Doctrine the Clergy preach, which you are so angry at, and
censure as preaching Justification by Works, and not by Faith only, is this;
that we are justified by Faith only and not by Works; thus explained, viz. that
we are justified by such a Faith only, as is true and lively that is actually
producing good Fruits or Works, and consequently implying them as a necessary
condition (but no meritorious Cause) of our Justification.

This then, I say, is the Doctrine which you censure, and are so angry at: But
which notwithstanding is indeed the true Doctrine of the Gospel; -- and
agreeably, taught by the ancient Fathers, by the Church of England; by her
Clergy at all Times; and (be not surprised!) the very Doctrine taught by your
Reverence and Brethren Methodists, though not without apparent Shuffle and
Contradiction, disguised under the Distinction of before and after
Justification.

1. This Doctrine you condemn, is the true Doctrine of the Gospel. -- We are
justified by Faith and not by Works, teaches St. Paul; that is (expounds St.
James) not by such a Faith as is without Works; for Faith, if it has not
Works, is dead being alone; but by a lively operative Faith, producing the
Fruit of good Works, by Works is Faith made Perfect.

2. This also is the Doctrine of all the ancient Fathers. -- We are justified
by Faith and not by Works, taught Clemens, Origin, Cyprian, Basil, Chrysostom,
Austin, etc. that is, not so meant of them,' (Hom. of Salv. Part 2d.) that the
said justifying Faith is alone in Man, without true Repentance, Hope, Charity,
and the Fear of God at any Time or Season: But this saying that we be justified
by Faith only, freely and without Works, is spoken, for to take away clearly
ALL MERIT of our Works, as being unable to deserve our Justification at God's
Hands; -- and wholly to ascribe the Merit of our Justification unto Christ
only, and his most precious Bloodshedding.

3. This same Doctrine also teaches the Church of England. We are accounted
righteous (or justified) before God only for the Merits of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, by Faith, and not for our own Works or Deservings. Art. 11. That
is, (says Hom. of Faith) not by a dead or barren, but a lively and fruitful
Faith. -- Good living cannot be separated from true Faith, which works by
Love; -- and Faith of itself is full of good Works; as soon as a Man believes
he is garnished with them. -- And by all the Declarations of St. Paul, it is
evident, that a true and Christian Faith, is no dead, vain, or unfruitful
Thing; but a Thing of perfect Virtue, of wonderful Operation, Working and
Strength, bringing forth all good Motions, and good Works. See Hom. of Salvat.
and short Declar. of a true and lively Faith.

4. And as of the Church, so agreeably is this the Doctrine at all Times
preached by her Clergy. -- We are justified by Faith only and not by Works; --
And yet (says Bishop Downam, Treat. of Justific. P. 15.) that Faith which is
alone, severed from all other inward Graces, and outward Obedience, does not
justify either alone, or at all; because it is not a true and lively, but a
counterfeit and dead Faith. Agreeably also Bishop Beveridge on the 39th Art.
(Art. 11.) Though it be by Faith (says he) that we are justified, and by Faith
only, yet not by such a Faith as has no Works accompanying it: No, every such
Faith is a dead Faith; so that Faith without Works is as unable to justify us,
as Works without Faith. And yet it is not from our Works that accompany our
Faith, but from the Faith that is accompanied by our Works, that we are
justified. -- Thus Bishop Burnet also (on the same 11th Art.) A Man is then
only justified when he is freed from Wrath, and is at Peace with God. And though
this is freely offered to us in the Gospel through Jesus Christ, yet it is
applied to none, but such as come within those Qualifications set before us in
the Gospel. That God pardons Sin and receives us into Favor, only through the
Death of Christ, is so fully expressed in the Gospel, that it is not possible
to doubt of it. Nor is it less evident, that it is not offered to us
absolutely, and without Conditions and Limitations. These Conditions are
Repentance, with which Remission of Sins (...) often joined; and Faith; but a
Faith that works by Love, that purifies the Heart; and that keeps the
Commandments of God. Such a Faith as shows itself to be alive by good Works by
Acts of Charity, and every Act of Obedience. Such a Faith as this justifies;
but not as it is a Work or meritorious Action, but as it is the Condition upon
which the Mercy of God is offered to us by Christ Jesus. -- Our Faith and
Repentance are not the valuable Considerations for which God pardons and
justifies; that is done merely for the Death of Christ. -- But still our Faith,
which includes our Hope, our Love, our Repentance and Obedience, is the
Condition that makes us capable of receiving the Benefit of this Redemption and
free Grace.

Agreeably also Bishop Williams (Sermon. of Justification by Faith) -- It is said
here, (Romans v. 1.) being justified by Faith; by which we are to understand, not
a mere notional Faith, (for that is no other than an Assent to the Truth of
what is revealed) but a Faith in Operation, a Faith active and vigorous, and
that does comprehend in it, all that Duty and those Graces, which are else
where in Scripture made the Condition of the Gospel Covenant, and which gives
me a Title to all the Benefits of it, such as Forgiveness of Sin, Adoption and
Glorification. And that is a practical Faith, and to which Repentance,
Obedience, and Perseverance do belong, as the essential Parts of it.

5. Finally, This is the very Doctrine taught by your Reverence and Brethren
Methodists, though not without Shuffle and Contradiction, disguised under the
groundless Distinctions of before and after Justification, and 'twixt
Justification and Salvation. Thus your Reverence (Sermon. What think ye of
Christ. Page 16.) The Faith we preach, is not a lead speculative Faith, an
Assenting to Things credible as credible, as it is commonly defined; it is not
a Faith of the Head only, but a Faith of the Heart. It is a living Principle
wrought in the Soul, by the Spirit of the everlasting God, convincing the
Sinner of his lost and undone Condition by Nature, and continually exciting
them to show forth that Faith, by abounding in every good Word and Work. Thus
also your Brother J. Wesley (Sermon. Salvation by Faith, Page 14.) -- The first
usual Objection to this (says he) is that to preach Salvation or Justification
by Faith only, is to preach against Holiness and good Works. To which a short
Answer might be given; it would be so, if we spoke, as some do, of a Faith
exclusive of these. But we speak of a Faith which is necessarily inclusive of
all good Works, and all Holiness.

Now Sir, this being the Doctrine of Justification as taught and explained by
the Clergy, and by you Methodists; how comes it to be a false Doctrine in the
Mouths of the one, and not of the other? How comes it to be preaching only the
Law ( i. e. Justification by Works, and not by Faith only) in the Clergy's
Mouths; and yet to be preaching the Gospel (Justification by Faith only, and
not by Works) in the Mouths of yourself and Brethren Methodists? -- Have not
the Clergy as good a Right as you to preach Justification by a true and lively
Faith, a Faith, operating and bringing forth good Works, or inclusive of them,
without being accused of preaching Justification by Works? Or rather is it not
altogether arrogant and wicked Slander in you, thus to accuse them, and on none
other Grounds than will equally support the Charge against your selves?

But this you will say, is not a fair and honest Representation or State of the
Matter in Question. For, the Grounds on which you accuse the Clergy of
preaching only the Law or Justification by Works, is not their Preaching, that
such good Works as are pleasing to God, are the necessary Fruits or Effects of
a justifying Faith; no, but their Preaching, that such good Works as are the
Fruits of a justifying Faith, are a necessary Condition of Justification; and
consequently must not only follow after Justification, but go before it also;
contrary to sound Doctrine, and the 2th Article of the Church. To which I
answer,

That is a miserable Distinction; a poor Jingle of Words, not serving to
instruct, but to entangle and amuse the Minds of the weak and unwary Populace.
For,

1. Is not the Word Condition, used in various Senses? And can good Works be
called a Condition of Justification, in no other Sense, than that of a
meritorious Cause? See what a Wrangler, in your own Way has said on this Point,
( Edwards of New England; Disc. of Justification, p. 8. prefixed to his
Narative of surprising Conversions etc. The Word (says he) seems ambiguous in
common Use and also as used in Divinity. In one Sense Christ alone performs the
Condition of our Justification and Salvation; in another Sense, Faith is the
Condition of Justification; in another Sense, other Qualifications and Acts,
are Conditions of Salvation and Justification too. And again, As the Wor^
Cond^tion is very often understood in the common Use of Language, Faith is not
the only Thing in us, that is the Condition of Justification. For by the Word
Condition, as perhaps most commonly used, we mean any Thing that may have Place
in a conditional Proposition, and as such is truly connected with the
Consequent, especially if the Proposition holds both in the affirmative and
Negative, as the Condition is either affirmed or denied: And in this Sense,
Faith is not the only Condition of Salvation or Justification; for there are
many Things that accompany and flow from Faith, that are Things with which
Justification shall be, and without which it shall not be; and therefore are
found to be put in Scripture, in conditional Propositions with Justification
and Salvation, in many Places; such are Love to God, and Love to our Brethren,
Forgiving Men their Trespasses, and many other good Qualifications and Acts.
Now if in the Judgment of this Writer, of your own Cast, good Works may be and
are usually called Conditions of Justification, in another Sense than that of
meritorious Causes; how dare you, in your Mobb Harangues, attempt to fix that
Sense of the Word upon the Clergy in which they use it not, but which they
expressly disclaim? And is not your doing it, a rendering your self guilty of
wilful Slander?

2. That Faith is, in some Sense, a Condition of Justification, is generally
admitted by Writers of your own Cast, and that both Faith and good Works are
Conditions of Salvation, is, I think, denied by none. The Distinct on 'twixt
Justification and Salvation, with Respect to good Works, as labored by Dr.
Edwards of Old England (Doctrine of Faith and Justific. etc.) is too much
Nonsense to be defended, and which a beloved Brother seems (though with usual
self Contradiction) to have rejected. See J. Wesley's Sermon. ( Salvation by
Faith, p. 9. Whatever else it (Salvation by Faith) implies* it is a present
Salvation, something attainable yea actually atained on Earth by those who are
partakers of this Faith. For thus says the Apostle, not ye shall be (though that
also be true) but, ye are saved through Faith. Now what other can this present
Salvation by Faith be* than a State of Pardon and Acceptance with God, that is,
a State of Justification? And therefore, if a State of Justification be a
present Salvation, or rather a present State of Salvation, the asserting of
good Works a necessary Condition of Salvation, but not of Justification, is a
Contradiction. And agreeably the learned Dr. Jackson, (Tom. 1. p. 739. of his
Works.) That good Works (says he) are more necessary to Salvation than to
Justification, or that they are less necessary before Justification, than after
it, implies a Contradiction in the Terms well expressed and equally compared.
And Man in that he is justified, is the immediate Heir of Salvation, at the
least acquitted from the Sentence of Death. Now if we affirm, that good Works
are more necessary after he is justified, than before, we should in Congruity
grant, that Works win Heaven, and Faith only delivers from Hell: Or granting
Justification to be the Passage from Death to eternal Life, the Addition of
such Works subsequent, as were not precedent, could be serviceable only to
supererogate some Excess of Glory; for though we stood still at the same Point
where Justification found us, we should be infallible Heirs of Glory. Or if
Faith without Works obtain Justification, having justified us, shall it not
much more without them lay sure hold on Salvation, and all the Degrees of Joy
that accompany it? Suppose a Man should die in the very Instant wherein he is
justified; none would Doubt either of his Absolution or Salvation. Is he then
saved with Works, or without them? If without them, then our Savior's Rule
does fail us, (Mat. v. 20. Except your Righteousness exceed, etc.) For this Man
enters into the Kingdom of Heaven without more strict Observance of the
Commandments than the Scribes and Pharisees used: If with them, then their
Presence is necessary to Justification, and in Order of Nature before it,
because necessary ever he can be capable of Entrance into the Kingdom of
Heaven; as the Performance of every Condition is in Nature precedent to the
Accomplishment of what is not promised without it.

Nor indeed is the admitting of Faith a Condition of Justification, in any
Sense, and yet denying it of the necessary Fruits or Effects of Faith less
absurd or contradictory.

This you know is the main Point in Distress with you, and which drove the
above cited Dr. Edwards not only on the Senseless Distinction of Justification
and Salvation, but moreover of the silly Subterfuges of scrupling to call Faith
a Condition, and denying its going before Justification. Because (says he
Doct. of Faith and Justific. p. 318.) Faith is not a Condition in the strict
Sense, I choose to lay that way of speaking aside, and to express my Thoughts
thus; the Gospel requires of those that are justified, that they believe in
Christ. Curiously thought and expressed too! The Gospel requires of those that
are justified, that they believe in Christ: But does it not require of those
who are not justified, that they believe in Christ also? Rare Champion of
Grace! Such Ways of Expression must do wonderful Feats, and enlighten every
Mind in the Kingdom. But this is not all. It is an idle Contest (says he) and
yet has troubled some Heads, which of these (Faith or Justification) is first
in Time For I apprehend that they are both together: therefore no Man can tell
which is precedent, and which Subsequent. Here is a Matter decided for you; Who
dares any longer contest it? I apprehend, etc. That this is an idle Contest,
and owing only to such Heads as his own will be easily granted: But his I
apprehend, etc. will be deemed a very sorry Decision. -- 99 of 100 will
apprehend, that his Apprehension of the Matter is absurd, and repugnant to the
very Order of Thought or Apprehension in all Cases whatsoever. And you are
defied to instance the Case, in which the Condition, Means or Instrument of any
Thing, must not in the Order of Thought or Apprehension be conceived to exist
before the Thing; or that a Workman's Tools must not be conceived to exist
previous to the Work done by them. But notwithstanding this Author's
Apprehension of this Matter, in the Passage above cited, viz. That Faith and
Justification are so instantaneous, as no Man can tell which is precedent and
which subsequent; Yet how vastly different do we find his Apprehension of it,
in his Preface to the same Performance, p. 15. The Passage is curious, and runs
thus. So as to Justification by Faith, it may be said that Faith goes before
Justification, and yet we are sure it comes after* The former is true, because
Pardon or Justification is propounded and promised as a Consequence and Reward
of Faith. The latter is also true; for we must not believe that we are
forgiven, before God has forgiven us. We must see our Pardon, and then exert
our Faith. Thus both are true in different Respects. On one Account Faith
Precedes Justification; on the other it follows it. This puts an End to the
Dispute, and lays all the Quarrels in the Dust. Whoever can write such a
Treatise, and such a Passage in the Preface to it, had need to be at an End of
all Dispute or Controversy. In the Treatise no Man can tell of Faith and
Justification which is precedent and which is consequent. In the Preface to it,
It may be said that Faith goes before Justification, and we sure also it comes
after. So that to make all plain, Faith in one Respect, goes before
Justification; in another comes after it; and yet in general they are so
instantaneous, that no Man can tell which goes before, or which comes after.
This is a Doctrine of Grace! Sanctified Logic out of all Question! That Faith
goes before Justification is easily admitted, and for the Reason assigned, viz.
Because Pardon or Justification (which by the bye are not allowed to be
synonimous Terms in the Treatise) is propounded and promised as a Consequence
or Reward of Faith: But how comes it also to follow after? Why because we must
not believe that we are forgiven, before God has forgiven us. We must see our
Pardon, and then exert our Faith. Did ever a more arrant Piece of Nonse drop
from the Pen of any Writer! As if Faith or Belief in Christ as the true Mesiah,
operating by Love, by which we are justified: And the Faith or Belief that God
has actually justified us by that Faith, were the Faith or Belief of the same
Thing in different Respects, and not of different and distinct Things! We must
see our Pardon, etc. seeing, says the Proverb, is believing. But how can we see
it? By the Eye of Faith. Well then, in plain Language, we must first see our
Pardon by the Eye of Faith, and then exert our Faith. Such Logic must surely
put an End to the Dispute and lay all the Quarrel in the Dust.

3. As to the 12th Article of the Church it is obvious, that by the Words, and
follow after Justification, the Article means not to exclude good Works going
before Justification, from being acceptable or pleasing to God, provided they
are the Fruits of Faith, because it has no negative Words to exclude them. And
not only so, but which is still confirmed, by the next following Article,
entitled, of Works before Justification. Works (says this Article) done before
the Grace of Christ and the Inspiration of his Spirit are not pleasant to God:
Why so? Forasmuch as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ. Here it is
plain, that by Works before Justification, the Article means Works that are
so before it as to be before the Grace of Christ, and consequently Faith in
him; that is Works in a State of mere Heathenism or Infidelity. And therefore
according to the Maxim, Exceptio firmat regulam in non exceptis, the Article
confirms, that Works which are not so before Justification as to be before
the Grace of Christ and Faith in him, but after these and springing from them,
are pleasing to God, though before Justification.

But do not both Articles rather seem to suppose that Faith and Justification
are coexistant; or that 'twixt the first Act of a justifying Faith, and that of
Justification, there intervenes no Space for good Works to be exerted in? I
answer, that however some few have chose to understand them in this Sense, and
in which they might remain undisturbed, if they would not disturb, insult and
abuse their Neighbors, for differing from them in Judgment; yet more generally
it is conceived, to be dishonouring the Articles, to understand them as
regarding so silly and speculative a Notion, which never has, nor ever can be
proved, to have the least Foundation either in Scripture, or common Reason; or
which in it self, whether held or rejected, is not of the least moment or
importance so long as the Foundation is held sure, viz. that we are justified
by a true and lively Faith, bringing forth the Fruit of good Works; but that
neither this Faith nor its Fruit of good Works, are in any Sense, meritorious
Causes of either our Justification or Salva^ion (to admit the Distinction) but
Conditions or Means only. Let one single plain Text of Scripture, or one single
conclusive Argument in Reason, be produced in Support of this speculative
Notion, that the first mere Act of Faith and that of Justification* are
co-existent; no one can be under any Temptation to reject it: For sure the less
we are required to do in the Work of our Salvation, so much the happier for us,
who are able to do so little, and so unwilling to do any Thing at all. Or let
it be shown, what Moment or Importance the holding or rejecting this Notion is
of, so long as this Foundation is held sure.

But without holding this Notion (as you teach and deceive the People) the
Foundation is not, and cannot be held: For that the contrary Notion, say you,
viz. that Faith and its necessary Fruits pre-exist, and go before Justification
as necessary Conditions of it, is destroying the Foundation and holding
Justification by Works as a meritorious Cause. This is your poisoned
Insinuation; false, and insiduous! Have you proved (Sir) or dare you attempt to
prove this Insinuation? No you dare not attempt it; not only because you have
no Talent at proving any Thing, but chiefly because you are conscious, that
such Proof must equally conclude against yourself and Brethren Methodists, in
the Case of Salvation, as against those you abuse in that of Justification. Do
not you and your Brethren hold that Faith and good Works are necessary
Conditions of Salvation? Well; upstarts a hair-brained Solifidian, and runs
about a Mouthing; The Methodists preach up Salvation by Works as meritorious
Causes: Will you think it a fair Charge against you? Or not rather disclaim it
as false and injurious? Produce (Sir) but one Argument, either from Scripture
or Reason, to prove, that the holding Faith and good Works necessary Conditions
of Justification, is holding Justification by Works, as meritorious Causes;
that will not equally conclude in the Mouth of this Solifidian, that your
holding Faith and good Works necessary Conditions of Salvation, is holding
Salvation by Works, as meritorious Causes: Produce, I say, but one single
Argument that will not equally conclude in the one Case as the other, and I Will
become your Proselyte the next Moment.

But if this be impossible for you to do, as sure it is, then lay your Hand on
your Mouth! Nay rather open it wide, and recall the Slander you have scattered
far and wide around you; and undo the Mischief you have already done. You boast
indeed, in your Journals, that you have kindled a Fire which all the Devils in
Hell shall not be able to exinguish! Alas (Sir) the Fire you have kindled is
that of Slander and Defamation. A Fire! which no Devil in Hell, no nor Jesuit
nor Deisi on Earth, will ever go about to extinguish; but faggot and foment it
with all their Might, as too effectually serving their Interests or Turn. You
and your Brethren cry out Pers^cution! It Is true* Persecution there is in the
Case; but are not you the Persecutors? Is it not you that falsely accuse the
Brethren, desturb the Peace of the Church; trample on her Laws and Cannons,
though solemnly engaged to obey them) and despise her Authority? But still
Persecution you cry out; for want of it you mean For ours is no Persecuting
Country for Religion; every Man may enjoy his own Way in Peace and Safety; but
as you may regard being persecuted as something essential to a true Christian,
and necessary to keep up the Spirit of Christianity, you seem to be in Quest or
Pursuit of it, please only to step into a Neighboring Country, Spain or
Portugal, and you will bid fair, I dare say, to find it. Or if this be too much,
only pursue your first Plan, you amused the World with, viz. the Conversion of
the Indians, you will either meet with it or something equivalent to it. But why,
poor Gentleman are you thus to be bantered? Are you not really persecuted? Are
you not cast out of the Synagogues; excluded the Church of England Pulpits; and
treated as a Disciple of Fox or Muggleton? And is not all this Persecution? But
for what Cause are you thus treated? Why, only for the trifling Cause of
accusing the Clergy, openly and avowedly accusing them in general, for
Apostates from Christianity, and ignorant of it as Mahomet; for blind Guides,
false Teachers, and leading the People to the Gates of Hell. And in all this
you speak the Truth in Christ, and lie not. And are not the Clergy of a strange
persecuting Spirit, to deny such Men their Pulpits, to insult, traduce and
defame them in! But why will you desire our Pulpits, or presume to approach the
Altars at which we minister? Is it not Persecution in you to attempt the one or
the other? Is it not wholly absurd and inconsistent in you to pretend holding
Communion with us, if you believe a Word of the Characters you assure us to be
true? Will you hold Communion with the Mufti or with the Pope, with the Turkish
or the Romish Clergy? And why any more with us, whom you are pleased to set
forth to the Multitude in such odious Colors? Sure you ought to get you up
from among us, lest you be consumed in our Iniquities!

But I have done. I thought indeed to have added some other Queries relating to
your Conduct, but since this Letter has been under my Pen, I have seen them put
by another Hand; and therefore shall here put an End to this present Trouble.

And remain, SIR, Your very humble Servant, Alex. Garden.
Charlestown, April 8. 1739-40. P. S. Will your Reverence be pleased to help
out your honored Friend and Brother, J. Wesley, against the following Charge
of a gross Contradiction, inserted in the Gentleman's Magazine for July 1739.
Vol. IX. p. 358.

In the Preface to the Hymns and sacred Poems lately published at London, by
Mr. John W-sl-y and his Brother, p. v. we are told, that "even the Condition of
our Acceptance with God, is not our Holiness either of Heart or Life, but Faith
alone; Faith contradistinguished from Holiness, as well as from good Works."
And then immediately follow these Words, " Other Foundation therefore can no
Man lay, without being an Adversary to Christ and his Gospel, than Faith alone,
Faith, though necessarily producing both, yet not including either good Works or
Holiness."

But in a Sermon on this Text, " By Grace ye are saved through Faith, Ephesians. ii.
8. written and published by the same Mr. John W^sl^y, p. 14. is the following
Expression: " But we speak of a Faith necessarily inclusive of all good Works
and all Holiness"

Several serious Persons are of Opinion, that Mr. W^sl^y and his Adherents
would behave with greater Modesty, if they left off to rail at the Clergy, and
charge them with omitting to preach the fundamental Doctrines of the Christian
Religion, till they reconcile both Sides of this Contradiction; or, if that
should appear a Task too difficult for them, that they would be pleased to
expunge one of those Assertions, in order to let their own Followers, and the
rest of the World know, what their own real Sentiments are with R^gard to That,
which themselves confess to be a Matter of the utmost Importance.



LETTER IV. To the Reverend Mr. Whitefield.
SIR,
AS you seem resolved to stick to your very edifying Motto, Answer him not a
Word; it is neither for your Sake not my own, that I trouble you with this
Fourth Letter, but for such Reasons as may in due Time be assigned.

I have now before me an anonymous Pamphlet, entitled, The Case between Mr.
Whitefield and Dr. Stebbing stated, etc. containing, or designed to contain,
the entire System of the Methodist Doctrine of Regeneration. Whether you
approve of all and every Thing it contains, I presume not to know; but to me it
appears as elaborate a Peace of dogmatical Theology, as any produced in the
Oliverian Age, and calculated not to edify, but to puzzle and amuse the Minds
of the Populace, or common Readers.

Touching the Foundation of this goodly Structure, either the Author must beg
the Question, of the Propagation of Souls, or his Propositions are mere
Amusements.

Either he must take for granted, that Adam begat the Souls, as well as Bodies
of his immediate Posterity, or who can understand the Second Proposition? viz.
Had Adam continued in his happy State, he should have transmitted to his
Posterity, by the Laws of Generation, that Image of God in which he was made.
Consisting chiefly (Prop. 1st.) In the Indowments of the Soul, viz. Knowledge,
Innocence, Righteousness and Holiness. -- Can the Endowments or Qualities of
any Thing be transmitted to another by any Laws of Generation, without the
Substance? The Author dare not say they can; and if they cannot, then how could
Adam transmit the Endowments and Qualities of Knowledge, Innocence,
Righteousness and Holiness to the Souls of his Posterity, by the Laws of
Generation, without transmitting the Substance also?

Again, either the Author must take the same Principle for granted, or to what
End or Purpose Prop. vii and its Comment?

If his Meaning, indeed be, that as every animal Creature, by the Laws of
Generation, begets its like; the Toad, the Viper, the Tiger, etc. begets Toads,
Vipers, Tigers, etc. So the animal Part or Bodies of our first Parents being
degenerate, corrupt and mortal, the animal Part or Bodies of their Posterity,
which alone they could beget, must therefore, by the Laws of Generation, be
degenerate, corrupt and mortal also: If this, I say, be his Meaning, who will
ever dispute the Truth of the Proposition? Nay* who will not moreover readily
grant, that the corruptible Body presses down the Soul, and often too easily
besets and draws it off, from heavenly and spiritual to earthly and carnal
Things? But then, alas! what other End or Purpose will all this be of, to the
Author's Scheme of Regeneration, than to destroy it? This Scheme absolutely
requires the positive innate Degeneracy and Corruption of the Soul for its
Foundation. And as the Author must plainly see, that this Degeneracy and
Corruption transmitted from Adam by the Laws of Generation, must necesarily
suppose the Propagation of Souls; it is evident to me, that rather than touch
this Point, or expressly beg the Question, he chose to lay its Foundation in
Darkness, and to hide its Weakness under general and ambiguous Phrases, and
especially the Word Nature; to the no small Puzzle and Perplexity of common
Readers.

It is true, Mention is once made of a Covenant Adam was under, his being the
Representative Head, and of the Imputation of his Sin; but as these, the Author
owns, lay ^ut of his Way, that is, answered not to his Corruption Scheme, they
are once, I say, as 'twere, compelled to make a sort of excentrick Appearance,
and we hear no more of them.

But to have done with this Head: Every Body can easily conceive, as Adam was
the Root, from which sprang the animal Part or Bodies of his Children, that the
animal Patt or Bodies of his Children must therefore, by the Laws of
Generation, partake of the Nature and Qualities of that Root, whether they were
good or evil; but how their Souls, if they sprung not from that Root, must
partake of its Nature and Qualities, by any Laws of Generation, I believe a
Methodist only can conceive.

The Populace have been strangely amused of late with the Doctrine of
Regeneration, as a sudden, instantaneous Work (Act) of the Holy Spirit, and in
which the Subjects are entirely passive. But this Author, though he still
dogmatically insists on some certain critical Act in the Case, yet has a whole
Chap. (4th) concerning the Manner, Means and Steps, by which this Work is
wrought by the Spirit of God in the Hearts of his People. I Am afraid that in
this Chap. he has departed from the ancient Testimony, and advanced several
Things, which natural Men may take for Inconsistences and Contradictions.

Page 52, 53. I find the following remarkable Passages. In all his Ways toward
us, and especially in the Work of Regeneration and Conversion, God deals with
us as reasonable Creatures, however weak degenerate, or corrupt; and always
acts in a Way agreeable to our rational Powers; this the Precepts, Admonitions,
Promises, Councils and Invitations, etc. of the Word do clearly demonstrate.

How from the Bottom of my Heart do I wish, that this honest and instructive
Passage stood in Golden Capitals, at the Head of every Page, throughout the
whole Performance; with [Regeneration is the whole and sole Work of God, in
which we are entirely passive] incerted between Hooks in the very Center of it;
to expose the Contradiction in direct View, and guard the Judgment of the
unwary Reader! The Author goes on, These (that is, Precepts, Admonitions,
Promises, etc. of the Word all suppose that we are either capable of doing
something or other in a Way of Duty; or, at least, of being excited, disposed
and enabled to hear, understand, and do what is required. Though we have lost our
Innocence, Righteousness and Holiness, we have not lost our Faculties and
Powers. We are not Stocks and Stones, and mere Machines; but, intelligent
Agents: And though we cannot, in our natural State, know the Things of the Spirit
of God, as we should, and as we must, if we would be saved; yet many Things we
still know of our Maker, and his Will; yea, and many Things we can also do. In
our Renovation, God restores what we have lost, but does it by working upon
what remains. He calls and excites us, to the exercise of our rational
Faculties, and at the same Time cures the Disorders of them, and frames them in
some Measure, for what he enjoins. He commands us, for Example, to hear and
read his Word, with Reverence and Seriousness; and in our obeying, as we can,
and hearing it with that Reverence, we would do any Thing of Moment, he makes
us to understand it. He commands us to mix Faith with our Hearing; and in our
receiving it, with that Faith which we may have, he confirms our Assent to it.
He says, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead, etc. and when we
humble our selves under a deep Sense of our utter Inability, and heartily pray
for Almighty quickening Grace, he by the Power of his Spirit, working with the
Word, thoroughly awakens us, and raises us from the Dead. He commands Sinners
to cease to do Evil; and in their sincere Care to compply, he many Ways assists
them, And, to learn to do well; and in their setting about this Work, in
earnest, he by the Word both disposes them farther, and enables them also. Now
if all this be Methodism, I subscribe to it Heart and Hand; only with this
Difference from the Author, that I must insist on these, not as previous
Dispositions only, to the Work of Regeneration; but in Reality the Work adoing,
and part of it actually done. For according to his own Description of
Regeneration, it consists, In the checking, weakening, and in part subduing our
Natural Depravity and Corruption; and the restoring in some Measure, that Image
of God, which Adam lost by his Fall. But if the Work of Regeneration consists
in these, then I must insist, that it is not a sole, critical or instantaneous,
but a gradual cooperating Work of the Holy Spirit; commencing at Baptism, and
gradually advancing throughout the whole course of Christian Life; including
all the Steps or Degrees of Faith, Repentance, renewed Dispositions of the
Mind, and Habits of Obedience, 'till we arive at the Measure of the Stature of
the Fullness of Christ; that is, to such a Degree of Christian Perfection, as is
attainable here; that which is absolute, being only atainable at the
Resurrection hereafter. In a Word, I must insist, that according to the
Scriptures, the whole Economy of Grace is, an Economy of COOPERATION, where
the Subject is capable; and therefore, that the above cited Particulars are not
only preparative, or previous Dispositions to Regeneration; but the Work
actually adoing, and Part of it actually done.

This, in the Judgment of the Christian Church in all Ages, is the plain
Doctrine of the Scripture, and therefore the Passage next following, contains a
Contradiction to the above cited Passage, and a manifestly false Assertion,
viz. We are never commanded to regenerate our selves, or beget our selves
again; that is God's Work, his wholly and solely. But are we indeed never
commanded to regenerate or beget our selves again; though not in the very Words,
(for the Word Regenerate occurs not once in the whole English Bible) yet not in
this Author's own Sense or Meaning of them? Are we never commanded to check,
weaken, or in part subdue our natural Depravity and Corruption, and to improve
our selves in Knowledge, Righteousness and Holiness? Or are not these the
Purport of all the Divine Commands? Are we never commanded, to purge out the
old Leaven, that we may be a new Lump? To put off the Old Man, and to put on
the New? To cracify the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts? To mortify our
Members which are upon the Earth? Are we never commanded to cleanse our selves
from all Filthiness both of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the
Fear of God? To cleanse our Hands and purify our Hearts? etc. And can these, or
any like Commands, be understood to import any more, than our doing such Part
of these Things as we are able, or that the main or principal part is not the
Work of the Holy Spirit, without whose cooperating Aids and Graces, we can do
nothing? Nay, but says the Author, this (Regeneration) is God's Work, his
wholly and solely; and in which we are entirely passive. Are these the Words of
him who just before had said, That in all his Ways, and especially the Work of
Regeneration, God deals with us as reasonable Creatures, not as with Stocks or
Stones, or mere Machines, but intelligent Beings? And a few Lines after says,
That in the whole Work of Grace, God treats us as reasonable Creatures, and in
a Way congruous to our rational Powers? Away with such confused and
contradictory Gibberish.

But our Author's Eyes being fitted only for Methodist Light, he is over with
it again, page 60, 61. Taking it for granted, that the Holy Spirit is the
Almighty Worker of our Regeneration, in which we are entirely passive; we may
observe, that ordinarily there are certain Works which are previous
preparative, and some Way dispose to it. -- Several Things are required of us
in a Way of Duty; which all Men may in some Measure comply with, if not by
their own natural Abilities, yet through the Assistance of that common Grace,
which is in some Degree, given to all the Hearers of the Gospel, viz. That we
seriously read* and carefully attend, to all the Dispensations of the Word;
that we frequently think of our Ways* consider our State and Frame, and be much
in Prayer for the holy Spirit to enlighten, renew and sanctify us, etc. Nor has
any Man any Reason to expect any such invaluable Blessing, who is either utter
negligent of, or only superficial in the Performance of them. Commonly also in
the serious Attention of the Soul, to these Duties, the Holy Ghost much
enlightens the Mind, awakens the Conscience, convinces of Sin, fills with
Grief, and Shame, and Fear, excites to Confession, Prayer and Humiliation, and
frequently works strongly upon, and produces a mighty Change, not only in the
outward Life, but inward Affections. Now if Regeneration consists in checking,
weakening, and in part subduing our natural Depravity and Corruption, etc. must
not this Author allow the above Particulars, especially the mighty Change, both
of the outward Life and inward Affections, to be not only a previous disposing
to, but the real Work of Regeneration a doing, and part of it actually done?
But no such Thing. Tho none of these (insists he) nor all of them together be
Regeneration, yea though all of them may be wrought, and that in a high Degree,
in those who are never born of the Spirit, etc. Is it not plain, that he here
shifts the Idea of the Word Regeneration, and instead of meaning by it the
gradual and Progressive Work of checking, weakening, subduing, etc. he annexes
it to the Idea of an immediate critical Act; or the natural Depravity or
Corruption actually checked, weakened and subdued, etc. The same which other
Christian Writers or Divines call the highest Degree of Christian Perfection,
which through a Growth in Grace, is attainable here, if not that, which none
shall attain to, till the Resurrection hereafter.

But above all (Sir) what I chiefly design to observe to you is, that either
this Author must be in a very great Error, or your self; either his Doctrine
must be false, or your own.

This Author Asserts, That several Things are required of us in a Way of Duty,
which all Men may in some Measure comply with, if not by their own natural
Abilities, yet through the Assistance of that common Grace given to all the
Hearers of the Gospel viz. that we seriously read and attend to all the
Dispensations of the Word, frequently think of our Ways, consider our State,
and be much in Prayer, etc.

Now if according to this Author, these Works or Duties, viz. serious reading,
careful Attention to all the Dispensations of the Word, frequent Meditation,
and diligent Prayer, etc. if all these Works or Duties (and which through common
Grace given to all Gospel Hearers we are able to perform) be required of us as
Means naturally disposing to the Work of Regeneration, and without which no one
has Reason to expect that Blessing; then of necessary Consequence they must be
required to Justification also, which in the Order of Nature, according to this
Author, cannot precede Regeneration, but follow after it; but if these Works or
Duties be required to our Justification, then what becomes of your remarkable
Antinomian Challenge, Who dares assert that we are not justified in the Sight of
God, merely by an Act of Faith in Jesus Christ, without any Regard to Works,
past, present, or to come? (Jour. cont. P. 108. Edit. Phil.)

Again, these Works or Duties which God thus requires the Performance of, as
Means materially, disposing for Regeneration, when through common Grace
performed, are they acceptable to God or not? If you say they are not, you say,
that the Performance of God's own Commands are not acceptable to him: If you
say they are, you contradict your own express Doctrine, (Sermon. What think ye of
Christ, P. 18.) Our Persons must be justified before our Performances can be
accepted.

I have no Intention to wade through the Farrago of the Pamphlet, which I
believe no one breathing will be ever be idle enough to do: But if you will
please to satify these few Exceptions I have offered upon it, you will much
oblige.

Sir, Your very humble Servant, Alex. Garden.
Charlestown, April 15th. 1740.
To the Reverend Mr. Whitefield.
SIR,
TOUCHING your two Letters, which you have caused to be published in this
Place, I am in no doubt what Spirit you were when you wroute them. Had you
observed common Decency or good Manners in them, you had then been only an
Object of common Pity; but your contrary Behavior, exposes you to the utmost
Scorn and Contempt of every Reader. You know not, you say, how to give
flattering Titles in the cause of God; but you know how, pretending the Cause
of God, to bring railing Accusations (which an Archangel durst not do against
the Devil) to support some Crotchets you have got in your own Brains; how to
insult and abuse the Memory and Writings of two of the most sound, Pious and
learned Authors that ever adorned the English Church or Nation: And how to call
God's Truth to witness the Falsehood of the Gospel being a Covenant! You know
how to do all this, and to dispense it to the Populace in a Vehicle of cant
Terms, without Sense or Meaning. And if this be the Spirit of Methodism, my
Soul come thou not into their Secrets.

But have you indeed vindicated your Assertion that the Archbishop Tillotson
knew no more of Christianity than Mahomet? ^ ^ay how have you done it? Why in a
very suitable Manner; by advancing two other Assertions, equally false and
slanderous, and equally wanting a Vindication, viz. That the Archbishop knew of
no other than a bare Historical Faith; and that, as to the Method of our
Acceptance with God through Jesus Christ, and our Justification by Faith alone,
he was as ignorant as Mahomet.

Now (Sir) have you proved, or attempted to prove that the Archbishop knew of
no more than a bare Historical Faith? No: Every Spiritual Man, you say, that
reads his discourses may see it. Did you take this on trust from your honored
Friend J. W? If you did, you must not lose your Reward. If you grounded it on
your own Knowledge of those Discourses; how came this Passage of them in
Particular, besides many others, not to confound you! Vol. II. Fol. Sermon. 25.
But then this Faith must not be a bare assent and persuasion of the Truth of
the Gospel, but such an effectual Belief as expresses itself in suitable Acts
of Obedience and Holiness, such as the Apostle here calls a Faith which works
by Love; a Faith that is inspired and acted or rather consummate and made
perfect by Charity, (for so the Word does often signify) and then this Phrase
will be just of the same Importance with that of St. James, by Works is Faith
made perfect. REMEMBER (Sir) this Passage must look you full in the Face at the
great Day.

Have you proved for certain that the Archbishop knew no more of our Acceptance
with God, etc. than Mahomet? Unfortunately then it turns out, that you have
proved the same of yourself also. The naughty Passage by which you have proved
this of the Archbishop you have interpolated: Restored with the Interpolation
'twixt Hooks, it runs thus.

You see then what it is that must recommend us to the Favor of God; the real
Renovation of our Hearts and Lives, after the Image of him that created us.
[This must be repaired in us] before we can be restored to the Grace and Favor
of God, or to be capable of the Reward of Eternal Life. And what could God have
done more reasonable, than to make these very Things the Terms of our
Salvation, which are the necessary Causes and Means of it? How could he have
dealt more mercifully and kindly with us, than to appoint that to be the
Condition of our Happiness, which is the only Qualification that can make us
capable of it?

Now (Sir) if this Passage proves, that the Archb^shop knew no more of the
Method of our Acceptance, etc. then what must these following Passages of
yours, prove of you.

Whitefield's Sermon on Regeneration, P. 14, 17. The Apostle declares it to be
the irrevocable Decree of the Almighty, that whithout Holiness, i. e. without
being made pure by Regeneration, and having the Image of God thereby
reinstamp'd upon the Soul, no Man living shall see the Lord. And it is very
observable, that our Divine Master, in the famous Passage before referred to,
concerning the absol^te Necessity of Regeneration, does not say unless a Man be
born again he shall not, but unless a Man be born again he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God, For it is founded on the very Nature of Things, that unless
we have Dispositions wrought in us suitable and answerable to the Objects that
are to entertain us, we can take no Manner of Complacency or Satisfaction in
them, etc. Nay, in one Place of Scripture, Sanctification is put before
Justification, on purpose as it were, to show that there is no Salvation
without it. But ye are washed, says the Apostle, but ye are sanctified. Another
indisputable Argument why we must be new Creatures, viz. because without it
Christ is dead in vain.

If St. Paul would pronounce an Anathema against the Archbishop on that naughty
Passage of his, how much more would he do so against you on these of yours!
Here (in these Passages of yours) is not a Word about the All sufficient
perfect and everlasting Righteousness and Death of Christ, as the sole Cause
and Condition of our being accepted by the Father; (but what asserts the direct
contrary, viz. That the Righteousness and Death of Christ are not Allsufficient
as the sole Cause of our being accepted by the Father, but that without
Regeneration Christ is dead in vain) Our Sanctification which is the Effect and
not the Cause of Christ's Righteousness being imputed to us, is here as
elsewhere represented, as the sole Cause of our Justification and Salvation. So
that (a monstrous Inference!) our Righteousness, which is but as filthy Rags,
is here valued at so high a Price, as to be made to purchase, or which is the
same, is made the Cause of our enjoying Christ, and Heaven and eternal
Happiness. And what is this but Deisin refined? No, Sir, I Will tell you what it
is; Arrant Gibberish and Nonsense; and equally so, applied to the Archbishop's
Passage, or your own.

The Archbishop has asserted Regeneration, or the Image of God being repaired
in us, as a necessary Cause, that is instrumental Cause, and Means of our
Salvation: And have not you asserted, that without this no Man shall see the
Lord? without it, we cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven? without it, there
is no Salvation? and without it Christ is dead in vain? The Archbishop has
asserted it the only Qualification that makes us capable of Happiness: And have
not you asserted it as such, founded in the very Nature of Things? Or is the
Asserting it the only Qualification of our Happiness, representing it as the
SOLE CAUSE of our Salvation? Lay your Hand upon your Heart (Sir) and say,
whether the Archbishop has not asserted a supreme Cause of that very
Qualification! But above all; supposing the Archbishop and yourself from him*
(for let even a Methodist say) whether on the Comparison, there be no Grounds
to presume, that you had the chief Materials of your Discourse from his;
especially from the Paragraphs next preceding that you censure) had worded
your Sentiments in such a Manner, as to leave it doubtful, whether you meant
Regeneration the SOLE CAUSE of Justification and Salvation or no; yet how will
this support your monstrous Inference, -- So that our Righteousness, etc. How
long is it since you have made Regeneration, or Sanctification (for you love
dearly to shuffle among Terms) OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS? Alas, my old Friend! whither
is your poor Head now wandering?

And thus, Sir, (in your Mountebank Way) you have, young David like, as you
fancy, slain your Goliath: But whether it be not in the Pride and Naughtiness of
your Heart, you have made so absurd an Attempt, and so foolishly managed it,
the World is at no loss to determine; for the great and good Archbishop is
still quite alive and well (his Works and Memory I mean) and will doubtless
long survive in the highest Honor and Esteem, after you and your dirty
Pamphlets are sunk into Oblivion. But might not one such Conquest have sufficed
you, as it did young David, at a Time? No, your noble Spirit scorns only to
imitate, but must excel. No sooner have you dispatched this Champion of the
uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, but advancing from a David into a Knight of
Lamanca, you go strait in Pursuit of new Adventures! And who unhapily falls in
your Way, but another Son of Anak, the Author of the Whole Duty of Man? Down he
must come; and thus you gird your self for the Battle!

Since it has pleased God to give me a True Knowledge of the Doctrines of
Grace. Choice Armor indeed! Who shall be able to stand before you? None sure
but the Pope or the Mufti; and it must be deemed not so honorable in you, to
attack any one not equally armed for the Combat. A mo^ly Triumverate of
Infallibles! Your Reverence, the Pope, and the Mufti! Each of you claiming the
Gift of the True Knowledge of the Doctrines of Grace, yet each denying his
Claim to the other; and which therefore ought to be denied equally to you all;
and regarded only as the Result of the most consummate Assurance, wherewith you
jointly and severally disturb and confound the World.

But it has pleased God to give you a True Knowledge of the Doctrines of Grace;
and therefore who dares dispute your Infallibility in pronouncing the false
Ones! Who dares dispute when you pronounce, the Clery's falling away from the
Principles of the Reformation; that such or such Books are founded on the
Arminian Scheme; and the Chief Cause why many have built their hopes of
Salvation on a false Bottom? And agreeably as you have pronounced, or born your
noble Testimony concerning the Writings of Arbishop Tillotson, as directly
contrary to the Gospel of Christ; if any dares to dispute the Matter, let them
but remember, it has pleased God to give you the true Knowledge of the
Doctrines of Grace, this must Command Assent, and hush every Tongue to Silence.
Thus an elder Brother of yours, the ever memorable GEORGE FOX, (an Infallible
also in his Days, to whom God had given the true Knowledge of the Doctrines of
Grace) bore his Testimony concerning the BIBLE, as only a Dead Letter; and
which was implicitly recieved by his Followers, at least of that Age.

And thus equipped you advance on the Author of the Whole Duty of Man. This Book
(you pronounce) is in general cal-to civilize, but you're persuaded never was a
means of converting one single Soul. Will your Reverence stay your Hand here a
little? The Book (you say) is calculated to civilize; Something then it is good
for; please not utterly to destroy it. The Wrath, you know, of another noble
Champion of Grace, See Edwards's Preacher, P. 49, 50.) was kindled against this
Book; but his went no farther than the Title, Yours extends to the Preface,
general Titles, and Index. The Book (says he) pretends to treat of the Whole
Duty of Man, and puts us off with Half of it. Bad indeed! But is there no way
to salve the Affair? Let the Title be altered, and for the future run, One half
of the Whole Duty of Man; or rather let your Reverence, some spare Day or
other, supply the other Half that is wanting, under the Title of the first or
second Part, as you please, to be added next Edition, and then the first
general Title and Book itself may stand. And this, I hope, you will the more
readily fall in with, because of the Judgment of this Brother Champion of
yours, who with some Temper and Modesty says: I deny not that the aforesaid
Book is of very good Use in its Kind, and is in some Respects an excellent
Piece; and it is probable that if the worthy Author had lived longer, he would
have made those necessary Additions to it which I have hinted. Will either of
these proposals do? By no means, You have looked over the general Titles and
Index, and cannot find the WORD Regeneration so much as once mentioned. A fatal
Defect indeed! I have just been looking into my Concordance, and almost tremble
to tell you, that I find this WORD but twice mentioned in the whole Bible; and
in neither Place anywise to your Purpose! What the Consequence may be, when you
have considered the Matter, I cannot say.

But neither is this all. The whole Treatise (you say) is built on such a false
Foundation, as not only proves the Author to be no real Christian at Heart; but
also that he had not so much as a Head-Knowledge of the true Gospel of Christ.
All Heads, it is certain, are not alike furnished, nor capable of the same
Furniture; and therefore, saving your Infalibility, this Passage plainly shows
your Head sufficiently furnished, with what I forbear to name. But what is this
false Foundation this Treatise is built upon? Why it is contained in these
Words of the Preface, This second Covenant was made with Adam, and us in him,
presently after his Fall; and is briefly contained, Genesis iii. 15. where God
declares, that the Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents Head. And this
was made up as the first was, of some Mercies to be offered by God, and some
Duties to be performed by us. In this Passage lies the false Divinity, or
Fundamental Error that poisons the whole Book: But, alas, who that is not some
Way Enlightened, nay, who that is not equally Enlightened with your Reverence,
shall be able to find it? The Scotch second sight People pretend often to see
strange Things, which no Body else can see but themselves; and the Pope and the
Mufti pretend to see all the Fundamental Errors, and false Divinity in the
World; but what is all that to me, except they can open my Eyes to see the same
also? If they can open my Eyes to see the same Things as they pretend to see,
the Obligation of doing it will be very great; but their pretending to see this
or the other, which yet I cannot see is of no Avail to me, who am not disposed
to rely on their Pretenses, or to see with their Eyes, but with my own.

This Passage asserts, that God made a second Covenant with Adam, and us in
him, presently after his Fall; Genesis 3d. 15th. -- This you say, is false
Divinity and fundamental Error; and that it cannot be proved that God made any
second Covenant at all with Adam himself, or any of his Posterity. -- Pray,
Sir, are you in a Jest or Earnest in this Matter? Have you not been dabling
with, the Marrow of modern Divinity, or some such precious Book, which puzzles
your Head, and lies crude on your Understanding? Or are you deputed by some
other Head or Hand behind the Curtain, to put off such Stuff upon the World? Or
finally, do you really mean to burlesque the Bible, and try Practices on the
weak and unstable of Mankind? Here you say, ( Genesis ^d. and 15th.) is a Free
Gift and Promise of Salvation made to Adam; but no Covenant, not a Word of any
Condition mentioned. There are certain People in the Word called Deists, who
will contend it with you* that this Text contains no free Gift, nor any Promise
of Salvation to Adam, or any other. Please try a Cast of your masterly Hand
against these same Diests; and if the same Arguments by which you prove the
Text to contain a Free Gift, or Promise of Salvation to Adam, do not equally
prove that it contains or implies a Covenant also, then let it be given up
without further Contention.

But suppose this Text given up, and wholly out of the Question, will it thence
follow, that it cannot be proved that God made any second Covenant at all with
Adam himself, or any of his Posterity? Have you never read of the Covenant
which God made with Abraham, and the Oath which he swear unto Isaac? Know you
nothing of the Covenant which God made at Horeb, with the Seed of Abraham his
chosen? or the Two Tables of it wrote with his own Finger, nor the Ark wherein
they were kept? Are you wholly ignorant, how often God complains by his
Prophets, of that chosen People's breaking his Covenant, and how often he
punished them for such Breaches? Does not St. Paul (Gal. 4.) expressly assert
two Covenants, represented by the two Sons of Abraham; that of the Law
represented by the Son of the Bondwoman, and that of the Gospel, by the Son of
the Free? And is not Christ expressly styled by the same Apostle, the Mediator
of the NEW Covenant; of a better Covenant, which was established on better
Promises? See Heb. 8th passim. -- More-over, (Sir) if you are thus persuaded,
that God never (...) any second Covenant with Adam, nor any of his Posterity;
how can you without Hypocrisy or Dissimulation presume to baptize according to
the Office of the Church of England, or to teach her Catechism? How can you
with a good Conscience, oblige any Person in Baptism, to the solemn Vows and
Promises; First, Of renouncing the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and
Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh: Secondly,
Of believing all the Articles of the Christian Faith: And, Thirdly, Of keeping
God's Holy Will and Commandments, and walking in the same all the Days of their
Life? How can you, I say, with an honest and upright Conscience, lay this Yoke
on the Necks of the Disciples, which God himself never laid, nor ever empowered
Men to lay; if so be that he never made any second Covenant with them, and that
the Gospel is a Free Gift in such a Sense, as to exclude its being a Covenant
Dispensation?

Here I should lay down my Pen, and wait your Answers to the above Particulars;
but one more Remark, and it will probably drop from my Hand.

After having quoted the 21st Paragraph of the Preface, viz. The Third Thing
that Christ was to do for us, etc. You go on to ask, Where has God taken off
from the Hardness of the Law given to Adam? And required of us an holy and
hearty Endeavor to do what we are able; and when we fail accepting of sincere
Repentance? I answer, in every Page of the Bible: But to which your Answer is,
This is all as false as God is true. Presumptuous Man! What more can the
hold Infidel presume, than to call God's Truth to witness the Falsehood of
the Bible! My trembling Hand can no longer, than to subsribe myself,

Sir, Your very humble Servant, Alex. Garden.
Charlestown, April 21st. 1740.
LETTER VI. To the Reverend Mr. Whitefield.
ALAS Sir is it come to this at last! That you to whom God has given a true
Knowledge of the Doctrines of Grace! And who in the Fullness of that Knowledge
had so absolutely vindicated your modest and christian Assertion, viz. That
Archbishop Tillotson knew no more of Christianity than Mahomet! That you, I
say, instead of defending your noble Vindication, are fain to run for Shelter
under the Wings of the poor shattered Dr. Edwards, (as dogmatical captious,
unfair and confuted a Writer as any of his Time) and to throw out his exploded
Snarling Stuff to your Opposers, and bid them Answer it! Are these the Arts of
a Man of your Gifts and Graces? Or can you think your Opposers simple enough to
be caught by them; and set to Work to confute such Stuff, as has been confuted
and exploded above 30 Years ago? It is a Maxim, I am told among the Jesuits in
Controversy, never to regard the Objections of an Adversary; but to neglect
them, and always return to their own Assertion, as if nothing had been offered
against it. A Maxim worthy indeed of that singular Order! Do not you also
pursue this Trick of theirs in your Polemicks? Did you learn it of them? Or is
it the Fruit of your own Genius? Do you Sir, first vindicate Dr. Edwards
against his Opposers in the Case, and your Opposers may probably take some
Notice of your Vindication.

But mean-time, as this Letter, though directed to you, is designed to be
published, and as many of the Readers of your Epistle in these Parts, may never
have seen either Dr. Edwards's PREACHER, nor any Vindication the Archbishop
from the injurious Treatment contained in it; I shall therefore take leave, in
a few Words, to put such Readers in the Way, to avoid Imposition in the Case,
and to do common Justice to the Parties concerned. And to this Purpose the
following single Rule, and a few Instances to show the Necessity and Usefulness
of it, shall suffice.

The Rule is this, That such Readers do by no Means trust to the Authority
either of Dr. Edwards, your Reverence, or any other, concerning any Passages
excepted to, of the Writings of the Archbishop; but that they see with their
own Eyes, by reading them in Connection as they stand in the said Writings, and
with due Regard to the Scope and Argument of the respective Discourses in which
they are found. This is the Rule, and the Necessity and Usefulness of it will
appear in these following Instances.

1st. Tillot. Works, Vol. III. P. 414. You do not find any where revealed in
all the Scripture, that there is a God. And yet (excepts Dr. Edwards) it is
agreed by all sober and intelligent Christians, that there is express Mention
and Confirmation of a Deity in the Scriptures. Is this a fair and honest
Quotation from the Archbishop? Or is this a fair and honest Exception to it? It
is not any where REVEALED, says the Archbishop; there is express Mention and
Confirmation of it, says Dr. Edwards: What Inconsistency or Contradicton in
these? The Archbishop denies not the express Mention and Confirmation; The Dr.
asserts not the Revelation. But let the Reader see the Passage in this
following Connection (as it ought to have been quoted) with his own Eyes. A
divine Revelation cannot possibly be an Argument inducing me to believe the
Existence of a God, for this plain Reason; because a divine Revelation can be
no Argument to any, that is not persuaded that it is a divine Revelation: But
before I can be persuaded that any Revelation is from God, I must be persuaded
there is a God; and if so, there is no Need of this Argument to prove to me
there is one. And therefore you do not find it any where revealed in all the
Scripture, that there is a God. The Scripture often declares, that Jehovah is
the true and living God; and that, besides him there is no other: But it does
not reveal but every where suppose, that there is one. Thus stands the Passage
in Connection, containing as plain and demonstrable a Truth, as any Proposition
in Euclid.

2. From the same Vol. and Page of the Archbishop's Works, Dr. Edwards quotes
these Words; I do not find the Immortality of the Soul, or a future State is
expressly revealed in the Bible; and excepts to them as denying the express
Mention and Confirmation of these Particulars, in the Scriptures. The Words
indeed are in the same Vol. and Page, but not together as they are quoted. The
Passage in Connection runs thus: As for the other two Principles of Natural
Religion, the Immortality of the S^ul, and a future State; after we believe a
God* we may be persuaded of these from Divine Revelation; and that does give
the highest and firmest Assurance of them, in the Resurrection of Christ from
the Dead. Yet I do not find but that these also are rather supposed, than
expressly revealed in the Bible. Indeed the Immortality of the Soul may be
inferred from several Places of Scripture, and the Tenor of the whole Bible.
And so a future State, which as for the Thing it self, seems to he supposed as
a Thing acknowledged by Natural ^ight; only the Scripture has revealed the
Circumstances more particularly to us, and given us higher Assurance of the
Thing. Thus let the Reader see with his own Eyes, and not trust the Quotations
of Edwards, your Reverence, or any like foul and partial Writer.

3. As to the Archbishop's denying such Power or Prerogative to the Devil, as
to imprint wicked Thoughts on the Minds of Men, (Vol. II. P. 532, 533, not 352,
353. as you directed) I must beg the Reader to consult that whole Sermon,
entitled, the Knowledge of God. Of the several Passages relating to this
Particular, I shall here set down but this one. -- I do not see, how by any
Means it can be granted, without Prejudice to this Prerogative of God, which
the Scripture plainly gives him, of being the only Knower of the Heart, that
the Devil can have so immediate an Access to our Minds, as to put wicked
Thoughts into them; nor can I think that when it is said, that Satan provoked
David to Number the People, that the Devil entered into Judas; that Satan had
filled the Heart of Ananias, etc. that any or all of these Expressions do
amount to such an immediate Power, of putting wicked Thoughts into Men's Minds;
but they only signify, that the Devil has a greater Hand in some Sins than
others; and that a Heart wickedly bent and inclined, gives him a great
Advantage to tempt Men more powerfully, by presenting the Occasions of such
wicked Thoughts and Actions to them: For it is usual, in Scripture Phrase, as
to ascribe all good Motions to God's Spirit, so all evil Thoughts and Actions
to the Devil; not that he is the immediate Cause of them, but because he is
always ready to tempt Men to them, and one Way or other to promote them.' --
Thus every Reader may see, from this Passage, but more fully from the whole
Tenor of the Sermon, that the Archbishop is only asserting the Knowledge of
Men's Hearts to be the sole Prerogative of God, and therefore denying the same
Prerogative to the Devil. But the unparalleled Abuse of the latter Part of this
Passage by Dr. Edwards, and yourself his Voucher, must not be passed over in
Silence. The lat^er Part of this Passage you cite from Dr. Edwards's Preacher,
P. 117. Word for Word, thus; -- As it is usual, in the Scripture Phrase, to
ascribe all good Motions to God's Spirit, so all evil thoughts to the Devil;
not that he is the immediate Cause of these, no more than God's Spirit is the
Author of the other. Thus Word for Word, I say, you have cited from Dr.
Edwards, and all in I^aliks, as if they all were the Words of the Archbishop.
In this Sir, you have injure^ both the Archbishop and the Dr. For neither are
these last Words, viz. NO MORE THAN GOD'S SPIRIT IS THE AUTHOR OF THE OTHER,
the Words of the Archbishop at all; nor indeed has Dr. Edwards set them down as
such in his Book, but in a different Character, as an Addition of his own. Rare
juggling Work indeed! Dr. Edwards injuriously adds to the Archbishop's Words,
and still more injuriously censures him on that Addition. You, to mend the
Matter, put the added Words directly into the Archbishop's Mouth, and vouch the
same Censure, viz. Is not this a strange Comparison between these two contrary
Spirits? And does not the Framer of it discover what new Models of Divinity he
affects? He is pleased to excuse the Devil from ejecting any bad Thoughts into
Men's Minds, and he exempts God's Spirit from being the Cause or Author of any
good or holy Thoughts. The Comparison is strange enough indeed! But whether Dr.
Edwards and your Reverence are not the Framers of it, let the Reader see. You,
Sir, and your Brother Champion are the Framers of it, and as stupidly as
injuriously have you framed it. For so far is the Archbishop from exempting
God's Spirit from being the Author of any good or holy Thoughts, that it is the
whole Scope or Argument of that very Discourse, to prove it the sole
Prerogative of God, to know the Hearts of Men; and consequently his Power of
being the immediate Author of good and holy Thoughts there; and denying this
Prerogative to the Devil, and consequently his Power of being the immediate
Author of bad or evil ones.

Dr. Edwards is now dead and before his Maker, but you are yet alive, and
therefore upon you I call, either to vindicate or retract your Testimony in
this Matter, in as public a Manner as you have bore it, or to rest under the
Charge of being a wilful Deciever.

These few Instances are sufficient to show the Necessity and Usefulness of
observing the above Rule in the present Case, and indeed in all like Cases of
Controversy whatsoever. Let no Reader trust the Citations of either Party or
Parties concerned; but consult and see them with his own Eyes. For how easy a
Matter is it for a dishonest Adversary to mis-represent and abuse the Writings
of any Author, specially if gone to rest from his Labors? It is but exposing
them in Shreds, Scraps, or Sentences detached from their Connection, with some
few Addition of Words, Glosses, Inuendoes, etc. in order to give a wrong Turn;
and the Work is done: By these and like Means, the poor Author is demolished;
made to speak the very Reverse of his true Sentiments, the very contrary of
what he meant and intended. Let Readers take Care; the best of Writers are not
exempted from this Usage. The sacred Pages have not escaped it, at the Hands of
Collins, Tindal, and other Infidel Writers.

As to the Archbishop's Sentiments of Christianity in general, so charitably
represented by Dr. Edwards and your Reverence, as mean and disparaging, and his
either giving a very crude Account of Christian Duties, or jumbling them with
mere Acts of Morality; I shall only lay before the Reader, the following
Paragraph from the Bishop of London 's 2d Pastoral Letter, P. 64. 65. 4th Edit.
It may not be improper, before I shut up this Head, to observe that several of
our most eminent Divines after the Restoration, set themselves both by
Preaching and Writing to enlarge upon the Importance of Moral Duties, and to
recommend them with great Earnestness to the Regard of the People; to such a
Degree, as to stand charged by others with too great a Disregard of the
D^ctrines and Duties peculiar to Christianity. Whereas, the Case in reality was
this. During the Times of Confusion, many of the Preachers had not only forborne
to inculcate the Duties of Morality, but had labored to depreciate them; to
persuade the People that Faith was All, and Works Nothing. And therefore the
Clergy after the Restoration, in order to take off those unhappy Impressions,
found themselves obliged to inculcate with more than ordinary Diligence, the
Necessity of moral Duties in the Christain Life, and to labor to restore them
to their proper Share in the Christian Scheme. But those of them, who with the
honest View I have mentioned, labored the most zealously in that Way, were at
the same Time as zealous to explain to the People the great Work of our
Redemption by Jesus Christ, as the Means of Salvation which God has appointed:
(a) The Corruption and Misery into which Mankind was sunk by the Fall of our
first Parents; (b) The Necessity of a Mediator to recover them, and restore
them to the Favor of God; (c) The Incarnation of ^he Son of God for that End;
(d) The Goodness of God in appointing his own Son to be the Mediator between
him and Us; V. I. 471.
The Comfort of having a Mediator of our own Nature; V. I. 477. V. II 361.
The Expiation made for Sin by the Suffering of Christ; V. I. 473.
The Wisdom of God in making Christ a Sacrifice for Sin; V. II. 637.
The inestimable Value of his Sufferings, for the Redemption of all Mankind; V.
III. 480
Our Justification by Faith in him, V. III. 300, 320, 488.
and Sanctification by the Holy Spirit, and his Intercession for us at God's
Right Hand. In general; what can be more express, than the Doctrine laid down
by V II ^^^
Archbishop Tillotson, concerning our Redemption by Christ, That Men are to
place all their Hope and Confidence of Salvation in Jesus Christ the Son of
God; that is, to believe that through the alone Merit of his Death and
Sufferings, God is reconciled to us; and that, only upon the Account of the
Satisfaction which he has made to Divine Justice, we are restored to the
Favor of God, and our Sins are pardoned to us, and we have a Title to Eternal
Life. Not but that there are Conditions on our Til. V. III. p. 303, 320. 589.
V. II. 129.
V. I. 437, 460. V. II. 261.
V. I. 445.
Part to make us capable of these Benefits, Faith and Repentance, and sincere
Obedience, and Holiness of Life, without which we shall never be made Partakers
of them; but that the Satisfaction of Christ is the only meritorious Cause of
those Blessings.

I should here put an End to this Trouble, but as your Letter to the
Inhabitants of Mariland, etc. is annexed to this I have now remarked upon, I
shall take Leave to subjoin a few Remarks on that valuable Performance.

In my humble Opinion, Sir, had you caused another Edition to be printed at
Philadelphia, of the Bishop of London 's Letter to the Masters and Mistresses
of Slaves in these Parts, and dispersed the Copies on your Way, as you came
through the several Provinces, you had done much more effectual Service, than
by the Publication of your own. But if you knew of any such Letter of His
Lordship's being extant, I suppose you will plead a special Call for the
Publication of your own, and that answers all Objections.

You must inform them (the Inhabitants of Maryland, etc.) you say, In the
Meekness and Gentleness of Christ, etc. the Invective is so apparent throughout
this notable Epistle, that these can only be taken for some Cant-Terms you
accustom yourself to in all your Scriblings. But what is it you Must thus
inform them of? Why, that you Think God has a Quarrel with them, etc. Had God
sent you charged with this special Message, you might well say, that you MUST
inform them of it; but as it is only a Matter of your own Thoughts, the
Necessity does not so well appear. Your Thoughts in this Case may possibly be
idle or ill grounded* and so better kept at home. But God you THINK has a
Quarrel with them, and for their Abuse of and Cruelty to the poor Negroes. That
God will have a Quarrel with any of the Human Race, for their Abuse of and
Cruelty to others, is a very just Thought; and sinful out of all Doubt it is,
for any of those Inhabitants to use their Negroes as bad, nay worse, than as
though they were Brutes. But pray, Sir, on what Grounds do you bring this Charge
against the Generality of those Inhabitants who own Negroes, of using them as
had, nay worse than as though they were Brutes? Do you know this Charge to be
just and honest? Or have you sufficient Evidence to support it? No; you only
think it to be so, and fear it, and believe it. But on the contrary, I shall
presume, and on much better Grounds, to think, fear, and believe, that your
Charge is false and injurious! and that the very Reverse of it is true, viz.
that what particular Exceptions soever there may be as to good Usage of Slaves
(as some doubtless there are) yet that the Generality of Owners use their
Slaves with all due Humanity, whether in respect of Work, of Food, or Raiment.
And therefore I farther think and believe, that the Generality of Owners of
Slaves in the respective Colonies, may bring their Actions of Slander against
you; and that in a certain Country I know, you would be indicted for meddling,
as you have done in this Matter, which may endanger the Peace and Safety of the
Community.

Hitherto we have only your Thoughts, your Fears, and your Belief on the
Matter; you advance a-pace into positive Assertions. And perhaps, you say, it
might be better for the poor Creatures themselves to be hurried out of Life,
than to be made so miserable, as they generally are in it. And indeed,
considering what Usage they commonly meet with, etc. -- I suppress the
remainder of this and the next following Paragraph of your Epistle, as judging
it both sinful, and dangerous to the public Safety to reprint them. More
Virulence and Falsehood cannot be contained in so few Lines. For so far are the
generality of Slaves in these Colonies, from being miserable, that I dare
confidently vouch and affirm, and partly on my own Knowledge, that their Lives
in general are more happy and comfortable in all temporal Respects (the Point
of Liberty only excepted) than the Lives of three fourths of the hired farming
Servants, and Day Laborers, either in Scotland, Ireland, or even in many Parts
of England, who not only labor harder, and fare worse, but have moreover the
Care and Concern on their Minds how to provide for their Families; which Slaves
are entirely exempted from, their Children being all provided for at the
Owner's Charge.

Now, Sir, if this be really the Case with respect to the generality of Slaves
in these Colonies, which can fully be proved it is; what Apology can suffice
either for the Matter or Manner of your Letter, specially the two modest
Paragraphs above mentioned? Will you plead Hearsay or Report? Alas, Sir, this
Plea will never do! I have heard by Report, of your Abuse and Cruelty to the
poor Orphans under your Care, not only in Pinching their Bellies, but giving
them up also to Task-Master^ or Mistresses, who Plow upon their Backs, and make
lomg Furrows, in a very inhuman Manner. And would you think it a fair and
honest Thing in me, should I, on such Hearsay or Report, print and publish a
Letter directed to you, pretending a Necessity of informing you, that God had a
Quarrel with you, for your Cruelty to the poor Orphans; that perhaps they had
better be hurried out of Life, than be made so miserable as they are in it; and
that I wondered, they did not either put an End to their own Lives or Yours,
rather than bear such Usage: Would you think this, I say, a fair and honest
Proceeding in me, and not rather foul and injurious, and having no good
meaning, either toward yourself or the Orphans? And though it came prefaced in
the Meekness and Gentleness of Christ, would you not regard it rather as a
Burlesque of the Words? No, Sir, I know ther^ must be a due Discipline, or Rod
of Correction exercised among Children; and this may be, and often is
misrepresented for Cruelty and bad Usage. I know also, that like Discipline and
Correction must be observed among every Parcel of Slaves; and which in like
Manner, may be, and often is misrepresented in the same Light: And therefore no
such Reports, in either Case, can justify a direct Accusation.

As to the little or no proper Care taken by Owners of the Souls of their
Slaves, it is too sad a Truth; and I tremble to think, what Account they will
give of it at the great Day! A sore Evil indeed! But for which, your Letter, I
conceive, will afford but a poor Remedy. I cannot think so ill of any, as you
do of most of them, viz. that on Purpose, they keep their Slaves ignorant of
Christianity. I believe the Reason of their being so kept, is the want of one
certain uniform Method of teaching them, and which I hope will soon be
established with Success. I readily agree, that the Objection to teaching them
Christianity, viz. that it would tend to make them less governable, or worse
Slaves, is wild and extravagant: But wish you had a little explained, what you
mean by the Phrases, Christianizing; and MADE thorough Christians; and the
Gospel preached with Power; whether by these Phrases you mean Things in the
Power of Men? For sure I am, that Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but
God alone can give the Increase. Men may teach true Christianity, but no Man
can MAKE a true Christian.

Your Complement on Pastors and People, and apprehended Difference 'twixt the
Importation of Rum and Bibles, are no Exceptions to the usual Style, Modesty,
or Manners of your Epistles, and particularly of this under Consideration,
which I have now done with, and remain,

Sir, Your very humble Servant, Alex. Garden.
Charlestown, July 30th, 1740.
A Short Trip to ROME, OR A DIALOGUE between the famous Roman Casuist Escabar,
and a Missionary lately employed.
Miss. ALL hail! Father Escabar,


Esca. Whence comes my Son


Miss. Sir, you know it is my hard fate to be lately appointed to propagate our
Holy Religion in a C^untry where the darling Idol is Liberty; where Men will
take nothing upon Trust, where they hate some of the fundamental Tenets of our
Catholic Faith, and as I dedesire faithfully to discharge my Duty; so I want
your Assistance to pair off the Roughness of some of those Things, till once we
have engaged 'em into our Party, and then there is hope they will be easily
reconciled to what seems most severe in our holy Religion.


Esc. What in particular think thou deserves my Care?


Miss. Why this Doctrine of Infalibiliiy, or implicit Faith in their spiritual
Guides, is what they abhor; they read their Bibles, and have learnt to refuse
us the Privilege of thinking for them, or explaining the Scriptures by our
Traditions.


Esc. I have a Remedy provided in this Case that will bring them by degrees to
be true Sons of our Church. The greatest Number of People in every Place never
think for themselves, but follow the Man they admire. Your Business is to set
up for uncommon Degrees of Sanctity, make bold Pretenses to Illuminations and
the Indwelling of the Spirit, and who can contradict you; Ply these Heretics
with Scripture, fix on that Text the moral Man exercises not the Things of the
Spirit of God, for they are Foolishness unto him, neither can he know them
because they are spiritually discerned; but he that is spiritual judges all
Things, and is judged of none. Insist on it that all who differ from you in
their Notions are carnal Men, who never felt the Power of Godliness in their
own Souls; produce your own Experiences, as the best Commentaries on the
Scriptures, and this will suit your Purpose as well as our Traditions, and will
keep Men from explaining any Text contrary to Experiences of the Godly. These
Heretics themselves depend on the Spirit? Take a little Advantage of what is
natural to their Tempers to expect, and what there is ground for the Righteous
to wait for, turn to mechanic Impulses and violent Movings, and this will not
fail to suit most Tempers, pretend that the same Spirit who inspired the
Apostles is freely bestowed on you, and since natural Men cannot understand the
Scriptures; and you have the Spirit in such extraordinary Measure, you may
surely claim the Rights to show them the true Meaning of the Word, and to think
for them in religious Matters, and this will effectually wrest the Bible cut of
their Hands who think not as you do, nor receive your Doctrine as the true Mind
of God. For if any will dare to oppose the Sentiments of such a holy Man,
proclaim him an Enemy to God and his Interest, and set the Mobb on him, and it
will pass for Merit to make a Sacrifice of such an Hererick.


Miss. But how shall I introduce auricular Confession amongst 'em; for they
hate to be under the Jurisdiction of the Clergy, or, in their Language, to be
Priest ridden?


Esc. Ply 'em with the same Weapons, tell them, The spiritual Man judges all
Things; tell 'em That you have such Feelings of the Spirit, that by a certain
Simpathy, by comparing your Experiences with theirs, you can know certainly
whether they be Christians or not. Thunder 'em out of their Senses with
dreadful Sounds; that will do as well with the Ignorant as all the Thunders of
the Vatican. And since they themselves confess, there may be Men sound in the
Faith, and regular in their Lives, an^ yet not real Christians. Hence you may
easily persuade 'em not to trust their own Judgment or Examination of their
State, but to give themselves up to their spiritual Guides, who can clearly see
through 'em, and learn from their Confession how Matters are between God and
their Souls. And since none but real Christians, as they all grant, have a
Right to sealing Ordinances, here is their Hold; show 'em the Danger of
Partaking if they are not Christians; insist that they confess their Cases,
under a Pretense of Reciting their Experiences, 'till you school and accustom
'em to confess themselves to you upon all Occasions; and as you know they
cannot tell their Experiences without mixing amongst them some of their
Relapses and Miscarriages, this will bring them by Degrees to lay their Sins
before you, and introduce Confessions of all Sorts, and gently bring them home
to our holy Mother.


Miss. But their Teachers will prevent this, and we shall labor in vain,
unless we can spoil their Credit, and bring the People to believe that the
Blessing depends o^ the Intention of the Preacher.


Esc. That Is too bold a stroke all at once* but act your Part nicely, and the
Thing will be managed, you must, as I said, make very great Pretenses to the
Spirit, and endeavor for a while to live stricter than their Teachers, and
these Things in any Man, especially a Stranger, never fail to gain the good
Opinions and Admiration of the Multitude, proclaim their Teachers Carnal Men,
Enemies to God, and strangers to those Christian Experiences which you have,
and by consequence unfitt for their Office, and unable to direct Men in their
great Concerns and then the more they oppose you, the more family will People
believe your Report; because they will imagine you see further than they do,
and are able and ready to discover such Hypocrites; by this means you will
bring them to confine the Blessings of God on his Ordinances to the Piety of
Men, and having once got it, thus restrained to the Piety: The next remove will
be to the Intentions of the Spiritual Guides, and if once you can bring them to
believe that their Salvation or Damnation is so much in their Power, and
depending on your Intentions, your point is fully gained.


Miss. But the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is contrary to the Carnal reason
of those Heretics, that I despair to introduce it amongst them without your
Assistance.


Esc. Courage my Son, cride quod habes and habes. Believe that you are able to
do Wonders, and you shall succeed, if you can bring them to renounce Reason
and depend on their Spiritual Guides. What difficulty can there be in this? You
know that the Plan is laid to wrest the BIBLE out of their Hands, by giving it
up to your pious Explications, and you know that in Scripture it is said that
Christ is formed in believers: By Christ in this Place tell them (Vol. 2. P
33.) that they are to understand the Man Christ, or the human Nature of our
blessed Lord; and if the Man Christ or his human Nature is formed in every true
believer, what a vast Number of human Bodies must be all in different Places;
at the same Time that his individual Body is in Heaven? And what is still more
surprising, The Man Christ must be in another Man, or two different Bodies be
in one and the same Place at one and the same Time without just^ing one
another, and without altering the external visible, bodily appearance in the
least, that the Person had before the Man Christ was formed in him; and when
this Doctrine is swallowed, which I promise you many will do very readily; how
easily may you again bring them to believe, that the Body of Christ may be in
Heaven, and in a Thousand consecrated Wafers at the same Time, without altering
their outward Appearance? If it be reasonable to believe that the Man Christ ^r
his Body is in the Believer, when he tells us that he is formed in the
Believer, is there not as good ground to conclude, that it is in the
consecrated Wafer, when he says this is my Body? If it be possible that the Man
Christ Jesus is now exalted in Heaven, and at the same Time is in Thousands of
Believers. Why is it not as easily to concieve, that he is at once in Heaven
and in Thousands of consecrated Wafers? But you may possibly think that it will
star^^e the People to imagine that the Priest by repeating a few Words can
convert a piece of Bread into the Body of his Redeemer; no my Son, there is no
ground for such fears, you may easily bring them to so strong a Faith as to
swallow all you Teach them, without ever examining it by saying with bold
Assurance you speak the Truth in Christ, and Lie not: But to make the Thing
take more readily, I have a Salve to Cure all. Tell them with a Holy Grimace
that the Words which in the other Sacrament, we Translate Baptizing them in the
Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, may as well be rendered, Baptizing them
into the Nature of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. And upon this turn given to
the Text, which none must venture to Question, there is a sufficient Foundation
laid for this Power which we Claim, and it will effectually support the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation: For if the Priest by Baptism may change Men who
are by Nature half Beasts and half Devils, into the Nature of the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, certainly he may with as much ease by repeating the Words of
the Institution in the Lords Supper change a bit of Bread, which is not near so
bad as a Devil or a Beast into the real Body and Blood of Christ; if the one
change can be made in Baptism; why not the other in the Lords Supper? It Is as
easy to change a Wafer into Christ's Body, as a Man into a God, and he that
believes the last, will soon be brought to swollow the first.


Miss. But how shall I introduce Monks, Friars, Abbots, and all the lay
Brotherhood, when they have been long since exploded, who are so very useful
to promote our Designs and raise Divisions.


Esc. Very easy my Son, persuade them, that the weakest, most ignorant Person
is a true Christian, has a better acqu^intance with the Christian Religion,
than the greatest Letter learned Rabbi amongst them, and whenever you find any
pragmatical Fellow, that has impudence and self-conciet enough to be a Fool,
and industry enough to serve your turn, Teach him his Lesson, persuade him to
despise an orderly call to the Ministry, as only the call of Men, and to follow
the inward call of the Spirit, going about doing good to Souls, tell them, that
Learning signifies nothing; and that the Spirit which is now promised to all
Believers, as well as it was in the Apostles Days, will guide them to a clear
infallible experimental Explanation of all the difficult Passages in the Old
and New Testament; prompt the Sighing Sisters, not to bury their Talents, but
employ their Tongues: And thus you may send Hundreds on your Errands without
knowing whose Interest they serve: And if the designed Revolution can be
accomplished, they will every skin of them serve for Monks, Friars and Nuns;
and if we fail of Success our Holy Fathers will cannonize all of them, that
deserve our Notice, for Saints under the pious Names of Monks and Confessors,
50 Years after their Death, or as soon as they are purified from their Heresy,
in the sacred Flames of Purgatory.


Miss. But their Teachers are all or most of them inclined to Marry, therefore
please to propose a method to oblige the Clergy to live single.


Esc. My Son you must set a good Example yourself obstinately refuse to alter
your Condition, and I allow you always the privilege to carry about with you
some pious Ladies for the good of their Souls; but if our Scheme takes, and you
succeed in the other Things proposed, you shall introduce this of Course. At
present you need do no more then to plead, that it is the indisputable
Privilege of every Christian to hear the Minister he reaps most benefit by;
and of consequence the Ministers will be obliged to Preach where they can do
most good, and get most hearers; which will prove so inconvenient to those who
have Families and lay them under such hardships and uncomfortable tossings to
and fro, as will effectually discourage all the gifted Brethren that are
single, from ever thinking to alter their single State, unless they be Fools or
Madmen.


Miss. But how shall I introduce Penance it is a Doctrine. So contrary to Flesh
and Blood, that these carnal Herriticks, will scarce ^ver be brought to embrace
it


Esc. This may easily be done, for Men have naturally a desire to make some
expiation for their crimes and what can they think will better or more easily
recommend 'em to the favor of God, then some gentle Austerities, you know the
Scheme you go upon excludes repentance and good Works* instead of these insist
upon The necessity of Strong Convictions, a high degree of Law work, in all
attended with bodily convulsions; much Crying and public Lamentations persuade
'em they must go through all these before they are fit for the grace of God; and
when this pious Fraud of Michanical Conversion has taken place they will be
content to be brought to it by undergoing any outward Labor and fatigue, by
joining in a Chorus of Mourners, undertaking Pilgrimage, and enduring
Scourgings and which is still better parting with their Pence for the pious use
of the kind instruments, who have freely bestowed their Labor to bring 'em to
so hopeful a Pass.


Miss One thing more, Father Escaber, and I have done for this seems to Crown
all and complete our Work.


Esc. Speak on my Son,


Miss. There will always be some bold inquirers who will not submit to our
Doctrines and may Spoil all; and you know these Heriticks will not be brought
to use proper Severity's against those who are out of the Pale, and may prevent
others from coming in; for they keep Faith with those that differ from 'em, and
allow Civil privileges to such as are not of the same Faith with themselves.


Esc. This Doctrine of cutting off Heriticks must be a little paired to suite
their Palates for a while but take Courage, the thing may be accomplished, all
Men are (as themselves confess) while in a State of nature, the Children of
wrath; upon this privilege then, that you can judge their State, and know who
are, and who are not, the Dear Children of God, you may plausibly advise all
that are Holy in your Eyes to refuse to converse with such as you see fit, to
pronounce Children and Emissaries of the Devil, and would hinder the good Works
you are employed in, and this will unavoidablie beget Shyness des^ike
Ill Nature and an unfriendly unsociable temper for when Men are once brought to
look on their Neighbors as Heirs of Hell and inca^nate Devils (and this you
must imprint deeply on their minds) they will soon think no treatment too bad
for; and so by an insensible Gradation. Fines Impresonment. Loss of Civil
Rights may fire and Faggot and the most wholesome Severities, will be introduced
^o Cur^ the insolence of these bold inquirors who dare scruple to receive our
dictates and will not submit to our Holy Catholic Faith.


Miss. Well Father Escabar, I will carefully endeavor to observe these
Directions, and what other instructions you shall be pleased to send by the
Secret conveyances agreed on, for my Conduct amongst the Heriticks to whom I am
sent,


Esc. According to the Accounts of your Success, my Son, you shall be supported
and directed; you may sometime for a blind rail a little against Mother Rome,
but let all your Lo^d aproaches fall upon the Church of England, lift up your
voice like a Trumpet against her, and every one of her ablest Rabbis, whether
Living or Dead; but by all means avoid entering into Arguments with them, your
Talent lies not that way, call them Car^a^ unregenerated Men, Strangers to the
Spirit, Life and Power of true Godliness and Solemnly declare, that you never
intend to Reason with such. Court the Favors of all Parties, especially their
Teachers, but when you find Men of Letters amongst them, loudly proclaim them
unregenerated and Carnal Men. And seriously advise their Hearers to join
themselves to Congregations who are happy, and believe under the Inspection of
the most ignorant and stupid holders forth, whom you must cry up for Spiritual,
at least seemingly Spiritual Men; they will be elated and proud of such a
Character, and in return will publish your Praises, and publicly Pray for your
Success, that you may go on Conquering and to Conquer, besides having neither
Capacity nor Ability, when you drop the Mark they will be an easy Prey, and
will naturally fall into our Scheme, as it happens some important Affairs laid
before the Congregation de propaganda demand my immediate Attendance. The
Prayers of Mother Church* for your Success shall be offered up to the Blessed
Virgin, to St. Anthony, and all the Saints, and may the blessing of our Holy
Father who has employed thee, be with thee.


AMEN.

