A LETTER From the Rev. Mr White-field from Georgia, to a Friend in London,
showing the Fundamental ERROR OF A BOOK, ENTITLED The Whole Duty of Man.

CHARLESTOWN, Printed by Peter Timothy 1740.

A Letter from the Rev. Mr. Whitefield, to a Friend in London, showing the
Fundamental Error of a Book, entitled, The Whole Duty of Man.
My dear Friend,
SINCE it has pleased God to give me a true Knowledge of the Doctrines of
Grace, I have frequently thought, that next to the falling away of the Clergy
from the Principles of the Reformation, the Books which are in our Church
founded on the Arminian Scheme, have been the chief Cause why so many of our
own Communion in particular, have built their Hopes of Salvation on a false
Bottom. The Authors not only led the People Captive in their own Life Time, but
also after their Death, like Simon Magus, for a long Season have bewitched the
People with their Sorceries; I mean their seemingly devout, but at the Bottom
Antichristian, Compositions.

The only Way therefore, to open People's Eyes, I think is this: To show them
that the Writings which for some Years past, have been so much admired, are
directly contrary to the Gospel of Jesus Christ for this Reason, I thought it
my Duty, to bear a public Testimony against the Writings of Archbishop
Tillotson* And upon the same Account, think it my Duty* to point out the
Fundamental Error of an Author as much admired and read by the more common, as
the Archbishop by the more learned and polite, sort of People.

I know you are impatient to hear, who this can be: If you will promise me not
to be angry, I Will tell you; it is that much admired Book called the WHOLE DUTY
OF MAN. Methinks, I see you surprised at the very mentioning of it. But
remember, I desired you not to be angry; and if you will throw aside Prejudice,
and are sincerely desirons to know and do the divine Will, I am persuaded we
shall be both of one Mind concerning this Book, are you lay this Letter down
out of your Hand.

But before I show you its Error, to convince you of my Impartiality, I
confess, that the Devotions of that Book, were once of Service to me: And I
believe have been useful to many others. The Book in general, is calculated to
civilize, but I am persuaded it never was a Means of converting one single
Soul. I have just been looking over the Index and general Titles at the End of
it, and cannot find the Word Regeneration so much as once mentioned; and indeed
the whole Treatise is built on such a false Foundation, as not only proves the
Author to be no real Christian at Heart* But also, that he had not so much as a
Head-Knowledge of the true Gospel of Jesus Christ. To prove this, I need only
refer you to part of the Preface, Of the Necessity of caring for the Soul,
(17th Paragraph) wherein the Author talking of the second Covenant, speaks
thus: This second Covenant, says he, was made with Adam and us in him,
presently after his Fall, and is briefly contained in those Words, Genesis 3d,
15th, where God declares, that the Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpent's
Head; and this was made up as the First was, of some Mercies to be afforded by
God, and some Duties to be performed by us. Who, that is any Way enlightened,
cannot see the false Divinity and Fundamental Errors of this Passage? For how
can it be proved, that the second Covenant was made with Adam; or that God ever
entered into any Covenant at all, with Man after he had broken the First? It is
true, he did enter into a Covenant, (and that from all Eternity,) with the
second Adam* the God-Man Christ Jesus, in our Stead. But it cannot be proved
that he made any second Covenant at all with Adam himself, or any of his
Posterity. But says our Author; He did make a second Covenant with Adam, and us
in him, presently after his Fall, and it is briefly contained in these Words,
Genesis 3d. and 15th, where God declares, that the Seed of the Woman shall break
the Serpent's Head. But I would ask, where any Covenant is contained in these
Words? And, how it is made up as the first was, of some Mercies to be afforded
by God, and some Duties to be performed by us? Here is a free Gift and Promise
of Salvation made to Adam, but no Covenant, not a Word of any Condition
mentioned. No, it was the free Gift of God in Christ. Adam was now in a State
of Condemnation, he was so far from being desirous of entering into Covenant
with, that he fled from, God, and was not so much as truly convicted of his
Sin; as will evidently appear from the Context. For, both he and his Wife laid
the Fault not upon themselves, but one another and the Serpent. The Woman which
thou gave me, (therein tacitly reflecting upon God, for giving him that
Woman,) she gave me, says Adam, and I did eat. Here appears no true Sense of
Sin at all: and to show they had no Notion of a Savior, we are told they sewed
Fig Leaves together, instead of applying to God, to cover their Nakedness; and
afterward fled from God, when they heard the Voice of the Lord God walking
among the Trees in the Garden. Here then opens the Mystery of Godliness, God
manifest in the Flesh. Notwithstanding our first Parents had broken the
Covenant, and had their Hearts hardened; yet, out of the Riches of his free
Grace, God had provided a Remedy from all Eternity, and now reveals it in Time.
The Seed of this Woman, i. e. Jesus Christ, (who in all Probability was
spiritually conceived that Instant in the Heart of Eve) shall bruise the
Serpent's Head, i. e. by his Obedience and Death, shall satisfy divine Justice,
fulfill the moral Law in Man's Stead, and thereby deliver him from the Power of
the Devil. Here are no Terms mentioned, on Man's Part at all. And supposing
there had been a Covenant made with Man, 'And it had been made up as the first
was, of some Mercies to be afforded by God, and some Duties to be performed by
us: Alas, we are of all Creatures the most miserable; for then we are not under
Grace, but under the Law. And if Adam could not keep the first Covenant, though
in perfect Innocence; how can we, who hate God by Nature, and whose Thoughts
are only evil continually, keep a second like unto it? Is not this putting Man
into a most unhappy Condition, and making his poor imperfect Obedience the
Cause why Jesus Christ is merciful unto him? and if so, how is boasting
excluded in the great Work of our Redemption, as the Scriptures every where
affirm? And how can Eternal Life be the free Gift of God, through Jesus Christ
our Lord? But this is agreeable enough to the Divinity of this Author, who in
the Twenty-first Paragraph of his Preface says; The Third Thing that Christ was
to do for us, was, to enable us, or give us Strength, to do what God requires
of us. This he does, first by taking off from the Hardness of the Law given to
Adam,which was, never to commit the least Sin upon Pain of Damnation, and
requiring of us only an holy and hearty Endeavor to do what we are able, and
where we fail accepting of sincere Repentance. Now, I would fain know, where
God has taken off from the Hardness of the Law given unto Adam? And required of
us only an holy and hearty Endeavor to do what we are able? And, when we fail,
accepting of sincere Repentance? This is all as false, as God is true; the
whole Law is as much, in Force against us, as it was against Adam, before we
are found in Christ. God has been so far from taking off from the Hardness of
the Law given to Adam, that Jesus Christ declares, that he came not to destroy,
but to fulfill it. And, until convinced of the Obligation we lie under to obey
the whole moral Law, in Thought, Word, and Deed, how can we see the Necessity
of the Righteousness of Jesus Christ? God's Law was honorable, Jesus Christ
fulfilled it in our Stead, and upon Account of that Righteousness imputed to
us, and not on our hearty Endeavors or Repentance, are we accepted by him.
What is there in our hearty Endeavor or Repentance, to recommend us to the
Favor of God, or render them worthy or being joined with the Righteousness of
Christ, as though that was not sufficient in itself? Our best (...) are but
Splendida peccata, glittering Sins. I cannot pray, says the pious Bishop
Beveridge, but I Sin; I cannot hear or preach a Sermon, but I Sin; I cannot
give an Alms, or receive the Sacrament, but I Sin; Nay, I cannot confess my
Sins, but my very Confessions are still Aggravations to them: my Repentings
need to be repented of; my Tears want washing, and the very washing of my
Tears, need still to be washed over again with the Blood of my Redeemer, Jesus
Christ, The Lord is our whole Righteousness, we are to go to him as poor
Sinners. Beg Salvation of him as his free Gift, and entreat him to give us a
living Faith, whereby that Righteousness may be applied to our Hearts; and then
that Faith, if true, will work by Love. This, the Author of the WHOLE DUTY OF
MAN, was wholly ignorant of, otherwise he would not have laid such a
Foundation: and if the Foundation be so bad, judge you how wretchedly weak, the
Surperstructure must be. It would take more Time than I can at present spare,
to point out all the Mistakes of the whole Book: I will only refer you to what
this Author says about Recreations, Sunday, 19th, Sec. 7th wherein he seems not
only to allow of Gaming, by saying, if we play at any Game, but directs us when
we do it, to let the End of our doing it be merely to recreate ourselves. I
thought the Glory of God, and not self-pleasing, had been the Principle from
which all Christians ought to act. I suppose from this Passage, a Man whom I
reproved lately on the Road, for Gaming in the Christmas Holy Days, grounded
his Authority for so doing: He told me, the Whole Duty of Man said, he might do
so And indeed I believe he is not the first by thousands, who have been
miserably deceived, by this much applauded Book: And therefore I thought myself
obliged to write this Letter. You may make what Use you will of it. I care not
if the Contents are published upon the House Top. Nay, I think it your Duty, if
convinced yourself, to endeavor to convince others; for there is no Hopes of
bringing People to a right Knowledge of the Gospel, till their Favorite, though
erroneous, Authors are discountenanced and laid aside. Before I see England, I
hope I shall hear that my dear Friends in the Ministry, both in preaching and
printing have seconded my Testimony. Future Ages as well as the present, will
be much beholden to them for it. Their Declarations will stand as Records that
God did not leave himself without Witness, even in the Worst of times. Other
Gospel Ministers will be much encouraged thereby; and thousands, nay, ten
thousands preferved from Infection, which other (...) perhaps they may not be
able avoid. However, whether they second me or not, by the Help of my God, both
abroad and at Home, (if it be the Divine Will I should see England again) I
will persevere in bearing a more explicit and particular Testimony against the
false Writings of our admired Rabbis. Do you and my other Friends watch over
me; reprove me sharply whenever you perceive my Spirit embitter'd. Pray that I
may be as meek as a Lamb, and as bold as a Lion; and then whatever befalls me
for speaking as I ought to speak, through divine Grace shall be cheerfully
submitted to by

Your affectionate Friend and Servant in Christ* GEORGE WHITEFIELD.


