A True and Faithful NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings OF THE House of Burgesses of
North Carolina, Met in Assembly for the said Province at Ne^bern, Feburary 5th
1739*

On the Articles of Complaint exhibited before them against the Honorable
William Smith, Esquire Chief Justice of the said Province, for high Crimes and
Misdemeanors done and committed by the said William Smith in the execution of
his Office.

Published for the Justification of the Gentlemen Members of that House, who
voted the said Articles sufficiently proved for the said Chief Justice to be
charged therewith.

Addressed to the Freeholders of North Carolina.

Pro. xxix.2. When the Righteous are in Authority the People rejoice, but when
the Wicked bears Rule the People mourn.

A True and Faithful Narrative, etc.
THE slow and confused Proceeding of the late Assembly held at Newbern for this
Province, the little regard the Majori^y of that House seemed to have for the
Interest of their Country, in rejecting the Evidence brought to* support the
Articles of Complaint, exhibited before them against Mr. Chief Justice Smith,
makes it necessary for those Gentlemen who happened to differ ^n Opinion from
^he Majority to appeal to the World for their Just^fication, and to acquit
themselves of any Blame that may lay at their Doors, by publishing those
Articles against the Chief Justice, with the Pr^ceedings thereupon, to the
World, and they are the more inclined to this Method of Proceeding, not only
because it will ^pen the Eyes of the deluded People of this Province, but that
the Iniquities committed by Mr. Smith in the Courts of Justice where he
presides may meet with the Censure they deserve.

Before I en^er further into the Proceedings of the last Assembly it will not
be amiss to look back into, and enquire out the Causes of the Dissolution of
the former, who took more pains to reconcile and unite the divided Inter^sts of
their Country, than any that went before them. That Ass^mbly was, (according to
it is Prorogation) to have met at Newbern, on the sixth Day of November last;
accordingly Twenty-six Members met at that Town, but four of those Gentlemen
being more attached to the Chief Justice, than to the Service of their Country
refused to attend the House, by which Means, there wanted two M^m^ers, to make
a M^jority without which their could not be a House, His Excellency the
Governor being acquainted with the true State of the Affair, prorogued the
Ass^mbly s^veral Tim^s, in hopes more Members would come, but the Season of the
Year and the intemperan^ of the Weather, prevented the coming ^f any more,
until after the Diss^lution of that Assembly, which happened a Week after the
Time appointed for it is Meeting Thus after many Prorogations within the space
of a We^k at the end of each of those Prorogations the fou^ Gentlemen
constantly neglect^ng to attend the Service of the House; that Assembly was put
an end to by Dissolution to the great Damag^ of the Provi^ce.

I th^nk it would not be just, should I n^glect to acquaint the World with the
Names of those abdicating Gentlem^n, their Con^uct, sinc^ suffici^n^ly
convinces us, what Motive occ^s^^ned th^^r Desertion, and as those Gentlemen
this p^es^nt Assembly moved to have the Thanks of the House for the Service
done their Country, by their A^dication. I imagine (notwithstanding the House
was not so kind as to comply with their D^sires) that I cannot offer a more
pleasing incense to the vanity of the illustrious Pa^riots; and so without any
kind of Apology, I inform our Read^rs they were, John Hodgson, Esquire the present
Speaker, Colon^l Benjamin H^ll, Mr John Blount, and Colonel Benjamin Peyton The
Reasons which induced those Gentlemen to such Conduct were notoriously known to
proceed from Mr. Chief Justice, that Gentlemen was acquainted, that Articl^s of
Complaint would be (...) against him, for Male Administrations in his Offi^^,
and he plainly foresaw that if there should be at that Time a Hou^e, a strict
Inquiry would be made into his Conduct, which he was well convinced would not
bear a nice Scrutiny, and that there was no Way so eff^ctual to prevent the
Danger he was exposed to, as breaking the House, which could not be effected
but by p^rswading those Gentlemen to to A^d^cate: This is Eviden^ to any one,
who considers the Correspondence the Chief Justice kept with those G^ntlemen in
the Time of their Desertion, and more especially from a very remarkable Letter
sent from the Chief Justice, to the now Speaker in their last Retreat, which
Letter for the Elegance of it is Style, deserves to be ^^nded down to Poste^^^y
with great Care and Circ^^spection, but as we have not been so happy as to
peruse that extraordinary Epistle, we can only communicate the Substance of it,
as we received the same, from one of those abdicating Gentlem^n; Sir, the
Ass^mbly is Dissolved and the Members sent to the Devil, tantarararo, tantwive,
tantwive If our Readers will consider this Correspondence, and how steadily
those Gentlemen have since adhered to the Chief Justice's Interest in the
Affair of the Articles, exhibited against him, they will not think, those
Gentlemen unjustly charged with deserting the Service of their Country at that
Time with intent to screen the said Chief Justice from a deserved Public
Censure. Immediately after the D^ssolution of the last Assembly, his Excellency
the Governor, was pleased to issue Writs for Electing Members for a new
Assembly; We imagine it cannot supprize any judicious Persons, that the
Articles of Complaint, against Mr. Chief Justice Smith should miscarry, when he
shall be acquainted with the great Expense and Dilig^nce of that Gentleman to
g^t his Friends into the House, he worked upon the Hopes, the Fears and the
Avarice of the Electors to gain his Point, every Election throughout the whole
Province was more or less influenced by that Gentleman or his Friend: It is
indeed much greater Cause of wonder, how there came to be so great a Minority
as was in that House, and that in so great a Defection from the Interests of
their Country, and notwithstanding so powerful, so assiduous an Interest
carried on by that Gentleman and his Friends at the Last Election, with so much
Profuseness and Extravagance, so many Gentlemen should obtain Seats in that
H^use, contrary to the Expectations and Designs of himself and his Friends. And
that notwithstanding all Mr Chief Justice, his Assiduity and Expense at
N^wbern, all his Persuasions and Promises of passing such favorite Bills as
those, he depended upon were most Interested in, that after this, this very
Assembly, which he flattered himself he had molded to his Wishes, should
refuse to Vote the Articles against him, false, or him Innocent and Upright,
contrary to the Motion of his ^ecurer Friends in that House, and his own
Expectations, and that those his own Friends, should not r^j^ct the Articles
against him, but only reject the Evidence and should unfortunately leave those
Articles so much his dread, upon their Journals, still subject to a further
Examination and Inq^iry.

We shall now proceed to the Journals of the Assembly as far as relates to the
Subject of this Narrative.

Feb 11. 1739 Mr. Benjamin Peyton moved this House, as Mr. Chief Justice Smith
was the last Assembly if they had sat, to have been Charged with several Crimes
and Misdemeanors, and they were not yet produced to this House, that they might
be produced immediately, or the said Chief Justice might be declared a just and
upright Judge, upon which Sir Richard Everard Baronet one of the Members of
this House charged the said Chief Just^ce with high Crimes and Misdemeanors,
and was seconded by Mr. Samuel Swann, and prayed leave to exhibit Articles to
that purpose against him, and moved this House to have Leave till Wednesday to
bring in the said Articles, which was accordingly granted. Vera Copia Test
William Heritage Clerk Dom Bur And a Warrant issue Signed by Mr. Speaker to
bring all Persons, Papers and Records before them, to enable them to make good
their said Articles.

True Copy, Wiliam Heritage Cl. Dom. Bur.

Sir Richard Everard moved this House, as he was ordered to draw the Articles
against the Honorable William Smith* Esquire Chief Justice, that Mr. Maurice Moore
might assist therein, and that they might withdraw from the Service of the
House, till Tomorrow Morning to prepare the said Articles:

Ordered, that they have Leave to withdraw themselves Accordingly.

We aprehend it will be proper for the clearer Understanding of the present
Controversy for us to make our Observations upon the Proceedings as they passed
in the House, Day by Day, rather then to Observe upon the whole at once, which
may possibly render them confused and intricate so that we may unfortunatly by
that Means disappoint the World.

On Monday Feb 11th Mr. Benjamin Peyton Member for the County of Beaufort, made
the Motion aforementioned, upon which ensued a very warm Debate, in which the
Gentlemen, who were concerned in the Articles, seemed to decline the producing
them to the House, at that Juncture for Reasons very plain and obvious, but the
Gentlemen on the other Side tumultuously insisting that the Chief Justice
should be voted innocent and upright* notwithstanding no Accusation then lay
against him* and Mr. Speaker being very forward to put the Question, which he
often during the Debate stated thus, Viz Whether Mr. Chief Justice Smith should
not be declared by the House an impartial and upright Judge, and that he should
receive the Thanks of the House for his good Services? It was then thought high
Time to put a stop to such extravagant Proceedings, and since Argument and
Reason, had been found ineff^ctual, to have recourse to some other Method,
which induced Sir Richard Everard Baronet to rise up and accuse the said Chief
Justice of high Crimes and Misdemeanors, and to pray a sufficient Time might be
granted to exhibit Articles for that purpose to the House, and he was seconded
by Mr. Samuel Swan^. The Chief Justice's Friends, who did not apprehend such a
Consequence would proceed from Mr. Peyton's Motion, were very much Alarmed
thereat, and they knew that nothing could save their Friend, but straitning the
Gentlemen who were to produce the Articles, as to Time, upon which those
Gentlemen insisted that they might be produced the next Morning, which
occasioned another Debate, and the House were told that it looked as if they
had no real Design to give their Country any Relief as to the Matters which
might be contained in the Articles, since they seemed so desirous to Contract
the Time, that the Articles ought to be well considered before they appeared in
the House, and that in the like Cases at home, sufficient Time was never
denied; at last Mr. Speaker put the Question, If the Gentlemen should be
allowed Time till Saturday, to prepare and bring in their Articles? which was
carried in the Negative, but no notice is taken of this Division in the
Journals of the House, and as many other Things are neglected in the course of
this Proceeding, we shall upon every Division which happened upon any Question,
relating to the Affair in Hand, constantly set down the Names o^ the Persons
who Voted for and against the Question.

For the said Question.
Col. Maurice Moore Mr. James Cas^elaw Mr. Thomas Bryan Mr. John Broun Mr.
Simon Alderson Mr. John Banbury Mr. John Starkey Mr. William Brice Mr. Edmund
S^^^hwick Mr. William Gardener Mr. Samuel Swann Mr. John Swann Sir. Rich
Everard Bar. Mr. Arthur M^bs^n Mr. Samuel Sinclair Mr. William Bertram John
Montgomery E^q His Majesty's Attor Genesis Mr Joseph Sutton Mr. Joshua Long
Against the Question.
Mr Thomas Loow^^k Collector of Port Beaufort. Mr. George Robers Mr George
Bold Mr. Benjamin Peyton Mr. Richard Rigby Mr, Joseph Tart Mr. John Blount
Col. Benjamin Hill Doct Abra Blackall Deputy Postmaster. Mr. James Cravin
Clerk of the Genesis Court Mr. Walton Col. Macrora Scarbow Mr. Car^uthers Mr.
James Sumner Mr. Tho. Pendilton Col. Tho. Hunter Mr David Bailey Mr. William
Relf Mr. John Caron Mr. Jacob Carrow Mr. Leary Mr. Thomas Louther.
The Question thus carried against allowing Time till Saturday, the House was
at last prevailed with to grant Time till Wednesday. Soon after the House
adjourned, Sir Richard Everard and Mr. Samuel Swann waited upon the Speaker,
with a List of the Persons, Records, and Papers which were wanting as Proofs of
the Articles. Mr. Speaker declared after he had perused the Lists he could not,
nor would not grant his Warrant for every Thing contained in the said Lists,
but that he would for the Persons therein named, and that he would the next Day
ask the Opinion of the House thereupon, and Mr. Speaker returned the L^sts,
which were the next Day laid before the House by Sir Richard Everard, as
appears by the following Transcript of the Journals*

Tuesday Feb. 12 1739 Sir Richard Everard Bart gave in a List to this House of
the following Persons necessary for Evidences, and prayed they might be
Summoned to make good the Articles against the Honorable William Smith Esquire*
Chief Justice, viz.

William Dudley of Onslow County. Cornelius Harnet, Esquire Sheriff of N^w Han^ver
County. " Samuel Bridgin of New Hanover. Ru^us Marsa^n Merchant in Newton.
Dani^l Dun^i^in Merchant in Newton. Mr B^njamin Wheatly of N^w Hanover. Mr.
John Smithers, Dep. Sheriff of New Hanover Coun^y. Thomas Morphy of Craven
County. William Tunnielif of Craven County. Robert Pitts of Craven County.
Robert Ki^kland of Craven County. James Kieth of Craven County.


And also a List of Persons and Copies of Records wanting from Bath* Bertic*
Chowan and Edent^n, in the Articles of Accusation of high Crimes and
Misdemeanors against (...) Honorable William Smith, E^q* Chief Justice of North
Carolina, to be sent for, by the Speaker's Warrant, V^z.

Copies of the Venites and Pannels since Mr Smith was Chief Justice, Copies of
the four Writs for Executing the Criminals at Edenton signed by the Chief
Justice, Copy of Mr Smith's Commission as Chief Justice, Copy of the
Commissions of Grand Sessions, and Comm^ssions Si non Omnes. (If any) Copy of
the Record of Mr. Dawson's contempt about Trotter July 1737, ditto concerning
the Presentment of John Boude, March 1736. Ditto of R^bert Calahorn, Andrew
C^nner and others at Bath August 1739. Copy of the Execution in the Case of
Bridgin against Fullwood, ditto Copy of the Indictm^^t against K^lly for
forcible entry into Mr. Anderson's Land, and Copies in the two Cases per
Anthony Bo^th* ditto in the Case of William Dudley, against William Crosby for
Assault, R^bert Forster, E^q, Joseph Anderson, Esquire, Thomas Jones Attorney a^
Law* O^lando Champion of Chowan, Robert Calahorn and Andrew Conn^r of Bath
Town, James K^lly of Edenton. Anthony Booth of Mr Duckenfield's Plantation in
Bertic County, William Macky late of Edenton bu^ now of Bertic Coun^y

The H^use no^withstanding the List given in as aforesaid, gave no other
Directions to Mr. Speaker concerning the same, nor does any Order of that Day
appear upon the Journal concerning them, neither did Mr. Speaker deliv^r his
Warrant for any of the Persons, Records or Papers mentioned in th^se Lists,
until Wednesday the Day appointed for Exhibiting the Articles And then only for
some of the Persons desired, and not for any Papers or Records, notwithstanding
the repeated Applications to him for the same.

It cannot be denied that the whole Conduct of the Speaker was such as plainly
showed how much he was interested in the safety of Mr. Chief Justice at that
Time, though he has heretofore more than once deceived, betrayed, and by solemn
Oath has conspired with others, (perfas et nefas) to destroy the said Chief
Justice, notwithstandi^g at that very Juncture he was receiving distinguishing
Marks of that Gentleman's grace and favor; Mr Speaker's Warrant I have
mentioned (an exact Copy of which is hereafter Inserted) is attended with a
remarkable Circumstance as to it is Date, it being dated Feb 10^h 1739, the Day
before Mr. Peyton's Motion; and consequently before any Charge against the
Chief Justice was moved for in the House, the Preamble of the Warrant suggests
that was granted the very Day the Charg^ of h^gh Crimes and Misdemeanors
against the Chief Justice was m^ved in the House, by Sir. Richard Everard and
Mr S^mu^l Swann; whereas in fact the said Charge was made on Monday the 11th of
Feb and not on Sunday the 10th as the Speaker in his Warrant would sugg^st,
neither was the Warrant (notwithstanding it is Date,) ever seen by any of the
Gentlemen who were for the A^ticles, until Wednesday the 13th, the very same
Time the Articles were exhibited to the House, when Mr. Speaker delivered that
Warrant; and anoth^r unsigned Warrant, for some Persons in Craven County to the
Horse, which Warrants were di^ect^d to no Person.

North Carolina, ss.
Whereas Sir Richard Everard, Baronet, and Mr. Samuel Swann have the Day of the
Date hereof before this House, charg^d the Hon. William Smith, Esquire* Chief
Justice of this Province, with high Crimes and M^sdemeanors, and have in order
to make good their said Charge moved t^is House, that the Speaker Issue his
Warrant to Summons Persons etc Th^se are therefore to Will, Require, and
Command you to Summons William Dudley o^ O^s^^w County, Cornelious Harnet Esquire
Sheriff of New Hanover County, Samuel Brigdin (...) New-Hanover, Gentleman,
Ru^us Marsden and Dani^l Dunbibin Merchants of Newton, Mr. Benjamin Wheatly of
New Hanover, John Smithers D^puty Sheriff of New Hanover, to attend this House
on Wednesday next the thirteenth Instant at Newbern. Herein sail not at your
Peril, and for so doing this shall be your Warrant. Given under my Hand at
Newbern the Tenth Day of Feb 17^9 By Order

John Hodgson, Speaker.
To
Upon reading this Warant, would any Man alive imagine New Hanover County, to
be One Hundred Miles from Newbern, and the Persons within that Warrant
contain^d to, live at so great a distance from Newbern, as ^n fact they do? Is
it not wonderfully consistent with the honor and uprightness of the House of
Burgesses, to compel Gentlemen to accuse the Chief Justice of high Crimes and
Misdemeanors in the Administration of his Office; and then to limit them to the
space of three Days, to prepare and exhibit Articles which contained ten Sheets
of Paper; and to prevent them as far as was in their Power, from obtaining one
Proof to support their Charge, by their obstinate Resolution of having the
Articles the very Day they were exhibited, to be fully and substantially
proved, they declared they would not be satisfied with such Proof, as would be
sufficient to induce* G^and Jury to fi^d a Bill^ Vera upon an Ind^ctmen^,
because they were confident that such Evidence, notwithstanding all obstacl^s
could be produced, but would have such Evidence as should be sufficient for a
petit Jury to Convict upon, which they imagined as Circumstances then stood
with the Gentlemen who produced the Articles, were not to be had, though many of
them afterward owned that they were persuaded if Time had been allowed, such
Evidence could have been produced to have supported the Charge; nay the
Gentlemen of that side the Question have made further discoveries of the
Motives which induc^d them to such unaccountable Conduct, as shall be shown in
it is proper Place. T^ke the whole Affair relating to summoning Evidences, and
to produce Records and Papers before the House, to support the high and heinous
Accusations exhibit^d against the Chief Justice, an^ consider it in all it is
Progressions, Mr. Speaker's Conduct in relation ^o the Warrants, the Order of
the House of Feb 11th, two Days before the Exhibition of the Articles* for Mr.
Speaker to Issue his Warrants to bring Persons, Papers and Records before the
House, that Order intimates Time for such Things to be done in, Mr. Speaker's
Warrant commands Persons to be summoned to appear before the House on
Wednesday, who most of them lived upwards of one Hundred Miles from the Place
where the Assembly sat, and supposing the Date of that Warrant to be right; and
a Messenger immediately po^^ed away to Execute it, was there a possibility of
performing that Service within the Time expressed in that Warrant? No one will
presume there was* But from the Time Mr. Speaker produced his Warrant to the
Time the Articles were exhibited to the H^use, no Man could have gone one Mile.
The Gentlemen accusers of the Chief Justice were ordered to lay before the
House Articles for that purpose on Wednesday the 13, but no Part of tha Order
directed the Articles to be then proved, nor could any one in his Senses
imagine it was intended; the very O^d^r plainly intimates the contrary, it
directs that the Speaker Issue his Warrant for Persons, Records and P^pers, to
make good the said Charge; the House thereby granted Time for such Proofs; and
by what Art and Managem^nt, they were persuaded afterward to insist upon Proof
on Wednesday, shall appear before we leave this Subject.

"Wednesday 13. 1739. Sir Richard Everard pursuant to his Motion of Monday
last, laid before this House the several Articles against the Hon. William
Smith, Esquire Chief Justice; which he read in his Place, as follows, Viz.

"To his Excellency Gabriel Iohnston, Esquire Governor and Commander in Chief of
His Majest^'s Province of North Carolina in Council.

"Articles of Complaint against William Smith, Esquire Chief Justice of the
Province of North Carolina by the General Assembly of the said Province, as
well in their own Name, as for and in the Name and on the behalf of all His
Majesty's Liege People of this Province for diverse high Crimes and Misdemeanors
done and committed by him the said William Smith in the Execution of his said
Office.

1 "That he the said William Smith at sundry Times since his Admission into the
said Office of Chief Justice, has endeavored in a most violent, arbitrary and
illegal Manner, to subvert the Laws both of Great Britain and this Province,
made for the preservation of the Lives, Liberties and Estates of His Majesty's
Liege Subjects living and residing within the same. And also by diverse others
illegal, violent and abitrary Proceedings, does fr^quently disturb the Peace
and good Order of this His M^jesty's Government; and all these Things he has
op^nly and avowedly declared, acted and done, not only in Words, but
premediately and deliberately, in his Opinions, Judgment, Practices, and
Actions contrary to his Duty, and in manifest Violation of his Oaths, and
Breach and Derogation of the great and high Trust reposed ^n him

2 "And the said G^neral Assembly do more particularly and expressly Charge that
by an Act of the General Assembly of this Province passed the 23d Day of June
1723 entitled, An Act to provide indifferent Jurymen in all Cases civil and
criminal, it is Enacted among other Things, that all Jurors should be drawn by
balloting according to the Method and Rules by the Act prescribed, and that no
Person should be a Juryman but such whose Names were written in the List
thereunto annexed, or such as should then after be added by Authority of
Assembly; and every Judge, Justice, and Officer of the said General Court is
required to take an Oath for the due observance of the said Act, and the
Penalty of One Hundred Pounds thereby annexed for each default, in non
observance of the same, as by the said Act, to which they refer, does more
fully appear; and the said Act has been strictly observed and put in Ex^cution
by all the Justices of the General Court of this Provinc^ from the Time of it is
passing until the said William Smith acted as Chief Justice That pursuant to
said Act, the said William Smith Chief Justice, upon his entering into the said
Office took the Oath thereby enjoined for the due Observance of the said Act:
Nevertheless the said Chief Justice having no Regard to the said Act, nor to
his solemn Oath which he took on the Holy Evangelist of Almighty God for the
due Observance thereof, nor to the Penalty thereby inflicted for each default
for Non-obs^rvance of the same* has for diverse Years l^st past in manif^st and
open Violation of the said Act, and by, and of his own mere Will, contrary to
the Pract^ce of all former Justices, caused Jurors to be summoned by Venire,
without ever drawing the said Jurors or any of them by way of Lot or Ballot,
either before the Venire issued, or after the Jurors were Summoned, returned
and appeared, as by the said Act is required, by Means of which illegal
Proceeding of the said Chief Justice; all the Care taken by the L^gislature for
preventing Corruptions of Officers in packing of Jurors, are entirely
obstructed and defeated Diverse Criminals have been illegally convicted,
condemned and Executed. All Judgments in civil Cases after Verdict liable to be
reversed, and the Lives, Liberties, Property, and Estates of His Maj^sty's
Subjects in this Province continually exposed to much Hazard and D^ng^r.

3. "That the said Chief Justice being appointed by his Excellency's Commission
of the 29th of July last to hold several Courts of Assizes, Oyer and Terminer,
and General Goal delivery, at the several Towns of Ba^h, Newbern, and Newton,
held all the said Courts accordingly at the several Times appointed, but never
took any Oath for the due Execution of the said Commission, nor the Oaths to
His Majesty at any Time since the Issuing the said Commission as by Law
required, though it is now many Months since. Thus sometimes neither regarding
the Oaths he has taken, nor the Statutes enjoining the Oaths to be taken, nor
the Penalty of Five Hundred Pounds Sterling thereby inflicted for not taking
the same.

4 "That the said Chief Justice assuming to himself an ^qual Power and
Authority with His Majesty's Ancient Court of King's Bench at Westminster, when
Criminals are convicted of capital Offenses without waiting for any Warrant
from the Governor or Commander in Chief for the Time being, does cause
Ex^cution to be done on the Bodies of such Offenders by his own Orders and
Rules of Court and Precept, thereby depriving his Excellency the Governor of
all Opportun^t^es of showing His Majesty's Grace and Pardon* to such Persons as
might happen to be real Obj^cts of Mercy, and which your Excellency is
empowered to do by His most gracious Commission and Instructions.

5. "That one John Powel at a Court of Grand S^ssions held at Edenton the last
Tuesday in July 1736. being Convicted of Murder in poisoning his Wife,
Sentence of Death was awarded against him, and he was accordingly hung up by
the Neck at the usual Place of Execution, but the said Chief Justice having
caused him to be cut down while he was yet alive, soon afterward,
n^twithstanding Judgment, and in Part executed as abovesaid, and without ever
any Pard^n being granted to the said Powel; did constitute and appoint the said
Powel to be Crier of the General Court at Edenton; and he continued to hold the
said Office till July last.

6. "And for as much as by the Great Charter passed of King Henry Third, and at
diverse Times since confirmed, it is among other Things Ordained, that a Freeman
shall not be Amerced for a small Fault, but after the manner of the Fault: Yet
the said Chief Justice has on the most trivial and light Occasions, contrary
to the said Charter, and diverse other the Laws of the Kingdom of Great Britain,
frequently imposed excessive Fines on diverse of His Maj^sty's good Subjects in
the Province, in no wise adaquate to the Offense, and Imprisoned them till the
same were paid, and that in in a most illegal and arbitrary Manner, without any
Bill of Indictment found, or Information filled, by His Majesty's Attorney
General, or any due Process or Trial at Law, or the Parties ever being legally
convicted of such Offenses by the Oath of twelve Jurors, contrary likewise to
the Statute of Magna Charta, which expressly enjoins that no Man shall be taken,
imprisoned or condemned but by lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of
the Land, and this some Times, under pretense, that such Offenses were
Contempts of Court; although the said General Assembly are informed that the
Offenses for which the said Persons were so illegally Fined and Imprisoned
werein themselves no Crimes or Offenses that could subject the Parties to any
Criminal Prosecutions, and that if they were so, they were not c^mmitted in the
Presence, or within View of the said Court, or against the process of the same;
and the said General Assembly in further Maintenance of their Allegations
abovesaid, do expr^sly Charge that one John Dawson a Member of the General
Assembly, being summoned to serve as Petit Juryman at the General Court held at
Edenton the last Tuesday in July 1737* by on^ James Trotter a common Bailif or
Deputy Marshal, told the said Deputy Marshall that he need not have given
himself the trouble, for that he had been summoned already* or was obliged to
attend, whereupon the said Trotter told the said Dawson, that he need not
expect any Favor from him, the sa^d Daws^n replied he did not, and further
told the said Trotter, that if he the said Trotter had any Trump Cards in his
Hand, to play them, for he (m^aning himself) might chance one Time or other to
get Jack and Ace in his Hand, and should make (...) of them; and the said Chief
Justice being informed of the said Dawson's having sp^ken and uttered such
Words out of Court, the Court being then adjourned, did the next Day without
any legal Trial set a Fine on the said Dawson of Ten Pounds Proclamation Money,
and ordered him to be Committed to Goal without Bail or Mainprise ^ill he
should pay the same, and to find good Security for his the said Dawson^s good
Behavior for a Year and a Day, as by Record, Minutes, or Docker of the same
Court does appear; and the said Dawson after having lain about five Days in
Goal paid the said Ten Pounds Proclamation Money, or Value thereof accordingly:
Although the said General Assembly do conceive that the Words so spoken are
frivol^us and senceless, and in Case any Ind^ctment had been preferred against
the said Dawson for the same, they could not by the most far fetched Innuendo
have been strained to Mean or Signify any Thing, and was a very small Fault, if
any, nor can the same be any Ways deemed (as they conceive) to be a Contempt
offered to the Court

7 "That the said Chief Justice at a Court of Oyer and Terminer held at Newbern
the first Tuesday in September 1^39, did set a Fin^ upon one John Bryan one of
His Maj^sty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Craven, of Ten Pounds
Proclamation Money for a supposed Misdemeanor, without ever the said Bryan's
being called to Answer the same, either by Presentment, Indictment, or any due
Process of Law whatsoever* and when one Mr. Heritage ^n Attorney moved the said
Chi^f Justice, that he would be pleased at least to send for the said Bryan to
know if he had a^y Thing to say, the said Chief Justice refused it, saying, do
you know my Sentiments Sir, better than I d^ my self? I Fine him the said Bryan
Ten Pounds Proclamation Money, to enlighten the Gentleman's Understanding, and
did afterwa^ds issue Process accordingly, and levied the Sum of Seventy five
Pounds this Currency on the said Bryan.

8. "The said General Assembly further Charge and Allege that by An Act
entitled An Act concerning Fees and Officers, passed the 19 of October 1^22
they did Provide and Establish sufficient Fees for the Support and Dignity of
the said Office of Chief Justice: and by another Act entitled An Act to
ascertain Officers Fees passed before that Time (to wit) the 19th Day of
January 1715, they did likewise provide sufficient Fees for the Maintenance and
Support of a Clerk of the said Court, notwithstanding which the said General
Assembly do expressly Charge that the said William Smith Chief Justice, has often
Times in a most illegal and arbitrary Manner, extorted from diverse of His
Majesty's Subjects within this Colony, most ex^ravagant and exorbitant Fees,
where no Fees are at all due by Law, and at other Times does exact and ex^ort
from His said Majesty's Subjects much greater Fees than ever were allowed or
established, in manifest violation and defiance of the several Acts of Assembly
made for ascertaining of Officers Fees, and to the grievous Oppression of His
Majesty's Subjects; and the said General Assembly in further Maintenance of
this their Charge, do particularly and expressly Charge and Allege that one
James K^lly sometime in the Month of March 1^^9 at the General Court held at
Edenton, being indicted for a forcible entry into the Lands and Tenements of
Joseph Anderson, Mr. Vernon Attorney for the Defendant moved to quash the
Indictment for some Defect ^ound therein, and the said indictment was quashed
by the said Chief Justice accordingly, nevertheless the said Chief Justice
issued an Execution for Twenty two Pounds ten Shillings Proclamation Money for
Fees pretended by him to be due on the said Indictment, al^ho' there were no
Fees whatsoever due on that Acc^unt that the said General Assembly ev^y kn^w or
heard of, save Fifty Shilling^ to the A^torn^y General, and three Shillings and
six Pence to the Clerk of the Crown. And the said General Assembly further
Charge that one John Boude Gentleman, at a General Court held at Edenton the
last Tuesday in March 1736 was presented for being the Father of a Bastard
Child; but it appearing to the Court that the said Boude had complied with the
Laws of this Province by indemnifying the Parish, and paying the Fine by Law
inflict^d, there were no fu^ther (...) had upon the said Presentment,
nevertheless the (...) William Smith, Chief Justice did th^n exact and extort
from the said Boude, Twenty-six Pounds old Shil^ings Current Bills of the said
Province for Fees pretended to be due on such a bare Presentment, although in
Truth there are no Fees due to the said Chief Justice on any such Account, as
they conceive; that the said Chief Justice where one Indictment has been
brought for a Ri^t against diverse, does exact and extort from each Defendant
the whole Fees pretended to be due to him on the said Indictment, and though the
whole Fees he pretended to Claim for himself and Clerk, i^ as he says, Twenty
two Pounds Eight Shillings, yet the said Chief Justice exacts Twenty two Pounds
Eight Shillings from each Def^ndant, although in Truth there is not one Penny due
to the Chief Justice, and but Six Shillings to the Clerk; and the said General
Ass^mbly do particularly Charge that the said Chi^f Justice at a Court of ^yer
and Te^mine^ held at Bath Town in August last upon an Indictment for a Riot
against Andrew Conner, Robert Calah^rn and others, did exact and extort from
each of the Defendants Conner and Calahorn Twenty two P^unds E^ght Shillings,
and Process upon the same Indictment Issued against others for the like Sum, so
that each Defendant is made chargeable with the wh^le Twenty two Pounds Eight
Shillings, although as they are r^ady to prove, there are no Fees whatsoever due
or allowed to the Chief Justice in Criminal C^ses, but he takes and exacts the
sam^, and what he thinks fit of his own mere arbitrary Will.

9 "And the said Assembly in further Mainten^nce of that Part of th^s general
Charge against the said Chief Justice for exacting and extorting more and
greater Fees than ever were established and allowed by Law, do particularly
Charge and Allege that one Anthony B^o^h being Indented to in the Sum of Two
Pounds Five Shillings, and to one in the Sum of Two Pounds Ten Shillings, both
this Country Currency* sometime in the Month of 173. The said Chief Justice
sent two Executions against the said Defendant for Seventy Pounds and upwards,
including the said original D^bts, which both together made but Four Pounds
Fifteen Shillings, and the Defendant having no Money to satisfy for the said
Debts and Fees, was obliged to deliver to the Marshal four Thousand Pounds of
good fresh Beef in satisfaction of the Debts and Charges aforesaid, though the
said Beef at that Time was worth One Hundred and Twenty Pounds computed at
Three Pounds each Hundred weight.

10 "That whenever any C^pi^s Issues, although the Defendant be never Arrested or
Summoned, and without the Defendant being made Party in Court by giving Bail or
Appearance otherwise; yet nevertheless the said Chief Justice does exact and
extort from every Plaintiff the Sum of Six Pounds Current Money of this
Province, for Fees pretended to be due to himself and Clerk, whereas in Truth
the whole Fees due to himself and Clerk do amount to no more than Twenty
Shillings and seven Pence, as appears by the said Acts, for ascertaining
Officers Fees, and which according to the said Chief Justice's own Estimation
of taking four for one for the difference of the Value of Money at that Time
the Fees were first settled, could amount to no more than Two Pounds two
Shillings and four Pence; and the said Chief Justice does Ex Offi^io most
fr^quently issu^ a Fier^ Facias Capi^s a^ Sati^fa^i^ndum, as he s^es (...),
without the Knowledge of* or Requ^st made to him either ^y Plaintiff or
Defendant* or either of their Attorn^ys: And the s^id G^n^ral Ass^mbly do
part^cularly Charge that one Samu^l B^^dgin, sometime before Oct^ber General
Court (...), took ^ut ^ Writ against one (...) Falw^od, but the Matter b^ing
made up between them, he proceeded no further therein, nor was any Declaration
filled against the Defendant* yet the said Chief Justice did exact and extort
from the said Bridgin the Sum of four Pounds eight Shillings and three Pence
Proclamation Money for Fees pretended to be due to himself and Clerk, although in
Truth the whole Fees for the said Writ according to the Fee-Act could amount
but to ten Shillings and seven Pence Proclamation Money; and the said Chief
Justice without any Request made by the Defendant or his Attorney under
pretense of a non pros before any such Judgment on a non pros was ever entered
upon Record against him, did issue an Execution against the Plaintiff for the
said four Pounds eight Shillings and three Pence Proclamation Money, and the
Plaintiff paid the Sum of seventeen Pounds thirteen Shillings this Currency,
although computing four for one according to the Chief Justice's own Method of
Computation, the whole Fees for the said Writ could amount to but two Pounds
two Shillings and four Pence, that the Plaintiff on Payment of the said
seventeen Pounds thirteen Shillings, had the Execution delivered up to him by
the Marshal, which Execution he has ready to produce. That sometime after the
said Chief Justice on his own mere Motion, issued another Execution against the
Plaintiff in the same Cause, for the like Sum of four Pounds eight Shillings and
three Pence Proclamation Money, for which the Plaintiff paid a second Time the
like Sum of seventeen Pounds thirteen Shillings, and took Mr. James Craven the
Chief Justice's Clerk his Receipt for the same, as appears by the Receipt ready
to be produced; and the said General Assembly are ready to produce many
Instances of the like kind, not only of the said Chief Justice his exacting
four Times more than his the said Chief Justic^'s real due, but also of his
issuing Executions over again, for the same Fees, after the same have been
really paid sometimes to his Clerk, and at other Times into the said Chief
Justice's Hand.

11. "That the said Chief Justice the better to color his illegal Proceedings,
does always issue his Executions on his supposed non pros's in this Form (
mutatis mutandis) North Carolina ss* George the Second by the Grace of God of
Great Britain, etc To the Provost Marshal of our said Province. Greeting* We
Command you to take Samuel Bridgin of C^pe Fear, so that you have him before
our Justices at our next General Court to be holden for our said Province (...)
the Courthouse at Edenton on the last Tuesday ^^ March next, to satisfy four
Pounds eight Shillings and three Pence Proclamation Money, which in our said
Court on the last Tuesday in October last was Adjudged and Taxed for his Cost
in his Suit against Th^mas Fullwood, wherein he would no further prosecute,
whereof he is Convicted, and have you then and there this Writ with your own
Fees. Witness William Smith, Esquire our Chief Justice of our said Province at
Edenton the 15th Day of November, Ann^q^^ D^mon^ 1738* W. Smith Whereby the
said Chi^^ Justice does artfully avoid saying to satisfy to the said Thomas
Fullwood, because in truth the said Defendant Thomas Fullwood, who is supposed
to apply for this non pros, is to have no Part of them paid to him, to
reimburse him the Fees he has paid his Attorney; for the Chief Justice keeps
all to himself* yet in the other Part of the Execution, it seems as if such
Fees belonged to the D^fendant, by saying for his Costs in h^s Suit against
Thomas Fullwood, but there is no Antecedent to be found in the Relative, his,
in all the precedent Part of the Writ, unless it be Samuel Bridgin the
Plaintiff, and it cannot be presumed that S^muel Bridgin should be taken into
Custody to satis^y Samuel B^idgin. And the General Assembly do not take
Occasion (...) criticize on this Proceeding for want of due Form, or as a
jeo^ail, slip, or mistake of the Clerk, but it is co^trived on set purpose by
the said Chief Justice to color his own illegal Exactions under pretense of
d^^ng Justice to the Defendant, who at the same Time never receives any Part of
these F^es, and ^ver and besides this, the Chief Justice takes eleven Shillings
and three Pence Proclamation Money, for Fees for (...) this non pros for
himself and Clerk, though there is but five Shillings and six Pence due to both
and no more; in which particular Fee they conceive the Chief Justice is very
modest, exacting very little more than Cent per Cent more than is due.

12. "That sometime in December 1734 one William Dudley applied to the said
Chief Justice for a Warrant against one William Crosby for an Assault, which
the said Chief Justice, granted without demanding any Fee, nevertheless the
said Chief Justice by a certain Act entitled An Act for reviving An Act
entitled an additional Act to the Act for Trial of small and mean Causes,
having procured himself to be invested with the same Power as two Justices of
the Peace for trying small and mean Causes, the said Chief Justice without ever
demanding any Fee of the said Dudley for the said Warrant, or summoning him to
show Cause why he did not pay it, issued an Execution against the said Dudley
for eight Pounds seventeen Shillings and six Pence pretended to be due to him
for the Fees of the Warrant* although at the said General Assembly apprehended
there is but ten Shillings this Currency due to the said Chief Justice for the
said Warrant.

13. "That the said Chief Justice does contrary to the Duty of his Office
execute an Officium merum et promotum and does instigate, promote, prosecute
and carry on diverse Suits and Prosecutions both civil and criminal Causes
against such Persons who have any ways offended him in opposing his violent and
arbitrary Measures* and the said General Ass^mbly in Maintenance and Support of
this their Charge, do particularly Charge and Allege that Sir Richard Everard
Baronet, Son of Sir Richard Everard Barone^, heretofore Governor of this
Province, being a Member of the General Assembly, and having frequently
mentioned and taken notice of the illegal and arbitrary Proceeding of the said
Chief Justice, the said Chief Justice sometime in the Month of June 1738, did
fill up or cause to be filled up a Writ of Capias against the said Sir Richard
Evera^^, Baronet, by the said Chief Justice (...) whatsoever, and was
accordingly acquitted by the said Chief Justice, whereupon the said M^bson
being fa^rly acq^ited of the said Contempt as abovesaid scrupled to pay the
Fees of the Court, and a dispute b^tween the Attorneys arising, whether the
said Mabson ought to pay Costs, the said Chief Justice without any Affront or
Indignity offered to him by the said Mabson, did in a most violent manner
V^ll^fy and Abuse the said Mabson, calling him Rogue, Villain, notorious R^gu^,
and treacherous Villain, although the said Mabs^n is well known to be a worthy
Man, a Person of very good Repute, and a Man of a good Estate.

16 "That the said William Smith having been advanced to be Chief Justice of
this Province and President of His M^j^sty's Council, ought to be a Person of
Vi^tue, and of a discre^t, sober and grave Conversation, giving g^^d Example to
others, and to Demean himself according to the Dignity of his Office, yet
nevertheless the said Chief Justice by the notorious Immorality of his Life,
and his constant profane Cursing and Swearing, does daily offer indignity to
Almighty God, and give just Occasion of great Scandal and Offense

17 "That all the Articles aforegoing are only a few Instances ^ut of many of
the said Chief Justice his violent, illegal, and arbitrary Proceedings, for his
Exactions and Extortions are more burdensome than the General Tax of the whole
Province, every Corner of the Country is filled with his Oppressions, and all
the People cry aloud for Justice from your Excellency's Hands.

"And the said General Assembly do most humbly pray your Excellency that the
said Chief Justice may be immediately put to Answer all and singular the said
Articles of Complaint, and that a reasonable Time during this present Sessions
of Assembly, may be appointed by your Excellency for the said General Assembly
to make good their said several Ch^^ges against the said Chief Justice, and
that if the said Chief Justice shall confess the same o^ be found Guilty
thereof, that then your Excellency will be pleased to cause the said Chief
Justice to be imm^diate^y and from thenceforth suspended from all his Offices
and Employments, until His Majesty's Pleasure b^ farther known thereupon, and
in so doing, your Excellency will remove him who has been the Source, Spring,
and chief Author of most of the Differences and D^stu^bances which have
happened in Government sin^e your Excellency's arrival, do a most exemplary
Piece of Justice both to the King and People, and restore Peace and T^anqullity
to the Province

"The General Ass^mb^y do further m^st humbly R^quest your Excellency that the
said Chi^f Justice be in the mean Time sequestered from the Council Board
pending the Debate and Examination of the said Articles, it being (as they
conceive) con^^ary to natural Right and Justice that any Person should set and
Vote in his own Case.

"And the said General Assembly by Protestation reserving to themselves the
Liberty of exhibiting at any Time hereafter any other and further Articles of
Complaint against the said Chief Justice, and of replying to any Answers, that
he shall make thereon, and off^^ing Proofs of the Premises, and to any other
Articles to be by them hereafter exhibited against him, and of further
explaining themselves upon all and every the same Art^cles of Complaint if need
require.

After reading the said Articles the House resolved itself into a Committee of
the whole House, to D^bate on the said Articles, unanimously chose Mr. Th^mas
Hunter Chairman. "Mr Speaker moved, and was seconded by Mr. Benjamin Hill, that
the Articles exhibited against the Honorable William Smith, Esquire Chief Justice
might be Debated, and that the Proofs of the same be produced immediately that
the House might resolve whither the Articles exhibited are sufficiently proved
to this House, for this House to Impeach the Chief Justice

"To which Mr Samuel Swann objected, and was seconded by Sir Richard Everard.

And it was put to the Vote, and carried in the Affirmative of a Majority of
(...) V^ces" Thus far the Jo^^nal in forms us I shall (...) N^mes of the
Persons for and (...) Sp^^ker'^ Mo^^on, which being very d^^k and
unintell^gi^le, I shall endeavor presently to Explain

For the Speaker's Motion
John Hodg^n^, Esquire ^peak Mr. Tho Lovi^k Collect of Port B^au^ors Mr. George
R^berts Mr George Bold Col Benjamin Peyton Mr Richard Rigby Mr. I^seph Tart
Col B^njamin Hill Mr John Blount Do^. Abraham Bl^kal, D^puty Post Master. Mr
(...) Mr T^^mas L^wther Mr. William Be^tram Mr. James Craven, Clerk of the
General Court. Mr Walton Col M^rora Scarborough Mr James Sumner Col Thomas
Hunter Mr Carruthers Mr. T^^m^s P^ndilton Mr. D^vid B^^ley Mr. William R^lf Mr
John Ca^^n M^ Jacob Ca^on Mr Io^^ph Sutt^n Mr Joshua Long.
Against (...) Speaker's Motion.
Col Mauric M^ore M^. (...) Caste^aw Mr T^oma^ Bryan Mr (...) Mr (...) A^d^rs^n
Mr John ^^nbury Mr. John S^arkey Mr W^^li^m B^^e Mr Edmund Smithwi^k Mr.
William Gardni^r Mr S^mu^l Swann Mr John Swann Sir Ric^ Ev^^a^d. ^ar. M A^thu^
M^b^^n M^ ^amuel S^nclair John M^n^gome^^, Esquire H^s M^j^sty's A^torney General
Could any Thing, be more absurd to say no worse than this M^ti^n of the
S^^^ker's, or (...) to the S^nse of (...) H^use, if w^ may judge of the^^ Sense
from th^^r J^urn^l^, he is d^rected by them to issue his Warrant to bring
before the House, Persons, Papers, and Records, which he refused, and neglected
to do, and (...) Gentleman and his wor^^y Fri^nd Col. B^^jamin Hill call for
Pr^ofs the Moment the Articles w^^e read, and such Proofs too, as he said,
should be sufficient to induce the Ho^s^ to Impeach the said C^ief Justice, the
first Words of an Impeachment menti^ned in that House is from Mr. Spe^ker. The
Artic^^s exhibited against the C^ief Justice were not Articl^^ of Impeac^ment,
they (...) A^ticles of Complaint f^r ^igh C^^mes and ^isdem^anors committed by
him in the Ex^cu^i^n of his Offic^, the Gentlemen who exh^^^ted ^he^ are st^ll
of Opi^ion they h^d sufficient cause to C^mplain of that Gentleman's Conduct in
his ^ffice, his past Actions and Behavior in that Stati^n (as they thought)
had rendered the Lives* Liberties and Fortunes of his M^j^sty's S^bj^cts in
this Province, very pr^cari^us, they were certain the Facts alleged by them in
their Art^cles were str^ctly true, and they nev^r im^gined that the
Representative Body of the whole Pr^vince, (...) have laid them under any
d^ffi^ulties as to T^me, and if the Chief Justice by his own Management, and
the scandalous Arts of his Friends, is continued in that Station, and shall
hereafter deviate from Law and his Duty, and oppress his Majesty's Subjects of
this Colony, it is those Gentlemen are to Answer for it, wh^ were delud^d by
the Art^fic^s of of him and his Friends, or were corrupted by m^re subst^^tial
(...) from their Du^y to the Public to (...) Enq^iry into his Conduct

And what hopes (...) c^nc^ived of that Gentleman's (...) Uprightn^^s and
Integrity in that Station may be easily determ^^ed, by considering the (...)
(...) the Articles, and ^he Proofs brought to support them* (...) Cond^ct ^f Mr
Speaker and the rest of the C^^ef J^stices F^iend's, was calculated only to
give M^. (...) Complexion. Should (...) foresaw that an absolute (...) Co^^uct
would not be (...) into (...) would (...) with great (...) him* in such a (...)
Affair, they thought the best Steps that could be ^^ken was to call for the
Articles when the Gentlemen engaged in that Affair were least aware of it* and
to limit them as to Time, that they might fall short in their Proo^s, Things
would then look (they imagined) with a favorable Aspect, if they should be
laid against Mr. Smith at home, no Body there might be acq^^inted with the
little Circumstances attending the Affair, such as the Management of the
several Elections, and of the Members afterward, the Behavior of the Speaker,
and the distance of the Evidences from New^^rn, and the scanty Allowance of
Time to prepare and prove Articles of so great Concern and Importance to the
Public. Mr John (...) moved that before the Articles were Proceeded upon the
House might be cleared; to which Col. Maurice Moore obj^cted saying that as the
Proceedings of this Day being of the greatest Consequence to the Province, he
could wish all the Inhabitants of the same were present to be Eye and Ear
Witnesses of the Conduct of their Representatives, that they might be satisfied
who were Friends and who Enemies to their Country, for which Reason he insisted
the Doors might remain open, and that whoever pleased might come into the
House, and hear the Debates, upon which the Door was left open. I shall now
return to the Journal.

Then Sir Richard Everard Proceeded to Proof as follows, 1st to the 7th
Article* and produced Mr. John Bryan and Mr. William Herritage Evidences to
Support the said Article, and then moved for the Opinion of the House whether
the said Article was proved sufficient to Impeach the said Chief Justice with
the same. Mr. Speaker objected to the said Motion, and moved they might go
through the Evidence of the whole Charge, and was seconded by Mr. Blackall:
Which was put to the Vote and carried in the Affirmative. Thus far from the
Journal.

For the Speaker's Motion.
John H^dgso^, Esquire Speak. Mr. Tho. Lovick, Colector of Port Beaufort. Mr.
George R^berts Mr. George B^uld Mr. Richard Rigby Col. Benjamin Payton Col.
Benjamin Hill Mr. John Blount Doct. Abraham Blackall Deputy Post Master. Mr
Iame^ Craven, Clerk of the General Court. Col. Macror^ Scarborough Mr.
Carruthers Mr. Tho Pendilton Mr. David Bayley Mr Wil^iam R^l^ Mr John Caron Mr
Jacob Caron Mr. Leary Mr. Thomas Lowth^r Mr Joseph Sutton Mr. Joshua Long
Against the Speaker's Motion.
Col. Maurice Moore James Castellaw Mr. Tho Bryan Mr. John Br^wn Mr Simon
Alderson Mr John Banbury Mr. John Starkey Mr William Brice M Edmund Smithwick
Mr. William Gardener Mr. Arthur Mabson Mr. Samuel Swann Mr John Swann Sir Rich
Everard* Bart. Mr. Samuel Sinclair Mr. James Sum^er Mr. Walton Mr Ios^ph Tart
Mr William Bart^am John M^nt^^mery, Esquire His Majesty's Attorney General.
It is necessary here to mention two Points of no small Consequence to the
Articles, which were determined by the House with dividing, and of which no
mention is made in the Journals, the first was a Motion of Sir Richard
Everard's to the House, seconded by Mr. Swann, that the Evidence which should
be produced against the Chief Justice might be taken in writing, which was bore
down by so great a Majority, that the Gentlemen who proposed the Question did
not think proper to call for a Division upon it, the other was a Motion made to
alter the Method of voting in the House, that upon any Question, the Names of
the Members for and against the Question might be taken in writing, which was
also refused by the House; these two Motions being determined as aforesaid, the
Gentlemen who were for the Articles were under a necessity to take Minutes of
the Examinations of the Evidences themselves* and it is from those Minutes that
the Matters of fact in this Narrative, as far as relates to the Articles are
taken, and we assure the World that they are as near as may be exact as they
were given in Testimoney to the House.

And whenever any Division of the House happn^d after that Determination upon
any Question relating to the Articles, we constantly committed to writing the
Names of the Members who Voted with us.

The seventh Article which through Accident came to be the Subject of the first
E^quiry was allow^d by all Persons to be fully and substantially proved, and no
one doubted but that the House would be of that Opinion which when Sir Richard
Everard moved for, Mr. Spe^ker who well knew that if the House was of Opinion
that any one Article was proved, they could not avoid charging the Chief
Justice with the Articles so pr^ved, obj^cted against that Motion, and desired
that the House would not give their Sense of the Evidences to each Articles
seperately in it is proper Course, but that they would suspend any Determination
whatsoever until they had gone through the whole Charge. This produced a warm
D^bate in the House, and upon the Question it was carried according to Mr.
Speaker's desire by the Majority of one Voice.

Mr. Speaker could have no other view in this Proposal of his but only to
perplex the Understandings ^f the Members of the House by mixing such Articles
which he knew ware) as Affairs had be^n managed) difficulties to be proved,
with such Articles as he was confident would be fully proved, and that the
Question at last might be reduced to this, (as in fact it was) whether the
Proofs that were produced and heard to Support the said Articles were
sufficient for this House to Impeach the said Chief Justice. That was the
Question, and many of the Members who voted against the Articles afterward
owned that many of the Articles were sufficiently proved, but that the whole
were not so well proved as might be expected in order to a Conviction: the
small allowance of Time laid insuperable Difficulties upon the Gentlemen on the
side of the Articles. Whether those Articles to which no Proof was produced, or
which were not fully proved, could have been sufficiently proved we leave the
World to determine, after they shall have perused the Proofs contained in the
Appendix to this Narrative, and which would have been produced to the House,
had Time been allowed But to return to the matter of fact given in Evidence to
the House* upon the seventh Article; Mr. John Bryan on his Examination upon
Oath before the House declared that some Time before the last Circuit-Court
held at Newbern, one Walker was committed to Prison by Captain George Roberts,
upon the Complaint of Mr. Joseph Hannis upon Suspicion of having stolen a Negro
from the said Hannis, that some Time after the Commitment of the said Walker,
Mr. Hannis came to the said John Bryan he being one of His Maj^sty's Justices
of the Peace for the County of Craven and desired him to let Walker out of
Prison, for that his Negro was come home, and he was fully persuaded that his
Accusations were groundless against him, and that he was sure Walker never had
the N^gro; but he the said John Bryan fearing that through Ignorance he might do
wrong, he advised with William Wilson, Esquire, Sherriff of Craven County, and with
Mr. Seth Pilkington Guardian to the said Walker, who represented to the said
Bryan that is was a very hand Case that Walker should be kept in Prison upon
that Account, because the very Negro for which he was committed was Justice
Walker's Negro, in right of his Mother agreeable to a Law of the Island of
Barbados, and that Mr. Hannis was possessed of that Negro no otherwise than as
Administrator to the said Walker's Father, but as Mr. Hannis who had been the
Accuser had absolutely acquitted him, they were of Opinion that the said Bryan
might discharge him the said Walker without any Ha^zard, and that if they were
Magistrates they would do it; and Mr. Seth Pilkington the Guardian of Walker
furth^r told Mr Bryan that if he would Discharge Walker he would give him his
Bond to ind^mni^y him, which he afterward did That the said Bryan upon this
and having likewise examined the Commitment of the said Walker, which he found
to be without Date, and without mentioning for what he was committed, and Mr.
Hannis having informed him that he had entered into no Recognizance to
Prosecute the said Walker, he Discharged the said Walker out of Prison, and the
said Bryan further declared upon his said Examination before the House that at
the Circuit-Court at Newbern, he had information given him that the Chief
Justice was displeased at this Proceeding of his, and that before the end of
the Court he must expect to be called upon to Answer for so doing; upon this,
the said Bryan attended about the Court and near the Courthouse; but that he
never heard himself called upon for that purpose, but one Day being near the
Courthouse Door he heard the Affair mentioned in Court with much heat by the
Chief Justice, who pronounced the said John Bryan fined Ten Pounds Proclamation
Money, that he knows of no Information or Presentment made or filled against
him, neither was there to his Knowledge any Oath made by any Person against
him, nor was he informed or believed that any was taken That the said John
Bryan heard a certain Person in Court whom he believes and took to be Mr
Herritage Attorney at Law, move the said Chief Justice that he would be pleased
to s^nd for the said Bryan, and hear what he had to say for himself, that he
was sure if his Honor was but acquainted with the Case he would mitigate the
Fine, that he hoped his Honor meant Ten Pound Bill Money. The said Bryan
declared upon his Oath that he heard some Person whom he took to be the Chief
Justice, and was afterward informed it was him, reply in these Words as near
as he could remember, I am well informed in the Affair, do you know Sir my
Sen^iments better than I do my self, I do pronounce John Bryan fined Ten Pounds
Proclamation Money, and that to enlighten the Gentleman's Understanding; and
the said John Bryan further declared that an Execution was issued Signed by the
said Chief Justice, directed to the Sheriff of Craven County to levy the said
Fine upon the said Bryan, and that in Consequence of the said Execution he paid
to William Wils^n, Esquire Sheriff the Sum of of seventy five P^unds Current Money
of this Province, and took the said Sheriff's Receipt for the same. The Receipt
mentioned by the said Bryan was produced to the House by Sir Richard Everard.
There are some other Circumstances which would have been still a stronger
support to this Article, forgot by Mr. Bryan in his Examination, for which we
refer the Reader to the Appendix

Mr. William Herritage Attorney at Law and Clerk of the House of Burgesses, was
called upon by Mr. Speaker in order to clear up this Article on the side of the
Chief Justice, though by what he said he left it worse than he found it, after
b^ing Sworn, he was asked if the said Bryan had been called in Court to Answer
to the Off^nce for which he was fined, to which he b^lieved he was, when the
Court sat in the Morning of that Day in the Afternoon of which the said Bryan
was fined, he also Swore that he appeared for the said Bryan at his Desire, but
agreed to take no Fee for so doing and being asked whether he moved the Chief
Justice in Court that Bryan might be sent for, and that the Fine might be
Mitigated, he declared that he had so done, and that the Chief Justice made
Answer to his Motion much as Mr John Bryan had Sworn, and being further asked
if any Enquiries had been made into Bryan's Offense in open Court, if there was
any Information against the said Bryan* or any Evid^nce examin^d upon Oath in
Court in Relation to the said Bryan's Offense for which he was fined, he
answered that he knew of none such.

This was the whole Substance of Mr. Herritage's Examination which was very
(...) from answering the Ends intended by it; we leave to the World to judge if
any Evidence be wanting to support this Ar^^cle, and whether this Article alone
is not sufficient to take away the Preten^ion of any Judge to the Character of
Impartiality and Uprightness. We shall return aagain to the Journals

And then they Proceeded to the second Article, and produced Mr. Joseph
Anderson, and Mr Ar^hibald Hamilt^n Evidences.

Mr Joseph Anderson Attorney at Law and formerly Clerk of the General Court,
being upon Oath, was examined before the House as follows; he was asked if the
said Chief Justice had taken the Oath directed to be taken by all Justices of
the Gen^ral Court for observance of the Jury Act, and whether the said Chief
Justice had observed that Act, to which he replied that the Chi^f Justice had
taken that Oath, and followed the Directions of that Act in drawing Jurors at a
General Court in which he presided before he went for England but that ever
since his return he had absolutely dis^egarded that Act

Mr Ar^hibald Hamilton Attorney at Law, being Sworn was asked by the House; if
the Jurys at the General Court since he had practiced the Law at the Court, had
been drawn according to the Dir^ctions of the Jury Act; to which he replied
that the Jurors who were Summoned to app^ar and s^rve at the Genera^ C^urt have
not been drawn by B^lot according to the Jury Act, but have been constantly
Summoned by V^nire from the Chi^f Justice without any regard to that Law* and
b^ing fu^th^r asked if he ever heard the Ch^^f Justice a knowledge that Law to
be i^ Force, and t^a^ he had (...) the Oath by that Law directed (...);
Answered, that he heard the said Chi^f Justice in open Court declare the Act of
this Province for appointi^g indifferent jurym^n in all Cases (...) and
criminal to be in Force, and that he had taken the Oath by that Act enjoined.

Before we take notice of the next Article mentioned in the Journals of the
House, we must inform our Readers that the third Article is not mentioned in
the Journals, from wh^nce that neglect proceeded is not material* is suffices
that the Article was true, which evidently appears from the said Chief
Justice's taking the Oaths before the Gov^rnor in Council, sometime after the
Exhibition of the Articles to the House. But to proceed to the J^urnals

"T^en Proceeded to the fourth Article and produced Mr. Joseph Anderson*
Evidence."

We could wish the J^urnals of the House had been more full and express, and
that they had been pleased to have suff^red the Evidence to have been committed
to writing, it would have spared us the Trouble and Pain we are forced to
encounter to render the Proceedings intelligible to our Readers, this Article
accuses the Chief Justice with assuming ^o himself, equal Power and Authority
with the Court of King's B^nch at Westminster, etc. to support which two
original W^its for the Execution of Criminals at Edenton were produced and read
to the House, the first in these Words, Viz.

North Carolina, ss. GEORGE the Second by the Grace of GOD, of Great Britain,
etc
To the Provost Marshal of our said Province, Greeting.
Whereas at our Court of K^ng's Bench holden for our said Province at the
Courthouse in Edenton on the last Tuesday in July last before our Chief
Justice and his Assistants Judges* one Beal Brown of Edgcomb Precinct in our
said Province Planter was Convicted for the fel^^i^us stealing a Horse from
Constant Williamson, and th^r^upon received S^ntence of Death* and at the
Motion of ^ur Attorney General for a W^it to Command the Marshal of our said
Province to put the S^ntence against him the said Beal Brown in Exe^ution,
which was granted, and a Rule of Court thereon made, we therefore Command you
that on Thursday the fifth of this Instant August* between the Hours of ten of
the Clock in the Forenoon and three in the Afternoon, you Cause the Body of the
said Beal Brown to be carried from our Goal at Edenton to the Place of
Execution, and there to be hanged by the N^ck till he is dead, and all our
Liege People are hereby Commanded to be aiding and assisting in the Pr^mises
Herein fail not and make due Return of this Writ, and your Proceeding thereon
Witness William Smith, Esquire* our Chief Justice of our said Province at Edenton
the second Day of August, in the tenth Year of our Reign, Anno Domini. 1736

W. Smith, C. I.

The Execution of which Writ, was thus Certified in writing upon the back
thereof, like wise read to the House.

Edenton, ss. By Virtue of the within Precept I executed (...) on the Body of
Beal Brown, on the Day and Time of the Day within mentioned being this fifth
Day of August, Anno Domini 1736* Christo. Becket, D.M.

The other original Writ for the Execution of one John Tucker convicted of
Burglary and Felony of the same Date with the former and in the same Words
Mutatis Mu^andis, and upon the back thereof was ^ndorsed as follows, Executed
this 5th Day of August, 1736, Christopher B^cket, D M.

Mr. Joseph Anderson declared upon Oath the said Writs to be original Writs, by
which the aforesaid Criminals were Executed, he being at that Time Clerk of the
Crown

Mr. Speaker having declared to the House that His Majesty's Warrant or S^gn
Manual, for appointing Mr. Smith Chief Justice of this Province, gave to the
said Chief Justice the same Power as the several Courts in Westminster Hill are
possessed of, that our Readers may be fully satisfied how much Mr. Speaker is
mistaken in his Assertion, we shall present them with an exact Copy of that
Warrant taken from the Records, then leave them to determine, if the Chief
Justice has the least Pretensi^n or Title to Claim or Execute the Powers of His
Maj^sty's Ancient Court of King's Bench at Westminster.

G R

Trusty and well Beloved, We Greet you well.

WHEREAS we have taken into our Royal Consideration the Integrity and Ability
of our Trusty and well Beloved William Smith, Esquire* we have thought fit hereby
to Require and Author^z^ you forthwith to cause Letters Patents to be passed
under our Seal of that our Province of North Carolina in America, for
Constituting and Appointing the said William Smith our Chief Justice of and in
our said Province, to have, hold, execute and enjoy the said Office during our
Pleasure and his Residence within our said Province, together with all and
singular the Rights, Profits, Privileges, and Emoluments unto the said Place
belonging or appertaining, with full Power and Authority to hold the Supreme
Courts of Judicature, at such Places and Tim^s as the same may and ought to be
held within our said Province, and for so doing this shall be your Warrant, and
so we bid your Farewell. Given at our Court at St. James's the 13th Day of
November in the fourth Year of our Reign.

By His Majesty's Command. H^lles Newcastle.

The fifth Article not mentioned in the Journals notwithstanding it contains a
fact so notoriously known that not one Member in the H^use was a Stranger to it.

We shall again Return to the Articles.

Then Proceeded to the six^h Article, and produced Mr. Joseph Anderson Evidence

The Journals neglect mentioning a more material Evidence produced to Support
this Article* than Mr. Anderson who only corroborated the Examination of Mr.
Dawson taken upon Oath by one of His Majesty's Justices of the P^a^^ for B^rti^
County, read to the House as follows, Viz.

"The Examination of John Dawson taken before Mr. John Edwards one of his
Maj^sty's Justices of the Peace for the said Precinct the 14th Day of January
^^37* who being duly (...) the Evangelists of Almighty GOD, declares that he
made his personal Appearance at a General Court held at Edenton the last
Tuesday in July last, and as he was in the Evening walking in the Street near
the Court House in Company with one James Barnes, accidentally met Mr. James
Trotter Deputy Marshal, and one Iackson who immediately Summoned the said
Dawson to attend that Court as a Petit Juryman, Mr Dawson at the same Time
telling him that he need not have given himself the Trouble for he had been
Summoned before; Trotter replied that he could not expect any Favor at his
Hand. Dawson answered that he did not, and if he had any Trump Cards in his
Hands to play them for he (meaning himself) might chance at one Time or other
to have Jack and Ace in his Hands, and should make Use of them; Trotter
signified that he the said Dawson had used him very ill at his House, when he
Demanded the Qu^trents, and he might expect no Favor at his Hands, Dawson
replying he was sorry when he took his Money from him in the manner he did,
that he had not well basted him; which ended the Conversation

Next Day the Court being opened and sitting, the Petit Jury was called, where
the said Dawson appeared, and were all orde^^d to give their Attendance when
wanting, whereup^n John Montgomery, Esquire His Majesty's Attorney G^neral moved to
the Chief Justice that Mr James Trotter the Marshal had Complained to him that
one John Dawson had insult^d him in the Execution of his Office, Trotter being
called, and Barnes and Iackson being Sworn, and having both delivered their
Evidence in the very Words above narrated. The Judge a^ked Trotter if he was at
that Time in the Execution of his Office, who replied your Honor knows I am
always about my ^usiness in Court Time, but could not readily give any Account
of what particular Business, but remembered that he had then Summoned the said
Dawson on the Jury, to which Trotter was Sworn, the Judge asked Mr Dawson, what
he had to say for ^^^self for insulting one of His Majesty's Officers in the
Execution of his Office in T^me of the Court sitting; who answered that it
being in the Evening when the Court was adjourned, and as he had been Summoned
before that Time, in Obedience thereto he appeared, and did not intend any
Offense to His Majesty's Officers, if deemed such he did it Ignorantly and was
sorry for it; the Judge without any further Enquiry, expressed himself in these
Words, I commit you to Goal without Bail or Mainprise, there to remain till you
pay Ten Pounds Proclamation Money, and give sufficient Security for your good
Behavior for twelve Months and one Day and Night. Mr. Chief Justice sent for
the said Dawson to his Lodgings, when Mr. Attorney General and Captain William
Downing an Assistant Judge procured his enlargement from Saturday Evening till
Monday Morning.

The Court being opened at the usual Time on Monday, the Judge discovered some
Words written on his Desk by some Person unknown, reflecting very much upon his
hasty committing and fining the said Dawson, which occasioned a warm Debate
between the Judge and Mr. Attorney, whereupon Mr. Attorney ordered the said
Dawson to Prison, where he continued two Days and Nights, and being prevailed
upon by his Friends paid Ten Pounds Proclamation Money, gave the Security
required, and was dismissed*"

"Certified under my Hand the Day and Year above written, John Edwards, Pac.
Just.

Mr. Joseph Anderson who was called as a corroborating Evidence, declared that
the said Dawson had been fined and imprisoned as he has Sworn.

But to return to the Journals

"Then Proceeded to the eight Article and produced Mr. Joseph Anderson, Mr.
John Caldom, Mr. Bryan, and Mr John Starkey Evidences.

Here again the Journals are remiss in not mentioning all the Evidences
produced to Support this Article, besides those mentioned in the Journals, John
Montgomery, Esquire Mr. Archibald Hamilton and Robert Cala^or^ were examined, and
the Deposition of (...) Boude read, before the House* Mr. Joseph Anderson
informed the House that he indicted one James Kelly for a forcible Entry, that
the Indictment was quashed, as is set forth in the Article, that Kelly p^id as
he believes between l. 70 and l. 80 Bill Money, in which all Fees relating to
the same were included, that he knew of no particular Fee ascertained by the
Law of this Provinc^ for such Service, but that he mad^ out the Fees Kelly paid
by Direction from the Chief Justice from the Complete Attorney and Solicitor

Mr Archibald Hamilton Swore that Kelly informed him that the Fees* with which
he was made chargable for that Indictment, amounted to Twenty two Pounds Ten
Shillings Proclamation Money, and that he had paid l. 90 Bill Money in Lieu
thereof.

John Montgomery Esquire also informed the House that Kelly acquainted him that he
had paid l 90 for the Expense, occasioned by that Indictment.

"The Deposition of John Boude aged near thirty Years, being first Sworm on the
Holy Evangelist, says that he was by the Grand Jury at Edenton in the Year
1735 or 1736 presented for having a Bastard Child by one Katharen Dew, which
this Deponent hearing of, went into the General Court, and moved by his
Attorney to be heard on the said Presentment, and on Motion to the said Court
Mr. Chief Justice Smith and Mr. John Montgomery Attorn^y General allowed the
said Presentment to be insufficient, the said Deponent having complied with the
Laws of the Province, in paying the Fines to the Church Wardens of the Parish,
and providing nec^ssaries for the Support and Maintenance of the Child, and
that the said Child was Born near five Years before the said Presentment and
the Fines then paid, and that the said Deponent has not Cohabited with the said
Katharine since, nor ever heard that there was any previous Complaints either
by Church Wardens, Overseers of the Poor or any other Persons, and that he had
always maint^ined the said Child in a Christian like manner* and further says
that when the said Court dismiss^d the said Presentment, Mr. Attorney John
Montgomery Esquire moved that the Deponent should pay the Costs, but Mr Chief
Justice Smith was silent, although Mr. Montgomery mentioned it twice to the said
Court, and the Deponent thought he was to pay no Costs, there being nothing
Alleged against him but a very short Presentment from the Jury, and no Summons
or Bill preferred against this Deponent, or any Thing else as ^e ever heard of
but the said Presentment, yet notwithstanding the Deponent for fear of further
Trouble went to the Clerk of the Crown when the Court was Adj^urned, and
tendered to pay the Fees, and demanded to know what they were; the said Clerk
laughing replied, Let it alone, I don't know whether you have any Thing to pay,
and made a Poh at it, from which this Deponent apprehended it to be a very
Trifle, but in a very short Time the Deponent met James Trotter the Marshal,
who showed the Deponent an Execution against him for Twenty-six Pounds some odd
Shillings Fees for the said Presentment, and the Deponent further says that
soon after seeing the Clerk of the Court and resenting his sending out the
Execution, he excused it by saying he could not avoid it, for it was by the
Chief Justice Smith's Commands, the which Twenty six Pounds the Deponent paid;
and further says not.

John Boude.
Sworn before me

the 26 th Day of March, 1737. Thomas Hansford.



Robert Calaborn being examined upon Oath Swore that himself, Andrew Conner,
and others were indicted at the last Circuit Court held at Bath^Town for a
Riot, as in the said Article is set forth, that himself and Andrew Conner each
of them paid the Sum of Twenty two Pounds to the Chief Justice and his Clerk
for Fees for the said Indictment, that he paid the same by Mr. John Caldom's
Assumption that Execution for the like Sum were out against the oath Persons
mentioned in the said Indictment.

Mr. John Caldom Swore that he gave his Assumption to pay to the Chief Justice
and his Clerk the Sum of Twenty-two P^unds upon the Account of the said Robert
Calaborn, and for the like Sum upon the Account of Andrew Conner, and that upon
his the said Caldom's Assumption, the said Calaborn and Conner were discharged
from the D^mand of the said Chief Justice and his Clerk We shall again Return
to the Journals which brings us to the ninth Article.

Then proceeded to the ninth Article and produced a Copy of Anthony Booth's
D^position in Evidence.

" Bertic Precinct, ss On the 17^h Day of March 1737, came before me John
H^brook E^q one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace, Anthony Booth, and made
Oath, on the holy Evangelists that on or before the first Day of October last
be the Deponent being sick in Bed of a Fever, Peter Y^ung Depu^y Marshal,
served two several Executions on the B^dy of the said Deponent for Debt, one
for two Pounds Ten Shilling, and another for two Pounds five Shillings Bills
together with Costs and Charges amounting t^ upwards of seventy P^unds, though
the Deponent never was legally Arrested, for which the said Peter Y^ung
insisted upon carrying the said An^hony Booth to Prison, but the Deponent being
very ill with great Difficulty prevailed upon the said Y^ung to take a N^gro
Girl for Security of the Payment of the above Sum until the Count Accordingly
the (...) Y^ung took her with him to Edenton by consent of the s^^d D^ponent,
notwithstanding which the sai^ Peter Y^ung with three Assistants came a second
Time and received from the said D^ponent 4000 Pounds of fresh Beef into his
Boat, and at the ^ame Time forced the said Deponent on Board the Boat with the
Beef to Edenton (by which means the Deponent was Violently forced away) and
kept him Prisoner two Days and then discharg^d him.

Sworn before me, I. Holdbrook. J. P

"The said Deposition was endorsed, A true Copy examined by us John Swann and
Thomas Jones, Col. Maurice Moore and Mr. John Swann affirmed to the House that
they had examined the said Copy with the Original, and that it was a true
Copy." But if the House had been in any Doubt as to the Truth of that fact,
they ought to have commanded Booth's Attendance.

"Then proceeded to the tenth Article, and produced Mr. Joseph Ande^son,
several Executions, and Mr. Richard Lovit E^idences.

Mr* Anderson being asked if he was Clerk of the General Court at the Time the
Facts alleged in this Article were committed, declared he was not. The several
Executions and other written Evidences produced to the House, were as follows,
Viz The first Ex^cutions against Samuel Bridgin in these Words.

North Carolina, ss. Seal. GEORGE the Second by the Grace of GOD of Great
Britain, etc. To the Provost Mashal of our said Province. Greeting.
We Command you to take Samuel Bridgin of Cape-Fear so you that have him before
our Justices at our next General Court to be holden for our said Province at
the Court House in Edenton on the last Tu^sday in March next, to s^ti^fy four
Pounds eight Shillings and three Pence Pro^lamation Money, which in our Court
on the last Tuesday in October last, was adjudged and taxed for his Costs in
his Suit against Thomas Fu^lwood, wherein he would no further Prosecute,
whereof he is convicted. An^ have you then and there this Writ, with your own
^^es Witness William Smith our Chief Justice of our said Province at Edenton
the 19th Day of November, Anno Domini, 1738.

W. Smith, C J.

Which Execution was endors'd on the back in the Hand writing of Mr. Richard
Lovit Attorney at Law to whose Car^ that Execution was committed.

Proclamation Money In Bill Money at four for one l. 19 18 0
"Chief Justice l 4 8 3 "This Precept 11 3 l 4 19 6


Then was Read Mr. James Craven's Receipt for the Fees in that Action agreeable
to Allegations of the Article^ the second Time the same was paid by Samuel
Bridgin, but as the Chief Justice's Friends would not allow Time sufficient to
s^nd for Brigdin and others, designed as Evidences to support this Article, we
refer our Readers to the Appendix.

"Received September 22d 1739, of Mr Samuel Bridgin the Sum of seventeen Pounds
thirteen Shillings Current Bills, for Fees due in his Cause against Thomas
Fullwood due to the Chief Justice and Clerk of the Court. I say Received for
the Use of the Chief Justice and Clerk of the General Court.

Per James Craven, Cl Genesis Court.

" Rusus Marsden has paid a Fieri Facias for discontinuing his Suit against
Edward Davis, the Sum of seventeen Pounds ten Shillings to Thomas Rowen, and
since has paid a Fieri Facias for the said Action the Sum of eight Pounds five
Shillings to the Chief Justice as may appear by the Clerk's Receipt.

Rufus Marsden.

" Daniel Dunbibin paid an Execution at the Suit of James Fergus, thirty Pounds
to Thomas Rowen, which he can make appear by the Oath of Edward Scot and James
Fergus, and since has been compelled to pay the Sum of twenty-one Pounds for
Costs of the said Suit as may appear by the Clerk's Receipt

Daniel Dunbibin.

Mr. Richard Lovit declared upon Oath before the House that he believed Mr.
Dunbibin might have paid the Sum to Mr. Thomas Rowen deceased, Clerk of the
General Court through the Hands of Mr Edward Scot*

Then was produced and read to the House an Execution upon a Non Pros against
William Dry in the same Words ( Mutatis Mutandis) as that against Samuel
Bridgin, being for the Sum of four Pounds and five Pence Proclamation Money,
and also three Fieri Facias's against the said Dry for the Discontin^ance of
three Suits brought by him in the General Court, all of them of the same Date.
In the following Words ( Mutatis Mutandis.)

North Carolina, ss. Seal. GEORGE the Second by the Grace of GOD King of Great
Britain, etc. To the Provost Marshal of our said Province^ Greeting.
Whereas at our General Court holden at Edenton, the last Tuesday in October
last for our said Province, William Dry having discontinued a Suit against
Jonathan Caulkins it was ordered that he pay Costs, as to us of Record appears,
which said Costs have been taxed as Three Pounds seventeen Shillings
Proclamation Money, and as yet has not been paid or satisfied.

We Command you that of the Goods and Chattels of the said William Dry if to be
found in your Bailwick you Cause the same to be levied, paid and satisfied
together with eleven Shillings and three Pence Proclamation Money, accruing on
this Writ as also your own Fees, an^ make due return. Herein fail not. Witness
William Smith, Esquire Chief Justice of our said Province at Edenton this 10th Day
of November, 1737

The other two Executions against Capt. Dry were one of them for Discontinuanc^
of a Suit against Thomas Sa^ier, and the other for the like against Clifton
Brown and the Costs mention^d in them, besides the eleven Shillings and three
Pence Proclamation Money as follows, Viz. Proclamation Money,
Mr. Dry's Cost in his Suit against Brown l. 3 17 0 Mr. Dry's Costs in his Suit
against Sawier 3 12 0

We shall now again return to the Journal,

"Then to the eleventh Article, and produced Mr. Joseph Anderson Evidence.

The Evidence produced to support the tenth Article fully and clearly proved
this Article; Mr. Anderson was asked if the Execution against Samuel Brigdin
upon the non pros was in the Form which the Chief Justice constanly issued them
in, he replied he believed it was in the same Form, and being a^ked if eleven
Shillings and three Pence Proclamation Money was the Fee which the said Chief
Justice claimed for himself and Clerk for such Executions, he answered it was.

"Then proce^d^d to the twelfth Article and produced Mr. Joseph Anderson and
Mr. Richard Lovit Evidences.

Here again the Journals decline mentioning the most ma^^ri^^ Evidence produced
and read to the House to support this Article, and concerning which only the
two Evidences mentioned in the Journals were called, the first being an
original Warrant granted by the Chief Justice against William Crosby.

By the Honorable William Smith, Chief Justice, North Carolina, ss. Seal
Whereas I have this Day received Information upon Oath that William Crosby of
Onslow Precinct Planter, about the first Day of June last did felloneously and
of Malice before thought, assault and wound David Berry, of which wound the said
David Berry for sometime Languished, and about five Weeks after died, and
likewise that he the said William at the Time aforesaid did without any lawful
Provocation assualt, wound, and bruise William Dudley.

These are therefore to Command you to apprehend the Body of the said William
Crosby and him bring before me at Edenton, or before Abraham Mitchell in Onslow
to Answer the Premises and to be dealt with according to Law. Fail not, and for
so doing this shall be your Warrant Given under my Hand and Seal at White Oak,
December 4th 1734.

W. Smith C. J,
To the Provost Marshall and his Deputy, and to each and every the Constables
of the aforesaid Provinc^ and their Assistants.
And then was read an Execution against Dudley in the usual Form, for one Pound
ten Shilling and seven Pence half Penny Proclamation Money* and eleven
Shillings and three Pence of the like Money Fees for the said Execution; that
Execution suggests that Dudley had discontinued a Suit against William Crosby:
all the Attorneys who practiced in the General Court of this Province at that
Time except one being present they were severally asked by the House if any of
them knew of, or had brought any Action against William Crosby (...) the Suit
of Dudley, and they severally declared they had not, neither could they
recollect any such Action to have been upon the Docket. It is further
remarkable, that Mr. Richard Lovit who received the Money and Fees arising from
the Execution against Dudley, upon Account of Mr. Chief Justice, could not
recollect any Action brought by Dudley against Crosby, he gave the following
Receipt upon the back of the Execution.

Received the within Sum of eight Pounds seven Shillings and six Pence for the
Use of William Smith, Esquire Chief Iusti^^, ad July 1746. Richard Lovit.

As this Case (...) very remarkable we intend to state it at large in our
Appendix, to which we refer our Readers.

We shall now go on with the Journals.

"Then proceeded to the thirteenth Article and produced Mr. Archibald Hamilton
Evidence*"

Mr Hamilto^ being produced to support this Article is a circumstantial
Evidence only, and the Evidence who would have put the same beyond Dispute not
being there through want of convenient Time and the aid of the House, we shall
refer our Readers o^ the Appendix.

But to follow the Journals.

Then to the fourteenth Article which they agreed to expunge being used in
private Conversation, notwithstanding which Confession we are of Opinion, we
ought to convince our Readers that the Matter contained in that Article was
Truth, as will undeniably appear from the following Deposition.

Berti^ Precinct* ss March 17, 1737.8.
James Castelaw of this Precinct of fitty Years of Age, and duly Sworn on the
holy Evangelists says, that on the 27th July having some Discourse with the
Chief Justice Smith and Mr Attorney General Montgomery in James Tro^ter's
Porch, concerning the Hardships the Inhabitants of this Province labored under
since the Administration of his Excellency Gabriel Iohnston, Esquire ou^ present
Governor, told them they were got to that height that we should be under a
necessity to rebel against them or runaway and leave ou^ Lands and Livings
behind us, Chief Justice Smith in a heat answered, by God I wish you would,
that is what we want; the Depone^^ started up from the Place where he sat
betwixt them, surpised at such an unguarded Expression, and replied* good God,
what a strange Government we are under, that the Ministry Labor the ruin of
the Subject, and are so bare faced as to own it. The Attorney said fie fie, are
such Expressions fit to come out of the Mouth of a Chief Justice of a Province,
or Words to th^^ effect. The Day following John D^wson a Member of the
Assembly, was committed to the Public Goal by Judge Smith for Words passed in
the Street between him the said Dawso^ and James Trotter, there to lie without
Bail or Mainpr^ze until he paid ten Pounds Proclamation Money, and find
Security for his good Behavior (as this Deponent was informed) for a Year and
a Day.

Sworn before me John H^l^brook, Jus Pe^*

Now we attend the Journals to the fifteenth Article.

"Then to the fi^teenth Article and produced Mr. Archibald Hamilton Evidenc."

Mr. Hamilton upon his Oath declared that he heard the Chief Justice in open
Court abuse Mr Arthur Mabson, in the Manner and Words, and at the Time as in
that Article is expressly mentioned.

We come now to the sixteenth and last Article mentioned by the Journal.

"Then to the sixteenth Article not any Evidence produced"

As the Proofs produced before the House were brought there not to convict but
only to induce the House to accuse the Chief Justice, it was thought needless,
to prove what every Member must by occular Demonstration know to be Truth,
there was scarce any Member of that House who had not at Times made his
Observation thereof, and was w^ll convinced that Mr. Chief Justice has long
since merited a Myrtle Wreath.

We come now to the Debate and Question upon the Articles

"Then proceeded to Debate the same, whether the Proofs to the said Articles
are sufficient for the House to Impeach the said Chief Ju^tice*

Then Mr. Speaker resumed the Chair.

Mr. Chairman reported from the Committee of the whole House that the above
Articles and Proofs were debated by the said Committee.

Then the Question was put whether the Proofs that were produced and heard to
support the said Articles were sufficient for the House to Impeach the said
Chief Justice, or whether they be rejected.

And voted by a Majority of six Votes rej^cted"

Vera Copia Wm. Herritage, Cl. Dom. Bur.

For rejecting the Proofs.
Mr. Tho. Lovick, Colector of Port Beaufort. Mr. Thomas Hunter Mr. George B^uld
Mr. George R^berts Mr. Ri^h^rd R^gby Col Benjam^n Hill Mr. John Blount Doct.
Abraham Blackall Deputy Post Master. Mr James Craven, Clerk of the General
Court. Col. Macrora Scarborough Mr Carruthers Mr. Tho Pendilton Mr. David
B^yley Mr. William Rel^ Mr. John Caro^ Mr. Jacob Caron Mr. Leary Mr. I^shua
Long Mr. James Su^^er Mr. Walton Mr Joseph Tar^ Mr. Thomas Louther
Against rejecting the Proofs.
Col. Maurice Moore Mr. James Castelaw Mr. Tho Bryan Mr. John Br^wn Mr. Simon
Alderson Mr. John Banbury Mr. John Starkey Mr William Bric^ Mr Edmund Smi^hwick
Mr. William Gardener Mr. Arthur Mabson Mr. Samuel Swann Mr John Swann Mr
William Bar^ra^ Sir Rich* Everard* Bart. John Montgomery, Esquire His Majesty's
Attorney General. Mr. Joseph Sutton Mr. Samuel Sinclair
I have now gone through the Articles and the Matters of Fact relating to them as
the same were actually given in and produced before the House, and I make no
doubt but that our Readers are convinced that, that Proceeding of ours was the
pure Effect of our Duty, and that the Articles of Complaint are neither
frivolous, idle, o^ maliciously intended only so asperse and blacken the Chief
Justice, as he has suggested, though the Members for the Articles acted by his
own Directions and Advice, and as it were with his own Consent signified to
them from the Bench in many of his Charges to the Grand Juries of this
Province* That he who condeme^ the (...) and h^ who lets the Guilty go frees
are b^th an A^omination to the LORD

We appeal to our Readers if it be not very monstro^^ to suppose that (...)
Gentl^men who without vanity may b^ looked upon a^ least equal to any in the
(...) the Expectation and ruin the Fortune of the Chief Justice, only to
gratify some little Pique or Malice of their own, in manifest and open
Contradiction, to Truth, and the Sense of the rest of the Province: As such an
attempt as this would be little short of down right Madness, so it would be
very easily b^ffled, and the villainy of it exposed to the World, and the Actors
therein would meet with deserved Reproach and Contempt; But blessed be GOD we
live under a British Constitution, where Liberty is our undoubted Inheritance,
is well understood and ought to be enjoyed in it is full Extent; in such a
Government if any one shall presume to break through and violate the common
Benefits and Privileges, secured to us by Law, and trample under Foot the most
solemn Oaths, the most binding and necessary Laws, Laws upon which the Safety
of the whole Province necessarily depends, and which have never been before
th^n broken or disobeyed, I say when all this happens, and Men in Power, behave
as if they were l^ss accountable for the abuse of their Trust, than the Royal
Hand which bestowed it upon them; is it not high Time for People laboring
under such Oppressions and Injuries to loo^ about them? I^ is not necessary to
put a stop so such Iniquities, and is it not just at least to endeavor to
punish such daring Offenders; can any Man or Set of Men possibly remain quiet
and easy when they se^ by Experience that neither the Laws of Great Britain nor
those of their own Province, are sufficient to secur^ them against the
arbitrary Attempts of Men in Power? And is it not the greatest Hardship and
Cruelty imaginable that Men in such a wretched Condition endeavoring honestly
to discharge the Trust reposed in them by the injured and oppressed People,
complaining in the most decent manner of these Enormities; should be looked
upon by the Gentlemen in the Administration little better than Rebels, and that
Gentlemen who had Courage and Honesty sufficient to exhibit Articles upon just
Grounds against the Chief Justice, should be called Libell^rs and Opposers of
the Measures of the Government, purely for the sake of Opposition (...) those
necessary Articles against the Chief justice, which are ^ounded upon undeniable
(...) of Fact, should be called by him false and libellous? (...) is an easy
matter to say so of the most solemn Truths, (...) we take the freedom to put
that Gentleman in mind, that the World will be much better satisfied wi^h his
proving them false and libellous, than with h^^ (...) ipse ^i^is, tha^ they are
so.

Our Readers we make no doubt will look upon the Matters of Fact contained in
the Articles and the Proofs collected in this Narrative, as sufficient to
support the necessity and justness of our Proceedings against Mr. Chief Justice
Smith*

The great Care taken by himself and Friends to suppress the Evidence against
him, by contracting the Time and by the other Methods and Artifices before
mentioned, ought to be taken for the strongest ^vidence imaginable. Upon the
whole it entirely lies upon Mr. Smith to convince the World that he is injured
by us, and that he has behaved with that Uprightness and Integrity in his
Station that he ought, and which we could have wished had accompanied all his
Actions.

THE END.

