A LETTER From the Reverend Mr. WHITEFIELD TO A FRIEND IN LONDON, Showing the
Fundamental Error of the Book, Entitled, The Whole DUTY of MAN.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, M, DCC, XL.

A LETTER, etc.
My Dear Friend,
SINCE it has pleased God to give me a true Knowledge of the Doctrines of
Grace, I have frequently thought, that next to the Falling away of the Clergy
from the Principles of the Reformation, the Books which are in our Church,
founded on the Arminian Scheme, have been the chief Cause that so many of our
own Communion in particular, have built their Hopes of Salvation on a false
Bottom. The Authors not only led the People Captive in their own Lifetime, but
also after their Death, like Simon Magus, for a long Season have bewitched the
People with their Sorceries, I mean their seemingly devout, but at the Bottom,
Antichristian Compositions. -- The only Way therefore, to open People's Eyes,
I think is this, to show them, that the Writings, which for some Years past
have been so much admired, are directly contrary to the Gospel of Jesus Christ;
for this Reason I thought it my Duty to bear a public Testimony against the
Writings of Archbishop Tillotson: -- And upon the same Account, think it my
Duty, to point out the fundamental Error of an Author, as much admired and read
by the more common, as the Archbishop by the more learned and polite Sort of
People.

I know you are impatient to hear who this can be: If you will promise me not
to be angry, I Will tell you. -- It is that much admired Book called The whole
Duty of Man. -- Methinks I see you surprised at the very mentioning of it; but
remember, I desired you not to be angry. -- And if you will throw aside
Prejudice, and are sincerely desirous to know and do the divine Will, I am
persuaded we shall both be of one Mind concerning this Book, ever you lay this
Letter down out of your Hand.

But, before I show you its Error, to convince you of my Impartiality, I
confess that the Devotions of that Book were once of Service to me. -- And I
believe have been useful to many others. -- The Book in general is calculated
to civilize, but I am persuaded, it never was a Means of Converting a single
Soul. -- I have just been looking over the Index and General Titles at the End
of it, and cannot find the Word Regeneration so much as once mentioned. -- And
indeed, the whole Treatise is built on such a false Foundation, as not only
proves the Author to be no real Christian at Heart, but also, that he had not
so much as a Head Knowledge of the true Gospel of Jesus Christ. To prove this,
I need only refer you to Part of the Preface. -- Of the Necessity of Caring for
the Soul (Paragraph 17) wherein the Author, talking of the second Covenant,
speaks thus. -- This second Covenant, says he, was made with Adam, and us in
him, presently after his Fall, and is briefly contained in these Words, Genesis
iii. 15. where God declares, that the Seed of the Woman shall break the
Serpent's Head; And this was made up, as the first was, of some Mercies to be
afforded by God, and some Duties to be performed by us. Who, that is any way
enlightened, cannot but see the false Divinity and fundamental Errors of this
Passage? For, how can it be proved, that the second Covenant was made with
Adam, or that God ever entered into any Covenant at all with Man, after he had
broken the First? It is true, God the Father, did enter into a Covenant (and
that from all Eternity) with the Second Adam, the God-Man, Christ Jesus, in our
stead. -- But it cannot be proved, that he made any Second Covenant at all with
Adam himself or any of his Posterity. -- But says our Author, He did make a
second Covenant with Adam, and us in him, presently after his Fall, and it is
briefly contained in these Words, where God declares, that the Seed of the
Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head. -- But I would ask where any Covenant is
contained in these Words, and how it is made up, as the first was, of some
Mercies to be afforded by God, and some Duties to be performed by us? Here is a
free Gift and Promise of Salvation made to Adam, but no Covenant. Here is not a
Word of any Condition mentioned. -- No, it was the Free Gift of God in Christ.
-- Adam was now in a State of Condemnation: He was so far from being desirous
of entering into Covenant with, that he fled from God, and was not so much as
truly convicted of his Sin, as will evidently appear from the Context. -- For
both he and his Wife laid the Fault, not upon themselves, but on one another,
and on the Serpent. The Woman which thou gave me (therein tacitly reflecting
upon God for giving him that Woman) she gave me, says Adam, and I did eat. The
Serpent beguiled me, says the Woman, and I did eat. -- Here appears no true
Sense of Sin at all. -- And to show they had no Notion of a Savior, we are
told, they sewed Fig Leaves together, instead of applying to God, to cover
their Nakedness,and afterward fled from God, when they heard the Voice of the
Lord God walking among the Trees of the Garden. -- Here then opens that Mystery
of Godliness, God manifested in the Flesh. Notwithstanding our first Parents
had broken the Covenant and had their Hearts hardened, yet out of the Riches of
his Free Grace, God had provided a Remedy from all Eternity, and now reveals it
in Time. -- The Seed of the Woman, i. e. Jesus Christ (who in all probability
was spiritually conceived that Instant in the Heart of Eve) shall bruise the
Serpent's Head, i.e. by his Obedience and Death, shall satisfy divine Justice,
fulfill the moral Law in Man's Stead, and thereby deliver him from the Power of
the Devil. -- Here are no Terms mentioned on Man's Part at all: And supposing
there had been a Covenant made with Man, and it had been made up, as the First
was, of some Mercies to be afforded by God, and some Duties to be performed by
us, Alas, we are of all Creatures the most miserable; for then we are not under
Grace but under the Law. -- And if Adam could not keep the first Covenant, though
in perfect Innocence, how can we, who hate God by Nature, and whose Thoughts
are only Evil continually, keep a Second, like unto it? Is not this putting Man
into a most unhappy Condition, and making his poor imperfect Obedience the
Cause, why Jesus Christ is merciful unto him? And if so, how is Boasting
excluded in the great Work of our Redemption, as the Scriptures every where
affirm? And how can Eternal Life be the Free Gift of God through Jesus Christ our
Lord? But this is agreeable enough to the Divinity of this Author, who in the
21st Paragraph of this Preface, says, -- The third Thing Christ was to do for
us, was to enable us, or give us Strength, to do what he requires of us. This
he does, First, by taking off from the Hardness of the Law given to Adam, which
was never to commit the least Sin, upon Pain of Damnation, and requiring of us
only an holy and hearty Endeavor to do what we are able, and where we fail,
accepting of sincere Repentance. Now I would fain know, where God has taken off
from the Hardness of the Law given unto Adam, and required of us only an holy
and hearty Endeavor to do what we are able, and where we fail, accepting of a
sincere Repentance? This is all as false, as God is true. The whole Law is as
much in force against us, as it was against Adam, before we believed in Christ.
God has been so far from taking off from the Hardness of the Law, given to
Adam, That Jesus Christ declares, That he came not to destroy, but to fulfill
it. And until convinced of the Obligation we lie under, to obey the whole moral
Law, in Thought, Word, and Deed, how can we see the Necessity of the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ. -- God's Law was honorable. Jesus Christ
fulfilled it in our Stead; and upon Account of that Righteousness, imputed to
us, and received by Faith, and not on our hearty Endeavor or Repentance, are
we accepted by him. What is there, in our hearty Endeavor or Repentance, to
recommend us to the Favor of God, or to render them worthy of being joined
with the Righteousness of Christ? as though that was not sufficient of itself. --
Our best Actions are but splendida peccata, Glittering Sins. -- I cannot pray,
says the pious Bishop Beveridge, but I sin; I cannot hear, or preach a Sermon,
but I sin; I cannot give an Alms, or receive the Sacrament, but I sin; nay, I
cannot confess my Sins, but my very Confessions are still Aggravations of them;
my Repentings need to be repented of, my Tears want washing, and the very
Washing of my Tears needs still to be washed over again, with the Blood of my
Redeemer.

Jesus Christ, the Lord, is our whole Righteousness. We are to go to him as
poor Sinners; -- beg Salvation of him, as his Free Gift, and entreat him to
give us a Living Faith, whereby that Righteousness may be applied to our
Hearts; and then that Faith, if true, will work by Love. But before this Faith,
we cannot be said to have an actual Interest in the Benefits of Christ's
Purchase. This the Author of the Whole Duty of Man, was wholly ignorant of,
otherwise he would not have laid such a Foundation. And if the Foundation be so
bad, judge you then, how wretchedly weak the Superstructure must be. It would
take up more Time than I can at present spare, to point out all the Mistakes of
the whole Book. -- I will only refer you to what this Author says about
Recreations, Sunday 9th. Sect. 7. wherein he seems not only to allow of Gaming,
by saying, If we play at any Game, but directs us when we do, to let the End of
our Doing it, be merely to recreate our selves. -- I thought the Glory of God,
and not self-pleasing, had been the Scope to which all Christians ought to be
directed. I suppose, from this Passage, a Man, whom I reproved lately on the
Road, for Gaming in the Christmas Holy Days, grounded his Authority for so
doing. -- He told me, The whole Duty of Man said he might do so. -- And,
indeed, I believe he is not the First, by Thousands, who has been miserably
deceived by this much applauded Book: And therefore, I thought myself obliged
to write this Letter; you may make what Use you will of it. I care not if the
Contents are published upon the House Top: Nay, I think it your Duty, if
convinced yourself, to endeavor to convince others: For there is no Hopes of
bringing People to a right Knowledge of the Gospel, till their favorite, though
erroneous, Authors, are discountenanced and laid aside. -- Before I see
England, I hope I shall hear, that my Dear Friends in the Ministry, both in
Preaching and Printing, have seconded my Testimony. -- Future Ages, as well as
the present, will be much beholden to them for it. -- Their Declarations will
stand as Records, that God did not leave himself without Witness, even in the
worst of Times: Other Gospel Ministers will be encouraged thereby, and
Thousands, nay, Ten Thousands preserved from Infection, which otherwise
perhaps, they may not be able to avoid: -- However, whether they second me or
not, by the Help of my God, both abroad and at home (if it be the divine Will I
should see England again) I will persevere in bearing a more explicit and
particular Testimony, against the false Writings of our admired Rabbis. Do you
and my other Friends watch over me. Reprove me sharply, whenever you perceive
my Spirit any way imbittered. -- Pray that I may be as meek as a Lamb, but as
bold as a Lion; and then, whatever befalls me, for speaking as I ought to
speak, through divine Grace, will be cheerfully submitted to, by

Your affectionate Friend and Servant in Christ, GEO. WHITEFIELD.


