A BRIEF and GENERAL ACCOUNT Of the FIRST PART OF THE LIFE Of the REVEREND Mr.
GEO. WHITEFIELD, From his BIRTH, to his Entering into HOLY ORDERS.

Written by HIMSELF.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, in Market-Street. M,DCC,XL.

PREFACE.
ALTHOUGH the following Account of what GOD has done for my Soul, will,
undoubtedly, be differently judged of, by different People; yet, as, I trust, a
single Eye to GOD'S Glory moved me to write, and as I find myself much pressed
in Spirit to publish it, I am not in the least solicitous about the Treatment
it will meet with in the World.

The Benefit I have received from Reading the Lives of good Men; the Examples
we have in Scripture of the Sacred Authors composing their own Histories; and,
more especially the Assistances I have received from the Holy Spirit, in
bringing many Things to my Remembrance, which otherwise I should have
forgotten, seemed to me Reasons sufficient to justify my Conduct, in the Sight
of GOD and all good Men.

Further, As GOD has been pleased of late to call me to a Public Work, I
thought his Children would be glad to know how I (...) trained up for it. And,
though some may (...) this had been as well deferred till after my Death, or
wrote by some other Person; yet, I thought it would be more beneficial, and be
better credited, if wrote with my own Hand, and published whilst I was yet
alive.

In the Accounts of good Men, which I have read, I have observed, that the
Writers of them have been partial: They have given us the bright, but not the
black Side of their Characters. This, I think, proceeds from carnal Reasoning,
lest mentioning the Person's Faults should encourage others in Sin. It cannot,
I am sure, proceed from that Wisdom which comes from above. The sacred Writers
give an Account of their Failings, as well as their Virtues: Peter is not
ashamed to confess, that with Oaths and Curses he thrice denied his Master; nor
do the Evangelists make any Scruple of telling, that out of Mary Magdalen JESUS
CHRIST cast seven Devils.

I fearing, therefore, lest my surviving Friends should not be thus impartial
in giving an Account of me, was resolved (among other Reasons) to give the
following Account of myself, that those who now have my Person too much in
Admiration, seeing what once I was, may learn not to think more highly of me
than they ought to think: That th^se who are awakened to a Sense of Sin, may
^^t despair; since for this Cause I obtained Mercy that in me JESUS CHRIST may
(...) ^ort all long Suffering, for a Pattern to them who should hereafter
believe on him to Life everlasting. And, finally, that all true Lovers of GOD
may join in hearty Thanks and Praises to the most adorable Trinity, for
Plucking such a Firebrand out of the Burning.

As I have often wished, when in my best Frame, that the first Years of my Life
might be put down as a Blank, and had no more in Remembrance; so I could almost
wish now to pass them over in Silence. But, as they will, in some Degree,
illustrate GOD's Dealing with me in my riper Years, I shall, as I am able, give
the following brief Account of them.

AUGUST 1739.
Mr. WHITEFIELD'S Brief ACCOUNT of the First Part OF HIS LIFE.
SECTION I.
From my Infancy, 'till my being for some Time at the University.
I WAS born in Gloucester in the Month of December, 1714. My Father and Mother
kept the Bell-Inn: The former died when I was two Years old, the latter is now
alive; and has often told me, how she endured fourteen Weeks Sickness after she
brought me into the World; but was used to say, even when I was an Infant, that
she expected more Comfort from me than any other of her Children. This, with
the Circumstance of my being born in an Inn, has been often of Service to me,
in exciting me to make good my Mother's Expectations; and to follow the Example
of my dear Savior, who was born in a Stable, and laid in a Manger belonging to
an Inn.

My very infant Years must necessarily not be mentioned: Yet I can remember
such early Stirrings of Corruption in my Heart, as abundantly convince me, that
I was conceived and born in Sin; that in me dwells no good Thing by Nature;
and, that if GOD had not freely prevented me by his Grace, I must have been
forever banished from his divine Presence.

I can truly say, I was froward from my Mother's Womb: I was so brutish as to
hate Instruction, and used purposely to shun all Opportunities of receiving it.
I can date some very early Acts of Uncleanness. I soon gave pregnant Proofs of
an impudent Temper. Lying, filthy Talking, and foolish Jesting, I was much
addicted to, even when very young. Sometimes I used to Curse, if not Swear.
Stealing from my Mother I thought no Theft at all, and therefore used to make
no Scruple of Stealing Money out of her Pocket before she was up; and have more
than once spent Money I took in the House in buying Fruits, Tarts, etc. to
satisfy my sensual Appetite. I was never much given to Fighting; but that, I
fear, rather proceeded from Cowardice, than a Principle of Meekness, or a good
Temper. Numbers of Sabbaths have I broken; and generally used to behave myself
very irreverently in GOD's Sanctuaries. Much Money have I spent in Plays, and
in the common Entertainments of the Age. Cards, and Reading Romances were my
Heart's Delight. Often have I joined with others in Playing roguish Tricks; but
was generally, if not always, happily detected; for which I have often since,
and do now, praise GOD.

It would be endless to recount the Sins and Offenses of my younger Days; they
are more in Number than the Hairs of my Head; my Heart would fail me at the
Remembrance of them, was I not assured that my Redeemer lives ever to make
Intercession for me. However the young Man in the Gospel might boast, that he
had kept, yet (with Shame and Confusion of Face) I confess, that all GOD's
Commandments I have broken from my Youth. Whatever foreseen Fitness others may
boast of for Salvation (if I trace myself from my Cradle to my Manhood) I can
see nothing in me but a Fitness to be damned. And, if GOD had not quickened me
by his Free Spirit when dead in Trespasses and Sins, and irresistibly worked
upon my Soul, I had now either been sitting. in Darkness and in the Shadow of
Death, or been condemned, as the due Reward of my Crimes, to be forever lifting
up my Eyes i^ Torments.

But, such was the Free Grace of GOD to me, that though Corruption worked so
strongly in my Soul, and produced such early and bitter Fruits; yet, I can
recollect very early Movings of the Blessed Spirit upon my Heart, sufficient to
satisfy me that GOD loved me with an everlasting Love, and separated me (even
from my Mother's Womb) for the Work to which he afterward was pleased to call
me.

I had early some Convictions of Sin; and once, I remember, when Persons (as
they frequently did) made it their Business to tantalize me, I immediately
retired to my Room and kneeled down, and with many Tears, prayed over that
Psalm wherein David so often repeats these Words, But in the Name of the LORD
will I destroy them. I was always fond of being a Clergyman; I used frequently
to imitate the Minister's Reading Prayers, and to make little Sermons in little
Books about as long as my Finger. Part of the Money I used to steal from my
Parents, I gave to the Poor, and some Books I privately took from others (for
which I have since returned Fourfold) I remember were Books of Devotion.

My Mother was very careful of my Education, put me out to two different
Schools to board, and always kept me in my tender Years (for which I can never
sufficiently thank her) from intermeddling in the least with public Business.

About the tenth Year of my Age, it pleased GOD to permit my Mother to marry a
second Time. It proved what the World would call an unhappy Match, as to
temporal Things; but GOD overruled it for Good. It set many of my Brethren upon
thinking more than otherwise they would have done, and made an uncommon
Impression upon my own Heart in particular.

When I was about Twelve, I was placed at a School called St. Mary de Cryps, in
Gloucester, the last G^amma^ School I ever went to. Having a good Elocution and
Memory, I was remarked for my making Speeches before the Corporation at their
annual Visitations: But I cannot say I felt any Drawings of GOD upon my Soul,
for a Year or two, saving, that I laid out some of the Money, that was given me
on one of the forementioned Occasions, in Buying Ken's Manual for Winchester
Scholars, a Book that had much affected me, when my Brother used to read it in
my Mother's Troubles, and which, for some Time after I bought it, was of great
Benefit to my Soul.

During the Time of my being at School, I was very fond of Reading Plays; and
have kept from School for Days together, to prepare myself for acting them. My
Master, seeing how mine and my School-Fellows Vein run, composed Something of
this Kind for us himself, and caused (...) to dress myself in Girl's Clothes
(which I had often done) to act a Part before the Corporation; a Thing which
ha^^ and, I trust, will still cause me much Sorrow, even to the End of my Life.

For, though GOD brought Good afterward, even out of this Evil, as it was a
Means of strengthening my Memory, and teaching me a proper Gesture in Speaking;
yet, this Way of Training up Youth, has a natural Tendency to debauch the Mind,
to raise ill Passions, and to stuff the Memory with Things as contrary to the
Gospel of JESUS CHRIST as Darkness to Light, Hell to Heaven: However, though
the first Thing I had to repent of, was my Education in general; yet, I must
always acknowledge, my particular Thanks are due to my Master, for the great
Pains he took with me and the other Scholars, in teaching us to speak and write
correctly.

Before I was Fifteen, having, as I thought, made a sufficient Progress in the
Classicks, and secretly longing to be set at Liberty from the Confinement of a
School, I one Day told my Mother, since her Circumstances would not permit to
give me an University Education, more Learning, I thought, would spoil me for a
Tradesman; and therefore I judged it best, not to learn Latin any longer. She
at first refused to consent; but my Corruption soon got the better of her good
Nature. Hereupon, for some Time, I went to learn to write only. But my Mother's
Circumstances being much on the Decline, and I being tractable that Way, I from
Time to Time, began to assist her occasionally in the Public House, till at
length, I put on my blue Apron and my Snuffers, washed Mops, cleaned Rooms,
and, in one Word, became a professed and common Drawer for near a Year and an
half.

But he, who was with David when he was following the Sheep big with young, was
with me even here. For notwithstanding I was thus employed in a common Inn, and
had sometimes the Care of the whole House upon my Hands; yet I composed two or
three Sermons, and (...) one of them, in particular, to my (...) Brother. One
Time, I remember, I was much pressed to Self-Examination, and found myself very
unwilling, at first, to look into my Heart. And when a dear Youth (now with
GOD) would often come entreating me, when serving at the Bar, to go to Oxon; my
general Answer was, I wish I could.

And He, that has promised to fulfill the Desires of them that fear him, was
pleased to fulfill this Desire his holy Spirit had put into my Heart.

When I had been employed above a Year in this servile Manner, my Mother was
obliged to leave the Inn. My Brother, who had been bred up for the Business,
married. All was made over to him. I being accustomed to the House, it was
agreed on all Hands, that I should continue there as an Assistant. But GOD's
Thoughts were not as our Thoughts; by his good Providence it happened, that my
Sister-in-Law and I could by no Means agree; and at length the Resentment grew
to such an Height, that my proud Heart would scarce suffer me to speak to her
for three Weeks together: But, notwithstanding I was much to blame, yet I used
to retire and weep, as Hagar did before the LORD, little thinking, that GOD, by
this Means, was forcing me out of the Publick-Business, and calling me from
drawing Wine for Drunkards, to draw Water out of the Wells of Salvation, for
the Refreshment of his spiritual Israel. After continuing a long Time under
this Burden of Mind, I at length resolved, thinking my Absence would make all
Things easy, to go away: Accordingly, by the Advice of my Brother, and Consent
of my Mother, I went to see my elder Brother, then settled at Bristol.

And here GOD was pleased to give me great Foretastes of his Love, and filled
me with such unspeakable Raptures in St. John's Church, that I was carried out
even beyond myself. I felt great Hungrings and Thirstings after the blessed
Sacrament, and wrote many pious Letters to my Mother, telling her, I would
never go into the public Employ again. Kempis was my great Delight, and I was
always impatient, till the Bell rung to call me to tread the Courts of the
LORD'S House: But, in the Midst of these Illuminations, something secretly
whispered, this would not last.

And indeed so it happened: For (Oh that I could write it in Tears of Blood!)
when I left Bristol (as I did in about two Months) and returned to Gloucester,
I changed my Devotion with my Place. Alas, all my Fervor went off! I had no
Inclination to go to Church or draw nigh unto GOD. In short, my Heart (though I
had so lately tasted of his Love) was far from him.

However, I had so much Religion left, as to persist in my Resolution not to
live in the Inn: And therefore my Mother gave me leave, though she had but a
little Income, to have a Bed upon the Ground, and live at her House, till
Providence should point out a Place for me.

Having now, as I thought, Nothing to do, it was a proper Season for Satan to
tempt me. Much of my Time I spent in reading Plays, and in saunt'ring from
Place to Place. I was careful to adorn my Body, but took little Pains to deck
and beautify my Soul. Evil Communications, with my old School-Fellows, soon
corrupted my good Manners. By seeing their evil Practices, a Sense of the
divine Presence and past Convictions insensibly wore off my Mind; and I at
length fell secretly into a Sin, for which O^a^ died; the dismal Effects of
which I have felt and groaned under ever since.

But GOD, whose Gifts and Callings are without Repentance, would let Nothing
pluck me out of his Hands, though I was continually opposing the Spi^i^ (...)
Grace. He saw me, with Pity and Compassion, when lying in my Blood. He passed
by me; He said unto me, LIVE; and even then gave me some Foresight of his
Providing for me.

One Morning, as I was reading a Play to my Sister, said I, Sister, I believe
GOD intends Something for me, which we know not of. As I have been diligent in
Business, I believe many would gladly have me for an Apprentice; but every Way
seems to be barred up, so that GOD, I think, will provide for me some Way or
other.

How I came to say these Words, I know not. GOD afterward showed me they came
from him; for, having lived thus with my Mother for a considerable time, a
young Student, who was once a School-Fellow, and then a Servitor of
Pembroke-College, Oxon, came to pay my Mother a Visit. Among other Conversation
he told her, how he had discharged all College Expenses that Quarter, and
received a Penny. Upon this, my Mother immediately cried out, That will do for
me. Then turning to me, she said, Will you go to Oxford, George? Yes, I
replied, with all my Heart. Whereupon, having the same Friends as this Student
had, my Mother, without Delay, waited upon them. They promised their Interest
to get me a Servitor's Place in the same College. She then applied to my old
Master, who much approved of my coming to School again.

In about a Week I went and re-enter'd myself, and being grown pretty much in
Stature, my Master addressed me thus, I see George, you are advanced in
Stature, but your better Part must needs have gone backwards. This made me
blush. He set me a proper Theme to translate into Latin; and though I had made no
Application to my Classicks for so long a Time, yet I had but one
inconsiderable Fault in my Exercise. This, I believe, somewhat surprised my
Master, and has afforded me Matter of Praise and Thanks ever since.

Being re-settled at School, I spared no Pains to go forward in my Book. GOD
was pleased to give me his Blessing; and I learnt much faster than ever I did
before.

All this while I continued in secret Sin; and at length got acquainted with a
Set of such debauched, abandoned, atheistical Youths, that if GOD, by his free,
unmerited, distinguishing Grace, had not delivered me out of their Hands, I
should, long since, have sat in the Scorner's Chair, My Thoughts of Religion,
insensibly grew more and more lax. I went to public Service only to make Game
and walk about. I took Pleasure in their lewd Conversation. I began to reason,
as they did; and to ask, Why GOD had given me Passions, and not permitted me to
gratify them? Not considering, that GOD did not, originally, give us these
corrupt Passions; and that he had promised Help to withstand them, if we would
ask it of him. In short, I soon made a great Proficiency in the School of the
Devil. I affected to look rakish, and was in a fair Way of being as infamous as
the worst of them.

But (Oh stupendous Love!) GOD even here stopped me, when running on in a full
Career to Hell. For, just as I was upon the Brink of Ruin, he gave me such a
Distaste of their Principles and Practices, that I discovered them to my
Master, who soon put a Stop to their Proceedings.

Being thus delivered out of the Snares of the Devil, I began to be more and
more serious; and felt GOD convicting and working upon my Soul in some small
Degree. One Day, as I was coming down Stairs, and overheard my Friends speaking
well of me, GOD so deeply convicted me of my Hypocrisy, that though I had formed
frequent, but ineffectual Resolutions before, yet I had then Power given me,
over my secret and darling S^^. Notwithstanding, some time afterward, being
overtaken in Liquor (as I have been twice or thrice in my Life time) Satan
gained his usual Advantage over me again. An experimental Proof to my poor
Soul, how that wicked One makes Use of Men as Machines, to work up to just what
he pleases, when by Intemperance they have chased the Spirit of GOD from them.

Being now near the Seventeenth Year of my Age, I was resolved to prepare
myself for the Holy Sacrament; which I received on Christmas Day. I began now
to be more and more watchful over my Thoughts, Words and Actions: I kept the
following Lent, Fasting Wednesdays and Fridays, thirty six Hours together. My
Evenings (when I had done waiting upon my Mother) were generally spent in Acts
of Devotion, reading Drelincourt upon Death, and other practical Books; and I
constantly went to public Worship twice a Day. Being now Upper Boy, (...)
GOD's Help, I made some Reformation among my School-Fellows. Was (...) diligent
in Reading and Learning the ^^^^sicks, and in Studying my Greek Testament: But
was not yet convinced of the absolute Unlawfulness of Playing Cards, Reading
and Seeing Plays; though I begun to have some Scruples about them.

Near this Time I dreamed, That I was to see GOD on Mount Sinai; but was afraid
to meet him. This made a great Impression upon me: A Gentlewoman to whom I told
it, said, George this is a Call from GOD.

Still I grew more serious after this Dream; but yet Hypocrisy crept into every
Action. As once I affected to look more Rakish, I now strove to appear more
Grave than really I was. However, an uncommon Concern and Alteration were
visible in my Behavior. I often used to find fault with the Lightness of
others, and sometimes took upon me to reprove my elder Brethren.

Not long after, as I was going one Night on an Errand for my Mother, an
unaccountable, but very strong Impression was made upon my Heart, that I should
preach and print quickly. When I came home I innocently told my Mother what had
befallen me: But she (like Joseph's Parents, when he told them his Dream)
turning short upon me, cried out, What does the Boy mean? Prithee hold thy
Tongue; or something to that Purpose. Since, GOD has shown her from whom those
Impres^^^^^ came.

For a Twelvemonth I went on in a Round of Duties, receiving the Sacrament
monthly, Fasting frequently, attending constantly on public Worship, and
Praying often more than twice a Day in private. One of my Brothers used to tell
me, he feared this would not hold long, and that I would forget all when I came
to Oxford. This Caution did me much Service; it fet me upon Praying to GOD for
Perseverance: And, under GOD, the Preparation I made in the Country was an
excellent Preservative against those manifold Temptations which beset me at my
first coming to that Seat of Learning.

Being near Eighteen, it was judged a proper Time for my going to the
University. GOD had sweetly prepared my Way. The Friends before applied to,
recommended me to the Master of Pembroke-College; another Friend took up Ten
Pounds upon Bond (which I have since paid) to defray the first Expenses of
Entering; and the Master (contrary to all Expectations) admitted me Servitor
immediately.

Soon after my Admission, I went to reside (and found my being) at a Public
House was of Service to me: For, all the Servitors being sick at my first
coming up, by my diligent and speedy Attendance, I ingratiated myself into the
Gentlemen's Favor so far, that many, who had it in their own Power, chose me to
be their Servitor. This much lessened my Expense: And, indeed, GOD was so good
to me, that with the Profits of my Place, and some little Presents made me by
my kind Tutor, for almost the Three first Years, I did not put all my Relations
together to above Eight Pounds Expense per Ann. And it has often grieved my
Soul, to see so many young Men spending their Substance in extravagant Living,
and thereby entirely unfitting themselves for the Prosecution of their Studies.

I had not been long here, before I found the Benefit of the Foundation I had
laid in the Country for a Holy Life. I was quickly solicited to join with
several, who lay in the same Room, in their Excess of Riot. GOD, in answer to
my Prayers, gave me Grace to withstand them; and, once in particular, it being
cold, my Thighs were so benumbed by Sitting alone in my Study, because I would
not go out amongst them, that I could scarce sleep all Night. But I soon found
the Benefit of not Yielding: For, when they perceived they could not prevail,
they let me alone for a singular, comical Fellow.

All this while I was not fully satisfied of the Sin of Playing at Cards, and
Reading of Plays, 'til GOD, upon a Fast Day, was pleased to convince me: For
taking the Play called George Barnwell, to read a Passage out of it to a
Friend, GOD struck my Heart with such Power, that I was obliged to lay it down;
and, blessed be his Name, I have never read any such Book since.

Before I went to the University, I met with Mr. Law's Serious Call to a devout
Life; but had not then Money enough to purchase it. Soon after my coming up to
the University, I seeing a small Edition of it in a Friend's Hand, soon
procured it. GOD worked powerfully upon my Soul, as he has since upon many
others, by that and his other Treatise upon Christian Perfection; for which I
desire to bless his Holy Name.

I now began to pray and sing Psalms thrice every Day, besides Morning and
Evening; to fast every Friday; and to receive the Sacrament at a Parish Church
near our College, and at the Castle where the despised Methodists used to
receive once a Month.

The young Men so called, were then much talked of at Oxford: I had heard of
and loved them, before I came to the University (...) so strenuously defended
them, when (...) them (...) by the Students, (...) that I also, (...) be one of
them.

For above a Twelvemonth, my Soul ^^^ged to be acquainted with them, and (...)
was strongly pressed to follow their good example, when I saw them go through a
^^diculing Crowd to receive the holy Eu^^arist at St. Mary's. At length GOD ^as
pleased to open a Door. It happened (...) a poor Woman, in one of the
Work^^ouses, had attempted to cut her Throat, it was happily prevented. I
hearing of ^^is, and knowing that both of the Mr. Wesleys were famous for being
ready (...) very good Work, sent a poor aged Apple-Woman of our College, to
inform Mr. Charles Wesley of it, charging her not t^ ^^scover who sent her. She
went, but, contrary to my Orders, discovered my name. He having heard of my
coming (...) the Castle and Parish Church Sacrament, and having met with me
walking ^^equently by myself, followed the Woman when she was gone away, and
sent (...) Invitation to me, by her, to come and ^^^akfast with him the next
Morning.

I thankfully embraced the Opportunity: (...), blessed be GOD, it was one of
the (...) profitable Visits I ever made in my (...). My Soul, at that Time, was
(...) for some spiritual Friends to lift up (...) Hands when they hung down,
and to (...) my feeble Knees. He soon discovered it, and, like a wise Winner of
Souls, made all his Discourse tend that Way; and after he had put into my Hands
Frank's Treatise against the Fear of Man, and a Book, entitled, The Country
Parson's Advice to his Parishioners, the last of which was wonderfully blessed
to my Soul, I took my Leave.

In a short Time after, he let me have another Book, entitled, The Life of GOD
in the Soul of Man. And, though I had fasted, watched, and prayed, and received
the Sacrament so long, yet I never knew what true Religion was, till GOD sent
me that excellent Treatise, by the Hands of my never to be forgotten Friend Mr.
Charles Wesley.

At my first Reading it, I wondered what the Author meant by saying, That some
falsely placed Religion in going to Church, doing Hurt to no one, being constant
in the Duties of the Closet, and now and then reaching out their Hands to give
Alms to their Neighbors. Alas! thought I, if this be not Religion, What is?
GOD soon showed me: For reading in a few Lines following, That TRUE Religion
was an Union of the Soul with GOD, and CHRIST formed within us; a Ray of divine
(...) broke in upon my Soul, and from that Moment, but not till then, did I
know ^^at I must be a New Creature.

Upon this, like the Woman, when CHRIST revealed himself to her at the Well, I
had no Rest in my Soul till I wrote Letters to my Relations, telling them there
was such a Thing as the New Birth. I imagined they would gladly have received
them; but alas! my Words ^^em'd to them as idle Tales, they though it that I was
going beside myself; and by their Letters, confirmed me in the Resolution I had
taken up, not to go down into the Country, but continue where I was, to carry
on the good Work GOD had begun in my Soul.

From time to time Mr. Wesley permitted me to come unto him, and instructed ^^e
as I was able to bear it. By Degrees ^^e introduced me to the Rest of his
Christian Brethren. They built me up daily (...) the Knowledge and Fear of GOD;
and taught me to endure Hardship, like; good Soldier of JESUS CHRIST.

I now began, like them, to live by (...); and to pick up the very Fragments
(...) Time, that not a Moment of it (...) be lost. Whether I eat or drank,
(...) whatsoever I did, I did all to the Glory (...) GOD. Like them, having no
Week^^ (...) (although the Rubric requires it) at our College, I received it
even Sunday at Christ Church. I joined with them in keeping the Stations, by
Fasting Wednesdays and Fridays; and left no Means unused, which I thought would
lead me nearer to JESUS CHRIST.

Regular Retirement Morning and Evening I found some Difficulty in submitting
to, but it soon grew profitable and delightful. As I grew ripe for such
Exercises, I was from time to time engaged to visit the Sick and the Prisoners,
and to read to poor People, till I made it a Custom, as most of us did, to
spend an Hour every Day in doing Acts of Charity.

The Course of my Studies I soon entirely changed: Whereas, before I was passed
in studying the dry Sciences, and books that went no farther than the Surface,
I now resolved to read only such Books as entered into the Heart of Religion,
and led me directly into an experimental Knowledge of JESUS CHRIST and him
crucified.

The lively Oracles of GOD were my Soul's Delight. The Book of the divine Laws
was seldom out of my (...) meditated therein Day and Night (...) ever since
that, GOD has (...) prosperous, (...) Success.

Much Good GOD enabled me to do to, as well as to receive from, the despised
Methodists; and made me instrumental in converting One, who is lately come into
the Church, and I trust, will make a burning and a shining Light.

Several short Fits of Illness was GOD pleased to visit and try me with, after
my first Acquaintance with Mr. Wesley. My new Convert was an Help-meet for me,
in those and in every other Circumstance^ And in Company with him and several
other young Christian Heroes, did I spend many sweet and delightful Hours.
Never did Persons, I believe, strive more earnestly to enter in at the strait
(...). They kept their Bodies under, even to an Extreme. They were dead to the
World, and willing to be counted as the (...) and Offscouring of all Things,
so (...) they might win CHRIST. Their Heart glowed with the Love of GOD; and
they never prospered so much in the inward Man, as when they had all Manner of
Evil spoke against them falsely without.

Many came amongst them for a while, who, in Time of Temptation, fell away. The
Displeasure of a Tutor or Head of a College the Changing of a Gown from ^lower
to a higher Degree; above all, (...) for the Praise of Men more than that which
comes from GOD, and a servile Fear of Contempt, caused Numbers that had put
their Hands to the Plow, shamefully to look back. The World, not themselves,
gave them the Title of Methodists, I suppose, from their Custom of regulating
their Time, and planning the Business of the Day every Morning. Mr. John and
Charles Wesley were the first that thus openly dared to confess CHRIST; and
they, under GOD, were the spiritual Fathers of most of them. They had the
Pleasure of seeing the Work of the LORD prosper in their Hands, before they
went to Georgia. Since their Return, the small Grain of Mustard Seed has sprung
up apace; it has taken deep Root; it is growing into a great Tree: (...) long,
I trust, it will fill the Land; and Numbers of Souls will come from the East
and from the West, from the North and from the South, and lodge under the (...)
of it.

But to return; whilst I was thus comforted on every Side, by daily (...) with
so many Christian Friends, (...) was pleased to permit Satan to (...) Wheat; a
general Account of (...) shall, by divine Assistance, (...) following Section.

SECTION II.
A Brief and Summary Account of my Temptations.
AT my first setting out, in Compassion to my Weakness, I grew in Favor both
with GOD and Man; and used to be wrapped up with sensible Devotions, especially
at the blessed Sacrament. But when Religion sunk from my Head into my Heart,
and I was fully convinced my Soul must totally be renewed ere it could see GOD,
I was visited with outward and inward Trials.

The first Thing I was called to give up for GOD, was, what the World calls, my
fine Reputation. I had no sooner received the Sacrament publicly, on a Week
Day, at St. Mary's, but I was set up (...) a Mark, for all the polite Students,
that knew me, to shoot at. By this they knew I was commenced Methodist. For
th^^ there is a Sacrament at the Beginning (...) Term, at which all, especially
(...), are by Statute obliged to be (...); yet so dreadfully has that once
(...) City played the Harlot, that no (...), but those of that Way, (...) upon
it.

Mr. Charles Wesley (whom I must always mention with the greatest Deference and
Respect) walked with me, in order to confirm me, from the Church even to the
College. I confess, to my Shame, I would gladly have excused him. And the next
Day, going to his Room, and one of (...) Fellows passing by, I was ashamed to
(...) to knock at his Door. But, blessed (...) GOD, this cursed Fear of Man
(...) wore off. As I had imitated (...) in his Cowardice, so, by the divine
Assistance, I followed him in his Courage. (...) confessed the Methodists more
and more publicly every Day. I walked openly with them, and rather chose to
endure contempt with those despised People of (...), than enjoy the Applause of
almost (...) for a Season.

Soon after this, I incurred the Displea^^^ of the Master of the College, who
(...) chid and once threat'ned to (...) me, if ever I visited the Poor again.
(...) surprised with his Treatment, and (...) by his Authority, I spoke (...)
with my Lips, and said, if it displeased him, I would not. My Conscience (...)
pricked me for this sinful Compliance. I immediately repented, visited the Poor
(...) first Opportunity; and told my Companions, if I was called to suffer
(...) CHRIST'S Sake, I would do with my Tongue as Archbishop Granmer did with
his Hands, make that burn first.

My Tutor, being a moderate Man, did not oppose me much; but thought, I
believe, that I went a little too far. He lent me Books, gave me Money, visited
and furnished me with a Physician when sick. In short, he behaved, in all
Respects, like a Father; and, I trust, GOD will remember him for Good, in
answer to those many Prayers I have put up in his Behalf.

My Relations were quickly alarmed at the Alteration of my Behavior, conceived
strong Prejudices against me, and for some Time counted my Life but Madness.

I daily underwent some Contempt at College. Some have thrown at me; others, by
Degrees, took their Pay from me; and two Friends, who were, dear to me, grew
shy of and forsook me, what they saw me resolved to deny myself, take up my
Cross daily, and follow JESUS CHRIST: But our LORD, by his Spirit, soon
convinced me, that I must not (...) after the Flesh. And I soon found that
Promise literally fulfilled, viz. That (...) Father or Mother, Brethren or
(...) Houses or Lands, for CHRIST (...) Gospel, but what shall (...) an
Hundredfold in this Life, with Persecution, as well as Eternal-Life in the
World to come.

These, though little, were useful Trials. They inured me to Contempt, lessened
Self-Love, and taught me to die daily. My inward Sufferings were of a more
uncommon Nature. Satan seemed to have desired me in particular, to sift me as
Wheat. GOD permitted him; for what Reason, I have seen already, viz. That his
future Blessings might not prove my Ruin.

Ever since my first Awakenings to the divine Light, I felt a particular
Hungring and Thirsting after the Humility of JESUS CHRIST. Night and Day I
prayed to be Partaker of that Grace; imagining the Habit of Humility would be
instantaneously infused into my Soul. But as Gideon taught the Men of Succoth
by Thorns, so GOD (if I am yet in any Measure blessed with true Poverty of
Spirit) taught it me by strong Temptations.

I observed before, how I used to be favored with sensible Devotions. Those
Comforts were soon withdrawn, and an horrible Fearfulness and Dread permitted
to overwhelm my Soul. One Morning, in particular, rising from my Bed, I (...)
an unusual Oppression and Weight upon my Breast, attended with inward Darkness.
I applied to my Friend Mr. Charles Wesley. He advised me to keep upon my Watch,
and referred me to a Chapter in Kempis.

In a short Time I perceived this Load gradually increased, till it almost
weighed me down; and as fully convinced me, that Satan had as real a Possession
given him of my Body, as he had over Job's. All Power of Meditating, or even
Thinking, was taken from me. My Memory quite failed me. My whole Soul was
barren and dry; and I could fancy myself to be like Nothing, so much as a Man
locked up in Iron Armor.

Whenever I kneeled down, I felt great Heavings in my Body; and have often
prayed under the Weight of them, till the Sweat came through me. At these Times
Satan used to terrify me much, and threatened to punish me if I discovered his
Wiles. It being my Business, as Servitor, in my Turn, to knock at the
Gentlemen's Rooms by Ten at Night, to see who were in their Rooms, I thought
the Devil would appear to me every Stair I went up; and he so troubled me when
Play down to rest, that for some Months I scarce slept above three Hours in a
Night.

GOD only knows how many Evenings I have lain upon my Bed, groaning under the
Weight I felt, and bidding Satan depart from me, in the Name of JESUS of
Nazareth, Whole Days and Weeks have I spent in lying prostrate on the Ground,
and begging for Freedom from those proud hellish Thoughts, which used to crowd
in upon and distract my Soul. But GOD made Satan drive out Satan. For these
Thoughts and Suggestions raised such a Self-Abhorrence within me, that I never
ceased wrestling with GOD, till he blessed me with a Victory over them.
Self-Love, Self Will, Pride and Envy, so buffeted me in their Turns, that I was
resolved either to die or conquer. I wanted to see Sin as it was; but feared,
at the same Time, lest the Sight of it should terrify me to Death.

Whilst my inward Man was thus exercised, my outward Man was not unemploy'd. I
soon found what a Slave I had (...) to my sensual Appetite, and now resolved to
get the Mastery over it, by the Help of JESUS CHRIST. Accordingly, (...)
Degrees, I began to leave off eating (...), Fruit, and such like; and gave the
(...) I usually spent in that Way, to the Poor. I always chose the worst Sort
(...) Food, though my Place furnished me with variety. I fasted twice a Week. My
Apparel was very mean. I thought (...) unbecoming a Penitent to have his (...)
powdered. I wore woollen Gloves, a patched Gown and dirty Shoes. And though I was
then, in some Degree, convinced, that the Kingdom of GOD did not consist in
Meats and Drinks; yet I resolutely persisted in these voluntary Acts of
Self-Denial, because I found them great Promoters of the spiritual life.

For many Months I went on in the State before described (...), (...) yet
pursuing, traveling alone in the Dark, hoping that the Star I (...) seen,
would hereafter appear again. During this Season I was very active; but (...)
Pride creep in at the End of almost (...) Thought, Word and Action, and (...)
with Castaniza's Spiritual Combat, in which he says, That he that was employed
he mortifying his Will, was as well employed as though he was converting Indians,
or Words to that Effect; Satan so imposed upon my Understanding, that he
persuaded me to shut myself up in my Study, till I could do Good with a single
Eye; lest in endeavoring to save others, as I did now I should at last, by
Pride and Self-Complacence, lose myself.

(...) forward he transformed himself (...) Angel of Light; and worked so (...)
upon my Understanding, that I (...) the good, and not the evil Spirit,
suggested to me every Thing that I did.

His main Drift now, was to lead me into a State of Quietism. He generally
plowed with GOD'S Heifer; and when the Holy Spirit put into my Heart good
Thoughts or Convictions, he always drove them to Extremes. For Instance, being
checked, for having, out of Pride, put down in my Diary what I gave away, Satan
tempted me to lay my Diary quite aside. When Castaniza advised to talk but
little, Satan said I must not talk at all: So that I, who used to be most
forward in exhorting my Companions, have sat whole Nights without speaking
scarce any Thing. Again, when Castaniza told me about keeping up a silent
Recollection to GOD, Satan told me, I must leave off all Forms, and not use my
Voice in Prayer at all. The Time would fail me, was I to recount all the
Instances, of this Kind, in which he has deceived me. But when (...) came to an
Extremity, GOD always showed me my Error, and by his Spirit pointed out a Way
for me to escape.

The Devil also sadly imposed upon me in doing my College Exercise. Whenever I
went to compose my Theme, my Head was like Brass. I had not Power to write a
Word, nor tell my Christian^ Friends of my Inability for so doing. Saturday
being come (which is the Day the Students give up their Compositions) Satan
(but, as I thought, the Holy Spirit) told me I must go down in the Hall,
confess I could not make a Theme, and so publicly suffer for my Master's Sake.
When the Bell rung to call us, I went to open the Door to go down Stairs; but
feeling something give me a violent inward Check, I retired into my Study, and
continued instant in Prayer, waiting the Event. My Tutor fined me Half a Crown.
The next Week Satan served me so again. But having now got more Strength, and
perceiving no inward Check, I went into the Hall. My Name being called, I stood
up, and told my Tutor I could not make a Theme. I think he fined me a second
Time; but, knowing that I would not wilfully neglect my Exercise, he afterward
called me into the common Room, and kindly inquired whether any Misfortune had
befallen me, or what was the Reason I could not make a Theme. I burst into a
Flood of (...), assured him, it was not out of Contempt of Authority, and that
I could not act otherwise; then, at length, he said, he believed I could not.
And when he left me, told a Friend (as he very well might) that he took me to
be really mad. This Friend, hearing from my Tutor what had happened, came to
me, urging the Command in Scripture, to be subject to the higher Powers. I
answered, YES, but I have a new Revelation. So artfully did the Devil lead me
Captive at his Will. By this was I experimentally convinced, that my
Understanding was not my own.

Further, as I daily got Strength by continued, though almost silent Prayer, in
my Study, my Temptations grew stronger, particularly for two or three Days
before Deliverance came. Near five or six Weeks had I now spent in my Study,
except when I was obliged to go out. During this Time, I was battling with my
Corruptions, and did little else besides (...) down by my Bedside, under great
Loads upon my Body, and unspeakable Pressure of Mind, offering up my Soul to
GOD through CHRIST, to stamp what he pleased upon it. Satan began now to suggest
to me that JESUS CHRIST went among the wild Beasts when he was tempted, and
that I ought to follow his Example. Whereupon, being willing to copy after
JESUS CHRIST, after Supper I went into Christ-Church, walked near our College,
and continued in silent Prayer, under one of the Trees, for near two Hours
sometimes lying flat upon (...) Face, sometimes kneeling upon my Knees, all the
while fearing Mr. John Wesley (who I knew was not far off reading the Holy
Scripture to some young Gentlemen, at his Brother's Room) should be destroyed
with Pride. It being a very blusterous, stormy Night, it gave me awful Thoughts
of the Day of Judgment. I continued, I think, till Great Tom called me Home.
And finding some Reluctance in the natural Man against staying so long in the
Cold, when I rose off my Knees, I fell a Rubbing my Hands, and hasted to
College, saying these Words, I am but a fresh Water Soldier.

The next Night I repeated the same Exercise, at the same Place; but Satan (as
he always does) now overshot, and thereby discovered himself; or rather, the
Hour of Extremity being come, GOD was pleased to interpose.

By this Time I had left off keeping my Diary, using any Forms or scarce my
Voice in Prayer, visiting the Prisoners, etc. Nothing remained for me to leave
(unless I forsook Public Worship, which I believe I should have done shortly)
but my religious Friends. Satan now told me, that I must now even leave them
for CHRIST'S Sake. This was a sore Trial; but rather than not be CHRIST'S
Disciple I was resolved to renounce them, though as dear to me as my own Soul.
Accordingly, the next Day, being Wednesday, whereon we kept one of our Weekly
Fasts, instead of meeting with my Brethren, as usual, I went out into the
Fields, and prayed silently by myself. Our Evening Meeting I neglected also;
and went not to Breakfast, according to Appointment, with Mr. Charles Wesly,
the Day following. This, with many other concurring Circumstances, made my
honored Friend, Mr. Charles Wesly, suspect something more th^n ordinary to be
the Matter. He came to my Room, soon found out my Case, (...) me of my Danger,
if I would not take Advice, and recommended me to (...) Brother, as more
experienced in the (...) Life. GOD gave me (forever (...) be his holy Name) a
teachable (...) I waited upon his Brother, with (...), from that Time, I had
the Honor (...) intimate. He advised me to (...) all my Externals, though not to
(...) on them in the least. From (...) line he gave me Directions, as (...)
v^rtous and pitiable Cases required; (...) at length, by his excellent Advice
(...) Management of me, under GOD, I was delivered from these Wiles of Satan,
-- Praise the LORD, O my Soul, and (...) that is within me praise his holy Name!

During this, and all other Seasons of Temptations, my Soul was inwardly
supported with great Courage and Resolution from above. Every Day GOD made me
willing to renew the Combat; and though my Soul, when quite empty of GOD, was
very prone to seek Satisfaction in the Creature; yet I was generally enabled to
sit in Silence, to wait for the Salvation of GOD; or to persist in Prayer, till
some Gleams of inward Comfort were given me from on High. Sometimes I fell into
Sensuality.

Kempis (since translated and published by Mr. John Wesly) Castaniza's
Spiritual Combat, and the Greek Testament, which I prayed over, Verse by Verse,
every Day, were great Means of carrying me on. At the Holy Sacrament,
especially before Trials, and just upon receiving the Elements, I have had
Grace in an abundant and very perceptible Manner imparted to my Soul. An
irrefragable (...) to me, against the Doctrine of that detestable Book, called,
The plain Account (...) the Sacrament of the LORD's Supper, which sinks that
holy Ordinance into a bare Memorial. The Author without Repentance, shall bear
his Punishment whosoever he be.

To proceed, I had now taken up my Externals again. And though Satan, for some
Weeks, had been bruising my Heel, GOD soon showed me that I should bruise his
Head. A few Days after, as I was walking along, I met a poor Woman, whose
Husband was then in Bocardo, Oxford Town Goal, which I constantly visited.
Seeing her much discomposed, I enquired the Cause: She told me, not being able
to bear the Cries of her Children, ready to perish for Hunger, and she having
nothing to relieve them, she had been to drown herself, but was mercifully
prevented; and said, she was coming to my Room to inform me of it. I gave her
some immediate Relief, and desired her to meet me at the Prison with her
Husband in the Afternoon. She came, and GOD there apprehended them both by his
Free Grace. She was powerfully quickened from above: And when I had done
Reading, her Husband came to me, like the Trembling Jailer, and Grasping me
hard, cried out, I am upon the Brink of Hell. From this Time forward both of
them grew in Grace. GOD by his Providence soon delivered him from his
Confinement: Though before (...) Offenders against GOD and one another (...) now
they became Helps (...) for (...) other in the great Work of the^ Salvation.
They are both now living, and I trust, will be my Joy and Crown of Rejoicing in
the Day of our LORD JESUS.

Soon after this, the Holy Season of Lent came on, which our Friends always
kept very strictly, Eating no Flesh during the Six Weeks, except on Saturdays
and Sundays; I abstained frequently on Saturdays also, Eating nothing on that
and other Days, except Sundays, but coarse Bread and Sage Tea without Sugar. I
constantly walked out in the cold Mornings till part of one of my Hands was
quite black. This, with my continued Abstinence and outward Conflicts, at
length, so emaciated my inward Man, that at Passion Week, finding I could
scarce creep up Stairs, I was obliged to inform my kind Tutor of my Condition,
who immediately sent for a Physician to me.

This caused no small Triumph among the Collegians, who began to cry out, What
is his Fasting come to now? But I rejoiced in this Reproach, knowing (...) though
I had been imprudent and left much of my Flesh, yet I had increased
proportionably in the Spirit.

This Fit of Sickness continued upon me (...) above seven Weeks, and a glorious
(...) it (...). While (...) Physician (...) Purging my Body, (...) Spirit was
purifying my Soul. All my gross, and even my Heart Sins, were brought to my
Remembrance, which I put down immediately, and confessed them before GOD
Morning and Evening. Though weak, I often spent two Hours in my Evening
Retirements, and Prayer over my Greek Testament, and Bishop Hall's most
excellent Contemplations, every Day that my Health would permit. About the End
of seven Weeks, and after I had been Groaning under an unspeakable Load both of
Body and Soul for above a Twelvemonth, GOD was pleased to set me free in the
following Manner: One Day perceiving an uncommon Drought and a noisome
Clamminess in my Mouth, and using Things to allay my Thirst, but in vain; (...)
was suggested to me, that when JESUS CHRIST cried out I Thirst, his Sufferings
(...) over. Upon this, I threw (...), the Bed, crying out, I Thirst, I (...):
Soon after I perceived my (...) off, a Spirit of Mourning was taken (...) me,
and I knew what it was truly to rejoice in the LORD. At first, after that, I
could not avoid Singing Psalms wherever I was; but my Joy gradually (...) more
settled, and, blessed be GOD, (...) abode and (...) in my Soul (saving (...)
few casual (...)) ever since.

Thus were the Days of my Mourning ended. After a long Night of Desertion and
Temptation, the Star which I had seen at Distance before, began to appear
again, and the Day Star arose in my Heart. Now did GOD take full Possession of
my Soul; and, as I humbly hope, sealed me to the Day of Redemption.

SECTION III.
From the Time of my first Leaving the University, to go to Gloucester, till
the Time of my Ordination.
AS fast as I got Strength from the Sickness beforementioned, my Tutor,
Physician, and some others, were still urging me to go into the Country; hoping
thereby to divert me (as they thought) from my present too intense Application
to Religion. I had for sometime been aware of their Design, and wrote Letters,
beseeching my Mother, if she valued my Soul, not to lay her Commands on me to
come down. She was pleased to leave me to my Choice; but finding, at last, it
was necessary for my Health, and many other providential Circumstances pointing
out my Way, after earnest Prayer for Support, by the Advice of Friends, I left
my sweet. Retreat at Oxford, and went to Gloucester, the Place of my Nativity.

GOD having now given me the Spirit of Adoption, my Friends were surprised to
see me look and behave so cheerful after the many Reports they had heard
concerning me. However, I soon found myself to be a Sheep sent forth amongst
Wolves in Sheep's Clothing: For they immediately endeavored to dissuade (...)
(as they lately had a Friend that began with me) from such a constant Use of
the Means of Grace, especially from weekly Abstinence, and receiving the
blessed Sacrament. But GOD enabled me to resist them steadfastly in the Faith;
and by keeping close to him in Holy Ordinances, I was made to triumph over all.

(...) accustomed, for a long Season, (...) to live without spiritual
Companions, and finding none that would join heartily with me, no not one, I
watched unto Prayer all the Day long, beseeching GOD (...) some religious
Associates in his (...) Way and Time.

(...) either (...) or make a Friend, had been my (...) and Practice for (...)
the House of (...) ^^merly had (...) Spectators, Pope's (...) trifling Books,
(...) now might see in (...) might, under GOD, in (...) GOD (...) pleased (...)
the (...) Effect. She received (...). She wanted to be taught the Word of GOD
more perfectly, and soon became a Feel for (...) Sake. Not long after, GOD made
me instrumental to awaken (...) other young (...) who soon formed themselves
into (...), and had quickly the (...) as we (...) them at Oxford. For they
(...) live godly in (...) must suffer Persecution.

My Mind being now more (...) and enlarged. I began to read the (...)
Scriptures on my Knees, laying after all other Books, and praying over, (...)
and Word. This proved (...), and Drink (...) to my Soul. I (...) acquired fresh
Light, Life, and (...) from above. I got more (...) knowledge from Reading the
(...) one Month, then I could (...) me Writings in a (...) and it (...), for
(...), every (...) the Man of GOD perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good
WORD and WORK.

Before I returned from Gloucester to Oxford, I spent three Weeks at Bristol,
where I went to see some Relations; but could not do them much good, because of
the Prejudices they had imbibed against me. I daily walked with GOD; and in
visiting an Aunt, then in an Almshouse, GOD put in my Way a young Woman, who
was hungring and thirsting after Righteousness. She received the Word into an
honest and good Heart, and since has proved a true Follower of JESUS CHRIST. --
So good was God, even in those early Days, not to leave me in any Place without
a Witness.

According to his abundant Mercy, he also raised me up some temporal Supplies.
(...) some time I had taken up the laudable Custom of Professor Frank, lately
of Germany; and whenever I wanted any worldly Assistance, pleaded the Scripture
Promises for the Things of this Life, as well (...) that which is to come, in
the Name of (...) JESUS CHRIST. This is still my (...), and I never yet failed
once of (...). When I came from Oxford, on (...) of my Sickness, and other
(...) and extraordinary Expenses, I (...) twelve or thirteen Pounds; And when I
was going to Bristol my kind Hostess (with whom I lodged at Gloucester, and
whose Husband and Family I pray GOD eternally to bless) lent me half a Crown to
bear my Charges on the Road. I was not disheartened at the Lowness of my
Circumstances. I continued pleading the Promises in the Name of CHRIST; and
soon after my coming to Bristol received an Answer: For a Brother of mine
coming from Sea, GOD inclined his Heart to give me four Guineas, and some
Shirts. Likewise, when I returned to Gloucester, as I did after I had continued
a short Time in Bristol, those I expected would assist me, did not; but Persons
I scarce ever spoke to, and who, I thought, were my Enemies, were raised up to
furnish me with Money; and thereby fulfilled that Promise, (...) first the
Kingdom of GOD, and his Righteousness, and all these Things shall be added unto
you.

Oh what sweet Communion did I daily carry on with GOD in Prayer after my (...)
again to Gloucester! How often (...) been carried out beyond myself, (...)
Meditating, as Isaac did, in the (...) How have I felt that CHRIST (...) me,
and I in him! And, how did I daily walk in the Comforts of the (...) Ghost, and
was edified! Not that I was always upon the Mount. Sometimes a Cloud would
overshadow me: But the Sun of Righteousness quickly arose and dispelled it. I
knew that it was JESUS that (...) himself unto my Soul.

I always observed, that as my inward Strength increased, so my outward Sphere
of Action increased proportionably. In a short (...) therefore, I began to read
to (...) poor People twice or thrice a Week. (...) (...) visited two other
little Societies besides my own, and almost every Day, been then and since,
have found the Benefit of being tempted myself; because that (...) taught me
how to give proper Advice and Succor to those that came to me (...) tempted.

(...), as Business and Opportunity permitted, I generally visited one or two
sick Persons every Day: And though Silver and Gold I had little of my own; yet;
in Imitation of my LORD'S Discipl^^, who entreated in behalf of the fainting
Multitude, I used to pray to him; and he (...) time to time inclined several
that were rich in this World's Goods, to give (...) Money, so that I generally
had a little Stock for the Poor in Hand. One of (...) Poor, whom I visited in
this Manner, (...) called effectually by GOD at the eleventh Hour. She was a
Woman above (...) Years old; and I really believe died in the true Faith of our
LORD JESUS CHRIST.

About this Time GOD was pleased to enlighten and bring me into the Knowledge
of the Freeness of his Grace, and the Necessity of being justified, in his
Sight, by FAITH alone. This was more extraordinary, because our Friends at Oxon
run into the Mystic Scheme: And one of them (a dear Servant of our LORD)
lately confessed he did not like me so well at my last coming to Oxford, as the
rest of his Brethren, because I held Justification by Faith: And yet he
observed I had more Success. But, blessed be GOD, most of us now have been
taught this Doctrine of GOD, and, I hope, shall be willing to die in the
Defense of it. It is the good old (...) of the Church of England. It is what
the Holy Martyrs in Queen Mary's Time sealed with their Blood, and which, I
pray GOD, if need be, that I and my Brethren, may seal with Ours.

Burkit's and Henry's Impositions were of admirable use to lead me into this
and all other evangelical Truths. Many Months have I kneeled to study and pray
over those Books, as though I had been (...) at my Master's Feet. The Holy Spirit
from time to time (...) into the knowledge of Divine Things; and I have been
directed, by Watching, and Reading the Scriptures in this Manner, even in the
minutest Circumstances, as plainly as the Jews were, who consulted the Urim and
Thummim at the High Priest's Breast.

Allen's Alarm, Baxter's Call to the Unconverted, and Janeway's Life, when I
read them at leisure Hours, were much blessed to me. I bless GOD, the Partition
Wall of Bigotry and Sectarianism was soon broken down out of my Heart. As soon
as the Love of GOD was shed abroad in my Soul, I loved all, of whatever
Denomination, that loved the LORD JESUS in Sincerity.

During my Stay here, GOD enabled me to give a public Testimony of my
Repentance for Seeing and Acting Plays. Hearing the Strolers were coming to
Town, and knowing what an egregious Offender I had been, I wrestled with GOD in
Prayer to put me in a Way to manifest my Abhorrence of my former ill Conduct.
In Answer to this. I was stirred up to (...) Mr. LAW'S excellent little
Treasure, entitled, The absolute Unlawfulness of the Stage Entertainment. GOD
gave me Favor in the Printer's Sight: At my Request he put a little of it in
the News for (...) Weeks successively; and GOD was pleased to give it his
Blessing.

Having been absent for six Months from the University, I thought it time to
think of moving thither; but before I came to a Resolution, was convinced that
the Hour for returning thither was not as yet come.

At my first coming to Gloucester, being used to visit the Prisoners at Oxford,
I prayed most earnestly that GOD would open a Door for me to visit the
Prisoners here also. Quickly after, I dreamed, That one of the Prisoners came
to be instructed by me. The Dream was impressed much upon my Heart. In the
Morning I went to the Door of the County Goal; I knocked, Nobody came to open
it; I thought the Hour was not yet come: I waited still upon GOD in Prayer; and
in some Months came a Letter from a Friend at Oxford, desiring me to go to one
Pebworth, who had broken out of Oxford Goal, and was retaken at Gloucester. As
soon as I had read this Letter, it was suggested to me, that my Prayer was now
answered. Immediately I went to the Prison, assuredly gathering that the LORD
called me thither. I met with the Person, and finding him and some others
willing to hear the Word of GOD (having gained leave of the Keeper and two
Ordinaries) I constantly read to and prayed with them every Day I was in Town;
I also begged Money for them (...) general, relieved one or two in particular,
ordered Provisions weekly to be distributed amongst them, and put such Books
into their Hands as I judged most proper. I cannot say any one of the Prisoners
was effectually wrought upon: However, much evil was prevented, many were
convinced, and my own Soul much edifyed and strengthened in the Love of GOD and
Man.

Thus employed, I continued in my own City for three Months longer; despised
indeed by many, but highly blessed and favored by GOD. My Understanding was
enlightened, my Will broke, and my Affections more and more (...) with a Zeal
for CHRIST. (...) believe, were added to my Society, (...) shall be saved.
Fresh Supplies came from unexpected Hands, to defray the (...) of the
University, during my (...) (...) And at the End of about 9 (...) ^^turned
thither, to the mutual (...) Comfort of me and my Friends, (...) was called to
take upon me (...); The particular Circumstances of which I shall relate in the
^^^lowing Chapter.

SECTION IV.
My Preparations for HOLY ORDERS.
FROM the Time I first entered at the University, especially from the Time I
knew what was true and undefiled Religion, I entertained high Thoughts of the
Importance of the ministerial Office; and was not solicitous what Place should
be prepared for me but how I should, prepare myself for a Place.

That Saying of the Apostle, Not a Novice, lest, being puffed up with Pride, he
fall into the Condemnation of the Devil; And that first Question of our
excellent Ordination-Office, Do you trust that you are inwardly moved by the
HOLY GHOST to take upon you this Office and Administration, used to make me
tremble, whenever I thought of entering into the Ministry. The Shyness that
Moses and some other Prophets expressed, when GOD sent them out to act in a
public Capacity, I though it (...) sufficient Examples for me to learn (...) not
to run before I was called. GOD knows my Heart, I never prayed more (...)
against any Sin, than I did against entering into the Service of the Church so
soon. Oftentimes have I been in an Agony in Prayer, when under Convictions of
my Insufficiency for so great a Work. With strong Crying and Tears, in the
Language of Moses, I have cried out, LORD, I am a Youth of uncircumcised Lips;
LORD, send me not out into thy Vineyard yet. And sometimes I had Reason to
think, GOD was angry with me for resisting his Will. However, I resolved to
pray against it as long as I could. If GOD did not grant my Request in keeping
me out, I knew his Grace would be sufficient to support and strengthen me,
whenever he sent me into the Ministry.

To my Prayers I added my Endeavors; and wrote Letters to my Friends at
Oxford, beseeching them to pray to GOD to disappoint the Designs of my Country
Friends, who were for my taking Orders as soon as possible. Their Answer was,
Pray we the LORD of the Harvest, to send THEE, and many more such Laborers,
into his Harvest.

Another old and worthy Minister of JESUS, when I wrote to him about the
Meaning of the Word Novice, answer^^ it meant a Novice in Grace and not (...)
Years; and he was pleased to add, (...) Paul was at Gloucester, he (...) Paul
would ordain me. All (...) is did (...) satisfy me. I still continued instant
in Prayer against going into HOLY ORDERS, and was not thoroughly convinced it
was the divine Will, till GOD, by his good Providence, brought me acquainted
with the present Bishop of Gloucester.

Before I conversed with his Lordship, GOD was pleased to give me previous
Notice of it. One Night, before I had the least Prospect of being called before
the Bishop, I dreamt, I was talking with him in his Palace, and that he gave me
some Gold, which chinked in my Hands. Almost every Day after, this Dream would
come into my Mind. Whenever I saw the Bishop at Church, a strong Persuasion
would arise in my Mind, that I should very shortly go to him. I always checked
it, and prayed to GOD to preserve (...) from over desiring that Honor which
comes of Man. One Afternoon it (...) that the Bishop took a solitary Walk, as
I was told afterward, to Lady Selwyn's, near Gloucester, who, not long (...)
had made me a Present of a Piec^^ (...) Gold. She, (...), recommended (...)
Bishop. A few Days after, as (...) from the Cathedral Prayers, (...) of no such
Thing, one of the (...) after (...) and said, the Bishop desired to speak with
me, I, forgetful, at that time, of my Dream, (...) turned back, considering
within myself what I had done to deserve his (...) Displeasure. When I came to
the Top of the Palace Stairs, the Bishop (...) me by the Hand, told me He was
(...) and begged me to wait a (...) put off his Habit, and he (...) me again.
This gave (...). Opportunity of praying (...) Assist^nce and adoring him (...)
over me. At his (...) the Bishop told me, he had heard of (...) Character,
liked my Behavior at Church; and after I told him my Age, (...) says he, I
have declared (...) Three and (...) for (...) He then made (...) to buy (...)
in my Hand, put me in (...) and (...) my Heart with (...) of God's Love.

(...), this News (...) Man's Favor, (...) the Event of (...) I hid from the^^
(...) me hard, I was ^^liged to tell them, how the Bishop, of his own Accord,
had offered to give me HOLY ORDERS whenever I would. They (knowing how I had
depended on the (...) His Lordship (...) made some Time ago, that he would
(...) under Twenty-three) said, (...) I then began to think so myself, (...)
held out any longer, I should (...) GOD. At length I came to (...) on, by GOD's
Leave, to (...) myself for HOLY ORDERS the next (...) Days.

The only Thing (...) into what Part of (...) LORD's (...). GOD had given me
much Success at Gloucester; and, my Friends being desirous (...) near them, I
had some (...) GOD would settle me (...). But when I came to Oxford, (...)
urged several Reasons for my (...) at the University, viz. (...) not long been
gone abroad, (...) take Care of the (...) further urged, that God (...)
Endeavors (...) known to me, some of them sent to that great and good Man, the
late Sir John Phillips, who was a great Encourager of the Oxford Methodists;
and though he had never seen, but only heard of me, yet he sent Word, he would
allow me Thirty Pounds per Annum, if I would continue at the University. Upon
this, finding the Care of the Prisoners would be no more than, under GOD, I
could manage with Pleasure; and knowing the University was the best Place to
prosecute my Studies, I resolved, GOD willing, to let Oxford have the
First Fruits of my ministerial Labors.

In the mean while (having before made some Observations upon the Thirty-nine
Articles, and proved them by Scripture) I strictly examined myself by the
Qualifications required for a Minister, in Paul's Epistle to Timothy; and also
every Question that I knew was to be publicly asked (...) at the Time of my
Ordination. This (...) I drew out at large in Writing, and sealed my
Approbation of it every S^n^^y at the blessed Sacrament. At length (...) Sunday
being near at Hand, and having my Testimonial from the (...), I went a
Fortnight beforehand to (...) intending to compose some (...) and to give
myself up (...) to Prayer. But GOD'S (...) are not as our Thoughts. When I came
to Gloucester, notwithstanding I strove and prayed for several Days, and had
Matter enough in my Heart, yet I was so restrained, that I could not compose
any Thing at all. I mentioned my Case to one Clergyman; he said, I was an
Enthusiast. I wrote to another, who was experienced in the divine Life; he gave
me some Reasons why GOD might deal with me in that Manner, and withal promised
me his Prayers. I joined with him in importunate Supplication, to know whether
this Restraint was of GOD or the Devil. At last, reading Mr. Henry upon the
Acts of the Apostles, this Passage was much pressed upon my Heart, We assayed
to go into Bythynia, but the Spirit suffered us not. Looking a little farther,
I found a Quotation out of Ezekiel, wherein GOD said to that young Prophet,
just after he had given him a divine and public Commission, Thou shall be
dumb, but when I speak unto thee, then shall thou speak. This made me quite
easy. The Remainder of the Fortnight I spent in reading the several Missions of
the Prophets and Apostl^^; and wrestled with GOD to give me Grace to follow
their good Examples.

About Three Days before Ordination, the Bishop came to Town; the Evening
after, I sent his Lordship an Abstract of my private Examination upon these two
Questions, Do you trust that you are inwardly ^^oved by the HOLY GHOST is take
upon you this Office and Ministration? Are you called according to the Will of
our LORD JESUS CHRIST and the Laws of this Realm?

The next Morning I waited on the Bishop in Person. He received me with all
Love; told me, He was glad I was come that he was satisfied with the
Preparation, I had made, and with the Allowance given me by Sir John Philips. I
had (...) self, said he, made Provision for you of two little Parishes; but
since you choose to be (...) Oxford, I am very well pleased, I doubt (...) but
you will do much good. Upon this, I took my leave, wondering at GOD's (...)
toward (...) a Wretch, but (...) delighted, that in every (...), he had made
my Way into the Ministry so very plain before my (...).

(...) I think was on Friday. The Day following I continued to spend (...). In
the Evening I retired to a Hill near the Town, (...) prayed most fervently for
about two Hours, in Behalf of myself and those who were to be ordained with me.

On Sunday Morning I rose early, and prayed over St. Paul's Epistle to Timothy,
particularly that Precept, (...) no one despise thy (...). When I went up to
the Altar, I could think of Nothing but Samuel standing before the LORD with a
linen Ephod. When the Bishop laid his Hands upon my Head, my Heart was melted
down, and I offered up my whole Spirit, Soul and Body to the Service of GOD's
Sanctuary. I read the Gospel, at the Bishop's Command, with Power; and
afterward sealed the good Confession I had made before many Witnesses, with
CHRIST's most blessed Body.

Being restrained, as was before observed, I could not, though solicited
thereto, preach in the Afternoon; but I read Prayers to the poor Prisoners,
being willing to (...) the first Act of my ministerial Office be an Act of
Charity.

The next Morning, waiting upon GOD in Prayer, to know what he would have me to
do, these Words, Speak out Paul, came with great Power upon my Heart.
Immediately my Heart was enlarged: GOD spoke to me by (...) Spirit; I was no
longer dumb; I finished a Sermon I had in Hand some time before; I began
another, and preached, the Sunday following, to a very crowded Audience, with
as much Freedom as though I had been a Preacher for some Years.

Oh the unspeakable Benefit of Reading to the Poor, and exercising our Talents
while Students at the University! Such previous Acts create excellent Habits,
and make young Ministers not awkward, but apt to teach. It is remarkable our
LORD sent out his Apostles on short Missions, before they were so solemnly
authorized at the Day of Pentecost. Would Tutors of our Universities follow his
Example, and send out their Pupils to visit the Sick and the Prisoners, to pray
with, and read practical Books of Piety to the Poor, they would find such
Exercises of more Service to their Pupils and the Church of GOD, than all their
private and public Lectures put together.

But to come to a Conclusion. Thus GOD dealt with my Soul: And at the same Time
he was not forgetful of my Body; for he inclined the Bishop's Heart to give me
Five Guineas more; and by this Time; Quarter's Allowance way due to me from Sir
John Philips, b^^ which Sum put together, served (...) well to defray the
Expenses of my Ordination, and taking my Batchelor's Degree, which was
conferred upon me at ^^^ford the Week after my being (...) being then
Twenty-one (...) Seven Months old.

These Changes from a Servitor to a Bachelor of Arts, from a common Drawer to
a Clergyman, were great Temptations to think more highly of myself than I ought
to think. Some were jealous over me, as I trust they always will be, with a
godly Jealousy. Hereby GOD, who is rich in Mercy, forwarned me of my Danger,
stirred up my Heart to pray against spiritual Pride, and kept me, as I hope he
will unto the End, in some Measure humble.

Thus did GOD, through a Variety of unforeseen Acts of Providence and Grace,
train me up for, and at length introduced me into the Service of his Church.
What has happened to me since that Time, especially for these two last Years
past, is too notorious to need a Repetition. However, as I find Freedom in
myself, and Leisure from my ministerial Employ, hereafter (GOD willing) I shall
relate some Dealings of GOD with my Soul, and how he led me (without any
Foresight of my own) into my present Way of Acting.

In the mean while, My dear Reader, whoever thou art, I pray GOD what I have
now written may not prove a Savor of Death unto Death, but a Savor of Life ^
through Ignorance, Prejudice and Unbelief, when they read this, will contradict
and blaspheme. Be not thou of this Number. If thou art as yet unspotted from
the World, I pray GOD to keep thee so: For, believe me, Innocence is better
than Repentance; And though Sin may afford thee some bruti^^ present Pleasure,
ye^ the Remembrance of it afterward is exceeding bitter. If thou art immersed
in Sin, as I was, take no Encouragement from me to continue in it on one Hand,
nor despair of Mercy on the other: Let GOD's Goodness to me lead thee to
Repentance. The same LORD is rich unto all that call upon him through Faith in
CHRIST JESUS. And if through Grace I have done any Thing Praiseworthy, not
unto me, not unto me, but unto GOD give all the Glory. If thou art awakened to
a Sense of the Divine Life, and art Hungering and Thirsting after the
Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, and the Indwelling of his blessed Spirit in thy
Heart, think it not absolutely necessary to undergo all the Temptations that
have befallen me. It is in the spiritual as it is in the natural Birth. Some
feel more, others less; but all must experience some Pangs and Travails of Soul
ere CHRIST JESUS be formed within them. If GOD (...) the Work of Conversion is
effected in thy Heart, thou ought to be exceeding Thankful; or if he should
lead thee through a larger Wilderness than I have passed through, thou need
not complain. The more thou art humbled now, the more thou shall be exalted
hereafter. One True of CHRIST in thy Heart will make amends for all. And if
thou art one that has (...) the Powers of the Wor^^ to come, (...) already
converted, I know thou (...) ^^joice and give Thanks for what (...) done for my
Soul. To (...) all that peruse these (...) deeply and as (...) and (...) been
in (...) the (...)

I cannot better close this Account of my LIFE, than with the following divine
Poem by Mr. ADDISON.
I.
WHEN all thy Mercies, O my GOD,
MY rising Soul surveys;
(...) with the View, I Am lost
(...), Love and Praise.
II.
(...) equal Warmth
(...)
(...) Heart?
V.
(...)-numbered Comforts to my Soul
Thy tender Care bestowed,
Before my infant Heart conceived
From whom those Comforts flowed
VI.
When in the slippery Paths of Truth,
With heedless Steps I ran;
Thine Arm unseen conveyed me safe,
And led me up to Man.
VII.
Through hidden Dangers, Toils and Death,
It gently cleared my Way;
And through the pleasing Snares of Vice
More to be feared than they.
VIII.
When worn with Sickness, often have the
With Health renewed my Face;
And when in Sin and Sorrow sunk,
Revived my Soul with Grace.
IX.
Ten thousand thousand precious Gifts,
My daily Thanks employ:
Nor is the least a cheerful Heart,
That tastes those Gifts with Joy.
X.
Through (...) Period of my Life,
Thy Goodness I Will (...);
And after (...)
The (...). The (...).
XI.
When (...) Day and Night
Divide (...) no more;
My ever-grateful Heart, O LORD!
Thy Mercy shall (...).
XII.
Through all (...) to (...),
A joyful (...) I Will raise
(...) Eternity's too short,
(...) all thy Praise.
FINIS.

