The Heinous SIN of Drunkenness.

A SERMON Preached by GEORGE WHITEFIELD, A. B. of Pembroke College, Oxford.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by ANDREW and WILLIAM BRADFORD, at the Sign of
the Bible, in Front-Street*

EPHESIANS 5. 6. Be not drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess; but be filled with
the Spirit.
THE Persons to whom these Words were written, were the People of Ephesus; who
being, as we are told in the Acts, Worshippers of the great Goddess Diana, in
all Probability worshipped the God Bacchus also: at the Celebration of whose
Festivals, it was always customary, nay, Part of their Religion, to get drunk;
as though there was no other Way to please their God, but by turning themselves
into Brutes.

The Apostle therefore, in this Chapter, amongst many other precepts more
especially applicable to them, lays down that in the Text; and exhorts them, as
they had now, by the free Grace of God, been turned from heathenish Darkness to
the Light of the Gospel, to walk as Children of Light, and no longer make it
Part of their Religion or Practice to be drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess;
but, on the contrary, strive to be filled with the Spirit of that Savior,
after whose Name they were now called, and whose Religion taught them to
abstain from such a filthy Sin, and to live soberly as they ought to live.

By the World being now Christian, and the Doctrines of the Gospel every where
received, one would imagine, there should be no Reason for repeating the
Precepts now before us. But alas, Christians! I mean Christians falsely so
called, are so ^ed captive by all Sin in General, and by this of Drunkenness in
particular, that was St. Paul to rise again from the dead, he might be tempted
to think most of us were turned back to the Worship of dumb Idols; that we had
set up Temples in Honor of Bacchus, and ma^^; it Part of our Religion, as the
Ephesians did of theirs, to be drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess.

Our civil Magistrates have not been wanting to use the Power given them from
above for the Punishment and Restraint of such evil Doings; and I wish it could
be said this Plague of Drinking, by what they have done, had been stayed
amongst us. But alas! though their Labor, we trust, has not been altogether in
vain in the Lord, yet thousands, and I could almost say, ten thousands fall
daily at our Right Hand, by this Sin of Drunkenness, in our Streets; nay, Men
seem to have made a Covenant with Hell, and though the Power of the civil
Magistrate is exerted against them; nay, and though they cannot but daily see
the Companions of their Riot hourly by this, brought to the Grave, yet they
will rise up early to follow strong Drink, and cry, To Morrow shall be as to
Day, and so much the more abundantly; when we awake, we will seek it yet again.

It is high Time therefore, for thy Ministers to life up their Voices like a
Trumpet, and since human Threats cannot prevail, to set before them the Terrors
of the Lord, and try if these will not persuade them to cease from the Evil of
their Doings.

But alas! how shall I address my self to them? I fear Excess of Drinking has
made them such mere Nabals, that there is no speaking to them. And many of
God's Servants have toiled all their Lifetimes in dissuading them from this Sin
of Drunkenness, yet they will not forbear. However, at his Command, I will
speak also, though they be a rebellious House. Magnify thy Strength, O Lord, in
my Weakness, and grant that I may speak with such Demonstration of the Spirit,
and with Power, that from henceforward they may cease to act so unwisely, and
this Sin of Drunkenness may not be their Ruin.

Believe me, ye unhappy Men of Belial (for such, alas! this Sin has made you)
it is not without the strongest Reasons, as well as utmost Concern for your
precious and immortal Souls, that I now conjure you, in the Apostles Words, Not
to be drunk with Wine, or any other Liquor, wherein is Excess.

For, First, Drunkenness is a Sin which must be highly displeasing to God;
because it is an Abuse of his good Creatures.

When God first made Man, and had breathed into him the breath of Life, he gave
him Dominion over the Works of his Hands, and every Herb bearing Seed, and
every Tree, in which was the Fruit of a Tree yielding Seed, to him it was given
for Meat; but when Adam had tasted the forbidden Fruit, which was the only
Restraint laid upon him, he forfeited this Privilege, and had no Right, since
he had disobeyed his Creator, to the Use of any one of the Creatures.

But, blessed be God, this Charter, as well as all other Privileges, is
restored to us by the Death of the second Adam, our Lord and Master Jesus
Christ. Of every Beast of the Field, every Fish of the Sea, and whatsoever
flies in the Air, or moves on the Face of the Earth, that is fit for Food, we
may freely eat, i. e. without Scruple take, and eat; but then, with this
Limitation, that we use them moderately. For God, by the Death of Jesus, has
given no Man License to be intemperate; but, on the contrary, has laid us under
the strongest Obligations to live soberly, as well as godly, in this present
World.

But the Drunkard, despising the Goodness and Bounty of God, in restoring to us
what we had so justly forfeited, turns his Grace into Wantonness; and as though
the Creature was not of itself enough subject to Vanity, by being Cursed for
our Sakes, he abuses it still more, by making it administer to his Lusts; and
turns that Wine which was intended to make glad his Heart, into a deadly Poison.

But think thou, O Drunkard, whosoever thou art, thou shall escape the
righteous Judgment of God? No, the Time will shortly come that thou must be no
longer Steward, and then the sovereign Lord of all the Earth will reckon with
thee for thus wasting his Goods. Alas! will thou then wrest Scripture any
longer to thy own Damnation? And because Jesus Christ turned Water into Wine at
the Marriage Feast, to supply the Wants of his indigent Host, say, that it is
therefore meet to make merry, and be drunken. No, thou shall be silent before
him; and know, that though thou have encouraged thyself in Drunkenness by such
like Arguments, yet for all these Things God will bring thee into Judgment.

But, Secondly, What makes Drunkenness more exceeding sinful, is, that a Man,
by falling into it, sins against his own Body!

When the Apostle would dissuade the Corinthians from Fornication, he urges
this as an Argument, Flee Fornication, says he, Brethren; for he that
commits Fornication, sins against his own Body. And may not I as justly
cry out, Flee Drunkenness, my Brethren, since he that commits that Crime,
sins against his own Body? For, from whence come so many Diseases and
Distempers in you Bodies: Come they not from hence, even from your Intemperance
in drinking? Who has Pains in the Head? Who has Rottenness in the Bones? Who
has Redness of Eyes? He that tarries long at the Wine, he that rises early to
seek new Wine. How many walking Skeletons have you seen, whose Bodies were once
exceeding fair to look upon, fat, and well favored; but, by this Sin of
drinking, how has their Beauty departed from them, and how have they been
permitted to walk to and fro upon the Earth, as though God intended to set them
up, as he did Lot's Wife, for Monuments of his Justice, that others might learn
not to get drunk? Nay I appeal to yourselves. Are not many, for this Cause,
even now sickly among you? And have not many of your Companions whom you once
saw flourishing, like green Bay Trees, been brought by it, with Sorrow, to
their Graves?

We might perhaps, think ourselves hardly dealt with by God, was he to send to
us, as he did to the royal Psalmist, to choose one Plague out of three, whereby
we should be destroyed. But had the Almighty decreed to cut off Man from the
Face of the Earth, and to shorten his Days, he could not well send a more
effectual Plague than to permit Men, as they pleased, to overcharge themselves
with Drunkenness; for though it be a slow, vet it is a certain Poison. And if
the Sword has slain its thousands, Drunkenness has slain its ten thousands.

And will not this alarm you, O ye Transgressors? Will not this persuade you to
spare yourselves, and to do your Bodies no Harm? What, have you lost the first
Principles of human Nature, the fundamental Law of Self-preservation? You seem
to have a great Fondness for your Bodies, why otherwise to gratify their
inordinate Appetites, do you drink to Excess? But surely, if you truly loved
them, you would not thus destroy them; and was there no other Argument to be
urged against Drunkenness, the Consideration that it will destroy those Lives
you are so fond of, one would imagine, should be sufficient.

I know, indeed, that it is a common Answer that Dru^kards make to those, who,
out of Love, would pull them as Firebrands out of the Fire "We are no Body's
Enemy but our own." But this, instead of being an excuse for, is but an
Aggravation of their Guilt: For (not to mention that the Drunkenness of one Man
has c^^athed many a Family with Rags, and that it is sc^ace po^^^ble for a
Person to be drunk, without t^^pting his Neighbor also) I say, not to mention
these, and many other ill Consequences, which would prove such an Excuse to be
entirely false; yet what is dearer to a Man than himself? And if he himself be
lost, what would all the whole World avail him? But how will thou stand. O Man,
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, and make such an Excuse, when thou shall be
arraigned before him as a Self-Murderer? Will it then be sufficient, think
thou, to say, I was no Man's Enemy but my own? No; God will then tell thee,
that thou wast not thy own; that thou wast bought with the Price of his dear
Son's Blood, and thou ought therefore to have glorified him with thy Spirit,
and with thy Body, which were his. And since thou have, by Intemperance,
destroyed thy Body, he will destroy both thy Body and Soul in Hell.

But, Thirdly, What renders Drunkenness more inexcusible, is, that it robs a
Man of his Reason.

Reason is the Glory of a Man; the chief Thing whereby God has made us to
differ from the Brute Creation. And our modern Unbelievers have exalted it to
such a high Degree, as even to set it in Opposition to Revelation, and deny the
Lord that bought them. But though in doing this, they greatly err, and whilst
they profess themselves wise, become real Fools; ^et we must acknowledge, that
Reason is the Can^^e of the Lord, and whosoever puts it out, shall bear his
Punishment, whosoever he be.

But yet, this the Drunkard does. Nebuchadnezzar's Curse he makes his Choice,
his Reason departs from him; and then what is he better than a Brute?

The very Heathen Kings were so sensible of this, that, in order to deter their
young Princes from drinking, they used to make their Slaves get drunk, and be
exposed before them. And did thou but see thine own Picture, O Drunkard,
when, after having drowned thy Reason, thou staggerest to and fro, like one of
the Fools in Israel, and see thy very Companions making Songs upon thee,
surely thou would not return to thy Vomit again, but abhor thyself in Dust
and Ashes?

When David, in a holy Extacy, was dancing before the Ark, Mich^^, Readiness
Daughter, despises him in her Heart; and when he came home, she said, How
glorious was the King of Israel to Day, who uncovered himself to Day in the
Eyes of the Handmaids of his Servants, as one of the vain Fellows shamelesly
uncovereth himself. And may not every one that meets a Drunkard, more justly
say, How glorious does he, that was made a little lower than the Angels, look
to Day, when unmindful of his Dignity, he has, by drinking, robbed himself of
his Reason, and reduced himself to a Level with the Beasts that perish.

But what if God, in the midst of one of these drunken Fits, should arrest thee
by Death, and say unto thee Thou Fool, this Moment shall thy Soul be required
of thee. Oh! How would thou appear in those filthy Garments before that God,
in whose Sight the Heavens are not clean. And how know thou, O Man, but this
may be thy Lot? Have thou not known many, in thy Lifetime, summoned at such an
unguarded Hour; and what Assurance have thou given thee, that thou shall not be
the next? Because God has forborne thee so long, think thou he will forbear
always? No, this is rather a Sign that he will come at an Hour thou look not
for him; and since his Goodness and Long-Suffering has not led thee to
Repentance, he will cut thee down, and not permit thee to cumber the Ground any
longer. Consider this then, all ye that count it a Pleasure to turn yourselves
(...) Brutes, lest God pluck you away by a sudden Death and there be none to
deliver you.

But, Fourthly, There is a farther Aggravation of this Crime, that it is an
Inlet to, and Forerunner of many other Sins; for it seldom comes alone.

We may say of Drunkenness, as Solomon does of S^ri^e, that it is like the
letting out of Water; for we know not what will be the End thereof. Its Name is
Legion; For behold a Troop of Sins comes after it. And for my own Part, when I
see a Drunkard, I can scarce, with the holy Prophet, when he looked in Hazael's
Face, forbear weeping, to consider how many Vices he may fall into, ere he
comes to himself again.

What horrid Incest did righteous Let commit with his own Daughters when they
had made him drunk? And, I doubt not, but there are many amongst you, who have
committed such Crimes when you have deprived yourselves of your Reason by
drinking; that were you to hear of them, your Heart, like Nabal's, after he was
told how he had abused David when he was drunk, would die within you. And had
any one told you, when you were sober, hat you would have been guilty of such
Crimes, you would have cried out, with Hazael before mentioned, Are thy
Servants so many Dogs, that they should do thus?

But no marvel that Drunkards commit such Crimes: For Drunkenness drives the
Holy Spirit from them; they become mere Machines for the Devil to work up to
what he pleases; he enters into them, as he entered into the Herd of Swine; and
no Wonder if they then commit all Uncleanness, and any other Crime, with
Greediness. But this leads me to a

Fifth Consideration, which highly aggravates the Sin of Drunkenness, viz. That
it seperates the holy Spirit from us.

It is to be hoped, that no one here present need be informed, that before we
can be Christians indeed, we must receive the Holy Ghost, must be born again
from above, and have the Spirit of God witnessing with our Spirits, that we are
the Sons of God. This, this alone is true Christianity; and without the
Cohabitation of this Blessed Spirit in our Hearts, our Righteousness does not
exceed the Righteousness of the Scri^es and Pharisees, and we shall in no wise
enter into the Kingdom of God.

But now, Drunkards do, in Effect, bid this Blessed Spirit depart from them:
For what has he to do with such filthy Swine? No, they (...) no Lot or Share in
the Spirit of the Son of David. They have chased him our of their Hearts, by
defiling his Temple; I mean their Bodies. And he can no more hold Communion
with them, than Light can have Communion with Darkness, or Christ have Concord
with Belial.

The Apostle therefore, in the Words of the Text, exorts the Ephesians, not to
be drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess, but to be filled with the Spirit;
thereby implying* that Drunkenness and the Spirit of God could never dwell in
the same Heart. And in another Epistle, he bids them avoid unprofitable
Conversation, as a Thing which grieved the Holy Spirit; whereby alone they
could be sealed to the Day of Redemptions. And if unprofitable Conversation
grieves the Holy Spirit, at what an infinite Distance must Drunkenness drive
him from the Hearts of Men?

But oh that you were wise! That you would consider what a dreadful Thing it is
to have the Spirit of the living God depart from you: For, assure yourselves,
if you live without him, you live without God in the World. You are in the same
miserable forlorn Condition as Saul was, when an evil Spirit of the Lord came
upon him; and you are only so many Vessels of Wrath fitted for Destruction. But
this brings me to the

Sixth and last Reason I shall urge against the Sin of Drunkenness, that it
absolutely unfits a Man for the Enjoyment of God in Heaven, and exposes him to
his Eternal Wrath.

To see and enjoy God, and to be like the blessed Angels, always beholding the
Face of our Heavenly Father, in the Glories of his Kingdom, is such an
unspeakable Happiness, that even wicked Men, though they will not live the Life
of the Righteous, cannot but wish their future State to be like his.

But think you, O ye Drunkards, that you shall ever be Partakers of this
Inheritance with the Saints in Light? Do you flatter yourselves, that you, who
have made them often the Subject of your drunken Songs, shall now be exalted to
sing with them the Heavenly Songs of Sion? No, as by Drunkenness you have made
your Hearts Cages of unclean Birds, with impure and unclean Spirits must you
dwell.

A burning Tophet, kindled by God's Wrath, is prepared for your Reception,
where you must suffer the Vengeance of an eternal Fire, and in vain cry out for
a Drop of Water to cool your Tongues. Indeed you shall drink, but it shall be a
Cup of God's Fury: For in the Hand of the Lord, there will be a Cup of Fury, it
will be full mixed; and as for the Dregs thereof, all the Drunkards of the Land
shall suck them out.

But perhaps you may not believe this Report. These Words may be looked upon by
you as idle Tales, and I may seem to you as Lot did to his Sons-in-Law, when he
came to warn them to get up out of Sodom, as one that mocketh. But if you
believe not me, believe eternal Truth itself, and he has possitively declared,
that no Drunkard shall ever enter into his Kingdom.

And I call Heaven and Earth (...) against you this Day, that as (...) the Lord
rained Fire and Brimstone, as soon as Lot went out of S^^^m, so surely will God
cast you into a Lake of Fire and Brimstone, when he that come to take Vengeance
on them that know not God, and have not obeyed the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Behold then I have told you before* remember you this Day were informed what
the End of Drunkenness would be. And I summon you, in the Name of that God whom
I serve, to meet me at the Judgment Seat of Christ, that you may acquit both my
Master and me; and confess, with your own Mouths, that your Damnation was of
yourselves, and that we were freed from the Blood of you all.

But, Lord, has no one believed our Report? Will thou suffer so many Words to
be spoken in vain, if it be yet in vain? No, methinks I see some pricked to the
Heart, and ready to cry out in the Language of David to Abigail, Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this Day to speak unto us. For surely,
unless he had sent thee, this Sin of Drunkenness had been our Ruin. But, now,
since we find whither it will lead us, we are resolved to drink no Liquor to
Excess while the World stands, lest we should be tormented in the Flames of
Hell.

But alas! how shall we be delivered from the Power of this Sin? Can the
Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots? So hard, almost, will it
be for us who have been accustomed to be intemperate, to learn to live sober.

But do not despair; for what is impossible with Man, is possible with God. Or
whom then should you seek for Succor, but of him your Lord? Who, though for
this Sin of Drunkenness, he might justly turn away his Face from you; yet if
you pour out your Hearts before him in daily Prayer, and ask Assistance from
above, he will endue you with Power from on high, and make you more than
Conquerors through Jesus Christ that loved you. Had you kept up Communion with
him in Prayer, you would not so long, by Drunkenness, have had Communion with
Devils. And had you besought him instantly, that you might not be led into
Temptation, you would always have been delivered from the Evil of it. But (...)
^he Prodigal, you have desired to be your own (...); you have lived without
Prayer, depended on your own Strength; and see, alas! on what a broken Reed you
have leaned. How soon have you made yourselves like the Beasts that have no
Understanding? But turn ye, turn ye from your evil Ways. Come to him, with the
repenting Prodigal, saying, Father we have sinned, we beseech thee, let not
this Sin of Drunkenness have any longer Dominion over us. And lo! it shall
happen to you even as you will.

But think not that God must do all, and you nothing. No; as we can do nothing
without him, so he will do nothing without us. And if we pray that we may not
be led into Temptation, we must take heed not to throw ourselves into it.

A Second Means therefore I would recommend to you, in order to get the better
of Drunkenness, is to avoid evil Company. For it is the evil Communications of
wicked Men, that has drawn so many thousands into this Sin, and so corrupted
their good Manners.

But you may say, If I leave my Companions, I must expect Contempt: For they
will certainly despise me for being singular, And think thou, O Man, ever to
enter in at the strait Gate by a true Conversion, without being had in Derision
of them that are round about thee? No; though thou may be despised, and not
go to Heaven, yet thou can not go to Heaven, without being despised: For the
Friendship of the World is Enmity with God. And they that are born after the
Flesh, will persecute those that are born after the Spirit. Let not, therefore,
a servile Fear of being despised by a Man that shall die, hinder thy turning
unto (...) God. For what is a little Contempt? It (...) Vapor which vanishes
away, and comes not again. Better be derided by a few Companions here, than be
made ashamed before Men and Angels hereafter. Better be the Song of a few
Drunkards on Earth, than dwell with them where they will be eternally
reproaching and cursing each other in Hell. Yet a little while, and they
themselves shall praise thy Doings, and shall say, We, fools, counted his
leaving us to be Folly, and his End to be without Honor: But how is he
numbered among the Sons of God, and his Lot among the Saints!

But I hasten to lay down a Third Means for those who would overcome this Sin
of Drunkenness, -- to enter upon a Life of strict Self-denial and
Mortification: For this Kind of Sin goes not forth but by Prayer and Fasting.
It is true, this may seem a difficult Task; but then, we must thank ourselves
for it; For had we begun sooner, our Work would have been the easier. And even
now, if you will but strive, the Yoke of Mortification will grow ^ighter and
^ighter every Day.

And here, by way of Conclusion to this Discourse, I cannot but exhort all
Persons, high and low, rich and poor, one with another, to practice a strict
Self-denial in eating and drinking. For though the Kingdom of God consists not
in Meats and Drinks, yet an abstemious Use of, and a frequent total Abstinence
from God's good Creatures, are great Promoters of the spiritual Life. And
perhaps there are more destroyed by living in a regular Sensuality, than even
by that very Sin I have now been warning you of. -- I know, indeed, that many,
who are only almost Christians, and who seek, but do not strive to enter into
the Kingdom of God, urge a Text of Scripture to justify their Indulgence,
saying, That it is not what enters into the Man defiles the Man. And so we
grant, when taken moderately; but then they should consider, that it is
possible, nay, it is proved by daily Experience, that a Person may eat and
drink so much as not to hurt his Body, and yet do infinite Prejudice to his
Soul. For Self-indulgence lulls the Soul into a spiritual Slumber, as well as
direct Intemperance; and though the latter may expose us to more Contempt among
Men, yet the former, if continued in, will as certainly shut us out from the
Presence of God. St. Paul knew this full well; and therefore, though he was the
spiritual Father of thousands, and was near upon finishing his Course, yet he
says, it was his daily Practice to keep his Body under, and bring it into
Subjection, no doubt, by a strict Abstinence and Fasting; not that he might
arrive at higher Degrees of Perfection, but lest after he had preached to
others, he himself should be a Castaway. But why urge I the Apostle's Example
to excite you to a strict Temperance in eating and drinking? Rather let me
exhort you only to put in Practice the latter Part of the Text, to labor to be
filled with the Spirit of God, and then you will no longer search the
Scriptures to find Arguments for Self-Indulgence; but you will deal sincerely
with yourselves, and fast as often as the Church enjoins, if your Healths will
permit; and eat and drink no more at any Time, than what is consistent with the
strictest Precepts of the Gospel. Oh do but beg of God, that you may see how
you are fallen in Adam, and must be renewed ere you can be happy, by the Spirit
of Jesus Christ! Let us beseech him to enlighten us, to see the Treachery of
our corrupt Hearts, and how pure and holy these Bodies ought to be, which are
living Temples of the Holy Ghost, and then we shall show ourselves Men. Abstain
from all Appearance of any thing that will quench this holy Spirit, and do any
Thing that will invite him into, or cause him to abide in our Hearts. And thus
being made Temples of the Holy Ghost, by his dwelling in our Bodies here,
though, after Death, Worms may destroy them; yet shall they be raised by the
same Spirit at the general Resurrection of the last Day, to be fashioned like
unto Christ's glorious Body hereafter.

Which God of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

