Short History OF A Long Journey,

IT being some Account of the Life of JOSIAH QUINBY, until he came to enter
into the 48 th Year of his Age, with Remarks and Reflections upon his own past
Actions.

NEW YORK, Printed by John Peter Lerger 1740.

To the Reader.
THE Reason of my publishing the following Discourse, was this; I have
undertaken many Projects, and Business of several Sorts and Kinds, most of
which has been for the Good of the Common Wealth, as most People say, though
other Parts of my Business has been prejudicial to particular Persons.

In the End* however, my said Projects, Business and Miscariages has made a
great Noise in this Government, and something of it has been heard in diverse
other Governments, and there has been many Enquirers, that was willing to know
how these Things were; and therefore I thought fit to give a short historical
Account of some of the most remarkable Things that I have met with, and I have
endeavored to set Things in a true Light, as well condemning in my self, in
every Case, where I judge I was wrong, as saying something in my own Favor;
wherein I was not so much to blame I have endeavored to write in such an
impartial Manner, relating the very Truth of Facts, that if I knew I was to dye
in a few Days Time, yet I would order this to be published for Truth, as it now
stands and is true; and I only offer this Discourse to those that are so
charitable as to believe the Truth when they hear it, hoping it may be
something of a Warning to others, that they may not let out their Minds to, and
undertake Things that which do not belong to them as I have done: For it seems
to me, that I am something like those Camels and Asses that I have heard of,
which have been employed to carry Burdens, and great Treasure, through the long
and tedious Deserts of Arabia, from Sea to Sea; but at length those poor
Creatures are stripped of all their Treasures* and then there remains nothing to
them but the Bruises, Gauls and Wounds that they have received by their
carrying them said Burdens and Riches* which did not properly belong to them:
And so now, though I have had many Projects, and much Business of diverse Kinds,
some of which brought me plenty of Money, and others miscarrying; now of all
there remains no more to me than to those Camels and Asses, to wit, Gauls
Bruiser and Wounds, which can hardly ever be cured; and was it not for a
received Favor and Presence of Mind, which lifts me a little above and over
most my Troubles* I should have been in a worse Condition than any of them
miserable Creatures, which were wounded and worn out, and turned off to die a
languishing Death, in the said Deserts of Arabia* For I see clearly, it was
very wrong for me* to enter into such and so much Business as I have done,
endeavoring to bring about my worldly Purposes, which if I could attai^ed to
them all, they would have been but miserable Comforters in the End, no better
nor so well as the Case of the Camels and Asses; and the more Riches and
Burdens they Carry, the greater are the Gauls and Wounds on their Bodies, and
so it often happens with us, that when we engage in a multitude of Business and
Undertakings (not proper for us to meddle with) it not only afflicts our Brains
and Bodies, but makes great Wounds and Bruises on our Souls; which if they
should never be healed, how dreadful is then our Case, and how much happier
are those Camels, which though they are grown old, tired, worn out and stripped
from their Burdens and Treasures, and left to Fam^sh for want in that dry
barren Desert, and if we think that the Case with those Creatures whose Bodies
only are distressed with Miseries and strong Pains is miserable, how much more
miserable is the State of we human Creatures, whose Bodies and Souls are
plagued in Distress and Pain in the fatigues of this unquiet World and the
Guilt that Pursues.

But now I being blame worthy as I have said, it is no Wonder that I have been
blamed by those that knew my Misdeeds; -- however I have not been so much to
blame: But that some could and have laid great Faults to my Charge in Years
past, as well as now, which I was never Guilty of, for although I let my Mind out
after Bargains, Business and Enterpri^es somewhat uncommon, whereby sometimes I
got great and extravagant Gains, yet I had generally so much honesty, or
fariness in my Dealings, that it has been my known Custom and Practice, that
when I have overreached People by great Gains I have generally released them,
or added so much to them as did make them easy that I dealt with; insomuch that
I do not Remember in Twenty Years Time that ever I had made a Bargain with any
Man whatsoever in Land Affairs, but if that he Repented within one Years Time,
I released him or them, they paying for the Writings, and the Damage I had
actually recieved thereby, and in such Cases I have dropped the Profit of many
Hundreds of Pounds, but if they repented not in a Years Time, I used to hold
them to it; but othe^s have not used me with the same Liberty's. And when my
dealings have been in buying, selling or trucking of Horses, which I did not
much Practice; yet if those I dealt with in that kind repented in a Weeks Time,
I always released them. And though I have bought many hundreds or some Thousands
of Cattle, yet I do not Remember that I ever had any Contention or Quarrel
concerning any one of them, nor concerning the Price nor Payment, for I used to
be punctual in those Cases, but though most of my common Business I did very
fairly to the Satisfaction of those I had to do with, yet other Parts of my
Business was critical and unfair, and I did greatly love and delight to run
upon Numbers of Projects and venture-some Enterprises and Bargains, whereby I
expected Profits; but yet upon the most deliberate Consideration, I cannnt
accuse myself of a worse Action than that concerning the Mills, which I have
given a faithful Account of at large in the following Discourse, accusing
myself wherein I was to blame. And as some of my said Business has been much
on the ^^treams* so some Peoples Accusations against me have been on the
Extremes, by which there has been many Stories, Reports and Accusa^^^ns
against me in Years past, which were (...) and uncharitable, concerning many
Things which never came into my Mind, nei^^^r to Devise nor Practice.

And also, as I h^ve related in the following ^ccount something of my being
accused with ^ Design of going off to Sea, in order to defeat (...) Creditors,
which Report was altogether (...), for when I came last out of York, I in^^^ded
to return again and make Payments, as much as I did intend to breath in the
Air; (...) there is no Person that can speak true, and say, that ever I had
spoken of any such Intention, or made any Preparation thereto. And there have
been many other Accusations and Surmises against me, which I never had devised
in the least, but yet I find (...) more Satisfaction in reflecting on myself
for (...) Misdeeds then I can have in laying of any blame to the Charge of
others, though they Accuse me ever so much; for though I was wrong in my
Undertakings, yet I was in hopes that this Trading Affairs as I had laid it out
in my Mind would have afforded me Profits, and been of great Service to People
in that Government where I did Trade, and I am not yet convinced but that a
Scheme something like what I had proposed might be carried on by suitable and
honest Hands to great Advantage on both Sides.

And on the whole, I am really sorry that any should be hurt any ways by me,
and if there were any that I could recall that Part back again how gladly would
I do it with all my Might; but as to my own Part; I neither mourn my self* nor
do I want others to Pity me, for I well know I deserve from the Hand of
Providence all that I meet with, and much more, and this is I concieve a
suitable Place for me, perhaps I have learned already more here in a little
Time, than I should have done in Seven Years either at Court or College. To
wit. So much of a resigned Mind, that I now can quietly let alone all Things
that I cannot amend, and although I have done wrong Things to a great Degree, yet
I know assuredly that the Power of Truth is present to heal: And what now shall
hinder me from choosing this Visitation and the healing Balm of Gilead to be my
Portion.

Farewell. Josiah Quinby.

A short History of a long Journey, etc.
I Was born at Westchester, in the Year 1693, of honest Parents, and good
Livers, according to the Custom of that Place. I being my Father's eldest Son,
he wanted my Help on his Farm, and so brought me up to Husbandry. I had very
little Schooling; I could read pretty well, But was but a poor Writer. As my
Father and Mother were of those called Quakers, so they endeavored to bring me
up in that Way of Religion; but I proved rude and very unlucky or mischeivous
amongst my Companions, though at some Times I was sober and rel^gious, and after
I had done such Things as I judged wicked and ungraceful, was so condemned for
it in my Conscience, that I thought I would never be guilty of doing such
Wickedness more; and yet by my being careless and unwatchful, I was often drawn
into great Temptations, and would fall into the like Offenses again: But as my
Temptations were great, so the Kindness of Providence was likewise great, and
afforded me a tender Visitation of Love, by which my Heart was much affected.

When I was about 17 Years old, I grew more sober and religious; and before I
was 19 was accounted a Member of that Church, and had so good an Impression of
Virtue and Religion on my Mind, that those of that Society received me as such,
and the Eyes of many were on me for Good, hoping that I would prove a good,
religious, selfdenying Man.

I was very sincere and tender in those Days, and really intended, through the
Help of Grace, that then seemed to rest in me, to have given up my Mind to live
answerable thereto; but yet at Times I grew careless, and after that fell upon
several Projects and Schemes of Business, some of which were somewhat accute,
and accounted witty; and letting my Mind run out after Multiplicty of Business
and Notions, seemed to do me a great deal of Hurt, as to my religious Concerns,
it choked the good (...) that was sown and had sprou^ed in my Heart; this my
Friends as well as well as my Relations quickly perceived, and therefore warned
me of the Temptations and Snares which they saw were prevailing on me. However
I gained several considerable Sums of Money, and other Profits, by my Projects,
which made me the more bold to argue and resist their Council; and instead of
desiding, I entered into much more.

Some of my Business was such, that it did not become neither me, nor any of
that Society to which I belonged, nor indeed any rel^gious Christian; and for
these my Proceedings, several Members and Elders of the Meeting that I belonged
to, came to me, an^ let me know, they were concerned to forwarn me of the ill
Cons^quences of my following such a Course of Business as I had done; for by
this Time I had bought and sold many Uncertainties, and (...) into the Law,
which I had no Reason to have done. I was so forward an Adver^^^ (...) that not
only many of this C^un^y (...) to me, and I to them, but als^ (...), from
several Parts of this Government, and some from other adjacent Governments,
came to me to truck, traffic, buy and sell, with me, in very uncert^in Affairs
and Business, some of which went hard on my Side, I loosing large Sums of
Money; ye^ for the most Part I got the better of those with whom I ventured.

I got Money by large Sums; for my Dealings were not much in Trifles, but in
Houses, Lands, Mills, and chiefly Things of great Consquence. Though I also
bo^ght some Tracts of Land fairly, and dividing them, sold them fairly, and
gained considerable Money by such fair Dealings; and I gained Money by several
Projects and Contrivances. I had a Way to get Money, yet I had not a Faculty to
keep it; I got large Sums from Rich Men, that were more wise and honest than my
self, and Fools some Times got it from me again; I sometimes thought there was
a just Judgment upon me, for this Business I followed; for though I got large
Sums of Money, and great Bargains, and had Money very plenty at Times, yet
sometimes I wanted Money very much, so that I hired 12 or 15 Hundred Pounds,
and for several Years I gained above 500 Pounds a Year, and one Year I gained
upwards of 900 Pounds; I have begun finished and ended some Bargains in six
Weeks Time, whereby I have gained 540 Pounds clear Profit to my self, by buying
and selling of Land, and the Money paid me in Cash, I can give an Account when,
where and how I gained Thous^nds of Pounds, though I d^d no^ keep it, and I
used to employ Numbers of Men to work, and carry on my Proj^ct^, some hit, and
some missed my Interest.

This my going on in a wrong Way and Business much grieved many of my religious
Friends, who saw that I was grown more careless concerning Religion and Virtue
than I had been; whereupon several of the Elders again dealt with me, by
ensuring me for my uncommon Proceedings, and running of Ventures in Hazards not
much better than Gaming. They read to me the Advice and Counsel of the yearly
Meeting of London, and others of Friends Orders and Discipline; wherein it is
set forth and declared, That those in Unity with that Church may not cheat the
King by turning of Goods, nor act deceivably with any of his Su^jects; and they
knowing I was g^t into a st^ange Sort of juggling Business, t^o much like that
of the Sou^^-Sea-Stock. Some of them were for denying me, except I would adhere
to their Couns^l; others advised to the contrary; for though some of my
Business was wrong, yet they said, That I was a good Commonwealth's Man, for I
had bought and sold a great Deal very fa^rly, and employed many Men, whom I
generally paid very punctually, so that my Wo^d would pass for Hundreds of
Pounds, as ready Money. They theref^re advised me to d^sist some Part of my
Business, such as they thought unfair, and endeavored to enforce their
Arguments against me. I Answered them with my Reasons, and went on still with
my Notions and Business according to my own Humor, some of which was partly
mathematical (though I wanted Learning) yet I got considerable Moneys by
something of that Kind; I thought I saw f^r into Things of that Nature, and
under^ook and employed many Hands, in b^^lding and rebuilding several Stocks of
Mills, and for my projecting had several Sums of Money.

As I had made many uncertain Bargains, of many other Kinds, so I have some
uncertain Bargains concerning Mills; one of which I will relate something of in
particular, by which you may partly judge of others. The Case was thus.

I met with some Merchants at New York, solid honest Men, and they
understanding I was rekoned somewhat acute or famous for projecting or building
of Mills; and knowing I had a Stream which might serve to set a Stock of Mills
on, they viewed the Place, and found that at best it would afford but a low
Head of Water. They wanted Mills, and as there had been a Mill built on the
Place before, by a noted Mill-Wright, which Mill could never grind so much as 5
Bushels an Hour of good Meal; these Merchants thought it impossible for me to
build Mills there to grind above 6 Bushels an Hour of good bolting Meal 6 Hours
in one Tide; yet I Proposed to build Mills on the said Place to great
Perfection and Performance. In the Conclusion we agreed, and made the Price
according to what they should grind for 6 Hours together, in an Hour, for that
was to be the Trial. But though those Men knew, and (...) their common Business
well, yet they d^d not know, nor believe, that I was capable of making any
great Performance with M^lls in that Place; but I knew it, and therefore I was
the more guilty of overr^^e^^ng, them. However, we agreed and went on, I was to
build the Mills, and they were to have them at a Price according to the Wheat
they could grind in 6 Hours, in one (...); though we made several Barg^^ns
b^f^re we settled fully the Agreement how the Trial should be made and Price
compu^^d, and at last agreed, That only the little Pair of Stones should grind
on the Tr^^l, and determine the Perfection of the Mills* and the Price thereof,
by grinding good Bolting Meal on that Trial. I had a great M^nd to have got
their Consent, to have made the said Trial with the great Pair of Stones, which
was 5 Feet broad, and the lesser but 4 Feet and 7 Inches; for after the M^lls
were finished, and both Pairs of Stones proved by grinding. I offered to drop
164 Pounds the Price of the Mills* if they would consent that the Trial should
be made with the great Pair of Stones, but they refused that. A Day was
appointed to (...) in, and we, and two of our three Jud^es appeared there to
see this Trial; now this Trial was difficult, because in th^s Province of New
York Wheat and Flower are suppos^d to be the greatest Articl^s of Produce we
have, and Mills being exce^ding Plenty and wanting Custom a great deal of their
Time, so the Millers or owners of Mills have been very nice and careful to
grind for the Bolters in the exact^st Manner the very best of Bolting Meal to
gain Custom; which consists of grinding.

1stly. A broad Bran, and it will not do if it be cut short or fine.

2dly. The Bran must be thin and light.

3dly. The Meal must be Cool or at most but about Blood-Warm.

4thly. The Meal must not be over much smothered in the Mill, but be Ground
light and lively; and such, and none but such, could justly Answer this Trial.

We then got ready for said Trial, and and after the Stones had ground a little
while, and seemed to be well settled in their Motion, and came to make good
Boulting Meal to the unanimous Satisfaction of said Judges; then I began to
grind measured Wheat, and went on the Trial; the other Party, viz. the
Merchants at same Time had got a noted Miller to grind with the great Stones
while I was grinding on the Trial. The said Miller ground very carefully to
make the very best of Bolting Meal for an Example for me to follow; he dressed
his Stones his own Way, and ground but slowly, about 4 or 5 Bushels an Hour,
and made choice Meal; but I let my Mill go apace, and kept her constantly to
good Bolting Meal also, to the Satisfaction of the Judges: The first Hour I
ground upwards of 16 Bushels of Wheat, and after that I ground near 18 Bushels
an Hour; and so on until the Mills were shut down; grinding as fast and well
to the end as at any Time at all. There happened to be a Bolter there that was
on the Merchants Party; a great Friend of theirs, though not concerned in the
Trial, who called out to the Judges when I was grind^ng and told them that my
Meal was not good Bolting Meal; and that I ought to grind on this Trial such
Meal as the other Miller did grind. N^w it is to be observed, that Capt.
William Walton, Merchant, now living in New York, was one of our said chosen
Judges, and then pr^sent at the Try^l; and as the said Walton has several
Mills of his own, and buys and Ships off more Flower by far than any other
Merchant in this Province; therefore his Care and great experience had
sufficiently improved his Skill in the b^st of Meal for Bolting: He the said
Walton therefore undertook to try the Skill of that Bolter which the M^rchants
had there; Capt. Walton took some of my Meal ground so very fast* and of the
other Mill^r's ground so very careful, and kept the Meals apart, and then
ask^d the Bolter to see if he could find the difference; the said B^lter said
the difference was easily known, for that the one was good and the other not;
but he chose (...) for the good, and declared the other Miller's not so good,
but our Judges agreed that mine was right good.

Indeed I had a Mind to have brought the said little pair Stones to have ground
20 Bushels an Hour on the Trial, but the Judges persuaded me that I ground fast
enough, though it was remarkable that my Meal was not nigh so warm as the other
Miller's was, notwithstanding the Mills were set to Work together, and went
equal as to Time, and though I ground at the ra^e aforesaid; yet my Meal was
delivered so cool, light and lively with a clean Bran, when she went* that the
said Judges all along feeling of the Meal, admired it to the last. And I have
heard them since say; that they b^lieved I would have br^ught the g^inding to
20 Bushels an Hour, if they had not in the Trial perswad^d me to the contrary.

I would not have been so particular in relating this Matter, but that several
Persons some of whom saw this Trial performed* and are now living; have urg^d
me to publish the said Trial to the World as an Advertisement to excite those
that are concerned in Mills, to endeavor to come to a greater Perfection in
grinding than is usually performed: For perhaps it may cause some who have
Money to spare, to amend the Regulations of their Mills to their Advantage (but
I advise such as have not Money plenty, that they be content just to keep their
old Mills in repair) but now though those Mills did grind to exceed (as it is
Thought) any in America; and that the like Pr^sident cannot be shown by
grinding: Ye^ they came to an unreasonable P^ice, nigh two Thousand Pounds more
(...) they were really Worth: I was Guilty of thi^ I ^^osition on these Men,
because I knew most (...) these Affairs; for it was not under th^^r N^ti^e*
what a Performance I could make; I believe they wanted Mills, and were willing
to give a good honest Price for them; but I wanted an Advantage, and I knew
when they put their Hands to the Se^ls of the Bonds and Covenants, that they
had brought themselves into a Preminery. This I do declare to my own Shame, and
have sin^^rely thought, that I have found as much Guilt and Condemnation within
my self for this T^ing as ever I found for any Deed that ^ver I did in the
course of all my Life and Business, because this was done with a premeditated
Design; for if I should kill a Man, or an hundred Men without a design of so
doing I might be free from the weight of that Guilt for killing those Men.

However these Merchants, after they saw themselves caught, made a vigorous
Defense against paying so much Money, and their Lawyers found fault with our
Bonds and Articles of Agreement; I Sued them, and though I seemed too hard for
them in the Law, yet they found means to avoid the Payment of the Money, until
partly by Arbitrations and partly by consent of Parties, a great Part, or all
of the extravagant Price was dropp^d, and they finally paid me 975 Pounds and
Court Charges. As for their Opposition and D^fence against my unreasonable
Demand* I think they were to be commended, notwithstanding 6 Months after the
Barga^n was made, and I threatened them with g^tting a very great Price, yet
they approved of it so far as to give out a Request under their Hands and
Seals, desiring me to bring the Mills to as great a Price by grinding as was
possible, and they would like them the better, which made some justify my
Proceedings with them in the Law.

Now sometimes Men have come to me with a design to over reach me in Bargains,
knowing that I was very bold and apt to venture, and if such should happen to
be bitt as we call it, I did not pity them so much; many such I have met with,
some of which went away with Loss, and others with Gain and Triumph; and thus I
have stood many Chances. But when I found I had overdone honest Men it has
made me heartily sorry for them; and in such Cases I have given back many
hundreds of Pounds, and can tell when, and to whom I have so given back; for
sometimes I had plenty of Money, and at other Times I wanted: But at length I
was got much in Debt, for Providence seemed to Work against me, though I got some
thousands of Pounds from Wise Men, yet Fools got it from me; which sometimes I
wondered at, as the Egyptians wondered at their Chariot Wheels. Notwithstanding,
I took Courage again and again, and obtained several Prizes, or undertakings of
Profit, and as often met with some Business or Project that would draw away my
Money: I bought several Tracts and Shares of Lands, which I could not well sell
again to my Mind, and spent considerable Moneys in digging of Mines, which was
all lost in this last sort of Business, I often had Occasion to Travel to
New England, and by enquiring there amongst their Traders, I found by their
Invoices and Bills of Parcels made at Boston, that many Sorts of Goods
especially Land Goods were considerably cheaper at York, than they were at
Boston, I also observed that barrelled Pork, Wheat and Flax-Seed, were much
cheaper in Connecticut Government than at York, at that Time, considering the
difference of the Money's; and observing that some of the Traders in
New England, sold many Things to the Inhabitants extreme dear, I thought some
of them used great Extortion in Dealing so with the People; and that I could
Use them much better, and perhaps mend thereby my decaying circumstances. So I
ventured to begin to Trade from York to New England; I took some hundred Pounds
worth of Goods in York, and sold them in New England for advance, and likewise
got good Returns for York; I advanced on Pork Twelve Shillings per Barrel, on
Wheat thirteen pence, and on Flax-Seed sixteen pence per Bushel. And though then
I sold Goods cheap, the Returns made out Profit enough, and this Succe^^
encour^ged me to go largely the second Year; now the natural Courage, and
boldness of my Temper commonly used to lead me to Extremes, and now I wanted
Money, so I ventured to set u^ several Stores in New England, and when it came
to be generally known in York that I kept Stores in New England, the Merchants
in York were very fond of my Custom; one would call me into this Store, and
another into another, so that I have been called into 4 or 5 in going about 40
or 50 Rod; then they would show me their good Pennyworths, some again would
take me by the Hand, others by the Coat, some claiming old acquaintance, and
offering me Credit, both Jews and Gentiles; and by such means I was prevailed
on t^ke great Quantities of Goods, where I intended to have taken less: There
were several likewise in New England who encouraged me, telling me, that they
could by trading turn several Thousand Pounds worth of Goods into profitable
Reurns for New York in a Year. Now as I said, being got out of Business and
into Debt; and being both ambitious and ^oth to break of Business, and
considering that several Times by bold and uncommon Enterprises, (which I
thought more unlikely to hit than this) and yet some of them had taken
wonderful Turns in my Favor, to the amending my circumstances. I now
concluded to go on with great Business of this Kind, and therefore set up
Stores in several Places in New England; giving Orders to my Store-Keepers to
sell cheap, considerably cheaper than other traders did; though to the best of my
Understanding, I ordered every Thing we sold, to be sold for more than what
they cost me; and I hoped to make some Profit by Returns to York, and by my
underselling others I thought to have drawn a vast Custom in the several Parts
in which I traded: I was of Opinion that very small Gains in a large Trade,
would have made all Answer; for as I employed several Factors in different
Towns and Places, so I thought every one had his Business in selling the Goods,
and taking in suitable Returns for New York; and I likewise concluded if a Man
could get Profit by Trading in one Place o^ Town, so I might get more Profit by
many Factors in several Towns; and that I might receive the Eff^cts of the
Country, delivered on Vessels for York, and so went on Trading in several
Places.

But as I was much in Debt before I entered into this precarious Business of so
large Trading; several of those I owed Money to began to think I was got into a
more dangerous strain by trading in New England, than the Business I was in
before; some of them therefore pressed hard on me for their Moneys, wherefore I
was forced to pay Moneys to some, and to secure others; yet still I encouraged
myself I should do great Matters, by trading in very great Quantities of Goods;
and by making profitable Returns to York: But in this I was deceived; for though
some of my Factors were careful, yet others got confused in their Accounts,
and made great mistakes, I myself was but a poor Writer, and did not understand
such Affairs, neither was I so careful as I should have been, but trusted too
much to others.

Toward the latter end of February 1737-8, I being at New Haven s^lling Goods
and taking in Effects for New York, I was taken Sick with a sort of a Pleurisy,
the News of which quickly got to York amongst my Creditors, and was as quickly
followed by the News of my Death.

The Merchants hearing I was Dead, got into a great stir and care how they
should get their Money; and making enquiry one among another, they found my
Debts large and many; and although they were informed by my Letters to them, that
I had been Sick b^t was Recovering, and intended to come home in a little Time;
yet they were got in^o such a stir and strife who should get their Moneys
first, that at my coming home, I heard that several of them had ordered Writs
out against me, thinking (I suppose) I might lay down Money, or secure the
first that Arrested me: This I heard was their contrivance, though it was for
Money not then due by several Months; for it is to be understood that I took
the Goods at diverse Times of Payment. viz. some at 2 Months, some at 3, some at
6, some at 9, and the most at 12 Months Credit. The Reason was, there were
several that let me have Goods on a short Credit, at what they called ready
Money Price* and when I thought I could Answer short Payments, I had the Goods
the cheaper, and by this Time had paid all the Merchants for the Goods I had
the first Year, though indeed it was inconsiderable to what I had taken this
second Year; I had also answered very punctually in paying for those Goods I
had taken on a short Credit.

Most of my great Debts were not yet become due, and all that were then due,
and unpaid, I had Money in my Hands, and Eff^cts on board a Vessel then bound
for York to Pay, and some Hundreds of Pounds more. But however, as I said, the
Merchants were got into stir and strife who should get their Moneys first, though
it was not yet due, the Times of Payment according to our Agreement when I took
the Goods not being yet come, but I had nothing to show for that from under
their Hands.

As I had been a Man of much Business, and had Business with great Numbers of
People, so I had many hearty Friends, and some back door Friends (as we call
them) for I have heard that some of them at that Time went to my Creditors, and
informed them that had a large Sea Sloop nigh sitted for the Sea, and that in
all Probability, I would take my Wife, Child, Goods and Money, and go off to
some foreign Part of the World. Some of my Creditors were afraid that these
Reports were likely to be true; others would not believe any Thing of it; and I
have heard that there was a strife amongst them, some being for falling on and
Suing me for the Money, others were of the Mind, it would be a great hardship
to serve a Man so. By this Time I was come home to my House at Mamaroneck, from
New England, and then heard more of these Tumults and Discontents amongst the
Merchants, my Creditors at York; and that some of them had taken out Writs
against me for the Mon^es as aforesoid. I therefore shut my Doors, and
dispatched a messenger directly to my Creditors, and thereby acquainted them;
that I had heard of their uneasiness concerning the Goods I had had of them,
and that I understood there were some Writs out against me, that I had shut my
Doors against such Writs, and could not stand such a Storm as was risen
aagainst me; but since it had happened thus, I knew I could not go on with
Business, that my Circumstances were but mean, if therefore they would choose a
Committee, I would deliver all I had into their Hands, for the Use or Security
of my Creditors in general, on a Settlement; for that I intended to do them all
the Justice that was in my Power; upon their receiving this Letter, I heard
they had a Meeting, and some Time after there came two of them to tr^a^ with me
in behalf of themselves and others (it being 25 Miles from York to my House) I
opened the Doors to them, and they came in; and discoursed with me concerning
the subject Matters. I told them, I was sorry my Circumstances were no better,
though I thought I could Answer all my Debts very well; and have considerable
left to live on, by selling my Lands and other Estate: But that there were
several claimed my Lands, who I thought had no lawful Right thereto, niether
in Law nor Equity, if it were tried.

However it spoiled the sale of them to a great Degree, and unless I could sell
my Lands well, I should fall much short in paying* of my Creditors; I was
sincere (I told them) in the Matter, and would secure them in the best manner I
could; and that no one Thing which was in my Power should be wanting; for they
might take the Goods which were yet unsold, and the outstanding Debts, and all
I had should be made over to them for the Use of my Creditors in general, upon
a Settlement (as I said before) that this was all I could do, if I had ever so
much less than would Answer my Debts.

We had much Discourse concerning the Premises, and drinking Tea together,
they seemed very friendly, and in conclusion told me this: That what I offered
them, was all that my Creditors could now expect of me; though they were sorry
that my Lands were claimed by others, and my Circumstances so mean; but however
they concluded to go to York, and inform my Creditors of the state of Things,
and get Power from them to make a Settlement if they consented* as they doubted
not but they would; and accordingly they went for New York, to return within a
few Days, and accordingly returned; but brought Writts and took me Prisoner
about the beginning of April, Anno 1738; others likewise by their Orders brought
more Writts against me, until I was Arrested for about Eight Thousand Pounds
New York Currency: And I knew many more Writts might come against me still, and
now they in Company had agreed to stand and sell together, and and all that
they should receive, should be divided according, and in Proportion to what
each Creditor had due to him; so they brought me to Westchester, and delivered
me up to the high Sheriff Isaac Willet; who, as some thought would have
committed me to close Goal. I being now in his Care, it may not be amiss to
mention the usage that Prisoners now have, and heretofore have had under the
several preceding high Sherriffs of this County, which has been thus. When
they have Arrested such Prisoners that could not get Bail because of the
largeness of their Debts, yet if they were such as the Sherriff dare to confide
in, he let them have the Liberty of the County, until the Debt or Debts have
been ripened to Execution; and then such trusty Prisoners have come, and
delivered themselves to Goal, and such have had the best of the Rooms within
the Verge and Court of the Prison House, which is sufficiently commodious and
comfortable for Debtors, when at the same Time those that cannot be trusted,
are shut up in a close Room, or Rooms with Bolts, Bars and Locks, but
notwithstanding my Debts were so very large and many. Yet Providence so ordered
it, that I have had the same Favors with the said Officer, as has been
usually granted to the most trusty Prisoners; for which some have given out in
Spe^ches, as though I had given the Sherriff some great Sum or Sums of Money, for
those Liberty's which I enjoyed under him; and for the Resque that he runs of
his Fortune on my Account (though it be so considerable that there are very few
in these Parts that has the like Estate) but I do assure you, and positively
Declare; that though he does run said Resque, if I should have proved untrue to
him, would have proved of very bad consequence and have been very fatal to him.
Yet he has never asked me, nor recieved from me the Value of One Shilling,
neither directly nor indirectly, on any such Account; and I can truly say, I
was never under the least Temptation to be untrue to him; so Providence I
concieve, has directed him to believe the verity of my Heart, and he is
altogether easy as to the Trust and Confidence he puts in me: Yet I understand
it to be the Mind of the said present Sherriff, that he would not give such
Liberties to any Persons, that thereby would contrive to make their lives
comfortable, and heep their Creditors out of their just Dues, when it was in
their Power to do otherwise; but that he would Confine such in close Rooms,
under Bolts and Locks, that thereby they might become willing to do their
Creditors Justice to the utmost of their Power, as he is fully satisfied I am
willing to do. For that is the design of the Law (says he) that thereby Men
should be compelled to do Justice to each other; and again he understands, it
is not the design and intent of the Law, that Mankind should Torment one
another, and distress them into Misery, when the afflicted, though Debtors,
cannot do any good thereby to their Creditors.

But now, several Men claim my Lands and Improvements since this my
Confinement, though I am persuaded they have no lawful Right thereto, and I being
under disadvantage, Things must even take their course, for now they well know,
I am not able to make the defense I once could have done; and my misfortune is
to have powerful Men to make defense against in these Times, so now though I
have several Lands, yet I cannot sell them for one third Part so much, as I was
offered for them before; I see in these Troubles, and one Reason may be this; I
was formerly reckoned somewhat Powerful in defense of Lands, I remember it was
but a very few Years since, that there were several considerable Men of this
Province; as our present Chief Justice, and others, they applied to me to asist
them in defense of some of their Lands, against those that did contend in the
Law, to take them away, and I having a small share in the same Patent, and
fully believing we had right on our Side, I undertook the burden of the
several Causes then depending; and we being victorious in all the said Causes,
they the said Company allowed me above Six Hundred Pounds worth of Lands for my
Service that Year; though now the Case much differs, and I must comply with these
present Times, for though I have had considerable Sums of Money for my Advice and
Undertakings concerning Lands, Mills and other Inventions, which Moneys I got
easily, and like the fate of Mall-Projectors, laid them out again foolishly in
Projects, some of which was reckoned accute, and proved Profitable; yet others
miscarried to my great Loss, as it has often been said, That though I have had a
Faculty to get Money, yet I may say, I never learnt the Art to keep it. I was
always allowed to be a Sober Man, and so moderate on the account of strong
Drink, that there was scarce one in a hundred like me, and because I did not
keep Company, and spend my Money in strong Liquor, some and especially one
Person gave out, that I must needs have spent Money in private Whoring;
otherwise I could not have parted with so much as had gone through my Hands,
etc. In Answer to which I do solemnly say and declare it for the Truth, and the
Truth; That I only never spent one Penny of Money in that Way, but that I never
committed the Act of Whoring, or Fornication in any Time even to this Day, in
my Life, though I lived unmarried until the 36th Year of my Age.

But to go on, my Accounts concerning Merchandise and Store-keeping in
New England, was poorly and carelessly kept by some that had sold Goods for me,
and I did not keep the state of them Affairs as I ought to have done my self,
so that Things now lay unsettled and in great Confusion, and my Creditors also
had sent into New England, siezed the Goods in several of my Stores, for so it
is admitted by the Law of that Government; and some of them Store-Keepers since
refuse to render me an Account of the Goods to this Day, for say they the Goods
was siezed and taken from us, and we know not the Value of them so taken; so it
seemed to me that all these Things worked together to make my Circumstances
more dark and desperate than otherwise they would have been; and upon the whole
state of Things I apprehended that there would be exceeding Losses fall on my
Creditors, notwithstanding all that I then could possible do for them; I was
really grieved that I should become the Cause of great Losses and Damage to so
many as I was concerned with, and owed Money to; I was convinced I was
certainly wrong and out of the way, for entering into this, and other
Businesses, that did not belong to me, nor I to that, for I was not capable of
such Business, therefore the pressure that by Times has lain on my, Mind on
that account, was very great, but as to my own Disappointment and loss of
Credit and Business I did not so much Matter (though that I had some Place in my
Mind also) for I can easily comply with a low and mean way of living: And I
believe had I been sentenced and confined; that I should never have enjoyed,
and have any higher fare than Bread and Water to the Day of my Death; that that
would not so much have afflicted me as the abovesaid has done; but however I
cannot Mourn for ever, but must submit to what I cannot amend, and so take
Things and Times as they are, and not as they are not to be had; it is now in
vain for me to strive to bring back the Things that are past and gone, though
they were as grievous as Death itself, so I endeavored therefore in the midst
of these my Troubles, to give up my Mind to Solitude, Meditation, Recollection
and Lamentation in the Fields, in the Woods, by the Hills, Brooks and Rivers of
Waters, and I found a great deal of Comfort some Times in these Retirements,
for I found I was frustrated and disappointed in all Business and Undertakings,
and brought down as it were to the Dust, if I ever had been reckoned somewhat
accute, or witty, it was now all turned into manifest Folly, if ever I had been
a little apt or ingenious in Projections and getting Money, it was now all lost
and come to nothing, my folly manifested to the World, and I left a despisable
Creature upon the Earth; and I was destitute of those religious Influences and
Comforts which I wanted to stay my Mind; and I said where shall I go to take up
a Lamentation, or find a sit Place to give my Heart Mourning, and I said, are
not these Hills and Mountains happier than I am, how sweetly does the Fields
and Valleys recieve the heat and Comfort of the Sun, and send forth the Grass
and Fruits most pleasantly, they seem to be in a sweet Temper and Habit, and no
Troubles affects them; the Hills and the Earth were in Unity together, and the
Waters of the Brooks and Rivers passed along freely without Sorrow, the prudent
Bees were gathering Honey and the Birds did Chirrup and Sing, and the ^attle
and Sheep did eat the pleasant Herbs of the Fields and Woods, and lay down and
rested quietly; and I could not find any Creature that was affected with Sorrow
like my Sorrow; I thought I was distressed and forsaken by all the Comforts of
the World, and left to Lament and Mourn alone; the Hills and the Mountains did
not join with me in Lamentation, the Brooks and streams of Waters run from me,
and would not stay, and take any Part of my Grief; If I looked on the Waves of
the Sea, they moved without Care or Pain, the Grass and Trees were made glad by
the Pleasant Showers; and I said Woe is me because I am more miserable than all
Creatures, and above all my Conscience oppressed for so many Misdeeds; but I
endeavored to hide my Grief from all Men, and imparted not my Trouble to any
living Creature; for I thought it most just that I should bear these my
Afflictions alone, because I had unnessessarily plunged my self into these
Things, that had brought these my Troubles on me without taking the Advice of
those, that would gladly have restrained me from these multiplicities of
Business, that I so engaged in: And so I traveled in this deep dark Valley of
Afflictions; the Waters thereof were as Wormwood and Gaul, and those that have
not been there and Drank of tkem cannot judge of the bitterness thereof; and in
this Depth of Darkness, I remembered the saying of David, that when his Father
and his Mother had forsaken him, then was he found; and even in this Time of
great forsaking, I yet found some Comfort that sustained me, and at Times
raised my Countenance above all Trouble; but again and again I was apt to be
overwhelmed; and now about the last of May following the yearly Meeting on
Long Island; remembering that I formerly had refused to take their Council, but
had acted contrary thereto, and had run into Business, some of which was unfit
for me to meddel with; it is like n^w some of them wished that they heretofore
had published their Sentiments against me by a Denial; except I had returned
and kept within bounds, for it was supposed, that I was like to hurt my
Creditors, and the Meeting thought it Time to clear themselves of me; and
although I not had taken their Council, yet it was pretty hard for them to fix
any great Matter on me, for that it has been acknowledged by those, who were
called my Enemies, that in my common and smaller Affairs, I had dealt very
uprightly, made my Agreements fairly* and Paid my Money punctually; which
dealings came to about 8, 10, or 12 Hundred a Year, and by me was performed to
as great and general Satisfaction to the People, as any Man that ever dealt in
the County; and now some could have said a great deal in my Favor, toward
justifying most Things that ever I had done; yet others condemned me very much,
but now the Meetings had one particular Thing against me, sufficient to judge
me, except I would have answered for my self, which I was not then disposed to
do, neither by Word nor writing, and that was this.

Several Months before this Time there was another man, belonging to the
Monthly Meeting in this County; and he and I had some Difference, which was
refered and traversed until I was ordered to pay him about One Hundred Pounds,
which I had not done, for that I thought I had sufficient Reasons, to object
against the said Payment, for that I had other Accounts against him unsettled,
and the judges between him and I give it as their Opinion that I might bring in
them afterward, his being on Bond, and mine but accounts. But now as I had not
complied to the said Order and Payment, they on this Occasion, the said Yearly
meeting denied me, when I heard first of it, I Received the News with Patience,
believing it was just (though not so much on the Account, of this Money) as for
the offenses before given; now as to such as did perform this my denial,
sincerely and religiously being concerned to clear their own Consciences, the
Church from Scandal, and themselves from me, that refused to take their counsel
as aforesaid I must believe so far they did well: and all good People may have
good Unity therewith, but as most Churches have some of them; of a different
design or Temper in Mind, so there might possible be here some such; and if
there were any here that drove on or endeavored to drive on my said Denial, on
Account of any ill will to me, and not in love to the truth, and a Right Zeal
for the Church, they were (I thought too much like unto Flesh-Flies, that
deligh^ ^o dwell on the bruises and wounds of other Creatures, making them
worse, but consider not their own Imperfections, nor the Meaness of their own
kind.

Though I do believe that all those that know the whole Orders and Discipline of
those called, Quakers (may say without Reflections or Flattery, that their
Church Government is the best in all Christendom) and that their Poor, the
Widow and Fatherless is better provided for, and differances settled without
Law-Suites. Whereby Peace and Unity is irreserved in a more Christian like
Manner, then it is in or among any other Church or People. But yet some Times
their falls out Mistakes, and Things are by some missmanaged, but that is not
to be laid to the Charge of those that are innocent.

And I received the News of my being denied by the Meeting with Patience; though
afterward, I had it in my Mind, to expose the Man I was ordered to pay the
said Moneys to with several Things I had to lay to his Charge; and also the
Proceedings against me in that Case, when he and I differed, and how I came to
be ordered to pay him Money while our other Accounts was unsettled, but this I
found to be a Temptation and not my business, so desisted: And in August
following there was great preparation for Choosing an Assembly-Man for this
County in the Room of Governor Morris, who was then removed to his Government
in New-Iersey, and there were several put up for it, and a great Division in
the County in this affair, and there were some considerable Men came to me from
several parts of the Country; some of both Parties, though the most of one, and
they told me that the Minds of the People in general were more toward me than
any other Person in the County; for they said I had been a good Common Wealth's
Man, and had brought into and disbursed more Money in the County than any one
born in it had ever done before; and therefore if I would serve, they did not
Doubt of my being Chosen, for that many of both parties would fall in, with me,
and all this Time it was generally thought that my Creditors had used me with
Severity. And it was said they were Rich Men, and did not want Money, and if I
should serve in this post, I could not then be kept a Prisoner by them; but I
acknowledge their Love and good will toward me: And said, as I had not managed
well for my self it would not be for the Credit of the County that I should
Represent them, in that Station; And I had other Reason for which I could not
Serve if Chosen; so there was another Chosen the time passed, until about the
last of October. Anno: 1738 and then I had an Execution served on me, in
Consequence of which I came to this Place, and so have continued under this
roof from that time, until this Day; it being the 30 th of April Anno 1740,
and I am now 47 Years and one Month old, as to my living here I have no Reason
to complain, as to my diet, I live temperately, eat sparingly; And since I have
been here, and for many Years before, have chiefly drank Water, and at some
Times Small-Beer, as to Rum I want none, and as to Wine I don't drink a pint in
three Months; I now generally Work part of every Day, following some small
timber Business, by which I earn some Money, more than any ever earned here
before; the other Part of the Day I can Read, Converse with my Friends, and
recollect the past times, generally ever since I came here, I have taken
something of the care of the close Prisoners, both of the Debtors, Criminals
and Condemned; all which have been kept with safety, though before I came,
Prison^rs us^d sometimes to break out, as to thos^ Debtors that are kept close,
I generally find them some Work, or Employment, whereby they can earn their
Provisions, and live tolerable Comfortable, without being chargeable either to
me or the Public; whereas they used to live by begging, and some times almost
starved, they now wish and pray, that I may continue long here, for their said
help and comfort; But I wish I could do better for my Creditors than I am able
to do, I have let that Company, viz. my Creditors have considerable Money, and
Eff^cts since they have confined me, that I could have kept from the^; for
which some People blame me, because I always have stood ready, and have offered
my Creditors to deliver all I had to them, in the best Manner I could, as
before related, if they would have accepted of it on a Settlement; but they
have not accepted, and I am now ready to do the same, without the least Deceit
or Evasion if they would, and more I cannot do, and so I must rest it; though I
hear most of them consent to accept. I have no Blame to lay to their Charge, I
believe they proceeded against me as they did, believing that it would have
proved most to their Profit and Safety; yet I conceive their so proceeding has
made Things abundantly more dark and difficult than they would have been, and
it is not in my Power now to mend it, for my Business lies in a poor unsettled
manner in New England to this Day, and I cannot get any perfect Account from
several there that I am concerned with, who had the Goods in Possession, which
were seized since my Confinement; and on the whole I cannot see but there will
be great Losses to my Creditors, but how much I cannot yet tell, for which I am
really sorry from my Heart.

For my own Part, I do not much regard all that has or is like to fall on me,
for I am fully persuaded, that I never have received any Wrong by any Man, nor
by any Creature whatsoever, and am satisfied, That that Affliction,
Contradiction and Punishments which I have met with, are all of them not only
just, but more abundantly I have deserved: And think that if Providence had not
raised up, and brought on me all these Troubles that ever I have met with; I
might have looked upon Providence itself to have been unjust to me, and although
it may be, I have met with as many Troubles and Disappointments, as most Men
have done in a common or low Station of Life; yet I can truly say, I have no
more Resentments lodged with me on that Account, than a Child or a Servant that
well knows he justly deserves for his Misdeeds, many heavy Stripes, and inste^d
of his recieving them all, he recieved a few, and they but light; for this
Reason I take all these Things as light and easy Burdens.

As to myself, the Ease, Satisfaction and Content thereof, no Man on Earth can
judge, except he feel something of the same Temper of Mind, and just so long as
we are hating and resisting the Chastisements and Troubles that Providence
brings on us for our Misdeeds, just so far and so long we are overwhelmed in
Vexation and Bitterness of Mind, having no quiet or Place in ourselves; and
thus we are often entrapped in the Plague and Torment of Discontent, until we
give up to a resigned Mind; considering that all our Afflictions are most just,
and come from the Head of the Just; and that they would certainly be for our
Good, Content and Comfort, if we by the help of Grace, would make a right
Application thereof.

And now, if any would enquire further, how I can account for these
Miscarriages and Miscomputations, which I have made; and being brought up but a
Plowman, how I came to run into such a multiplicity of Business and Inventions
that did not properly belong to me, it being beyond my proper Sphere? I answer
and say, It was of Covetousness in a great Measure, that thus led me out of the
Way; for that I had a Mind to get Money, and then let my Mind out to seek after
many Inventions to satisfy this my inordinate Desire, some of which was
commendable, and others not good; and so I entered into may Undertakings, which
in the End has not only been a Hurt to me, but to my said Creditors also, as
may be observed by what has gone before.

Although we see that many Men have erred in Undertakings that did not properly
belong to them, or have reached or strove to reach after those Things which
they could not fathom, whereby they have hurt themselves and others to a very
great Degree; yet, I cannot justify my self in these Things which I have done.

We see Mankind are failable Creatures even from the Kings to the B^^gars, they
have mightily fallen short of their Purposes, some more and some less, as may
be seen by those that are a little acquainted with History; they may s^e
Mistakes made by some of the greatest Men in England, as well as by some of the
lowest Degree, (...) many Lords, Dukes and Earls have followed their Schemes
and Projections, until they have not only lost thereby their great Lordships
and Estates, but enbrued their best Friends Hands in Blood and Destruction; and
have by their disappointed Schemes lost their own Heads also.

Now if those mighty Men or Eagles, could but Eagle's Height sore,
No Wonder that I a Wren, for a Wren could do no more.
And if we consider frail and conceited Men, and how they come down,
We shall see their Lives full of Misery and Disappointments, though they wore a
Crown;
So when I consider the World, the Pleasures, Profits, and its Ioys,
I have thought it but fit for foolish Children's Toys.
Where is that mighty Pompey, and Alexander the great?
Have they not ^^ft their Glory, and tumbled into the Den of Common Fate?
And if they have unhapily missed the Crown of Peace and Rest,
The Honest despised ^eggar is much the Best.
And when this i^ considered, and found to be the very Case,
Who will not be weary to strain, and run such a painful Race?
But now if (...), by the Help of Grace, the little Time we have to spend,
May lead such a Life, as neither God nor Man to offend;
And if we in this inoffensive Life by Grace can live and steer,
It will remove from us all other Troubles, Fear and Care.
And those that do this Method know, and sweet Life obtain,
Will find in it more Satisfaction and Comfort than in all this World's Gain:
For in this Life there is such Content, Felicity and Rest,
That those that it obtain, are very highly blessed.
And now coming toward Conclusion, I believe that there be many of my Friends
and Acquaintance that would be glad, to enquire of me, whether I can be content
in these Times of my Confinement. To which I Answer; there is several sorts of
Content, there is a Content proper to Beasts and Birds, but that is a low and
mean sort of Content. For although they of them that are strong, glory in their
Strength, and delight to ^a^e and devour the Prey, yet the Bear and Lion may be
bereaved of their Whelps, and also miss of their desired Prey, and meet with
Sickness and Anguish; and then all their Content is turned (...) Torments and
strong Pains; so also there is some sorts of Contents amongst Men of all Ranks
and Stations, high and low, which is too much like that of the Beasts, soon
ruffled into the utmost Confusion, and so all Content that is amongst Mankind,
is low, mean, and to be despised as not fit to be rested in; except it be only
which proceeds from a resigned Mind to the Will of divine Providence; and so
far the Minds of Men are reconciled and united to what ever the great wise
Order of Providence brings about. So far Mankind may Rest, in an undesturbed
Mind, and say from a true principle of Obebience; Thy Will be done, thy Kingdom
come.

But now I have been greatly affected, and troubled, that I should become an
Instrument to hurt others, either in their Minds or Estates; I have often most
sincerely Thought, that I could and would willingly suffer the Pains of many
Deaths, if it was possible thereby to take away the Damages and Offenses from
those with whom I have been concerned; but I find that what I cannot possibly
bring back must rest as it is.

But sure I am, that I cannot rest nor be Content in any other Temper of Mind,
than that I stand ready in singleness of Heart, to do the best for them all,
for the future that possible I can. And now I stand open and free to recieve
Council from them, and from all others that can advise me in all Things for the
best in this present Cas^, as also in all Things for the Time to come: And in
th^s Resolution and Disposition of Mind, I find that Content, that will not be
easily taken away. But concerning true Content and Religious Influences, I
would in Modesty and Meakness have shut my Mouth and held my Pen, because of
the Folly that I have been Guilty of, but it is thought a little of the Power
of resigned Mind and warmth of Love, that makes me bold to declare what is
Truth; and whosoever he be, that knows the Power of a full resigned Mind, well
knows, that it makes the Spirit of a Man bolder than a Lion, and stronger than
the Unicorn; the Weights of the Rocks and Hills cannot bear it down, the Flames
of Fire cannot consume it, nor the Seas drown it; they live in a Dominion, and
Sphere immencely above all created Things, and therefore cannot be bounded nor
comprehended by any, its Strength is only in the Cross of JESUS; and in being
resigned, it is found in the deep Valley of Humility, and as it was said by the
Darkness of Egypt, it was so great it might be felt, so this is a Light in
Opposition to that Darkness, and it never was, nor can be rightly known, only
but by being felt, and it is to be felt only in the in most Part, and whosoever
do so feel as to find it will see it to be that Grace and Truth that came by
JESUS; and it is like the Rod, in the Hand of Moses, when it is held up in the
Hand it will prevail; and by the Powers and Wonders wrought by it, we shall
overcome Pharoh, and be brought out of Egypt's bondage, and though a Sea of
Trouble should be before us, and Pharoh left behind, yet by virtue thereof,
Deliverance will be found through the Sea, and through the Wilderness, for it
drives back the Enemy and Temptations and Causes the Water to gush out of the
Rock of Consolation and Comfort to the Thirsty, and is a Deliverer to all th^^
fully give up to follow it in singleness of Heart, this Grace and a resigned
Mind is a pleasant Companion, it is sweeter than the Honey Comb, it will
sufficiently sweeten all the bitter Waters of this Life, surely this
Disposition of Mind will sweeten Death itself, though it was in the Flames of
Fire; that through Grace has come to a resigned Mind to the Will of Providence,
then, and never before then finds in themselves streams of Content that cannot
be stoped, though they be in Dungeons or Deserts. I have thought that it is like
a Spring that is opened in a deep Valley, at the foot of a Mountain, which
Stream flows freely, and it is neither the heat and Drouth of Summer, nor the
violence of Frost in the coldest Winter, that can stop that Spring from
running, it runs sweetly, and will it not run for ever more, though sometimes it
flows higher for a Time, and then declin's again; yet in its greatest
Declension, there is sweet Waters remaining in that Spring, and they that draw
at that Spring with all their Might, will find Water enough; for it is of such
a Nature, the more one draws thereof, the more plenty is that Water, until it
becomes Rivers to Swim in.

And it will float us above the Troubles of this unquiet World, where there is
felicity and an undesturbed Content, and then if the Sea should Roar, and
Tumults arise in the World, yet there remains a Sanctuary to those of a
resigned Mind. May we all so resign our own Wills to his Will, who rules in
wisdom now and ever more, is that which is heartily desired by,

Your Friend and Well Wisher. JOSIAH QVINBY.


