THE Necessity and Benefits OF Religious Society. A SERMON From ECCLES. iv. 9,
10, 11, 12. Two are better than One, etc. By the Reverend Mr. George
Whitefield, A.B.

BOSTON, Printed and Sold by G. (...) over against the South-East (...) House.
1740.

THE Necessity and Benefits OF RELIGIOUS SOCIETY.
ECCLES. vi. 9, 10, 11, 12. Two are better than One, because they have a good
Reward for their Labor. For if they fall, the One will lift up his Fellow: But
woe be to him that is alone when he falls; for he has not another to help
him up. Again, if Two lie together, then they have Heat; but how can one be
warm alone? And if One prevail against him, Two shall withstand him; and a
Threefold Cord is not quickly broken.


AMong the many Reasons assignable for the sad Decay of True Christianity,
perhaps the neglecting to assemble ourselves together, in Religious Societies,
may not be one of the least. That I may therefore do my Endeavor toward
promoting so excellent a Means of Piety, I have selected a Passage of Scripture
drawn from the Experience of the wisest of Men, which being a little enlarged
on and illustrated, will fully answer my present Design; that being to show, in
the best Manner I can, the Necessity and Benefits of Society in general, and of
Religious Society in particular.

Two are better than One, etc,

From which Words I shall take Occasion to prove,

First, The Truth of the Wise Man's Assertion, viz. Two are better than One,
and that in Reference to Society in general, and Religious Society in
particular.

Secondly, To assign some Reasons why Two are better than One, especially as to
the last Particular. 1. Because Men can raise up one another when they chance
to slip: For if they fall, the One will lift up his Fellow. 2. Because they can
impart Heat to each other: Again, if Two lie together, then they have Heat; but
how can One be warm alone? 3. Because they can secure each other from those
that do oppose them: And if One prevail against him, Two shall withstand him;
and a threefold Cord is not quickly broken. From hence,

Thirdly, I shall take Occasion to show the Duty incumbent on every Member of a
Religious Society.

Fourthly, and lastly, I shall draw an Inference or two from what shall have
been said; and then conclude with a Word or two of Exhortation from the whole.

First then, I am to prove the Truth of the Wise Man's Assertion, viz. that Two
are better than One, and that in Reference to Society in general, and Religious
Societies in particular.

And how can this be done better than by showing that it is absolutely
necessary for the Welfare both of the Bodies and Souls of Men? Indeed, if we
look upon Man as he came out of the Hands of his Maker, we imagine him to be
perfect, entire, lacking nothing. But GOD, whose Thoughts are not as our
Thoughts, saw something still wanting to make Adam happy. And what was that?
Why, an Help meet for him. For thus speaks the Scripture: And the LORD GOD
said, It is not good that the Man should be alone, I will make an Help meet for
him.

Observe, GOD said, It is not good, thereby implying that the Creation would
have been imperfect, in some sort, unless an Help was found out meet for Adam.
And if this was the Case of Man before the Fall; if an Help was meet for him in
a State of Perfection surely since the Fall, when we come naked and helpless
out of our Mother's Womb, when our Wants increase with our Years, and we can
scarcely subsist a Day without the mutual Assistance of each other, well may we
say, It is not good for Man to be alone.

Society then, we see, is absolutely necessary in respect to our bodily and
personal Wants. If we carry our View farther, and consider Mankind as divided
into different Cities, Countries, and Nations, the Necessity of it will appear
yet more evident. For how can Communities be kept up, or Commerce carried on,
without Society? Certainly not at all, since Providence seems wisely to have
assigned a particular Product to almost each particular Country, on Purpose, as
it were, to oblige us to be social; and has so admirably mingled the Parts of
the whole Body of Mankind together, that the Eye cannot say to the Hand, I have
no Need of thee, nor again, the Hand to the Foot, I have no Need of thee.

Many other Instances might be given of the Necessity of Society, in Reference
to our bodily, personal, and national Wants. But what are all these when
weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, in Comparison of the infinite greater
Need of it, with respect to the Soul? It was chiefly in regard to this better
Part, no doubt, that GOD said, It is not good for the Man to be alone. For, let
us suppose Adam to be as happy as may be, placed as the Lord of the Creation in
the Paradise of GOD, and spending all his Hours in adoring and praising the
blessed Author of his Being; yet as his Soul was the very Copy of the Divine
Nature, whose peculiar Property it is to be communicative, without the Divine
All Sufficiency, he could not be completely happy, because he was alone and
incommunicative, nor even content in Paradise for want of a Partner in his
Joys, GOD knew this, and therefore said, It is not good that the Man should be
alone, I will make a Help meet for him. And though this proved a fatal Means of
his falling; yet that was not owing to any natural Consequence of Society; but
partly to that cursed Apostate, who craftily lies in wait to deceive; partly to
Adam's own Folly, in rather choosing to be miserable with one he loved, than
trust in GOD to raise him up another Spouse.

If we reflect indeed on that familiar Intercourse our first Parents could
carry on with Heaven, in a State of Innocence, we shall be apt to think he had
as little Need of Society, as to his Soul, as before we supposed him to have,
in respect to his Body. But yet, as GOD and the Holy Angels were so far above
him on the one Hand, and the Beasts so far beneath him on the other, there was
nothing like having one to to converse with, who was Bone of his Bone, and
Flesh of his Flesh.

Man, then, could not be fully happy, we see even in Paradise, without a
Companion of his own Species, much less now he is driven out. For, let us view
him a little in his natural Estate now, since the Fall, as having his
Understanding darkened, his Mind alienated from the Life of GOD; as no more
able to see his Way wherein he should go, than a blind Man to describe the Sun:
That notwithstanding this, he must receive his Sight ever he can see GOD: And
that if he never sees him, he never can be happy. Let us view him, I say, in
this Light (or rather this Darkness) and deny the Necessity of Society if we
can. A Divine Revelation we find is absolutely necessary, we being by Nature as
unable to do our Duty. And how shall we learn except one teach us? But was GOD
to do this himself, how should we, with Moses,exceedingly quake and fear? Nor
would the Ministry of Angels in this Affair be without too much Terror. It is
necessary, therefore (at least GOD's Dealing with us has showed it* to be so)
that we be drawn with the Cords of a Man. And that a Divine Revelation being
granted, we should use one another's Assistance, under GOD, to instruct each
other in the Knowledge, and to exhort one another to the Practice of those
Things which belong to our everlasting Peace. This is undoubtedly the great End
of Society intended by GOD since the Fall, and a strong Argument it is, why Two
are better than One, and why we should not forsake the assembling our selves
together.

But farther, let us consider ourselves as Christians, as having this natural
Veil, in some measure, taken off from our Eyes by the Assistance of GOD's Holy
Spirit, and so enabled to see what he requires of us. Let us suppose ourselves
in some degree to have tasted the good Word of Life,and to have felt the Powers
of the World to come, influencing and moulding our Souls into a religious
Frame: To be fully and heartily convinced that we are Soldiers listed under the
Banner of CHRIST, and have proclaimed open War at our Baptism, against the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and have, perhaps, frequently renewed our
Obligations so to do, by partaking of the Lord's Supper: That we are surrounded
with Millions of Foes without, and infested with Legions of Enemies within:
That we are commanded to shine as Lights in the World, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Generation: That we are traveling to a long Eternity, and
need all imaginable Helps to show us, and encourage us in our Way thither. Let
us, I say, reflect on all this, and then how shall each of us cry out,
Brethren, what a necessary Thing it is to meet together in Religiuos Societies?

The Primitive Christians were fully sensible of this, and therefore we find
them continually keeping up Communion with each other: For what says the
Scripture? They continued steadfast in the Doctrine and Fellowship, Acts ii. 42.
Peter and John were no sooner dismissed by the Great Council, than they haste
away to their Companions. And being set at Liberty, says the Text, they came to
their own, and told them all these Things which the High Priest had said unto
them, Acts iv. 23. Paul, as soon as converted, tarried three Days with the
Disciples that were at Damascus, Acts ix. 19. And Peter afterward, when
released from Prison, immediately goes to the House of Mary, where there were
great Multitudes assembled, praying, Acts xii. 12. And it is reported of
Christians in After-Ages, that they used to assemble together before Daylight,
to sing a Psalm to CHRIST as GOD. So precious was the Communion of Saints in
those Days.

If it be asked, what Advantage we shall reap from such a Procedure now? I
answer, much every Way. Two are better than One, because they have a good
Reward for their Labor: For if they fall, the One will lift up his Fellow; but
woe be to him that is alone when he falls, for he has not another to help
him up. Again, if Two lie together, then the have Heat; but how can One be warm
alone? And if One prevail against him, Two shall withstand him; and a
Threefold Cord is not quickly broken.

Which directly leads me to my Second general Head, under which I was to assign
some Reasons why Two are better than One, especially in Religions Society.

I. As Man in his present Condition cannot always stand upright, but by Reason
of the Frailty of his Nature cannot but fall; one eminent Reason why Two are
better than One, or, in other Words, one great Advantage of Religious Society
is, That when they fall, the One will lift up his Fellow.

And an excellent Reason this, indeed! For alas! When we reflect how prone we
are to be drawn into Error in our Judgments, and into Vice in our Practice; and
how unable, at least how very unwilling, to espy or correct our own
Miscarriages; when we consider how apt the World is to flatter us in our
Faults, and how few there are so kind as to tell us the Truth; what an
inestimable Privilege must it be to have a Set of true, judicious, hearty
Friends about us, continually watching over our soul, to inform us where we
have fallen, and warn us that we fall not again for the future. Surely it is
such a Privilege that (to use the Words of an eminent Christian) we shall never
know the Value of, till we come to Glory.

But this is not all; for supposing that we could always stand upright, yet
whosoever reflects on the Difficulties of Religion in general, and his own
Propensity to Lukewarmness and Indifference in particular, will find that he
must be zealous as well as steady, if ever he expects to enter the Kingdom of
Heaven. Here then, the Wise Man points out to us another excellent Reason why
Two are better than One. Again, says he, If Two lie together, then they have
Heat, but how can One be warm alone?

Which was the next Thing to be considered under the Second general Head, viz.
to assign a second Reason why Two are better than One, because they can impart
Heat to each other.

It is an Observation no less true than common, That kindled Coals, if placed
asunder, soon go out, but if heaped together, quicken and enliven each other
and afford a lasting Heat. The same will hold good, in the Case now before us.
If Christians kindled by the Grace of GOD unite, they will quicken and enliven
each other; but if they separate and keep asunder, no marvel if they soon grow
cool or tepid. If Two or Three meet together in CHRIST's Name, they will have
Heat; but how can One be warm alone?

Observe, How can One be warm alone? The Wise Man's expressing himself by way
of Question, implies an Impossibility, at least a very great Difficulty, to be
warm in Religion without Company, where it may be had. Behold here, then,
another excellent Benefit flowing from Religious Society; it will keep us
zealous, as well as steady, in the Ways of Godliness.

But to illustrate this a little farther by a Comparison or two. Let us look
upon ourselves (as was above hinted) as Soldiers listed under CHRIST's Banner;
as going out with ten thousand to meet One that comes against us with twenty
thousand: as Persons that are to wrestle not only with Flesh and Blood, but
against Principalities, against Powers, and spiritual Wickednesses in high
Places. And then tell me, all ye that fear GOD, if it be not an invaluable
Privilege to have a Company of Fellow Soldiers continually about us, animating
and exhorting each other to stand our ground, to keep our Ranks, and manfully
to follow the Captain of our Salvation, though it be through a Sea of Blood?

Lastlv, Let us consider ourselves in another View before mentioned, viz. as
Persons traveling to a long Eternity; rescued by the freeGrace of GOD, in some
Measure, from our natural Egyptian Bondage, and marching under the Conduct of
our spiritual Joshua, through the Wilderness of this World, to the Land of our
Heavenly Canaan. Let us farther reflect how apt we are to startle at every
Difficulty; to cry, There are Lions! There are Lions in the Way! There are the
Sons of Anak to be grappled with, ever we can possess the Promised Land: How
prone we are, with Lot's Wife, to look wishfully back on our spiritual Sodom,
or with the foolish Israelites, to long again for the Fleshpots of Egypt, and
to return to our former natural State of Bondage and Slavery. Consider this my
Brethren, and see what a blessed Privilege it will be to have a Set of
Israelites indeed about us, always reminding us of the Folly of any such
cowardly Design, and of the intolerable Misery we shall run into, if we fall in
the least short of the Promised Land.

More might be said on this Particular, did not the Limits of a Discourse of
this Nature, oblige me to hasten.

3. To give a Third Reason, mentioned by the Wise Man in the Text, why Two are
better than One; namely, because they can secure each other from Enemies
without. And if One prevail against him, yet Two shall withstand him; and a
Threefold Cord is not quickly broken.

Hitherto we have considered the Avantages of Religious Societies, as a great
Preservative against falling (at least dangerously falling) into Sin and
Lukewarmness, and that too from our own Corruptions. But what says the Wise Son
of Sirach? My Son, when thou go to serve the Lord, prepare thy Soul for
Temptation: And that not only from inward, but outward Foes; particularly from
these two grand Adversaries, the World and the Devil: For no sooner will thine
Eye be bent Heavenward, but the former will be immediately diverting it another
Way, telling thee thou need not be singular in order to be religious; that
one may be a Christian without going so much out of the Common Road.

Nor will the Devil be wanting in his artful Insinuations, or impious
Suggestions, to divert or terrify thee from pressing forwards, that thou may
lay hold on the Crown of Life: And if he cannot prevail this Way, he will try
another; and in order to make his Temptation the more undiscerned, but withal
more successful, he will employ, perhaps, some of thy nearest Relatives, or
most powerful Friends (as he set Peter on our blessed Master) who will always
be bidding thee spair thyself; telling thee thou need not take so much
Pains; that it is not so difficult a Matter to get to Heaven as some People
would make of it, nor the Way so narrow as others imagine it to be.

But see here the Advantage of Religious Company; for supposing thou find
thyself thus surrounded on every Side, unable to withstand such horrid (though
seemingly friendly) Counsels, haste away to thy Companions, and they will teach
thee a truer and better Lesson; they will tell thee, that thou must be singular
if thou will be religious; and that it is as impossible for a Christian, as for
a City set upon a Hill, to be hid: That if thou will be an almost Christian
(and as good be none at all) thou may live in the same idle indifferent
Manner as thou see most other People do: But if thou will be not only almost
but altogether a Christian, they will inform thee thou must go a great deal
farther: That thou must not only faintly seek, but earnestly strive to enter in
at the strait Gate: That there is but One Way now to Heaven as formerly, viz.
through the narrow Passage of a sound Conversion: And that in order to bring
about this mighty Work, thou must undergo a constant, but necessary Discipline
of Fasting, Watching, and Prayer. And that therefore, the only Reason why these
Friends give thee such Advice, because they are not willing to take so much
Pains themselves; or, as our Savior told Peter on a like Occasion, because
they savor not the Things that be of GOD, but the Things that be of Men.

This then, is another excellent Blessing arising from Religious Society, that
Friends can hereby secure each other from those that oppose them. The Devil is
fully sensible of this, and therefore he has always done his utmost to
suppress, and put a Stop to the Communion of Saints. This was his grand
Artifice at the first planting of the Gospel; to persecute the Professors of
it, in order to separate them. Which, though GOD, as he always will, overruled
for the better; yet it shows what an Enmity he has against Christians
assembling themselves together. Nor has he yet left off his old stratagem; it
being his usual Way to entice us by our selves, in order to tempt us; where, by
being destitute of one another's Helps, he hopes to lead us captive at his Will.

But, on the contrary, knowing his own Interest is strengthened by Society, he
would first persuade us to neglect the Communion of Saints, and then bid us
stand in the Way of Sinners, hoping thereby to put us into the Seat of the
Scornful. Judas and Peter are melancholy Instances of this. The former had no
sooner left his Company at Supper, but he went out and betrayed his Master: And
the dismal Downfall of the latter, when he would venture himself amongst a
Company of Enemies, plainly shows us what the Devil will endeavor to do, when
he gets us by ourselves. Had Peter kept his own Company, he might have kept his
Integrity; but a single Cord, alas, how quickly was it broken? Our blessed
Savior knew this full well, and therefore it is very observable, that he
always sent out his Disciples Two by Two.

And now, after so many Advantages to be reaped from Religious Society, may we
not very justly cry out with the Wise Man in my Text, Woe be to him that is
alone; for when he falls, he has not another to lift him up: When he is
cold, he has not a Friend to warm him; when he is assaulted, he has not a
Second to help him to withstand his Enemy.

III. I now come to my Third general Head, under which was to be shown the
several Duties incumbent on every Member of a Religious Society, as such, which
are three.

1. Mutual Reproof: 2. Mutual Exhortation: 3. Mutual assisting and defending
each other.
1. Mutual Reproof. Two are better than One: for when they fall, the One will
lift up his Fellow.

Now, Reproof may be taken either in a more extensive Sense, and then it
signifies our raising a Brother by the gentlest Means, when he falls into Sin
and Error; or in a more restrained Signification, as reaching no farther then
those, little Miscarriages, which unavoidably happen in the most holy Men
living.

The Wise Man in the Text, supposes all of us subject to both: For when they
fall (says he, thereby implying that each of us may fall) the One will lift up
his Fellow. From whence we may infer, that when any Brother is overtaken with a
Fault, he that is spiritual (that is, regenerate, and knows the Corruption and
Weakness of Human Nature) ought to restore such a one in the Spirit of
Meekness. And why he should do so, the Apostle subjoins a Reason considering
thyself, lest thou also be tempted; i.e. considering thy own Frailty, lest thou
also fall by the like Temptation.

We are all frail unstable Creatures; and it is merely owing to the Free Grace
and good Providence of GOD, that we run not into the same Excess of Riot with
other Men. Every offending Brother, therefore, claims our Pity rather than our
Resentment; and each Member should strive who should be most forward, as well
as most gentle, in restoring him to his former State.

But supposing a Person not to be overtaken, but to fall wilfully into a Crime;
yet who art thou that deniest Forgiveness to thy offending Brother? Let him
that stands take heed lest he fall. Take ye, Brethren, the holy Apostles as
eminent Examples for you to learn by, how you ought to behave in this Matter.
Consider how quickly they joined the Right Hand of Fellowship with Peter, who
had so wilfully denied his Master: For we find John and him together but two
Days after, Joh. xx. 2. And v. 19. we find him assembled with the rest. So soon
did they forgive, so soon associate with their sinful, yet relenting Brother,
-- Let us go and do likewise.

But there is another kind of Reproof incumbent on every Member of Religious
Society; namely, a gentle Rebuke for some Miscarriage or other, which, though
not actually sinful, yet may become the Occasion of Sin. This indeed seems more
easy, but perhaps will be found a more difficult Point than the former: For
when a Person has really sinned, he cannot but own his Brethrens Reproof to be
just; whereas, when it was only for some little Misconduct, the Pride that is
in our Natures, will scarce suffer us to brook it. But however ungrateful this
Pill may be to our Brother, yet if we have any Concern for his Welfare, it must
be administered by some friendly Hand or other. By all Means then let it be
applied; only, like a skilful Physician, gild over the ungrateful Medicine, and
endeavor if possible, to deceive thy Brother into Health and Soundness. Let
all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Malice, and Evil-speaking, be put away from it.
Let the Patient know his Recovery is the only Thing aimed at, that thou
delightest not causelessly to grieve thy Brother; and then thou can not want
Success.

2. Mutual Exhortation is the second Duty resulting from the Words of the Text.
-- Again, If Two lie together, then they have Heat.

Observe here again, the Wise Man supposes it as impossible for Religious
Persons to meet together, and not to be the Warmer for each other's Company, as
for two Persons to lie in the same Bed, and yet freeze with Cold. But now, how
is it possible to communicate Heat to each other, without mutually stirring up
the Gift of GOD which is in us, by brotherly Exhortation? Let every Member then
of a Religious Society write that zealous Apostle's Advice on the Tables of his
Heart; See that ye exhort, and provoke one another to Love, and to good Works;
and so much the more as you see the Day of the LORD approaching. Believe me,
Brethren, we have need of Exhortation to rouse up our sleepy Souls, to set us
upon our Watch against the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil;
to excite us to renounce ourselves, to take up our Crosses, and follow our
blessed Master, and the glorious Company of Saints and Martyrs, who through
Faith, have fought the good Fight, and are gone before us to inherit the
Promises. A third Part, therefore, of the Time wherein a Religious Society
meets, seems necessary to bespent in this important Duty: For what avails it to
have our Understandings enlightened by pious Reading unless our Wills are at the
same Time inclined, and inflamed by mutual Exhortation, to put it in Practice?
Add to this, that this is the best Way both to receive and impart Light, and
the only Means to preserve and increase that Warmth and Heat which each Person
first brought with him; GOD so ordering this, as all other spiritual Gifts,
that to him that has, i.e. improve and communicates what he has shall be
given; but from him that has not, i.e. does not improve the Heat he has,
shall be taken away even that which he seemed to have. So needful, so
essentially necessary is Exhortation to the Good of Society.

3. Thirdly and lastly, The Text points out another Duty incumbent on every
Member of a Religious Society, viz. To defend each other from those that do
oppose them. And if One prevail against him, yet Two shall withstand him; and a
Threefold Cord is not quickly broken.

Here the Wise Man takes it for granted, that Offenses will come, nay, and that
they may prevail too. And this is no more than our blessed Master has long
since told us. Not indeed, that there is any Thing in Christianity itself that
has the least Tendency to give rise to, or promote such Offenses: No, on the
contratry, it breathes nothing but Unity and Love.

But so it is, that ever since the fatal Sentence pronounced by GOD, after our
first Parents Fall, viz. I will put Enmity between thy Seed and her Seed; He
that is born after the Flesh, i. e. the unregenerate unconverted Sinner, has in
all Ages persecuted him that is born after the Spirit: And so it always will
be. Accordingly we find an early Proof given of this in the Instance of Cain
and Abel; and of Ismael and Isaac; of Jacob and Esau afterward. And indeed,
the whole Bible contains little else but an History of the great and continued
Opposition between the Children of this World and the Children of GOD. The
first Christians were remarkable Examples of this; though those troublesome
Times, bless;ed be GOD, are now over, yet the Apostle has laid it down as a
general Rule, and all that are sincere can experimentally prove the Truth of
it, That they that will live godly in CHRIST JESUS, must (to the End of the
World, in some Degree or other) suffer Persecution. That therefore this may not
make us desert our blessed Master's Cause, every Member should unite their
Forces, in order to stand against it. And for the better effecting this, each
would do well, from Time to Time, to communicate his Experiences, Grievances,
and Temptations, and beg his Companions first asking GOD's Assitance, without
which all is nothing) to administer Reproof, Exhortation or Comfort, as his
Case requires: So that if One cannot prevail against it, yet Two shall
withstand it; and a threefold (much less a many-fold) Cord will not be quickly
broken.

IV. But it is Time for me to proceed to the Fourth general Thing proposed,
viz. To draw an Inference or two from what has been said.

1. And first then, if Two are better than One, and the Advantages of Religious
Society are so many and so great, then it is the Duty of every true Christian
to set on Foot, establish and promote, as much as in him lies Societies of this
Nature. And I believe we may venture to affirm, that if ever a Spirit of true
Christianity is revived in the World, it must be bro't about by some such Means
as this. Motives, surely, cannot be wanting, to stir us up to this commendable
and necessary Undertaking: For granting all hitherto advanced to be of no
Force, yet methinks the single Consideration that great Part of our Happiness
in Heaven will consist in the Communion of Saints; or that the Interest as well
as Piety of those Sectarists that differ from us, is strengthened and supported
by nothing more than their frequent Meetings; either of these Considerations, I
say, one would think, should induce us to do our utmost to copy after their
good Example, and settle a lasting and pious Communion of Saints on Earth. Add
to this that we find the Kingdom of Darkness established daily by such like
Means; and shall not the Kingdom of CHRIST be set in Opposition against it?
Shall the Children of Belial assemble and strengthen each other in Wickedness;
and shall not the Children of GOD unite, and strengthen themselves in Piety?
Shall Society (...) Societies be countenanced for Midnight Revellings, and the
promoting of Vice, and scarcely one be found intended for the Propagation of
Virtue? -- Be astonished, O Heavens at this!

2. But this leads me to a second Inference; namely, to warn Persons of the
great Danger those are in, who either by their Subscriptions, Presence or
Approbation, promote Societies of a quite opposite Nature to Religion.

And here I would not be understood to mean only those public Meetings which
are designed manifestly for nothing else but Revellings and Banquetings, for
Chambering and Wantonness, and at which a modest Heathen would blush to be
present; but also those seemingly innocent Entertainments and Meetings which
the politer Part of the World are so very fond of, and spend so much Time in:
But which notwithstanding, keep as many Persons out of a Sense of true
Religion, as Intemperance, Debauchery or any other Crime whatever. Indeed,
whilst we are in this World, we must have proper Relaxations, to fit us both
for the Business of our Profession, and Religion. But then, for Persons who
call themselves Christians, that have solemnly vowed at their Baptism, to
renounce the Vanities of this sinful World; that are commanded in Scripture to
abstain from all Appearance of Evil, and to have their Conversation in Heaven.
For such Persons as these to support Meetings, that (to say no worse of them)
are vain and trifling, and have a natural Tendency to draw off our Minds from
GOD, is absurd, ridiculous, and sinful. Surely Two are not better than One in
this Case: No; it is to be wished there was not One to be found concerned in
it. The sooner we forsake the assembling ourselves together in such a Manner,
the better; and no matter how quickly the Cord that holds such Societies (was
it a Thousand-fold) is broken.

But you, Brethren, have not so learned CHRIST: But, on the contrary, like true
Disciples of your LORD and Master, have by the Blessing of GOD (as this
Evening's Solemnity abundantly testifies) happily formed yourselves into such
Societies* which, if duly attended on and improved, cannot but strengthen you
in your Christian Warfare, and make you fruitful in every good Word and Work.

What remains for me to do, but, as was proposed, in the last Place, to close
up what has been said, in a Word or two, by Way of Exhortation from the whole,
and to beseech you, in the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to go on in the Way
you have begun; and by a constant conscientious Attandance on your respective
Societies, to discountenance Vice, encourage Virtue, and build each other up in
the Knowledge and Fear of GOD.

Only permit me to stir up your pure Minds, by Way of Remembrance, and to
exhort you, if there be any Consolation in CHRIST, any Fellowship of the
Spirit, again and again to consider, that as all Christians in general, so all
Members of Religious Societies in particular, are in an especial Manner, as
Houses built upon an Hill; and that therefore it highly concerns you to walk
circumspectly toward those that are without, and to take heed to your selves,
that your Conversation, in common Life, be as becomes such an open and
peculiar Profession of the Gospel of CHRIST: Knowing that the Eyes of all Men
are upon you, narrowly to inspect every Circumstance of your Behavior; and
that every notorious wilful Miscarriage of any single Member, will, in some
Measure, redound to the Scandal and Dishonor of your whole Fraternity.

Labor, therefore, my beloved Brethren, to let your Practice correspond to
your Profession: And think not that it will be sufficient for you to plead at
the last Day, LORD, have we not assembled ourselves together in thy Name,and
enlivened each other, by singing Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs? For
verily, I say unto you notwithstanding this, our blessed LORD will bid you
depart, from him; nay, that you shall receive a greater Damnation, if, in the
midst of these great Pretensions, you are found to be Workers of Iniquity.

But GOD forbid that any such Evil should befall you; that there should be ever
a Judas, ever a Traitor amongst such distinguished Followers of our Common
Master. No, on the contrary, the Excellency of your Rules, the Regularity of
your Meetings, and more especially your pious Zeal in assembling in such a
public and solemn Manner so frequently in the Year, persuade me to think, that
you are willing, not barely to seem, but to be in Reality, Christians; and hope
to be found at the Last Day, what you would be esteemed now, viz. holy, sincere
Disciples of a Crucified Redeemer.

Oh, may you always continue thus minded* and make it your daily, constant
Endeavor, both by Precept and Example, to turn all you converse with, more
especially those of your own Societies, in the same most Blessed Spirit and
Temper* Thus will you adorn the Gospel of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, in all Things:
Thus will you anticipate the Happiness of a future State; and by attending on,
and improving the Communion of Saints on Earth, make yourselves meet to join
the Communion and Fellowship of the Spirits of just Men made perfect, of the
Holy Angels, nay, of the Ever Blessed and Eternal GOD in Heaven.

Which GOD of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.

