DIRECTIONS HOW to HEAR SERMONS,

Preached by the Reverend Mr. George Whitefield, A. B.

THE THIRD EDITION.

PROVE. i. 5. A wise Man will hear, and will increase Learning.

ROMANS x. 17. So then, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of GOD.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by G. ROGERS and D. FOUL, at the Printing-Office
over against the South East Corner of the Townhouse. And also by B. ELIOT at
the South End. 1740.

DIRECTIONS How to Hear SERMONS.
LUKE viii. 18. Take Heed therefore how you hear,
THE Occasion of our LORD's giving this Caution was this: Perceiving that much
People were gathered together, to hear him, out of every City, and knowing (for
he is GOD, and knows all Things) that many, if not most of them, would be
Hearers only, and not Doers of the Word, he spoke to them by a Parable,
wherein, under the Similitude of a Sower, that went out to sow his Seed, he
plainly intimated how few there were amongst them who would receive any saving
Benefit from his Doctrine, or bring forth Fruit unto Perfection.

The Application, one would imagine, should be plain and obvious: But the
Disciples, as yet unenlightened in any great Degree by the HOLY SPIRIT, and
therefore unable to see into the hidden Mysteries of the Kingdom of GOD, dealt
with our SAVIOR, as People ought to deal with their Ministers, -- discoursed
with him privately about the Meaning of what he had taught them in Public, and
with a sincere Desire of doing their Duty, asked for an Interpretation of the
Parable.

Our blessed LORD, as he always was willing to instruct those that were
teachable (herein setting his Ministers an Example to be courteous and easy of
Access) freely told them the Signification of it. And withal, to make them more
cautious and more attentive to his Doctrine for the future, He tells them, That
they were in an especial Manner to be the Light of the World, and were to
proclaim on the Housetop whatsoever he told them in Secret. And as their
improving the Knowledge already imparted, was the only Condition upon which
more was to be given them, it therefore highly concerned them to take Heed how
they heard.

From the Context then it appears, that the Words were primarily spoken to the
Apostles themselves. But because they were the Representatives of the whole
Church, and it is to be feared, out of those many Thousands that flock to hear
Sermons, but few comparatively speaking, are effectually influenced by them; I
cannot but think it very necessary to remind you of the Caution given by our
LORD to his Disciples, and to exhort you with the utmost Earnestness to take
heed how you hear.

In Prosecution of which Design, I shall in the following Discourse,

I. First, Prove that every One ought to take all Opportunities of hearing
Sermons. And, II. Secondly, I shall lay down some Cautions and Directions, in
order to your hearing them with Profit and Advantage.
I. And, First, I am to prove that every One ought to take all Opportunities of
hearing Sermons.

That there have always been particular Persons set apart by GOD to instruct
and exhort his People to practice what he should require of them, is evident
from many Passages of Scripture. -- St. Jude tells us, that Enoch the seventh
from Adam prophesied, or preached, concerning the LORD'S coming with ten
Thousand of his Saints to Judgment. And Noah, who lived not long after, is
styled by St. Peter, a Preacher of Righteousness. And though in all the
intermediate Space between the Flood and giving of the Law, we hear but of few
Preachers, yet we may reasonably conclude, that GOD never left himself without
Witness, but at sundry Times, and after diverse Manners, spoke to our Fathers by
the Patriarchs and Prophets.

But how ever it was before, we are assured that after the Delivery of the Law,
GOD has constantly separated to himself a certain Order of Men to preach to, as
well as pray for, his People; and commanded them to enquire their Duty at the
Priests Mouths. And though the Jews were frequently led into Captivity, and for
their Sins scattered abroad through the Face of the Earth; yet he never utterly
forsook his Church, but still kept up a Remnant of Prophets and Preachers, as
Ezekiel, Jeremiah, Daniel, and others, to reprove, instruct, and call them to
Repentance.

Thus was it under the Law. Nor has the Church been worse, but infinitely
better provided for under the Gospel: For when JESUS CHRIST, that great High
Priest, had through the Eternal Spirit offered himself as a full, perfect,
sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole
World, and after his Resurrection had all Power committed to him both in Heaven
and Earth, he gave Commission to his Apostles, and in them to all succeeding
Ministers, to go and preach his Gospel to every Creature; promising to be with
them, to guide, assist, strengthen and comfort them always, even to the End of
the World.

But if it be the Duty of Ministers to preach (and Woe be to them if they do
not preach the Gospel, for a Necessity is laid upon them) no doubt, the People
are obliged to attend to them: for otherwise, wherefore are Ministers sent?

And how can we here avoid admiring the Love and tender Care which our dear
Redeemer has expressed for his Spouse the Church? Who, because he could not be
always with us in Person, on account it was expedient he should go away, and as
our Forerunner take Possession of that Glory he had purchased by his precious
Blood, yet would not leave us comfortless, but first settled a sufficient
Number of Pastors and Teachers; and afterward, according to his Promise,
actually did and will continue to send down the Holy Ghost to furnish them and
their Successors with proper Gifts and Graces for the Work of the Ministry, for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of his Body in Love, till we all
come in the Unity of the Spirit, to the Fullness of the Measure of the Stature
of CHRIST.

Oh! how insensible are those of this unspeakable Gift, who do Despite to the
Spirit of Grace, who crucify the Son of GOD afresh, and put him to an open
Shame, by wilfully refusing to attend on so great a Means of their Salvation?
How dreadful will the End of such Men be? How aggravating, that Light should
come into the World, that the glad Tidings of Salvation should be so very
frequently proclaimed in this City, and that so many should loath this
spiritual Manna, this Angels Food, and call it light Bread? How much more
tolerable will it be for Tire and Sidon, for Sodom and Gomorrah, than for such
Sinners? For better Men had never heard of a Savior's being born, than after
they have heard, not to give heed to the Ministry of those, who are employed as
his Ambassadors, to transact Affairs between GOD and their Souls.

We may, though at a Distance, without a Spirit of Prophesy, foretell the
deplorable Condition of such Men; and behold them cast into Hell, listing up
their Eyes, being in Torment, and crying out, How often would our Ministers
have gathered us, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings! -- But we
would not. -- Oh that we had known in that our Day, the Things that belonged to
our everlasting Peace -- But now they are for ever hid from our Eyes.

Thus wretched, thus inconc^ivably ^^f^rable, will such be as slight and make a
Mock at the public Preaching of the Gospel. -- But taking it for granted,
there are but few, if any, of this unhappy Stamp, who think it not worth their
while to tread the Courts of the LORD's House, I pass on now to the

II. Second general Thing proposed, -- To lay down some Cautions and
Directions, in order to your hearing Sermons with Profit and Advantage.

And here, if we reflect on what has been already delivered, and consider that
Preaching is an Ordinance of GOD, a Means appointed by JESUS CHRIST himself,
for promoting his Kingdom amongst Men, you cannot reasonably be offended, if,
in order that you may hear Sermons with Profit and Advantage, I

First, direct or entreat you to come to hear them, not out of Curiosity, but
from a sincere Desire to know and do your Duty.

Formality and Hypocrisy in any religious Exercise is an Abomination unto the
LORD. And to enter his House merely to have our Ears entertained, and not our
Hearts reformed, must certainly be highly displeasing to the Most High GOD, as
well as unprofitable to our selves.

Hence it is, that so many remain Unconverted, yea, Unaffected with the most
Evangelical Preaching; so that like St. Paul's Companions, they only hear the
Preacher's Voice with their outward Ears, but do not experience the Power of it
inwardly in their Hearts. Or like the Ground near Gideon's Fleece, they remain
untouched; whilst others that came to be fed with the sincere Milk of the Word,
like the Fleece itself, are watered by the Dew of GOD's Heavenly Blessing, and
grow thereby.

Flee therefore, my Brethren, flee Curiosity; and prepare your Hearts by a
humble Disposition to receive with Meekness the engrafted Word, and then it
will be a Means, under GOD, to quicken, build up, purify, and save your Souls.

A Second Direction I shall lay down for the same Purpose, is, not only to
prepare your Hearts before you hear, but also to give diligent heed to the
Things that are spoken, whilst youare hearing the Word of GOD.

If an earthly King was to issue out a Royal Proclamation, on performing or not
performing the Conditions wherein contained, the Life or Death of his Subjects
entirely depended, how sollicitous would they be to hear what those Conditions
were; And shall not we pay the same Respect to the KING of KINGS, and LORD of
LORDS, and lend an attentive Ear to his Ambassadors, when they are declaring in
his Name on what Terms our Pardon, Peace, and Happiness may be secured?

When GOD descended on Mount Sinai in terrible Majesty, to give unto his People
the Law, how a tentive were they to his Servant Moses? And if they were so
earnest to hear the Thunderings or Lightnings of the Law, shall not we be as
sollicitous to hear from the Ministers of CHRIST, the glad Tidings of the
Gospel?

Whilst CHRIST was himself on Earth, it is said, that the People hung upon him
to hear the gracious Words that proceeded out of his Mouth. And if we looked on
Ministers as we ought, as the Representatives of JESUS CHRIST, we should hang
upon them to hear their Words also.

Besides, the sacred Truths that Gospel Ministers deliver, are not dry insipid
Lectures on Moral Philosophy, intended only to amuse us for a while; but the
great Mysteries of Godliness, which therefore we are bound studiously to listen
to, left through our Negligence we should either not understand them, or by any
other Means let them slip.

But how regardless are those of this Direction, who instead of hanging on the
Preacher to hear him, doze or sleep whilst he is speaking to them from GOD?
Unhappy Men! Can they not watch with our blessed LORD one Hour? What; Have they
never read how Eutichus fell down as he was sleeping, when St. Paul continued
his Discourse till Midnight, and was taken up dead?

But to return. Though you may prepare your Hearts, as you may think, by a
teachable Disposition, and be attentive whilst Discourses are delivering, yet
this will profit you little, unless you observe a

Third Direction, -- not to entertain any the least Prejudice against the
Minister.

For could a Preacher speak with the Tongue of Men and Angels, if his Audience
was prejudiced against him, he would be but as a sounding Brass, or a tinkling
Cymbal.

That was the Reason why JESUS CHRIST himself, the eternal Word, could not do
many mighty Works, nor preach to any great Effect among those of his own
Country; for they were offended at him. And was this same JESUS, this GOD
incarnate again to bow the Heavens, and to come down speaking as never Man
spoke; yet if we were prejudiced against him, as the Jews were, we should
harden our Hearts as the Jews did theirs.

Take Heed therefore, my Brethren, and beware of entertaining any Dislike
against those whom the Holy Ghost has made Overseers over you. Consider that
the Clergy are Men of like Passions with your selves. And though we should even
hear a Person teaching others to do, what he has not taught himself; yet that
is no sufficient Reason for rejecting his Doctrine. For Ministers speak not in
their own but CHRIST'S Name. And we know who commanded the People to do
whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees should say unto them, though they said but
did not.

But Fourthly, as you ought not to be prejudiced against, so you should be
careful not to depend too much on a Preacher, or think more highly of him than
you ought to think. For though this be an Extreme that People seldom run into;
yet preferring one Teacher, in Opposition to another, has been of ill
Consequence to the Church of GOD.

That, we read, was a Fault which the great Apostle of the Gentiles condemned
in the Corinthians: For whereas one said, I am of Paul; another, I am of
Apollos: Are ye not Carnal, says he? For who is Paul, and who is Apollos, but
Instruments in GOD's Hand by whom you believed? And are not all Ministers sent
forth to be ministering Ambassadors to those who shall be Heirs of Salvation?
And are they not all therefore greatly to be esteemed for their Work's Sake?

The Apostle, it is true, commands us to pay double Honor to those who labor
in the Word and Doctrine. But then to prefer one Minister at the Expense of
another (perhaps to such a Degree, as when you have actually entered a Church,
to come out again, because he does not preach) is earthly, sensual, devilish.

Not to mention that Popularity and Applause cannot but be exceeding dangerous
even to a rightly informed Mind; and must necessarily fill any thinking Man
with a holy Jealousy, left he should take that Honor to himself, which is due
only to GOD; who alone qualifies him for his ministerial Labors, and from whom
alone every good and perfect Gift comes.

A Fifth Direction I would recommend is, to make a particular Application of
every Thing that is delivered, to your own Hearts.

When our Savior was discoursing at his last Supper with his beloved
Disciples, and foretold that one of them should betray him, each of them
immediately applied it to his own Heart, and said, LORD, Is it I? And would
Persons in like Manner, when Preachers are dissuading from any Vice, or
persuading to any Virtue, instead of crying, this was designed against such and
such a one, turn their Thoughts inwardly, any say, LORD, Is it I? How far more
beneficial should we find Discourses to be, than they generally are now?

But we are apt to wander too much abroad: Always looking at the Mote which is
in our Neighbor's Eye, rather than the Beam which is in our own.

Haste we now to the Sixth and last Direction: If you would receive a Blessing
from the LORD, when you hear his Word preached, pray to him, both before, in,
and after every Sermon, to endue the Minister with Power to speak, and to grant
you a Will and Ability to put in Practice what he shall show from the Book of
GOD to be your Duty.

This would be an excellent Means to render the Word preached effectual to the
enlightening and enflaming your Hearts, and without this all the other Means
before prescribed will be in vain.

No doubt it was this Consideration that made St. Paul so earnestly entreat his
beloved Ephesians to intercede with GOD for him, -- Praying always, says he,
with all Manner of Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit; and for me also, that
I may open my Mouth with Boldness, and make known the Mysteries of the Gospel.
And if so great an Apostle as St. Paul, needed the Prayers of his People, much
more do those Ministers, who have only the ordinary Gifts of the Holy Spirit.

Besides, this would be a good Proof that you sincerely desired to do as well
as to know the Will of GOD: And it must highly profit both Ministers and
People; because GOD through your Prayers will give them a double Portion of his
Holy Spirit, whereby they will be enabled to instruct you more fully in the
Things which pertain to the Kingdom of GOD.

And Oh! that all that hear me this Day, would seriously apply their Hearts to
practice what has now been told them! -- How would Ministers see Satan like
Lightning fall from Heaven, and People find the Word preached sharper than a
two edged Sword, and mighty through GOD, to the pulling down of the Devil's
strong Holds!

The Holy Ghost would then fall on all them that heard the Word; as when St.
Peter preached. The Gospel of CHRIST would have free Course, run very swiftly,
and Thousands again be converted by a Sermon.

For JESUS CHRIST, is the same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever. He has promised
to be with his Ministers always, even unto the End of the World. And the Reason
why we do not receive larger Effusions of the blessed Spirit of GOD, is not,
because our All-powerful Redeemer's Hand is shortened, but because we are not
prepared to receive them, and because we do not expect them, but confine them
to the Primitive Times.

It does indeed sometimes happen that GOD to magnify his free Grace in CHRIST
JESUS, is found of them that sought him not; a notorious Sinner is forcibly
worked upon by a public Sermon, and plucked as a Firebrand out of the Fire.
But this is not GOD's ordinary Way of acting. No; for the Generality, he only
visits those with the Power of his Word, who humbly wait to know what he would
have them to do. And sends unqualified Hearers not only empty, but hardened,
away.

Take heed, therefore, ye careless, curious Professors, if any such are here
present, how you hear. Remember that, whether we think of it or not, we must
all appear before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, where Ministers must give a
strict Account of the Doctrine they have delivered, and you as strict a one,
how you have improved under it. And good GOD! how will you be able to stand at
the Bar of an angry, Sinavenging Judge, and see so many Discourses you have
despised, so many Ministers who once longed and labored for the Salvation of
your precious and immortal Souls, bro't out as so many swift Witnesses against
you? Will it be sufficient then, think you, to allege that you went to hear
them only out of Curiosity, to pass away an idle Hour, to admire the Oratory,
or ridicule the Simplicity of the Preacher? No, GOD will then let you know,
that you ought to have come out of better Principles, that every Sermon has
been put down to your Account, and that you must then be justly punished for
not improving by them.

But fear not, you little Flock, who with Meekness receive the ingrafted Word,
and bring forth the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness; for it shall not be so
with you. No; you will be your Minister's Joy, and their Crown of Rejoicing in
the Day of our Lord JESUS. And they will present you in a holy Triumph
faultless and unblamable to our common Redeemer, saying, Behold us, O LORD, and
the Children which thou have given us.

But still take you heed how you hear. For upon your improving the Grace you
have, more shall be given, and you shall have abundance. For he is faithful
that has promised, Who also will do it. Nay, GOD from out of Sion shall so
bless you, that every Sermon you hear shall communicate to you a fresh Supply
of Spiritual Knowledge. The Word of GOD shall dwell in you richly; you shall go
on from Strength to Strength, from one Degree of Grace unto another, till being
grown up to be perfect Men in CHRIST JESUS, and filled with all the Fullness of
GOD, you shall be translated by Death to see Him as he is, and to sing Praise
before his Throne with Angels and Archangels, Cherubims and Seraphims, and the
general Assembly of the Firstborn, whose Names are written in Heaven for ever
and ever.

Which GOD of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

FINIS.

