THE QUERISTS, OR An EXTRACT of sundry Passages taken out of Mr. Whitefield's
printed Sermons, Journals and Letters: TOGETHER WITH Some ^^^^PLES proposed in
proper QUERIES raised on each Remark.

By some Church Members of the Presbyterian Persuasion.

2 Timothy i. 13. Hold fast the Form of sound Words. --
Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
PHILADELPHIA: Printed in the Year M,DCC,XL.

To the READERS.
CHRISTIAN FRIENDS,
THE following Queries and Remarks seem to us to concern Matters of the utmost
Importance. We ar^ represented in the Scripture as Pilgrims and Travelers a
better Country; and as a wrong Choice of the Ro^ may ruin us eternally, we
ought to examine every Step we tread, and take Notice that our Guides be not
blind nor mistaken, lest they lead us astray. None can blame us when our Souls
are in Danger of eternal Ruin, to look to ourselves, and to secure the one
Thing needful; nor dare we allow ourselves to follow the Multitude, if we fear
they go astray; nor regard any Man further than he follows Christ: And we hope
this will justify us in what we have done in the following Pages; for, if all
our Christian Brethren, who may think worth while to read our Remarks, have
such superior Seize as to see clearly, that all that Mr. Whitefield has
printed, is sound and agreeable to the holy Scriptures; yet we ^ope that their
christian Charity is so great, that they will not condemn us for applying as we
have done to our Teachers, and by their Advice, to Mr. Whitefield himself, to
remove some unhappy Stumbling Blocks out of our Way. We cannot help thinking
for ourselves, and judging of Things according to the Light they appear in; and
we promise, that when that Gentleman satisfies us in these Things, we will
believe him; and we cannot do it sooner. But when we reflect, that he is but a
Man; that great and good Men have been mistaken; and that Infallibility (as far
as we know) is entailed neither on him nor his Followers, w^ hope that both he
and they are better Christians than t^ blame us if we can be the Instruments of
pointing out their Mistakes, if there be any (...), that they regard their
Souls, and will look on it as the most eminent Service can be done them, if by
our Means they receive a Kindness that will turn to their Account, through a
boundless Eternity.

We confess, that we are at a Loss to know what to make of some of his
Expressions; if they have any Meaning at all, we fear that it is a bad one; and
will rejoice to find ourselves disappointed, if he shows us that they are sound
and good. But if he pretends Hurry or Want of Time, and does not either justify
or condemn them, or give us some Satisfaction, he will constrain us to think,
that he has his own Glory in View more than the Glory of God or the Good of his
Church. He has such high Conceptions of Man, or such low Conceptions of God,
that we fear he has just Conceptions of neither; to say, "That Man was adorned
with all the Perfections of the Deity, that he was the Perfection of the moral
and material World," as he does, Page 17, Vol. 2d. of Sermons, is what we can
neither believe, nor find ground from Reason nor Revelation to support it. When
our Divines prove the Divinity of our blessed Lord, they sometimes do it (we
think to good Purpose) by proving, that the Scriptures attribute to him all the
Perfections of the Deity, and of Consequence, that he is the eternal God, equal
with the Father and Holy Spirit; but if a mere Man may be adorned with all
these Perfections, we know not what to make of this Argument, 'till he give us
better Light. -- Again, if Men be baptized into the Nature of the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, as he seems to assert, p. 128, vol. 2. is not this to make
them, on their Conversion, Partakers of the Godhead, or someway equal to the
supreme Being? What shall we think of the Doctrine, that one while sinks us
into Brutes and Devils, and again exalts us to be equal to God? This puts us in
Mind of some Antinomian Reveries, of being goded with God, and christed with
Christ: And we hope the Readers will pardon us, though we desire to get Light in
these Things, seeing it is our great Concern to have right Notions of God and
ourselves, and to act accordingly.

When we hear him tell us, "That the Regenerate washes away the Guilt of Sin by
the Tears of a sincere Repentance, joined with Faith in the Blood of Christ,"
p. 22, 23, vol. 2. we think that it savours of Popery and Arminianism, to join
any Thing with the Blood of Christ to wash away Sin; and hope it will offend
none, that we cannot believe this on his bare Word contrary to many Scripture
Texts, for we abhor an implicit Faith. Is not that Expression of the same
Stamp? Vol. 1, p. 79, Where he says, "That a single Aim at God's Glory, --
alone can render our Actions acceptable in God's Sight:" If a single Aim at
God's Glory alone can render our Actions acceptable in his Sight, what need is
there for the Blood of Christ? We hope none of our Brethren will be offended,
that we cannot believe this popish Doctrine, till he explain or prove it from
Scripture. -- He further tells us, p. 128, vol. 2. (if we mistake him not)
"That our Lord commanded his Disciples to baptize Men into the Nature of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost," which is either to convert them, or rather to make
them equal with God: And if he has given Men Ability to do either the one or
the other, by repeating the Words of the Institution; Why may they not as
castly change a Wafer into his Body and Blood? And this smells of Popery, and
will support the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. -- When he tells us, "That we
must be justified by the inherent Righteousness of Christ," if by this he
intends our Sanctification, or good Habits, and good Works performed by the Aid
of the Spirit, does not he here again give another fair Invitation to bring us
to Rome? And we hope we will be excused from setting our Face that Way, till we
be once convinced, that it is the sure Road to eternal Happiness. Are not these
Doctrines full of Arminianism? And it is no Wonder, that we are surprised to
find them in his own Writings, and to hear him continually applaud Mr. Westly,
who (we are informed) is an Arminian, when we find him cry them down in all but
themselves: We detest these Errors in both, and cannot see through this Piece
of Management.

But possibly by inherent Righteousness, in vol. 1. p. 16. he understands the
Righteousness of Christ inherent in us; if so, we hope every one will desire to
know, as well as ourselves, how the infinite Righteousness of Jesus Christ can
inhere in a finite Creature? Unless, as has been already observed, he make the
Believer in some Measure equal with God; but when we compare this with Mr.
Flavel's 2d Appendix, vol. 1. Fol. and find it the seventh Antinomian Error,
that he there condemns, what can we say? When we find Mr. Whitefield
countenancing Mr. Westly's Preface to Halyburton's Memoirs, which is big with
Antinomian Absurdities; when he can applaud that Gentleman, and not discover
the false Divinity, that he has there sent abroad to poison the World; Can we
think that himself is sound? When he tells us in his Letter against the Book,
entitled, The Whole Duty of Man, p. 4, and 5. "That God never made a second
Covenant with Adam himself, nor any of his Posterity; That it is a Promise and
no Covenant; That there are no Terms nor Conditions in it. "We cannot take his
bare Word, while we think that above one Hundred and Fifty Texts in our Bibles
assert the contrary. How many of our ablest Divines have long since refuted
this wild Antinomian Notion? And among others, Mr. Flavel, Vol. 1. Fol. in his
2d Appendix, where he exposes it as the Ninth of their Errors.

When we find him, vol. 1. p. 7. giving Reasons why Men must be New Creatures,
in order to qualify them to be savingly in Christ; Why does he condemn
Archbishop Tillotson, Letter First against the Archbishop, page the 3d. for
showing the Nature of Regeneration and its Necessity, in order to our
Justification and Salvation? Is not the New Creatu^^ in Mr. Whitefield, and the
Regenerate in the Archbi^^op's Words, of the same Meaning and Import? Is not
being Savingly in Christ, as the First expresses it, and obtaining
Justification and Salvation, as the other has it, the very same Thing? Why did
not Mr. Whitefield correct this Error in his own Writings, as well as in the
others? If it be an Error in the one, to say, That we must be regenerate or be
New Creatures, in order to Justification and Salvation, or being savingly in
Christ, is it not so in the other? Or, does Mr. Whitefield's expressing the
same Error in different Words, make it a Gospel Truth? We dislike what looks
like the Arminian in both, and we hope none of his Friends will blame us for
this, when he sometimes does it himself.

If we have dropped any Expressions in our Queries, that may in any wise
displease any other religious Society, we hope they will pardon our Bluntness;
we profess a hearty Charity and Good Will toward all that hold the fundamental
Truths of the Gospel; we claim no Dominion over any Man's Conscience, but
cheerfully allow every one the Liberty we take, to judge for ourselves, to seek
for the best Information he can get in such weighty Concerns, and to adhere to
what Doctrines are most agreeable to the holy Scriptures: But when we find any
Person profess one Thing, and yet seem to run into another; when any of another
Denomination seem to come nearer to us than others of our Neighbors, when at
the same Time we imagine, that he is at as great or even a greater Distance
than they, we cannot help having a worse Opinion of such Practices, than
theirs, who plainly tell us in what they agree with us, and in what we differ.
If any Weakness or Mistakes be discovered in this, and what follows, by Mr.
Whitefield, or any of our Christian Brethren, and it be pointed out with a
Spirit of Meekness, we gain our End, which is only to be able to find out and
maintain the Truth: And that the Holy Spirit may guide us all in the Ways of
Truth, and preserve us from Errors, is the earnest Prayer of your sin^^^
Friends,

The Querists.

The Humble ADDRESS of several Persons of the Presbyterian Persuasion, being
Members of several Congregations in our Bounds, to the Presbytery of
New Castle, met at Whiteclay Creek, September the Ninth 1740.
THE venerable and sacred Character the Reverend Mr. Whitefield bears, as an
incomparable Reformer; and the high Commendations given to his public
Performances and Writings, both from the Pulpit and Press, as well as in
private Conference, and that, by some Ministers and People of our own
Denomination, having raised our Expectations very high, we were induced to
attend his Sermons, and to read and peruse his Books, hoping to receive much
Light and Benefit thereby: But, upon the best Perusal we could make of them,
albeit, we find that a great Part of his Writings do answer the Character given
them, as being sound, yet, to our great Surprise, we every now and then stumble
upon something that seems to jar with those sounder Parts, as well as with
other good Books; and, if we be not much mistaken, with Scripture and sound
Reason. -- Our Jealousies hereanent, whether Right or Wrong, giving us some
Uneasiness, we were much perplexed what to do: If we should think of going to
some of Mr. Whitefield's warm Adherents, we were afrai^^ by reason of the
Treatment that others (and it may be some of ourselves) met with, that nothing
could be expected thereby, but incensing them against us, to call us blind and
carnal Men, as usual. Now, though Mr. Whitefield himself, by some Part of his
Writings, would seem to be a Man of another Spirit and Sentiments from such
warm inconsiderate Adherents, as appears by many Expressions in his Letters
against Archbishop Tillotson, and the Author of the Book entitled The Whole
Duty of Man; particularly by his taxing the Dissenters for acting very
partially, for not speaking so explicitly as they ought, against the
Archbishop's Doctrine, when known to be contrary to the Truth of the Gospel,
albeit, the Archbishop was their Friend, and behaved with much Moderation
toward them, whilst he lived; we cannot see, how he could, consistent with
this, tax any of the Lovers of Truth for acting unchristianly, for enquiring
into the Reasons of some of his Assertions, when we judge, that they appear to
us as contrary to Truth as some of the said Archbishop's Doctrines: For, if we
mistake not, it is the Duty and Privilege of every doubting Christian, to
enquire into the Reasons of the plainest Scripture-Doctrine, when he hesitates
about it: But we should not speak explicitly against any Doctrine, but what
upon mature Deliberation we have found false. But when we consider the
Treatment a Neighboring Minister had from Mr. Whitefield's warm Adherents, and
their Cries still against him, for desiring a Conference with Mr. Whitefield,
about some Points in his Sermon, which said Minister was in Doubts about; we do
despair of Access to him. -- The only Remedy therefore left us, to solve us of
our Doubts, as we see, is, an Address to you our Teachers, now in Presbytery
met, and setting our Scruples in order before you: And we promise, that if you,
or any of you, can satisfy us with Scripture and sound Reason, we shall not
only cheerfully submit to the same, but also return you our most hearty Thanks,
^^counting the Discovery of Truth our Gain and Joy. But if you decline, or
cannot agree among yourselves, about solving us here in, we desire your
Judgments, whether it be any Breach of order, for us, at our own Expenses, and
such as shall join with us, to put our Scruples into print, that so there may
be an Opportunity given to Mr. Whitefield to clear his Doctrine, if
misrepresented or misapprehended by us: And that we may make a fair Essay to
have our Doubts cleared, which for the present seem to be Bars and Letts to
hinder us to join with our Christian Brethren in Matters of common Concern,
with that Oneness of Mind and Heart, which is desirable and necessary for our
mutual Comfort: For when one Side is as Zealous for, as the other is Jealous of
a controverted Point, and Assertions about it in Matters of Conscience, it is
well known how difficult it is to go Hand in Hand. We find by Experience, that
the other Side have their Difficulties to entertain a good Opinion of those
Ministers that except against some of Mr. Whitefield's Expressions as unfound:
And we, according to our present Light, find it hard to entertain a good
Opinion of those that proclaim all his Doctrines sound in the strongest Terms.
We have therefore endeavored to put our Scruples in the most inoffensive Way
we could, by not only Transcribing some Paragraphs out of Mr. Whitefield's
printed Writings; but also, according to our Capacities, we have endeavored to
propose our Doubts by raising proper Queries upon such Paragraphs, as follows.

First, Mr. Whitefield in his Sermon on Acts 19.5. Page 5. See Vol. II. of
Sermons, printed at Philadelphia, Page 17.
where speaking of Man's Creation, he has these Words, viz. He, that is, God,
breathed into Man the Breath of spiritual Life, and his Soul became adorned
with all the Perfections of the Deity.

Q. I. Must not that Man have either very diminutive Thoughts of God, or else
monstrously exalted Thoughts of Man, that can think, mu^^ more speak and write,
that the Soul of Man in its best State was adorned with all the Perfections of
the Deity! What then is become of the Distinction, that all sound Divines make
between the communicable and incommunicable Attributes of God? Does not
Scripture and Reason support this necessary Distinction? If the Soul of Man was
adorned with all the Perfections of the Deity, without Exception of any, what
is the native and necessary Consequence therefrom, but that the Soul then was
in some sort equal to God; which is too horrid to utter, without a Detestation
of it? Were not Expressions of this Import condemned for Blasphemies in the
Mouths of Fox and Naylor?

II. In the same Sermon, p. 9. [ Vol. II. p. 22. 23.] Mr. Whitefield speaking
of the Regenerate, when fallen into Sin, has these Words: He, i. e. the
Regenerate Person, quickly Rises again, and goes out from the World, and weeps
bitterly, washes away the Guilt of Sin, by the Tears of a sincere Repentance,
joined with Faith in the Blood of Jesus Christ.

Quer. I. Is not the Blood of Christ to be applied by Faith, the sole or only
Laver, to wash away the Guilt of Sin, 1 John 1.7. It Is true, Faith in grown
Believers, to make Application of his Blood to the Soul, must be exercised
thereon: And it is true, that a Believer must renew the Exercises of
Repentance, in order to regain the Sense of Pardon; but still, what solely
obtains the Pardon, and blots out the Guilt, is the Blood of the attoning
Sacrifice. Is it not by our Justification that the Guilt of Sin is washed away?
How then can there be any room to join our Tears with Faith in the Blood of
Christ, to justify us before God, without we suppose the Satisfaction of the
Cross to be incomplete? By what Art can our Tears be joined with Faith in the
Blood of Christ to cleanse away the Guilt of Sin? What Quantity of the one and
of the other will make a due Composition, without Spoiling the Whole? Why may
not some Grains of new Obedience be again added to our Tears to make the
Composition more complete; for surely this is Duty, and a necessary Fruit of
Faith as well as godly Sorrow, and as inseparable from it?

Quer. II. How is this consistent with what Mr. Whitefield himself says, in
his Letter against the Book entitled the Whole Duty of Man, p. 6. God's Law was
honorable, Jesus Christ fulfilled it in our steads; and upon account of that
Righteousness imputed to us, and received by Faith, and not on our hearty
Endeavor or Repentance, are we accepted by him?" What is there in our hearty
Endeavor or Repentance, to recommend us to the Favor of God, or render them
worthy of being joined with the Righteousness of Christ; as though that was not
sufficient of itself? Further, Mr. Whitfield adds the Words of pious Bishop
Beveridge to the same purpose, p. 7. who says, Nay, I cannot confess my Sins,
but my very Confessions are still Aggravations of them: My Repentings need to
be repented of: My Tears need Washing; and the very Washing of my Tears need
still to be washed over again with the Blood of my Redeemer. Now, if Mr.
Whitefield speaks right in p. 8. of the same Letter; for there is no hopes of
bringing People to the right Knowledge of the Gospel, till their favorite,
though erroneous Authors, are discountenanced and laid aside: and it is therefore
accounted a becoming Zeal in Mr. Whitfield to write warmly and keenly against
the Writings of others, upon this Account; How then can others be blamed for
opposing such Expressions in Whitefield's Books as are as erroneous as those he
condemns in others? Nay, should not Mr. Whitefield, and his warm Adherents, be
as careful in Correcting his own Sermons as the Books of others, if found
faulty in some of the same Points, or other Points as material? If it be said,
that Mr. Whitefield is so busily employed in Preaching, and Writing against
other Men's Writings, that he has no time to look back upon his former
Writings; may not some of his Adherents assist herein to a good Purpose? Or if
a By-Stander should mark some of those Expressions that look exceptionable; by
what Rule, but that of Contraries, can he be judged an Opposer of God's Work,
or of the Gospel?

III. In the same Sermon, p. 18. [ vol. 2. p. 33.] He says, You have passed
through the Pangs of the New Birth, and now rejoice, that the Man Christ Jesus is
spiritually formed in your Hearts. To the same purpose, if we rightly apprehend
it, is what we find in the Letter aforesaid, p. 5. where paraphrasing upon
those Words, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head; Mr.
Whitefield writes thus, The Seed of the Woman, i. e. Jesus Christ (who in all
probability was spiritually conceived that Instant in the Heart of Eve) shall
bruise the Serpent's Head: Agreeable to which Notion, we have in Mr.
Whitefield, Vol. I. of Sermons, printed at Philadelphia, p. 53. The many Souls
that are nourished weekly by the spiritual Body and Blood of Jesus Christ by
your Means.

Quer. I. Had the Man Christ Jesus a real though a spiritual Being or Conception
in the Days of Eve?

Quer. II. What or who was that which was spiritually conceived that Instant in
the Heart of Eve, wherein the Promise was given, but the New Creature, or the
Image of Christ? If so, in what sense can the New Creature, or Image of Christ
in us, be called the Seed of the Woman, or the Man Christ Jesus? Is the Man
Christ Jesus, and the New Creature in us, one and the same? Are we to believe
in the New Creature, as the Christ held forth in this Promise? How, or when,
did this New Creature, or this spiritual Man Christ Jesus, who then had a
Conception, bruise the Serpent's Head by his Obedience and Sufferings? Had the
Man Christ Jesus, as the Seed of the Woman, any other Conception, besides that
supernatural One by the Power of the Holy Ghost, in the Womb of the Virgin
Mary? We would be glad to know, where there is any scripture Ground to support
the spiritual Conception of Christ, as the Seed of the Woman; or the spiritual
Manhood of Christ? Are not these Notions as unintelligible as those of Barclay
in his Apology, p. 135, 136. where he speaks of the Christ within? It is true,
the Apostle speaks of Forming of Christ in us, Gal. 4.19. but are not we to
understand that Place as intending the Image, and not the Person of Christ, as
God-Man? much less, can we understand it of Christ, as the Seed of the Woman,
or as Man. We hope we do (according to our Measure) understand what it is to
feed on a crucified Christ, but yet, we would desire to know what is that
spiritual Body and spiritual Blood, with which Souls are nourished? Is this
spiritual Body and Blood of Christ Humane or Divine? Are these finite or
infinite? Was it not the natural Body of Christ that suffered for us? Was it
not the natural Blood of Christ that was shed for our Sins? How then can we
feed upon the spiritual Body and Blood of Jesus Christ, which never (as we know
of) had a Being in Heaven, nor on Earth? It is true, we own, according to the
Scriptures, that Christ's Soul and Body have undergone a glorious and an
ineffable Change; so that if we speak of Christ's Body, as it now subsists in
an exalted State, it may well be called a spiritual Body: But yet, when we feed
by Faith on a crucified Christ, does not Faith look to Christ's Body as Hanging
on the Cross; and to the real Sufferings of Christ in his humane Nature in a
State of Humiliation, as what atones Justice for us, and as what feeds and
nourishes our Souls?

IV. In the aforesaid written Letter against the Book entitled, The Whole Duty
of Man, wherein Mr. Whitefield quotes the 17th Paragraph of the Preface of that
Book, wherein the Author, as Mr. Whitefield observes, talking of the Second
Covenant, speaks thus: The Second Covenant, says he, was made with Adam, and us
in him, presently after his Fall, and is briefly contained in these Words, Genesis
3.15. where God declares, that the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's
Head: And this was made up, as the First was, of some Mercies to be afforded us
by God, and some Duties to be performed by us. Who that is any way enlightened,
cannot but see the false Divinity and fundamental Errors of this Passage: For
how can it be proved, that the Second Covenant was made with Adam, or that God
ever entered into any Covenant at all with Man after he had broken the First? It
is true, God the Father did enter into a Second Covenant (and that from all
Eternity) with the Second Adam, the God-Man Christ Jesus, in our stead: But it
cannot be proved, that he made any Second Covenant at all with Adam himself, or
any of his Posterity.

Before we come to propose Queries on this Head, it may not be amiss to premise
a Word or two, to prevent Mistakes, viz.

I. We freely grant that Christ Jesus is our Second Adam, our common Head and
Surety in the Second Covenant, and that the First Adam was only a private
Believer or Person, and so must come in, or enter into Covenant with God by or
through a Mediator, and at a Second Hand (if we may so speak) as well as we his
Posterity. And when we read the 16th Paragraph of the Preface of that before
cited Book, we cannot but judge that the Author thereof does fully own this,
when he says, For though by that Sin of Adam all Mankind were under the Sentence
of eternal Condemnation, yet it pleased God so far to pity our Misery, as to
give us his Son, and in him to make a new Covenant with us, after we had broken
the First. Thus far the Author seems sound enough.

Whether the next Paragraph that Mr. Whitefield condemns may bear a favorable
Construction, we leave you to judge; but we cannot but heartily join with him
in showing our Dislike to whatsoever in any Author may mislead the Weak or
Ignorant, or countenance the Erroneous: Yet, whether this may lay a Foundation
for such a hard Censure as that he was not a Real Christian at Heart, or had
not so much as a Head Knowledge of the Gospel of Christ, as Mr. Whitefield
asserts, is what we are at a Loss to determine? How would Mr. Whitefield, or
some of his warm Adherents, like it, if another would take the same Liberty to
censure his Writings, and him for them, to the same Degree? Upon the like
Ground, we must, and do condemn the Author of The Whole Duty Duty of Man, for
Asserting that the Second Covenant was made with Adam, and us in him, if
thereby is meant, his being our Public Head and Surety in the Second Covenant.
And may not we also condemn Mr. Whitefield for running into another Extreme and
an Error, that seems as dangerous as this, in Asserting that God never made any
Second Covenant at all with Adam himself, or any of his Posterity? And must beg
leave to lay before you the following Queries.

Quer. I. How can Christ be a Mediator of the new Covenant, if there be no
other Parties in the Covenant, but God the Father, and Christ engaging for us?
Must not the Elect or Believers, be considered as a third Party in the second
Covenant?

Quer. II. How can the new Covenant be called a Testament, and Christ the
Testator of it, if there be no Parties in it but the Father and him? He
receives all from the Father as Mediator: On whom then does he bestow Legacies,
without there be a third Party in this Covenant?

Quer. III. How is the second Adam, Christ Jesus, a public Head and Surety of
his elect Seed, unless such come under the Bond of the second Covenant; and
that not only virtually, as Elect, but also in Time actually as Believers; so
that the Covenant may be truly said, to be established and made with them in
Christ?

Quer. IV. How can any justify Mr. Whitefield's Calling the Second Covenant a
bare Promise, and that in a Way of Distinction from and Opposition to its being
a Covenant? when the Apostle calls it, in Respect of the several Editions of
it, the Covenants of Promise, Ephesians. ii. 12. Is there any Promise made to the
Sinner or Believer, but what is or may be, yea, must be owned to be a second
Covenant Promise? And are not all that are Strangers to the Covenant of
Promise, or out of the Bond of the second Covenant, without God, without
Christ, and without Hope? How poor then is the Condition of all the Posterity
of Adam, if it cannot be proven, that God did make any second Covenant with any
of them? Must not then all of them be under the Law as a broken Covenant, and
under the Curse thereof, without Remedy?

Quer. V. If there be not any second Covenant at all made with Adam himself, or
any of his Posterity; what then can we make of plain Scripture Texts, that
speak of God's Covenanting or making a Covenant with Men, Genesis 17.7, Deuteronomy. v.
2. xxix. 10.15. 2 Samuel 23.5. 1 Kin. 8.9.2^. Isai. 55.3. Jer. 31.33. Heb. 8.10.
Hos. 2.18, 19. with many more that may be quoted to the same Purpose? Do not we
on the other Hand, read of Men's covenanting with God, 2 Kin. 23.3. 2 Chronicles.
34.31. 2 Chronicles. 29.10. Ne^. 9.38? How can we give up the many Scores of
Scripture Texts, that seem plainly to import, that the second Covenant is made
with Believers in Christ Jesus? Wou^d this be Reformation? May not we as
rationally give up the whole Bible, as any considerable Part of it? Will it do,
that we believe as Mr. Whitefield speaks or writes contrary to plain Scripture
Texts?

Quer. VI. Is it any Thing like a solid Way of Arguing, for Men to say, that
there is a Covenant of Redemption, therefore there is no Covenant of Grace;
when the very Design of the one was to lay a Foundation for the other: Or,
because there is a Covenant made with the Redeemer, therefore there is none
made with the redeemed Ones, to whom Christ is said to be given as a Covenant
of the People? Is it any Argument, that because there was a Covenant made with
Christ as Second Adam and public Head of his Elect-Seed; therefore there was
no Covenant made with his Seed in Time? Is it any Argument that because there
was a Counsel of Peace from all Eternity, between the Father and the Son, that
therefore there is no Covenant of Peace and Reconciliation transacted in Time,
through the Mediator, with fallen Sinners? How could the former be of any Use
without the latter follow?

Quer. VII. If it be said, that the second Covenant could not be made with
Adam, or any of his Posterity, because it was made primarily with Christ; may
not we as well say, that the first Covenant was not at all made with us,
because it was made primarily with Adam, as our Surety and Covenant-Head? Was
not the very making of the first Covenant with Adam, as a public Person, the
making of that Covenant at least virtually with us in him? Was not the making
of the second Covenant with Christ as a public Person, virtually the making
that Covenant with us? Did not the Consent of our Representative make us
Parties in the first Covenant? Why then will not the Consent of the second Adam
make his Covenant-Seed Parties in his Covenant as well? If the Consent of our
Representative does not make us Parties in the first Covenant, how are we born
under the Guilt of Adam's first Sin? How are Infants in the Womb bereaved of
Original Righteousness and born in Sin? Is not the Original Pollutions of our
Natures the Fruit and Punishment of the first Transgression of Adam? If an
implicit Consent to the Terms of the first Covenant in grown Persons, and
acting accordingly, be a Bond firm enough to keep and hold us Parties in that
Covenant; Why will not an explicit Consent to the Terms of the second Covenant
make us Covenanters with God? Do not Believers, when they come to believe and
profess Faith in Christ, as expressly and explicitly enter under the Bond of
the second Covenant, as any of the Sons of Adam ever entered into the Bond of
the first? Besides, if the Consent of our Head and Surety in the second
Covenant, does not make us Subjects and Parties in the Covenant; How then can
Infants be regenerated and saved?

Quer. VIII. If there be not any second Covenant at all made with Men, how can
the Sacraments be called sealing Ordinances? Can they seal the Covenant to us,
if it be true there is none made with us? Can the Covenant be confirmed to us
by Seals, before, or without it is made with us? And does not Mr. Whitefield
seem to allow, that the Sacraments are sealing Ordinances? when he says in his
Journal, p. 110, This Day 24 Years, was I baptized; Lord! to what little
Purpose have I lived? However, I sealed my baptismal Covenant with my dear
Savior's most blessed Body and Blood, and trust in his Strength I shall keep
and perform it. Now, what Covenant is that, which is transacted over between
God and Believers in all Ages, in the Use of sealing Ordinances, if it be not
the Covenant of Grace, or the second Covenant?

V. In the same Letter, p. 4, Mr. Whitefield further asks, Where any Covenant
is contained in these Words, 'The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's
Head,' and how it is 'made up of some Mercies to be afforded by God and some
Duties to be performed by us?' Here is a Free Gift and Promise of Salvation
made to Adam, but no Covenant. Here is not a Word of a Condition mentioned. --
No, it was the Free Gift of God in Christ. --

Quer. I. Was not here (besides a Promise of Salvation through Christ) so also
the Promise of Christ himself to be a Savior and Covenant of the People herein
included and primarily intended?

Quer. II. Though we freely grant there is no express Condition mentioned in said
Promise, yet we would again ask, Does not every Promise in our Bible, in the
Nature of it, require Faith to believe and embrace it, before we can reap the
Benefit of it, and consequently contain an implicit Condition? Besides, what
are the both Testaments, but a fuller Explication of this Promise? and is it
not evident, that there are many conditional Promises added to the absolute
Promises, that so we may have a complete View of this Covenant? Can any Man
expect to have a truer View of the second Covenant, as to the complete Nature
of it, in that initial and first Edition of it, than by a fuller View of all
its Editions compared together? Are there not many weighty Truths and Lessons
to be learned from the after Editions thereof, touching the Nature of this
Covenant, which are of absolute Necessity to Salvation, now under the
Dispensations we are under? Is not there more required of those that received
more?

Quer. III. Whether it be not as great an Error in Divinity, to deny consequent
Conditions or Duties in the second Covenant, as to assert antecedent Conditions
therein? Does not the one run as far into the Antinomian as the other runs in
the Arminian Scheme; and so leave the true Gospel Doctrine, or Calvinistical
and Lutheran Scheme, in the middle between these two strained Extremes? Does
not the Law as a Rule of Life, require Duties of those that are delivered from
under the Law as a Covenant? If there be no Duties required in the second
Covenant, to what Purpose are we so often pressed to the Performance of them,
in the Old and New Testament; and why are the Neglecters of them so often
blamed and reproved?

Quer. IV. Whether Mr. Whitefield well agrees with himself or Truth, in
seemingly denying any Condition or Duties in the second Covenant one while, as
may be seen in the forecited Letter, p. 4, 5. when he himself elsewhere presses
Men to perform those easy Conditions prescribed by our Savior, as necessary to
Salvation, and upon Pain of Damnation, as appears by p. 71 and 92 of Vol. 1. of
his Sermons printed at Philadelphia?

VI. Mr. Whitefield, in his Sermon on Job. vii. 37, 38, 39. in his opening or
explaining the Apostle's Commission, p. 8, 9. [ vol. 2. p. 128.] has these
Words, viz. For though we translate these Words, baptizing them in the Name;
yet as the Name of God, in the Lord's Prayer, and several other Places,
signifies his Nature, they might as well be translated thus, baptizing them
into the Nature of the Father, into the Nature of the Son, and into the Nature
of the Holy Ghost?

Quer. I. Whether it be not an Error to say, that by God's Name, in the Lord's
Prayer, we are to understand his Nature? Are not we to understand by God's Name
there, his Word, his Works, his Ordinances, especially his Titles, Attributes,
and every Thing whereby God makes himself known, as we are taught by other
Authors?

Quer. II. Whereas Mr. Whitefield before acknowledges, that this Commission
authorizes Ministers to baptize the proper Subjects of Baptism in all Ages, we
would ask, In what Age of the New Testament Church, could mere Men fulfill it,
in the Sense Mr. Whitefield gives of it, by baptizing Men into the Nature of
the Father, and into the Nature of the Son, and Holy Ghost? What can be meant
by baptizing Men into the Nature of the Father, etc. unless it be regenerating
Men? If so, can one Man regenerate another? How then could this Commission be
fulfilled? If the Priest can fulfill this Commission in this Sense of it, why
may not he as well turn the Bread and Wine in the other Sacrament, into the
true Body and Blood of Christ^? And when Mr. Whitefield, as we have noted
already, speaks elsewhere of the spiritual Body and spiritual Blood of Jesus
Christ, with which Souls are nourished, we would ask, whether this does not
savor something of Transubstantiation? For though we freely own, according to
the Scripture, that God prepared him a natural Body, which he offered once a
Sacrifice for Sin; yet we would know a Creature of whose making is Christ's
spiritual Body and Blood, if it be not a Creature of the Priest's Making?

VII. Quer. I. How does Mr. Whitefield agree with himself, when in p. 9. [ vol
2. p. 128.] of last cited Sermon, he says, It is evident, that we all must
actually receive the Holy Ghost, ever we can say, that we truly believe in
Jesus Christ, compared with what he says in p. 18. [ vol 2. p. 137.] of the
same Sermon, which is as follows, viz. For notwithstanding you are all now sunk
into the Nature of the Beast and the Devil, yet if you truly believe on Jesus
Christ, you shall receive the quickening Spirit promised in the Text, and be
restored to the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God? Does not Mr. Whitefield in
this last Clause seem to make true Faith an antecedent Condition to Men in the
State of Nature, to be performed by them in order to receive the quickening
Spirit? May not a dead Man walk as easy as this? Is not there better Divinity
in that Paragraph of the Book entitled The Whole Duty of Man, excepted against,
than this, when he says, that the third Thing Christ was to do for us, was to
enable us, or give us Strength, to do what he requires of us? Now, if we must
truly believe, ere we receive the quickening Spirit, are we not left to our own
Strength in the first and most difficult Step?

VIII. In the Vol. I. of Whitefield's Sermons, printed at Philadelphia, p. 7.
Whether or no Mr. Whitefield's Doctrinal Query or Proposition, which runs thus,
why we must be new Creatures, in order to qualify us for being savingly in
Christ, be not of the same Purport, and amount to as much Heterodoxy, as what
Archbishop Tillotson says, by entitling his Book, On the Nature of
Regeneration, and its Necessity in order to our Justification and Salvation?
And may not the same Consequences be as natively drawn from the former, that
Mr. Whitefield draws from the latter, in his first Letter against the
Archbishop, p. 3.?

IX. In Vol. I. p. 14. Whether or no Mr. Whitefield's calling Prayer, Fasting,
Hearing, Reading, and the Sacraments, not only Means, but also essential Ones
too, be not popish Dialect? We own the Means of Grace and Use of them,
necessary to us, because commanded; but cannot God save Men without them?

X. In Vol. I. p. 16. Mr. Whitefield has these Words, It is to be feared we
shall be found naked at the great Day, and in the Number of those who vainly
depend on their own Righteousness, and not on the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, imputed to and inherent in them, as necessary to their eternal
Salvation.

Quer. I. How can the Righteousness of Christ, which is infinite Righteousness,
inhere in any finite Creature? Must not we be equally righteous with Christ
himself, if his Righteousness inhere in us? If Christ's Righteousness inhere in
us, where should there be any Room for, or Need of the Imputation of it to us?

Quer. II. If it be said that Mr. Whitefield intends no more than the Necessity
of inherent Righteousness, as Part of our Sanctification, then we would ask, is
this to be depended upon as well as imputed Righteousness? Or, are we to have
and exercise a joint Dependence upon inherent and imputed Righteousness, as the
Righteousness of Christ? Is not this Calvinism and Quakerism mixed together? Is
it not the false Notion that Mr. Whitefield elsewhere seems to entertain of a
real, though a spiritual forming of the Man Christ Jesus in Believers, the Ground
of his Error in this Point?

XI. In Vol. I. p. 79. where Mr. Whitefield, speaking of Self-denial and a
single Aim at God's Glory, has these Words, It is this, my Brethren, that
distinguishes the true Christian from the mere Moralist and formal Professor,
and which alone can render any of our Actions acceptable in God's Sight.

Quer. I. Whether Men may not aim at God's Glory in those Actions done in a
blind Zeal? And may not some such deny themselves, in giving up their own
Understandings and Wills, Believing and Acting as the Church, or their Guides
do? Are such Actions, when contrary to Rule, acceptable merely upon Account of
a good Aim? It is hard to say, but that Uzzah might have a good Aim in
stretching forth his Hand to touch the Ark; but did not the Event prove that
the Action was not acceptable?

Quer. II. Must not all good Actions proceed from a good Principle, be done in
a right and due Manner, and for a good End; and after all, must not the Merits
of Christ be the sole Cause of the Acceptance of such Actions? How Harsh does
it sound in the Ears of all true Protestants, that any Thing in the Action
itself, be proclaimed as the alone Cause or Reason of its being acceptable in
God's Sight?

XII. Mr. Whitefield in his Journal, p. 20. speaking before of the Scotch and
English Protestants keeping distinct Societies at Gibraltar, makes this Remark,
What a Pity it is that Christ's seamless Coat should be rent in Pieces on the
Account of Things in themselves purely indifferent!

Quer. I. What is meant by Christ's seamless Coat that is rent in Pieces by
Men's meeting in different Places to worship God in a Way that seems to them
most agreeable to God's Word; when in some of those Places, Things in
themselves purely indifferent, and more than that (as has been often shown)
some Things of a more dark and doubtful Nature, at least according to the
Apprehension of the one Side, are imposed as necessary Terms of Communion? Does
not Men's Agreements in Fundamentals save the seamless Coat whole, though Men
worship in different Places, because of disagreement in some lesser Points.

Quer. II. Does not Mr. Whitefield's joining cordially (as we suppose) with
both Parties, by conforming to their different Ways and Modes, strengthen the
Hands of the one in imposing, and of the other in separating^ and so help to
make the Rent wider? It is true, he may in his Doctrine cry against the one and
the other for Bigotry, etc. But how is this convincing, when his Practice seems
to justify both Sides? May it not be supposed, that Men who are convinced in
their Judgments that the one Side or the other is in the Right, and act
accordingly, do seem to act as honest a Part as Men, and as Christians, as
those who jump in with, and jump out from all Parties in their several
differing Ways and Modes, according as the Gale seems to blow? May it not be
supposed, that he that has Catholicism enough to carry him through the several
differing Sects among Protestants, so as to join cordially with each, is in
great Danger of falling into a perfect Indifferency in some main Points, and so
be prepared to turn Roman at Rome, if a fair Gale drives him there? If
Antinomians, Arminians, and Calvinists, and Lutherans, while each of them
adheres to his different Scheme, should, for some politic End, lay aside their
Jarrs, and join Hands, and agree to make one Community or Church; whether there
may not be just Grounds to fear that such a Church may sooner turn a Babel,
than a Pillar of Truth? Whether it be an advisable Remedy, for Men to swallow
whole Pounds of Babel Bigotry, upon the bare Advice of some Hotheaded
Empyrick, to purge out a few Grains of Party Bigotry, till we know that the
former is of a purging Nature? We grant that Unity among all true Protestants
in the Truth, is very desirable, that so upon good Ground all Names of
Distinction might cease; but can any imagine, that that good End will be
obtained, by casting a Contempt upon a standing Ministry, and those, that in
some good Measure, have given good Proof of their Faithfulness for many Years;
and on the other Hand, by Idolizing raw unstable Novices with their unturned
Cakes, so as to give up fundamental Truths, standing Judicatures, good
Constitutions, scripture Order and Discipline, as a Sacrifice to obtain a
golden Dream of supposed Union we know not in what? If any Non-conformists are
so happy as to come over their Scruples in the Points of Conformity, is it not
all Reason, that Non-conformists should grant a Toleration, as far as their
Power reaches, to their Brethren to act accordingly? Only seeing some of their
Brethren are so weak as to labor under the same Scruples that they once seemed
to labor under, Is it any more but a reasonable Request, that they be not
active in over-turning the Constitution, Order and Discipline of the Church of
Scotland, till such a Time as we her poor Sons are either buried, or till we
have our conscientious Scruples removed so that we may be able to follow the
Crowd, who seem for the present to outrun us?

XIII. Journal p. 80. Whether or no Mr. Whitefield bidding Defiance to Satan in
these Words, O Satan! Satan! I defy thee to do thy worse, be an Expression that
calls for the Commendation given it in Mr. Finley's Letter?

XIV. Whether or no there be not an Insinuation of a Claim to immediate
Revelation, in the Expressions Mr. Whitefield drops in his Journal, p. 99.
saying, I pray God, I may be so blessed as to believe; for there will certainly
be a fulfilling of those Things, which God by his Spirit has spoken unto my
Soul; compared with p. 137. where he says, 'There are many 'Promises to be
fulfilled in me, etc.

XV. What was that Religious Concern which the true Ministers of Christ could
or should determine but by Lot, when they remained in Doubt about it after
Prayer, and that upon a Day of Fasting and Prayer, of which Mr. Whitefield
speaks in his Journal, p. 113? If the Word was silent, what need was there of
determining it? If the Word spoke, why was not the Sentence there given
decisive? What became of the High Degrees of the Spirit, when Men took such a
blind Way to solve their Doubts? Did the Spirit, and the Word disagree; or did
their several Trumpets give a various Sound? Is not the Use of Lots under the
present Dispensation, in religious Concerns, a flying out of the ordinary Road
to try an extraordinary expedient? and we would be glad to know how far this
may be safe? And further, we desire to know, how far it may be safe to trust to
such Guides who are so much in the Dark that they are obliged at Seasons to
solve their own Doubts by Lots?

XVI. Mr. Whitefield in his Journal, p. 127. says, I find I gain greater Light
and Knowledge by preaching Extempore; so that I fear I should quench the
Spirit, did I not go on to speak as He gives me Utterance?

Quer. I. If by preaching Extempore, be meant preaching without Premeditation
or Studying, we would ask whether any since the Days of Moses, that were sound
in the Faith, have said that they gained more scripture Light and Knowledge by
not reading and meditating on God's Word, than by so doing? Does not Mr.
Whitefield in this differ in Judgment from Dr. Edwards, as far as the Doctor
differed in other Points from Archbishop Tillotson?

Is it any Way likely, that God should own us the better, because we neglect
plain Duties, than if we perform them? If Mr. Whitefield means any thing else
by preaching Extempore, should he not explain himself, that so Quakers and
others may not be misled, to depend on immediate Impulses and Revelations by
such Hints?

Quer. II. Is there any Grounds of Fear of quenching God's Spirit, whether in
his ordinary or extraordinary Gifts, by performing the plain Duties of reading
of and meditating on God's Word? Is not here a plain Insinuation of immediate
Impulses, and Dependence thereupon? If Mr. Whitefield will allow us to try the
Spirits, what Spirit is that Mr. Whitefield fears to quench by reading the
Scriptures, or meditating on them? or by reading and studying other good Books,
or by writing his Sermons, and making a moderate Use of his Notes to help his
Memory? yea, would not this be much better than ma^kng plain Blunders for want
thereof, if Men's Memories do not serve them without this Care? for though we
own, that we like no Preacher the better for his using Notes, if he has a good
Invention and Memory to do well without them; yet, does not preaching with
Notes, if done to Purpose, require as much, if not more Premeditation and
Study, than when (...) are not used? for though we own, that Confidence and
Assurance may help Men to rub along, and a good Utterance may please many who
regard Sound more than Matter; yet, is it not evident, by comparing Mr.
Whitefield's printed Sermons with other good Sermon-Books, that some of our old
Scots Divines have more Matter in one Page than he has in several Pages? And
is it not true, that though Mr. Whitefield speaks many ^ound Truths on some
common Heads of Divinity, yet, we desire to know, what Point in Divinity is
that which some other Divines of our own have not more than trebbled him in
Distinctness, Exactness and Explicitness? And will any tell us what is the
Reason, that many late Sermons preached by Mr. Whitefield's warm Adherents, are
(if we mistake not) more barren of Matter and Method, than some of their former
Sermons, as being more hung on a common String, if this ^^^^eed not from Want
of Studying?

Quer. III. Did not the Prophets themselves, when destitute of divine immediate
Inspiration, use Reading and Meditating, in order to gain further Light and
Knowledge? 1 Pet. 1.10. Dan. 9.2. Did not Paul give it in Charge to Timothy,
though an Evangelist, to give Attendance to Reading, as well as Exhortation and
Doctrine? 1. Tim. 4.13, 15.

XVII. Mr. Whitefield, in his Journal, p. 129. says, Now know I, that I have
received the Holy Ghost at the Imposition of Hands. -- For, I feel it as much
as Elisha did, when Elijah dropped his Mantle. Nay, others see it also.

Quer. I. Whether the giving the Holy Ghost by the Imposition of Hands, was not
an extraordinary Gift, and now long ago ceased?

Quer. II. Can any suppose, that the ordinary Gifts and Operations of God's
Spirit, are so sensibly felt, or carry with them so clear a Demonstration, as
the extraordinary Ones did to the Prophets? When, or how could Mr. Whitefield
compare Feelings with Elisha?

XVIII. Mr. Whitefield in his Journal, p. 181. speaking of some Quakers, with
whom he conversed; and of his Disagreement with them about the Sacraments and
paying Tithes, adds, But I think their Notions about walking and being led by
the Spirit, right and good.

Quer. I. Do not Quakers in general cast off the written Word from being a
primary Rule of Faith and Practice, and make it at best but a secondary Rule,
which only some of them will grant; which, in Effect, is to say, that it is
none at all; for if Scripture be only a secondary Rule, then it is no Rule, for
a Rule must be primary in its Kind; for if so, the Scripture is no further a
Rule than thus, If the Spirit at Seasons, speaks well of any Part, that is then
to be followed; but if the Spirit does prompt to throw off any Part of it, then
it is not to be regarded; for the Spirit is not to be tried by the Rule of the
Scripture, as being a higher Rule? If this be not their Notion, we do not
understand their Writings.

Quer. II. How can Mr. Whitefield be thought sound and orthodox in this Point,
if he judges those that pretend to walk by immediate Revelations and Impulses,
have right and good Notions? Is not this different from the professed Judgment
of sound Churchmen and Dissenters in this Point?

Quer. III. If it be supposed these Quakers might have different Sentiments
from what their Sect have published to the World, should not Mr. Whitefield
then have told us, what their Notions were? Might not that be instructive to
their Friends, and prevent them from being misled by him, to think their own
Notions good, because Quakers?

XIX. Mr. Whitefield, in his Journal, p. 212. partly speaking and partly
writing to Mr. Kinchin, who, as it would seem, was under some Scruples about
the Habits, and some other Things, probably the Ceremonies and Canons in the
established Church, and so was like to leave the Church and turn Dissenter,
says thus, This, I must needs confess, gave me a great Shock: For I knew what
dreadful Consequences would attend a needless Separation from the established
Church. -- As for my own Part, I can see no Reason for leaving the Church,
however I am treated by the corrupt Members and Ministers of it: For I judge
the State of the Church, not from the Practice of its Members, but its
primitive and public Constitutions.

Quer. I. Whether a regular orderly Separation from the established Church,
upon the Account of conscientious Scruples, about the Vestments, Ceremonies,
etc. be a needless Separation? Is it not evident, to those that are any way
conversant in the late History of the Puritans, that many conscientious
Churchmen suffered severe Penalties, by Exclusions and Imprisonments, for not
conforming to those, before there was a separate Dissenter in England? Did not
many of the Bishops then declare against the Vestments, in plain Terms, who
complied afterward merely in Obedience to their Sovereign, as Head of the
Church? What are the dreadful Consequences that have attended such a
Separation, in conscientious and orthodox Dissenters, who have kept themselves
within the Limits of the Act of Toleration? Would not more dreadful
Consequences attend Men's conforming against the Dictates of their own
Consciences? Do not more dreadful Consequences attend Men's making Schisms, or
Factions in the Church, than by a quiet and peaceable Separation from it? Did
not Dr. Sacheverel, in his Time, make more Disturbance and Uproar, by raising
the Mobs and warming them, than all the Dissenters in England? In what Country
was it, that designing Men, that aimed to draw a Party after them, stopped at
conforming to the Modes and Ceremonies that were most admired by the Vulgar; at
least for a Time?

Quer. II. Whether Corruption in Ministers and Members, when incurable, either
for Want of Discipline, or the due Exercise of it, be not a just Cause of
Separation, to every one that judges in Conscience that Ministers and Members
are generally become corrupt? How far can such an one be judged to walk
regularly and conscientiously himself, who judges that Ministers and Members
are become corrupt in a Church, and yet withdraws not from such disorderly
and corrupt Brethren?

Quer. III. What Sort of a Reformer can he be, as to Doctrine or practical
Godliness, that judges the State of the Church from its primitive and public
Constitutions, and not from the Practice of its Members? If it be the Practice
of the Ministers to preach corrupt Doctrine, and the Practice of Members to
profess corrupt Principles, and to act accordingly, who can believe the State
of that Church to be good, let their primitive and public Constitutions be
never so good and orthodox? Who can doubt, but that the primitive Constitutions
were good in the Church of Rome? What great Degeneracies must Men run into,
before they have Courage enough to alter their public Constitutions, who think
after this Manner?

XX. Mr. Whitefield in his Journal, p. 216. cries out with some Emphasis, 'Oh!
what Advantage has Satan gained over 'us, by our Brother Kinchin putting off
his Gown!

Quer. I. What can be the Meaning of this O^tery* if something more than is
spoken be not intended? If the Gown be a thing entirely indifferent, what
Damage could it be to the main Cause that Mr Kinchin should put it off upon
conscientious Scruples, as well as Mr. Whitefield does at Seasons in point of
Liberty when among Dissenters? Does not Mr. Whitefield seem to hint in p. 214.
That the Kingdom of God does not consist in Externals? and what, but a Cloak,
is more external than a Gown? If a Catholicism be intended, why might not a
good Dissenter be of use in England as well as America, to carry it on? Has
not Mr. Whitefield made the Experiment of praying and preaching without it? and
does he find any more odds then, than when he has it on? Can any of
Whitefield's Opposers think, that he was so mean as to think that the Gown was
any of our spiritual Armor? Does not Bishop Latimer, at the Time of his being
stripped of the Vestments, seem to hint that the main Loss was that he could
make no more Holy Water? and unless that would help somewhat, why may not a Man
as well, in the Strength of Christ, wrestle with the Devil in his Coat?

XXI. Mr. Whitefield in his Journal, p. 234. in Answer to a Query proposed in
p. 233. says, as for the Business of an Attorney, I think it unlawful for a
Christian, at least exceeding dangerous: Avoid it therefore, and glorify God in
some other Station.

Quer. I. Why should the Business of an Attorney be thought unlawful, or at
least exceeding dangerous, if conscientiously discharged? Is not the Civil Law,
in its Place, as well as the Divine, still Good, if founded upon Equity, and
lawfully used? How can poor Farmers have the Privilege of the Law, unless they
are brought up to it themselves, without the Help of conscientious Attorneys,
well versed in the Law, to plead for them? What signifies our having good Laws,
without all the Subjects are somehow put in a Way to obtain the Privilege of
them in proper Season? Is it not more dangerous by far, for Men to trust Lives
and Fortunes in the Hands of unchristian Advocates and Judges? Are not Honest
and Christian Attorneys one great Defense, under God and the King, of our
Christian and Civil Privileges? What will engage Men to Faithfulness in such
Places, more than the true Fear of God, and the firm Attachment to true
Christian Principles, and their viewing of the Sacred and Civil Privileges of
others as their own in common with others? Have not even Quakers now adays in
Pennsylvania, come over their Scruples in this Point?

Quer. II. If a Civil Office in the Commonwealth be unlawful, at least
exceeding dangerous, how dangerous and unlawful must a Military-Office be? Must
it not of Consequence follow, that the Office of a General or Captain in an
Army be unlawful and dangerous with a Witness? And if any English Subject could
convert a great Part of the Fellow Subjects into such Principles as these now
in a Time of War, would it not be a Piece of common Justice for the Crown of
Spain to allow them at least as large a Pension as would maintain an Army equal
to the Number of that converted Party, if not a little larger, and let them
share in the Plunder, in case the Victory be got over the unconverted Party,
who hazard Lives and Fortunes for the public Defense of the Nation?

Thus we have laid before you what now occurs of conscientious Scruples. If we
have misunderstood any Paragraph herein cited, and thereby have been misled to
ask any improper Questions thereupon, we are willing to be set right in what we
are wrong; our Aim being to get right Information in these Points, and a fair
Resolution of our Doubts; hoping you will allow us the Liberty to lay our
Scruples before you in their full Strength, without which we see not how you
can be in a Way to resolve us full^ (...) our Answers. Albeit, we be not
accurate enough in every ^^^t to suit our Queries to your proper Paragraphs, as
Men of Learning might be able to do, by reason of their better Education. We
shall now conclude with a few general Queries upon the whole, and then submit
all to your mature Judgments.

Quer. I. Whether or no Men's high Pretenses to the Spirit, when their
Doctrines appear not to come up to that Degree of Accuracy which other Divines
have attained to, who never pretended to any thing extraordinary, be not liable
to Suspicion?

Quer. II. How can it be supposed, that any regular Reformation can be carried
on by a Combination of Anti^^nians, Arminians and Calvinists joining Hand in
Hand?

Quer. III. Whether or no the strange Fits and Convulsions, and the Noise of
Visions and Revelations, that seem to prevail along with this Scheme, be Matter
of Joy and Comfort, or of Grief?

Quer. IV. How could the Oxford Methodists, being at first a Company of young
Students in the College, be so liberal in making Alms and Deeds of Charity, so
as to be able to raise their Characters to an high Pitch upon this Account,
while poor Scholars, unless they had a large public Fund?

Quer. V. How comes it to pass, that many who never appeared to have any Regard
for Religion, nor seem to come nearer to join with any religious Society of any
Denomination, yet are, or seem to be very zealous for this new Scheme?

Quer. VI. Whether it be any true Sign of Reformation in Men, that when they
pretend to Conversion and high Degrees ^f spiritual Seize, that they
manifest more Hatred and R^^^ against their former pious Ministers and
Fellow Members, and declaim worse against them than against the Rabble and
Error ^f the Times, if current Reports be true, that many new Converts, they
call themselves, do so?

THese Remarks and Queries were considered maturely by the Presbytery of
New Castle, and it was agreed upon, that Mr. Whitefield being expected soon, to
come again into these Parts; therefore, a^ be best understands has own
Intentions, in these Expressions that seem to us to have a bad Aspect, (...)
leave it to the People to print their Remarks, and Mr. Whitefield himse^^ (...)
answer them. Mr. Alex. Hutchinson, Mr. Samuel Blair, and Mr. Charles Tennent,
voted thus. -- Mr. Whitefield being expected soon to come again into these
Parts, and as he best understands his own Intentions in such Expressio^ (...)
said Remarks, as seem to us to have a bad Aspect, we leave it to the (...) to
print their Remarks, and Mr. Whitefield himself to answer the^* ^^^ham M "Crea
and John Bravade chose this last State of the Vote likewise.

FINIS.

