CHRIST's Presence THE Glory of an House of Public Worship. A SERMON From
Haggai ii. 9. Preached at Hartford December 30th, 1739. At the Opening OF A New
Meeting House.

CHRIST's Presence THE Glory of an HOUSE OF PUBLIC WORSHIP
HAGGAI II. 9. The glory of this latter House shall be greater than of the
former, says the LORD of Hosts. --
WHEN the Jews returned from the Babylonish Captivity, they (according to the
direction and commandment of Cyrus the King of Persia) laid the foundation of
the house of God at Jerusalem, when some greatly rejoiced and others wept, as
you may see in Ezra 1st and 2d Chapters. But the Samaritans* who were mortal
Enemies to the Jews, by hiring Counselors and bribing some principal Persons
at the Persian Court, greatly retarded the work: So that from laying the
foundation, (...) seems to have been but little done to (...) finishing the
house until the second (...) Darius, which probably included the (...) about
seventeen Years. When being (...) up by the Prophets Haggai and Zechariah, and
encouraged by the decree of Darius in their favor, the work went on again.
Indeed, it seems as if the obstruction and opposition they met with from their
enemies was not the only Reason of the works ceasing so long as it did. Its
probable they had the common Excuse for not engaging in and neglecting to
prosecute Expensive Undertakings, viz The difficulty and hardness of the times
Chap. 1. ver. 2. This people say, The time is not. come that the Lord's house
should be built. But says the Prophet, ver. 4. Is it time for you to dwell in
your cieled houses, and (...) housely wast? As if he had said, You complain of
the times, yet they have not been so difficult, but that you have found means
and opportunity to build fine Houses for your selves, though ye are content to
let the House of God^ly in Ruins.

There are three things more especially which the Prophet sets before the Jews
to excite them to this work. As,

1. That their neglecting of it so long already was the reason that they
prospered no better. They were blasted and the work of their hands not blessed.
Ye have sown much says the Prophet, and bring in little, ye eat, but ye have
not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye cloathe you, but
there is n^ne warm; and he that earneth wages, earneth wages to put them into a
bag with holes. Ye looked for much, and lo, it came to little; and when ye
brought it home I did blow upon it; Why? says the Lord of hosts, because of
mine house that is waste, and ye run every man unto his own house, etc. Chap.
1. ver. 6, 9, 10, 11.

2. He promises them God's assistance and blessing, Chap. 1. ver. 13. I am with
you, says the Lord. And Chap. 2. ver. 19 From this day will I bless you. That
is from the day they engaged vigorously to carry on the work of God's house.

3. He encourages them to this work, by assuring them that the glory of this
House should be greater than that of the former. They might be under
discouragement, when they considered how far this house which they were about
to build, would fall short of the first Temple in beauty and glory. Ver. 3. of
Context, Who is left among you that saw this house ^n her first glory? And how
do you see it now? Is ^t not in your eyes in comparison of it as nothing?

It was this that made the ancient men weep then the foundation of this latter
house was (...), that it was like to be so much less glorious than the first
Temple. But to remove this difficulty and discouragement, he assures them that
the glory of this latter house should be greater than of the former, in our
Text. But how this could or should be is the Question For the former house
certainly exceeded the latter in Riches, magnificence of Building and external
Ornaments, as well as diverse tokens of the divine Favor, which the latter
house was destitute of* But the Question admits an easy Solution from our Text
and Context; and is obviously this, That Christ the desire of all Nations*
should during the standing of this second Temple or latter House, come and
honor it with his Presence Ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. For thus says the Lord of hosts,
Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth,
and the sea, and the dry land And I will shake all nations, and the desire of
all nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory says the Lord of
hosts. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the Lord of hosts. The
(...) this latter house shall be greater than of the (...) says the Lord of
hosts; --

Which is as if he had said, I will stir (...) all Nations, by Signs, by
Prophecies, and (...) mighty Wonders, a general expectation the Messiah, and in
the fullness of time (...) send him who can answer all their wants wishes; who
will be a Prophet to (...) them, a Priest to make Atonement, and (...) Advocate
to make Intercession for them, and may therefore deservedly be styled the
Desire of all Nations; and I will fill this House with glory* For though the
former Temple was very famous for many extraordinary things, for the Ark of the
Covenant, the U^im and Thummim, a vast profusion of Silver and Gold, and the
Angelical appearance on the Mercy-seat: Yet all these shall be nothing in
comparison of that Glory which shall redound on the present Temple, when this
divine Person shall vouchsafe to grace it with his Presence, as he certainly
shall do, during its standing. In other Ornaments, says the Lord, I could make
the splendor of this Temple as well as Solomon's, consist: For gold is mine
and silver is mine; but in this particular will I have it distinguished, and in
this shall the glory of the latter House be greater than that of the former,
viz. the Presence of the Messiah in it.

So that it was Christ's Presence in the second Temple, that rendered it more
glorious than (...) first. Both these Temples were Erected ^or the public
Worship of God to be perfor^ed in; but Chirst's Presence in the latter ^ndred
it more glorious than the former.

I shall not stay to show what Evidence the ^^ragraph of the Prophecy in which
our Text (...) affords to prove the Lord Jesus to be the Messiah of whom the
Prophet spoke (...) more agreeable to the circumstances (...) present season,
shall take notice of this (...) Inference from the words of our Text, as (...)
stand in connection with the Context, as (...) Subject of the ensuing
Discourse, viz.

DOCTRINE.
That its CHRIST's Presence in it, that renders a House of Public Worship
truly glorious.



Solomon's Temple had the advantage of the latter Temple in many respects, its
external Ornaments were more; its Workmanship was exceeding Curious, its
Overlayings vast and prodigious; and there were also some Extraordinary marks
of the divine Favor in it, which were not in the latter, as the Ark of the
Covenant, in which were put the Tables of the Law and the Mercy-seat, which was
upon the Ark: There was also tho symbol of the divine Presence in a visible
Cloud that rested over the Mercy-seat: The Urim and Thummim, by which the
High Priest consulted God in difficult and momentous Cases relating to the
public Interest of the Nation, and also the holy Fire which came down from
heaven upon the Altar, at the consecrating of the first Temple. I say these
were things that tended to render the first Temple glorious: But yet CHRIST's
Presence in the latter, rendered it ^ore glorious than the former. The Presence
of this glorious Person, rendered the latter House (which in the eyes of some of
the Jews was as nothing) far more glorious than the former.

But in the prosecution of the Doctrine, I shall consider and endeavor to show,

I. In what manner we may expect CHRIST's Presence in a House of public
Worship. And,

II. How his Presence renders it truly glorious.

I. I shall consider and show, In what manner we may expect the Presence of
CHRIST in a house of public Worship. As it was foretold of Christ, That he
should come into the Second Temple, so we read that he actually did; He was
personally and bodily Present there: When he was but Twelve years of age, we
read of his ^eing there, sitting in the Luke 2* 46, 47.
midst of the Doctors, both hearing them and asking them Questions; and all
that heard him were asto^ished at his understanding and Answers: and Luke 19.
47. and 20. 1.
of his teaching daily in the Temple and reaching the Gospel. But in this
manner we (...) not to expect him now in places or houses of public Worship:
His bodily Presenc^ (...) are not now to expect. We are not to (...) him
Personally and Visibly present among (...) in our worshipping Assemblies; for
he is ascended on high* the heavens have received him Acts 3. 21.
until the times of the restitution of all things But it is his spiritual
Presence, his gracious Presence by his Spirit, that we may now expect in houses
erected for his Worship. He assured his Disciples that he would be with them
always to the end of the world, Mat 28. 20. And in Mat 18. 20. He says, Where
two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them.
Though we are not now to expect his bodily Presence in our worshipping
Assemblies, yet his spiritual Presence we may, in houses set apart to honor
and worship this our Redeemer in. His Spirit is the Comforter, which before he
left the world he promised should abide with his Disciples forever, Joh. 14 16,
17, 26. Thus has Christ by his Spirit been present in places and houses o^
public Worship in ages past; and thus his Presence may be expected in them
yet, by them that are there gathered together in his Name.

But I proceed,

II. To show, How CHRIST's Presence render^ a House or place of public Worship
truly glorious.

Its curious Workmanship and external Ornaments may give it a splendid and
magnificent appearance, and render it in some respects glorious: But the true
and greatest glory of it is the Presence of CHRIST in it. The presence of a
Person of such Dignity, Excellency and Glory, graces and adorns it, vastly
beyond what the Art of man in its greatest perfection can do.

But particularly,

1. CHRIST's Presence renders a House of public Worship glorious, as it
assists and enables the Worshippers there, to worship God in an Acceptable
manner. Its the honor and glory of a house of public Worship, when the End
and design of its Erection is obtained; when God is worshipped in it in such a
manner as is acceptable to him; that is, in spirit and in truth; for such it is
that the Father seeks to worship him. But such a Worship will not be performed
without the presence and assistance of Christ: For without Him we can do
nothing, Joh. 15. 5. Without him all our acts of Worship will be of no
significancy: But through him we may find acceptance; our offerings come up as a
sweet savor before the Lord. That worship that is insincere, hypocritical, or
on any account unacceptable unto God, is very far from doing any honor to a
house of public Worship: But that worship which God accepts and manifests his
approbation of, does honor to (...) Place where it is performed. But its owing
(...) to Christ's Presence and Assistance when it (...) thus. By his Spirit we
are assisted in Praye^ which is no small part of public Worship Hence the
house of God was wont to be styled the House of Prayer. The teaching and
assistance of Christ, helps to an acceptable performance of this part of
public Worship. Sensible of their need of this, the Disciples of our Lord were
desirous that he would teach them to Pray. Its through his Mediation, Merits and
Intercession, that our Prayers, Praises, and all other parts of public Worship
are accepted with the Father; and when they are so, its an honor and glory to
the Place where they are offered.

2. CHRIST's Presence renders a House of public Worship glorious, as it is by
that, that the preaching of the word there is made Effectual for the Conviction
and Conversion of Sinners and the Edifying of Saints. Its owing to the Presence
of Christ, by his Spirit, when the word of God dispensed in his House becomes
like a fire and a hammer, breaking the rocky hearts of sinners in pieces: Its
owing to this when it is quick and powerful, sharper than a two edged sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, joints and marrow:
When its mighty to the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations,
and every high thing that ^^alts it self against the knowledge of God, and
^ringing into captivity every though it to the obe^ience of Christ. It contributes
much to the glory of an house of public Worship, when multitudes are Converted
there; when many are taught the good knowledge of the Lord, and are brought to a
saving acquaintance with Jesus Christ: When converts as a Cloud and as Doves to
their windows are hastening thither: When of this and that man it may be said,
That he was born there. Such a house then becomes a Seminary for Heaven, a
Nursery of Plants for the Celestial Regions, a Garden of the Lord. Here the
sinner is Converted, the saint Edified; here he finds spiritual Consolation and
that Refreshment that makes him grow in grace; and all this because Christ is
there. And those happy and glorious Effects of the word preached there, renders
such an house glorious in the sight of Angels and Men: Put a luster and beauty
upon it, so that such as pass by and observe it will be ready to say as Jacob
in another case, Surely God is Gen, 28. 16, 17.
in this place; this is none other but the house of God, and the gate of
Heaven. From serving and praising God in such an House, many are frequently
passing into Heaven, there to serve, glorify and praise the same Almighty
Being, whom they have loved and honored here below. It reflects honor and
glory on a house when it thus serves as a place to fit many for the Inheritance
of the saints in light: When many can say, Here were we first Awakened from
security in Sin, here were we convinced of the Evil of it, here were our hearts
broken for it: Here was that divine Light let into our minds which brought us
out of darkness into mavelous light: By the power of divine grace here were
we redeemed from the power and dominion of sin, and brought into and
established in the liberty of the Children of God. Here divine Instructions
have edifi^d us; and here have we been qualifying for heavenly glory. Such
glorious effects of the Word proceeding from the Power, Presence and Spirit of
Christ, will contribute more to the honor and true glory of an house of
public Worship, than the most shining Ornaments of Gold, yea than the presence
of the greatest Potentates or most dignified Personages on Earth.

3. The Presence of CHRIST in a House of public Worship renders it glorious,
as it renders the Sacraments there administered, pleasant, desirable and
beneficial. The Sacraments of Christ's Institution, are Baptism and the Lord's
Supper. These are usually to be administered in Public, in places set apart for
God's worship; but the influence and the efficacy, the benefit and advantage of
them, depends upon Christ's Spirit ^ere. The Baptism of Water will not of it
^elf wash away Sin: That must be done by the ^enewing of the Holy Ghost, or
else the Ordinance will be ineffectual. So the spiritual benefit and advantage
of the Lord's Supper, is owing to the Presence of the Lord there* His Blessing
and gracious Presence there, renders the Ordinance effectual, for the
comforting and edifying the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of
the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, to the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. This renders it pleasant and
desirable, as well as advantageous and beneficial. To Sit at the Table of the
Lord, this causes his People to sit under his shadow with great delight* and
makes his fruit sweet to their taste. They are refreshed edified and comforted
by it, and improved in their fitness for Heavenly Glory* Here they receive some
foretasts of the inexpressible pleasure of Communion with Christ. This
strengthens their hands and encourages their hearts to be sledfast and
unmovable, always to abound in the work of the Lord; and causes them to wax
stronger and stronger in the Lord and in the power of his Might, and to grow
brighter and brighter Ornaments of Christ's Church; like those the Psalmist
speaks of, that are planted in the house of the Lord, They will flourish in the
courts of our God, they will bring forth fruit in old age, Psalm. 92. 13, 14.

4. The Presence of CHRIST in an House of public Worship, renders it glorious,
as that tends (...) inspire the Worshippers there with such Reverence and
Devotion, and to dispose them to behave with such Gravity and Solemnity, as
will be an honor and glory to the house where they Worship Reverence and
devotion of spirit, Gravity and solemnity of behavior in the Worshippers*
gives luster and glory to a worshipping Assembly: They are then some saint
resemblance of the worshipping Assembly above. They then adorn the house of
Worship. Its worshippers thus influenced by Christ's Spirit, and not its
curious Carving^, Painting and Colorings, are its O^nament and honor: For
that it composes them to this Reverence and devotion, Gravity and solemnity.

5. CHRIST's Presence renders a House of public Worship glorious, as it
influenceth those that worship there to Peaceableness, Unity and Love. Says the
Prophet in our Context, The desire of all Nations shall come, and I will fill
this house with glory. And in our Text, Yea, the glory of this latter house
shall be greater than the former; and in this place will I give Peace; Or as
some render

For in this place will I give Peace: Implying that the Peace he would give, or
cause in that House, would not only contribute to the glory of it, but would be
one happy Effect of Christ's Presence in it. Christ is the Prince of peace; and
he is styled, Our Peace: And his gracious Presence with those that meet
together in his Name, is happily influential to excite them to Peace, Unity and
Love. Me^k and quiet spirits are Ornamental to them, and adorn the House where
they meet to Worship. They then obey Christ's Commands, imitate his Example,
and show that they are influenced by his Spirit.

Thus then the Effects and Influences of Christ's gracious Presence, renders a
House of public Worship truly glorious.

What farther remains, is to make some IMPROVEMENT of what has been said.

I* From what has been said we may learn something of the Glory and Excellency
of CHRIST. It is His Presence that beautifies and adorns, that renders
honorable and glorious a house of public Worship: Its His Presence that makes
it shine more than any costly Ornaments that man can put upon it. How Excellent
a Person then must this be, and how Glorious? Thi^ should serve to Recommend
him to our Love and Esteem: This should Excite us to Reverence. Honor and Obey
him Will not a Person of such glorious Excellent and Worth, attract our Love
and Esteem! The glorious Person, though he took upon him (...) form of a Servant,
and was found in fashion as man; Yet in him dwelt the fullness of the God-hea^
bodily, as the Col. 2 9.
Apostle expresses it; That (...) really and not figuratively. How proper
therefore is that advice, Psalm. 2. 11, 12. Serv^ the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling. (...) the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the
way when his wrath is kindled but a little: blessed a^^ all they that put their
trust in him. This is the Person who is called Wonderful, Counselor, the
Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Is 9. 6. And the
Person whom the prophet in our Context calls, The desire of all Nations.

*II From what has been said, People should learn not to pride themselves in
the Beauty or Ornaments of a house set apart for public Worship. Not but that
Houses built for public Worship, should be decent, beautiful and comely. Its
meet that we serve God with the best we have. The Best of beings should be
served with our best, to manifest our great Regard to and high Esteem of him.
When David resolved upon building God an House, he determined that it must be
Exceeding magnificent, of fame and of glory, 1 Chronicles. 22. 5. And Solomon in his
Letter to Huram, said The house which I build is great, for great is our God
above all gods, 2 Chronicles 2. 5. But then our aim in building such an house,
should not be to feed our Vanity and gratify our Pride. For if Christ be not in
it; if his gracious Presence be not there, the House is no better than the man
without Charity, as sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal. Its no better than a
whited sepulcher, which appears beautiful outward, but is within full of dead
men's bones and all uncleanness. But yet the external Beauty and Ornaments of an
house, is what vain minds are most desirous of and gratified with; little
concerning themselves about what is its true glory, viz. the Presence of Christ
in it.

III* What has been said should Excite us all, to endeavor by all means to
Engage CHRIST's gracious Presence with us in this House. This is the First Day
of our Meeting here for public Worship. This House is beautiful and
magnificent; much Labor and Cost has been Expended upon it: But unless
Christ's gracious Presence be with us here, its all lost and to no purpose. If
Christ be not present here, this House will be destitute of any true glory:
Without that we shall not Worship God here Acceptably, neither will the Word
preached be savingly beneficial to us, and the Sacrament^ of little
significancy. Therefore if we would beautify and adorn this House; if we would
have it rendered truly glorious, we should by all means endeavor to Engage the
Presence o^ Christ with us here.

And for this purpose be directed,

1. Heartily to accept of and submit to Christ (...) your Lord and Savior. Let
every one in order to engage Christ's Presence with us here, speedily accept of
and submit to Christ as their Lord and Savior. Its not enough to Assent to the
truth of the Revelation that is made of him in the Gospel, as the Savior of
the world; but you must Consent to Accept of Him as your Savior: Not only as a
Prophet to teach you, as a Priest to make atonement and intercession for your
acceptance; but also as a King to rule and govern you. Here the insincerity of
many, in the acceptance of and submission to Christ, appears; Though they are
willing to be saved by him, yet they will never submit to be ruled and governed
by him: His Discipline is too strict, the Obedience he requires is too exact
for them. They strangely delude themselves with hopes of being saved by him,
though they are never governed by him But if ever you would have his gracious
Presence here, or his glorious Presence hereafter, now receive and submit to
Christ. Open the door of your hearts, that the King of Glory may come in; and
(...) he be admitted into our hearts, we shall ^hen have his Presence with us
in this House.

2. Let us endeavor to Engage Christ's Presence with us here, by Meeting here
in his Name. We are assured, That where two or three are gathered together in
Christ's Name, he will be in the midst of them, Mat 18 20 Let us therefore when
we come here to Worship come in Obedience to Christ; Let us come with a view
and aim to glorify him; to do honor to this our Lord and Master, Then may we
expect his gracious Presence. Its not merely our coming here that does honor
unto Christ. Such as come only out of a vain curiosity of hearing or seeing
some new thing, consult not the honor of Christ, nor the good of their own
Souls: and are not likely to contribute anything toward engaging the Presence
of the blessed JESUS with us here.

3. We should earnestly Pray for Christ's Presence with us here. Our hearts
desire and prayer to God, should be for the gracious Presence of Christ with us
in this place; That by his Spirit we may be enabled to Worship in an acceptable
manner; and that by the Influences and Operations of it, his Word may be made
Effectual for the Awakening the Secure, Converting the Unconverted; that the
Doubting may be Resolved, the Weak and heavy laden Comforted and Supported. We
should Earnestly pray for his presence in his Ordinances that may be here
administered: That in them we may have Communion with our blessed LORD, as well
as with one another.

4. That we may Engage Christ's Presence with us in this House, we should be
diligent, constant and devout in our Attend not upon his Worship and Ordinances
here. We should be diligent and constant in our attending the public Worship
in God's House. If we are slack, negligent and inconstant in our Attendance on
the public Worship, it shows that we have bu^ little Regard to it, and are
little concerned whether we have Christ's Presence or no. We should likewise be
devent in our approaches to God in his House. Reverence and Devotion are very
becoming, and likely means to Engage the Presence of our glorious Redeemer here.

5. That w^ may Engage Christ's Presence with us in this House, we should set
that our behavior in it be Decent, Peaceable and Humble. As Christ has set
before us an Example of Peaceableness and Humility, so he expects that his
Disciples imitate it. And its not only their indispensible duty, but a prudent
and likely method to engage the Presence of Christ with them. Its the quiet and
humble that God's Spirit dwells with. To this man will I look, even to him that
is poor and of a contrite spirit and trembles at my word, Isa, 66. 2. A
peaceable and humble Behavior will recommend us to the Esteem and entitle us
to the kind Regards of the blessed JESUS, and invite his gracious Presence
among us.

IV. Is it Christ's Presence in a House of public Worship, that renders it
truly glorious? We should (...) very careful then that we do nothing to prevent
our being favored with his gracious Presence in this House, or that may cause
him to withdraw it from us. If the glory of this House consists in our having
the gracious Presence of Christ in it, then let us do nothing that may tend to
prevent or deprive us of this Favor. The things that tend to prevent or
deprive us of it, and which we should therefore endeavor that they may not be
found with us, are some such as these.

1. Unbelief and hardness of Heart. When persons repeatedly refuse an offered
Savior; when they will not believe in him; though they have greater Evidence of
his being the Messiah and Savior of the world, than they would have should one
rise from the dead and tell them so. When they will not believe his Promises
nor Threatenings, nor his power to Renew, Sanctify and Save them. This causes
him to withold or withdraw the gracious and powerful Influence and Efficacy
of his Spirit from them. He does not think fit to continue it where its so
slighted and disregarded. Thus we find that it was because of their Unbelief,
that Christ did not many mighty works in his own Country, Mat. 13. 58. He did
not think it fi^ting to bestow his pains upon such persons, or to continue his
gracious Presence in such places where they were generally hardened in Unbelief.

2. Another thing that tends to prevent or deprive us of Christ's gracious
Presence, and which we should therefore be careful that it be not found with
us, is, An Unpeaceable and Contentious, spirit. Christ is a Prince of peace,
and has taught his followers to be at peace amongst themselves, To study to be
quiet, and to do their own business. But yet if they are Unpeaceable, Wrathful
and Contentious; live in Envy, Variance, Malice and Hatred: And especially if
they discover such a ^emper and behavior in the public Worship of God's House
it will be highly displeasing to Christ, and may provoke him to withdraw his
Presence from them.

3. Another thing of the like unhappy tendency, and which we should be watchful
against, is, A spirit of I difference about, Carelessness, Levity and Rudeness
in God's House in times of public Worship. When persons are indifferent and
careless about the public Worship, are little concerned whether they attend it
or no, it discovers want of love to Christ and a low esteem of his gracious
Presence: And when in the House and at the times of public Worship, their
behavior is irreverent and rude; when they indulge themselves in sporting and
play, they deserve to be treated in the manner that Christ treated them that
bought and sold in the Temple, when making a scourge of small cords he drove
them out of it. For by such behavior they defile the House of public Worship
and provoke Christ to withdraw his gracious Presence from it Let us then be
very careful that we don't by any of these things prevent Christ's gracious
Presence coming into this House, nor provoke him to withdraw it if once he
vouchsafes to favor us with it.

V. From what has been said, we may learn in what manner every one may be
Instrumental in rendering this House glorious; and that is by their sincere and
constant Endeavors to engage the Presence of Christ in it. It Is that (as we
have heard) that will render it truly glorious. They at whose Expense it has
been Set up and rendered so Convenient for the public Worship to be performed
in, have done well, and God will, no doubt, think upon them for good according
to all they have done for him; He will remember them concerning this, and not
wipe out their good deeds that they have done for the House of their God. But
in this Expense every one has not been Equally interested: But in their
Endeavors to render this House truly glorious, the Poor may do as much as the
Rich, the Low as much as the High, the Young as much as the Old; all Ages,
Sexes and Ranks may here unite in their sincere Endeavors to engage the
Presence of the King of Glory here, whose Presence will be its greatest
Ornament and Glory.

VI. From what has been said we learn, That although this House in outward
respects, be much more beautiful and glorious than the former House, in which
we and our Fathers before us, were wont to Worship God, Yet unless Christ's
Presence be with us in this, it will be far less glorious than that. It
doubtless affects us with some degree of pleasure and satisfaction, to see how
much this latter House Exceeds the former in External beauty and glory; and may
serve to wipe off the Reproach which some have been ready to cast upon us, As
Honoring the Law more than the Gospel; by reason of the decayed and ruinous
state in which the House of God for a long time lay. But yet if Christ be not
with us here, the glory of this House will be far less than the glory of the
former: For we have heard with our Ears and our Fathers have told us, how
Christ was graciously Present with them there. Though they built that House in
troublous times, When laboring under the pressing difficulties that a howling
Wilderness exposed them to* and when encompassed with numerous and barbarous
Enemies: Yet there they found Christ was with them in his House and Ordinances,
and in those Eminent Lights that shone among them, whose Praise is yet in the
Churches. It should therefore be our ambition and care, above all things to
Engage the Presence of Christ with us here, as it was with them; lest it be
said, That the glory of the former House was greater than that of the latter.

VII. Let us all be Exhorted to Bless and Praise (...) GOD, for that he has now
favored us with so convenient and decent a House to Worship in. It is now some
Months more than The Reverend Mr. Thomas Hooker, and the Reverend Mr. Samuel
Stone, Arrived in New England Sept. 3d. 1633, They with their Congregation
continued at a place called Newtown* now Cambridge, in the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, about Three Years: In the Month of June, 1636, they, with
about an Hundred Persons in their Company, Removed from Cambridge to
Connecticut-River, and Sat down at a place now called Hartford: They were near
a Fortnight in their Journey thither. Mr. Hooker departed this Life, July 7,
1647, and Mr. Stone, July 20, 1663. Its said of Mr Stone, that he would with
some longing, say, Heaven is the more desirable for such Company as Hooker, and
Shepard and Haynes, who are got there before me. Mr. Whiting and Mr. Haynes
Succeeded those Eminent Persons in the Ministry. In the time of their Ministry,
another Meeting House was built in the South part of the Town, and Mr. Whiting
was Pastor to Church and Congregation meeting there. To Mr Haynes, in the First
Church, Succeeded Mr. Foster, and to him the Rev'd Mr. Timothy Woodbridge, who
was Ordained, November 18, 1685, and Died April 30, 1732. To him Succeeded the
Author, and was Ordained, September 28, 1732.
One Hundred Three Years since the public Worship of God was first set up in
this Town, by our Pious Progenitors, who left Father and Mother, Brethren and
Sisters, Houses and a pleasant Land, and some of them Circumstances of ease and
plenty with respect to the things of this world, and followed the Lord in a
Wilderness, a Land not sown; that there they might serve him in peace, in the
manner, they apprehended most agreeable to his Will: They are dead and buried
and their Graves are with us: And the House The first Meeting House here was
Built in the Year 16^7. which stood 99 Years; then taken down.
which they, in the Infant State of the Town prepared to Worship God in, is
also gone: And although we have reason to (...) under a sense of our many
Declensions, since our Fathers fell asleep, Yet blessed be God that there yet
remains so much care and concern about Religion, that by his Blessing on our
Endeavors, we are now provided with another House The Foundation of this New
one laid, Sept. 8, 173^
for public Worship, more beautiful, comely and decent, than the former: Its
through the good hand of our God upon us that it is thus. Let us then give Thanks
to him and Bless his Name for it; saying, Blessed be the Lord 1 Chronicles, 29. 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
God of Israel, for ever and ever, Thine, O Lord, is the Greatness, and the
Power, and the Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty; For all that is in
Heaven and in Earth, is thine, Thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and thou art
Exalted as Head above all. -- All things come of Thee, and of thine own have we
given thee, -- All this Store that has been prepared to build thee an House for
thine holy Name, comes of thine Hand, and is all thine own. Its Thou that have
Opened unto us the Doors of this ^ouse, and made us Joyful to Day in this House
of prayer. Now therefore, our God we Thank and Praise (...) glorious Name for
it. And let not only our Tongues, but our holy and fruitful Lives Express our
Gratitude unto the Eternal JE^OVAH. Let us delight our selves in Worshipping
the LORD here May we all be Enabled to say and resolve with the Royal Psalmist,
Psalm. 122. 1, 2, 4. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house
of the Lord: Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem. Whither the
Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel, to give
Thanks unto the Name of the Lord.

VIII. Finally, Let us all be instant and fervent in Prayer, for a Blessing on
the Word Preached and the Sacraments Administered here. Let us be Earnest in
prayer to God, that his Word may have free course, here, and be glorified; and
that Sacramental Administrations may quicken, comfort and edify us, and
abundantly promote our growth in grace. Forget not to pray that the Gospel in
the dispensation of it (...) be the Power of God to the Salvation of many. And
for (...) to whom, though less than the least of all Saints, is the grace given,
that I should preach the Unsearchable Riches of Christ; That Utterance may be
given unto me, that I may open my mouth boldly, to make known the (...) of the
Gospel, that so many may be Born unto God in this House; That the Lord may
count when he writes up the pe (...) That this and that man was born here. Let
(...) pray, that those that Minister before the (...) here, from Time to Time,
may be c^oathed with Salvation, and that the Saints of the Lord may shout aloud
for Joy. That this Church, which is part of the Mystical Body (...) Christ, may
continually be Edified: That we may grow up into him in all things, which is
the Head, even Christ. From whom Ephesians. 4. 15, 16.
the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every joint
supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part,
makes increase of the body, unto the Edifying of it self in Love*

The Lord grant that this Church may flourish, and shine in Purity, Peace and
Holiness. And that of this House, as of Zion of old, it may be said, The Lord
has Psalm. 132. 13, 14.
Chosen it, He has desired it for his Habitation; This is my Rest for ever;
Here will I dwell, for I have desired it. AMEN.

FINIS.

