A JOURNAL OF A VOYAGE FROM LONDON TO GIBRALTAR.

By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, B.A. of Pembroke-College, Oxford.

The SIXTH EDITION.

BOSTON. Reprinted by T. Fleet, for Charles Harrison, over against the Brazen
Head in Cornhill. 1740.

Mr. WHITEFIELD's JOURNAL FROM London to Gibraltar.
My dear Friends,
ACcording to your Request, I have herewith sent you an Account of what GOD has
done for my Soul since I left England. -- The sole Motive (if my Heart does not
deceive me) which induced me to leave my native Country was a full Conviction
that it was the Divine Will I should. What Reasons I can urge for this
Persuasion, is needless to mention, because few in this Case would judge
impartially, and what seems a Reason to me, may not be deemed so by another.
Let it suffice to inform you, that after earnest Prayer for a Year and a half,
that if the Design was not of GOD, it might come to naught, though strongly
solicited to act in a contrary Manner, I found myself as eagerly bent on going
abroad as ever.

Accordingly, Wednesday December 28, 1737, after having continued instant in
Prayer with my Friends at Mr. J. H's, and afterward receiving the Holy
Sacrament at St. Dunstan's, being recommended to the Grace of GOD by a great
Number of weeping Christian Brethren at the Rev. Mr. H's, I set out at Night
for Deptford in a Coach, accompanied by four Friends, and got there at Ten.
Here a Widow Woman gladly received us in her House; and many of my Friends gave
me the meeting, who came on Foot from London, with intent to accompany me to
the Ship; and with them I took a little bodily Refreshment; spent two or three
Hours in particular Intercession for our Friends and Enemies, and all Mankind;
sung Psalms and Hymns and spiritual Songs, and then betook ourselves to Rest,
and the LORD made us to dwell in Safety. [ Oh who can express the unspeakable
Joy of religious Friends?

Thursday, Dec. 29. Rose early in the Morning, and continued instant in
Intercession, chanting and singing of Psalms with my Friends till Nine, at
which our Hearts were much rejoiced. After this we went in quest of our Ship,
but finding she was fallen down to Purfleet, and was not to remove to Gravesend
for some Time, we returned to Deptford praising GOD, and praying for a Blessing
on our intended Voyage. The LORD perform all our Petitiion!

(...) returned to Deptford with my friends, we dined comfortably together,
joined in a Psalm, read the Lessons for the Day, and concluded with Prayer.
Some were then obliged to depart for London. After they were gone, I continued
with the rest in particular Intercession for near two Hours, and then GOD was
pleased to comfort my Heart. If parting from a few earthly Friends for a Season
be so grievous, How will the Wicked bear to be parted from GOD and good Men for
all Eternity.

It happened providentially that a Lecture was to be preached that Evening at
Deptford, and several importuned me to preach it. At first I was fearful (O me
of little Faith) having no Notes: But afterward (having got the Consent of the
Minister) I went up, depending on the Promise, Lo I am with you always even
unto the End of the World; and was enabled to preach to a large Congregation
without the least Hesitation. Did any one yet ever trust in the LORD and was
forsaken? What gave me a great Comfort, and made me more thankful, was, that
the Opportunity, I believe, was granted, in answer to Prayer.

Friday, Dec. 30. Went with our Baggage and nine or ten Friends in a Gravesend
Boat to Purfleet, where the Whitaker was fallen down. Spent the Time we were on
the Water in singing Psalms and particular Intercession; and came on board
about Ten in the Morning.

I spoke some few Things to my new Charge, spent the Remainder of the Day on
Shore with my Friends, in singing Psalms, Prayer, and exhorting one another to
Love and good Works: Returned at Night to our Ship, and lay with my Friend H.
upon the Ground in a Matress, in the great Cabin: And GOD was pleased to give
me a Proof that he was with me in the Ship.

Saturday, Dec. 31. Began this Morning to have public Prayers on open Deck, at
which the Officer and Soldiers attended with Decency and Reverence. After
Prayer I enlarged a little on those Words of St. Paul, I am determined to know
nothing among you save JESUS CHRIST and him crucified, told them how my future
Conduct would be; made some Professions of my hearty Love and sincere Affection
for their Souls; and then dismissed them, I believe somewhat moved. Oh, that I
may have Grace to act suitably to this Profession!

Today also I began to visit the Sick, and took that Opportunity of
discoursing on the Uncertainty of Life, and the Certainty of a future Judgment,
to those around me; and GOD was pleased not to let my Words fall to the Ground.

About Twelve, I went and paid my Friends a Visit, who were on Shore, and spent
two or three delightful Hours in praising and blessing GOD.

Soon came another Friend with two honest Men from Gravesend, desiring me in
the Name of the Minister to come and preach to them the following Lord's Day:
At first I was unwilling to leave my own Flock in the Ship, but my Friends
Reasonings overbalanced mine, and I went on board, read public Prayers,
visited the Sick, gave the Soldiers an Exhortation, (at which the Solders were
surprisingly affected); and then took Boat with them for Gravesend. My Heart
was much enlarged in Intercession. The Evening was exceeding calm, the Sky
clear, and all Things conspired to praise that glorious and lofty One that
inhabits Eternity, who stretches forth the Heavens like a Curtain, and holds
the Waters in the Hollow of his Hand.

About Seven at Night, GOD brought us safe to Gravesend, where Mr. H. received
both me and my Friends most courteously, and loaded us with many Benefits: The
good LORD have Mercy on him in that Day.

We spent the Evening very agreeably in Prayer, and Singing, and then betook
ourselves to Sleep, having before exhorted one another to prepare our Spices
and Ointments of Praise and Thanksgiving, and to rest on the approaching
Sabbath according to the Commandment.

Sunday, January 1. Blessed be GOD for the happy Beginning of a new Year! for
it has been a Day of fat Things: We rose in the Morning, and retired to an
adjacent. Hill with my Friends to Prayer; and afterward were most agreeably
surprised with the Coming of several more London Friends (whom I love as my own
Soul), who came all Night on the Water to see me.

About Ten we went to Church, where I preached; and the Curate was so kind, at
our Request, as to give us the Sacrament.

In the Afternoon I preached again to a more numerous Congregation than in the
Morning: And being to stay there but one Lord's Day, I was pressed to preach
and read Prayers a third Time, at Six in the Evening. It was a Thing I found
entirely new; but upon the Curate's readily complying to lend the Pulpit, and
my Friends and the People's Importunity, I looked upon it as a Call of
Providence, and accordingly read Prayers and preached to a very thronged
Auditory; and this I did without Notes, having brought but two written Sermons
with me. Oh! who can express the loving Kindness of the LORD, or show forth all
his Praise?

Monday, Jan. 2. 1737. 8. Sat up 'till Twelve at Night, to take leave of some
of my Friends, whose Business obliged them to be at London the next Morning;
and then, after three or four Hours Rest, rose and walked to Greenhith with the
Remainder of my Friends, intending to take a Boat there, and so return to my
Charge at Purfleet. But just as we were entering the Boat, providentially came a
Boy, telling us, the Whitaker was falling down to Gravesend, and ready to sail,
if not actually under Sail; we immediately hasted back from whence we came, and
went on our Way rejoicing.

About Eleven we reached Gravesend, and happily found the Ship was not to sail
till the morrow. This put Gladness into my Heart, as it gave me an Opportunity
of settling some Affairs of Consequence, and conversing a little longer with my
dear Friends.

About Twelve o'Clock I went on board, leaving my Friends to dine on Shore: And
as I went along, GOD was pleased to show me he had given a Blessing to my
Discourses; the People seemed greatly alarmed, and wished me heartily a good
Voyage, and the very Sailors were surprisingly affectionate. Blessed be GOD for
setting his Seal to my unworthy Ministry! Spent the Remainder of the Day in
settling Things on board, visiting the Sick, teaching the Children, and reading
Prayers, and Preaching. All Love, all Glory be to GOD through CHRIST!

In the Evening I went on Shore again to my Friends, prayed, sung Psalms, and
expounded (I think) a Chapter out of the holy Scriptures to them, and was not a
little comforted. Praise the LORD, O my Soul!

Tuesday, Jan. 3. Went on board, read Prayers and Preached, visited the Sick,
and then took a final Leave, as I thought, of my Friends. Spent the Afternoon
in writing Letters, and putting Things in Order. And (what I esteemed a great
Blessing) though I had been used to so large a Sphere of Action, yet my Change of
Life gave me not the least Uneasiness, but my Heart was refreshed with Joy
unspeakable, and full of Glory.

This Evening began to read Prayers between Decks, judging it would be too cold
above.

At Night I went, according to Custom, on Shore to Gravesend, where I was
agreeably surprised by seeing my Friends. I took leave of them in the Morning
once more, the Weather preventing their going to London. Here also Mr. C. W.
and Mr. W. H. gave me the meeting, with whom we prayed, sung Psalms, commended
one another to GOD, and parted the next Morning like Christian Brethren.

Wednesday, Jan. 4. Came on board at Ten in the Morning; but could not have
public Prayers, because the Soldiers were engaged with their Officer: But I
visited the Sick, and perceived the Soldiers were attentive to hear me, when I
applied myself to those around the sick Persons. I also distributed amongst the
Sick of my London Friends kind Presents, to convince them I had a Love for, and
to gain an Access to their Souls. I visited the Sick, read Prayers, and
preached extempore (as I constantly do Morning and Evening) and went with Mr.
H. in the Evening on Shore to Gravesend, where we interceded for Friends,
expounded a Chapter, and went to Bed, with that Peace of Mind which passes all
Understanding. Oh that the sensual, careless, half Christian could but know the
Comforts of Religion!

Thursday, Jan. 5. This Day GOD was with me of a Truth: I was refreshed in
Spirit, by hearing from some London Friends, and receiving some kind Presents
from Persons I could never have thought of; was assisted much in writing
Letters; came on board, read Prayers, and preached; visited the Sick, and had
GOD with me all Day long: Begun to catechize six or seven of the young Soldiers
on open Deck. I was surprised they would submit to it* but GOD has the Hearts
of all Men in his Hands.

Great Civility was shown me on board by the Officers; and Capt. W. sent his
Boat to fetch me to Gravesend, whither I went; having visited the Sick, read
Prayers, and preached on Deck.

When on Shore, I wrote several Letters, expounded a Chapter to a Room full of
People. Catechized the Children of the House, and three of my own Companions,
and then went to Bed, full of Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

My Health of Body, I could perceive, increased, and my Soul was much
refreshed. I now began once more to feel the Comforts of a retired Life, and
blessed GOD from my Heart, that he had called me whither I was going.

Friday, Jan. 6. About Nine I came on board, read Prayers, and preached between
Decks; and Mr. H. sung a Psalm, as he generally does. In the mean while, the
Ship loosed from Gravesend, and sailed by Twelve o'Clock to the Nore. We had a
very brisk Gale of Wind.

GOD gave me great Comfort, and I went between Decks, and sat down on the
Ground, and read Arndt's True Christianity: And part of the Time I stood upon
Deck, and admired the Wonders of GOD in the Deep.

Three or four were added today to my Catechumens, some of whom I had great
Hopes of Read Prayers, preached upon Deck near the Stern, (having no Place for
Retirement;) talked to the Sailors on the Fore-Castle; wrote my Journal; and
climbed up into my Cabin to Bed, where my Friend H. and I say as comfortably
as on a Bed of State.

Some of the Passengers, amongst whom was Mr. H. began now to be sick: But I
felt very little of it; on the contrary GOD enabled me to rejoice with
exceeding great Joy; my Heart was warmed by talking to the Sailors, and I was
so lifted even above myself, that I could have watched unto Prayer and Praise
all Night.

I found that above an Hundred, exclusive of the Ship's Company, were on board;
GOD grant that not one of them may perish through my Neglect.

Saturday, Jan. 7. Breakfasted with some of the Gentlemen in the Great Cabin,
who were very civil, and let me put in a Word for GOD.

Read public Prayers, and began to expound the Lord's Prayer to the Soldiers,
by way of Sermon, and GOD enabled me to do it with Power. After that I
instructed my Catechumens, who now amounted to twelve or thirteen. GOD made
them Soldiers of CHRIST as well as of the King.

Had an Hour's Conversation with a Gentleman on board, on our Fall in Adam, and
the Necessity of our New Birth in CHRIST JESUS, and hope it was not unpleasant
to him.

Today obtained what I prayed for, viz. a Place to retire into: For Captain W.
on my bare mentioning my Want of such a thing, offered me the free Use of his
own Cabin, a Place very commodious for that Purpose.

Catechized those who went with me on open Deck, for Example to others, and
found they improved. Captain W. the two Cadets, and Serieants, sat very serious
and attentive. But when the Captain of the Soldiers came, my Heart sunk a
little (though without any Reason;) however I did not leave off. O Corruption
thou art my Sister!

Read public Prayers, and finished my Exposition of the Lord's Prayer to the
Soldiers, at which they attended very orderly. At Night I and my five
Companions went upon Deck, and interceded and sung Psalms, by which my Heart
was much enlarged. The Weather was very cold, and the Wind magnified that GOD,
at whose Word the stormy Wind arises.

Now I fulfilled my Promise to the LORD'S People and while the Winds and Storms
were blowing over me, I made earnest Supplications to GOD for them.

The Ship continued at the Nore all this Day; but I hope we made some Advances
toward Eternity.

In the Evening the Wind blew very fresh indeed; and had our Ship been in the
Downs, we should have been in great Danger. How wisely does GOD provide for us!
Most People began now to be Seasick, particularly J.D. one of my Companions was
grievously afflicted.

Sunday, Jan. 8. My Friend H. and I have great Reason to be thankful to GOD;
for we slept as well as we could desire, though the Wind blew very hard, and
the Sailors were very busy in taking care of the Ship, which by the Morning had
dragged her Anchor two Miles.

Went early and visited the Sea-sick Soldiers and their Families between Decks,
gave them some Sage-Tea and Sugar, etc. and excited them all to Thankfulness
and Repentance, out of Gratitude for their Preservation from the last Night's
Storm; and returned public Thanks at Morning Prayers.

Thought much of my dear London Friends; though absent in Body, was present in
Spirit in sacred Ordinances; and interceded for them and all Mankind most
servently. Read public Prayers and preached twice to the Soldiers: and read
Prayers once in the Great Cabin to the Officers, at their Request, which I
liked very well: Catechized my own Companions, but had not Time to catechize
the Soldiers, on account of attending the Sick.

Today being the first LORD's Day I have spent this long time in so private a
manner, I could not avoid reflecting on the following Lines:

I sigh whenever my musing Thoughts
Those happy Days present,
When I with Troops of pious Friends
Thy Temple did frequent;
When I advanced with Songs of Praise,
My solemn Vows to pay,
And led the joyful sacred Throng
That kept the Festal Day.
But I considered it was the Divine Will that placed me here, and therefore I
rejoiced. He is unworthy the Name of a Christian, who is not as willing to hide
himself when GOD commands, as to act in a public Capacity.

Began now to live a little by Rule, and to examine into the Interiors of those
that came with me; which I found a most useful Exercise both for them and me.
Continued all this Day at the Nore, being quite becalmed; and at Night had a
most comfortable Intercession for all Friends, etc.

Monday, Jan. 9. Mr. H. began to learn Latin. Had near twenty Catechumens with
my own Companions, who I believe made some Advances.

Weighed from the Nore, and sailed before the Wind in Company with several
others, which carried us on so briskly, that we anchored before Margate about
One. Here I enjoyed a wished for Opportunity of writing to some of my London
Friends, and found my Heart greatly enlarged toward them.

After Dinner having some Necessaries to buy, Mr. H. and I went on Shore to
Margate. The Wind blew very fresh, and the Sea raged horribly, but He that
dwells on high was mightier, and kept us from the least Fright, and filled me
with great Joy, and brought us safe on Shore. We had the most abandoned Man
with us I ever saw, who came out of an East India Ship: He had so much of the
Devil in him, that the very Boat Men, profane as they were, abhorred him. From
whence I infer, that was the Devil himself to appear as he is, the wickedest
Sinners could not but detest him.

This Afternoon I began to feel the Power of Faith more than ever I did before,
and to find that as the Day, so will our Strength be. When I went into the Boat
the Sea run dangerously high; but I could boldly say:

GOD is our Refuge in Distress,
A present Help when Dangers press;
In Him undaunted we'll confide,
Though Earth were from her Center tossed,
And Mountains in the Ocean lost,
Torn piecemeal by the roaring Tide.
About Five we got safe to Margate, where having received a little bodily
Refreshment, and recommended our selves to GOD in Prayer, we went about the
Town to buy the Things we came for. The Generality of the People we met with
were civilized and teachable.

After we had done our secular Business, we paid the Curate a Visit, the
Minister being at Canterbury: He received us most courteously: Our Conversation
was such as tended to the Use of Edifying; it ran chiefly upon the great
Importance of the Ministerial Function; the Necessity of Preaching up the
Doctrine of the New Birth; and the Necessity and Benefit of Visiting from House
to House.

About Ten we left him, greatly refreshed in Spirit, and thankful to GOD for
exciting Persons every where to entertain us.

On the Morrow I sent him Mr. Law's Serious Call and Christian Perfection, with
some other Books; and also a few Catechisms and Sermons to some other serious
People, whom Providence put in our Way. Now Thanks be to GOD, says the
Apostle, which always causes us to triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the
Savor of his Knowledge to us in every Place!

Tuesday, Jan. 10. About Four this Morning, Mr. H. and I arose, intending to go
on board immediately; but the Wind blew so very violent, that by the Advice of
the Boat-Men we deferred going on board 'till Daylight; and therefore after we
had kneeled on the Shore, and prayed for ourselves and others, we went back to
the Inn; and took that Opportunity of writing to a Friend, or two.

About Seven we took Boat and praised and blessed GOD to see the Floods clap
their Hands. About Eight we came on board, and found we had great Reason to be
thankful that we were on Shore last Night: The Sailors told us that the
Lightning shone on the Sea all Night; and that the Storm was very great, and
the Ship's Longboat was lost.

I read public Prayers, returned public Thanks for our Deliverance, and
expounded by Way of Sermon the Second Article of the Creed, which I began
Yesterday. Did the same after Evening Prayers. Spent the Remainder of the Day
in writing Letters; and have not enjoyed a more calm delightful Frame of Mind a
long Time.

The Sick increased on my Hands, but were very thankful for furnishing them
with Sage-Tea, Sugar, Broth, etc. At the Sight of so many Objects of Pity, I
was sensibly touched with a fellow feeling of their Miseries. I could not but
transverse the Prodigal's Complaint, How many of my Father's Children are ready
to perish with Hunger, whilst I have enough and to spare.

Had a most comfortable Sense of the Divine Presence with me in many
Particulars: And in the Evening, joined in Intercession with my other
Companions on Deck, in Behalf of absent Friends and all Mankind.

Wednesday, Jan. 11. Weighed from Margate Road, and cast Anchor in the Downs,
the Ship sailing most pleasantly before the Wind. Wrote several Letters whilst
the Ship was under Sail. Had my Spirits mightily refreshed upon our Arrival in
the Downs, by hearing from two or three Christian Brethren at London; and was
desirous to bless GOD for a providential Opportunity that was offered of
sending a whole Packet to them and some other Friends, to acquaint them how
lovingly the LORD had dealt with me. O that the Mercies bestowed on me, may
through the Thanksgiving of many redound to the Glory of GOD.

Had no public Prayers this Morning, being much hurried in writing Letters to
go by Post; and when I went to read, the Soldiers were engaged in their
military Affairs upon Deck, so that I did nothing thing but visit the Sick. I
fear I did foolishly* Father, forgive me for thy dear Son's sake.

Went on in explaining the Creed after Evening Prayers, and was enabled to talk
of the Crucifixion of our LORD: I believe it pricked them to the Heart. O that
I could hear them cry out, What shall we do to be saved?

Had the Comfort to hear good was done among the Soldiers; and the Captain was
pleased to express his Approbation of my Conduct. GOD grant I may with a single
Eye seek to please the Captain of my Salvation!

After Evening Prayers and visiting the Sick, went ashore with Mr. H. to Deal;
and was so highly delighted with a Prospect of the Downs, that we expressed our
Thankfulness in singing of Psalms all the Way. The Boat-Men I believe wondered
at it at first; but they were not ashamed to blaspheme, and I thought had no
Reason to be ashamed to praise GOD. I had the Satisfaction before we got to
Deal, to hear one of them join seriously with us; and perceived a surprising
Alteration in their Behavior always after, Blessed be GOD!

About Five we got to Deal, and not knowing a single Person, went (as at
Margate) to pay my Respects to the two Ministers of the Place: But finding
neither of them at Home, spent the Remainder of the Evening with my Friend H.
very comfortably in religious Talk, Family Prayer, interceding for absent
Friends and all Mankind, and writing to Christian Brethren. And even here GOD
did not leave my Ministry without a Witness; for he was pleased to impress
something I said on a poor Woman's Heart, that providentially came in, and
joined with us in Family Prayer: for which we endeavored to thank him. Behold
how great a Fire this little Spark kindled before we left Deal!

Thursday, Jan. 12. Spent most of the Morning in writing Letters: Went about
Eleven on board* and was highly delighted with the Prospect on the Downs, which
was exceeding calm; and a great many beautiful Ships which were riding here
added to the Prospect. O that Men who occupy their Business in the great
Waters, would (since they cannot but see) admire GOD's Wonders in the Deep!

Read Prayers and went on explaining the Creed to the Soldiers; visited and
prayed with the Sick; and began this Afternoon to explain the Catechism to the
Women by themselves: I find they are in Number about sixteen; and blessed be
GOD were much affected. Prosper thou, O LORD, this Work of my Hands upon me!

Had some religious Talk with the Surgeon of the Soldiers, who seems very well
disposed. I seldom (it ever) see him idle, and find he has many good Qualities.
GOD grant Christianity may be grafted in him!

After Evening Prayers and explaining the Creed, went again to Deal with Mr. H.
to buy some Necessaries for our Companions. Spent the Remainder of the Evening
in writing Letters, and reading and praying with eight or nine poor People, who
came I suppose at the Report of the other poor Woman to hear me.

Friday, Jan. 13. Remained all Day on Shore, the Weather being too rough to go
on board: Was in Care about leaving my Flock so long; but hope this short
Absence will make our Meeting more agreeable Tomorrow. Had the Pleasure of
joining in public Workship at Deal, in a pretty Chapel; which was more
agreeable on account of our being confined for some Time within the narrow
Limits of a Ship.

Set apart this Day as a Day of Humiliation, Abstinence, and Intercession for
Friends and all Mankind, and found my Heart greatly enlarged in that divine
Exercise. Intercession is a glorious Means to sweeten the Heart!

Spent the Remainder of the Day, and sat up till One in the Morning in writing
to Friends.

Had two or three added to my Company at Night, who seemed very attentive, and
prayed for me most heartily. The Poor receive the Gospel. I dispersed some
Books among them, as I saw proper: I hope GOD will give them his Blessing.

Expected Letters to night from London, but was disappointed: GOD enable me in
every thing to give Thanks!

Fancied myself all this Day in my little Cell at Oxford: For I have not spent
so many Hours in sweet Retirement since I left the University. The Pleasure I
felt was inexpressible.

Saturday, Jan. 14. Spent the Morning in writing Letters, and was much pleased
with the pious Conversation of a poor Woman, who was one of my Auditors last
Night, and who I believe, has passed through the Pangs of the New Birth.

Hasted on board about Eleven, (the Wind promising fair) to take us out of the
Channel, and was affectionately received by the People.

I was greatly delighted to see all the Ships sail together from the Downs.
Nature, indeed, would have been glad to have staid till the Morrow, that I
might have received Letters from my London Friends, but God, I considered,
orders all Things for the Good of those that love him, and therefore gave
Thanks from my Heart. Examined into the State of my little Ones, (my Friend H's
Charge) and had Reason to hope well of them.

Was enlarged in preaching after Prayers to the Soldiers, and spent two most
pleasant Hours in reading GOD's holy Word. At Night, though it was piercingly
cold, we continued instant in Intercession on Deck; and the Prospect of a clear
Sky, the Stars glittering, and the Moon shining bright warmed my Heart, and
made me greatly rejoice in Spirit. I now began to be more reconciled to a Ship
Life; for GOD gave me Health of Body, and without which all is nothing, Content
ot Mind. Had near an Hour's Conversation with one who, I hope, will become come
an altogether Christian. Oh that that blessed Time would come.

Sunday, Jan. 15. GOD gave me and Mr. H. sweet Sleep. Had near two Hours
Retirement in the Captain's round House, and was much delighted with singing
Psalms on Deck with my Companions. Read public Prayers in the Cabin this
Morning, and was much enlarged in preaching to the Soldiers on this Article, I
believe in the Holy Ghost: In treating of which, I took Occasion to show the
Nature and Necessity of the New Birth; a Subject on which I delight to dwell.

Catechized the Soldiers, and, blessed be GOD, find some of them improved. Was
enlarged again in my Evening Sermon to the Soldiers, and had Prayers a second
Time in the great Cabin, which gave me no small Satisfaction; the Officers,
etc, willingly complied as soon as I imposed it; GOD be praised!

Had great Delight in reading the Holy Scriptures, enjoyed an unspeakable Peace
of Mind, and was much comforted in interceding for Friends, etc. on Deck. The
Weather was cold, and the Wind blew very hard; but when the Heart is full of
GOD, outward Things affect it little. Surely my Friends in England pray for me;
methinks I feel they do.

All the Day the Sea was entirely becalmed; every thing about us seem hushed
quiet, as though it would remind us of that sacred Rest the Day was set apart
to commemorate. In the Evening the Wind blew very fresh but being full against
us, we were obliged to sail back to the Downs (though we had got near fifty
Miles) where we arrived about Twelve a Clock.

Monday, Jan. 16. After private Prayer, was most agreeably entertained with
some Letters from my London Friends, which filled my Soul with unspeakable
Pleasure, and caused me to shed Tears of Joy. If the Correspondence of good
People is so transporting here, O! how unspeakably revishing must the Personal
Communion of Saints be hereafter. Hasten, O LORD, that blessed Time and let thy
Kingdom come.

Was a little affected by seeing a poor Soldier tied Neck and Heels, for
several mutinous Words he had spoken. The Captain related the Case to me, and
said, if I could make him sensible of his Crime, I might beg him off. I
endeavored to do it, but, alas, in vain; he continued obstinate, and thereby
hindered my Design taking Effect. After this, the Captain ordered him to be tied
down between Decks; from whence I took Occasion, in my Morning Sermon, to
exhort the Soldiers to obey them That had the Rule over them, and to avoid
those Sins, that would provoke GOD to command them to be tied Hand and Foot,
and to be cast into outer Darkness, where would be weeping and gnashing of
Teeth.

About Twelve, a Deal Boat coming along Side, I was minded to go on Shore to
answer my Letters. The Sea was very boisterous, but God brought us to Shore
rejoicing. O wherefore did I in the least fear? What am I, when left to myself.

It being the 16th Day of the Month, Mr. H. and I joined in an Hour's
Intercession and Abstinence, with all those that meet together to bewail their
own and the Sins of the Nation. About Four, took some bodily Refreshment; and
from thence till One in the Morning, continued answering my Correspondents,
having first spread their Letters before the LORD in Prayer, and begged that I
might send them Answers of Peace.

Tuesday, Jan. 17. Was awakened with an Alarm, that the Ship was ready to sail,
but found it soon contradicted. Spent an Hour in particular Intercession, and
the rest of the Morning in writing Letters, and teaching Mr. H. Latin. Oh that
I may be made an Instrument of breeding him up for GOD!

Came on board about Two in the Afternoon, and found all Things quiet in the
Ship, was most kindly recieved; and I observed the Women were very attentive
when I proceeded to explain the Catechism to them. May GOD open their Hearts as
he did that of Lydia, that these may give diligent Heed to the Things that are
spoken.

Was much enlarged in my Evening Discourse, and hope the Word entered into
their Hearts. Was kindly invited by the Post Master of Deal, to lie at his
House. Gained an Opportunity, by walking at Night on Deck, after Intercession,
to talk closely to the chief Mate, and one of the Sergeants of the Regiment,
and hope my Words were not altogether spoken in vain. O that all Men would come
to the Knowledge of the Truth, and be saved!

Wednesday, Jan. 18. Spent all the Morning in Retirement, reading the
Scriptures, public Prayer and preaching; the Weather being extremely pleasant.

Began to live by Rule more than ever; for nothing I find is to be done without
it. All that had been sick being recovered, came to Prayers, for whom I gave
Thanks; particularly to them: At the End of my Sermon exhorting them with the
utmost Earnestness, to Sin no more least a worse Evil should befall them, and to
show forth their Thankfulness, not only with their Lips, but in their Lives O
that there may be always in them such a Mind!

Finished my Exposition on the Creed. Read public Prayers, and preached as
usual in the Afternoon Catechized both my own Companions and the Soldiers; and
was pleased to see many others very attentive to hear

Had great Comfort in reading the Scriptures Was afterward a little inclined
to Heaviness, but drove it off by a long Intercession. Prayer is an Antidote
against every Evil.

Upon Examination, had Reason to hope my Companions grew in Grace; blessed be
GOD for it!

About Eleven at Night went and sat down among the Sailors in the Steerage, and
reasoned with them about Righteousness, Temperance, and a Judgment to come; at
which some of them almost trembled.

Thursday, Jan. 19. Was much comforted by hearing from my Friends. Began, after
Prayers this Morning, to explain the Catechism to the Soldiers, and draw proper
Inferences by way of Sermon: I find it is much approved of, and, for them, by
far the fittest Way of Instruction.

Spent the Afternoon in answering Correspondents; was much assisted in my
Evening Exposition on the Catechism; and had great Hopes of two Soldiers
becoming Christians indeed. Would to GOD, all the King's Soldiers were such!

Was enabled to compose a great Part of a new Sermon this Evening. Enlarged in
Intercession, and Afterward much rejoiced by three more Letters, and sat up
till One in the Morning to answer them. Whatsover thou find in thy Hand to
do, says the wise Man, do it with all thy Might.

We had now such a calm and smooth Sea, that all the People every where
expressed their Admiration of it. GOD grant that we may in a Calm provide for a
Storm, and, like the primitive Christians, when the Churches had Rest, walk in
the Comforts of the Holy Ghost, and be edified!

Friday, Jan. 20. Rose with great Peace of Mind, spent all the Morning in
composing a Sermon.

Happily composed a Difference between a Soldier and his Wife, who were one of
the four Couple I married when first I came on board: The Man had resolved to
leave her, but upon my reminding him of his Marriage Vow, and entreating him
with Love, he immediately took to her again. What may not a Minister do through
Christ, when his Flock love him? Almost finished the Sermon I began Yesterday,
blessed of GOD!

Went on in expounding the Catechism after Evening Prayer; and now began to
read the first Lesson, which I purposely omitted before, not knowing they would
bear it, and willing to imitate Jacob, who was careful of his little Ones not
to over drive them.

Proposed to the Captain to read a few Prayers in the Great Cabin every Night,
which he really consented to, and withal said, he should be glad to hear me
preach, whenever I should think proper.

Was surprised in the midst of my Evening's Discourse by the chief Mate, who
came and told me, that the Minister of Upper Deal had sent a Boat for me,
desiring me immediately to come on Shore. Accordingly, after I had concluded,
Mr. H. and I went and found the Minister, which was left to officiate, who
desired me, at the Request of the Inhabitants, to preach the Sunday following.
After this, we retired to our Lodging in Deal; and after a Sermon and long
Intercession, was unspeakably comforted by the Reception of several Letters
from Persons, who, I believe sincerely fear GOD. At which my Heart was so full,
that I could not but kneel down, pray, and return Thanks to GOD for them.

Found the Number of my Hearers greatly increased tonight, and very joyful to
see me once more on Shore. I sat up till One in the Morning, answering my
Correspondents, and then laid down, filled with such Joy as no Man could take
from me, nor a Stranger intermeddle with. Oh that all Men knew the Comforts of
Religion.

Saturday, Jan. 21. Spent all the Day in writing Letters, and delightful
Conversation with Mr. H.

At Night, the Number of my Hearers was so increased, that the Stairs were
full, as well as my Room. I expounded to them the 25th of St. Matthew, at which
they were much affected, and seemed to love and pray for me most earnestly: And
I desire to have no greater Portion than the Prayers of the Poor.

Sat up till One, writing Letters; gave Thanks for the Blessing of the Week,
and then lay down in Peace, hoping to rise early the next Morning, more fit for
my Master's Service.

Sunday, Jan. 22. About Nine went on board with Capt. W. who is always
extremely civil. Visited the Sick, and read Prayers in the Great Cabin. Read
Prayers, and preached my Sermon on Early Piety, on open Deck to the Soldiers;
the Officers, and other Gentlemen, attending very seriously. The Weather was
very cold, but Preaching warmed my Heart.

About Noon went on Shore with Capt. W. and Mr. H. Dined at the Post-Master's,
who received us hospitably. Afternoon preached at Upper Deal, on Acts xxviii.
26. Many seemed pricked to the Heart, and some so quickened, that they
expressed a Desire to follow me wherever I should go. O free Grace in JESUS
CHRIST! I have scarce known a Time I have preached any where, but I have seen
some Effect of my Doctrine. From the Hearts of the Mighty the Word of the LORD
has not turned back, the Sword of the Spirit returned not empty. A Proof this,
I hope, that the Words are not my own, but that GOD is with me of a Truth: May
I never, by Pride and Vain Glory, provoke him to depart from me!

Stayed all Night on Shore, to expound the Lord's Prayer, and had a large
Company to hear me, and should have had seven Hundred, as my Hostess told me,
would the House have held them: So swiftly run the Word of GOD and prevailed.

Was again refreshed by receiving five Letters: Sat up till past Ten, to answer
some of them; and then went to Rest, with comfortable Reflections of GOD's
unmerited loving Kindness to me.

Ten thousand thousand precious Gifts
My pious Thanks employ:
Nor is the least a thankful Heart
That tastes those Gifts with Joy.
Through all Eternity, to GOD
My grateful Song I Will raise,
But, Oh! Eternity's too short
To set forth all his Praise!
Monday, Jan. 23. Was much comforted by receiving five more Letters; answered
some of them; and about Eleven in the Morning went on board the Amy, to pay my
Respects to Colonel C. and to visit the Soldiers, whom I looked upon as Part of
my Charge. I was received very civilly by the Officers; went among the
Soldiers, enquired into the State of their Souls, gave them a Word or two of
Exhortation; promised to bring them some Books [I saw their Wants], and (at the
Officer's Request) to come and preach to them, if Opportunity should offer,
before we left the Downs.

After this, I visited the Lightfoot, our other Transport Ship, in which were
about twelve Soldiers and a Sergeant: they received me kindly. I sat down and
conversed with them; promised to send them some Books, and to come and preach
to them also, if Providence should permit. The Downs being exceeding calm, and
the Weather clear, going from Ship to Ship was very pleasant. Mine are but
little Flocks, O that it may be my heavenly Father's good Pleasure to give them
the Kingdom.

About Two went again on board the Amy, to dine with the Officers, being kindly
invited by them when I was before on board: They all treated me with great
Kindness, and in the midst of our Meal was most agreeably surprised by the
coming of two London Friends, who made a Journey from thence (O unmerited Love)
on purpose to see me.

Dinner being ended, I went and dispersed some Books among the Soldiers; took
my Leave and hastened on board my own Ship; read Prayers and preached, and then
went on Shore with my Friends, not being a little rejoiced to see them.

Jan. 23. This Night GOD let me see greater Things than before, for so many
came to hear me that the poor Landlady that owned the House where I lodged sent
to her Tenants, beseeching them to let no more come in for fear the Floor
should break under them; and indeed there were such Numbers that I first
expounded the Creed to about eighty, and then the second Lesson to as many
more; among whom I observed there were many of the chief Inhabitants.

About Eleven they went, and I then rejoiced with my Friends for what GOD had
done for my Soul, eat a little Food, interceded for absent Friends, and all
Mankind, and went to Bed about Two in the Morning. O what shall I render unto
the LORD for all the Mercies he pours down upon me!

Tuesday, Jan. 24. Spent all the Morning in writing Letters, walking, singing
of Psalms, and Intercession all along the Sea Shore, from whence we had a most
delightful Prospect of the Downs, which afforded me and my Friends most noble
Matter for Praise and Thanksgiving. Met with a little Opposition to day; but I
should have wondered indeed, if such an effectual Door had been opened for
preaching Christ, and there had been no Adversaries. Nothing has done more Harm
to the Christian Church than thinking the Examples recorded in the Holy
Scriptures, were written only to be read and not imitated by us.

More People came to hear me to Night than ever, so that I divided them into
two Companies again, and providentially from the second Lesson for the Morning,
had a glorious Opportunity for showing the absolute Unlawfulness of running or
buying Run Goods, a Sin that does most easily beset the Deal People.

After Exposition paid Mr. E. a Visit, who most kindly entertained us, and
offered me his Boat to go or come on Shore when I pleased, which would save me
much Expense. After we returned from his House, we kneeled down on the Sea
Shore, and prayed for them that opposed themselves, and then went to Bed,
blessing and praising GOD.

Wednesday, Jan. 25. Went on board in the Morning with my Friends, intending to
read Prayers and preach to the Soldiers, but they were engaged about their own
Affairs, and I could not stay long. -- Had great Civilities showed us by the
Officers, etc. who treated my Friends respectfully, and the Captain, upon my
Request, pardoned a Woman who otherwise was to have been sent on Shore.

After Breakfast, returned on Shore with my Friends, and read Prayers, and
preached at Upper-Deal to a large Congregation; I was surprised to see such a
Number of People, but all Deal seems to be in a holy Flame, and, was I prepared
for it, I should see still greater Things than these.

Dined at Mr. R's, a Grocer in Deal, with my Friends; we were most hospitably
entertained, and what was far better, had an excellent Opportunity given me of
discoursing for a considerable Time on our Fall in Adam, and the Necessity of
our New Birth in JESUS CHRIST.

Expounded to two Companies again at Night the Epistle for the Morning, and the
two Lessons for the Evening, as most suitable for the Day, and was enabled to
do it with Power: More People came to Night than before, so that they now did
actually put a Prop under the Floor of the Room. Was agreeably entertained with
more Letters, and though the Duty of the Day had a little fatigued me, yet GOD
strengthened me to sit up till Three in the Morning, answering my Christian
Correspondents. They that wait upon the LORD shall renew their Strength.

Thursday, Jan. 26. I had a Visit paid me by an Anabaptist Teacher, who came to
discourse with me about the Things that belonged to the Kingdom of GOD. By what
I could find he was a spiritual Man. I asked him several Questions about taking
the ministerial Function, without being called as was Aaron; but he did not
answer me to my Satisfaction; however, we both agreed in this, That unless a
Man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of GOD.

I was much comforted by the coming of two more Friends from London, with whom
I took sweet Comfort, and could not but fancy myself once more at London, being
surrounded with religious Intimates.

How sweet must their Advantage be,
How great their Pleasure prove,
Who live like Brethren, and consent
In Offices of Love.
It Is like refreshing Dew, which does
On Hermon's Top distill,
Or like the early Drops that fall
On Zion's fruitful Hill.
In the Afternoon I took my Friends on board, read Prayers and preached to the
Soldiers; after this, went on Shore, sung Psalms with my Friends, and then
expounded to the People, who now increased so much that I was obliged to divide
them into three Companies, and GOD enabled me to continue expounding three
Hours without any Intermission, or the least Weariness. Thanks be to GOD for
his strengthening Grace! As our Day is, so shall our Strength be.

Received three more Letters, and sat up till One in the Morning to answer some
sent before, and then went to Bed rejoicing and blessing GOD for the great
Things he had done for me. But withal desirous to say with the Divine Herbert,

Less than the least of GOD's Mercies shall be my Motto still.

Friday, Jan. 27. Spent the Beginning of the Morning in writing Letters, then
breakfasted with all my Friends at one Mrs. H's, a Widow Gentlewoman, who
kindly invited, and as kindly entertained us. The LORD reward her a thousand
fold.

About Twelve I came on board, being unwilling to be absent from my proper
Charge long together. I was received kindly, visited the Sick and catechized
the Soldiers, some of whom answered most aptly, for which I distributed amongst
all something I knew would be agreeable. Oh! that I may catch them by a holy
Guile! but that Power belongs only unto GOD.

About Two came a Clergyman on board, from a neighboring Village to pay me a
Visit, with whom I spent an Hour or two agreeably, had Prayers on open Deck,
and enforced the Duty of keeping holy the Sabbath Day, which then came in
Course to be explained, but was afraid to sing a Psalm, Mr. H. being at Deal
with friends. Where was my Courage then? LORD, what am I when left to myself!

At Five returned ashore with the Clergyman, to whom I promised some Books for
his Parishioners. Expounded three Hours to three Companies, as before. Glad
Tidings of great Joy sent me by four or five Correspondents, sat up till One in
the Morning answering them, and then went to Bed and had a feeling Possession
of my GOD. And will GOD in very deed, dwell in this Heart of mine? O free Grace
in CHRIST! Praise the LORD, O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his
holy Name!

Spent the Morning most agreeably in Conversation, Intercession for all
Friends, and all Mankind* walking on the Sea Shore.

Dined with Mrs. St. L. who hospitably entertained us. Went about Three in the
Afternoon, intending to go on board, but could not, which gave me a little
Uneasiness, thinking it by no Means right to leave my Flock so long.

At Night I expounded to three Companies more numerous than before. Received
Letters, and sat up till One in the Morning answering them, and went to sleep
in order to fit myself for the Duties of the following Sabbath.

Sunday, Jan. 29. Went on board early in the Morning, read Prayers, and
preached to the Soldiers, and visited the Sick; then returned on Shore, and,
accompanied with a Troop of pious Friends, hasted to Shroulden Church, about a
Mile and half distant from Deal. Where I preached to a weeping thronged
Congregation, at the Request of the Minister, who at my Request, gave me and my
Friends the Blessed Sacrament. Others staid also, to the Number of sixteen: And
(which I never observed before) the Clerk pronounced a loud Amen to every
Person that received either Bread or Wine: An excellent Custom, and worthy in
my Opinion to be imitated in all Churches.

After this, I and my Friends went on our Way rejoicing, and dined comfortably
at Mr. R's, and in the Afternoon preached at Upper-Deal. The Church was quite
crowded, and many went away for Want of Room; some stood on the Leads of the
Church on the outside, and looked in at the Top Windows, and all seemed eager
to hear the Word of GOD. I preached against Worldly-Mindedness, and had great
Reason to think GOD gave it his Blessing.

The Weather was exceeding pleasant, and seeing the People go in such Flocks
over the Fields, put me in mind of our Blessed LORD's Words, when he saw the
People coming in Companies from Samaria: The Fields are white already to
Harvest. I then prayed, that he would be pleased to enable me to gather Wheat
into his heavenly Garner.

In the Evening, such Numbers came to hear me, that I was obliged to divide
them into four Companies; and GOD enabled me to expound to them from Six till
Ten. Some would have persuaded me to have dismissed the last Company without
Expounding, but I could not bear to let so many go empty away. And I find the
more we do for GOD, the more we may. My Strength held out surprisingly; I was
but little if at all fatigued; or if I had, I should have been sufficiently
recompensed by some Letters, which I received from my dear Friends, which gave
me unspeakable Satisfaction: And after I had perused them, I took a little
Refreshment, rejoiced and gave Thanks with my Friends for the Blessings of the
Day, and went to our respective Beds about Twelve at Night. Oh! Who can express
the Loving Kindness of the LORD, or show forth all his Praise?

Monday, Jan. 30. At the Request of the Inhabitants, and the Leave of Mr. R.
(who sent from Canterbury a most obliging Message) I preached again at
Upper-Deal to as crowded and attentive Audience as I had Yesterday; and
afterward I and Mr. H. waited upon the Rev. Mr. W. who read Prayers, and most
courteously invited me to come and see him. Our Conversation run chiefly on the
Excellency of Baptising Infants at Church. I continued with him about an Hour;
and then at his Request visited a poor Woman of the Parish, who was grievously
troubled in Mind: And GOD was pleased to bless my Ministry to her Comfort. To
him be all the Glory!

So poor, so frail an Instrument,
If Thou, my GOD, vouchsafe to use,
It Is Praise enough to be employed,
Reward enough if thou excuse.
If thou excuse, then work thy Will,
By so unfit an Instrument;
It will at once thy Goodness show,
And prove thy Power Omnipotent.
Soon after this we went to Mr. R's, where our Friends expected us: But we had
not been long there, before the Wind shifted about on a sudden, and a Cry came,
The Wind is fair, prepare yourselves for Sailing. I received the News with an
humble Joy. But Sorrow, I perceived, filled the Hearts of my dear Friends, who
came from London to see me. We immediately retired, intending to intercede for
all Mankind before we parted: But the People were in such a Hurry, for fear the
Sea should grow too tempestuous to go off, that we were obliged to be very
brief. Having therefore recommended ourselves to GOD, I took my Leave. But Oh,
what Affection did the Deal People express to my unworthy Person! for no sooner
were they apprized of the Wind being fair, but they came running in Droves
after me to the Seashore, wishing me good Luck in the Name of the LORD; and
with Tears, and other Expressions of Kindness, praying for my Success and safe
Return. I was confounded with a Sense of GOD's Mercies to me.

The Sea was very boisterous indeed, and the Waves rose Mountains high: But GOD
was pleased to give Mr. H. and me an unusual Degree of Faith, and we went on
singing Psalms and praising GOD, the Water dashing in our Faces all the Way.
Doubtless we were in Jeopardy, But wherefore should we fear, having so many on
Shore praying for us?

About Five we came on board, and were received with Joy: For the Ship was
under Sail, and the People were afraid I should be left behind. As I was going
into the great Cabin, I fell down the Steerage Stairs; but received little or
no Hurt. After we had sailed for a short Time, the Man of War not moving, we
cast Anchor again. Mr. H. was so sick by the Ship's Motion after we came on
board, that he was obliged to go to Bed.

Tuesday, Jan. 31. Spent the Morning in writing Letters, visiting the Sick,
reading Prayers and preaching to the Soldiers.

About Twelve was pleasingly surprised with another Sight of my London Friends,
who stayed at Deal all Night, and finding the Ship did not sail, came with some
more Deal Friends to take me on Shore, that I might bid them once more farewell.
I was a little unwilling at first, but by their Importunity and affectionate
Entreaties they even compelled me. I accordingly went with them, singing Psalms
and praising GOD all the Way.

But I had scarce been on Shore an Hour before the Man of War gave a Signal for
sailing; and so we were obliged to hasten back on board. The People expressed
much Joy at seeing me come to Deal again, and accompanied me to the Sea Shore,
as before.

The Weather being fair, we went on board with Pleasure: The Ship was under
Sail, but we met with it, and were received affectionately. I hope that these
frequent and sudden Removes will put me in mind that I have here no continuing
City; and stir me up to live so holily, that was GOD at any time to say, This
Night shall thy Soul be required of thee; I might with Pleasure say, Lo I come!

Another Thing I could not but reflect on Yesterday, when I saw Deal all in a
Confusion when the Wind shifted about so suddenly, some crying for one thing,
some another, but all anxious least their Ship should sail without them. Alas!
I what Confusion (thought I) will the Inhabitants of the World be in, when in a
Moment, in the Twinkling of an Eye, they shall hear the Voice of the Archangel
and Trump of GOD, crying aloud, Arise, ye dead, and come to Judgment!

After I was on board, I preached, read Prayers to the Soldiers, visited the
Sick, wrote some Letters, and interceded for all Mankind; and retired to Bed
about Twelve.

Our Ship sailed briskly for a few Hours; but the Wind shifting again, was
obliged to return back once more, and we cast Anchor in the Downs about Nine at
Night.

After this, I went cheerfully about my Ministerial Business, visited the Sick,
read Prayers and preached to the Soldiers, answered some Letters I had received
in the Morning.

Sent some Books for the Soldiers on Board the Lightfoot; and at Night went on
Shore at Deal with Mr. H. where we were most kindly received, and courteously
entertained and lodged at Mr. R's: The LORD reward him a thousand fold!

Did nothing that Night, it being late, save that I visited a sick Person at
her earnest Desire and the Minister's Consent, and talked about half an Hour on
the Benefit of Afflictions.

Answered two or three Letters I received after I came on Shore; prayed with
some well-disposed People that were at Mr. R's, and about Twelve went to Bed.

Thursday, Feb. 2. Rose early in the Morning went on board in Mr. E's Boat,
intending to read Prayers and preach to the Soldiers, and then return to
Upper-Deal to preach there, being asked to do so by the Inhabitants and the
Minister.

About Ten o'Clock there sprung up a pleasant fair Gale, which carried us from
the Downs near forty Miles that Day; during which Time I read Prayers, preached
to, and catechized my Soldiers, wrote some Letters, and had an Opportunity of
sending them as we sailed by Dover; for which I was desirous to bless GOD.

Any one must needs think I should have been glad to have heard from Mr.
Wesley, He came from Georgia to England, just as Mr. Whitefield left it.
as he went by Deal; out I considered GOD ordered all Things for the best; and
therefore I now joyfully went, but not knowing whither I went; and doubted not,
but He that strengthened David when he went out against Goliath, would also
strengthen me against all my spiritual Adversaries, and send his HOLY GHOST to
guide, assist, and comfort me in all Emergencies. The Good LORD keep me always
thus minded!

Friday, Feb. 3. Let this Day be noted in my Book; for GOD has wrought for us a
wonderful Deliverance! About Seven in the Morning, the Men upon Deck not
keeping a good Look out, one of the East India Ships in shifting to the Wind
ran near us so very briskly, that had not Capt. W. providentially been on Deck,
and beseeching them for GOD's sake to tack about, both the Ships must
inevitably have split one against another. They were within four Yards of each
other. The Captain said he never was in so great Danger in his Life. GOD so
ordered it, that Mr. H. and I knew nothing of it till it was over: But when I
was apprised of it, I endeavored to excite all to Thankfulness, and returned
public Thanks at Prayers. Too many seemed to be unsensible of the Mercy
received. But,

Since GOD does thus his wondrous Love
Through all our Lives extend,
Those Lives to him let us devote.
And in his Service spend.
Read public Prayers and preached to the Soldiers as usual; explained the
Catechism to the Women, exhorted them particularly to be obedient to their own
Husbands, which they had lately been wanting in: And was pleased to hear the
Captain, as I came on Deck, remind me of the Motion I made to him some time
ago, about having Prayers daily in the Great Cabin; and withal desired that
from henceforward I would read Prayers Morning and Evening to them. This I most
readily consented to, it being what I had long desired and prayed for, and what
I was just then about to propose to him again. Accordingly I went immediately
and acquainted the Lieutenant, etc. of the Captain's Desire, and we begun this
Night to have full public Prayers: And at the Request of Capt. W. I expounded
the second Lesson; and a glorious Lesson it was. Blessed be GOD! for that I
hope we shall now begin to live like Christians, and call upon the Name of the
LORD daily. The very Thoughts of GOD's granting me this Petition filled me with
Joy.

Saturday, Feb. 4. Began to have Prayers in the Great Cabin in the Morning;
read Prayers and preached twice to the Soldiers as usual; and expounded the
second Lesson in the Evening to the Gentlemen, after Prayers in the Great
Cabin, which from henceforth I intended, GOD willing, to continue: Unspeakable
I find is and will be the Benefit of it; for it gives me an Opportunity of
saying many salutary Truths, and affords us Matter for serious Table-talk
afterward.

Was much pleased to see our Ship sail directly before the Wind; was enlarged
in Intercession; furnished three Soldiers with Books, who began to*day to learn
to read: GOD enable them not only to read, but to do their Duty!

Mr. H's Scholars increase: The LORD increase his Strength!

Sunday, Febr. 5. Joined in Spirit with absent Friends in holy Ordinances;
spent some Time most delightfully in reading the Word of GOD: Read Prayers, and
some Observations on both the Lessons in the Great Cabin; and then read
Prayers and expounded both the Lessons to the Soldiers. O that the LORD would
open our Understandings! for they are but a dead Letter without the
Illumination of his Holy Spirit!

Read Prayers and preached my Sermon on Justification in the Afternoon to the
Officers, etc. in the Great Cabin.

Begun tonight to turn the Observations made on the Lessons in the Morning
into catechistical Questions, and was pleased to hear some of the Soldiers and
my Companions make such apt Answers. I find this an excellent Way of
Instruction: It makes them bring their Bible, and give diligent Heed to the
Things that are spoken: It teaches them the Scriptures practically, and
consequently will by the Divine Blessing make them wise unto Salvation. Thanks
be to GOD for putting this into my Heart! By his Assistance I intend to
continue it.

Monday, Feb. 6. Had no Prayers in the Morning between Decks; but read Prayers
in the Cabin, likewise did the same in the Evening, and expounded the 14th
Chapter of St. Matthew, the second Lesson, which containing an Account of St.
John's reproving Herod, gave me an Opportunity of telling them, that great Men
should not be angry if Ministers should reprove them out of Love; and they
seemed to assent to it.

Read Prayers and preached to the Soldiers as usual; interceded warmly for
absent Friends and all Mankind; and went to Bed full of Peace and Joy. Thanks
be to GOD for this unspeakable Gift!

Was pleased to see Mr. H. so active in teaching the Children. He has now many
Scholars: May GOD prosper the Works of his Hands upon him!

Had such pleasant Sailing, that Captain W. said he never knew the like before.
What Reason have I to be thankful! O that my Friends would help me to give
Thanks.

Tuesday, Feb. 7. Read Prayers and expounded the Lessons as usual to the
Soldiers, and in the great Cabin; and after Dinner sung Psalms with Mr. H. and
a Gentleman on board, on open Deck.

Being now in the Bay of Biscay, the Ship rocked very much, though there was a
great Calm: But if there is a fixed Principle of Grace, a firm Love of GOD
rooted in the Heart; what avails all outward Motions?

Wednesday, Feb. 8. Had public Worship and expounded as usual to both my
Congregations. Was pleased to hear a Gentleman discourse for some Time of the
utter Inability of any Thing to make us happy but GOD.

In the Afternoon I preached and read Prayers on open Deck, at the Captain's
Desire, who ordered Chairs to be brought, and Boards put across them for the
Soldiers to sit upon. My Subject was, the Eternity of Hell Torments; and I was
earnest in delivering of it, being desirous that none of my dear Hearers should
experience them. Praying and singing Psalms on open Deck enlarged my Heart.

Was enabled to make good Part of a Sermon this Evening, and lay down to Sleep.
GOD grant I may die daily!

Thursday, Feb. 9. Read Prayers, expounded and catechized as usual; had
delightful Sailing, and great Joy in the HOLY GHOST, and was very thankful that
GOD called me abroad to see and admire his Wonders in the Deep. O who can serve
a better Master than JESUS CHRIST?

Friday, Feb. 10. Read Prayers, and according to Custom went on in explaining
the Catechism to the Women; and after Evening Prayer expounded the 49th Psalm
instead of the Lesson. Had still greater Reason to bless GOD for bringing me to
Sea. O what shall I render unto the LORD?

Saturday, Feb. 11. Catechized, visited the Sick, expounded and read Prayers as
usual; and met with some Soldiers who could sing by Note, with whom I propose
to join in Divine Psalmody every Day.

A Psalm may win him who a Sermon flies,
And turn Delight into a Sacrifice.
In the Evening gave Thanks for the Blessings, and examined into the Actions of
the past Week. It Is well I have a Savior to satisfy for my Performances as
well as my Person, for otherwise how should I stand before thee, O Holy LORD
GOD? GOD be merciful to me a Sinner.

Sunday, Feb. 12. Did as usual, and preached my Sermon on Glorification to the
Gentlemen in the great Cabin. Oh that GOD may make us Partakers of it.

Honest Joseph my Servant returned Thanks after Morning Prayers for his
Recovery from a late severe Fit of Sickness. I hope now CHRIST has touched him,
by the Right Hand of his healing Power, he will arise and minister unto him. He
tells me he can say with David, It is good for me that I have been afflicted.
GOD be praised! for sanctified Afflictions are Signs of special Love.

Monday, Feb. 13. Did as usual, only instead of the second Lesson, expounded
the 22d Chapter of St. Matthew, at the Captain's Request, who takes all
Opportunities to express his Kindness to me: May the GOD whom I serve, sanctify
and save him.

Tuesday Feb. 14. May I never forget this Day's Mercies, since the LORD was
pleased to deal so lovingly with me! About. Twelve at Night a fresh Gale arose,
which increased so very much by Four in the Morning, that the Waves raged
horribly indeed, and broke in like a River on many of the poor Soldiers who lay
near the Main Hatch Way. Friend H. and I knew nothing of it, but perceived
ourselves restless, and could not sleep at all; he complained of a grievous
Headache. I arose and called upon GOD for myself and those that sailed with me,
absent Friends, and all Mankind. After this I went on Deck; but surely a more
noble awful Sight my Eyes never yet beheld! for the Waves rose more than
Mountains high; and sometimes came on the Quarter Deck. I endeavored all the
while to magnify GOD, for thus making his Power to be known: And then creeping
on my Knees (for I knew not how to go otherwise) I followed my Friend H.
between Decks, and sung Psalms and comforted the poor wet People. After this, I
read Prayers in the great Cabin; but we were obliged to sit all the while.
Then thinking I should be capable of doing nothing, I laid myself across the
Chair reading; but GOD was so good, so to assist me by his Spirit, that though
Things were tumbling, the Ship rocking, and Persons falling down unable to
stand, and sick about me; yet I never was more cheerful in my Life, and was
enabled, though in the midst of Company, to finish a Sermon before I went to
Bed, which I had begun a few Days before: So greatly was GOD's Strength
magnified in my Weakness! Praise the LORD, O my Soul, and all that is within me
praise his holy. Name!

Thursday, Feb. 16. Did as usual in the Ship; only instead of Catechizing,
examined into the Proficiency of my Friend H's Scholars; gave them proper
Encouragement, as I saw they wanted; and had Hopes some of them would become
living Members of JESUS CHRIST.

Joined with those at Night, who set apart this Day as a Day of Fasting and
Humiliation, to deprecate the Judgments our National Sins deserve. LORD, hear
our Prayers, and let our Cry come unto thee.

Friday, Feb. 17. Read Prayers, expounded the Lessons and proceeded on my
Explanation of the Catechism to the Women: Expounded part of the Lord's Prayer,
after Evening Prayer, in the Great Cabin; and intend, after this is done, to
go on with Creed and Ten Commandments. GOD give us all praying, believing,
obedient Hearts.

Found honest Mr. D. particularly useful to me, I being a little sick by the
late shaking of the Ship, and the Heat and Smell of the People between Decks,
who, as yet, have scarce Had Time to recover themselves since the Storm. O how
soon are these frail Tabernacles of ours put out of Order! Happy the Man who
serves GOD in his Health, and has nothing to do when Sickness seizes him but
quietly to lie down and die.

Saturday, Feb. 18. Performed the usual Duty, and finished the Lord's Prayer.
Perceived my bodily Disorders to go off, and was enabled to preach to the
Soldiers with more Enlargement than I have been for these four Days past. The
Captain observed me a little disordered, and gave Mr. H. a Cordial for me: The
good LORD note this Favor in his Book.

After Dinner I grew better and better; was exceedingly delighted by sitting on
Deck, praising GOD for the Pleasantness of the Weather, and reading Archbishop
Cranmer's Life: Surely he was a righteous Man. The Account of his Fall made my
Heart tremble within me. But why should thou be cast down, O my Soul? Still
trust in GOD: He that has begun will carry on and finish the good Work. Even
so, LORD JESUS, come quickly.

Though the Weather was exceeding pleasant all the Day, yet it grew more and
more pleasant in the Evening, and our Ship sailed at the Rate of nine Miles an
Hour, and as steady as though we were sitting on Shore. The Night, was exceeding
clear, and the Moon and Stars appeared in their greatest Luster; so that not
having Patience to stay below, I went upon Deck with Friend H. and praised GOD
for his wonderful loving Kindness in singing Psalms, and gave Thanks for the
Blessings, and asked Pardon for the Offenses of the Week, and then had a long
Intercession. GOD grant I may learn a Lesson from this good Providence of GOD,
and the nearer I come to my Journey's End, the quicker may my Pace be.

It is worth coming from England; to see what we have beheld this Day. GOD be
praised for all his Mercies.

Sunday, Feb. 19. Slept better to Night than I have a long while; blessed be
the Keeper of Israel. Read Prayers in the great Cabin; was enlarged in
expounding both the Lessons to the Soldiers; and had Prayers, and preached one
of the Sermons GOD enabled me to make since I came on board, on open Deck in
the Afternoon, All the Gentlemen attended, Benches were laid for the People,
and the Ship sailed smoothly, and the Weather was finer than I can express; so
that I know not where I have performed the Service more comfortably. And
indeed, I have been so delighted these two Days with our pleasant sailing, and
the Promontaries all around us, that I could not avoid thanking GOD for calling
me abroad, and stirring up all to praise him: Who by his Strength sets fast
the Mountains, and is girded about with Power.

For these two Days our Ship has sailed at the Rate of a Hundred and sixty
Miles in twenty-four Hours, and rode in Triumph directly before the Wind, and
cast Anchor about Two in the Morning; 'till which Time, I sat up on purpose to
give Thanks in Gibraltar Haven. Oh that my Friends would therefore praise the
LORD for his Goodness, and extol him for the wonderful Works he has done for
me, the least of the Sons of Men.

How Providence will be pleased to dispose of me here, I cannot yet know; but I
thought proper to send you this Account of my short Voyage already, to show you
how GOD has heard your Prayers, to provoke you to Thankfulness, and to
encourage you to persevere in praying on my Behalf. If you observe (as
doubtless you may) any thing amiss or imprudent in my Conduct, I beseech you,
by the Mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, tell me plainly: for that Cause have I
been so particular: And if you should happen to see any Thing commendable or
praiseworthy in my Behavior, Oh, do not think more highly of me than you
ought to think; for I am a Worm, and no Man, and deserve to be the Outcast of
the People: but give all Glory to my best Master, by whose free Grace I am what
I am.

I cannot help transcribing the Verses that follow, as a Conclusion to what I
have now sent you.

How are thy Servants blessed, O Lord!
How sure is their Defense!
Eternal Wisdom is their Guard;
Their Help Omnipotence.
Think, O my Soul, devoutly think,
How with affrighted Eyes
Thou saw the wide extended Deep
In all its Horrors rise!
Confusion dwelt in every Face,
And Fear in every Heart;
When Waves on Waves, and Gulf on Gulf,
O'ercame the Pilot's Art.
Yet then from all my Griefs, O Lord!
Thy Mercy set me free;
Whilst in the Confidence of Prayer,
My Soul took Hold on Thee.
For though in dreadful Whirl's we hung
High on the broken Wave;
I know thou were not slow to hear,
Nor impotent to save.
The Storms were laid, the Wind retired,
Obedient to thy holy Will:
The Sea that roared at thy Command,
At thy Command was still.
In midst of Dangers, Fears, and Death,
Thy Goodness I Will adore;
And praise Thee for thy Mercies past,
And humbly hope for more.
My Life, if Thou (...) serv'st my Life,
Thy Sacrifice shall be:
And Death, if Death shall be my Doom,
Shall join my Soul to thee.
FINIS.
Advertisement.
In a short Time will be published, A Continuation of the First Volume of the
Rev. Mr. WHITEFIELD's JOURNAL, from GIBRALTAR to GEORGIA, to be Sold by Charles
Harrison, over against the Brazen Head in Cornhill.

N.B. At the abovesaid Place may be had Bibles, Common Prayers, etc. and a
Sortment of pleasant Histories: As also Books neatly Bound, Gilt on the Back or
Lettered, with other Plain Binding, all at a reasonable Price.


