A LETTER Relating to a Medium of Trade, IN THE PROVINCE OF THE
Massachusetts Bay.

BOSTON, Printed at the NEW PRINTING-OFFICE, opposite to the South East Corner
of the TOWN HOUSE. MDCCXL.

A LETTER Relating to a MEDIUM of TRADE.
SIR,
IT has been the common Complaint, ever since I have been upon the Stage, That
the Times are hard and Money scarce. But at this Juncture, there is undoubtedly
far more Reason and Truth than ordinarily has been, in the Complaints made upon
these Hea^^, specially the latter of them.

But how scarce soever Money (i. e. Bill^ of Credit, the only Money passing
among us) be, yet it is obvio^^^ that its Scarcity does not enhance its Value:
For in the Year past, those Gentlemen who from Time to Time have depr^^^ated
our Bills, have given higher for Silver in said Bills, than (...) any former
Years.

As the sinking the Credit of our Province Bills, has in a g^^^^ Measure
subverted commutative Justice through the Land; so those who have been the
Sufferers by it, have been ready to compl^^^^ of the Legislature, and too
rashly to lay the Blame at their (...). I say too rashly, for the State of our
Trade and Mercha^^^ abroad has been such, that unless we could suppose our
(...) chants to act with a due Regard to the public Weal, and (...) Cause of
common Justice and Equity, as well as their priv^^^ personal Gain, it is hard to
conceive how it could have bee^^^ the Power of any Laws whatsoever to have kept
up the Cr^^^^ of our Bills.

It is certain, the Funds upon which they have been emitted, have been
sufficient to give them a ready Currency amongst (...), and Persons for some
Years at first were so well satisfied on (...) Account, that our Bills really
were, agreeable to the Desig^^^^ their Emission, equal in Value to lawful Silver
Money: And they would undoubtedly have continued of the same Value to this Day,
had they not been depreciated by those who have been the Sellers and Buyers of
Silver and Gold amongst us.

Whilst the Seller of these has not been content to part with them for Bills of
Credit without some Advance, and whilst the Buyer, to serve his present Turn,
has yielded to give that Advance, they have by that Means, in too sound a
Sense, been the Clippers of our Coin (i. e. our Bills of Credit) and had the
first Hand in all that Injustice and Oppression, which has been the unavoidable
Consequence of their Practice herein.

And now what is the great Temptation that has led them into this Practice?
It Is undoubtedly some Gain to themselves, either real or imaginary. But what
real Gain have they acquired or could they have in View, which can be thought
so tempting, as to lead them into a Practice so pernicious to the Public, and
of so pernicious Consequence in regard of Multitudes, who are in no Capacity to
ward off the Wrong they sustain hereby?

As to the Vender of these Commodities, the very Day he got up his Silver (for
Instance) from 20 s. to 22 s. per Ounce, he sunk the Bills he received 2 s. in
the Pound. And now, suppose he was One whose Debt did exceed his Credit, though
in this Case he might discharge a 20 s. Debt and have 2 s. left to himself; yet
since his Gain was his Creditors Loss, if he be a Man of Justice and Honesty, I
should think he can take but little Satisfaction in it.

But this, as I apprehend, has not often been the Case, but the Generality of
those who have had Silver to sell, have been such, the Balance of whose
Accounts have been in their own Favor.

Some Years since, a Gentleman who had Silver by him, told me, such a Merchant
had been with him to buy, but that upon his holding his Silver at a higher Rate
(as I remember 18 d. or 2 s. per Oz.) than it had usually passed at, they
parted, yet nevertheless within a few Days after, the same Merchant sent him
Province Bills to exchange with him at his own Price; which hereupon soon
became the common Rate at which Silver was sold.

This was a Gentleman free of Debt perhaps as any in the Province, and had not
only a large Sum due to him upon Book, but many Hundreds of Pounds due upon
Bond, payable in Province Bills. And now suppose he gained 2 s. per Oz. upon
his Silver for two or three hundred Ounces, he for that Gain (supposing he
raised it from 20 s. to 22 s. per Oz.) lost 2 s. per Pound upon a Sum perhaps
more than two or three thousand Pounds. And I doubt not but this has been the
Case with many others; which when they experience the Truth of, however
instrumental they themselves have been in bringing it to pass, they seem to
disregard that, and fill their Mouths with Exclamations against the Government,
for not keeping up the Credit of their Bills!

And now let us consider the Case of the Buyer. And here, I see not but the
Advance he makes, is at present to his own Loss. And the great Reason why he is
willing to sustain this Loss, is the Prospect he has of making it up, by
setting a proportionable Advance upon either the Goods he has already in his
Possession, or those that next come to Hand, or both: And if he make no greater
Advance upon these, than barely to make up his Loss, where is his Gain? And if
he make a greater, under this Pretense, where is his Honesty.

And now agreeable to this Representation, where is the great Gain to either the
Seller or Buyer of Silver and Gold, for the Sake of which they should be led
(as I said) into this Practice, so pernicious to the Public, etc?

And if there be a greater Gain to either, than this Representation sets in our
View, I am persuaded, that if it were carefully examined into, it would be
found such as will not bear the Light: Nor can I think that those who have
acquired it, will be able to take much Satisfaction in it, if they consider, as
I think there is Reason they should, That together with their respective Shares
thereof, they must share between them, if not the whole, yet a principal Part
of the Guilt arising from that Injustice and Oppression, which their Practice
has bro't upon the Widow and the Orphan, and all such who depend on certain
Sums in Province Bills annually to be paid for their Subsistence.

In brief, as the Emission of Bills of Credit, which so well served all the
Ends of Trade and Commerce amongst ourselves, put it into the Power of the
Merchant soon to send off our Silver and Gold, as he did, so his bidding upon
the Silver since imported, has I think been the sole Cause of the sinking of
the Credit of our Province Bills. And it seems needless and in vain to enquire
after any other Cause thereof I am aware of it, that many have freely charged
the Government with Breach of Faith, in postponing Payments established by Law,
and assigned this as the Reason of the fall of the Credit of our Bills. But if
I am not misinformed, this has Reference only to the Payments of the several
Loans that have been granted. With respect to which (as I humbly conceive) it
will be difficult to demonstrate any Injustice in the Delays of those Payments,
more than there is when a private Person that lets his Money upon Interest,
taking Bond for the Payment thereof in one Year, delays putting his Bond in
Suit against the Debtor immediately, if at that Period he does not make
Payment. But to assign this Indulgence to the Debtor whilst he has given good
Security, and which remains good and sufficient for the Recovery of the Bills
and Interest, as any Cause of the sinking the Credit of the Bills so let,
seems not to have so much as the Shadow of a Reason to support it.
. And unless, agreeable to what I before obferv'd, we might suppose that the
Sellers and Buyers of Silver and Gold will alter their Practice, and act more
upon Principles of Wisdom, Honor and Justice, than they have done, 'twill be
but a vain Thing to hope for the Continuance of that Credit our public Bills
at present obtain, nor will it be in the Power of any Laws to support their
sinking Credit.

But if once our Merchants, who have the Value of our Bills set by the
Legislature, at their Emission, and who have the Balances in their Hands, and
ought to esteem the keeping invariable the Medium with which they carry on
their Trade, as an essential Basis of their just Commerce, will be prevailed
with to take up and keep inviolate a just Resolution, not to undervalue our
Bills by over-rating Silver and Gold, there will be nothing wanting, either in
the Funds upon which they have been emitted, or in the Ends and Uses to which
they may serve, in order to their being preserved in their full Credit and
Value.

And I should think what I have said, together with those further Thoughts,
which those who closely attend to Reason, will by these brief Hints, be
naturally led into, would be sufficient to induce every Man of Penetration and
Virtue to take up and keep this Resolution. And should there be found any,
whose earthly Souls cannot be made to see an Hair's Breadth beyond the Circle of
self, and who care nothing for the Good of their Country, nor regard the
Injuries and Oppressions their Neighbors sustain, so that their private
personal Gain be but secured and advanced; these ought to be discouraged by
penal Laws, in their unrighteous Practices.

And as to this Practice of giving or receiving any Advance in Bills of Credit
for Silver or Gold more than 5 per Cent. above the Value set upon those Bills
by the Legislature at their Emission, I think, Justice requires that they
should, upon their being detected herein, suffer the same Shame and Punishment
which they incur, who are convicted of clipping the KING's Coin.

Having premised these general Thoughts, I shall adventure to offer a Scheme
for supplying the Province with a Medium of Trade, which may at present relieve
the pressing Difficulties under which it labors, prevent those further
Oppressions the Inhabitants lie exposed to, and in the Issue introduce a better
Medium.

And to these desired Ends, it is proposed;

I. That upon the Motion of a sufficient Number of Subscribers, the Great and
General Court enact a Law for the Emission of Two Hundred Thousand Pounds Bills
of Credit of the following Tenor, viz.

This TWENTY SHILLING BILL shall be esteemed equal in Value to one Ounce of
SILVER Sterling Alloy, and shall be accordingly accepted by the Treasurer, and
Receivers subordinote to him in the Payment of all public Taxes, and in all
Payments by the Company and every of them, at whose Motion it has been emitted.
By Order of the General Court and Agreement of said Company, BOSTON.

E. F. G. H. In the Name of the Company. A. B. C. D. Committee.


II. That the said Sum of Two Hundred Thousand Pounds thus emitted, be taken
out of the Treasury by said Company, each Person receiving the Sum he
subscribed for, he giving good Security to the Province Treasurer, either Real
or Personal, for the Payment of the same at ten equal Payments, viz. Ten per
Cent. per Annum, in Silver at 20 s. per Ounce, or Gold pro rato.

III. It Is proposed, That the said Sum of Two Hundred Thousand Pounds be drawn
into the Treasury by Tax upon the Inhabitants of the Province, in ten equal
annual Payments, viz. Twenty Thousand Pounds each Year: The first Payment to be
in 1743.

IV. That for the Supply of the Medium, and that the Inhabitants may be the
better enabled to pay their Tax, it is proposed, that at the beginning of each
Year, wherein Twenty Thousand Pounds is drawn into the Treasury by Tax, there
be the same Sum emitted upon the Motion of Persons belonging to the Company or
others that may be disposed to join them, to be taken out and paid in by the
Company in the same Manner the first 200000 l. was, and to be drawn in by Tax
at the Distance of ten Years from the Emission; in taking out whereof let those
that acceed to the Company have the Preference. And let 20,000 l. be thus
called in by Tax, and the same Sum emitted ab Anno ad Annum, so long as the
General Court shall think fit.

V. Now upon Supposition these Emissions of 20,000 l. are continued from 1743
to 1759, inclusive, the State of the Treasury will be this 1760, viz. In Silver
and Gold received of the Company to the amount of 450000 Ounces of Silver. In
Silver and Gold due from the Company, to the Amount of 90000 Oz. and the Bills
outstanding will be 200000 l.

VI. It Is proposed, That the abovesaid Silver and Gold, as it comes in, be let
out upon good Security at Six per Cent. per Annum, special Regard to be had in
letting the same to such Persons through the Province, as may be in Danger of
Oppression by the Extortion of excessive Usury or otherwise; from such, who may
delight in the Pleasure which their Brethren the great Fish of the Sea, take in
devouring the less. And due Care being also taken to call in the Silver so let,
before the Year 1760, by which Means the Sum in the Treasury may be very
considerably increased.

VII. It Is proposed, That in the Year 1760, the said Sum of 450000 Ounces of
Silver, and what may be added thereto by letting any Part thereof upon
Interest, be divided to and amongst the several Towns in the Province, each
Town to receive thereof in Proportion to the Tax laid upon it. And whereas it is
to be supposed, that after all the Treasurer's Care, there will be some Bonds
not discharged by Persons who may have taken some Part of the Sum upon
Interest, it is proposed That said Bonds (if any there be) come into the
Division, each Town taking the Bonds of their own Inhabitants as a Part of
their Proportion of the Dividend.

VIII. It Is proposed, That each Town distribute the Silver and Gold by them
received, to and among their Inhabitants, each one to receive thereof in
Proportion to his Rate in the Province Tax. And as to their Bonds (if any there
be) call them in at Discretion, in the mean Time appropriating the Interest to
such Purposes as may lighten the Town Charges.

IX. That from and after the Year 1760, the public Taxes be laid for Silver at
6 s. 8 d. per Oz. or Gold pro rato, providing nevertheless that Bills of Credit
be accepted instead thereof: And as a Reward for their good Service, and to
hasten their coming in, let Twenty Shillings in said Bills be received as equal
in Value to twenty one Penny Weight, or Seven Shillings in Silver. And that all
private Debts after said Year contracted, be payable in Silver at 6 s. 8 d. per
Ounce, or in Province Bills three for one. And that one Ounce of Silver or 20
s. in Bills, discharge 20 s. of all Debts contracted before or in that Year.

X. It Is proposed, That 3000 Ounces, Part of the 90000 due from the Company, as
it comes in, be given to Harvard College so far to make good the Loss their
Stock has sustained by the Fall of the Credit of our Province Bills, whereby
the Design of their generous and pious Benefactors has in considerable Measure
been frustrated. And, that all other Stocks of Money, founded for the
Encouragement of inferior Schools of Learning, or any pious or charitable
Uses, and that have sustained the like Loss, do receive of said Silver, a Sum
that bears the same Proportion to the respective Stocks as 3000 Oz. does to the
Stock of Harvard College.

And that the Remainder of the said Sum of 90000 Oz. be left as an additional
Fund for the more speedy and effectual drawing in and sinking the Bills
outstanding. It Is supposed that the Province Charge will be included, with the
20000 l. yearly to be drawn in and sunk in the same Tax Bill. And as Bills will
pay said Tax with 1 s. per Pound Advance above Silver, it is supposed the
Inhabitants will of Choice pay their Rates in Bills. And it is proposed that all
the Bills so paid in, be sunk, and that in Case the Sum paid in Bills, exceed
20000 l. the Excess of that Sum, be paid out in Silver from said additional
Fund: By which Means perhaps the Bills may all be gathered in and sunk, in six
or seven, instead of ten Years.

If the abovesaid Scheme be proceeded to, and bro't to Effect, it is obvious to
the discerning Reader,

1. That all Temptation to hoarding up the Bills, and so defeating the Design
of their Emission, which is, to serve as a Medium of Trade, is obviated: The
Importance of which may be seen, in which Experience teaches, with Respect to
the ensnaring Scheme upon which the Merchants Notes were emitted.

2. That which is here proposed, strongly tends to defeat the unrighteous
Hopes, and discourage the oppressive Practices of avaritious Men: For as there
will be a Medium of Trade provided, so there will be a growing Sum in the
Treasury to be let upon good Security at lawful Interest, by which Means
Persons will not lie at the Mercy of their Oppressors, but may be supplied
where they will be treated with Justice. And if finally they become Debtors to
their own Towns, it is to be expected they will be treated by their Neighbors
agreeable to the Laws of Kindness.

3. That we shall be furnished with a Medium of Trade, which for the present
Time, will be as good to all Intents and Purposes within ourselves, as Silver
and Gold; and such a one as will hold its Value: For these Bills being received
by the Province Treasurer, and by the Company, according to the Tenor thereof,
it will not be in the Power of others to depreciate them. If others should
advance upon their Commodities, the Effect would be, that the Company (acting
with Justice and Honor) would draw all the Trade of the Province. And unless
others can make such Advance, there is no Danger of their bidding upon Silver
and Gold, and consequently no Danger of the Bills being depreciated, especially
when it is further considered, that in a few Years they will convert into Silver
and Gold.

4. That at the Period proposed, the Province will be furnished with a Medium
for Trade in Silver and Gold, of more Value than 600000 l. of the present
Currency; and every individual Person have his Proportion of it in his Pocket
or at Interest.

The great Enquiry is, Whether what has been proposed is practicable? And in
order to the forming a proper Judgment upon this Head, these three Things are
carefully to be considered, viz.

1. The Part proposed to be undertaken by the SUBSCRIBERS.

2. The Part assigned to the PROVINCE.

3. What Influence this SCHEME, should it take Effect, would have upon our
British Plantations.

I. The Part proposed to be undertaken by the Subscribers. And this, besides
the Obligation they lay themselves under, expressed in the Face of the Bills,
is only to pay in 10 per Cent. annually, of the respective Sums they receive,
'till the whole be paid. And surely, with but ordinary Success in their Trade,
they will be able to do this, and find their Account in undertaking it.

I say it is only this, besides the Obligation he brings himself under to
receive 20 s. in these Bills, as equal in Value to one Ounce of Silver in all
Payments; which Obligation why should any Merchant decline bringing himself
under? Were the Medium with which they carry on their Trade, wholly Silver and
Gold, and so such as with little or no Variation would hold its Value, would he
not then, generally speaking, set the same Advance upon his Goods from Year to
Year, and yet have sufficient Encouragement to proceed in his Business? And why
is there not then as great Encouragement to proceed in it, upon Supposition,
the proper Medium is preserved in its full Value, and he goes on to set his
Advance accordingly? But here 'twill be said, That though in the supposed Case
he might have the same Encouragement, yet that in our present Circumstances, he
is so straightened and pressed for Returns, and Silver being so scarce, which is
the best Commodity to make Returns in, those that have it being fully knowing
to all this, will not part with their Silver for these Bills, without Advance;
and therefore if he obtain them, he must comply to give it.

To this I reply,

1. That allowing the Truth of what is here suggested, and that the Merchant
for these Reasons should give some Advance in Bills for Silver to make Returns,
does it thence follow that he must needs raise in Proportion upon all his
Commodities? Is there any Reason in it, that because Silver is scarce and in
Demand, he gives some Advance in Bills for it, that therefore he must make the
same Advance upon all other Commodities, though they be not scarce nor in so
great Demand? It would be no Detriment to the Credit of the Bills, if such an
Advance was given in Exchange for Silver, as might be sufficient to induce
Persons to make the Exchange, if at the same Time the Bills were allowed to
have their just Value (i. e. the Value set on them by the Legislature) in the
purchasing all other Commodities. Nor in this Case would there be any Danger of
their fluctuating, but their Value would be nevertheless invariable.

But

2. What imaginable Reason is there, or what Advantage can it be under the
Circumstances pleaded, for the Merchant to go on from Year to Year to bid
higher and higher for Silver? An Ounce of Silver now it costs 29 s. in Province
Bills, is no better at London than it was when it cost but Twenty Shillings in
the same Bills: And 20 s. then as effectually and readily precured it, as 29 s.
does now. In brief, as Silver, let the Price of it here be what it will, is not
thereby altered in its Value at Home; so it was as readily sold, by those that
had it, when it was but 9 s. per Oz. as it is now it is 29 s. And however the
Merchant is pressed for Returns, and Silver be the best Commodity to answer
that End, yet he can have no more Silver than there is; and a smaller Advance,
as Experience has shown, has been as effectual to draw into his Hands the whole
of that, as a greater. And were this Practice of giving higher and higher for
Silver, laid aside, every Person that wants would have as good a Prospect of
being supplied, as in this Way. For if none gave such Advance, the Seller would
not expect it, but he that first spoke, would have the Refusal; and when those
that want (...), look out with greater Care and Diligence, they may expect
Success, and their Practice is more rational and far less exceptional, than in
striving to answer their End by bidding a greater Advance than others are
willing to give.

3. I reply, That whatever Straits the Merchant may be in for Returns, and
however great his Temptations may be under all Circumstances, to raise the
Price he gives for Silver, yet these will not justify him in the Practice, if
the Practice it self be such as involves Injustice or Dishonesty in it. Which
that it does I think I have already said enough to evince. To which I shall
only desire the Reader to add, the Consideration of the Way which this Practice
opens to designing Men, to deal unjustly to the last Degree.

And I think he cannot but discern, so much of this, as to show him, upon how
precarious Foundations Justice and Righteousness stand, in the present State of
our Affairs, and of how great Importance it is, that proper Care should be
taken in the Matter. And that therefore the Obligation proposed (and under our
Consideration) is both reasonable and important, and what no wise and just Man
should decline, in the most explicit Manner to bring himself under.

But I now pass,

II. To consider the Part in this Scheme assigned to the Province, and this is
to pay in annually a Tax of l. 200000. That is so much besides the current
Charges of each Year, which this Scheme does not meddle with.

And I should think this no insupportable Burden: It Is true the Inhabitants of
the Province complain of the Weight of the Taxes at present laid upon them; but
it is to be considered, that the present Taxes are heavier, and will continue so
to be till 1743, than what is here proposed. And besides, the Ground of the
present Complaint is really not so much because of the Greatness of the Tax, as
the Scarcity of Money. And since in this Scheme there is Provision made for a
competent Supply, it cannot be thought, but that they will bear easily the Tax
proposed, and that with the greater Cheerfulness, seeing they will not only be,
perhaps more than rewarded by the Benefit they will receive from the Use of so
good a Medium of Exchange, but after a few Years, will have their Bills
returned into their own Hands in good Silver and Gold, with Interest.

III. What Influence this Scheme, should it take Effect, will have upon our
British Trade.

I mention this, because, that however we might argue, that by our Charter the
General Assembly of the Province, are vested with full Power to transact such
an Affair in and by themselves, yet since the principal Advantage Great Britain
reaps from the Plantations, arises from the supplying them with their
Manufacturies, and receiving in Returns such Commodities as the Plantations
have or can get in their Power: If such a Scheme as this should be thought to
clog that Trade, and so be detrimental to his Majesty's good Subjects there,
it is but just to expect that Obstructions will be thrown in the Way, to prevent
its taking Effect.

And I think, as the Matter has been managed amongst us, it is no wonder that it
has reached his Majesty's Ear, and that he has so far interposed in the Affair
of our emitting Bills of Credit, as to give Instructions to his Governor of
this Province relating thereto. For beyond doubt, the Merchants in London, who
have supplied us with their valuable Commodities, have not only, been sometimes
long kept out of their Money, but when it has come to Hand, it has fallen short
of what it ought to have been, as much as our Paper-Currency has sunk in its
Credit, which however it may not have been the Effect of Design and
Pre-meditation in our Merchants, yet it has really been an Injustice, and so
far as this has been the Case, his Majesty's endeavoring to redress it, by
giving such Instructions to his Governor, as he thought proper for that End,
ought to be deemed, but the Fruit of his paternal Care for the good of his
Subjects.

But now if what is here proposed, will be found upon Examination, sufficient
to fix the Value of our Bills, the Grievance will be removed, and upon a proper
Representation the Instructions will undoubtedly be recalled, especially if it
be further found that this Scheme, tends greatly to the flourishing of our
British Trade, and so to the mutual Advantage of his Majesty's good Subjects
there and in this Province, which that it does might easily be demonstrated,
but I forbear; and shall now close by observing,

1. That in the foregoing Scheme I have the rather set the Value, at the Rate I
have, that so they might the better correspond with those Bills of Credit of
this Province, already passing amongst us. For whilst the Law sets those of the
new Tenor (as we distinguish them) at 6 s. 8 d. the Ounce, and at the same Time
requires three for one, if paid in Bills of the old Tenor, it does in Effect
set the old Tenor Bills at the Rate of 20 ss. the Ounce. And however by an ill
Management, neither of those Sorts of Bills, at present carry in them that
Value, especially as received by the Merchant, yet they ought to carry it, and
I think their sinking Credit ought so far to be recovered, as to bring them to
that, as being (all Things considered) the most proper Standard. And as the
Government are obliged to receive them at that Rate, so it may be of good
Effect for the abovesaid Company to take them in all Payments at the same Rate
too; and as it will be needful that a proper Instrument be drawn for them to
subscribe, it seems very advisable, there should be an Article therein
obliging them so to do.

This being undertaken and complied with, will certainly fix an equal Value
upon the Bills projected in the foregoing Scheme, and those already extant, nor
can there I think be any Danger but that both will hold their Value, for what
imaginable Reason can there be, for any to set a less Value upon Twenty
Shillings in these Bills than upon an Ounce of Silver? if at present it will
purchase the same Quantity of such Goods as he wants, that an Ounce of Silver
would, and which had he the Silver, he would part with it for? The Truth is,
whatever I have to part with, that will as well procure what I at present want,
as Silver and Gold would, is at present as good to me, as Silver and Gold
themselves. For which Reason, he that can think abstractly, must, I think, be
able to see, that a Medium of Trade, considered merely as such, is no whit the
better or worse, on Account of what we call intrinsic Value, be the same
greater or less. But its true Value as a Medium of Trade is to be estimated, by
the Credit it obtains, and the Demand it is in. And since Silver and Gold were
never in greater Demand in any Commonwealth, than our Paper-Medium is, and is
like to continue to be in this Province, there appears nothing wanting in the
Nature of Things to support its Value, so long as we have Silver and Gold,
Fish, Lumber, and all Necessaries of Life to buy, so long as we have Ships and
Houses to build, Farms to purchase and subdue, and Debts to pay; and so long as
with our Paper-Medium all these Things may be accomplished, there is no Hazard
of its not being in Demand.

The only Thing needful then to keep up its Value, is the making a proper and
resolute Stand against that inconfiderate Folly (to put the most charitable
Construction upon it) which it was the main Design of the Pages preceding the
foregoing Scheme to detect. Which Folly might and ought in Justice, I think, to
have been corrected long ago (and especially by the Merchants at that Juncture
when they emitted their Notes) and which it will be in the Power of the Company
should this Scheme take Effect, by a wise and just Management easily to
overruled.

2. Although I have set to the foregoing Scheme (to the End it might be the
more fully conceived of) the Period of 1760, yet the Reader will observe that I
have left the Matter of fixing the Period to the Discretion of the General
Court. And although that should be the Period fixed by them, and agreeable to
what has been projected, the Province should then be furnished with so large
and valuable a Medium, and that so effectually scattered amongst the
Inhabitants, yet it is very uncertain whether the State of the Trade of the
Province will not then be such, as that in a few Years, it will grow too scant
to serve the End, through the Demand Silver and Gold will still be in for
Exportation. And whether it will not be found that a Paper-Medium, is better
adapted to promote the Trade and Prosperity of the Province, than one that
consists of Silver and Gold.

It has been generally complained of, as a Failure in our Trade, That our
Importation exceeds our Exportation, and this has been assigned by many as the
Reason why Silver and Gold don't center with us. But if those that advance
this, would be understood to intend, That our Exportation falls short of being
sufficient to pay for what is imported to us, I think it cannot in Reason be
true; for were this the Case, we should long ere now been Bankrupt. And if they
intend that the Value of what we import as Returns, exceeds the Value of our
Exportation, and this be true, it is by no Means to be complained of as a
Failure in our Trade. Yet, suppose the Balance of these were a Million a Year
in our Favor, it would not thence necessarily follow, that any of that Balance
would rest with us in Silver and Gold. (it is true, if our Exportation should be
sufficient to procure a greater Quantity of foreign Commodities, and Silver and
Gold too (which it is to be remembered, is not our own Production) than we could
ourselves consume or apply to the carrying on and increasing the several
Branches of our Trade, the Balance in this Case, would remain with us in Silver
and Gold, as being of all our Effects the most convenient to lay by. But when
or whether ever this will be the Case is uncertain, nor need we concern
ourselves much about it: For, 'till it is the Case, though Silver and Gold will
not abide with us, it will be our Advantage to send it off; and the Balance of
our Trade, if it be in our Favor, will remain with us, and naturally center in
the Cultivation and beautifying this extensive Land, the Accomplishment whereof
will take an almost immense Sum, it being as yet (comparatively speaking) but a
rough and unpolished Wilderness.

And 'till this be in some good Measure accomplished, it is not in Reason to be
expected, that Manufacturies will be carried on with any great Degree of
Strength and Advantage amongst us; And consequently it is to be expected that
foreign Manufacturies, specially those Great Britain abounds with, will be in
great Demand with us. Nor can the Silver and Gold we may receive from Spain,
Portugal and the West India Islands, be better improved, than by sending it to
Great Britain to procure them for our Use.

And lest any should think that the SCHEME I have above proposed, militates
with what I now advance, I would observe, That ^^^ever by said SCHEME it is
proposed that 20000 l. of Sil^^ ^e annually stopped in its Circulation, in the
Way of the British Trade for a Number of Years, yet the Design hereof is, to
give Life and Value to the PAPER MEDIUM projected, by the Help of which we
shall undoubtedly be able to import more than double that Sum, beyond what we
possibly could, upon Supposition of our being destitute of such a Medium.

Your Humble Servant, PHILOPOLITES.
December 20. 1739.

