AN ALARM TO Unconverted Sinners; In a SERIOUS TREATISE: SHOWING, I. What
Conversion is not, and Correcting some Mistakes about it. II. What Conversion
is, and wherein it consists. III. The Necessity of Conversion. IV. The Marks
of the Unconverted. V. The Miseries of the Unconverted. VI. Directions for
Conversion. VII. Motions to Conversion.


Whereunto are annexed diverse Practical Cases of Conscience judicially resolved.

By JOSEPH ALLEIN, late Minister of the Gospel at Taunton, in Somersetshire.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by B. FRANKLIN, at the New Printing-Office,
near the Market. M,DCC,XLI.

To all the Ignorant, Carnal, and Ungodly, who are Lovers of Pleasure more than
God, and seek this World more than the Life Everlasting, and live after the
Flesh, and not after the Spirit. These Calls and Counsels are directed, in hope
of their Conversion to GOD, and of their Salvation.
He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear.
Miserable Souls!
THere is that Life, and Light, and Love in every True Believer, but especially
in every faithful Minister of CHRIST, which engages them to long and labor
for your Salvation. Life is communicative and active. It makes us sensible
that Faith is not a Fantasy, nor true Religion a Stage Play, nor our Hopes of
our eternal Happiness a Dream. And as we desire nothing more for ourselves,
than to have more of the Holy Life which we have, alas! in so small a Measure;
so what is it that we should more desire for others? With the Eye of an
infallible (though too weak) Faith, we see the Heaven which you neglect, and the
blessed Souls in Glory with Christ, whose Companions you might be forever: We
see the multitude of Souls in Hell, who came thither by the same Way that you
are going in. Who are shut out of the glorious Presence of God, and are now
among those Devils that deceived them, remembering that they had their good
Things here, Luke 16.25. And how they spent the Day of their Visitation, and
how light they once set by God, by Christ, by Heaven, by Mercy, whilst Mercy
was an earnest Solicitor for their Hearts: And with our bodily Eyes we see at
the same time, abundance of poor Sinners living about us, as if there were no
God, no Christ, no Heaven, no Hell, no Judgment; nor no Death to be expected;
as if a Man were but a Master-beast, to rule the rest, and feed upon them, and
perish with them. And if it were here our own Case, to see what Souls do in
Heaven and Hell, and at once to see how unbelievingly, carelessly and sensesly
most Men live on earth, as if there were no such difference in another world:
Would it not seem a pitiful sight to you? If you had once seen the five
Brethren of Dives on Earth, eating, drinking laughing and merry, clothed and
faring daily with the best, and at the same time seen their Brother's Soul in
Hell, begging in vain for a little Ease, and wishing in vain that one from the
dead might go warn his Brethren, that they come not to the Place of Torment;
would it not seem to you a pitiful Sight? Would not Pity have made you think, [
Is there no way to open these Gentlemen's Eyes? No way to acquaint them what is
become of their Brother, and where Lazarus is, and whither they themselves are
going? No one drives or forces them to Hell, and will they go thither of
themselves? And is there no way to stop them or keep them back?] Did you but
see yourselves, what we see by Faith (believing God) and at once beheld the
Saints in Heaven, the lost despairing Souls in Hell, and the senseless sensual
Sinners on Earth, that yet they will lay none of this to Heart, sure it would
make you wonder at the stupidity of Mankind. Would you not say, O what a
Deceiver is the Devil, that can thus lead on Souls to their own Damnation? O
what a Cheater is this transitory World, that can make Man so forget the World
where they must live forever? O what an Enemy is this Flesh, that thus draws
down Men's Souls from God? O what a besotting thing is Sin, that turns a
reasonable Soul into worse than a Beast? What a Bedlam is this wicked World,
when Thousands are so busily laboring to undo themselves and others, and
gratifying the Devil, against the GOD and Savior who would give them an
everlasting blessed Life!

And as we have such a Sight as this by Faith to make us pity you, so have we
so much Taste of the Goodness of God, the Sweetness of his Ways, and the
Happiness of Believers, as must needs make us wish, that you had but once tried
the same delights, which would turn the Pleasures of sin into detestation. God
knows that we desire nothing more for ourselves, than the Perfection and
Eternity of this Holiness and Happiness which we believe and taste. And should
we not desire the same for you?

And being thus moved with necessary Pity, we ask of God what he would have us
to do for your Salvation; and he has told us in Scripture, that the Preaching
of his Gospel, to acquaint you plainly with the Truth, and earnestly and
frequently entreat you to turn from the Flesh and World to God by Jesus Christ,
is the Means with which his Grace is ready to concur for your Salvation; when
obstinate Resistance causes the Holy Spirit to forsake the Sinner, and leave
him to himself, to follow his own Counsels, Lusts and Wills.

In this Hope we undertook the sacred Ministry, and gave up ourselves to this
great and most important Work, in the great Sense of our Unworthiness, but yet
in the sense of your Souls Necessity. We were not such Fools at our first
setting out, as not to know it must be a Life of Labor, Self-denial and
Patience, and the Devil would do his worst to hinder us, and that all sorts of
his Instruments would be ready to serve him against our Labors, and against
your Souls. Christ your Captain saved by Patient Conquest, and so must we save
ourselves and you; And so must you save yourselves under Christ, if ever you be
saved. It was not strange to Paul, that Bonds and Afflictions did every where
abide him; nor did he account his Life dear, that he might finish his Course
with Joy, and the Ministry committed to him by the Lord, Acts 20, 23, 24. It
was no strange thing to him, to be forbidden to preach to the Gentiles, that
they might be saved, by such as were filling up the measure of their Sins, and
where, under God's uttermost Wrath on Earth, 1 Thessalonians. 2.15, 16 Devils and
Pharisees, and most where they came, both high and low, were against the
Apostles preaching of the Gospel, and yet they would not sacrilegiously and
cruelly break their Covenant with Christ, and perfidiously desert the Souls of
Men, even as their Lord, for the love of Souls did call Peter Satan, that would
have tempted him to save his Life and Flesh, instead of making it a Sacrifice
for our Sins.

What think you should move us to undertake a calling so contrary to our
fleshly ease and interests? Do we not know the the way of Ease and Honor? of
Wealth and Pleasures, as well as others? And have we not Flesh as well as
others? Could we not be content that the Cup of Reproach, and Scorn and
Slander, and Poverty and Labors, might pass from us, if it were not for the
Will of God and your Salvation? why should we love to be the lowest, and trodden
down by malignant Pride, and counted as the filth of the World, and the
Offscouring of all things, represented to Rulers whom we honor, as
Schismatics, disobedient, turbulent, unruly, by every Church-Usurper, whom we
refuse to make a God of; why give you not over this Preaching of the Gospel, at
the will of Satan, that is, for the everlasting suffering of your Souls, under
the pretense of making us suffer? Is not all this that you may be converted and
saved? If we be herein besides ourselves, it is for you. Could the words of the
Ignorant or Proud, have persuaded us that either your wants or dangers are so
inconsiderable, or your other Supplies and Helps sufficient, that our Labors
had been unnecessary to you, God knows we should have readily obeyed the
silencing sort of Pastors, and have betaken us to some other land, where our
Service had been more necessary. Let shame be the Hypocrites reward, who take
not the saving of Souls, and the pleasing of God, for a sufficient reward,
without Ecclesiastical Dignities, Preferments, or worldly Wealth.

I have told you our Motives, I have told you our Business, and the Terms of
our Undertaking It is God, and you Sinners, that next must tell us what our
Entertainment and Success shall be. Shall it still be Neglect and unthankful
Contempt, and turning away your Ear and Heart, and saying, we have somewhat
else to mind? Will you still be cheated by this deceiving World? And spend all
your Days in pampering your Guts, and providing for your Flesh, that must lie
rotting very shortly in a Grave? Were you made for no better Work than this?
May not we bring you to some sober thoughts of your Condition, nor one awakened
look into the World where you must be forever? Nor one Heart-raising Thought of
the everlasting Glory? Not one Heart-piercing Thought of all your Savior's
Love? Not one Tear for all your sinful Lives? O God forbid! Let not our Labor
be so despised: Let not your God, your Savior, and your Souls be set so light
by. O let there be no profane Person among you like Esau, who, for one morsel,
sold his Birthright.

Poor Sinners! we talk not to you as on a Stage in customary words, and because
that talking thus was our Trade; we are in as good earnest with you as if we
saw you all Murdering yourselves, and we are persuading you to save your Lives.
Can any Man be in a Jest with you who believes God? Who by Faith foreseeth
whither you are going, and what you lose, and where the Game of Sin will end?
It is little better to jest now in Pulpit or in private, than to stand jesting
over your departing Souls, when at Death you are Breathing out your last.

Alas! with Shame and Grief we do confess that we never speak to you of these
things as their truth and weight deserve, nor with the Skill and Wisdom, the
Affection and Fervency which beseems one engaged in the saving of poor Souls.
But yet you may perceive that we are in good Sadness with you (for God is so)
what else do we study for, labor for, suffer for, live for? Why else do we so
much trouble ourselves, and trouble you with all this ado, and anger them that
would have had us silent? For my own Part, I will make my free confession to
you to my shame: That I never grew cold and dull, and pitiless to the Souls of
others, till I first grew too cold and careless of my own (unless when weakness
or speculative studies cool me, which I must confess they often do.) We never
cease pitying you, till we are growing too like you, and so have need of Pity
ourselves.

When, through the Mercy of my Lord, the Prospect of the World of Souls which I
am going to, has any powerful Operation on myself; O then, I could spend and
be spent for others. No Words are too earnest, no Labor too great, no Cost too
dear, the Frowns and Wrath of malignant Opposers of the preaching of Christ's
Gospel are nothing to me. But when the World of Spirits disappears, or my Soul
is clouded, and receives not the vital illuminating Influences of Heaven, I
grow cold, first to myself, then to others.

Come then poor Sinners, and help us who are willing at any rate to be your
Helpers. As we first crave God's Help, so we next crave yours. Help us, for we
cannot save you against your Wills, nor save you without your Consent and Help.
God himself will not save you without you, and how should we? We know that the
Devil is against us, and will do his worst to hinder us, and so will all his
Ministers by what Names or Titles soever dignified or distinguished. But all
this is nothing, if you will but take our parts yourselves; I mean, if you will
take Christ's part, and your own, and will not be against yourselves. Men and
Devils cannot either help or hinder us in saving you, as you may do yourselves.
If God and you be for us, who shall be against us?

And will you help us? Give over striving against God, and Conscience, give
over fighting against Christ and his Spirit: Take part no more with the World
and the Flesh, which in your Baptism you renounced. Set your Hearts to the
Message which we bring you. Allow it your Man-like sober Thoughts, search the
Scriptures, and see whether the things which we speak be so or no. We offer you
nothing but what we have resolvedly chosen our selves, and that after the most
serious deliberation that we can make. We have looked round about us, to know
what is the Happiness of Man: And had we found better for ourselves, we had
offered better to you. If this World would have served our turns, it should
have served yours also, and we would not have troubled you with the talk of
another World; but it will not; I am sure it will never serve your turns, to
make you happy, nor shall you long make that sorry, self-deceiving shift with
it, as now you do.

But if you will not think of these things, if you will not use the Reason of
Men, alas what can we do to save your Souls? O pity them, Lord, that they may
pity themselves. Have Mercy on them, that they may have some more Mercy on
themselves and us. Help them, that they may help themselves. If you still
refuse, will not your loss be more than ours? If we lose our Labor, (which to
ourselves we shall not) if we lose our hopes of your Salvation, what is this to
your everlasting Loss of Salvation itself? and what are our Sufferings for your
sakes, in comparison of your endless Sufferings?

But O, this is what breaks our Hearts, that we leave you under more guilt
than we found you; and when we have laid our Life and Labor to save you, the
impenitent Souls must have their Pains increased for the refusing of these
Calls. And that it will be Part of your Hell to think forever how madly you
refused our Counsel; and what Pains and Cost, and Patience were used to have
saved you, and all in vain. It will be so, it must needs be so: Christ says,
It shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment, than for the
Rejecters of his Gospel-calls. The Nature of the thing, and the Nature of
Justice certainly tell you, that it must be so

O turn not our Complaints to God against you; Turn us not from beseeching you
to be reconciled to God, to tell him you will not be reconciled. Force us not
to say, That we earnestly invited you to the Heavenly Feast, and you would not
come. Force us not to say, That we earnestly invited you; Lord, we could have
born all our Labor and Sufferings for them, much easier, if they would but
have yielded to thy Grace. But it was they themselves that broke our Hearts,
that lost our Labor, that made us Preach and entreat in vain: It was easier to
Preach without Maintenance than without Success. It was they that were worse to
us than all the Persecutors in the World. How often would we have gathered them
but they would not, but are ungathered still? How many Holy, Faithful Ministers
have I known these Eleven Years last past, who have lived in pining Poverty and
Want, and hardly by Charity got Bread and Clothing, and yet if they could but
have truly said, (Lord, the Sermons which I preach privately and in Danger,
have won many Souls to thee) It would have made all their Burden easy. But I
tell thee, senseless and Impenitent Sinner, thou that deniest God thy Heart,
and them thy Conversion, which was the End of all their Labors, have dealt
much more cruelly with them, than they that denied the Levite Bread.

Poor Sinners? I know that I am speaking all this to these that are dead in
Sin, but it is a Death consisting with a Natural Life, which has a Capacity of
Spiritual Life. Or else I would no more speak to you than to a Stone. And I
know that you are blind in Sin: But it is a Blindness consisting with a
Reasonable Faculty, which is capable of Spiritual Illumination; Or else I would
no more persuade you than I do a Beast. And I know that you are in the Fetters
of your own Lusts; your Wills, your Love, your Hearts are turned away from God,
and strongly bewitched with the Dreams and Dalliances, with the Flesh and
World. But your Wills are not forced to this Captivity. Surely those Wills may
be changed by God's Grace, when you clearly see sufficient Reason for to change
them: Else I would as soon preach (were I capable) to Devils and damned Souls.
Your Case is not yet desperate. O make it not desperate. There is just the same
Hope of your Salvation as there is of your Conversion and Perseverance, and no
more; without it there is no Hope And with it you are safe, and have no cause
to doubt and fear. Heaven may be yet yours, if you will. Nothing but your own
Wills, refusing Christ and a Holy Life, can keep you out, and shall that do it?
Shall Hell be your own choice? And will you (I say) will you not be saved?

O think better what you do! God's Terms are reasonable, his Word and Ways are
good and equal, Christ's Yoke is easy, and his Burden light, and his
Commandments are not grievous to any, but so far as Blindness and a bad and
backward Heart does make them so. You have no true Reason to be unwilling. God
and Conscience shall one Day tell you and all the World, that you had no Reason
for it. You may as wisely pretend Reason to cut your Throats, to torment
yourselves, as plead Reason against a true Conversion unto God. Were I
persuading you not to kill yourselves, I would make no Question, but you will
be persuaded; and yet must I be hopeless, when I persuade you from everlasting
Misery, and not to prefer the World and Flesh before your Savior and your God,
and before a sure everlasting Joy? God forbid.

Reader, I take it for a great Mercy of God, that before my Head lies down in
the Dust, and I go to give up my Account unto my Judge; I have this Opportunity
once more, earnestly to bespeak thee for thy own Salvation. I beg it of thee,
as one that must shortly be called away, and speak to thee no more, till we
come unto our endless State, that thou would sometimes retire into thyself,
and use the Reason of a Man, and look before thee, whither thou art going, and
look behind thee, how thou have lived, and what thou have been doing in the
World till now; and look within thee, what a Case thy Soul is in, and whether
it be ready to enter upon Eternity; and look above thee, what a Heaven of Glory
thou do neglect, and what a God thou have to be thine everlasting Friend or
Enemy, as thou choosest, and as thou live, and that thou art always in his
sight. Yea, and look below thee, and think where they are, that died
unconverted. And when thou have soberly thought of all these things, then do as
God and true Reason shall direct the^. And is this an unreasonable Request? I
appeal to God, and to all wise Men, and to thine own Conscience, when it shall
be awakened, if I speak against thee, or if it be not true and sure, then
regard not what I say; if I speak not that Message which God has commanded his
Ministers to speak, then let it be refused as contemptuously as thou will. But
if I do but in Christ's Name and stead beseech thee to be reconciled to God, 2
Cor. 5.19, 20. Refuse it at thy Peril; and if God's beseeching thee shall not
prevail against thy Sloth, Lust, thy Appetite, against the Desires of thy
Flesh, against the Dust and Shadows of the World, remember it when with
fruitless Cries and Horror, thou art beseeching him too late.

I know poor Sinner that Flesh is brutish, and Lust and Appetite have no
Reason. But I know that thou have Reason thy self which was given thee to
overruled them; and that he that will not be a Man, cannot be a Saint, nor a
happy Man. I know that thou live in a tempting and a wicked World, where
Things or Persons will be daily hindering this. But I know that this is no more
to a Man that by Faith sees Heaven and Hell before him, than a Grain of Sand
is to a Kingdom, or a blast of wind to one that is fighting or flying for his
Life, Luke 12.4 O Man! that thou did but know the difference between that
which the Devil and Sin will give thee, if thou will sell thy Soul and Heaven,
and that which God has promised and sworn to give thee, if thou will heartily
give up thy self to him. I know thou may possibly fall into company (at least
amongst some Sots and Drunkards) that will tell thee, all this is but
troublesome Preciseness, and making more ado than needs But I know withal, what
that Man deserves, who will believe a Fool before his Maker (For he can be no
better than a miserable Fool, that will contradict and revile the Word of God,
even the Word of Grace, that would save Men's Souls.)

And alas, it is possible thou may hear some of the Tribe of Levi (or rather
of Cain) deriding this Serious Godliness as mere Hypocrisy, Fantaticism, and
Self-conce^tedness: As if you must be no better than the Devil's Slaves, lest
you be proud in thinking that you are better than they; that is, you must go
with them to Hell, lest in Heaven ye be proud Hypocrites, for thinking
yourselves happier than they.

It may be they will tell you, that this talk of Conversion is fitter for
Pagans and Infidels to hear, than Christian and Protestants. Because such Men's
Biglooks or Coats may make the Poison the easier taken down; I will entreat
thee but as before God to answer these following Questions, or to get them
answered, and then judge whether it be they or we that will deceive thee: And
whether that as Men use to talk against Learning that have none themselves, so
such Men prate not against Conversion and the Spirit of God, because they have
no such thing themselves.

Quest. 1. I pray ask them, whether it be a Puritan or Fanatic Opinion, that
Men must die? And what all the Pomp, and Wealth and Pleasures of the World
would signify to a departing Soul? Ask them whether they will live on Earth for
ever, and their merry Hours, and lordly Looks will have no End? And whether it
be but the Conceit of Hypocrites and Schismatics, that their Carcass must be
rotting in a darksome Grave?

Q. 2. Ask them whether Man has not an immortal Soul, and a longer Life to
live when this is ended? Luke 12.41.

Q 3. Ask them whether Reason requires not every Man to think more seriously of
the Place or State where he must be forever, than of that where he must be for
a little while, and from whence he is posting Day and Night? and whether it be
wiser to lay up our Treasure where we must stay, than where we must not stay,
but daily look to be hasted away, and never more to be seen on Earth? Matthew.
6.19, 20. 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. and 5.1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8

Q 4. Ask them whether God should not be loved with all our Heart, and Soul and
Might? Matthew. 22.27. And whether it be not the Mark of an ungodly Miscreant, to
be a Lover of Pleasure more than God, 2 Timothy 3.4. and a Lover of this World
above him? 1 John 2.15, 16. And whether we must not seek first God's Kingdom
and his Righteousness, Matthew, 6.63. and labor most for the Meat that never
perishes, John 6 27. And strive to enter in at the strait Gate, Luke 13.24,
And gave all diligence to make our Calling and Election sure? 2 Pet. 1.10.

Q 5. Ask them whether without Holiness any shall see God? Heb. 12.14. Matthew.
5.8 Tit. 2 14. and whether the Carnal Mind is not Enmity to God; and to be
carnally minded is not Death; and to be spiritually minded, Life and Peace? And
whether if you live after the Flesh you shall not die, and be condemned? And
they shall live and be saved that walk after the Spirit? And whether any Man be
Christ's that has not his Spirit? Romans 8.1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13

Q. 6. Ask them whether any Man have any Treasure in Heaven; whose Heart is not
there? Matt. 6.21. And whether this be not the difference between the Wicked
and the Godly, that the first do make their Bellies their Gods, and mind
Earthly things, and are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, (though perhaps not his
Name) and the latter have their Conversation in Heaven, and being risen with
Christ do seek and set their affections on things above, and not on things that
are on Earth, to which they are as dead, and their Life is hid (or out of
sight) with Christ in God, till Christ appear, and then they shall appear,
(even openly to all the World) with him in Glory, Phil. 3.17, 18, 20. Col. 4.1,
3, 4, 5,

Q 7. Ask them whether it be credible or suitable to God's word or workings,
that he that will not give them the Fruits of the Earth without their Labor,
nor feed and clothe them without themselves, will yet bring them to Heaven
without any Care, Desire or Labor of their own? when he has bid them care not
for the one, and called for their greatest Diligence for the other, Matthew 6.23,
25, 33. John 6.27. Yea, ask them whether these be not the two first Articles of
all Faith and Religion 1. That God is. 2. That he is the Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6.

Q. 8. Ask them, yea ask your Eyes, your Ears, your daily Experience in the
world, whether all o^ most that call themselves Christians, do in good Sadness
thus live to God in the Spirit, and mortify the Flesh with all its Affections
and Lusts, and seek first God's Kingdom and Righteousness, love him above all,
and lay up Treasure and Heart in Heaven; or rather, whether most be not lovers
of the world, and lovers of Pleasures more than God, and live not after the
Flesh, and mind not most the things of the Flesh? I mention not now the
Drunkards and Flesh-pleasing Gentlemen, that live in Pride, Fullness and
Idleness and Sport, and play away their precious Time; nor the filthy
Fornicator, nor the merciless Oppressors, nor the malignant haters of a godly
life, nor the perjured perfidious Betrayers of Men's Souls, and of the Gospel,
or of their Country's good, nor such other Men of seared Conscience, whose
Misery none questioneth, but such as are blind and miserable. It is not these
only I am speaking of, but the common, worldly, fleshly and ungodly ones.

Q 9. Ask them whether the Name of a Christian will save any of these ungodly
Persons? And whether God will like Men the better for lying and calling
themselves Christians, when they are none indeed? And, whether they dare preach
to the People, that a Christian Drunkard, or a Christian Fornicator or
Oppressor, or a Christian Worldling needs not Conversion.

Q. 10. Ask them whether they say not themselves that Hypocrisy is a great
Aggravation of all other Sin? and whether God has not made the Hypocrites and
Unbelievers to be the Standards in Hell; Luke 25.51. And whether seeking to
abuse God by a mock Religion, do make such false Christians better than the
poor Heathens and Infidels, or much worse? And whether he be not an Hypocrite
that professes to be a Christian, and a Servant of God, when he is none, not
will be? and whether he that knows his Master's will, and does it not, shall
not have the sorest Stripes, or Punishment, Luke 10.47.

Q. 11. Ask them whether in their Baptism (which is their Christning as a
Covenant) they did not renounce the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, and vow
and deliver up themselves to God their Father, their Savior and their
Sanctifier? And whether all or most Men perform this Vow? And whether a
perjured Covenant braker against God, is fitter for salvation than one that
never was baptized?

Q. 12. Ask them whether the holy Nature of God be not so contrary to Sin, as
that it is Blasphemy to ^y that he will bring to Heaven, and into the Bosom of
his Eternal Delights, any unholy unrenewed Soul. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.

Q 13. Ask them why it was that Christ came into the World? whether it was not
to save his People from their Sins, Matthew. 1.21. and to destroy the works of
the Devil, 1 John 3.8. and to purify to himself a peculiar People, zealous of
good works, Titus 2.14. And to bring home straying Souls to God, Luke 15. And
to be the way to the Father, John 13.6 And whether Christ will save that Soul
that is not converted by him, and saved from his Sins? Or whether it be the
dead Image only of a crucified Jesus, that is all their Savior, while they
will have no more of him?

Q. 14. Ask them why they believe, and were baptized into the Holy Ghost; and
whether a Man can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, that is not born of the
Spirit as well as of Water, Joh. 3.3, 5, 6. and he that is not converted, and
begins not the World as it were anew, in a teachable, tractable newness of
Life, like a little Child? Matthew. 13.3. And whether it be not a certain Truth,
that, if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his? Romans
8, 9.

Q. 15 Ask them why Christ gave the World so many Warnings of the Damnableness
of the Pharisees Hypocrisy, if Hypocritical Christians may be saved? and what
were these Pharisees? They were the Masters of the Jewish Church. The Rabbis
that must have high Places, high Titles, and Ceremonies, formal Garments, and
must be reverenced of all: That gave God Lip-service without the heart, and
made void his Commands, and worshipped him in vain, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men, and strictly tithe the Mint and Cummin, while lovely Mercy
and Justice were past by? Who worshipped God with an abundance of Ceremonies,
and builded the Tombs, and garnished the Sepulchers of the Saints, while they
killed and persecuted those that did imitate them, and hated the living Saints,
and honored the dead. They were the bitterest Enemies and Murderers of Christ,
on pretense that he was a Blasphemer, and a seditious Enemy to Caesar, and the
common Peace, and one that spoke against the Temple: They were the greatest
Enemies of the Apostles, and silencers of those that preached Christ's Gospel,
and persecuted them that called upon his Name. And had these no need of
Conversion, because they could say, God is our Father (when the Devil was their
Father, John 8.44) and that they were Abraham's Seed? and are not Hypocritical
Christians, drunken Christians, fornicating Christians, carnal, worldly infidel
Christians, false-named hypocritical Christians, as bad, yea worse, as they
abuse a more excellent Profession? Matthew. 15.7, 8 and 22.18. and 6.2. etc. Luke
12.1.

Q. 16. Does not the holy Statute of Heaven require Holiness in all that shall
possess it? Can an unholy Soul there see and love, and praise and delight in
God forever, and in the Holy Society and Employment of Saints? Rev. 21.27. Is
he not like^ a Mohammedan then a Christian, that looks for a sensual and
unholy Heaven?

Q. 17 What is the difference between the Church and the World? Is not the
Church a Holy Society of regenerate Souls? Yea, the Church visible, is only
those that in Baptism vow Holiness and profess it: Look those Hypocrites in the
Face, and see whether they do not blush, when they repeat in the Creed I
believe in the Holy Ghost, I believe in the Holy Catholic Church, and the
Communion of Saints, who shall have the forgiveness of Sins, and Life
everlasting? Ask them whether they mean Holy Adulterers, holy Worldlings, holy
perjured Persons? Ask them whether they mean a holy Communion of Saints in a
Tavern, in a Play house, in a Gaming house, in a Whore house, or a Jesting,
canting Stage play Communion If the Church be holy, be holy if you will be of
the Church. If it be a Communion of Saints, make it not a Communion of Swine,
and make not Saints and their Communion seem odious either for their
Infirmities or their Crossness to your Carnal Interests or Conceits.

Q. 18 Ask them whether there be a Heaven and a Hell or not? If not, why are
they pretended Christians? If there be, will God send one Man to Heaven and
another to Hell, to so vast, so amazing a difference of States, if there be no
great difference betwixt them here! If holiness no more differenced Christians
from others, than saying a Sermon, or saying over a Prayer, does difference one
from an Infidel, where were the Justice of God, in saying some and damning of
others? And what were Christianity better than the Religion of Antony, Plato,
Socrates, Seneca, Cicero, Plutarch, if not much worse! Go into London Streets,
and when you have talked with living prudent Men, then go to the Painter's
Shop, and see a comely Picture, and to the Looking-glass, and see the
appearance of each Passenger in a Glass, and to the Periwig-shops, and see a
wooden Head with a Periwig on the Block, and you have seen something like the
difference of a holy Soul, and of a dead and dressed formal Hypocrite, Psalm
33.77.

Q. 19. Ask them whether Kings and all Men make not a great difference between
Man and Man: the Loyal and Perfidious, the Obedient and the Disobedient? And
whether they difference not themselves between a Friend and a Foe, one that
loves them, and one that robs or would kill them? And shall not the most
holy GOD make more difference between the Righteous and the wicked? Malachy
8.17, 18.

Q 20. But if they are dead in every Point save to Carnal Interests, ask them
whether they are Preachers or Priests? And if Conversion and Holiness be a
needless thing, what use they themselves are of? And why the Country must be
troubled with them, and pay them Tithes, and owe them Reverence? when these
twenty Questions are well answered, conclude that you may be saved without
Conversion.

But if, poor Soul, thou art fully convinced, and asks, What shall I do to be
converted? The Lord make thee willing, and save thee from Hypocrisy, and I will
quickly tell thee in some few words.

1. Give not over sober thinking of these things, till thy Heart be changed,
Psalm 119 59.

2. Come to Christ, and take him for thy Savior, thy Teacher, thy King, and he
will pardon all that is past, and save thee, John 1 12. and 3.16. and 5.40. 1
John 5.11, 12.

3. Believe God's Love, and the Pardon of Sin, and the Everlasting Joys of
Heaven, that thou may feel, all the Pleasures of the world and flesh, are
dung in comparison of the heavenly delights of Faith and Hope, and holy Love,
and Peace of Conscience, and Sincere Obedience.

4. Sin no more wilfully, but forbear that which thou may forbear, Isa. 55.7.

5. Away from Temptations, Occasions of Sin and Evil Company, and be a
Companion of the Humble, Holy, Heavenly, and Sincere, Psalm 119.155.

6. Wait on God's Spirit, in the diligent, constant use of his own: Read, Hear,
Meditate, Pray: Pray hard ^or that Grace that must convert thee: wait thus, and
thou shall not wait in vain, Psalm 29. and 37 34. and 69.6.

Pity, O Lord, and persuade these Souls: Let not Christ's Blood, his Doctrine,
his Example, his Spirit be lost unto them, and they lost for ever. Let not
Heaven be as no Heaven to them, while they dream and dote on the shadows of the
world. And O save this Land from the greater Destruction than all our late
Plagues and Flames, and Divisions, which our sins and thy threatenings make ^s
fear. O Lord, in thee have we trus^, let us never be confounded.

Having thus contributed my Endeavor in this Preface, to the furtherance of
the design of this excellent Book; I must tell thee, Reader, that I take it for
an Honor to commend so masculine a Birth unto the world. The Midwife of
Alexander or Aristotle need not be ashamed of her Office. Who the Author of
this Treatise was, how he preached, how he lived, how suffered, (and for what)
and how he died, his Life and Letters lately printed fully tell you. And I
earnestly commend the Reading of them to all, especially to Ministers, not to
tell them what Men have been here forbidden to preach Christ's Gospel, and for
what, nor what Men they are that so many Years have done it, or to tell you
what Men Christ's Ministers should be. But say not, he killed himself with
excessive Labor, and therefore I will take warning, and take my ease, For, 1.
He lived in perfect Health all his days, notwithstanding all his Labors, till
after his hard and long Imprisonment. 2. It was not the greatest Labors of his
Times of Liberty that hurt him, but his preaching six or seven or eight Times
in a week, after that he was silenced, because he could not speak to all his
People at once. Make not an ill use of so excellent Example ^ay not like Judas,
what need this waste! His Labor, his Life, his Sufferings, his Death, were not
in vain. The Ages to come that read his Life, and read this little popular
Treatise, and his Call to Archippus, shall say, They were not in vain. And though
he was cut off in the midst of his Age, and his longer Labors, and more
elaborate Writings thus prevented, take thankfully this small but methodical
warm and serious Tractate. Read it seriously, and it cannot be but it must do
thee good.

I am one that have looked into Books and Sciences, and Speculations of many
sorts, and seriously tell thee as a dying Man, that after all my Searches and
Experiences, I have found that Philosophical Enquiries into the Divine
Artifices, and the Nature of Things, has among a great Number of
Uncertainties, a great many Pretty Probabilities which a holy Soul can make
good Use of in admiring GOD, and may find us a lawful kind of Sport; but in the
Moralities which Atheists count Uncertainties, the Knowledge of GOD, and our
Hopes, the Doctrine and Practice of Holiness, Temperance, and Charity, and
Justice, and the diligent seeking, and joyful hopes of Life Everlasting, is all
the true Wisdom, Goodness, the Rest and Comfort of a Soul; whatever be our
Plea, this is the satisfying certainty, thy Business, and the beautifying
Improvement of our selves.

I have done when I have sought to remove a little Scandal, which I foresaw,
that I should my self write the Preface to his Life, where himself and two of
his Friends make such a mention of my Name, which I cannot own; which will seem
a praising him for praising me. I confess it looks ill-savouredly in me: But
I had not the Power of other Men's Writings, and durst not therefore forbear
that which was his due. Had I directed their Pens, they should have gone a
middle way and only esteemed me a very unworthy Servant of Christ, (who yet
longs to see the Peace and Prosperity of his Church) and should have forborne
their undeserved Praise, as other Men should have done their slanderous Libels.
But if the Reader get no harm by it, I assure him the use I made of it was, to
lament that I am really so much the worse then they esteemed me, and fear lest
I should prove yet worse than I discern my self, who see so much Sin and
Weakness in my Betters, and much more in my self, as to make it the constant
Sentiment of my Soul, that Pride of Men's Greatness, Wisdom and Goodness, is the
first Part of the Devil's Image on Man's Soul, and the Darkness is the second,
and Malignity the Third.

RICHARD BAXTER.

Unconverted READER.
READER.
HOw well were it if there were no more unconverted ones among us, than those
to whom this is directed! Uncon^erted Persons how many are there, but how few
Unconverted Readers, especially of such Books as this before thee! A Play or a
Romance better suits the lusts, and therefore must have more of the Eye of
such; what will cherish the evil Heart is only grateful, not what will change
it. How many are there to whom this is directed, who will not know that they
are the Men! And how little Hopes is there that this Excellent Treatise should
reach its End, with those who apprehend themselves not concerned in it? Art not
thou one of them? Art thou a Convert, or art thou yet in thy sins? What is sin?
What is Conversion? It may be thou can tell me neither, and yet a Convert
thou say thou art; but to what purpose is it then like to be, for the
Servant of God to treat with thee about this Matter? Let him bid thee believe,
thou art a Believer already; Let him bid thee repent and turn to the Lord, that
work thou say is not now to do; what can there be said to this Man that is
like to bring him to good? Friend, know thy self better, or thou perishest with
out Remedy. Thou may pray, but what hope is there in thy Praying: Thou
may read, but what Hope is there in thy Reading? Yet read on, this little
hope there is, in this Book there is Eye salve that may heal thee of thy
Blindness. In this Book there is a Glass, that will show thee thy Face. Do
thou know thine own Face when thou see it? Behold thy very Image in those
Marks that are given of an unconverted Person. Read and consider them, and then
say, if thou be not the Man.

Be willing to know thy self, and to know the worst of thy Case. Wink not at
the Light; hide not thy self from thine own Soul. Will thou never know thy
Disease till it be past remedy?

Much of our hardest Work would be over, if we could see the Sinners to whom we
are sent, to be convinced Sinners: If we could but open the blind Eyes, there
were hopes we should shortly raise the Dead.

Sinner, of a truth thou art in evil case, whether thou know it or not; thou
art among the dead, and there is but a step betwixt thee and Hell. Thou will
not believe it though it be told thee; yet once again let me beseech thee, come
to the Glass that is here presented to thee, and narrowly observe whether the
very Marks of the Dead be not found upon thee.

If there be miscarriage in this first work, if thou will not understand thy
Misery, and thy danger, there is an end of all hopes concerning thee. Whilst
Self-ignorance abides upon thee, all the Counsels that are necessary for a Man
in thy case, will do thee no good, they are never like to prosper with thee,
because thou will not count them proper for thee. Who will be persuaded to do
that which he believes is already done? Who will take the Counsel of the
Physician that does not think himself sick? The Man of God may spare his pains
of persuading thee to Conversion, whilst thou art confident thou art converted
already: Who will be at the pains of Repentance that concludes he has
repented? who will bear the Labor and the Pangs of the New Birth, that is
confident he is already passed from Death to Life.

But Friend, let me a little reason with thee; thou art confident it is well
with thee, yet why will thou not yield to thus much at least, to put it to the
question, Am I not mistaken? Thou art worse than mad, if thou think such a
Question may not be put. Do thou know that thy Heart is false and deceitful,
and yet because it speaks good conerning thee, must it not be questioned
whether it speaks truth or no? Be so wise as to conclude, I may be mistaken,
and thus come to the Trial whether thou art mistaken or not.

And if upon Trial by the Marks that are before thee, thou come to be
undeceived, and see thy self wrapped up in that Misery which hitherto thou
would not suspect, the next news I expect to hear from thee is, What must I
do to be saved? O were it come to that once, Then thou have an answer at hand
in those means thou will find prescribed thee. And because they are such as
thou will hardly be persuaded to use, take in the Motives that follow, and
these will help down the means Consider both the one and the other, and if thou
do not find the means proper, and the motives weighty, I think I shall do
thee no wrong, if I tell thee, thou art still of a blind Mind, and an harder
Heart.

The matter which this little Book comes to treat with thee about, is of the
highest Importance; It Is a matter of Life or Death. If thou say the Terms
upon which Life is offered, are hard; consider, is it not harder to die? He is
worthy to die who will lose his Soul to save his Labor. If thou could step
down into the deep, and take a turn or two with those damned Souls who are
drenched with Fire and Brimstone, and bound in everlasting chains of vengeance,
and should ask them now what do you think of the Terms upon which Life was
offered? Now, what think you o^ that Repentance, of that Obedience, of that
Circumspection, Self denial, and the greatest Severity, which by the Gospel
were imposed upon you? If you might once again have the same terms granted you
for your Redemption from this place of torment, would you yet say hard terms!
Let me rather die this death for ever, than live such a Life* let me broil in
this furnace, rather then escape with such difficulty. Should thou ask them
thus that have felt what it is to be damned, what answer do thou think they
would make? O Friend, never again groan under the difficulties of Conversion
till thou believe them to be worse than Hell. But I will not further anticipate
my worthy Author.

Nor is there much need I should commend either himself or his Work; for the
Author himself thou may at a small charge get acquaintance with him in that
History of his Life and Death, which is extant, concerning which I shall only
say, Sic mihi contigat vivere sicque mori.

And for this work of his, what Commendation I shall give of it, would be
needful no longer than till thou have read it over. Thou will find such wine in
it as needs no bush. This only I shall say, as far as my credit will go, it is
exceedingly well worth thy most serious Perusal; O may thou hear that voice
(such a voice from Heaven there is, whether thou hear it or us) Toll and lege:
Take up and read Read Friend, and read over again. Read and understand, and
understand and pray, pray and consider, and consent unto him, who by the pen of
his Servant, calls to thee from Heaven, Why will thou die? turn and live. O
suffer this word of instruction and exhortation to open thy blind eyes, to turn
thee from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that thou
may receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them that are
sanctified Et cum talis fueris memento mei; When it is thus with thee, then
pray for

The Friend and Servant of thy Soul, RICHARD ALLEINE.

An Earnest Invitation to SINNERS, to turn to GOD, in order to their Eternal
Salvation.
DEarly Beloved, and longed for; I gladly acknowledge my self a Debtor to you
all; and am concerned, as I would be found a good Steward to the Household of
God, to give to every one his Portion. But the Physician is most solicitous for
those Patients, whose Case is most doubtful and hazardous; and the Father's
Bowels are especially turned toward his dying Child. The Numbers of the
Unconverted Souls among you, call for my most earnest Compassions, and ^asty
Diligence, to pluck them out of the Burning. Jude 23. and therefore to these
First I shall apply my self in these Lines.

But whence shall I fetch my Arguments, or how shall I choose my Words? Lord,
wherewith shall I woo them? wherewith shall I win them? Oh, that I could but
tell! I would write unto them in Tears, I would weep out every Argument, I
would empty my Veins for Ink, I would petition them on my Knees; verily (were I
able) I would. Oh, how thankful I would be, if they would be prevailed with to
repent and turn!

How long have I travailed in Birth with you? How frequently have I made Suit
to you? How often would I have gathered you? Ho^ instant have I been with you?
This is that I ha^^ prayed for, and studied for, for many Years, that I might
bring you to God; Oh, that I might but do it? Will you yet be entreated? Oh,
what a happy Man might you make me, if you would but hearken to me, and suffer
me to carry you over to Jesus Christ!

But, Lord, how insufficient am I for this work! I have been many a Year wooing
for Thee, but the Damsel would not go with me Lord, what a Task have thou set
me to do? Alas, wherewith shall I pierce the Scales of Leviathan, or make the
Heart to feel that it is hard as a Stone, hard as a Piece of the
Nether-milstone! Shall I go and lay my Mouth to the Grave, and look when the
Dead will obey me, and come forth? Shall I make an Oration to the Rocks, or
declaim to the Mountains, and think to move them with Arguments? Shall I give
the blind to see? From the beginning of the World was it not heard that a Man
opened the Eyes of the Blind? But Thou, O Lord, can pierce the Scales and
prick the Hea^ of the Sinner. I can but shoot at Rovers, and draw the Bow at a
venture, and do thou direct the Arrow between the Joints of the Ha^ness, and
kill the Sin, and save the Soul of a Sinner, that casts his Eyes on these
Labors.

But I must apply my self to you, to whom I am sent: yet I am at a great Loss
Would to God I knew how to go to work with you! Would I stick at the pains? God
^noweth, you yourselves are my Witnesses, how I have followed you in private,
as well as in public, and have brought the Gospel to your Doors* testifying to
you the necessity of the New birth, and persuading you to look in time after a
sound and through change. Beloved, I have not acted a part among you to serve my
own advantage: your Gospel is not yea, and nay. Have you not heard the same
Truths, from the Pulpit, by public Labors, by Private Letters, and by
Personal Instructions? Brethren, I am of the same mind as ever, that Holiness
is the best choice, that there is no entering into Heaven, but by the straight
passages of the second Birth, that without Holiness you shall never see God,
Heb. 12.14. Ah, my Beloved! refresh my Bowels in the Lord. If there be any
Consolation in Christ, any Comfort of Love, any Fellowship of the Spirit, and
Bowels and Mercies, fulfill you my Joy. Now give your selves unto the Lord, 2
Cor. 8 5. Now set your selves to seek him Now set up the Lord Jesus in your
Hearts, and set him up in your Houses: Now come in and kiss the Son, Psalm
2.12. and embrace the Tenders of Mercy. Touch his Scepter and live; why will
you die? I beg not for my self; but fain I would have you happy: This is the
Prize I run for, and the white I aim at. My Soul's Desire and prayer for you
is, that you may be saved, Romans 10.1.

The Famous Lycurgus, having instituted most strict and wholesome Laws for his
People, told them he was necessitated to go a Journey from them, and got them
to bind themselves in an Oath, that his Laws should be observed till his
return. This done, he went into a voluntary Banishment, and never returned
more, that they might, by virtue of their Oath, be engaged to the perpetual
observing of his Laws. Methinks I should be glad of the hard Conditions which
he endured (though I love you tenderly) so I might but hereby engage you
thoroughly to the Lord Jesus Christ.

Dearly beloved, would you rejoice the Heart of your Minister? Why then,
embrace the Counsels of the Lord by me: forego your Sins: set to Prayer: up
with the Worship of God in your Families: keep at a distance from Corruptions
of the Times. What greater joy to a Minister, than to hear of Souls born unto
Christ by him, and that his Children walk in Truth? 2 John 4.

Brethren, I beseech you suffer friendly Plainness and freedom with you in your
deepest concernments. I am not playing the Orator to make a learned speech to
you, nor dressing my dish with eloquence wherewith to please you. These Lines
are upon a weighty Errand indeed, viz. To convince and convert, and to save
you. I am not baiting my Hook with Rhetoric, nor fishing for your applause,
but for your Souls. My Work is not to please you, but to save you, nor is my
Business with your Fancies, bu^ your Hearts. If I have not your Hearts, I have
nothing If I were to please your Ears, I could sing another Song. If I were to
preach myself, I would stee^ another Course? I could then tell you a smoothe
Tale: I would make you pillows and speak you Peace; for how can Ahab love his
Micaiah, that always prophesies evil concerning him? 1 Kings 22 8. But how much
better are the Wounds of a Friend, than the fair Speeches of the Harlot, who
flattereth with her Lips, till the Dart strike through the Liver, and hunteth
for the precious Life! Prove 7.21, 22, 23. and Prove 6.26. If I were to quiet a
crying Infant, I might sing him to a pleasant mood, and ^ock him asleep. But
when the Child is fallen into the Fire, the Parent takes another Course; he
will not go to still him with a song or trifle. I know if we speed not with
you, you are lost. If we cannot get your consent to arise, and come away, you
perish for ever. No Converson, and no Salvation. I must get your Good Will, or
leave you miserable.

But here the difficulty of my work again recurs upon me, Lord, choose my
Stones out of the Rock, 1 Samuel 17.40, 4^. I come in the Name of the Lord of
Hosts, the God of the Armies of Israel. I come forth like the stripling David,
to wrestle, not with Flesh and Blood, but with Principalities and Powers, and
the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, Ephesians, 6.12, This Day let the Lord
smite the Philistine, and spoil the strong Man of his Armor, and give me to
fetch off the Captives out of his Hand. Lord, choose my Words, choose my
Weapons for me, and when I put my Hand into the Bag, and take thence a Stone
and sl^ng it, do thou carry it to the Mark and make it sink, not into the
Forehead, 1 Samuel 17.49. but the Heart of the Unconverted Sinner, and smite him
to the Ground, with Saul ^n his so happy Fall, Acts 9.4. Thou have sent me, as
Abraham did Eleazer, to take a Wife unto my Master thy Son, Genesis 24.4. But my
discouraged Soul is ready to fear the Woman will not be willing to follow me. O
Lord God of my Master, I pray thee sen^ me good Speed this Day, and show
kindness to my Master, and send thine Angel before me, and prosper my Way, that
I may take a Wife unto thy Son, Genesis 24 12. That as thy Servant rested not till
he had brought Isaac and Rebekah together, so I may be successful to bring
Christ and the Souls of my People together before we part.

But I turn me unto you. Some of you do not know what I do mean by Conversion,
and in vain shall I persuade you to that which you do not understand; and
therefore for your sakes, I shall show what this Conversion is. Others do
cherish secret hopes of Mercy, though they continue as they be; and for them I
must show the Necessity of Conversion. Others are like to harden themselves
with a vain Conceit, that they are converted already, unto them I must show the
Marks of the Unconverted. Others, because they feel ^o Harm, fear none, and
sleep upon the Top of the Mast; to them I shall show the Misery of the
Unconverted. Others sit still because they see not their way out; to them I
shall show the Means of Conversion. And finally, for the quickening of all, I
shall close with Motives of Conversion.

CHAP. I. Showing the Negative, what Conversion is not, and correcting some
Mistakes about it.
LEt the blind Samaritans worship they know not what, John 4.22. Let the
Heathen Athe^ans superscribe their Altar unto the unknown God Acts 17.23. Let
the guileful Papists commend the Mother of Destruction, Hosea 4.6. for the
Mother ^f Devotion; they that know Man's Constitution, and the Nature of the
reasonable Soul's Operation, ^^nnot but know, that the Understanding having ^e
Empire in the Soul, he that will go rationally to ^ork, must labor to let in
the Light here. Igno^tis non est consensus. And therefore that you may ^
mistake me, I shall show you what I mean by the Conversion I persuade you to
endeavor after

It is storied, that when Jupiter let down the golden Chaplets from Heaven, all
of them but one were stolen: Whereupon (lest they should lose a relic of so
great esteem) they make five others so like it, that if thy were so wickedly
minded, as to steal that also, they should not be able to discern which was it.
And truly my beloved, the Devil has made many counterfeits of this Conversion
and cheats one with this, and another with that and such a Craft and Artifice
he has, in this Mystery of Deceits: (that if it were possible) he would
deceive the very Elect. Now that I may cure the damnable Mistakes of some, who
think they are Converted when they are not, as well as remove the troubles, and
fears of others, that think they are not converted when they are; I shall show
you the Nature of Conversion, both Negatively, o^ what it is not; and
positively what it is.

1 It is not the taking on us the Profession of Christianity Doubtless
Christianity is more than a Name. If we will hear Paul, it lies not in Words,
but in Power, 1 Cor. 4.20. If to cease to be Jews and Pagans, and put on the
Christian Profession, had been true Conversion (as this is all that some would
have to be understood by it) who better Christians that they of Sardis and
Laodicea? These were all Christians by profession, and had a name to live; but
because they had but a name, are condemned by Christ, and threatened to be sp^ed
out. Rev. 3.1^ 16. Are there not many that name the name o^ the Lord Jesus,
that yet depart not from Iniquity^ 2 Timothy 2.19. and profess they know God, bu^
in Works deny him? Titus 1.16. And will God receive these for true Converts,
because turned to the Christian Religion? What! Converts from Sin, when they do
live in Sin? It Is a visible Contradiction. Surely, if the Lamp of Profession
would have served the turn, the foolish Virgins had never been shut (...),
Matthew. 25 3, 12. we find not only Professors but Preachers of Christ, and
Wonder-work^rs turned off, because Evil workers, Matthew. 7.22, 23.

2. It is not the being washed in the Laver of Regeneration, or putting on the
Badge of Christ in Baptism. Many take the Press-money, and wear the Livery of
Christ, that yet never stand to their Colors, no^ follow the^ Leader. Ananias
and Sapphira, and Magus, were baptized, as well as the rest. How fondly do many
mistake here, deceiving, and being deceived! dreaming that effectual Grace is
necessarily tied to the external Administration of Baptism (which, what is it,
but to revive the Popish Tenent, of the Sacraments working Grace, ex opere
(...)) and so every Infant shall be regenerated, not only (Sacramento tenus)
sacramentally, but ^eally and properly. Hence Men do fancy, that being
regenerated already, when baptized, they need no farther work

But if this were so, then all that were baptized (in their Infancy) must
necessarily be saved? because the Promise of pardon and Salvation is made to
Conversion and Regeneration.

Acts 3.19. 1 Pet. 3.4. Matthew. 19.28. Our calling Sanctification (as to the
beginnings of it) or Conversion (which are but the same things, under different
Conceptions and Expressions) is but a middle link in the golden Chain, fastened
to Election at the one end, and Glorification at the other, Romans 8.30. 2 Thessalonians
2.13. 1 Pet. 1.2 The Silver to^d may not be broken, nor the connection between
Sanctification and Salvation, between Grace and Glory, impiously violated,
Matthew. 5.8. If we were indeed begotten again, it is to an Inheritance
incorruptible, reserved in Heaven for us, and the Divine Power is engaged to
keep us for it, 1 Pet. ^.5. And if the very Regenerate may perish at last in
their Sins, we will no more say, that he that is born of God, his Seed
remains in him, and that he cannot sin, 1 John 3.9. i. e. unto Death, nor
that it is impossible to deceive the very Elect, Matthew. 24.

And indeed, were this true, we need look no f^^ther to see our names written
in Heaven, than only to search the Register, and see whether we were baptized:
Then I would keep the Certificate of my Baptism, as my fairest Evidence for
Heaven, and should come by assurance of my gracious state, with a we^ Finger:
Then Men should do well to carry but a Certificate of their Baptism, under the
Register's Hand, when they died, (as the Philosopher would be buried with the
Bishop's Bond in his hand, which he had given him for receiving his Alms in
another World;) and upon sight of this, there were no doubt of their admission
into Heaven.

In short, if there be no more necessary to Conversion or Regeneration, than to
be turned to the Christian Religion, or to be baptized in Infancy, this will
fly directly in the Face of that Scripture, Matt. 7.14. as well as multitudes
of others. For First, W^ will then no more say, Strait is the gate, and narrow
is the way; for if all that were baptized, and of true Religion, are saved, the
door is become heavenly wide, and we will henceforth say, Wide is the gate, and
broad is the way that leads unto life; for if this be true, whole Parishes,
yea, whole countries, and whole kingdoms may go in a breast; and we will no
more teach, that the righteous is scarcely saved, or that there is need of such
a sti^ in taking the kingdom of Heaven by Violence, and striving to enter in.
Surely if the way be so easy as many make it, that there is little more
necessary, than to be regenerated in our Baptism, and cry God-a-Me^cy, and be
absolved by the Minister at our end; it is more ad^ then needs to put our selves
to such running and seeking, and knocking, and fighting, and wrestling, as the
word requires as necessary for Salvation.

Secondly, If this be true, we will no more say, Few there be that find it; yea
we will rather say, Few there he that miss it: We will no more say, that of the
many that are called, but few are chosen, Matthew. 22 14 and that even of the
professing Israel, but a remnant shall he saved, Romans 11.5. If this Doctrine be
true, we will not say any more with the Disciple^, who then shall be saved? but
rather, who then shall not be saved? Then if a Man be called a Brother, (that
is, a Christian) and be baptized, though he be a Fornicator, or a Ra^^er, or
covetous, or a Drunkard, yet he shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 5.11.

But the Arminian will reply, Such as these, though they did receive regenerating
Grace in Baptism, are since fallen away, and must be renewed again, or else
they cannot be saved.

I answer, ^ That there is an infallible connection between regeneration and
Salvation, as we have already showed, and ^i^ten to be farther evidencing, but
that it is against designed brevity. 2. Then Men must be born again, which
carries a great deal of absurdity in its very Face. And why may not Men be
twice born in Nature, as well as in Grace? Why not as great an absurdity to be
twice regenerated, as to be twice generated? But 3. and above all, This grants
however the thing I contend for, that whatever Men do, or pretend to receive in
Baptism, if they be found afterward to be grossly ignorant, or profane, or
formal, without the Power of Godliness, they must be born again, or else be
shut out of the Kingdom of God. So then they must have more to plead for
themselves, than their Baptismal Regeneration.

Well, in this you see all are agreed, that be it more or less that is received
in Baptism, if (when Men come to years) they are evidently unsanctified, they
must be renewed again by a thorough and powerful change, or else they cannot
escape the damnation of Hell. Friends and Brethren, be not deceived, God is not
mocked, Gal. 6.7. whether it be your Baptism, or whatever else that you
pretend, I tell you from the living God, that if any of you be prayerless
Persons, John 15.14. or unclean, or malicious, or covetous, or riotous, or a
Scoffer, or a lover of evil Company, Prove. 13.20. In a word, if you are not
holy, strict and self-denying Christians, Heb. 12.14. Matthew. 16.24. you cannot
be saved, except you be transformed by a further Work upon you, and renewed
again by Repentance.

Thus I have showed, that it is not enough to evidence a Man to be regenerate,
that he has been baptized, effectual grace not necessarily accompanying
Baptism, as some have vainly asserted. But I must answer one Objection before I
pass.

Object. The Sacraments do certainly attain their ends, where Man does not
ponere obicem, or lay some obstruction, which Infants do not.

Sol. I answer, it is not the end of Baptism, to regenerate, 1. Because then
there would be no Reason, why it should be confined only to the seed of
Believers, for both the Law of God and the Nature of Charity, requires us to
use the Means of Conversion for all, as far as we can have Opportunity. Were
this true, no such Charity as to catch the Children of Turks and Heathens, and
baptize them, and dispatch them to Heaven out of hand, like the bloody wretches
that made the poor Protestants (to save their Lives) to swear they would come
to Mass, and that they would never depart from it, and then put them forthwith
to Death, saying, They would hang them while in a good mind. 2. Because it
presupposes Regeneration, and therefore cannot be intended to confer it. In
all the express Instances in Scripture, we find that Baptism does suppose their
repenting, believing, receiving the Holy Ghost, Acts. 8 37. and 2.38. and
10.37. Mark 16.16. And to imagine, that Baptism was instituted for an end of
which not one of the first Subjects was capable (for they were all adult
Persons, and supposed to have Faith and Repentance accordingly as they
professed, and their Children were not baptized till after them, in their
Right) were no little absurdity. Were this Doctrine true, Baptism would make
Disciples; but we find it does bespeak them such before hand, Matthew. 28.19.3.
Because Baptism, being but a Seal of the Covenant, cannon convey the Benefits,
but according to the tenor of the Covenant, to which it is set.

Now the Covenant is conditional, therefore the Soul conveys conditionally. The
Covenant requires Faith and Repentance, as the condition of the grand Benefits,
Pardon, and Life, Acts 16.31. and ^.19. And what the Covenant does not convey,
^t upon these Conditions, the Seal cannot. So that ^aptism does presuppose
Faith and Repentance in ^he subject, without which, it neither does, nor can
^onvey the saving Benefits; otherwise the Seal should ^onvey contrary to the
Tenor of the Covenant to which it is affixed.

3. It lies not in a moral Righteousness. This exceeds not the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, and therefore cannot bring us to the Kingdom of God,
Matthew. 5.20 Paul, while unconverted, touching the ^ighteousness which is in the
Law, blameless, Phil. ^.6. None could say, Black is thine Eye. The
Self-^^sticiary could say, I am no Extortioner, Adulterer, ^njust, etc. Luke
18.11. Thou must have something more than all this to show, or else (however
thou may justify thy self) God will condemn thee. I ^ondemn not Morality,
but warn you not to rest here: Piety includes Morality, as Christianity does
Humanity, and Grace Reason, but we must not divide the Tables.

4 It consists not in an external conformity to the Rules ^f Piety. It Is too
manifest, Men may have a Form of godliness, without the power, 2 Timothy 3.5. Men
may pray long, Matthew. 23.14. and fast often, Luke 18.12. and hear gladly, Mark
6.20. and be very forward ^n the Service of God, though costly and expensive,
Isa. 1.11. and yet be strangers to Conversion. They must have more to plead for
themselves, than that they keep to their Church, and give Alms, and make use of
prayer, to prove themselves sound Converts. No outward service, but an
Hypocrite may do it; even to the giving all his Goods to the Poor, and his
Members to the Fire, 1 Cor. 13.3.

5. It lies not in the chaining up of Corruption, by education, human laws, or
the course of incumbent affliction. It Is too common and easy to mistake
Education for Grace; but if this were enough, who a better Man than Jehoash?
While Jehoiadah his Uncle lived, he was very forward in God's Service, and
calls upon him to repair the House of the Lord, 2 Kings 12.2^. But here was
nothing more than good Education all this while; for when his good Tuto^ was
taken out of the Way, he appears to have been but a Woll chained up, and falls
on to idolatry.

6. In short, it consists not in illumination or conviction; in a superficial
change, or partial reformation: An Apostate may be a Man enlightened, Heb 6 4.
and a Felix tremble under Convictions, Acts. 24.25 and a Heord amend many
things. Mark 6.20. It Is one thing to have Sin alarmed only by Convictions, and
another to have it captivated and crucified by Converting Grace. Many, because
they have been troubled in Conscience for their Sins, think well of their case:
miserably mistaking Conviction for Conversion. With these Cain might have
passed for a Convert, who ran up and down the World, like a Man distracted,
under the rage of a guilty conscience, till with building and business he had
wore it away, Genesis 4.13, 14. Others think, that because they have given off
their riotous courses, and are broken off from evil Company or some particular
lust, and reduced to sobriety, and civility, they are now no other than real
Converts; forgetting that there is a vast Difference between being sanctified,
and civilized; and that many seek to enter into the kingdom of Heaven, Luke
13.24. and are not far from it, Mark 12.34. and arrive to the almost of
Christianity, Acts 26.28. and yet fall short at last: While Conscience holds
the whip over them, many will pray, hear, and read, and forbear their
delightful sins; but no sooner is this Lion asleep, but they are at their vomit
again. Who more religous than the Jews, when God's ^^nd was upon them? Psalm
78.34, 35. But no sooner was the affliction over, but they forgot God, and
showed their Religion to be a Fit, verses 36, 37. Thou may have disgorged a
troublesome Sin, that will not sit in thy Stomach, and have escaped those gross
pollutions of the Word, and yet not have changed the swinish Nature all the
while, 2 Peter 2.20, 22.

You may cast the Lead out of the rude Mass, into the more comely propotion of
a Plant, and then into the shape of a Beast, and thence into the Form and
Features of a Man; but all the while it is but Lead still. So a Man my pass
through diverse transmutations, from Ignorance to Knowledge, from Profaneness to
Civility, thence to a form of Religion; and all this while he is but carnal and
unregenerate, while his Nature remains unchanged.

Application. Hear then, O Sinners, hear; as you would live, so come and hear,
Isa. 55.3. Why would you so wilfully deceive your selves, or build your Hopes
upon the Sand? I know he shall find hard work of it, that goes to pluck away
your hopes. It cannot but be ungrateful to you, and truly it is not pleasing to
me. I set about it as a Surgeon, when to cut off a putrified Member from his
well-beloved Friend; which of force he must do, but with an aching heart, a
pitiful Eye, a trembling Hand. But understand me, Brethren, I am only taking
down the ruinous House, (which will otherwise speedily fall of it self, and
bury you in the rubbish,) that I may build fair, and strong, and firm for ever.
The Hope of the wicked shall perish, if God be true of his word, Prove. 11.7.
And were not thou better, O Sinner, to let the Word convince thee now in time,
and let go thy false and self-deluding Hopes, than to have Death too late to
open thine Eyes, and find they self in Hell, before thou are aware? I should be
a false and faithless Shepherd, if I should not tell you, that you who have
built your hopes upon no better grounds then these forementioned, are yet in
your Sins. Let your Conscience speak; What is it that you have to plead for
your selves? Is it that you wear Christ's Livery? that you bear his Name? that
you are of the visible Church? that you have knowledge in the points of
Religion; are civilized, perform Religious Duties, are just in your Dealings,
have been troubled in Conscience for your Sins? I tell you from the Lord, these
Pleas will never be accepted ^^ God's Bar. All this, though good in it self, will
not prove you converted, and so will not suffice to your Salvation. Oh look
about you, and bethink your selves of turning speedily and soundly. Set to
Praying, and to Reading, and studying your own Hearts; rest not, till God has
made through work with you; for you must be other Men or else you are lost Men.

But if these be short of Conversion, what shall I say of the profane Sinner;
It may be he will scarce cast his Eyes, or lend his Ears to this Discourse. But
if there be any such reading, or within hearing, he must know from the Lord
that made him, that he is far from the Kingdom of God. May a Man be civilized,
and not converted? where then shall the Drunkard, and Glutton appear? May a Man
keep Company with the wise Virgins, and yet be shut out? shall not a companion
of fools much more be destroyed? Prove. 13.20. May a Man be true and just in his
dealing, and yet not be justified of God? What then will become of thee, O
wretched Man, whose Conscience tells thee thou art false in thy Trade, and
false of thy word, and make thy advantage by a lying Tongue? If Men may be
enlightened, and brought to the performance of Holy Duties, and yet go down to
perdition for resting in them, and sitting down on this side of Conversion;
what will become of you, O miserable Families, that live as without God in the
World? and of you, O wretched Sinners, with whom God is scarce in all your
Thoughts; that are so ignorant, that you cannot, or so careless, that you will
not pray? O repent and be converted! break off your Sins by righteousness, away
to Christ for pardoning and renewing Grace; give up your selves to him, walk
with him in Holiness, or else you shall never see God. Oh that you would take
the Warnings of God! In his Name I once more admonish you Turn you at my
reproof, Prove. 1.23. Forsake the Foolish, and live, Prove. 9 6 B^ sober,
righteous, godly, Titus 2.1^, Wash your Hand^ ^ou Sinners, purify your Hearts,
ye double minded, James 4 8. Cease to do evil, learn to dewel^, Isa. 1 16.17.
But if you will on, you must die, Ezekiel. 33.11.

Chap. II. Showing positively what Conversion is.
I May not leave you with your Eyes half open, as he that saw Men as Trees
walking, Mark 8.24. The Word is profitable for Doctrine, as well as Reproof. 2 Timothy 3.16. And therefore having thus far conducted you by the shelves and rocks
of so many dangerous Mistakes, I would guide yo^ at length into the Harbor of
Truth.

Conversion then, in short, lies in the thorough Change both of the Heart and
Life. I shall briefly describe it in its Nature and Causes.

1 The Author of it is the Spirit of God; and therefore it is called the
sanctification of the Spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. and the renewing of the Holy
Ghost, Tit. 3.5. Yet not excluding the other Persons in the Trinity: For the
Apostle teaches us, to bless the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for that he
has begotten us again, 1 Peter 1.3. and Christ is said to give Repentance to
Israel, Acts 5.31. and is called the everlasting Father, Isa. 9 6. and we his
Seed, and the Children which God has given him, Heb 2.13. Isa. 53.10. O
blessed Birth! Seven Cities, contended for the Birth of Homer: but the whole
Trinity fathers the new Creature. Yet is this Work principally ascribed to the
Holy Ghost, and so we are said to be born of the Spirit, John 3.8.

So then it is a work above Man's power. We are born, not of the will of the
Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God, John 1.13. Never think thou can
convert thy self: If ever thou would be favingly converted, thou must despair
of doing it in thine own strengh; Jer. 13.18. It is a Resurrection from the
Dead, Rev. 20.5. Ephesians. 2.1. a new creation, Gal. 6.15. Ephesians. 2.10. a Work of
absolute Omnipotency, Ephesians. 19. Are these out of the reach of Human power? If
thou have no more than thou had by thy First-birth, a good Nature, a meek and
chaste Temper, etc. thou art a very strang^^ to true Conversion. This is a
supernatural W^^k.

2. The moving Cause is Internal, or External.

The internal mover is only Free grace; not by works of righteousness which we
have ^^ne, but of his own Mercy he saved us -- by the renewing of the Holy
Ghost, Titus 3.5. Of his own Will began he us, James 1. We are chosen and
called unto Sanctification, not for it, Ephesians. 1.4.

God finds nothing in a Man to turn his Heart, but to turn his Stomach; enough
to provoke his loa^hing, nothing to provoke his love Look back upon thy self, O
Christian: Take thy verminous Rags: Look upon thy self in thy blood, Ezekiel.
16.6. Oh, reflect upon thy swinish Nature, thy filthy swill, thy once beloved
mi^e, 2 Pet. 2 Can thou think, without loathing, of thy trough and draugh?
Open thy Sepulcher, Matthew. 23.27. Art thou struck almost dead with the hellish
damp? Behold thy putrid Soul, thy loathsome Members O Stench unsufferable, if
thou do but sense thy own putrefaction. Psalm. 14.3. Behold thy ghastly
Visage, thy crawling lusts, thy slime and corruption. Do not thine own Clothes
abhor thee? Job 9.31. How then should Holiness and Purity love thee? Be
astonished, O Heavens, at this; be moved, O Earth, Jer 2 12. Who but must needs
cry, Grace! Grace! Zech 4.7 Hear and blush, you Children of the most High: O
you unthankful Generation! that Free grace is no more in your Mouths, in your
thoughts; no more adored, admired, commended by such as you. One would think
you should be nothing but praising and admiring God, whatever you are. How can
you make a shift to forget such Grace, or to pass it over with a slight and
seldom mention! What but Free Grace should move God to love you, unless enmity
could do it, or deformity could do it, unless vomit or rottenness could do it?
How affectionately does Peter lift up his Hands? Blessed be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of his abundant Mercy has begotten us again, 1
Pet. 1.3. How feelingly does Paul magnify the Free-mercy of God in it. God,
(...) ^s rich in Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he loved us, has quickened
us together with Christ? by Grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2.4, 5.

The external Mover is the Merit and Intercession of the blessed Jesus. He has
obtained gifts for the rebellious, Psalm. 68.18. and through him it is, that God
works in us what is well-pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13.21. Through him are
all spiritual Blessings bestowed upon us in heavenly things, Ephesians. 1.3. He
interceedeth for the Elect that believe not John 17.20. Every Convert is the
fruit of his Travel, Isa. 53.11. Oh, never was Infant born into the World with
that difficulty that Christ endured for us! How emphatically he groaneth in his
travail! All the Pains that he suffered on his Cross, they were our Birth
pains, Acts 2.24 odinas, the pulls and throws that Christ endured for us. He is
made Sanctification to us, 1 Cor. 1.30. He sanctified himself (that is, set
apart himself as a Sacrifice) that we may be sanctified, John. 17 19 We are
sanctified through the Offering of his Body once for all, Heb. 10.10.

It Is nothing then without his own Bowels, but the Merit and Intercession of
Christ, that prevails with God to bestow on us converting grace. If thou art a
new creature, thou know to whom thou owe it, to Christ's Pangs and
Prayers. Hence the natural affection of a Believer to Christ. The Foal does not
more naturally run after the D^m, nor the Suckling to the Dugs, than a Believer
to Jesus Christ. And whither else should thou go? If any in the World can
show that for thy Heart that Christ can, let them carry it. Does Satan put in,
does the World court thee? Does Sin sue for thy Heart? Why, were these
crucified for thee? 1 Cor. 1.13. O Christian, love and serve the Lord whilst
thou ^ast a Being. Do not even the Publicans love those that love them? And
show kindness to them that ^re kind to them? Matthew. 5.46, 47.

3. The Instrument is either Personal, or Real.

The Personal is the Ministry. I have begotten you ^ Christ through the Gospel,
1 Cor. 4.15. Christ's Ministers are they that are sent to open Men's Eyes, and
to turn them to God, Acts 26.18.

O unthankful World, little do you know what you are doing, while you are
persecuting the Messengers of the Lord: These are they whose Business is (under
Christ) to save you. Whom have you reproached and blasphemed? Against whom have
you exalted your Voice, and lifted your Eyes on high? Isa. 27.23. Those are the
Servants of the most high God, that show unto you the way of Salvation, Acts
16.17. and do you thus requite them, O foolish and unwise; Deuteronomy. 32.6. O Sons
of Ingratitude, against whom do you sport your selves, against whom ^^ke you a
wide mouth, and draw out the tongue Isa. 57.34. These are the Instruments that
God uses to convert and save you, and do you spit in the Face of your
Physicians, and throw your Pilots over board? Father forgive them, for they
know not what they do.

The Instrument Real is the Word. We were begotten by the Word of Truth: This
is it that enlightens the Eyes, that converteth the Soul, Psalm 19.7, 8. that
makes wise to Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. This is the incorruptible Seed, by which
we are born again, 1 Peter 1.23. If we are washed, it is by the Word, Ephesians. 5.26.
If we are sanctified, it is through the Truth, John 17.17. This regenerates
Faith, and regenerates us, Romans 10.17. James 1.18.

O ye Saints, how shuold ye love the Word? For by this you have been converted:
O ye Sinners, ^ow should you ply the Word? for by this you must be converted:
No other ordinary Means but this. You that have felt its renewing Power, make
much of it, while you live, be for ever thankful for it. Tie it about your
Necks, write it upon your Hands, lay it in your Bosoms, Prove. 6.21, 22. When
you go let it lead you, when you sleep let it keep you^ when you wake let it
talk with you: Say with Holy David, I will never forget thy Precepts, for by
them thou have quickened me, Psalm 119.93. You that are unconverted, read the
Word with Diligence, flock to it where powerfully preached, fill the Porches as
the multitude of the Impotent, Blind, ^al^ Withered waiting for the moving of
the Wa^e^, John 5.3. Pray for the coming of the Spirit in the Word. Come off
thy Knees to the Sermon; and to thy Knees from the Sermon. The Seed does not
prosper, because not watered by Prayers and Tears, nor covered by Meditation.

4 The final cause is Man's salvation, and God's Glory. We are chosen through
Sanctification to Salvation, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. Called that we might be glorified,
Romans 8.30. but especially, that God might be glorified, Isa. 6.21. that we
should show forth his Praises, 1 Peter 2 9. and be fruitful in good works, Col.
1.10. O Christian, do not forget the end of thy Calling, let thy Light shine,
Matthew. 5.16. Let thy Lamp burn, let thy Fruits be good and many, and in Season,
Psalm. 1.3. Let all thy Designs fall in with God's, that he may be magnified in
thee. Philip. 1.20. Why should God repent that he has made thee a Christian,
as in the time of the old World that he made them Men? Genesis 6.6. Why should
thou be an Eyesore in his Orchard, Luke 7. by thy unfruitfulness? or a Son
that causes shame, as it were, a grief to thy Father, and a bitterness to her
that bare thee? Prove 17 25. Prove. 10.5. O let the Womb bless thee that bare
thee, Prove. 17.21. He that begets a Fool, does it to his Sorrow; and the Father
of a Fool has no Joy.

5. The Subject is the Elect Sinner, and that in all his Parts and powers,
members and mind. Whom God predestinates, them only he calls, Romans 8.30. None
are drawn to Christ by their Calling, nor come to him by believing, but his
Sheep; those whom the Father has given him, John. 6 37.44 Effectual Calling
runs parallel with Eternal Election, 2 Pet. 1.10.

Thou beginnest at the wrong end, if thou disputest first about thine Election:
Prove thy Conversion, and then never doubt of thine Election: Or can thou not
yet prove it? Set upon a present and through turning* Whatever God's purposes
be, (which are secret) I am sure his Promises are plain. How desperately do
Rebels argue, If I am Elected, I shall be saved, do what I will; if not, I
shall be damned, do what I can. Perverse Sinner, will thou begin where thou
should end? Is not the word before thee? What says it? Repent and be
converted, that your Sins may be blotted out, Acts 13.19 if you mortify the
deeds of the Body, you shall live, Romans 8.13. Believe and be saved, Acts 16.31.
What can be plainer? Do not stand still, disputing about thine Election, but
set to repenting and believing. Cry to God for converting grace. Revealed
things belong to thee, in these busy thy self. It Is just (as one well said)
that they that will not feed on the plain food of the Word, should be choked
with the Bones. Whatever God's Purposes be I am sure His Promises be true. What
ever the Decrees of Heaven be, I am sure, that if I repent and believe, I shall
be saved; and that if I repent not, I shall be damned Is not here plain ground
for thee? and will thou yet run upon the Rocks?

More particularly this Change of conversion passes throughout the whole
Subject. A Carnal Person may have some Shreds of good Morality, a little near
the list; but he is never good throughout the whole cloth, the whole Body of
Holiness and Christianity; Feel him a little further near the Ridge, and you
shall see him to be but a deceitful Piece. Conversion is no repairing of the
old Building, but it takes all down, and erects a new Structure: It is not the
putting in a patch, or sowing on a List of Holiness: but with the true Convert,
Holiness is woven into all his Powers, Principles, and Practice. The sincere
Christian is quite a new Fabric, from the Foundation to the Top stone, all
Fire-new. He is a new Man, Ephesians 4, 24. a new Creature. All things are become
new, 1 Cor. 5.17. Conversion is a deep Work; a Heart-work, Acts 2.37. and 6.14.
it turns all upside down, and makes a Man be in a new World. It goes throughout
with Men, throughout the mind, throughout the Members, throughout the Motions
of the whole Life.

1. Throughout the mind. It makes an universal Change within. First, It turns
the Balance of the Judgment, so that God and his Glory do weigh down all
carnal and worldly Interest, Acts 20.24. Phil. 1.20. Psalm 73.25. It opens the
Eye of the Mind, and makes the Scales of its Native Ignorance to fall off, and
turns Men from darkness to Light, Acts 26 18. Ephesians. 5 8. 1 Pet. 2.9 The Man that
before saw no danger in his condition, now concludes himself lost, and for ever
undone, Acts 2.37. except renewed by the power of Grace. He that formerly
thought there was little Hurt in Sin, now comes to see it to be the Chief of
Evils; he sees the unreasonableness, unrighteousness, the deformity and
filthiness that is in Sin: so that he is affrighted with it, loathes at it,
dreads it, flies it, and even abhors himself for it, Rom 7.15. Job 42.6. Ezekiel.
36.31. He that could see little Sin in himself, and could find no matter for
confession (as it was said of that learned Ignoramus Bellarmine, who, it seems,
while he knew so much abroad, was a miserable Stranger to himself) that when he
was to be confessed by the Priest, could not remember any thing to confess; but
was fain to run back to the Sins of his Youth: I say, he that could not find
matter for confession, unless it were some few gross and staring Evils, now Sin
reviveth with him, Romans 7.9. he sees the Rottenness of his Heart, and desperate
and deep pollution of his whole Nature: he cries, Unclean, unclean, Levit.
13.45. Lord, purge me with byssop, wash me thoroughly, create in me a new heart,
Psalm 51.2, ^, 10. He sees himself altogether become filthy, Psalm 14.3
Corrupt, both Root and Tree, Matthew. 7.17, 18. he writes unclean upon all his
Parts and Powers, and Performances, Isa. 64.6. Romans 7.18. He discovers the
nasty corners that he was never aware of, and sees the Blasphemy, and Theft,
and Murder, and Adultery, that is in his Heart, which before he was ignorant
of. Heretofore he saw no form nor comeliness in Christ, no beauty, that he
should desire him; but now he finds the hid Treasure, and will sell all to
(...): Christ is the Pearl he seeks, Sin (...) ^e loa^ns.

^^w, according to this new light, the Man is of a^ (...) mind, another
judgment, than before he was. N^^ God is all with him, he has none in Heaven,
(...) Earth, like him, Psalm: 73.25. He prefers him truly before all the world:
his favor is his life; the light of his countenance is more than Corn or Wine,
and Oil, (the good that formerly he enquired after, an^ set his Heart upon,
Psalm 4.6, 7.) Now let all the World be set on one side, and God alone on the
other; Let the Harlot put on her paint and gallantry, and present her self to
the Soul (as when Satan would have tempted our Savior with her) in all the
glory of her kingdoms; yet the Soul will not fall down and worship her, but
will prefer a naked, yea, a crucified, persecuted Christ before her, Philip
3.8. 1 Cor. 2.2: Not but that a Hypocrite may come to yield a general assent to
this, that God is the chief good: yea, the wiser Heathens, some dew of them,
have at last stumbled upon this; but there is a Differance between the absolute
and comparative Judgment of the Understanding; no Hypocrite comes so far, as to
look upon God as the most desirable and suitable good to him, and thereupon to
acquiesce in him: This was the Convert's Voice. The Lord is my portion, says
my Soul: Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none upon Earth, that I
desire besides thee: God is the strength of my Heart, and my portion for ever,
Psalm 73.25, 26. Lam. 3.24.

Secondly, It turns the Biass of the Will, has as to means and end: (1.) The
Intention of the Will is altered, Ezekiel. 36.26. Jer 31.33. Isa 26 8, 9 Now the
Man has new ends and designs: Now he intends God above all, and desires and
designs nothing in all the World so much as that Christ may be magnified in
him, Philip 1.20. He accounts himself more happy in this, than in all that the
Earth could yield, that he may be serviceable to Christ, and bring him Glory in
this Generation: This is the Mark he aims at, that the Name of Jesus may be
great in the World, and that all the Sheaves of his Brethren may bow to this
Sheaf.

Reader, Do thou view this, and never ask thy self whether it be thus with
thee? Pause a while, and breathe on this great Concernment.

2. The Election is also Changed; so that he chooses another way, Psalm
119.13. He pitcheth upon God, as his blessedness and upon Christ as the
Principal; and holiness as the subordinate means to bring him to God, John
14.6. Rom 2.7. He chooses Jesus for his Lord, Col 2.6. He is not merely
forced into Christ by the storm, nor does he take Christ for ^^re necessity, as
the Man begged from the Gallows, when he takes the Wife rather than the Halter;
but he comes off freely in the Choice: This Match is not made in a fright, as
with the terrified Conscience of a dying Sinner; that will seemingly do any
thing for Christ, but does only take Christ, rather than Hell; but he
deliberately resolves, that Christ ^s his best choice, Philip. 1.23. and would
^ather have him to choose, than all the goods of this World, might he enjoy it
while he would: Again, he makes Holiness for his Path; he does not, out of mere
necessity submit to it, but he likes and loves it: I have chosen the way of thy
precepts, Psalm 119.173. He ^akes God's Testimonies, not as his Bondage, but as
^is Heritage; yea, his Heritage for ever, verse 111. He counts them not his
burden, but his bliss; not ^is cords, but his cordials, 1 John 5.3. Psalm
119.14, ^6.17. He does not only bear, but take up Christ's ^oke: He takes not
Holiness as the Stomach does he loathed potion, (which it will down with ra^er
than die,) but as the hungry does his beloved ^ood: no time passes so sweetly
with him (when ^e i^ himself) as that he spends in the Exercises of ^o ^ess;
these are both his aliment and element; ^e desire of his Eyes, and the Joy of
his Heart, Job 6: 12: Psalm 119.82, 131, 162, 174. Psalm 63: 5.

Put thy Conscience to it as thou go, whether ^ou art the Man? O happy Man,
if this be thy ^afe! But see thou be through and impartial in the ^arch.

Thirdly, It turns the bent of the Affections, 2 Cor 11. These run all in a new
Channel: The Jorda^ is now driven back, and the Water runs upwards against its
natural course.

Christ is his Hope, 1 Timothy 1.1. this is his Prize Phil 3: 8. here his Eye is,
here his Heart is. He i^ contented to cast all over board, (as the Merchan^ in
the Storm, ready to perish) so he may b^ keep this Jewel.

The first of his desires is, not after Gold but Grace Phil 3: 13; He hungers
after it, he seeks it as Silver he digs for it as for hid treasure. He had
rather be gracious than great; he had rather be the holie^ Man on the Earth,
than the most learned, the most famous, most prosperous. While carnal, he said,
O^, if I were but in great esteem, and rolled in Wealth, and swimmed in
pleasure, if my Debts were paid, and I and mine provided for! then I were a
happy Man: But now the Tune is changed; Oh, says the Convert, if I had but my
Co^ruptions subdued, if I had such measures of Grace, such Fellowship with God,
though I were poor and despised, I should not care, I should account may self a
blessed Man. Reader, Is this the Language of thy Soul?

His Joys are changed. He rejoiceth in the ways of God's testimonies, as much
as in all riches, Psalm. 11^ 14. He delights in the Law of the Lord, whereas
once he had little savor. He has no such Joy, ^ in the Thoughts of Christ,
the Fruition of his Company, the Prosperity of his People.

His Cares are quite altered. He was once set for the World, and any Scraps of
by time, nothing (too often) was enough for his Soul. Now he gives over caring
for the asses, and sets his heart on the kingdom Now all the Cry is, What shall
I do to be saved? Act 16.30. His great Solicitude is, how to secure hi^ Soul.
Oh, how he would bless you, if you cou^^ but put him out of doubt of this!

His Fears are not so much of suffering, but of s^ing Heb, 11.25, 27. Once he
was afraid of nothing so much as the loss of his Estate, or Esteem, the
Pleasure of Friends, the Frowns of the Great: Nothing ^ounded so terrible to
him as Pain, or Poverty, or ^isgrace Now these are little to him, in compari^on
of God's dishonor or displeasure. How warily does ^e walk, lest he should
tread on a snare? He fears ^way, he looks before and behind; he has his Eye
upon his Heart, and is often casting over his shoul^er, lest he should be
overtaken with sin, Psalm. 30.1. Prove. 28.14. Eccles. 1.14. It kills his Heart
to think ^f losing God's Favor: this he dreads as his only ^ndoing, Psalm
51.11, 12. Psalm 119.8. No thought (...) the World does pinch him, and pain him
so such as to think of parting with Christ.

His Love runs a new Course. My love was cru^^fied (said holy Ignatius) that
is, my Christ. This is my Beloved, says the Spouse, Cant. 5.16. ^ow does
Augustine often pour his Loves upon Christ? O Eternal Blessedness, etc.

He can find no Words sweet enough: Let me see ^^e, O Light of m^ne Eyes. Come,
O thou Joy of my spirit. Let me behold thee, O the gladness of my Heart, ^et me
love thee, O Life of my Soul. Appear unto ^e, O my great delight, my sweet
Comfort, O my ^od, my Life, and the whole Glory of my Soul. Let me ^d thee, O
Desire of my Heart. Let me hold thee, Love of my Soul. Let me embrace thee, O
heavenly ^ridegroom. Let me possess thee.

His Sorrows have now a new vent, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10. ^he view of his Sins, the
Sight of a Christ cruci^ed, that would scarce stir him before, now how ^uch do
they affect his Heart?

His hatred boils, his anger burns against sin, Psalm. ^9.104. He has no
patience with himself; he ^ls himself a Fool, and Beast, and thinks any Name ^o
good for himself, when his Indignation is stir^d up against Sin, Psalm 73.22.
Prove. 30.2. He ^^uld once swill in it with too much Pleasure; ^w he lothes the
thought of returning to it, as such as of licking up the filthiest Vomit.

Commune then with thine own Heart, and attend ^e common and general current of
thine affections, whether it be toward God in Christ, above all other
concernments. Indeed sudden and strong Commotions of the Affections, and
sensitive Part, are oft^^mes found in Hypocrites, especially where the natural
constitution leads thereunto; and contrariwise, the sanctified themselves are
many times without sensible stirrings of the Affections, where the Temper is
more slow, dry and dull. The great Enquity is, whether the Judgment and Will be
standingly determined for God above all other good, real or apparent; and if
the Affections do sincerely follow their choice and conduct, though it be not so
strongly and sensibly as to be desired, there is no doubt but the change is
saving.

2 Throughout the Members. Those that were before the Instruments of sin, are
now become the holy utensils of Christ's living Temple, Romans 6.16. 1 Cor. 3.16.
He that before made, as it were, a baud or a barrel of his Body, now possesses
his Vessel in Sanctification and Honor, in Temperance, Chastity and Sobriety,
and dedicated to the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4. Gal. 5.22, 23. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.

The Eye that was once a wandering Eye, a wanton Eye, a haughty, a covetous Eye,
is now employed, as Mary, in weeping over her Sins, Luke 38. in beholding God
in his Works, Psalm 8.3. i^ reading his Word, Acts 8.30. in looking up and down
for Objects of Mercy, and Opportunities for His Service.

The Ear that was once open to Satan's Call, and that (like a vitiated Palate)
did relish nothing so much as filthy, as, at least, frothy Talk, and the Fool's
laughter, is now bored to the Door of Christ's House, and open to his
Discipline: It says, Speak Lord, for thy Servant hears: It cries with him
Veniat Verbum Domini, and waits for his Word a^ the Rain, and relisheth them
more than the appoin^ed Food, Job 23.12, than the Honey and ti^ Honeycomb,
Psalm 19.10.

The Head, that was the Shop of worldly Design is now filled with other
matters, and set on t^ study of God's Will, Psalm 1.2. and 119.97. and the Man
beats his Head, not so much about his Gain, but about his Duty. The Thoughts
and Cares that now fill his Head, are principally, how he may please God, and
fly Sin.

His Heart, that was a fly of filthy Lusts, is now become an Altar of Incense,
where the Fire of divine Love is ever kept in, and whence the daily Sacrifice
of Prayer and Praises, and sweet Incense of Holy Desires, Ejaculations, and
Anhelations, are continually ascending, Psalm 108.1. and 119.20. and 139.1^ ^8.

The ^^th is become a Well of Life, his Tongue as choice Silver, and his Lips,
feed many: Now the Salt of Grace has seasoned his Speech, and eat out the
Corruption, Col. 4.6 and cleansed the Mouth from his filthy Communication,
Flattery, Boasting, Railing, Lying, Swearing, Backbiting, that once came like
the flashes proceeding from the Hell that was in the Heart, James 3.6, 7. The
Throat, that was once an open Sepulcher, Romans 3.13. now sends forth the sweet
Breath of Prayer and holy Discourse, and the Man speaks in another Tongue, in
the Language of Canaan, and is never so well as when talking of God and Christ,
and the matters of another World. His Mouth brings forth Wisdom, his Tongue
is become the silver Trumpet of his Maker's Praise, his Glory, and the best
Member that he has.

Now here you shall have the Hypocrite halting, He speaks, it may be like an
Angel, but he has a ^wetous Eye, or the gain of Unrighteousness in his and. Or
the Hand is white, but his Heart is full ^f rottenness, Matthew. 23.27. full of
unmortified cares, very Oven of Lust, a Shop of Pride, the Seat of ^alice. It
may be with Nabuchadnezzar's Image, he ^th a golden Head, a great deal of
Knowledge: but ^e has Feet of Clay, his Affections are worldly, he finds
Earthly Things, and his way and walk are ^^nal, and carnal, you may trace him
in his secret ^^nts, and his footsteps will be found in some By^^ of Sin. The
work is not throughout with him.

3. Throughout the Motions, or the Life and Practice. The new Man takes a new
Course, Ephesians. 2.2.3. His Conversation is in Heaven, Phil. 3.20. No sooner does
Christ call by effectual grace, but he straightway becomes a follower of him,
Matthew. 4.20. When God has given the new Heart, and writ his Law in his Mind,
he forthwith walks in his Statutes, and keeps his Judgments, Ezekiel. 36.26.27.

Though Sin may dwell (God knows a wearisome and unwelcome guest) in him, yet it
has no more Dominion over him, Romans 6.7, 14. He has his fruit unto Holiness,
Romans 6.22. and though he makes many a blot, yet the Law and Life of Jesus is that
he eyes as his copy, Psalm. 119.30. Heb 12.2. and has an unfeigned respect to
all God's Commandments, Psalm 119.6 He makes Conscience even of little Sins,
and little Duties, Psalm. 119.113, His very Infirmities which he cannot help,
though he would, are his Soul's burden, and are like the Dust in a Man's Eye,
which though but little, yet are not a little troublesome. [O Man do thou read
this, and never turn in upon thy Soul by Self-examination?] The Sincere Convert
is not one Man at Church, and another at home; he is not a Saint on his Knees,
and a Cheat in his Shop; he will not tithe Mint and Cummin, and neglect Mercy
and Judgment, and the weighty matters of the Law; he does not pretend Piety,
and neglect Morality, Matthew. 23.14. But he turns from all his Sins, and keeps
all God's Statutes Ezekiel. 18.21. though not perfectly (except in desire and
endeavor) yet sincerely; not allowing himself i^ the breach of any, Romans 7.15.
Now he delight in the Word, and sets himself to Prayer, and open his Hand, (if
able) and draws out his Soul to the hungry, Romans 7.21. Psalm 109, 4, Isa. 58,
10, H^ breaks off his Sins by Righteousness, and his Iniquities by showing
Mercy to the Poor, Dan. 4, 3^ and has a good Conscience, willing in all things
^^ live honestly, Heb. 3, 18, and to keep without Offense toward God and Man.

Here again you shall find the unsoundness of man Professors, that take
themselv^^ or good Christians. They are partial in the Law, Mal. 2.9. and take
up with the cheap and easy Duties of Religion, but they go not through with the
work: They are as a Cake not turned, half toasted, and half raw: It may be you
shall have them exact in their Word, punctual in their dealings: but then they
do not exercise themselves, unto Godliness; and for examining themselves, and
governing their Hearts, to this they are strangers: You may have them duly at
Church, but follow them to their Families, and there you shall see little but
their Families minded; or if they have a Road of Family Duties, follow them to
their Closets, and there you shall find their Souls are little looked after: It
may be they seem otherwise religions, but bridle not their Tongues, and so all
their Religion is in vain, James 1, 26. It may be they come up to Closet, and
Family Prayer; but follow them to their Shops, and there you shall find them in
a trade of lying, or some covert and cleanly way of deceit; Thus the Hypocrite
goes not throughout in the Course of his Obedience.

And thus much for the su^^^t of Conversion.

6. The Terms are either from, which or to which

1. The Terms from which we turn in this motion of Conversion, are Sin, Satan,
the World, and our own Righteousness.

First, Sin. When a Man is converted, he is for ever out with sin; yea, with
all sin, Psalm 119, 128, but most of all with his own sins, and especially with
his Bosom-sin, Psalm 18.23. Sin is now the But of his Indignation, 2 Cor. 7.11.
he thrists to bathe his hands in the blood of his sins. His sins set a broach
in sorrows: It is sin that pierces him, and wounds him; he feels it like a
thorn in his side, like a prick in his Eyes; he groans and struggles under it,
and not formally, but feelingly cries out, O ^^ched Man ^he is not impatient of
any Burden, so much as his sin, Psalm 40.12. If God should give him his
choice, he would choose any Affliction, ^o be might be rid of sin; he feels it
like the cutting Gravel in his Shoes, p^cking and paining him as he goes

Before Conversion, he had light thoughts of Sin; he cherished it in his Bosom,
as Uriah his Lamb; he nourished it up, and it grew up together with him; it did
eat, as it were, of his own Meat, and drank of his own Cup, and lay in his
Bosom, and was to him as a Daughter* But when God open his Eyes by Conversion,
he throws i^ away with abhorrence, Isa 30.22 as a Man would a loathsome Toade,
which in the dark he had hugged fast in his Bosom, and thought it had been some
pretty and harmless Bird: When a Man is savingly changed, he is not only deeply
convinced of the Danger, but Defilement of Sin; and Oh, how earnest is he with
God to be purified! He loathes himself for his Sins, Ezekiel 36.31. He runs to
Christ, and casts himself into the Fountain, for Sin, and for Uncleanness,
Zech. 13.1. If he fall, what a stir is there to get all clean again! He flies
to the Word, and washes, and rubs, and rinses; laboring to cleanse himself
from all Filthiness, both of Flesh and Spirit; he abhors his once beloved sin,
Psalm 18.23. as a cleanly Nature does the trough and mire wherein he sees the
Swine delight.

The sound Convert is heartily engaged against sin: he wrestles with it, he
wars against it; he is too often foiled, but he never yields the Cause, nor
lays down the Weapons; but he will up and to it again, while he has Breath in
his Body: He will never give quiet possession, he will make no peace, he will
give no quarter, he falls upon it, and fires upon it and is still disquieting
of it with continual Alarms. He can forgive his other Enemies, he can pity
them, and pray for them, Acts 7.60. But here he is implacable, here he is set
upon revenge; he hunteth, as it were, for the precious Life; his Eye shall not
pity, his Hand shall not spare, though it be a right hand, or a right Eye: Be it
a gainful Sin, most delightful to his Nature, or Support to his Esteem with
carnal Friends; yet he will rather throw his Gai^ down the Kennel, see his
credit fall, or the Flower o^ Pleasure wither in his hand* than he will allow
himself in any known way of sin, Luke 19.8. He will grant no Indulgence, he
will give no Toleration, but he draws upon sin, wherever he meets it, and
frowns upon it with this unwelcome Salute, Have I found thee, O mine Enemy!

Reader, has Conscience been at work, while thou have been looking over these
Lines? Have thou pondered these things in thine Heart? Have thou searched the
Book within, to see if these things be so? if not, read it again, and make thy
Conscience speak, whether or no it be thus with thee.

Have thou crucified thy Flesh with its Affections and Lusts; and not only
confessed, but forsaken thy Sins; all sin in thy fervent desires, and the
ordinary practice of every deliberate and wilful sin in thy life? If not, thou
art yet unconverted. Does not Conscience fly in thy Face, as thou read, and
tell thee that thou live in a way of lying for thy Advantage, that thou usest
deceit in thy Calling, that there is some way of secret wantonness that thou
live in? why then, do not deceive thy self, thou art in the Gall of
Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity.

Does not thy unbridled Tongue, thy brutish Intemperance, thy wicked Company,
thy Neglect of Prayer, of Hearing and Reading the Word, now witness against
thee, and say, We are thy Works, and we will follow thee? Or if I have not hit
thee right, does not the Bird within tell thee, there is such or such a way,
that thou know to be evil, that yet for some carnal respect thou do
tolerate thy self in, and art willing to spare? If this be thy Case, thou art
to this Day Unregenerate, and must be changed or condemned.

Secondly, Satan. Conversion binds the strong Man, spoils his Armor, casts out
his Goods, turns Men from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26 18. Before, the
Devil could no sooner hold up his Finger to the Sinner, to call him to his
wicked Company, sinful Games, filthy Delight, but presently he followed, like
an Ox to the Slaughter, and a Fool to the Correction of the stocks; as the Bird
that hastes to the Prey, and knows not that it is for his Life: No sooner
could Satan bid him lie, but presently he had it upon the top of his Tongue,
Acts 5.3. No sooner could Satan offer a wanton Object, but he was stung with
Lust. The Devil could do more with him than God could: It the Devil say, Away
with these Family duties, be sure they shall be rarely enough performed in his
house: If the Devil say, Away with this strictness, this Preciseness, he will
keep far enough from it: If he tells him, there is no need of these
Closet-duties, he shall go from Day to Day, and scarce perform them: But now he
is converted, he serves another Master, and takes quite another course, 1 Peter
4.4 he goes and comes at Christ's beck, Col. 3.24. Satan may sometimes catch
his Foot in a trap, but he will no longer be a willing captive: he watches
against the snares and Baits of Satan, and studies to be acquainted with his
devices; he is very suspicious of his Plots, and is very jealous in what comes
athwart him, lest Satan should have some Design upon him: He wrestles against
Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 6. he entertains the Messenger of Satan, as Men
do the Messenger of Death: he keeps his Eye upon his Enemy, 1 Peter 5.8. and
watches in his Duties, lest Satan should put in his Foot.

Thirdly, the World. Before a sound Faith, a Man is overcome of the World;
either he bows down to Mammon, or idolizes his reputation, or is a Lover of
Pleasure more than a Lover of God, 2 Timothy 3.4. Here Is the Root of Man's Misery
by the Fall; he is turned aside to the Creature, instead of God, and gives that
esteem, confidence, and affection to the Creature, that is due to him alone,
Romans 1.25. Mat. 10.37. Prove 18.11. Jer. 17.5.

O miserable Man! What a deformed Monster has sin made the^? God made thee
little lower than the Angels; Sin little better than the Devils, John 6.70. and
8.44. A monster, that has his Head, and Heart where his Feet should be, and
his Feet kicking against Heaven, and every thing out of place; the World, that
was formed to serve thee, is come to rule thee, and the deceitful Harlot has
bewitched thee with her Enchantments, and made thee bow down and serve her.

But converting Grace sets all in order again, ^^d puts God in the Throne, and
the World at his Footstool, Psalm 73: 25. Christ in the Heart, and the World
under Feet, Ephesians. 3, 17, Rev. 12, 1. So Paul I am crucified to the World, and
the World to me, Gal. 6.14 Before this change, all the cry was, Who will show
us any (worldly) good? But now he sings another tune, Lord, lift up the Light
of thy Countenance upon me, and take the Corn and Oil whosoever will, Psalm. 4.6, 7.
Before, his Heart's delight and content was in the World; then the Song was,
Soul take thine case; eat, drink, and be merry; thou have much Goods laid up
for many Years: But now all this is withered, and there is no comeliness, that
he should desire it; and he tunes up with the sweet Psalmist of Israel, The
Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, the lines are fallen to me in a fair
place, and I have a goodly heritage. He blesses himself, and boasts himself in
God, Psalm. 34.2. Lam. 3.24. nothing else can give him content. He has written
Vanity and Vexation upon all his worldly enjoyments, Eccles. 1 2. and loss and
dung upon all human excellencies, Philip. 3: 7, 8: He has Life and Immortality
now in chase, Romans 2, 7: He trades for Grace and Glory, and has a Crown
incorruptible in pursuit, 1 Cor. 8: 25. His Heart is set in him to seek the
Lord, 1 Chronicles. 22: 19: and 2 Chronicles. 15.15. He first seeks the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof; and Religion is no longer a matter by
the by with him, but the main of his care, Matt. 9.33. Psalm 17.4. Now the
gaudy Idol is become Nebushtan, 2 Kings 18.4; and he gets up and trends upon
it, as Diogenes trampling upon Plato's Hangings, saying, Celco Pl^tonis Fastum.
Before the World had a swaying Interest with him; he would do more for gain
than godliness, 1 Timothy 6.6. more to pleasure his Friend, or his Flesh than to
please the God that made him; and God must stand by till the World were first
served: But now all must stand by; he hates Father and Mother, and Life and
all, in comparison of Christ, Luke 1.26.

Well then, pause a little, and look within; Does not this nearly concern thee?
Thou pretendest for Christ, but does not the World sway thee? Do thou not
take more real delight and content in the World than in him? Do thou not find
thyself better at ease when the World goes to thy Mind, and thou art
encompassed with carnal Delights, than when retired to Prayer and Meditation in
thy Closet, or attending upon God's Word and Worship? No surer evidence of an
unconverted State, than to have the things of the World uppermost in our Aims,
Love and Estimation, John 2.15. James 4.4.

With the second Convert, Christ has the Supremacy. How dear is this Name to
him? How precious is its favor? Cant. 13. Psalm 54.8. The name of Jesus is
engraven upon his Heart, Gal. 4.19. and lies as a bundle of Myrrh between his
breasts, Cant. 1.13.14. Honor is but Air, and Laughter is but Madness, and
Mammon is fallen like Dagon before the Ark, with Hands and Head broken off on
the Threshold, when once Christ is savingly revealed. Here is the Pearl of
great price to the true Convert, here is his Treasure, here is his Hope, Matthew.
13.44.45. This is his Glory, My beloved is mine, and I am his, Gal 6.14. Cant.
2.16. Oh, it is sweeter to him to be able to say, Christ is mine, than if he
could say, The Kingdom is mine, the Indies are mine.

Fourthly, Your own Righteousness: Before Conversion, Man seeks to cover
himself with his own Fig Leaves, Phil, 3.6 7. and to lick himself whole with
his own Duties, Micah 6 6, 7. He is apt to trust in himself, Luke 16.15. and
18.9. and s^^ up his own Righteousness, and to reckon his Counters for Gold,
and not submit to the Righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. But Conversion changes
his Mind; now he casts away his filthy Rags, and counts his own Righteousness
but a menstruons Cloth? He casts it off, as a Man would the verminous tatters
of a nasty Beggar, Isa 64.7. Now he is brought to Poverty of Spirit, Matthew.
5.3. complains of, and condemns himself, Romans 7. and all his Inventory is,
Poor, and miserable, and wretched and blind, and naked, Rev. 3.17, He sees a
World of Iniquity in his holy things and calls his once idolized Righteousness
but Flesh, and Loss, and Dogs Meat, and would not for a thousand Worlds be
found in himself, Philip. 3.4, 7, 8, 9. His Finger is even upon his Sores,
Psalm 51.3. his, Sins, his Wants. Now he begins to set a high Price upon
Christ's Righteousness; he sees the Need of a Christ in every Duty, to justify
his Person, and justify his Performances; he cannot live without him, he cannot
pray without him. Christ must go with him, or else he cannot come into the
Presence of God; he leans upon the Hand of Christ, and so he bows himself in
the House of his God; he sets himself down for a lost, undone Man, without him:
His Life is hid in Christ, as the Life of a Man in the Heart; he is fixed in
Christ, as the Roots of the Tree spread in the Earth, for Stability and
Nutriment. Before, the News of a Christ was a stale and sapless thing; but no^
how sweet is a Christ; Augustine could not relish his before so much admired
Cicero, because he could not find the Name of Christ, how pathetically cries
he, Dulcissime, amantis. benignis. caris. etc. quando te videbo? quando satiabo
de pulchritudine tua? Medit. c. 37. O most sweet, most loving, most kind, most
dear, most precious, most desired, most lovely most fair, etc. all in a Breath,
when he speaks of, and to his Christ: In a Word, the Voice of the Convert, is
with the Martyr, None but Christ.

2. The Terms which are either Ultimate, or Subordinate, and Mediate.

The Ultimate, is God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, whom the true Convert
takes, as his Allsufficient and Eternal blessedness. A Man is never truly
Sanctified, till his very Heart be in Truth set upon God above all things, as
his portion and chief good. These are the natural Breathings of a Believer's
Heart; thou art my portion, Psalm. 119.57. My Soul shall make her boast in the
Lord, Psalm 34, 2. My expectation, is from him, he only is my rock, and my
Salvation, he is my defense: in God is my Salvation, and my Glory, the Rock of
my Strengh, and my Refuge is in God, Psalm 62.1, 2, 5, 6, 7. Psalm 18.1, 2.

Would you put it to an Issue, whether you be converted or not? Now then let
thy Soul and all that is within thee attend.

Have thou taken God for thy Happiness? Where does the content of thy Heart^ly?
Whence does thy choicest comfort come in; Come then, and with Abraham, lift up
thine Eyes Eastward, and Westward, and Northward, and Southward, and cast about
thee, what is it that thou would have in Heaven or Earth to make thee happy?
If God should give thee thy choice, as he did to Solomon, or should say to
thee, as Ahasuerus to Esther, What is thy Petition, and what is thy Request,
and it shall granted thee, Esther 5.3. What would thou ask? Go into the
Gardens of Pleasure, and gather all the fragrant Flowers from thence: Would
these content thee? Go to the Treasures of Mammon; suppose thou might lade
thy self while thou would from hence: Go to the Towers, to the Trophies of
Honor: What think thou of being a Man of renown and having a name like the
name of the great Men of the Earth? Would any of this, all this suffice thee,
and make thee count thy self a happy Man? If so then certainly thou art Carnal
and Unconverted; if not, go farther; wade into the Divine excellencies, the
sto^e of his Mercies, the hiding of his Power, the deeps unfathomable of his
All Sufficiency; Does this suit thee best, and please thee most? Do thou say.
It Is good to be here, Matthew. 17.4. Here I will pitch. ^ere I will live and die?
Will thou let all the World go, rather than this? Then it is well between God
and thee: Happy art thou, O Man! Happy art thou that ever thou wast born: If a
God can make thee happy, thou must needs be happy; for thou have avouched the
Lord to be thy God, Deuteronomy. 26.17. Do thou say to Christ, as he to us, Thy
Father shall be my Father, and thy God my God, John 20.17. Here is the turning
Point. An unsound Professor never takes up his rest in God, but converting
grace do the work, and so cures the fatal misery of the fall, by turning the
heart from its Idols, to the living God, 1 Thessalonians 1.9. Now says the Soul, Lord,
whither should I go? Thou have the Words of Eternal Life, John 6.68. Here he
centers, here he settles: O, it is as the entrance of Heaven to him, to see his
Interest in God. When he discovers this, he says, Return unto thy rest, O my
Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee, Psalm 116, 17. And it is
even ready to breathe out Simeon's Song, Lord, now let thou thy Servant
depart in peace, Luke 2.29. and says with Jacob, when his old heart revived at
the welcome tidings, It is enough, Genesis 45 28. When he sees he has a God in
Covenant to go to, this is all his Salvation, and all his desire, 2 Samuel 23.5.

M^n, is this thy Case? have thou experienced this? Why then, blessed art thou
of the Lord: God has been at work with thee, he has laid hold on thy heart by
the power of converting Grace, or else thou could never have done this:

The Mediate Term of Conversion is either principal, or less principal.

The Principal is Christ, the only Mediator between God and Man, 1 Timothy 2.5.
His Work is to bring us to God, 1 Peter 3.18. He is the way to the Father, John
14.6. the only plank on which we may escape, the only door by which we may
enter, John 10.9. Conversion brings over the Soul to Christ, to accept of him,
Col. 2.6. as the only means to Life, as the only way, the only name given under
Heaven, Acts 4.12. He looks not for Salvation in any other but him, nor in any
other with him; but throws himself on Christ alone, as one that should cast
himself with spread A^ms upon the Sea.

Here (says the convinced Sinner) here I will venture, and if I perish, I
perish: if I die, I will die here. But, Lord, suffer me not to perish under the
pitiful Eyes of thy mercy. Entreat me not to leave thee, or to turn away from
following after thee, Ruth 1 16. Here I will throw my self: If thou kick me, if
thou kill me, Job 13.15. I will not go from thy door.

Thus the poor Soul does venture on Christ, and resolvedly adhere to him.
Before Conversion, the Man made light of Christ, minded the Farm, Friends,
Merchandise, more than Christ, Matthew 22 5. Now Christ is to him as his
necessary Food, his Daily-bread, the Life of his Heart, the Staff of his Life,
Philip. 3 9: His great design is, that Christ may be magnified in him, Philip.
1.20. His Heart once said, as they to the Spouse, What is thy Beloved more than
another? Cant. 5.9. He found more sweetness in his merry Company, wicked Games,
earthly Delights, than in Christ. He took Religion for a Fancy, and the Talk of
great Enjoyments for an idle Dream. But now, to him to live is Christ. He sets
light by all that he accounted precious, for the Excellency of the Knowledge of
CHRIST, Phil. 3.8.

All of Christ is accepted by the Sincere Convert. He loves not only the wages
but work of Christ, Romans 7.12. not only the Benefits, but the burden of Christ:
He is willing not only to tread out the Corn, but to draw under the Yoke: He
takes up the Commands of Christ, yea, and Cross of Christ, Matthew 11. Matthew.
16.24.

The unsound closes by the halves with Christ: He is all for the Salvation of
Christ, but he is not for Sanctification: He is for the Privileges, but
appretrates not the Person of Christ: He divides the Offices and Benefits of
Christ. This is an Error in the Foundation: Whosoever loves Life let him beware
here; it is an undoing mistake, of which you have been often warned, and yet
none more common. Jesus is a sweet name, but Men love not the Lord Jesus in
Sincerity, Ephesians 6.24. They will not have him as God offers, To be a Prince, and
a Savior, Acts 5, 31. They divide what God has joined, the King and the
Priest; Yea, they will not accept the Salvation of Christ, as he intends it;
they divide it here. Every Man's Vote is for Salvation from Suffering, but they
desire not to be saved from sinning; they would have their Lives saved, but
withal, they would have their Lusts. Yea, many divide her again; they would be
content to have some of their Sins destroyed, but they cannot leave the Lap of
Dalilah, or divorce the beloved Herodias. They cannot be cruel to the
Right-eye, or Right Hand; the Lord must pardon them in this thing, 2 Kings
5.18. Oh! be infinitely tender here; your Souls lie upon it. The sound Convert
takes a whole Christ, and takes him for all intents and purposes: without
exceptions, without limitations, without reserves. He is willing to have Christ
upon his terms upon any terms. He is willing of the Dominion ^^ Christ, as well
as deliverance by Christ; he says with Paul, Lord, what will thou have me to
do? Acts 9.6. Any thing, Lord. He sends the blank to Christ, to set down his
own Conditions, Acts 1.37. and 16.30.

The less Principal is the Laws Ordinances and Ways of Christ. The Heart that
was once set against these, and could not endure the strictness of these Bonds,
the severity of these ways, now falls in love with them, and chooses them as
its Rule and Guide for ever, Psalm 119.111, 112.

Four things (I observe) God does work in every sound Convert, with reference
to the Laws and Ways of Christ, by which you may come to know your Estates, if
you will be faithful to your own Souls; and therefore keep your Eyes upon your
Hearts as you go along.

1. The Judgment is brought to approve of them, and subscribe to them as most
righteous and most reasonable Psalm 11.112.128, 137, 138. The Mind is brought
to like the Ways of God, and the corrupt Prejudices that were once against
them, as unreasonable, and intolerable, are now removed. The Understanding
assents to them all, as holy, just and good, Romans 7 12. How is David taken up
with these Excellencies of God's Laws; How does he explain in their praises
both from their inherent Qualities and admirable Effects, Psalm 19.8, 9, 10,
etc.

There is a twofold Judgment of the Understanding, Judicium abs^iutum and
comparatum. The absolute Judgment is, when a Man thinks such a course best in
the general, but not for him, or not under the present circumstances he is in,
pro hic and nunc. Now a godly Man's Judgment is for the Ways of God; and that
not only the absolute, but comparative Judgment; he thinks them not only best
in general, but best for him; he looks upon the Rules of Religion, not only as
tolerable, but desirable; yea, more desirable than Gold, fine Gold; yea, much
fine Gold, Psalm 19.10.

His Judgments are settledly determined, that it is best to be holy, that it is
best to be strict, that it is in it self the most eligible course; and that
it is for him the wisest, and most rational, and desirable choice. Hear the
Godly Man's Judgment. I know O Lord, that thy judgments are right. I love thy
commandment; above Gold, yea, above fine Gold. I esteem all thy precepts,
concerning all things to be right; and I hate every false Way, Psalm 119.127,
121. Mark, he did approve of all that God required, and disallowed of all that
he forbad; Righteous, O Lord, and upright are thy Judgments. Thy testimonies
that thou have commanded, are righteous and very faithful. Thy word is true
from the beginning, and every one of thy righteous Judgments endures forever,
Psalm 119.86, 160, 162, 163. See how readily and fully he subscribes: he
declares his assent and consent to it, and all and every thing therein
contained.

2. The desire of the Heart is to know the whole mind of Christ, Psalm 112.124,
125, 169 and 25.4.5. He would not have one Sin undiscovered, nor be ignorant of
one Duty required. It Is the natural and earnest breathing of a sanctified
Heart: Lord, if there be any way of wickedness in me, do thou discover it. What
I know not, teach thou me; and if I have done Iniquity, I will do it no more.
The unsound is willingly ignorant, 2 Peter 3.5. loves not to come to the light,
Job 3.20. He is willing to keep such or such a Sin, and therefore is loath to
know it to be a Sin, and will not let in the Light at that Window. The gracious
Heart is willing to know the whole latitude and compass of his Maker's Law,
Psalm 119.18, 19, 27, 33, 64, 66, 68, 78, 108, 124. He receives with all
Acceptance the Word that convinces him of any Duty that ^he knew not, or
minded not before; or discovers any Sin that lay hid before, Psalm 119.11.

3. The free and resolved choice of the Will is determined for the ways of
Christ, before all the pleasures of Sin, and prosperities of the World, Psalm
119.103. 127, 162. His consent is not extorted by some Extremity of Anguish,
nor is it only a sudden and hasty resolve, but he is deliberately purposed, and
comes off freely to the choice, Psalm 17.3. and 119. 39. True, the Flesh will
rebel, yet the prevailing Part of his Will is for Christ's Laws and Government,
so that he takes them not up as his toil or burden, but his bliss, 1 John 5.3.
Psalm 119.60, 72. When the unsanctified goes in Christ's w^ys as in Chains and
Fetters, he does them naturally, Psalm 40.8. Jer. 31.13. and counts Christ's
Law his liberty, Psalm 119.32, 45. James 1.25. He is willing in the beauties of
holiness. Psalm 110.3. and has this inseparable mark; That he had rather (if
he might have his choice) live a strict and holy Life, than the most prosperous
and flourishing Life in the World. 1 Samuel 10.26. There went with Saul a band of
Men, whose Hearts God had touched. When God touched the Hearts of his chosen,
they presently follow Christ, Matthew. 4.22. (and though drawn) do freely run after
him, Cant. 1.4. and willingly offer themselves to the Service of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 7; 16. seeking him with their whole desire, 2 Chronicles. 15: 15. Fear has
its use; but this is not the main Spring of Motion with a sanctified Heart.
Christ keeps not his Subjects in by force, but is King of a willing People.
They are (through his Grace) freely resolved for his Service, and do it out of
choice, not as Slaves, but as the Son or Spouse, from a Spring of Love, and a
loyal Mind. In a Word, the Laws of Christ are the Convert's Love, Psalm
119.159, 163, 167. Desire, Verse 5, 20, 40. Delight, Verse 77, 92, 103, 111,
143. and continual Study, Verse 99, 79. Psalm 1.2.

4. The bent of his course is directed to keep God's Statutes. Psalm 119.4, 8,
167, 198. It Is the daily Care of his Life to walk with God. He seeks great
Things, he has noble Designs, though he fall too short. He aims at nothing less
than Perfection: He desires it, he reaches after it, he would not rest in any
Pitch of Grace, till he were quite rid of Sin, and had perfected Holiness,
Phil. 3.11, 12, 13, 14.

Here the Hypocrites rottenness may be discovered. He desires Holiness (as one
says well) only as a Bridge to Heaven, and enquires earnestly, what is the
least that will serve his Turn; and if he can get but so much as may just bring
him to Heaven, this is all he cares for. But the sound Convert desires Holiness
for Holiness sake, Psalm 119.97. Matthew. 5.6. and not only for Heaven's sake. He
would not b^ satisfied with so much as might save him from Hell but desires the
highest Pitch. Yet Desires are no^ enough. What is thy Way and thy Course? Is
the drift and scope of thy Life altered? Is Holines^ thy Trade, and Religion
thy Business? Romans 8.^ Matthew. 25.16. Phil. 1.20. If not, thou art short ^^
sound Conversion.

Application. And is this, that we have described the Conversion that is of
absolute necessity to Salvation? Then be informed, 1. That strait is the Ga^^
and narrow the way that leads unto Life. 2. The there be but few that find
it. 3. That there is ne^ of a Divine Power, savingly to convert a Sinner ^
Jesus Christ.

Again, then be exhorted, O Man that reade^ to turn in upon thine own self.
What says Co^^science? Does it not begin to bite? Does it ^^ ^^itch thee as
thou go? Is this thy judgment, and this thy choice, and this thy way, that
we have described? If so, then it is well. But does not thy Heart condemn thee,
and tell thee, there is such a Sin thou live in, against thy Conscience? Does
it not tell thee, there is such and such a secret way of Wickedness, that thou
make no bones of? Such or such a Duty, that thou make no Conscience of?

Does not Conscience carry thee to thy closet, and tell thee how seldom Prayer
and Reading is performed there? Does it not carry thee to thy Family, and show
thee the Charge of God, and the Souls of thy Children and Servants that be
neglected there? Does not Conscience lead thee to thy Shop, thy Trade, and tell
thee of some mystery of Iniquity there? Does it not carry thee to the Ale-shop,
or to the Sack-shop, and round thee in thine Ear for the loose Company thou
keep there, the precious time thou mis-spendest there, for the Talents of
God which thou throwest down this sink, for thy gaming, and thy swilling? etc.
Does it not carry thee into thy Secret-^^amber, and read thee a curtain Lecture?

O Conscience! do thy Duty: In the Name of the living God, I command thee,
discharge thine office. Lay hold upon this Sinner, fall upon him, arrest him,
apprehend him, undeceive him; What! Will thou flatter and sooth him, while he
lives in his Sins? Awake, O Conscience! What meanest thou, O Sleeper? What!
Have thou never a reproof in thy Mouth? What! Shall this Soul die in a careless
neglect of God and Eternity, and thou altogether hold thy Peace? What! Shall he
still go on in his Trespasses, and yet have Peace? Oh, rouse up thy self, and
do thy Work. Now let the Preacher in the Bosom speak: Cry aloud, and spare not;
lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet; let not the Blood of this Soul be required at
thy Hands.

Chap. III. Of the Necessity of Conversion.
IT may be, you are ready to say, What means this stir? And are apt to wonder
why I follow you with such earnestness, still ringing one Lesson in your Ears,
That you should repent and be converted, Acts 3.19. But I must say unto you, as
Ruth to Naeomi, Entreat me not to leave you, nor to turn aside from following
after you, Ruth 1.16. Were it a Matter of Indifferency, I would never keep so
much ado: Might you be saved as you be, I would gladly let you alone. But would
you not have me sollicitous for you, when I see you ready to perish? As the
Lord lives, before whom I am, I have not the least hopes to see one of your
Faces in Heaven, except you be converted: I utterly despair of your Salvation;
except you will be prevailed with to turn thoroughly, and give up yourselves to
God in Holiness, and Newness of Life. Has God said, Except you be born again,
you cannot see the kingdom of God? John 3.3. and yet do you wonder why your
Ministers do so plainly travail in Birth with you? Think it not strange, that I
am earnest with you to follow after Holiness, and long to see the Image of God
upon you: Never did any, nor shall any enter into Heaven by any other way but
this. The Conversion described, is not an high pitch of some taller Christians;
but every Soul that it (...) ^asseth this Universal Change.

It was a Passage of the noble Roman, when he was hasting with Corn to the City
in the Famine, and the Mariners were loath to set sail in foul weather,
Necessarium est navigare, non est necessarium vivere: Ou^ Voyage is of more
necessity than our Lives. Wha^ is it that thou do account necessary? Is thy
Brea^^ necessary? is thy Breath necessary? Then thy Conversion is much more
necessary. Indeed, this is the unu^ necessarium, the one thing necessary. Thi^
Estate is not necessary; thou may sell all for the Pearl of great Price; and
yet be a Gainer by the Purchase. Matthew. 13.46. Thy Life is not necessary, thou
may part with it for Christ to infinite Advantage Thine Esteem is not
necessary; thou may be reproached for the Name of Christ, and yet be happy
you, much more happy in reproach than in repu^^ 1 Peter 4.4. Matthew. 5.10, 11.
But thy Conversion is necessary, thy Damnation lies upon it: And is it not
needful in so important a Case to look about thee? Upon this one Point depends
thy making, or marring, to all Eternity.

But I shall more particularly show the Necessity of Conversion in Five Things;
for without this,

1. Thy Being is in vain: Is it not Pity thou should be good for nothing, an
unprofitable burden of the Earth, a wart or wen in the Body of the Universe?
Thus thou art, whilst unconverted; for thou can not answer the End of thy
Being: Is it not for the divine Pleasure thou art and were created? Rev. 4.11.
Did he not make thee for himself? Prove. 16.4. Art thou a Man, and have thou
reason? Why then bethink thyself, why and whence thy Being is. Behold God's
Workmanship in thy Body, and ask thyself, To what end did God rear this
Fabric? Consider the noble Faculties of thy Heaven-born Soul: To what end did
God bestow these Excellencies: To no other, than that thou should please
thyself and gratify thy Senses? Did God send Men, like the Swallows, into the
World, only to gather a few sticks and dirt, and build their Nests, and breed
up their young, and then away! The very Heathens could see farther than this.
Art thou so fearfully and wonderfully made, Psalm 139. 14. and do thou not
yet think with thyself, surely it was for some noble and raised end!

O Man! set thy Reason a little in the Chair* Is it not pity such a goodly
Fabric should be raised in vain! Verily, thou art in vain, except thou art for
God; better thou had no being, than not to be for him. Would thou serve thy
End? Thou must repent, and be converted; without this, thou art to us Purpose;
yea, to had Purpose.

First, To no purpose: Man unconverted, is like a choice Instrument, that has
every String broke, or out of Tune; the Spirit of the living God must repair
and tune it by the Grace of Regeneration, and sweetly move it by the power of
actuating Grace, or else thy Prayers will be but how sings, and all thy
Services will make no Music in the Ears of the most Holy, Ephesians. 2.10. Philip.
2.13. Hosea 7.14. Isa. 1.15. All thy Powers and Faculties are so corrupt in thy
Natural State, that except thou be purged from dead Works, thou can not serve
the living God, Heb. 9.14. Titus 1.15.

An Unsanctified Man cannot work the Work of God. 1. He has no Skill in it. He
is altogether as unskilful in the Work, as in the Word of Righteousness, Heb.
5.13. There are great Mysteries, as well in the Practices, as Principles of
Godliness; now the Unregenerate knows not the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 13: 11.1 Tim. 3.16. You may as well expect him that never
learned the Alphabet, to read; or look for goodly Music of the Lute, from one
that never set his Hand to an Instrument, as that a natural Man should do the
Lord any pleasing Service: He must first be taught of God, John 6.45. taught to
pray, Luke 11.1. taught to profit, Isa. 48. 17. taught to go, Hosea 11.3. or
else he will be utterly at a Loss. 2. He has no Strength for it, How weak is
his Heart? Ezekiel. 16.30. He is presently tired. The Sabbath, what a weariness is
it, Mal. 1 13. He is without strength, Romans 5.6. yea, stark dead in Sin, Ephesians.
2.5, 3. He has no Mind to it. He desires not the Knowledge of God's ways, Job
21.14. He does not know them, and he does not ear to know them, Psalm 82 5. He
knows not, neither will he understand. 4 He has neither due Instruments, nor
Materials for it. A Man may as well hew the Marble without Tools, or limn
without Colors or Instruments, or build without Materials, as perform any
acceptable Service without the Graces of the Spirit, which are both the
Materials and Instruments in the Work. Almsgiving is not a Service of God, but
of Vainglory, unless dealt forth by the Hand of divine Love. What is the
Prayer of the Lips without Grace in the Heart, but the Carcass without the
Life? What are all our Confessions, unless (...) be Exercises of godly Sorrow,
and unfeigned Repentance? What our Petitions, unless animated all along with
holy Desires, and Faith in divine Attributes and Promises? What our Praises and
Thanksgivings, unless from the Love of God, and a holy Gratitude, and Sense of
God's Mercies in the Heart? So that a Man may as well expect that Trees should
speak, or look for Logic from the Brutes, or Motion from the Dead, as for any
Service holy and acceptable to God from the Unconverted. When the Tree is evil,
how can the Fruit be good? Matthew. 7.18.

Secondly, To bad purpose. The unconverted Soul is a very Cage of unclean
Birds, Rev. 18 2. a Sepulcher full of corruption and rottenness, Matthew. 23.27.
a loathsome Carcass, full of crawling Worms, and sending forth a hellish and
most noisome Savor in the Nostrils of God, Psalm 14.3. O dreadful Case! Do
thou not yet see a change to be needful? Would it not have grieved one, to have
seen the golden consecrated Vessels of God's Temple turned into quaffing Bowls
of Drunkenness, and polluted with the Idols Service, Dan. 5.2, 3. Was ^^ such
an Abomination to the Jews, when Antiochus set up the Picture of a Swine at the
Entrance of the Temple? How much more abominable then would it have been, to
have had the very Temple itself turned into a Stable or a Sty, and to have the
Holy of Holies served like the House of Baal; to have the Image of God taken
down, and be turned into a Draught-house? 2 Kings 10.27. This is the very Case
of the Unregenerate; All thy Members are turned into Instruments of
unrighteousness, Romans 6.19. Servants of Satan: and thy ^nmost powers into
receptacles of uncleanness. Ephesians. 2.2. Titus 1.15. You may see the goodly Guests
within, by what come out. For out of the Heart proceed evil Thoughts, Murders,
Adulteries, Fernicatione, Thefts, False Witness, Blasphemies, etc. This black
Guard discovers what a Hell there is within.

O Abuse insufferable! to see a Heaven-born Soul abased to the filthiest
Drudgery; to see the Glory of God's Creation, the chief of the Works of God,
the Lord of the Universe, a lapping with the Prodigal at the trough, or licking
up with greediness the most loathsome Vomit? Was it such a lamentation to see
those that did feed delicately, to sit desolate in the street; and the precious
Sons of Sion, comparable to fine Gold, to be esteemed as earthen pitchers; and
those that were clothed in Scarlet, to embrace dunghills, Lam. 4.2, 5. And is
it not much more fearful, to see the only thing that has Immortality in this
low^ world, and carries the stamp of God, to become as a Vessel wherein there
is no Pleasure, Jer. ^2.28. (which is but a modest Expression of the Vessel Men
put to the most sordid Use): O Indignity untolerable! Better thou were dashed
in a thousand pieces, than continue to be abused to so filthy a Service.

II. Not only Man, but the whole visible Creation is in vain without this:
Beloved, God has made all the visible creatures in Heaven and Earth for the
Service of Man, and Man only is the Spokesman for all the rest. Man is in the
Universe, like the Tongue in the Body, which speaks for all the Members: The
other Creatures cannot praise their Maker, but by dumb signs hint to Man, that
he should speak for them: Man is (as it were) the High Priest of God's
Creation, to offer the Sacrifice of Praise for all his Fellow Creatures, Psalm
147, and 148, and 250. The Lord expects a Tribute of Praise from all his
works, Psalm 103.22. Now all the rest do bring their Tribute to Man, and pay it
in by his Hand: So then, if Man be false, and faithless, and selfish, God is
wronged of all, and shall have no active Glory from his Works.

O dreadful Thought to think of! That God should build such a World as this,
^^d And lay out such infinite Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness thereupon, and
all in vain; and Man should be guilty, at last, of robbing and spoiling him of
the Glory of all: Oh think of this! while thou art unconverted, all the Offices
of the Creatures to thee are in vain: Thy Me^t nourishes thee in vain, the Sun
holds forth his light to thee in vain, the Stars that serve thee in their
Courses, by their most powerful, though hidden Influence, Judg' 5.20. Hos. 2.21,
22. do it in vain; thy Clothes warm thee in vain; thy Beast carries thee in
vain: In a Word, the unwearied labor and continual travel of the whole
Creation (as to thee) is in vain. The Service of all the Creatures, that drudge
for thee, and yield forth their Strength unto thee (that therewith thou
should serve their Maker) is all but lost Labor. Hence the whole Creation
groaneth under the Abuse of the unsanctified World, Romans 8.22. that pervert
them to the service of their Lusts, quite contrary to the very end of their
Being.

III. Without this, thy Religion is in vain, J^. 1.26. All thy religious
Performances will be but lost; for they can neither please God, Romans 8.8. nor
save thy Soul, 1 Cor. 13.2, 3. which are the very Ends of Religion. Be thy
services never so precious, yet God has no Pleasure in them, Isa. 1.14. Mal.
1.10. Is not that Man's Case dreadful, whose sacrifices are as murder, and
whose prayers are a breath of abomination, Isa. 66.3. Prove 28.9. Many, under
Convictions, think they will set upon mending, and that a few Prayers and Alms
will solve all again: But alas, Sirs! while your Hearts remain unsanctified,
your Duties will not pass. How punctual was Jehu! and yet all was rejected,
because his Heart was not upright, 2 Kings 10, with Hos. 1.4. How blameless was
Paul? and yet, being unconverted, all was but loss, Philip. 3.6, 7. Men think
they do much in attending God's Service, and are ready to twit him with it,
Isa. 58.3. Matthew. 7.22. and set him down so much their debtor, when as (their
Persons being unsanctified) their Duties cannot be accepted.

O Soul! do not think, when thy Sins pursue thee, a little praying and
reforming thy course will pacify God: Thou must begin with thine Heart; if that
be not renewed, thou can no more please God, than one that having unspeakably
offended thee, should bring thee his Vomit in a Dish to pacify thee; or having
fallen into the Mi^e, should think with his loathed Embraces to reconcile thee.

It is a great Misery to labor in the Fire. The Poets could not invent a
worser hell for Sis^plous, than to be getting the barrel still up the hill, and
then that it should presently fall down again, and renew his labor. God
threatens it, as the greatest of temporal Judgments, that they should build and
not inhabit, plant and not gather, and their Labors should be eat up by
Strangers, Deuteronomy. 23.30, 38, 39, 41. Is it so great a misery to lose our common
labors, to sow in vain, and build in vain? how much more to lose our pains in
Religion, to pray and hear, and fast in vain? This is an undoing and eternal
loss. Be not deceived, if thou go on in thy sinful state, though thou should
spread forth thine Hands, God will hide his Eyes; though thou make many prayers,
he will not hear, Isa. 1.15 If a Man without Skill set about our Work, and man
it in the doing, though he take much Pains, we give him but small thanks. God
will be worshipped after the due Order, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. If a Servant do our
Work, but quite contrary to our Order, he shall have rather stripes than
praise. God's Work must be done according to God's mind, or he will not be
pleased; and this cannot be, except it be done with a holy Heart, 2 Chronicles. 25.2.

IV. Without this, thy bo^^s are in vain, Job 12.13. The Lord has rejected thy
Confidence, Jer. 2.37.

First, Thy hopes of Comfort here are in vain. It Is not only necessary to the
Safety, but Comfort o^ your Condition, that you be converted. Without this, you
shall not know Peace, Isa. 59. Without the Fear of God, you cannot have the
Comforts of the Holy Ghost, Acts 9.31. God speaks peace only to his People, and
to his Saints, Psalm 35.8. If you have a false Peace, continuing in your Sins,
it is not of God's speaking, and then you may guess the Author. Sin is a real
Sickness, Isai. 1.5. yea, the worst of Sickness; it is a Leprosy in the Head,
Lev. 13.44. the Plague in the Heart, 1 Kings 8: 31. it is brokeness in the
Bones, Psalm 51.8. it pierces, it wounds, it racketh, it tormenteth, 1 Timothy
1.10. A Man may as well expect Ease, when his Diseases are in their strength,
or his Bones out of Joint, as true Comfort, while in his Sins.

O wretched Man, that can have no Ease in this Case but what comes from the
Deadliness of the Disease! You shall have the poor sick Man, saying in his
lightness, He is well, when you see Death i^ his Face: He will needs up and
about his Business, when the very next step is like to be into the Grave. The
unsanctified often see nothing amiss; they think themselves whole, and cry not
out for the Physician; but this shows the Danger of their Case.

Sin does naturally breed Distempers, and Disturbances in the Soul. What a
continual tempest and commotion is there in a discontented Mind? What an eating
evil is inordinate care? What is Passion, but a very Fever in the Mind? What is
Lost, but a Fire in the Bones? What is Pride, but a deadly Tympany, or
Covetousness but an unsatiable and unsufferable Thirst? or Malice and Envy, but
Venom in the very Heart? Spiritual Sloth is but a Scurvy in the Mind, and
carnal Security a mortal Lethargy? and how can that Soul have true Comfort that
is under so many Diseases? but converting Grace cures, and so eases the Mind,
and prepares the Soul for a settled, standing, immortal Peace, Great Peace have
they that love thy Commandments, and nothing shall offend them, Psalm. 119.165.
They are the Ways of Wisdom, that afford Pleasure and Peace, Prove. 3.17. David
had infinitely more pleasure in the Word, than in all the Delights of his
Court, Psalm. 119.103, 127: The Conscience cannot be truly pacified, till s^^dly
purified, Heb. 10.22. Cursed is that Peace, that is maintained in a Way of Sin,
Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. Two Sorts of Peace are more to be dreaded, than all the
Troubles in the World; Peace with Sin, and Peace in Sin.

Secondly, Thy hopes of Salvation hereafter are in vain; yea, worse than in
vain, they are most injurious to God, most pernicious to thy self: There is
Death, Desperation, Blasphemy in the Bowels of this Hope. 1. There is Death in
it. Thy Confidence shall be rooted out of thy Tabernacles (God will up with it
root and branch) it shall bring thee to the King of Terrors, Job 18.14. Though
thou may lean upon this House, it will not stand, Job 8.15. But will prove
like a ruinous building, which when a Man trusts to, it falls down about his
Ears. 2. There is Desperation in it. Where is the hope of the Hypocrite, when
God takes away his soul? Job 27.8. Then there is an end for ever of his Hope.
Indeed, the Hope of the Righteous has an end; but then it is not a destructive,
but a perfective end; his hope ends in fruition, others in frustration, Prove.
10. 28. The Godly must say at Death, It is finished; but the Wicked. It is
perished; and in too sad earnest bemoan himself (as Job in a mistake) Where now
is my hope? he has destroyed me, I am gone, and my hope is removed like a
tree, Job 19.10. The righteous has hope in his Death, Prove. 14.32. When Nature
is dying, his Hopes are living; when his Body is languishing, his Hopes are
flourishing; his Hope is a living Hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. eis alpida Zodan; but
others a dying, yea, a damning, Soul-undoing Hope. When a wicked Man dies, his
Expectation shall perish; and the Hope of unjust Men perishes, Prove. 11.7. It
shall be cut off, and prove like the Spider's Web, Job 8.14. which he spins out
of his own Bowels; but then comes Death with the Broom, and takes down all, and
so there is an eternal end of his Confidence, wherein he trusted: For the Eyes
of the Wicked shall fail, and their Hopes shall be as the giving up of the
Ghost, Job 11.20. Wicked Men are settled in the Carnal Hope, and will not be
beaten out of it: They hold it fast, they will not let it go. Yea but Death
will knock off their fingers: Though we cannot undeceive them, Death and Judgment
will: When Death strikes his dart through thy Liver, it will let out thy Soul,
and thy Hopes together. The unsanctified have Hope only in this Life, 1 Cor.
15.19. and therefore are, of all Men, most miserable: When Death comes, it lets
them out into the amazing Gulf of endless Desperation. 3. There is Blasphemy in
it. To hope we shall be saved, though continuing unconverted, is to hope we shall
prove God a liar. He has told you, that so merciful and pitiful as he is, he
will never save you notwithstanding, if you go on in Ignorance, or a Course of
Unrighteousness, Isa. 27.11. 1 Cor. 6.9. In a Word, he has told you, that
whatever you be, or do, nothing shall avail you to Salvation, without you be
New Creatures, Gal. 6.15. Now, to say God is merciful, and we hope he will save
us nevertheless, is to say, in effect, we hope God will not do as he says. We
may not set God's Attributes at variance: God is resolved to glorify Mercy, but
not with the Prejudice of Truth; as the presumptuous Sinner will find, to his
everlasting Sorrow.

Object. Why but we hope in Jesus Christ, we put our whole Trust in God, and
therefore doubt not but we shall be saved.

Ans. 1. This is not to hope in Christ, but against Christ. To hope to see the
Kingdom of God without being born again; to hope to find eternal Life in the
broad Way, is to hope Christ will prove a false Prophet. It Is David's Plea, I
hope in thy Word, Ps. 119.81. but this hope is against the Word. Show me a Word
of Christ for thy hope, that he will save thee in thine Ignorance, or profane
Neglects of his Service, and I will never go to shake thy Confidence.

2. God does with abhorrence reject this hope. Those condemned in the Prophet,
went on in their Sins, yet (says the Text) they will lean upon the Lord, Micah
3.11. God will not endure to be made a prop to Men in their Sins: The Lord
rejected those presumptuous Sinners, that went on still in their Trespasses,
and yet would stay themselves upon the God of Israel, Isa. 48.1, 2. as a Man
would shake off the Briars (as one said well) that cleaves to his Garment.

3. If thy Hope be any thing worth, it will purify thee from thy Sins, 1 John
3.3. but cursed is that hope, which does cherish Men in their Sins.

Object. Would you have us to despair?

Answ. You must despair of ever coming to Heaven as you are, Acts 2.37. that
is, while you remain unconverted You must despair ever to see the Face of God,
without holiness; but you must by no means despair of finding Mercy, upon your
thorough Repentance and Conversion; neither must you despair of attaining to
Repentance and Conversion, in the Use of God's Means.

V. Without this, all that Christ has done and suffered will be (as to you) in
vain, John 13.8. Tit. 2.14. That is, it will not avail to your Salvation. Many
urge this as a sufficient ground for their Hopes, that Christ died for Sinners:
But I must tell you, Christ never died to save impenitent and unconverted
Sinners (so continuing) 2 Timothy 2.19. A great Divine was wont, in his private
Dealings with Souls, to ask two Questions, 1. What has Christ done for you? 2.
What has Christ wrought in you? Without the Application of the Spirit in
Regeneration, we can have no saving Interest in the Benefits of Redemption. I
tell you from the Lord, Christ himself cannot save you, if you go on in this
estate.

I. It were against his Trust. The Mediator is the Servant of the Father, Isa.
42.1. shows his Commission from him, acts in his Name, and pleads his command
for his Justification, John 10.18, 36. and 6.38, 40. And God has committed all
Things to him, entrusted his own Glory, and the Salvation of the Elect with
him, Mat. 11.27. Job. 17.2. Accordingly, Christ gives his Father an account of
both parts of his trust, before he leaves the World, Joh. 17.4, 6, 12. Now
Christ should quite cross his Father's Glory, his greatest Trust, if he should
save Men in their Sins; for this were to overturn all his Councils; and to
offer Violence to all his Attributes.

First, To overturn all his Counsels: Of which this is the Order, that Men
should be brought through Sanctification to Salvation, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. He has
chosen them, that they should be holy, Ephesians, 1.4. They are elected to pardon and
life throught Sanctification, 1 Pet. 1.2. If thou can repeal the Law of God's
immutable Counsel, or corrupt him whom the Father has sealed, to go directly
against his commission, then, and not otherwise, may thou get to Heaven in
this Condition. To hope that Christ will save thee while unconverted, is to
hope that Christ will falsify his Trust. He never did, not will save one Soul,
but whom the Father has given him in Election, and drawn to him in effectual
Calling, John 6.34, 37. Be assured, Christ will save none in a Way contrary to
his Father's Will, John 6.38.

2dly. To offer Violence to all his Attributes. 1. To his Justice: For the
Righteousness of God's Judgment lies, in rendering to all according to their
Works, Romans 2.5, 6. Now, should Men sow to the Flesh, and yet of the Spirit
reap everlasting Life, Gal. 6.7, 8. where were the Glory of Divine Justice,
since it should be given to the Wicked according to the work of the Righteous?
2. To his Holiness: If God should not only save Sinners, but save them in their
Sins, his most pure and strict Holiness would be exceedingly defaced. The
unsanctified is, in the Eyes of God's Holiness, worse than a swine or viper,
Mat. 23.33. 2 Pet. 2.22. Now, what cleanly Nature could endure to have the
filthy Swine bed and board with him in his Parlour or Bedchamber? It would
offer the extremest Violence to the infinite Purity of the divine Nature, to
have such to dwell with him. They cannot stand in his Judgment, they cannot
abide in his Presence, Psalm 1.5. and 5.4, 5. If holy David would not endure
such in his House, no nor in his sight, Psalm 101.3, 7. shall we think God
will? Should he take Men as they be, from ^he Trough, to the Table; from the
Harlot's Lips, from the Sty and Draff, to the Glory of Heaven, the World would
think God were at no such a distance from Sin, nor had such dislike of it, as
we are told he has: They would conclude, God were altogether such a one as
themselves, (as they wickedly did, but from the very Forbearance of God, Psalm
50.21) 3. To his Vera^y: For God has declared from Heaven, That if any shall
say, he shall have Peace, though he should go on in the Imagination of his Heart:
his Wrath shall smoke against that Man, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 20. That they (only) that
confess and forsake their Sins, shall find Mercy, Prove. 28.13. That they that
shall enter into his Hill, must be of clean Hands, and a pure Heart, Psalm
24.3, 4. Where were God's Truth, if notwithstanding all this, he should bring
Men to Salvation without Conversion? O desperate Sinner, that dare to hope
that Christ will put the Lie upon his Father, and nullify his Word, to save
thee! 4. To his Wisdom* For this were to throw away the choicest Mercies on
them (...) would not value them, nor were any way suited to them. First, They
would not value them. The ^nsanctified Sinner puts but little Price upon GOD's
great Salvation, Matthew. 22.5. He sets no more by Christ, than the Whole by the
Physician, Matthew. 9. 12. He prizeth not his Balm, values not his Cure tramples
upon his Blood, Heb. 20, 29. Now, would it stand with Wisdom, to force pardon
and life upon them that would give him no thanks for them? Will the All-wise
God (when he has forbidden us to d^ it) thr^ his holy Things to Dogs, and his
Pearls to Swine, that would (as it were) but turn again, and rend him? Matthew.
7.6. This would ma^^ Mercy to be despised indeed Wisdom (...) Life be given in
a way suitable to God's Honor and that God provide for the securing his own
Glory, as well as Man's Felicity. It would be dishonor able to God to set his
Jewels on the snouts of Swine (continuing such) and to bestow his choicest
Riche^ on them that have more pleasure in their Swil^, tha^ the heavenly
Delights that he does offer. God should lose the praise and glory of his Grace,
if he should cast it away on them that were not only unworth^ but unwilling
Secondly, They are no way suite to them. The Divine Wisdom is seen in suitin^
things each to other, the Means to the End, the Object to the Faculty, the
Quality of the Gift to the Capacity of the Receiver. Now, if Christ should
bring the (...) a^e Sinn^^ to Heaven, he c^^ take no more Felicity there than a
Beast, if you should bring him into a beautiful Room, to the Society of learned
Men, and a well-furnished Table; when as the poor thing had much rather be
grazing with his Fellow brutes. Alas! what should an unsanctified Creature do
in Heaven^ He could take no Content there, because nothing suits him. The Place
does not suit him; he would be out piscis in arido, quite out of his Element,
as a Swine in the Parlour or a Fish out of Water. The Company does not suit
him: What Communion has Darkness with Light? Corruption with Perfection? Filth
and Rottenness with Glory and Immortality? The Employment does not sui^ him:
The Anthems of Heaven fit not his Mouth, suit not his Ear. Can thou charm thy
Beast with Music? Or will thou bring him to thy Organ, and expect that he
should mak^ thee melody, or keep time with t^ skilful Qui^e? Or, had ^he Skill,
he would ha^ no Will* and so could find no Pleasure, no more than the nauseous
Stomach in the M^^, on which it has newly surfeited. Spread thy Table with
delicates, before a languishing Patient, and it will be but a very Offense.
Alas! if the poor Man think a Sermon long, and say of a Sabbath, What a
W^^^iness is it? Mal. 1.13. how miserable would he think it to be held to it to
all Eternity? 5 To his Immutability, or else to his Om^isciency, or
Omnipotency. For this is enacted in the ^nclave of Heaven, and enrolled in the
Decrees of ^he Court above, that none but the Pure in Heart shall ever see God,
Matthew. 5.8. This is laid up with him, and sealed among his Treasures. Now, if
Christ yet bring any to Heaven unconverted, either (...) must get them in
without his Father's Knowledge, and then where is his Omnisciency? Or against
his Will, and then where were his Omnipotency? Or he must change his Will, and
the ^here were his Immutability?

^^^ner, will thou not yet give up thy vain Hop^ ^eing saved in this Condition?
Says Bildad, Shall ^arth ^^ forsaken for thee, or the Rocks moved out of their
place? Job 18.4. May not I, much more, reason so with thee? Shall the Laws of
Heaven be reversed for thee? Shall the everlasting Foundations be overturned
for thee? Shall Christ put out the Eye of his Father's Omnisciency, or shorten
the Arm of his eternal Power for thee? Shall divine Justice be violated for
thee, or the brightness of the Glory of his Holiness be blemished for thee? Oh
the Impossibility, Absu^^ity, Blasphemy, that is in such a Confidence! To think
Christ will ever save thee in this Condition, is to make thy Savior to become
a Sinner, and to do more wrong to the infinite Majesty, than all the Wicked on
Earth, or Devils in Hell ever did, or could: And yet will thou not give up such
a blasphemous Hope?

II. Against his Word: We need not say, Who shall ascend into Heaven, to bring
down Christ from above? ^ who shall descend into the Deep, to bring up Christ
from beneath? The Word is nigh us, Romans 10.6, (...) Are you agreed that Christ
shall end the Co^ Hear then his own Words, Except you be (...) you shall in no
wise enter into the Kingdom of Hea^ Matthew. 18.3. You must be born again, John
3.7. If I wash thee not, thou have no Part in me, John 13.8. Repent, or perish,
Luke 13.3. One Word, one would think, were enough from Christ; but how often and
earnestly does he reiterate it? Verily, verily, verily, Except a Man be born
again, he shall not see the Kingdom of God, John 3.3, 5 Yea, he does not only
assert, but prove the Necessity of the New birth, viz. from the Fleshliness and
Filthiness of Man's First birth, John 3.6. by Reason of which, Man is n^ more
fit for Heaven, than the Beast is for the Chamber of the King's Presence. And
will thou yet believe thine own presumptuous Confidence, directly against
Christ's Words? He must go quite against the Law o^ his Kingdom, and Rule of
his Judgment to Save thee in this Estate.

III. Against his Oath. He has lifted up his Hand to Heaven, h^ has sworn,
that those that remain in Unbelief, and know not his Ways (that is, are
ignorant of them, o^ disobedient to them) shall not enter into his Rest, Psalm
95.11. Heb. 3.18. And will thou not yet believe, O Sinne^ that he is in
earnest? Can thou hope he will be forsworn for thee? The Covenant of Grace is
confirmed by an Oath, and sealed by Blood, Heb. 6.17. and 9.^6, 18.19. Matthew.
20.28. but all must be made void, and another way to Heaven found out, if thou
be saved, living and dying unsanctified. God is come in his lowest and last
Terms with Man, and has condescended as far as with honor he could, has set
up his Pillars with a me plus ultra. Man cannot be saved, while unconverted,
except they could get another Covenant made, and the whole Frame of the Gospel
(which was established forever, with such dreadful solemnities) quite altered.
And would not this be a distracted Hope?

IV. Against his Honor. God will so show his love to the Sinner, as withal to
show his hatred to Sin. Therefore, he that names the name of Jesus must depart
from Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. and deny all Ungodliness: And he that has hope of
Life by Christ, must purify himself, as he is pure, 1 John 3 3. Titus 2.12.
otherwise Christ would be thought a favourer of Sin. The Lord Jesus would have
all the World to know, though he pardon sin, he will not protect it. If holy
David shall say, Depart from me all ye workers of Iniquity, Psalm 6.8. and
shall shut the Doors against them, Psalm 101.7. shall not such much more expect
it from Christ's Holiness? would it be for his Honor, to have the Dogs to the
Table, or to lodge the Swine with his Children, or to have Abraham's Bosom to
be a Nest of Vipers?

V. Against his Offices, God has exalted him to be a Prince and a Savior,
Acts 5.31. He should act against both, should he save Men in their Sins? It is
the Office of a King, Parcere subjectis, and debellare superbos.

To be a Terror to Evil doers, and a Praise to them that do well, Romans 14.34.
He is a Minister of God, a Revenger to execute Wrath on him that does Evil.
Now, should Christ favor the ungodly, (so continuing) and take those to reign
with him that would not that he should reign over them? Luke 19.27. this were
quite against his Office; He therefore reigns, that he may put his Enemies
under his Feet, 1 Cor. 15.24. Now, should he lay them in his Bosom, he should
cross the end of his regal power. It belongs to Christ, as a King, to subdue
Hearts, and stay the Lusts of his chosen, Psalm 45.5. and 110.3. What King
would take the rebels, in open hostility, into his Court? What were this, but
to betray life, kingdom, Government, and all together? It Christ be a King, he
must have Homage, Honors, Subjection, etc. Mal. 1.6. Now, to save Men while in
their natural enmity, were to obscure his Dignity, lose his Authority, bring a
Contempt on his Government, and sell his dear bought Rights for naught.

Again, as Christ should not be a Prince, so neither a Savior, if he should do
this; for his Salvation is spiritual: He is called Jesus, because he saves his
People from their Sins, Matthew. 1.21. so that should he save them in their Sins,
he should be neither Lord nor Jesus. To save Men from the Punishment, and not
from the Power of Sin, were to do his Work by halves, and be an imperfect
Savior. His Office, a^ the Deliverer, is, to turn away Ungodliness from Jacob
Rom 11.26. He is sent to bless Men, in turning ^^o^ their Iniquities, Acts
3.26. to make an end of Sin, Dan 9.24 So that he should destroy his own Design^
and nullify his Offices, to save Men abiding in their unconverted State.

Application. Arise then; what meanest thou, O Sleeper? Awake, O secure Sinner,
lest thou be consumed in thine Iniquities Say, as the ^epers, If w^ sit here,
we shall die, 2 Kings 7.3, 4. Verily, it is no^ more certain that thou art now
out of Hell, tha^ that thou shall speedily be in it, except thou repen^ and be
converted; there is but this one Door for the^ to escape by: Arise then, O
Sluggard, and shake o^ thine Excuses; How long will thou slumber, an^ fold
thine Hands to Sleep, Prove. 6.10, 11. Wi^ thou lie down in the midst of the
Sea, or sleep on the top of the Mast? Prove. 23.34. There is no Remedy; but thou
must either turn or burn. There is an unchangeable Necessity of the Change of
thy Condition, except thou art resolved to abide the worst of it, and try it
out with the Almighty. If thou love thy Life, O Man, arise and come away.
Methinks I see the Lord Jesus laying the merciful Hands of an holy Violence
upon thee; Methinks he carries it like the Angels to Lot, Genesis 19.15. etc Then
the Angels hastened Lot, saying, Arise, lest thou be consumed. And while he
lingered, the Men laid held upon his H^^d, the Lord being merciful unto him, and
they brought him without the City, and said, Escape for thy Life, stay not in
all the Plain, escape to the Mountain, lest thou be consumed.

Oh, how wilful will thy Destruction be, if thou should yet harden thyself in
thy sinful State! But none of you can say, but you have had fair Warning. Yet
methinks I cannot tell how to leave you so: It is not enough to me to have
delivered my own Soul. What, shall I go away without my errand? Will none of
you arise and follow me? Have I been all this while speaking to the Wind? Have
I been charming the deaf Adder, or allaying the tumbling Ocean with Arguments?
Do I speak to the Trees or Rocks, or to Men? To the tombs and monuments of the
Dead, or to a living Auditory? If you be Men, and not senseless Stocks, stand
still, and consider whither you are going: If you have the Reason and
Understanding of Men, dare not to run into the Flames and fall into Hell with
your Eyes open; but ^ethink yourselves, and set to the Work of Repen^ance What,
Men, and yet run into the Pit, when ^he very Beasts will not be forced in!
What, endued with Reason, and yet dally with Death and Hell, and the Vengeance
of the Almighty! Are Men here^ distinguished from the very Brutes, that they
have ^o Foresight of, and Care to provide for the Things ^ come; and will you
not hasten your Escape from ^rnal Torments? Oh, show yourselves Men, an^ let
Reason prevail with you: Is it a reasonable thing for you to contend against
the Lord, your Maker? Isa. 45.9 or to harden yourselves against his Word? Job
9.4. as though the Strength of Israel would lie? 1 Samuel 15.29. Is it reasonable,
that an understanding Creature should lose, yea live quite against the very End
of his Being, and be as a broken Pitcher, only fit for the Dunghill! Is it
tolerable, that the only Thing in this World that God has made capable of
knowing his Will, and bringing him Glory, should yet live in Ignorance of his
Maker, and be unserviceable to his Use, yea, should be engaged against him, and
spit his Venom in the Face of his Creator, Hear, O Heavens, and give Ear, O
Earth, and let the Creatures without Sense be judge, if this be Reason, That
Man when God has nourished and brought him up, should rebel against him? Isa.
1.2. Judge in your ownselves: Is it a reasonable Undertaking, for Briars and
Thorns to set themselves in Battle against the devouring Fire, Isa. 27.4. Or
for the Potsheard of the Earth to strive with his Maker^ If you will say, This
is Reason; surely the Eye o^ Reason is quite put out: And if this be not Reason
then there is no Reason that you should continue a^ you be, but it is all the
Reason in the World, you should forthwith repent and turn.

What shall I say? I could spend my self in the Argument. Oh, that you would
but hearken to me that you would presently set upon a new Course* Will you not
be made clean? When shall it o^ be? What! Will Nobody be persuaded? Reader
shall I prevail with thee for one? Will thou (...) down and consider the
forementioned Arguments and debate it, whether it be not best to turn? Com^ and
let us reason together: Is it good for thee to b^ here? Will thou sit still,
till the Tide come in upon thee? Is it good for thee to try whether God (...)
be so good as his Word; and not to harden thysel^ in a Conceit that all is well
with thee, while the^ remainest unsanctified?

(...) I know you will not ^e persuaded, but the greatest Part will be as they
have been, and do as they have done I know the Drunkard will to his Vomit
again, and the Deceiver will to his Deceit again, and the lustful Wanton to his
Dalliance again: Alas! that I must leave you where you were; in your Ignorance
or Looseness, or in your lifeless Formality and customary Devotions! However, I
will sit down and bemoan my fruitless Labors, and spend some Sighs over my
perishing Hearers.

O distracted Sinners! What will their End be? What will they do in the Day of
Visitation? Whither will they flee for Help? Where will they leave their Glory?
Is. 10 3 How powerfully has Sin bewitched them? How effectually has the god
of this World blinded them? How strong is their Delusion? How uncircumcised
their Ears? How obdurate their Hearts? Satan has them at his Beck. But how
long may I call, and can get no Answer? I may dispute with them Year after
Year, and they will give me the hearing, and that is all. They must and will
have their Sins, say what I will: Though I tell them there is Death in the Cup,
yet they will take it up; Though I tell them it is the Broad-way, and ends in
Destruction, yet they will go on in it: I warn them, yet cannot win them.
Sometimes I think, the Mercies of God will melt them, and his winning
Invitations will overcome them, but I find them as they were. Sometimes, that
the Terror of the Lord will persuade them; yet neither will this do it. They
will approve the Word, like the Sermon, commend the Preacher; but they will yet
live as they did They will not deny me, yet they will not obey me. They will
flock to the Word of God, and sit before me as his People, and hear my Words;
but they will not do them. They value, and will plead for Ministers, and I am
to them as the lovely Song of one that has ^ pleasant Voice; yet I cannot get
them to come under Christ's Yoke. They love me, and will be ready to say, they
will do any thing for me; but for my Life, I cannot persuade them to leave
their Sins, to fore-go their evil Company, their Intemperance, their unjust
Gain, etc. I cannot prevail with them to set up Prayer in their Families and
C^osets, yet they will promise me, like the forward Son, that said, I go, Sir,
but went not, Matthew 21.^0. I cannot persuade them to learn the Principles of
Religion, though else they will die without Knowledge. Job 36.12. I tell them
their Misery, but they will not believe but it is well enough: If I tell them
particularly, I fear for such Reasons their state is bad, they will judge me
censorious, or if they be at present a little awakened, are quickly lulled
asleep by Satan again, and have lost the Sense of all.

Alas for my poor Hearers! must they perish at last by Hundreds, when Ministers
would so fain save them? What Course shall I use with them, that I have not
tried? What shall I do for the Daughter of my People? Jer. 9.7. O Lord God,
help. Alas! shall I leave them thus? If they will not hear me, yet do thou hear
me: Oh that they might yet live in thy Sight! O Lord, save them, or else they
perish. My Heart would melt to see their Houses on Fire about their Ears, when
they were fast asleep in their Beds, and shall not my Soul be moved within me,
to see them falling into endless Perdition! Lord, have Compassion, and save
them out of the Burning: Put forth thy divine Power, and the Work will be done:
But as for me, I cannot prevail.

Chap. IV. Showing the Marks of the Unconverted.
WHile we keep aloof in generals, there is little fruit to be expected: It is
the Hand fight that does execution. David is not awakened by the Prophet's
hovering at a Distance, in parabolical Insinuations: He is forced to close with
him, and tell him Home, Thou art the Man. Few will, in Words, deny the
Necessity of the New Birth; but they have a Self-deluding Confidence, that the
work is not now to do: And because they know themselves free from that gross
Hypocrisy, that does take up Religion merely for a color to deceive others,
and for the Covering of wicked Designs, they are confident of their Sincerity,
and suspect not that more close Hypocrisy (where the greatest Danger lies) by
which a Man deceives his own Soul, Ja. 1.26. But Man's deceitful Heart is such
a matchless Cheat; and Self-delusion so reigning and so fatal a Disease, that I
know not whether be the greater, the difficulty, or displicency or the
necessity of the undeceiving Work that I am now upon. Alas, for my unconverted
Hearers, they must be undeceived, or undone. But how shall this be effected?
Hic labor, hoc opus est.

Help, O All searching Light! and let thy discerning Eye discover the rotten
Foundation of the Self deceiver; and lead me, O Lord God, as thou did the
Prophet, into the Chambers of Imagery, and dig through the Wall of Sinners
Hearts, and discover the hidden Abominations that are lurking out of sight, in
the dark. Oh send thine Angel before me, to open the sundry Wards of their
Hearts, as thou did before Peter, and make even the Iron gates to fly open of
their own Accord. And as Jonathan no sooner tasted the Honey, but his Eyes were
enlightened; so grant, O Lord, that when the poor deceived Souls with whom I
have to do, shall cast their Eyes upon these Lines, their Minds may be
illuminated, and their Consciences convinced and awakened, that they may see
with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and be converted, that thou may
heal them.

This must be premised, before we proceed to the Discovery, That it is most
certain Men may have a confident Persuasion, that their Hearts and States be
good, and yet be unsound. Hear the Truth himself, who shows in Laodicea's Case,
that Men may be wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked, and
yet not know it; yea, they may be confident they are rich, and increased in
Grace* Rev. 3.17. There is a Generation that is pure in their own Eyes, and yet
is not washed from their own Filthiness, Prove. 30.12. Who better persuaded of
his Case than Paul, while yet he remained unconverted? Romans 7.9. So that they
are miserably deceived, that take a strong Confidence, for a sufficient
Evidence. They that have no better Proof, than barely a strong Persuasion, that
they are converted, are certainly as yet Strangers to Conversion.

But to come more close; as it was said of the Adherents of Antichrist, so
here; some of the Unconverted carry their Mark in the Foreheads more openly;
and some in their Hands more covertly. The Apostle reckons up some, upon whom
he writes the Sentence of Death, as in these dreadful Catalogues, which I
beseech you to attend with all Diligence, Ephesians. 5.5, 6. For this you know, that
no Whore-monger, nor unclean Person, nor covetous Man, who is an Idolater, has
any Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God: Let no Man deceive you
with vain Words; for because of these Things comes the Wrath of God upon the
Children of Disobedience, Rev. 21.8. But the fearful and unbelieving, and the
abominable, and Murderers, and Whore-mongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and
all Liars, shall have their Part in the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone, which is the Second Death. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not, that the
Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers of
themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, See Gal. 5.19,
20, 21. Woe to them that have their Names written in these Bead-rolls: Such may
know as certainly as if God had told it them from Heaven, that they are
unsanctified, and under an Impossibility of being saved in this Condition.

There are then these several Sorts, that, past all dispute, are unconverted;
they carry their Marks in their Foreheads.

1. The Unclean. These are ever reckoned among the Goats, and have their Names,
whoever be left out, in all the fore mentioned Catalogues, Ephesians. 5.5. Rev. 21.8.
1 Cor. 5.9, 10.

2. The Covetous. These are ever branded for Idolaters, and the Doors of the
Kingdom are shut against them by Name, Ephesians. 5.5. Col. 3 5. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.

3. Drunkards. Not only such as drink away their Reason, but withal, yea,
above all, such as are too strong for strong drink: The Lord fills his Mouth
with Woes against these, and declares them to have no Inheritance in the
Kingdom of God, Isa. 5.11, 12, 22. Gal. 5.21.

4. Liars. The God that cannot lie has told them, that there is no place for
them in his Kingdom, no entrance into his Hill; but their Portion is with the
Father of Lies (whose Children they are) in the Lake of Burnings, Psalm 15.1,
2. Rev. 21.8, 27. James 8.44. Prove. 6.17.

5. Swearers. The End of these, without deep and speedy Repentance, is s^ift
Destruction, and most certain and unavoidable Condemnation, James 5.12. Zech.
5.1, 2, 3.

6. Railers and Backbiters: That love to take up a Reproach against their
Neighbor, and fling all the Dirt they can in his Face, or else wound him
secretly behind his Back, Psalm 15.1, 3. 1 Cor. 6.10. and 5.11.

7. Thieves: Extortioners, Oppressors, that grind the Poor, overreach their
Brethren when they have them at an Advantage: These must know that God is the
Avenger of all such, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Hear, O ye false, and purloining and
wasteful Servants! Hear, O ye deceitful Tradesmen! hear your Sentence: God will
certainly hold his Door against you, and turn your treasures of Unrighteousness
into the treasures of Wrath, and make your ill-gotten Silver and Gold to
torment you, like burning Metal in your Bowels, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. James 5.2, 3.

8. All that do ordinarily live in the profane Neglect of God's Worship, that
hear not his Word, that call not on his Name, that restrain Prayer before God,
that mind not their own, nor their Families Souls, but live without God in the
World, John 8.47. and 15: 4. Psalm 14.4. and 79.6. Ephesians. 2.12. and 4.18.

9. These that are frequent^rs and lovers of evil Company; God has declared he
will be the Destruction of all such, and that they shall never enter in the
Hill of his Rest, Prove. 13.20. Psalm. 15.4. Prove. 9.6.

10. Scoffers at Religion, that make a Scorn at precise Walking, and mock at
the Messengers and diligent Servants of the Lord, and at their holy Profession,
and make themselves mercy with the Weakness and Failings of Professors: Hear,
ye Despisers, hear your dreadful Doom, Prove. 19.29. 2 Chronicles. 36.16. Prove. 3.24.

Sinner, consider diligently whether thou art not to be found in one of these
Ranks! for if this be thy Case, thou art in the Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of
Iniquity; for all these do carry their Marks in their Foreheads, and are
undoubtedly the Sons of Death;

And if so, the Lord pity our poor Congregations. Oh, how little a Number would
be left, when these ten Sorts are left out? Alas, on how many Doors, on how
many Faces must we write, Lord, have Mercy upon us! Sirs, what shift do you
make to keep up your Confidence of your good Estate, when God from Heaven
declares against you, and pronounces you in a State of Damnation? I would
reason with you, as God with them; how can thou say, I am not polluted? Jer.
2.23: See thy way in the valley, know what thou have done. Man, is not thy
Conscience privy to thy tricks of Deceit, to thy Chamber-pranks, to thy Way of
lying? Yea, are not thy Friends, thy Family, thy Neighbors, Witnesses to thy
profane Neglects of God's Worship, to thy covetous Practices, to thy envious
and malicious Carriage! May not they point at thee, as thou go, There goes a
gaming Prodigal; There goes a drunken Nabal, a Companion of Evildoers; There
goes a Railer or a Scoffer, a loose Liver, Beloved, God has written it, as
with a Sunbeam, in the Book out of which you must be judged, that these are not
the Spots of his Children, and that none such (except renewed by converting
Grace) shall ever escape the Damnation of Hell.

Oh that such of you would now be persuaded to repent and turn from all your
Transgressions; or else Iniquity will be your Ruin! Ezekiel. 18.30. Alas, for poor
hardened Sinners! Must I leave you at last where you were? Must I leave the
Tipler still at the Alebench? Must I leave the wanton still at Dalliance? Must
I leave the malicious still in his Venom? And the Drunkard still at his Vomit?
However you must know that you have been warned, and that I am clear of your
Blood. And whether Men will hear, or whether they will forbear, I will leave
these Scriptures with them, either as Thunderbolts to awaken them, or as
searing Irons to harden them to a reprobate Sense, Psalm. 68.21. God shall wound
the Head of his Enemies, and the hairy Scalp of such an one as goes on still
in their Trespasses, Prove. 29.1. He that, being often reproved, hardneth his
Neck shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without Remedy, Prove. 1.24, etc.
Because I have called, and ye refused: I have stretched out my Hand and no Man
regarded, etc. I will mock at your Calamity, -- when your Destruction comes as
a Whirlwind.

And now I imagine, many will begin to bless themselves, and think all is well,
because they cannot be spotted with the grosser Evils abovementioned. But I
must further tell you, that there are another Sort of unsanctified Persons,
that carry not their Marks in their Foreheads, but more secretly and covertly
in their Hands: These do frequently deceive themselves and others, and pass for
good Christians, when they are all the while unsound at Bottom. Many pass
undiscovered* till Death and Judgment bring all to light. These Self-deceivers
seem to come even to Heaven's Gate with Confidence of their Admission, and yet
are turned off at last, Mat 7.22. Brethren, beloved, I beseech you deeply to
lay to heart, and firmly to retain this awakning Consideration; That Multitudes
miscarry by the Hand of some secret Sin, that is not only hidden from others,
but (for want of observing their own Hearts) even from themselves. A Man may be
free from open Pollutions, and yet die at last by the fatal Hand of some
unobserved Iniquity: And there be these twelve hidden Sins, by which Souls go
down by Numbers into the Chambers of Death. These you must search carefully
for, and take them as black Marks (wherever they be found) discovering a
graceless and unconverted Estate: And as you love your Lives, read carefully,
with a holy Jealousy of yourselves, lest you should be the Persons concerned.

1. Gross Ignorance. Ah, how many poor Souls does this Sin kill in the dark,
Hos. 4.6. while they think verily they have good Hearts, and are in the ready
Way to Heaven! This is the Murderer that dispatcheth thousands in a silent
Manner, when (poor Hearts) they suspect nothing, and see not the Hand that
mischiefs them. You shall find whatever Excuses you have for Ignorance, that it
is a Soul-undoing Evil, Isa. 27.21. 2 Thessalonians 1. S. 2. Cor. 4.3. Ah! would it not
have pitied a Man's Heart to have seen that woeful Spectacle, when the poor
Protestants were shut up, a Multitude together, in a Barn, and a Butcher comes,
with his inhuman Hands warm in human Blood, and leads them, one by one,
blindfold to a Block, where he slew them (poor Innocents!) one after another,
by Scores, in cold Blood? But how much more should our Hearts bleed, to think
of the hundreds in great Congregations, that Ignorance does bu^cher in secret,
and lead them blindfold to the Block? Beware this be none of your Case; Make no
Pleas for Ignorance. If you spare that Sin, know that that will not spare you.
Will a Man keep a Murderer in his Bosom?

2. Some Reserves in closing with Christ. To forsake all for Christ; to hate
Father and Mother, yea, and a Man's own Life for him; this is a hard saying,
Luke 14.26. Some will do much, but they will not be of the Religion that will
undo them; they never come to be entirely devoted to Christ, not fully to
resign to him; they must have the sweet Sin, they mean to do themselves no
harm; they have secret Exceptions for Life, Liberty, or Estate: Many take
Christ thus hand over head, and never consider his self-denying Terms, nor cast
up the Cost; and this Error in the Foundation marrs all, and sweetly ruins them
forever, Luke 14.28. Matthew. 13.21.

3. Formality in Religion. Many stick in the Bark, and rest in the outside of
Religion, and in the external Performances of holy Duties, Matthew. 23.35. And
this oft-times does most effectually deceive Men; and does more certainly undo
them, than open looseness; as it was in the Pharisee's Case, Matthew. 23.21. They
hear, they fast, they pray, they give Alms; and therefore will not believe but
their Case is good, Luke. 18.11. Whereas resting in the Works done, and coming
short of the Heart-work, and the inward Power and Vitals of Religion, they fall
at last into the Burning, from the flattering Hopes and confident Persuasions
of their being in the ready Way to Heaven, Matthew. 7.22.23. O dreadful Case,
when a Man's Religion shall serve only to harden him, and effectually to delude
and deceive his own Soul.

4. The Prevalency of false Ends in holy Duties, Mat. 23.25. This was the Bane
of the Pharisees. Oh, how many a poor Soul is undone by this, and drops into
Hell, before he discerns the Mistake! He performs good Duties, and so thinks
all is well, and perceives not that he is actuated by carnal Motives all the
while: It is too true, that even with the truly sanctified, many carnal Ends
will oftentimes creep in; but they are Matter of his hatred and humiliation,
and never come to be habitually prevailing with him, and to bear the greatest
Sway, Romans 14.7. But now, when the main Thing that does ordinarily carry a Man
out to religious Duties, shall be some carnal End, as to satisfy his
Conscience, (...) get the Repute of being religious, to be seen of Men, to show
his own Gifts and Parts, to avoid the Reproach of a profane and irreligious
Person, or the like; this discovers an unsound Heart, Hos. 19.1: Zach. 7.5, 6.
O Christians, if you would avoid Self-conceit, see that you mind, not only your
Acts, but withal, yea, above all, your Ends.

5. Trusting in their own Righteousness, Luke 18.9. This is a Soul-undoing
Mischief, Romans 10.3. When Men do trust in their own Righteousness, they do
indeed reject Christ. Beloved, you had need b^ watchful on every Hand; for not
only your Sins, but your Duties may undo you: It may be you never thought of
this, but so it is, that a Man may a^ certainly miscarry by his seeming
Righteousness, and supposed Graces, as by gross Sins; and that is, when a Man
does trust to these as his Righteousness before God, for the satisfying his
Justice, appeasing his Wrath, procuring his Favor, and obtaining of his own
Pardon; for this is to put Christ out of Office, and make a Savior of our own
Duties and Graces. Beware of this, O Professors! you are much in Duties, but
this one Fly will spoil all the Ointment. When you have done most, and best, be
sure to go out of yourselves to Christ, reckon your own Righteousness as filthy
Rags, Psalm 143.2. Philip. 3.8. Isaiah 64 6. Nah. 13.22.

6. A secret Enmity against the Strictness of Religion. Many moral Persons,
punctual in their formal Devotion, have yet a bitter Enmity against
Preciseness, and hate the Life and Power of Religion, Philip. 3.6. compared
with Acts 9.1. They like not this Forwardness, nor that Men should keep such a
Stir in Religion: They condemn the Strictness of Religion, as Singularity,
Indiscretion, and intemperate Zeal: And with them, a lively Preacher, or lively
Christian, is but a Heady-fellow. These Men love not Holiness, as Holiness (for
then they would love the Height of Holiness,) and therefore are undoubtedly
rotten at Heart, whatever good Opinion they have of themselves.

7. The Resting in a certain Pitch of Religion. When they have so much as will
save them (as they suppose) they look no further, and so show themselves short
of true Grace, which will ever put Men upon aspiring to further Perfection,
Philip., 3.13. Prove. 4 18.

8. The predominant Love of the World. This is the sure Evidence of an
unsanctified Heart, Mark 10.31 1 John 2.15.

But how close does this Sin lurk oft-times under fair Covert of forward
Profession? Luke 18.14 Yea such a Power of Deceit is there in this Sin, that
many times, when every Body else can see the Man's Worldliness, and
Covetousness, he cannot see it himself; but has so many Colors, and Excuses,
and Pretenses for his Eagerness on the World, that he does blind his own Eyes,
and perish in his Self-Deceit. How many Professors be here, with whom the World
has more of their Hearts and Affections than Christ* Who mind earthly things,
and thereby are evidently after the Flesh, and like to end in Destruction? Romans
8 5. Philip. 3, 19. Yet ask these Men, and they will tell you confidently, they
prize Christ above all, God forbid else! And see not their own
Earthly-mindedness, for Want of a narrow Observation of the Workings of their
own Hearts. Did they but carefully search, they would quickly find, that their
greatest Content is in the World, Luke 12.19. and their greatest Care, and main
Endeavor to get and secure the World; which are the certain Discovery of an
unconverted Sinner. May the professing Part of the World take earnest heed,
that they perish not by the Hand of this Sin unobserved. Men may be, and often
are kept off from Christ, as effectually, by the inordinate Love of lawful
Comforts, as by the most unlawful Courses, Matthew. 22.5. Luke 14: 18, 19, 20, 24.

9 Reigning Malice and Envy against those that disrespect them, or are
injurious them, 1 John 2.9, 11. Oh, how do many that seem to be religious
remember Injuries, and carry Grudges, and will return Men as good as they
bring, rendering Evil for Evil, loving to take Revenge, wishing Evil to them
that wrong them, directly against the Rule of the Gospel, the Pattern of
Christ, and the Nature of God, Romans 12.14, 17. 1 Pet. ^ 21, 23. Neh. 9.17.
Doubtless, where this Evil is kept boiling in the Heart, and is not hated,
resisted, mortified, but does habitually prevail, that Person is in the very
Gall of Bitterness, and in a State of Death, Matthew. 18.34.35. 1. John 3.14.15.

Reader, does nothing of this touch thee? Art thou in none of the
forementioned Ranks? Oh, search and search again; take thy Heart solemnly to
task. Woe unto thee, if after all thy Profession, thou should be found under
the Power of Ignorance, lost in Formality, drowned in Earthly Mindedness,
envenomed with Malice, exalted in an Opinion of thine own Righteousness,
leavened with Hypocrisy, and carnal Ends in God's Service, imbittered against
^ness; this would be a sad Discovery, that all thy Religon were in vain. But I
must proceed,

10. Unmortified Pride. When Men love the Praise of Men, more than the Praise
of God; and set their Hearts upon Men's Esteem, Applause and Approbation, it is
most certain they are yet in their Sins, and Strangers to true Conversion, John
12.43. Gal. 1.10. When Men see not, nor complain, nor groan under the Pride of
their own Hearts, it is a Sign they are stark dead in Sin: Oh how secretly does
this Sin live and reign in many Hearts, and they know it not, but are very
Strangers to themselves, John 9.40.

11. The prevailing Love of Pleasure. 2 Timothy 3.4. This is a black Mark: When
Men give the Flesh the Liberty that it craves, and pamper and please it, and do
not deny and restrain it; when their great Delight is in gratifying their
Bellies, and pleasing their Senses* Whatever Appearance they may have of
Religion, all is unsound, Romans 16.18. Titus 3.3. A Flesh-pleasing Life cannot
be pleasing to God; They that are Christ's have crucified the Flesh, and are
careful to cross it, and keep it under, as their Enemy, Gal. 5 24. 1 Cor. 9.25,
26, 27.

12. Carnal Security, or a presumptuous and ungrounded Confidence that their
Condition is already good, Rev. 3.17. Many cry Peace and Safety, when sudden
Destruction is coming upon them, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3. This was that which kept the
foolish Virgins sleeping, when they should have been working; upon their Beds,
when they should have been at the Markets, Matthew. 25.5.19. Prove. 20.5 They
perceived not their Want of Oil, till the Bridegroom was come; and while they
went to buy, the Door was shut. And Oh that these foolish Virgins had no
Successors! Where is the Place, yea, where is the House almost, where these do
not dwell? Men are willing to cherish in themselves, upon ever so slight
Grounds, a Hope that their Condition, is good and so look not out after a
Change, and by this means perish in their Sins. Are you at peace! Show me upon
what Grounds your Peace is maintained: Is it a Scripture-peace? Can you show
the distinguishing Marks of a sound B^liever? Can you evidence that you have
something more than any Hypocrite in the World ever had? If not, fear this
Peace more than any Trouble; and know, that a carnal Peace does commonly prove
the most mortal Enemy of the poor Soul, and while it smiles and kisses, and
speaks it fair, does fatally smite it (as it were) under the fifth Rib.

By this time methinks I hear my Reader crying out with the Disciples, Who then
shall be saved? Set out from among our Congregations all those ten Ranks of the
Profane on the one hand, and then besides, take out all these twelve Sorts of
close and self deceiving Hypocrites on the other hand, and tell me then,
whether it be not a Remnant that shall be saved! How few will be the Sheep that
shall be left, when all these shall be separated, and set among the Goats? For
my part, of all my numerous Hearers, I have no hope to see any of them in
Heaven, that are to be found among these two and twenty Sorts that are here
mentioned, except by sound Conversion they be brought into another Condition.

Application: And now, Conscience, do thine Office. Speak out, and speak home
to him that hears, or reads these Lines: If thou find any of these Marks
upon him, thou must pronounce him utterly unclean, Levit. 13.44. Take not up a
Lie into thy Mouth: speak not Peace to him to whom GOD speaks no Peace: Let no
Lust bribe thee, or Self-Love or carnal Prejudice blind thee: I subpoena thee
from the Court of Heaven, to come and give in Evidence: ^ require thee, in the
Name of God, to go with me ^o the Search of the suspected House: As thou will
^nswer it at thy Peril, give in a true Report of the State and Case of him that
reads this Book. Conscience, will thou altogether hold thy Peace at such a
Time as this? I adjure thee by the living G^^, that thou tell us the Truth,
Matthew. 26.63. as the Man converted, or is he not? Does he allow himself in any
Way of Sin, or does he not? Does he truly love, and please, and prize, and
delight in God above all other Things, or not? Come, put it to an Issue.

How long shall this Soul live at Uncertainties! O Conscience, bring in thy
Verdict. Is this Man a new Man, or is he not? How do thou find it? Has there
passed a through and mighty Change upon him, or not? When was the Time, where
was the Place, or what was the means by which this through Change of the New
birth was wrought in his Soul? Speak, Conscience: O^ if thou can not tell
Time and Place, can thou show Scripture-evidence, that the Work is done! Has
the Man been ever taken off from his false Bottom, from the false Hopes, and
false Peace, wherein once he trusted? Has he been deeply convinced of Sin, and
of his lost and undone Condition, and brought out of himself, and off from his
Sins, to give up himself entirely to Jesus Christ? Or do thou not find him
to this Day under the Power of Ignorance, or in the mire of profaneness? Have
thou not taken upon him the Gains of Unrighteousness^ Do thou not find him a
Stranger to Prayer, a Neglecter of the Word, a Lover of this present World Do
not thou often catch him in a Lie? Do no thou find his Heart fermented with
Malice, or bu^ning with Lust, or going after his Covetousness Speak plainly to
all the forementioned Particulars Can thou acquit this Man, this Woman, from
being any of the two and twenty Sorts here described? he be found with any of
them, set him aside, I Portion is not with the Saints: He must be conveed, and
made a New Creature; or else he cau^^ enter into the Kingdom of God.

Beloved, be not your own Betrayers, do not ^^ceive your own Hearts, nor set
your Hands to y^ own Ruin, by a wilful binding of your selves. Set up a
Tribunal in your own Breasts: Bring the Word and Conscience together^ To the
Law, and to the Testimony, Isai. 8.20. Hear what the Word concludes of your
Estates. Oh, follow the search, till you have found how the Case stands:
Mistake here, and perish. And such is the Treachery of the H^, the Subtilty of
the Tempter, and the Deceitfulnes^ Sin, Jer. 17.9. 2 Cor. 11.3. Heb. 3.13. all
conspire to flatter and deceive the poor Soul; and withal, so common and easy
it is to be mistaken, that it is a Thousand to One but you will be deceived,
unless you be very careful, and through, and impartial in the Enquiry into your
spiritual Conditions, Oh, therefore ply your Work, go to the Bottom, search as
with Candles, weigh you in the Balance, come to the Standard of the Sanctuary,
bring your Coin to the Touch stone. You have the archest Cheats in the World to
deal with, a World of Counterfeit Coin is going, happy is he that takes not
Counters for Gold. Satan is Master of Deceits; he can draw to the Life, he is
perfect in the Trade, there is nothing but he can imitate: You cannot wish for
any Grace, but he can fit you to a Hair with a Counterfeit. Trade warily, look
on every Piece you take, be jealous, trust not so much as your own Hearts. Run
to God to search you, and try you; to examine you, and prove your Reins, Psalm
26.2. and 139.23, 24. If other Helps suffice not to bring all to an Issue, but
you are still at a Loss, open your Cases faithfully to some godly and faithful
Minister, Malachi 2.7. Rest not, till you have put the Business of your eternal
Welfare out of question, 1 Peter 2.10. O Searcher of Hearts, put Thou this Soul
upon, and help him in the Search.

Chap. V. Showing the Miseries of the Unconverted
SO unspeakably dreadful is the Case of every Unconverted Soul, that I have
sometimes thought, if we could, but convince Men that they ^e yet unregenerate,
the Work were upon the Matter done. But I sadly experience, that such a Spirit
of sloth and slumber ( Romans 11.8. Matthew. 13.15.) possesses the unsanctified,
that though they be convinced that they are yet unconverted, yet they oft-times
carelessly sit still; and what through the Avocation of sensual Pleasures, or
Hurry of Wordly Business, or Noise and Clamor of Earthly Cares, and Lusts, and
Affections, Luke 8.14. the Voice of Conscience is drowned, and Men go no
farther than some cold Wishes, and general Purposes of repenting and amending,
Acts 24.25.

It is therefore of high Necessity, that I do not only convince Men that they
are unconverted, but that I also endeavor to bring them to a Sense of the
fearful Misery of this Estate.

But here I find my self a-ground at first putting forth. What Tongue can tell
the Heirs of Hell sufficiently of their Misery, unless 'twere Dives's in that
Flame? Luke 16.24. Where is the ready Writer whose Pen can decipher their
Misery, that are without God in the World? Ephesians. 2.12. This cannot fully be
done, unless we knew the infinite Ocean of that Bliss and Perfection which is
in that God, which a State of Sin does exclude Men from: Who knows (says
Moses) the Power of thine Anger? Psalm 90.11. And how shall I tell Men that
which I do not know? Yet so much we know, as one would think, would shake the
Heart of that Man that had the least Degree of spiritual Life and Sense.

But this is yet the more posing Difficulty, that I am to speak to them that
are without Sense. Alas, this is not the least Part of Man's Misery upon him,
that he is dead, stark dead in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. 2.1.

Could I bring Paradise into View, or represent the Kingdom of Heaven to as
much Advantage as the Tempter did the Kingdoms of the World, and all the Glory
thereof to our Savior; or could I uncover the face of the Deep, and devouring
Gulf of Tophet, in all its Terrors, and open the Gates of the Infernal
Furnace; alas, he has no Eyes to see it, Matthew. 1^ 14, 15. Could I paint out
the Beauties of Holiness or Glory of the Gospel to the life; or could I bring
above board the more than diabolical Deformity and Ugliness of Sin, be can no
more judge of the Loveliness and Beauty of the one, nor the Filthiness and
Hatefulness of the other, than the blind Man of Colors. He is alienated from
the Life of God, thro^ the Ignorance that is in him, because of the Blind^^^s
of his Heart, Ephesians. 4.18. He neither does, not can know the Things of God,
because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. His Eyes cannot be
savingly opened but by converting Grace, Acts 26.16. He is a Child of Darkness,
and walks in Darkness, 1 John 1.6. Yea, the Light in him is Darkness, Matthew.
6.2, 3.

Shall I ring his Knell, or read his Sentence, or sound in his Ear the terrible
Trump of God's Judgments, that one would think should make both his Ears
^tingle, and strike him into Be^^azzar's Fit; even to appa^e his Countenance,
and loose his Joints, and make his Knees smite one against another? Yet alas!
he perceives me not, he has no Ears to hear. Or shall I call up all the
Daughters of Music, and sing the Song of Moses, and of the Lamb? Yet he will
not be stirred. Shall I allure him with the joyful Sound, and the lovely Song,
and glad Tidings of the Gospel? With the most sweet and inviting Calls,
Comforts, Cordials of the Divine Promises, so exceeding great and precious? It
will not affect him savingly, unless I could find him Ears, Matthew. 13.15. as
well as tell him the News.

Shall I set before him the Feast of fa^ Things, the Wine of Wisdom, the Bread
of God, the Tree of Life, the hidden Ma^a: He has no Appetite for them, no
mind to them, 1 Cor. 2.14. Matthew. 22.5. Should I press the choicest Grapes, the
heavenly Clusters of Gospel-Privileges, and drink to him in the richest Wine of
God's own Cellar, yes, of his own side; or set before (...) the delicious
Honeycomb of God's Testimonies, Psalm 19.10. alas, he has no Taste to discern
them. shall I invite the Dead to arise, and eat the Banquet of their Funerals?
No more can the Dead in Sin savor the Holy Food wherewith the Lord of Life
has spread his Table.

What then shall I do? Shall I burn the Brimstone of Hell at his Nostrils? Or
shall I open the Box o^ Spikenard, very precious, that fills the whole House
of this Universe with its Perfume, Mark 14 3. John 12.8. and hope that the
Savor of Christ'^ Ointments, and the Smell of his Garments, will attract him?
Psalm 45.8. Alas! dead Sinners are lik^ the dumb Idols, they have Mouths, but
they spea^ not; Eyes have they, but they see not, they have Ears, but they hear
not; Noses have they, but the^ smell not; they have Hands, but they handle not*
Feet have they, but they walk not; neither spea^ they through their Throat,
Psalm 115.5, 6, 7. They are destitute of all Spiritual Sense and Motion.

But let me try the Sense that does last leave us, an draw the Sword of the
Word. Yet lay at him whi^ I will, yea, though I choose mine Arrows out of God
Quiver, and direct them to the Heart, neverthel^^ he feels it not; for how
should he, being pa^ feeling? Ephesians 4.19. So that though the Wrath of Go^ abides
on him, and the mountainous Weight of ^ many thousand Sins, yet he goes up and
down (...) light as if nothing ailed him, Romans 7.9. In a Wo^ he carries a dead
Soul in a living Body, and his Fle^ is but the walking Coffin of a corrupted
Mind, the is twice dead, Jude 12. rooting in the Slime and P^trefaction of
noisome Lusts, Matthew. 23.27, 28.

Which Way then shall I come at the miseral^ Object that I have to deal with?
Who shall make ^ Heart of Stone to relent, Zech. 11.12. or the life! Carcass to
feel and move? That God that is able Stones to raise up Children unto Abraham,
Matthew ^ 9. that raises the Dead, 2 Cor. 1.9. and melts ^ Mountains, Neh.
1.5. and strikes Water out of ^ Flints, Deuteronomy. 8.15. that loves to work like
hims^ beyond the Hopes and Belief of Man; that people his Church with dry
Bones, and planted his Orch^ with dry Sticks; he is able to do this. Therefore
I bow my Knee to the most high God, Ephesians. 3.14. and as our Savior prayed at the
Sepulcher of Lazarus, John 11.38, 41. and the Sh^namite ran to the Man of God,
for her dead Child, 2 Kings 4.25. so does your mourning Minister kneel about
your Graves, and carry you in the Arms of Prayer to that God in whom your Help
is found.

O thou All-powerful Jehovah, that workest and (...) can let Thee; thou have
the Keys of Hell, and of Death, pity thou the dead Souls that lie here
inte^bed, and roll away the Gravestone, and say, as to Lazarus, when already
stinking, Come forth. Lighten thou this Darkness. O inaccessible Light, and let
the Dayspring from on High visit the darksome Region of the Dead, to whom I
speak; for thou can open the Eyes that Death it self has closed; thou that
formedst the Ear, can restore the Hearing. Say thou to these Ears,
Ephphathah, and they shall be opened. Give the Eyes to see thine Excellencies,
a Taste that may (...) thy Sweetness, a Scent that may savor thine Ointments,
a Feeling that may sense the Privilege of thy Favor, the Burden of thy Wrath,
the intolerable Weight of unpardoned Sin* and give thy Servants Command to
prophesy to the dry Bones, and let the Effects of this Prophesy be, as of thy
Prophet, when be prophesied the Valley of dry Bones into a living Army,
exceeding great, Ezekiel. 37.1. etc. The Hand of the Lord was upon me, and carried
me out in the Spirit of the Lord, and set me down in the Midst of the Valley,
which was full of Bones. He said unto me, Prophecy upon these Bones, and say
unto them, O ye dry Bones, hear the Word of the Lord. Thus says the Lord God
unto these Bones, Behold, I will cause Breath to enter into you, and ye shall
live. And I will lay Sinews upon you, and will bring up (...) you, and cover
you with Skin, and ^ut Br^ (...) you, and ye shall live, and ye shall (...)
that I (...) the Lord. So I prophesied as I was commanded, and (...) I
prophesied, there was a Noise, and behold a Shaking, and the Bones came
together, Bone ^ his Bone. And when I beheld, Lo, the Sinews and the Flesh came
upon them, and co^^ed them above, but there was no Breath in them Then said he
unto me, Prophecy unto the Wind, prophecy, Son of Man, and say unto the Wind,
Thus says the Lord God, Come from the four Winds, O Breath, and breathe upon
these slain, that they may live. So I prophesied as he commanded me, and the
Breath (...) them, and they lived and stood upon their Feet, an exceeding great
Army.

But I must proceed, as I am able, to unfold that Misery, which, I confess, no
Tongue can unfold, no Heart can sufficiently comprehend. Know therefore, that
while thou art unconverted,

I. The infinite God is engaged against thee.

It is no small Part of thy Misery, that thou art without God, Ephesians. 2.12. How
does Micah run crying after the Danites, You have taken away my Gods, and what
have I more? Judges 18.23.24. Oh, what a Mourning then must thou lift up, that
art without God, that can lay no Claim to him, without daring Usurpation!
Thou may say of God, as Sheba o^ David, We have no Part in David, neither
have w^ Inheritance in the Son of Jesse, 2 Samuel 20.1. Ho^ pitiful and piercing
a Moan is that of Saul, in hi^ Extremity? The Philistines are upon me, and God
is d^^ parted from me, 1 Samuel 28.15. Sinners, But what w^ you do in the Day of
your Visitation? Whither will y^ flee for Help? Where will you have your Glory?
Isa. 10.^ What will you do when the Philistines are upon you; when the World
shall take its eternal Lea^ of you; when you must bid your Friends, House
Lands, farewell for evermore? What will you ^ then, I say, that have never a God
to go to? W^ you call on him? Will you cry to him for Help Alas! he will not
own you, Prove. 1.2^ ^8. He w^ not take any Knowledge of you, but (...) with an
I never knew you, Mat. 7.23. They the know what it is to have a God to go to, a
God ^ live upon, they know a little, what a fearful Mise^ it is to be without
God. This made that holy M^ cry out, Let me have a God or nothing. Let me (...)
him, and his Will, and what will please him, and how I may come to enjoy him;
or would I had never had an Understanding to know any Thing, etc.

But thou art not only without God, but God is against thee, Ezekiel. 5.8, 9:
Nahum 2.13. Oh, if God would but stand a Neuter, though he did not own nor help
the poor Sinner, his Case were not so deeply miserable. Though God should give up
the poor Creatures to the Will of all his Enemies, to do their worst with him;
though he should deliver him over to the Torments, Matthew. 18.34. that Devils
should tear and torture him to their utmost Power and Skill, yet this were not
half so fearful. But God will set himself against the Sinner; and believe it,
It Is a fearful Thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God, Heb. 10.31.
There is no Friend like him, no Enemy like him. As much as Heaven is above the
Earth, Omnipotency above Impotency, Infinity above Nullity; so much more
horrible is it to fall into the Hands of the living God, than into the Paws of
Bears or Lions, yea, Furies or Devils. God himself will be thy Tormentor, thy
Destruction shall come from the Presence of the Lord, 2 Thessalonians 1.9. Tophet is
deep and large and the Wrath of the Lord, like a River of Brimstone, does
kindle it. Isai. 30.33. If God be against thee, who shall be for thee? If one
Man sin against another, the Judge shall judge him: But if a Man sin against
the Lord, who shall entreat for him? 1 Samuel 2.25. Thou, even thou, art to be
feared: and who shall stand in thy Sight, when once thou art angry? Psalm 76 7.
Who is that God, that shall deliver you out of his Hands? Dan. 3.15. Can
Mammon? Riches profit not in the Day of Wrath, Prove. 11.4 Can Kings, or
Warriors? No, they shall cry to the Mountains and Rocks to fall on us, and hide
us from (...) Face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the Wrath of the
Lamb; for the great Day of his Wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand?
Rev. 6.15, 16, 19.

Sinner, Methinks this should go like a Dagger to thine Heart, to know that God
is thine Enemy. Oh, whither will thou go? Where will thou shelter thee? There
is no hope for thee, unless thou lay down thy Weapons, and sue out thy Pardon,
and get Christ to stand thy Friend, and make thy Peace. If it were not for
this, thou might go into some howling Wilderness, and there pine in Sorrow,
and run mad for Anguish of Heart, and horrible Despair. But in Christ there is
a Possibility of Mercy for thee, yea, a Proffer of Mercy for thee, that thou
may have God to be more for thee, than he is now against thee. But if thou will not forsake thy Sins, nor turn thoroughly, and to Purpose, unto God, by a
sound Conversion, the Wrath of God abides on thee, and he proclaims himself to
be against thee, as in the Prophet, Ezekiel. 5.8. Therefore thus says the Lord
God Behold I, even I, am against thee.

I. His Face is against thee, Psalm 34.15. The Fac^ of the Lord is against them
that do Evil, to cut off the Remembrance of them. Woe unto them whom Go^ shall
set his Face against. When he did but loo^ upon the Host of the Egyptians, how
terrible was the Consequence, Ezekiel. 14.8. I will set my Face against that Man,
and will make him a Sign, and Proverb, a^ will cut him off from the Midst of my
People, and yo^ shall know that I am the Lord. 2. His Heart is again^ thee: He
hates all the Workers of Iniquity. Man, d^ not thine Heart tremble, to think
of thy being an Object God's Hatred? Jer. 15.1. Though Moses and Samu^ stood
before me, yet my Mind could not be toward the People: Cast them out of my
Sight, Zech. 7.8. ^ Soul loatheth them, and their Souls also abhorred ^ 3. His
Hand is against the^ 1 Samuel 12.14, 15. A^ his Attributes are against thee.

First, His Justice is like a flaming Sword, ^ sheathed against thee. If I whet
my glittering Sw^ and my Hand take hold on Judgment, I will (...) Vengeance to
mine Adversaries, and will reward t^ that hate me. I will make mine Arrows
drunk w^ Blood, etc. Deuteronomy. 32.41, 42. So exact is Justic^ that it will by no
Means clear the Guilty, Exodus ^ ^ God will not discharge thee, he will not ^^
^e guiltless, Exodus 20.7. but will require the whole ^bt in Person of thee,
unless thou can make a Scrip^e claim to Christ, and his Satisfaction. When ^e
enlightened Sinner looks on Justice, and sees the ^llance in which he must be
weighed, and the Sword (...) which he must be executed, he feels an Earth^ake
in his Breast: But Satan keeps this out of ^ght, and persuades the Soul, while
he can, that (...) Lord is all made up of Mercy, and so lulls it a^ep in Sin.
Divine Justice is very strict; it must ^ave Satisfaction to the utmost
Farthing; it denoun^th Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, ^ every
Soul that does evil, Romans 2.8, 9. It curses ^very one that continues not in
every thing that is ^itten in the Law, to do it, Gal. 3.10 The Jus^ice of God
to the unpardoned Sinner, that has a ^ense of his Misery, is more terrible
than the Sight of the Bailiff or Creditor to the Bankrupt Debtor, (...) than
the Sight of the Judge and Bench to the Robber, or of the Irons and Gibbet to
the guilty Murderer. When Justice sits upon Life and Death, Oh, what dreadful
Work does it make with the wretched Sinner! Bind him Hand and Foot, cast him ^o
utter Darkness, there shall he Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth, Matthew 22.13.
Depart from me, ye Cursed, (...) everlasting Fire, Matthew. 25.41. This is the
ter^ible Sentence that Justice pronounces. Why Sinner, by this severe Justice
must thou be tried; and as God lives, this killing Sentence shall thou hear,
^nless thou repent, and be converted.

Secondly, The Holiness of God is full of Antipathy against ^hee, Psalm. 5.4, 5
He is not only angry with thee, (so he may be with his own Children) but he
has a fix^ (...) habitual Displeasure against thee, he (...) ^uch. 11.8. and
what is done by thee, (...) ^ince commanded by him, Isa. 1.14. ^a^. 1.10. As if
a Man should give his Servant never so good Meat to dress; yet if he should
mingle F^th or Poison with it, he would not touch it. God's Nature is
infinitely contrary to Sin, and so he cannot (...) hate a Sinner out of Christ.

Oh, what a Misery is this, to be out of the Favor, yea, under the hatred of
God, Eccles. 5.4. Hos. 9.15. That God can as easily lay aside his Nature, and
cease to be God, as not be contrary to thee, and detest thee, except thou be
changed and renewed by Grace. O Sinner, how dare thou think of the bright and
radiant Sun of Purity, upon the Beauties, the Glory of Holiness that is in God!
The Stars are not pure in his Sight, Job 25.5. He humbles himself to behold
Things that are done in Heaven, Psalm. 11.3, 6. O those light and sparkling eyes
of his? What do they espy in thee? And thou have no Interest in Christ neither,
that he should plead for thee. Methinks I should hear thee crying out,
astonished, with the Bethshemites, Who shall stand before this holy Lord God? 1 Samuel 6.20.

Thirdly, The Power of God is mounted like a mighty Cannon against thee. The
Glory of God's Power i^ to be displayed, in the wonderful Confusion and
Destruction of them that obey not the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians 1.8, 9. He will make his
Power known in them, Romans 9.22. How mightily he can torment them* For this end
he raises them up, that he might mak^ his Power known, Romans 9.17. O Man, art
thou able to make thy Party good with thy Maker? No more than a silly Reed
against the Cedars of God, or a little Cock-boat against the tumbling Ocean, or
the Childrens Bubbles against the blustering Winds.

Sinner, the Power of God's Anger is against thee Psalm. 90.11. and Power and
Anger together make fearful Work. 'Twere better thou had all the world in
Arms against thee, than to have the Power of God against thee. There is no
escaping his Hand, n^ breaking his Prison, The Thunder of his Power who can
understand? Job 26.14. Unhappy Man that shall understand it by feeling it! if
he will contend with him, he cannot answer him one of ^ thousand. He is wise in
Heart, and mighty i^ Strength: who has hardened himself against him and
prospered? Which removes the Mountain and they know it not: which overturneth
the in his anger; which shakes the Earth out of ^ Place, and the Pillars
thereof tremble; which commands the Sun, and it rises not; and seals up
the Stars. Behold, he takes away, who can hinder him? who will say unto him,
what do thou? If God will not withdraw his Anger, the proud helpers do stoop
under him, Job 9.3, 4, 5, 6, etc. And art thou a fit Match for such an
Antagonist? Oh, consider this, you that forget God, lest he tear you in Pieces,
and there be none to deliver you, Psa. 50.22. Submit to Mercy, let not Dust and
Stubble ^and it out against the Almighty. Set not Briars and Thorns against him
in Battle, lest he go through them, and consume them together; but lay hold on
His ^trength, that you may make Peace with him, Is. 27.4, 5. Woe to him that
striveth with his Maker, Isa. 45.9.

Fourthly, The Wisdom of God is set to ruin thee. He ^th ordained his Arrows,
and prepared the Instruments of Death, and made all Things ready, Psalm ^.12,
13. His Counsels are against thee, to contrive ^y Destruction, Jer. 18.11. He
laughs in himself, ^o see how thou will be taken and ensnared in the ^vil Day,
Psalm. 37.13. The Lord shall laugh at him, for ^e sees that the Day is coming.
He sees how thou will ^ome down mightily in a Moment, how thou will ^ring thine
Hands, and tear thine Hair, and eat thy ^lesh, and gnash thy Teeth for Anguish
and Asto^shment of Heart, when thou see thou art fallen ^medilesly into the
Pit of Destruction.

Fifthly, The Truth of God is sworn against thee, Psalm. ^.11. If he be true and
faithful, thou must perish, ^ thou go on, Luke 13.3. Unless he be false of
^s Word, thou must die, except thou repent, Ezekiel: ^.11. If we believe not, yet
he abides faithful, He ^t deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. That is, He is ^thful to
his Threatenings, as well as Promises; ^d will show his Faithfulness in our
Confusion, if ^ believe not. God has told thee, as plain as it ^ be spoken,
That it he wash thee not, thou have no ^t in him, John 13.8. That if thou
live after the ^, thou shall die, Romans 8.13. That except thou be (...), thou
shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 18.3. and he abides
faithful, he cannot deny himself. Beloved, as the immutable Faithfulness of God
in his Promise and Oath, afford Believers strong Consolation, Hell: 6.^8. so
they are to Unbelievers, for strong Consterna^^^n and Confusion. O Sinner, tell
me, What Shift do thou make to think of all the Threatenings of God's Word,
that stand upon Record against thee? Do thou believe their Truth or not? If
not you are a wretched Infidel, and no Christian, and therefore give over the
Name and Hopes of a Christian: But if thou do believe them, O Heart of Steel
that thou have, that can walk up and down in quiet, when the Truth and
Faithfulness of God is engaged to destroy thee! That if God Almighty can do it
thou shall surely perish and be damned. Why, Man, the whole Book of God does
testify against thee, while thou remainest unsanctified: It condemns thee in
every Leaf, and is to thee, like Ezekiel's Roll, written within and without
with Lamentation and Mourning, and W^ Ezekiel. 2.10. And all this shall surely
come upon the^ and overtake thee, Deuteronomy. 28.15. except thou repent Heaven and
Earth shall pass away, but one Jot or Tittle (...) this Word shall never pass
away, Mat. 5 18.

Now put all this together, and tell me if the C^ of the Unconverted be not
deplorably miserable* As we read of some Persons, that had bound themselves in
an Oath, and in a Curse, to kill Paul, (...) thou must know, O Sinner, to thy
Terror, that (...) the Attributes of the infinite God are bound in (...) Oath
to destroy thee, Heb. 3.28. O Man! Wi^ will thou do? Whither will thou fly? If
God Omniscience can find thee, thou shall not escape* If the true and faithful
God will save his O^ perish thou must, except thou believe and repe^ If the
Almighty has Power to torment thee, t^ shall be perfectly miserable in Soul
and Body all (...) Eternity, unless it be prevented by thy spe^ Conversion.

II. The whole Creation of God is against thee ^ whole Creation (says Paul)
gro^^eth and tro^ i^ pain, Romans 8.22. But what is it that the Creation groaneth
under? Why, the fearful Abuse that it is subject to, in serving the Lusts of
unsanctified Men. And what is it that the Creation groaneth for? Why, for
Freedom and Liberty from this Abuse; for the Creature is very unwillingly
subject to this Bondage, Romans 8.19, 20, 21. If the unreasonable and inanimate
Creatures had Speech and Reason, they would cry out under it, as Bondage
unsufferable, to be abused by the ungodly, contrary to their Natures, and the
Ends that the great Creator made them for. It is a Passage of an eminent
Divine, The Liquor that the Drunkard drinks, if it had Reason as well as a
Man, to know how shamefully it is abused and spoiled, it would groan in the
Barrels against him, it would groan in the Cup against him, groan in his
Throat, in his Belly against him, it would fly in his Face, if it could speak.
And if God should open the Mouths of the Creatures, as he did the Mouth of
Balaam's Ass, the proud Man's Garment on his Back would groan against him.
There is never a Creature, but if it had Reason to know how it is abused, till
a Man be converted, it would groan against him: The Land would groan to bear
him, the Air would groan to give him breathing, their Houses would groan to
lodge them, their fleds would groan to ease them, their Food to nourish them,
their Clothes to cover them, and the Creature would groan to give them any Help
and Comfort, so long as they live in Sin against God. Thus far he. Methinks
this should be a Terror to an Unconverted Soul, to think that he is a Burden to
the Creation, Luke 13.7. Cut it down, why cumbreth it the Ground? If the poor
inanimate Creatures could but speak, they would say to the Ungodly, as Moses to
Israel, Must we fetch you Water out of the Rock, ye Rebels, Numb. 2.10. Thy
Food would say, Lord, must I nourish such a Wretch as this, and yield forth my
Strength for him to dishonor thee withal? No, I will choke him rather, if thou will give me Commission. The very Air would say, Lord, must I give the Man
breath, to set his Tongue against Heaven, and scorn thy People, and vent his
Pride and Wrath, and filthy Communication, and belch out Oaths and Blasphemy
against thee? No, if thou but say the Word, he shall be Breathless for me. His
poor Beast would say, Lord, must I carry him upon his wicked Designs? No, I
will break his Bones, I will end his Days rather, if I may have but Leave from
thee. A wicked Man the Earth groans under him, and Hell groans for him, till
Death satisfies both, and unburdens the Earth, and stops the Mouth of Hell with
him. While the Lord of Hosts is against thee, be sure the Hosts of the Lord are
against thee, and all the Creatures (as it were) up in Arms, till upon a Man's
Conversion, the Controversy being taken up between God and him, he makes a
Covenant of Peace with the Creatures for him, Job 5.22, 29, 24. Hosea 2.18, 19,
20.

III. The Roaring-Lion has his full Power upon thee, 1 Pet. 5.8. Thou art fast
in the Paw of that Lion, that is greedy to devour: In the Snare of the Devil,
led captive by him at his Will, 2 Timothy 2.26. This is the Spirit that works in
the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. His Drudges they are, and his Lusts
they do. He is the Ruler of the Darkness of this World, Ephesians. 6.12. that is, of
ignorant Sinners that live in Darkness. You pity the poor Indians, that worship
the Devil for their God, but little think that it is your own Case. Why it is the
common Misery of all the Unsanctified, that the Devil is their God, 2 Cor. 4.4.
Not that they do intend to do him Homage and Worship; they will be ready to
defy him, and him that should say so by them; but all this while they serve
him, and come and go at his Beck, and live under his Government: His Servants
you are, to whom you yield your selves to obey, Romans 6.16. Oh, how many then
will be found the real Servants of the Devil, that take themselves for no other
than the Children of God! He can no sooner offer a sinful Delight or
Opportunity for your unlawful Advantage, but you embrace it. If he suggest a
Lie, or prompt you to Revenge, you readily obey: If he forbid you to read or
pray, you hearken to him, and therefore his Servants you are. Indeed he lies
behind the Curtain, he acts in the Dark, and Sinners see not who sets them
on Work, but all the While he leads them in a String. Doubtless the Liar
intends not a Service to Satan, but his own Advantage; yet it is he that stands
in the Corner unobserved, and puts the Thing into his Heart, Acts 5.3. John
8.44. Questionless Judas, when he sold his Master for Money, and the Chaldeans
and Sabeans, when they plundered Job, intended not to do the Devil a Pleasure,
but to satisfy their own covetous Thirst, yet 'twas he that actuated them in
their Wickedness, Job 13.27. Job 1.12, 15, 17. Men may be very Slaves, and
common Drudges for the Devil, and never know it; nay, they may please
themselves in the Thoughts of a happy Liberty, 2 Peter 2.19.

Art thou yet in Ignorance, and not turned from Darkness to Light? Why, thou
art under the Power of Satan, Acts 26.18. Do thou live in the ordinary and
wilful Practice of any known Sin? Know that thou art of the Devil, 1 John 3.8.
Do thou live i^ Strife, or Malice, or Envy? Verily, he is thy Father John
8.49, 41. O dreadful Case! However Satan may provide his Slaves with diverse
Pleasures, Tit. 3.3. yet it is but to (...) them into endless Perdition. The
Serpent comes with the Apple in his Mouth, Oh, but (with Eve) thou see not
the deadly Sting in his Tail. He that is now thy Tempter, will be one Day thy
Tormenter. Oh, that I could but give thee to see how black a Master thou
servest, how filthy a Drudgery thou do, how merciless a Tyrant thou
gratifiest! all whose Pleasure is, to set thee on work to make thy Perdition
and Damnation sure, and to heat the Furnace hotter and hotter, in which thou
must burn for Millions of Millions of Ages.

IV. The Guilt of all thy Sins lies like a Mountain upon things Poor Soul! thou
feel it not, but this is that which seals thy Misery upon thee. While un^ed,
none of thy Sins are blotted out, Acts 3.10. They are all upon the Score
against thee: Regeneration and Remission are never separated; the Unsanctified
are unquestionably unjustified and unpardoned, 1 Cor. 6.11. 1 Peter 1.2. Heb.
9.14. Beloved, it is a fearful Thing to be in debt, but above all in God's Debt;
for there is no Arrest so formidable as his, no Prison so horrible as his. Look
upon an enlightened Sinner, who feels the Weight of his own Guilt: Oh, how
frightful are his Looks, ^ow fearful are his Complaints! His Comforts are
turned into Wormwood, and his Moisture into Drought, and his Sleep departed
from his Eyes. He is a Terror to himself, and all that are about him; and is
ready to envy the very Stones that lie in the Street, because they are
senseless, and feel not his Misery; and wishes he had been a Dog, or a Toad, or
a Serpent, rather than a Man, because then Death had put an End to his Misery,
whereas now it will be but the Beginning of that which will know no Ending.

How light soever you may make of it now, you will one Day find the Guilt of
unpardoned Sin to be a heavy Burden. This is a Millstone that whosoever
falls upon it, shall be broken, but upon whomsoever it shall fall, it will
grind him to Powder, Matthew. 21.44. What Work did it make with our Savior? It
pressed the very Blood (to a Wonder) out of his Veins, and broke all his Bones.
And if it did this in the Green-tree, what will it do in the Dry?

Oh! think of thy Case in Time. Can thou not think of that Threat without
trembling, Ye shall (...) in your Sins! John 8.24. Oh! bettor were it for the
(...) die in a Goal, die in a Ditch, in a Dungeon, than di^ in thy Sins. If
Death, as it will take away all thy other Comforts, would take away thy Sins
too, it were some Mitigation; but thy Sins will follow thee when thy Friends
leave thee, and all worldly Enjoyment^ shake Hands with thee: Thy Sins will not
die with thee, 2 Cor. 5.10. Rev. 20.12. as a Prisoner's other Debts will; but
they will to Judgment with thee, there to be thine Accusers, and they will to
Hell with thee, there to be thy tormentors. Better to have so many Fiends and
Furies about thee, than thy Sins to fall upon thee, and fasten in thee. Oh, the
work that these will make thee! Oh look over thy Debts in time; how much art
thou in the Books of every one of God's Laws? How is every one of God's
Commandments ready to arrest thee, and take (...) by the Throat, for
innumerable Bonds that it h^ ^on thee? What will thou do then, when they (...)
all together lay in against thee? Hold open the Eyes of Conscience to consider
this, that thou may despair of thyself, and be driven to Christ, and fly for
Refuge to lay hold upon the Hope that is set before thee, Heb. 6.18.

V. Thy raging Lusts do miserably enslave thee. While unconverted, thou art a
very Servant to Sin, it reigns over thee, and holds thee under its Dominion,
till thou art brought within the bonds of God's Covenant, John 8.34.36. Tit.
3.3. Romans 6.12.14, 16, 17. Now there is no such Tyrant as Sin: O the filthy and
fearful Work that it does engage its Servants in: Would it not pierce a Man's
Heart, to see a Company of poor Creatures drudging and toiling, and all to
carry together Faggots and Fuel for their own Burning? Why, this is the
Employment of Sins Drudges. Even while they bless themselves in their
unrighteous Gains, while they swing and swill in Pleasures, they are but
treasuring up Wrath and Vengeance for their eternal Burnings; they are but
laying in Powder and Bullets, and adding to the Pile of Toph^t, and flinging in
Oil to make the Flame rage the fierces. Who ^^uld serve such a Master, whose
Work is Drudgery, and whose Wages is Death? Romans 6.13.

What a woeful Spectacle was that poor Wretch possessed with the Legion? would
it not have pitied (...) Heart to have seen him among the Tombs, cutting and
wounding of himself? Mark 5.5. This is thy (...), such is thy Work, every
Stroke is a The at thine Heart, 1 Timothy 6.10. Conscience indeed is now asleep;
But when Death and Judgment shall bring thee to thy Senses, then will thou feel
the raging Smart and Anguish of every Wound. The convinced Sinner is a sensible
Instance of the miserable Bondage of Sin: Conscience flies upon him, and tells
him what the End of these Things will be: and yet such a Slave is he to his
Lusts. that on he must, though he see it will be his endless Perdition; and when
the Temptation comes, Lust gets the Bitt in his Mouth, breaks all the Cords of
his Vows and Promises, and carries him headlong to his own Destruction.

VI. The Furnace of eternal Vengeance is heated ready for thee, Isa. 3.33. Hell
and Destruction open their Mouths upon thee, they gape for thee, they groan for
thee, Isa. 5.14. waiting (as it were) with a greedy Eye, as thou stand upon
the Brink, when thou will drop in. If the Wrath of Man be as the roaring of a
Lion, Prove. 20.2. more heavy than Sand, Prove. 27.3. what is the Wrath of the
infinite God? If the Burning-Furnace heated in Nebuchadnezzar's Fieryrage, when
he commanded it to be made yet seven times hotter, were so fierce as to burn up
even those that drew near it to throw the Children in, Dan. 3.19, 22. how hot
is that burning Oven of the Almighty's Fury! Mal. 4.1. Surely this is seventy
times seven more fierce. What think thou, O Man, of being a Faggot in Hell
to all Eternity? Can thine Heart endure, or can thine Hands be s^rong in the
Day that I shall deal with thee, says the Lord of Hosts, Ezekiel. 22.14. Can
thou dwell with everlasting Burnings! Can thou abide the consuming Fire? Isa.
33.4. When thou shall be as a glowing Iron in Hell, and thy whole Body and Soul
shall be as perfectly possessed by God's burning Vengeance, as the fiery
sparkling Iron, when heated, or in fiercest Forge? Thou can not bear God's
Whip, how then will thou endure his Scorpions? Thou art even crushed, and ready
to wish thyself dead, under the Weight of his finger, how then will thou bear
the Weight of his Loins? The most patient Man that ever was, did curse the Day
that ever he was born, Job 3.1. and even wish Death to come and end his Misery,
Job 7.15, 16: when God did but let out one little Drop of his Wrath: How then
will thou endure, when God shall pour out all his Vials, and set himself
against thee, to torment thee! When he shall make thy Conscience the Tunnel, by
which he will be pouring his burning Wrath into thy Soul forever; and when he
shall fill all thy Powers as full of Torment as they be now full of Sin! When
Immortality shall be thy Misery: and to die the Death of a Brute, and be
swallowed into the Gulf of Annihilation, shall be such a Felicity, as the whole
Eternity of Wishes, and an Ocean of Tears shall never purchase! now thou can
put off the evil Day, and can laugh and be merry, and forget the Terror of
the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11. but how will thou hold out, or hold up, when God will
cast thee into a Bed of Torments, Rev. 2.21. and make thee to lie down in
Sorrows, Isa. 50.11. When Roarings and Blasphemy shall be thine only Music;
and the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without Mixture, into the
Cup of his Indignation, shall be thine only Drink, Rev. 14.10. When thou shall
draw in Flames for thy Breath, and the horrid Stench of Sulphur shall be thy
only Perfume! In a Word, when the Smoke of thy Torment shall ascend up for evet
and ever, and thou shall have no rest, Night nor Day; no rest in thy
Conscience, no Ease in thy Bones, but thou shall be an Execration, and an
Astonishment, and a Curse, and a Reproach for evermore, Jer. 42.18.

O Sinner! stop here, and consider: If thou art a Man, and no senseless Block,
consider; bethink thy self where thou stand; why, upon the very Brink of his
Furnace. As the Lord lives, and thy Soul lives, there is but a Step between
thee and this, I Sam. 10.3. Thou know not when thou lie down, but thou
may be in it before the Morning: Thou know^ not when thou risest, but thou
may drop in before the Night: Dare thou make light of this! Will thou go on
in such a dreadful Condition, and as if nothing ailed thee? If thou put it
off, and say, This does not belong to thee; look again over the foregoing
Chapter, and tell me the Truth: Are none of these black Marks found upon thee?
Do not blind thine Eyes, do not deceive thyself; see thy Misery while thou
may prevent it; think what it is to be a vile Cast-out, a damned Reprobate,
a Vessel of Wrath, into which the Lord will be pouring out his tormenting Fury,
while he has a Being, Romans 9.22.

Divine Wrath is a fierce, Deuteronomy. 32.22. devouring, Isa. 33.14. everlasting,
Matthew. 25.41. unquenchable Fire, Matthew. 3.12. and thy Soul and Body must be the
Fuel upon which it will be feeding forever, unless thou consider thy Ways, and
speedily turn to the Lord by a sound Conversion. They that have been only
singed by this Fire, and had no more but the Smell thereof passing upon them;
Oh, what amazing Spectacles have they been! whose Heart would not have melted,
to have heard Spira's Outcries? To have seen Chaloner, that Monument of
Justice, worn to Skin and Bones, blaspheming the God of Heaven, cursing
himself, and continually crying out, O Torture, Torture, Torture! O Torture,
Torture! as if the Flames of Wrath had already took hold on him? To have heard
Rogers crying out, I have had a little Pleasure, but now I must to Hell for
evermore; wishing but for this Mitigation, that God would let him lie burning
forever behind the Back of that Fire (on the Earth) and bringing in this sad
Conclusion still, at the End of whatsoever was spoken to him to afford him some
Hope, I must to Hell, I must to the Furnace of Hell, for Millions and Millions
of Ages? Oh! if the Fears and Fore-Thoughts of the Wrath to come, be so
terrible, so intolerable, what is the Feeling of it?

Sinner, it is but in vain to flatter you, this would be but to toll you into
the unquenchable Fire; know ye from the living God, that here you must lie,
with these Burnings you must dwell. ^ill Immortality die, and Immutability
change* (...) Eternity run out, and Omnipotency is not longer able t^ torment,
except you be in good Earnest renewed throughout by sanctifying Grace.

VII. The Law discharges all its Threats and Curses at thee, Gal. 3.10. Romans
7. Oh, how dreadfully does it thunder* It spits Fire and Brimstone in thy Face:
Its Word^ ^re as drawn Swords, and as the sharp Arrows of the Mighty: It
demands Satisfaction to the Utmost, and cries, Justice, Justice: It speaks
Blood, and War, and Wounds, and Death against thee. O the Execrations, and
Plagues, and Deaths that this murdering Piece is loaded with! (read Deuteronomy.
28.15, 16, etc.) and thou art the Mark at which this Shot is levelled. O Man!
away to thy strong Hold, Zech. 9.12. Away from thy Sins, haste to the
Sanctuary, the City of Refuge, Heb. 13.13. even the Lord Jesus Christ; hide
thee in him, or else thou art lost without any Hope of Recovery.

VIII. The Gospel itself binds the Sentence of eternal Damnation upon thee,
Mark 16.16. If thou continuest in thine impenitent and unconverted Estate, know
that the Gospel denounces a much sorer Condemnation, than ever would have been
for the Transgression only of the first Covenant. Is it not a dreadful Case ^o
have the Gospel itself fill its Mouth with Threats and Thunder and Damnation?
To have the Lord to roar from Mount Sion against thee? Joel 3.16. Hear the
Terror of the Lord, He that believes not, shall be damned: Except ye repent,
ye shall all perish, Luke 13.3. This is the Condemnation, that Light is come
into the World, and Men love Darkness rather than Light, John 3.19. He that
believes not, the Wrath of God abides on him, John 3.36. If the Word spoken
by Angels was steadfast, and every Transgression and Disobedience received a
just Recompense of Reward, how shall we escape, if we neglect so great
Salvation, Heb. 2.2, 3. He that despised Moses's Law, died without Mercy: Of
how much sorer Punishment shall he be thought worthy, that has trampled under
Foot the Son of God? Heb. 10.28, 29.

Application. And is this true indeed? Is this thy Misery? Yea, it is as true as
God is. Better open thine Eyes, and see it now, while thou may remedy it,
than blind and harden thy self, till, to thine eternal Sorrow, thou shall feel
what thou would not believe: And if it be true, what do thou mean to
loiter and linger in such a Case as this?

Alas for thee, poor Man! how effectually has Sin undone thee, and deprived
and despoiled thee, even of thy Reason to look after thine own everlasting
Good? O miserable Caitiff! What Stupidity and Senselessness has surprised
thee? Oh! let me knock up, and awake this Sleeper. Who dwells within the Walls
of this Flesh? Is there ever a Soul here, a rational, understanding Soul? Or
art thou only a walking Ghost, a senseless Lump? Art thou a reasonable Soul,
and yet so far brutified, as to forget thy self immortal, and to think thy self
to be as the Beasts that perish? Art thou turned into Flesh? that thou
savourest nothing but gratifying the Sense, and making Provision for the Flesh?
Or else having reason to understand the Eternity of thy future Estate, do
thou yet make light of being everlastingly miserable? which is to be so much
below a Brute, as it is worse to act against Reason, than to act without it. O
unhappy Soul, that wast the Glory of Man, the Mate of Angels, and the Image of
God! that wast God's Representative in the World, and had the Supremacy
amongst the Creatures, and the Dominion over thy Maker's Works! Art thou now
become a Slave to Sense, a Servant to so base an Idol as thy Belly; for no
higher Felicity than to fill thee with the Wind of Man's Applause, or heaping
together a little refined Earth, no more suitable to thy spiritu^ immortal
Nature, than the Dirt and Sticks? O^ why do thou not bethink thee where thou
shall be for ever? Death is at Hand, The Judge is even (...) the Door, James
5.9. Yet a little while, and Ti^ shall be no longer, Rev. 10.5, 6. And will thou run the Hazard of continuing in such a State, in which, if thou be
overtaken, thou art irrecoverably miserable.

Come then, Arise, and attend thy nearest Concernments. Tell me, Whither art
thou going? What! will thou live in such a Course, wherein every Act is a Step
to Perdition; and thou do not know, but the next Night thou may make thy
Bed in Hell* Oh, if thou have a Spark of Reason, consider, and turn, and
hearken to thy very Friend, ^o would therefore show thee thy present Misery, ^
at thou might in time make thine Escape, and ^ eternally happy.

Hear what the Lord says, Fear ye not me? says the Lord. Will ye not tremble
at my Presence? Jer. 5.21. O Sinners! Do ye make light of the Wrath to come?
Matthew. 3.7. I am sure there is a Time coming, when you will not make light of
it. Why the very Devils do believe and tremble, James 2.19. What, You more
hardened than they! Will you run upon the Edge of the Rock? Will you play at the
Hole of the Asp? Will you put your Hand upon the Cockatrice's Den? Will you
dance about the Fire till you are burnt? or dally with devouring Wrath as if
you were at a point of Indifferency, whether you did escape it, or endure it? O
madness of Folly* Solomon's Madman, that casts Firebrands, and Arrows and
Death, and says, Am I not in Jest? Prove. 26.18. is nothing so distracted as
the willful Sinner, Luke 15.17. that goes on in his unconverted Estate without
Sense, as if nothing ailed him. The Man that runs on the Cannon's Mouth, that
sports with his Blood, or lets out his Life in a Frolic, is sensible, sober
and serious to him that goes on still in his Trespasses, Psalm. 68.21. For he
stretches out his Hand against God, and strengthens himself against the
Almighty: He runs upon him, even upon his Neck, upon the thick Bosses of his
Buckler, Job 15.25, 26. Is it Wisdom to dally with the Second death, or to
venture into the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, Rev. 21.8. as if
thou were but going to wash thee, or swim for thy Recreation? Will thou, as it
were, fetch thy Vieze, and jump into eternal Flames, as the Children through
the Bon-fire? What shall I say? I can find out no Expression, no Comparison,
whereby to se^ forth the dreadful Distraction of that Soul, that shall go on in
Sin.

Awake, awake, Ephesians. 5.14. O Sinner! Arise and take thy Flight: There is but one
Door that thou may fly by, and that is the strait Door of Conversion, and
the New Birth. Unless thou turn unfeignedly from all thy Sins, and come unto
Jesus Christ, and take him for the Lord thy Righteousness, and walk in him in
Holiness and Newness of Life; as the Lord lives, it is not more certain that
thou art now our of Hell, than that thou shall without fail be in it but a few
Days and Nights from hence. Oh, set thine Heart to think of thy Case! Is not
thine everlasting Misery or Welfare that which does deserve a little
Consideration? Look again over the Miseries of the Unconverted: If the Lord
has not spoken by me, regard me not; but if it be the very Word of God, that
all this Misery lies upon thee, what a Case a^ thou in? Is it for one that has
his Senses to live i^ such a Condition, and not to make all possible Expedition
for preventing his utter Ruin? O Man! wh^ has bewitched thee, Gal. 3.1. that
in the Matte^ of this present Life thou should be wise enough i^vent forecast
thy Business, foresee thy Danger, and prevent thy Mischief; but in Matters of
Everlastin^ Consequence should be slight and careless, as if the little
concerned thee? Why, is it nothing to the to have all the Attributes of God
engaged again thee? Can thou do well without his Favou^ Can thou escape his
Hands, or endure his Veng^ance? Do thou hear the Creation groaning und^ thee,
and Hell groaning for thee, and yet think t^ Case good enough? Art thou in the
Paw of the Li^ under the Power of Corruption, in the dark (...) noisome Prison,
fettered with thy Lusts, working ^ thine own Damnation; and is not this worth ^
considering? Will thou make light of all the T^rors of the Law, of all its
Curses and Thunder b^ as if they were but the Report of the Childrens ^ guns,
or thou were to war with their Paper-pelle^ Do thou ^augh at Hell and
Destruction? or can thou drink the envenomed Cup of the Almighty's Fury, as
if it were but a common Potion?

Gird up now thy Loins like a Man, for I will demand of thee, and answer thou
me, Job 40.7. Art thou such a Leviathan, as that the Scales of thy Pride should
keep thee from thy Maker's coming at thee? Will thou esteem his Arrows as
Straw, and the Instruments of Death as rotten Wood? Art thou Chief of all the
Children of Pride, even that thou should count his Darts as Stubble, and
laugh at the Shaking of his Spear? Art thou made without Fear, and contemnest
thou his barbed Irons? Job 41. Art thou like the Horse that paweth in the
Valley, and rejoiceth in his Strength, who goes out to meet the armed Men?
Do thou mock at Fear, and art not affrighted, neither turnest back from God's
Sword, when his Quiver raileth against thee, the glittering Spear and the
Shield? Job 39.21, 22, 23. Well, if the Threats and Calls of the Word will not
fear thee, nor awaken thee, I am sure Death and Judgment will. Oh, what will thou do when the Lord comes forth against thee, and in his Fury falls upon
thee, and thou shall feel what thou read! If when Daniel's Enemies were cast
into the Den of Lions, both they, and their Wives, and their Children, the
Lions had the Mastery of them, and brake all their Bones in Pieces, ere ever
they ^ame at the Bottom of the Den, Daniel 6.24. What shall be done with thee,
when thou fallest into the Hands of the living God? When he shall gripe thee ^n
his Iron-arms, and grind and crush thee to a thou^and Pieces in his Wrath?

Oh, do not then contend with God, Repent and ^e converted, so none of this
shall come upon thee, ^sa. 55.6, 7. Seek the Lord while be may be found; call
(...) upon him while he is near. Let the Wicked forsake his ^ays, and the
unrighteous Man his Thoughts; let him ^n unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy
on him; and our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

Chap. VI. Containing Directions for Conversion.
Mark x. 17. And there came one, and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good
Master, What shall I do that I may inherit Eternal Life?


BEfore thou read these Directions, I advise thee, yea, I charge thee before
God, and His Holy Angels, to resolve to follow them (as far as Conscience shall
be convinced of their Agreeableness to God's Word, and thy Estate) and strive
in his Assistance and Blessing that they may succeed. And as I have sought the
Lord, and consulted his Oracles, what Advice to give thee, so must thou
entertain it with that awe, reverence, and purpose of Obedience, that the Word
of the living God does require.

Now then attend, Set thine Heart unto all that I seal^ testify unto thee in
this Day; for it is not a vain Thing, i^ is your Life, Deuteronomy. 32.46. That is the
End of all that has been spoken hitherto, to bring you to set upon turning, and
making use of God's Means for you^ Conversion. I would not trouble you, nor
tormen^ you before the Time, with the Fore-thoughts of you^ Eternal Misery, but
in order to your making you^ Escape. Were you shut up under your present
Misery, without Remedy, it were but Mercy (as one speaks) to let you alone,
that you might take i^ that little poor Comfort that you are capable of, he^ in
this World: But you may yet be happy, if yo^ do not wilfully refuse the Means
of your Recovery Behold, I hold open the Door unto you; arise, tak^ your
Flight: I set the Way of Life before you: wal^ in it, and you shall live, and
not die, Deuteronomy. 30.1^ Jer. 9 16. It pities me to think you should be you^ own
Murderers, and throw yourselves headlong when God and Men cry out to you, as
Peter, in another Case, to his Master, Spare thyself. A noble Vi^gin, that
attended the Court of Spain, was wicked^ ravished by the King, and hereupon
exciting the Duke, her Father, to Revenge, he called in the Moors to his help;
who, when they had executed his Design, miserably wasted and spoiled the
Country, which this Virgin laying so exceedingly to Heart, shut her self up in
a Tower belonging to her Father's House, and desired her Farher and Mother
might be called forth, and bewailing to them her own Wretchedness, that she
should have occasioned so much Misery and Desolation to her Country for the
satisfying of her Revenge, she told them she was resolved to be avenged upon
herself. Her Father and Mother besought her to pity her self and them, but
Nothing could prevail, but she took her Leave of them, and threw her self off
the Battlements, and so perished before their Faces.

Just thus is the wilful Destruction of ungodly Men. The God that made them
beseeches them, and crying out to them, as Paul to the distracted Jailer, when
about to murder himself, Do thy self no harm. The Ministers of Christ forewarn
them, and follow them, and fain would have them back; but alas! no
Expostulations nor Obtestations will prevail, but Men will hurry themselves
into Perdition, while Pity itself looks on.

What shall I say? Would it not grieve a Person of any Humanity, if in the Time
of a reigning Plague he should have a Receipt (as one said well) that would
infallibly cure all the Country, and recover the most hopeless Patients, and
yet his Friends and Neighbors should die by the Hundreds about him, because
they would not use it? Men and Brethren, though you carry the certain Symptons of
Death in your Faces, yet I have a Receipt that will cure you ^ll, that will
cure infallibly; follow but these few Directions, and if you do not then win
Heaven, I will be content to lose it.

Hear then, O Sinner! and as ever thou would be converted and saved, embrace
this following Counsel.

Direct. I Set it down with thyself, as an undoubted Truth, that it is
impossible for thee ever to get to Heaven in this thy unconverted State. Can
any other but Christ save thee? And he tells thee, he will never do it, except
thou be regenerated and converted, Matthew. 18.3. John 3.3. Does he not keep the
Keys of Heaven? And can thou get in without his leave? As thou must, if ever
thou come thither in thy natural Condition, without a sound and through
Renovation?

Direct. II. Labor to get a through Sight and lively Sense and Feeling of thy
Sins. Till Men are weary and heavy laden, and pricked at the Heart, and stark
sick of Sin, they will not come unto Christ, in his Way, for Ease and Cure; nor
to purpose enquire, What shall we do? Matthew. 11.28. Acts 2.37. Matthew. 9.12.
They must set themselves down for dead Men before they will come unto Christ,
that they may have Life, John 5.40. Labor therefore to set all thy Sins in
Order before thee; never be afraid to look upon them, but let thy Spirit make
diligent Search, Psalm. 77.6 Enquire into thine Heart and into thy Life; enter
into a through Examination of thy self, and of all thy Ways, Psalm 119.59. that
thou may make a full Discovery: and call in the Help of God's Spirit, in the
Sense of thine own Inability hereunto, for it is his proper Work to convince of
Sin, John 16.8. Spread all before the Face of thy Conscience, till thine Heart
and Eyes be set abroach. Leave not striving with God, and thine own Soul, till
it cry out under the Sense of thy Sins, as the enlightened Jailor, What must I
do to be saved? Acts 16.30. To this Purpose,

Meditate of the Numerousness of thy Sins. Davi^ Heart failed when he thought
of this, and considere^ that he had more Sins than Hairs, Psalm 40.12. Thi^
made him cry out upon the Multitude of God's tender Mercies, Psalm 51.1. The
loathsome Carcass dot^ not more hatefully swarm with crawling Worm^ than an
unsanctified Soul with filthy Lusts; the^ fill the Head, the Heart, the Eyes
and Mouth of him Look backward; Where was ever the place, what wa^ ever the
time, in which thou did not sin? Lo^ inward: What Part or Power can thou
find in Soul ^ body but it is poisoned with Sin? What Duty do thou ever
perform, into which Poison is not shed? Oh, how great is the Sum of thy Debts,
who have been all thy Life long running upon the Books, and never did, nor
can pay off one Penny? Look over the Sin of thy Nature, and all its cursed
Brood, the Sins of thy Life; call to Mind thy Omissions, Commissions, the Sins
of thy Thoughts, of thy Words, of thine Actions, the Sins of thy Youth, the
Sins of thy Years, etc. Be not like a desperate Bankrupt, that is afraid to
look over his Books. Read the Records of Conscience carefully. These Books must
be opened sooner or later, Rev. 20.12.

Meditate upon the Aggravations of thy Sins, as they are the grand Enemies
against the God of thy Life, against the Life of thy Soul: In a Word, they are
the public Enemies of all Mankind. How do David, Ezra, Daniel, and the good
Levites, aggravate their Sins, from the Consideration of their Injuriousness to
God, their Opposition to his good and righteous Laws, the Mercies, the Warnings
that they were committed against, Neh. 9. Dan. 9. Ezra 9. O the Work that Sin
has made in the World. This is the Enemy that has brought in Death, that has
robbed and enslaved Man, that has blacked the Devil, that has dug Hell,
Romans 5.12. 2 Pet. 2.4. John 8.34. This is the Enemy that has turned the
Creation upside down, and sown Dissension between Man and the Creatures,
between Man and Man, yea, between Man and himself, setting the sensitive Part
against the rational, the Will against the Judgment, Lust against Conscience;
yea, worst of all, between God and Man, making the lapsed Sinner both hateful
to God, and the Hater of him, Zech. 11.8. O Man! how can thou make so light
of Sin? This ^s the Traitor that sucked the Blood of the Son of God, that sold
him, that mocked him, that scourged ^im, that spit in his Face, that dug his
Hands, that pierced his Side, that pressed his Soul, that ^angled his Body,
that never left till he had bound ^im, condemned him, nailed him, crucified
him, and put him to open Shame, Isa. 53.4, 5, 6. This is that deadly Poison, so
powerful of Operation, as that one Drop of it shed upon the Root of Mankind,
has corrupted, spoiled, and poisoned, and undone his whole Race at once, Romans
5.18, 19. This is the common Butcher, the bloody Executioner, that has killed
the Prophets, burnt the Martyrs, murdered all the Apostles, all the Patriarchs,
all the Kings and Potentates, that has destroyed Cities, swallowed Empires,
butchered and devoured whole Nations Whatever was the Weapon that 'twas done
by, Sin was it that did Execution, Romans 6.23. Do thou yet think it but a
small Thing? If Adam and all his Children could be dug out of their Graves,
and their Bodies piled up to Heaven, and an Inquest were made, what matchless
Murderer were guilty of a^ this Blood; it would be all found in the Skirts of
Sin. Study the Nature of Sin, till thy Heart be brought to fear and loath it.
And meditate on the Aggravations of thy particular Sins, how thou have sinned
against all God's Warnings, against thine own Prayers, against Mercies, against
Corrections, against clearest Light, against freest Love, against thine (...)
Resolutions, against Promises, Vows, Covenants o^ better Obedience, etc. Charge
thine Heart home wit^ these Things, till it blush for Shame, and be brought out
of all good Opinion of itself, Ezra 9.6.

Meditate upon the Desert of Sin It cries up to Heaven: It calls for
Vengeance, Genesis 18.21. Its du^ Wages is Death and Damnation; it pulls the Curs^
of God upon the Soul and Body, Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 28 The least sinful Word or
Thought lays thee under the infinite Wrath of God Almighty, Romans 2.8, 9 Matthew.
12.36. Oh, what a Load of Wrath, what ^ Weight of Curses, what Treasures of
Vengeance have all the Millions of thy Sins then deserved? Romans 2.^ John 3.36.
Oh, judge thy self, that the Lord man not judge thee, 1 Cor. 11.31.

Meditate upon the Defilement and Deformity of ^ It Is as black as Hell, the
very Image and Likene^ of the Devil drawn upon the Soul, 1 John 3.8, 1^ it
would more affright thee to see thy self in t^ hateful Deformity of thy Nature,
than to see the Devil. There is no Mire so unclean, no Vomit so loathsome, no
Carcass or Carrion to offensive, no Plague or Leprosy so noisome, as Sin, in
which thou art all enrolled, and covered with its odious Filth, whereby thou
art rendered more displeasing to the pure and holy Nature of the glorious God,
than the most filthy Object, composed of whatever is hateful to all thy Senses,
can be to thee, John 15.15, 16. Could thou take up a Toad into thy Bosom?
Could thou cherish it, and take Delight in it? Why, thou art as contrary to
the pure and perfect Holiness of the Divine Nature, and as loathsome as that is
to thee, Matthew. 3 33. till thou art purified by the Blood of Jesus, and the
Power of renewing Grace.

Above all other Sins, fix the Eye of Consideration on these two, 1. The Sin of
thy Nature It Is to little Purpose to lop the Branches, while the Root of
^riginal Corruption remains untouched In vain do Men lave out the Stream when
the Fountain is running, that (...) up all again. Let the Ax of thy Repentance
(with David's) go to the Root of Sin, Psalm 51.5. Study how deep, how close,
how permanent is thy natural Pollution, how universal it is, till thou do cry
out, with Paul's Feeling, upon thy Body of Death, Romans 7 2 Look into all thy
Parts and Powers and see what unclean Vessels, what Styes, what Dunghills, what
Sinks they are become, Heu miser, quid sum? vas sterquilinii, concha
putredentis, plenus fetore and horrore, August Solil. c. 2. The Heart is never
foundly broken, till thoroughly convinced of the heinousness of Original Sin.
Here fix thy Thoughts, this is that that makes thee backward to all good, prove
to all Evil, Romans 7.15. that sheds Blindness, Pride, Prejudice, Unbelief, into
thy Mind. Enmity, Unconstancy, Obstinacy, into thy Will: inordinate Heats and
Colds into thy Affections; Insensibleness, Benummedness, Unfaithfulness, into
thy Conscience; Slipperiness into thy Memory; and, in a Word, has put every
Wheel of thy Soul out of Order, and made it, of an Habitation of Holiness, to
become a very Hell of iniquity, James 3.6. This is that that has defiled,
corrupted, perverted all thy Members, and turned them into Weapons of
Unrighteousness, and Servants of Sin, Romans 6.19. that has filled the Head with
carnal and corrupt Designs, Mic. 2.1. the Hand with sinful Practices, Isa.
1.15. the Eye with Wandering and Wantonness, 2 Pet. 2.14. the Tongue with deadly
Poison, James 3.8. that has opened the Ears to Tales, Flattery, and filthy
Communication, and shut them against the Instruction of Life, Zech. 7.11, 12.
and has rendered thy Heart a very Mint and Forge for Sin, and the cursed Womb
of all deadly Conceptions, Matthew. 15.16. so that it pours forth its
Wickedness without ceasing, 2 Pet. 2.14. even as naturally, freely and
unweariedly, as a Fountain does pour forth its Waters, Jer. 6.7. or the raging
Sea does cast forth Mire and Dirt, Isa. 57.20. And will thou yet be in Love
with thyself, and tell us any longer of thy good Heart? Oh, never leave
meditating on this desperate Contagion of original Corruption, till, with
Ephraim, thou bemoan thyself, Jer. 31.8: and with deepest Shame and Sorrow,
smite on thy Breast, as the Publican, Luke ^8.13. and with Job abhor thy self
and repent in Dust and Ashes, Job 42.6, 22. The particular Evil that thou art
most addicted to, find out all its Aggravations, set home upon thy Heart all
God's Threatenings against it: Repentance drives before it the whole Herd, but
especially sticks the Arrow in the beloved Sin, and singles this out above the
rest, to run it down, Psalm. 11.23. Oh, labor to make this Sin odious to thy
Soul, and double thy Guards, and thy Resolutions, against it, because this
has, and does most dishonor God, and endanger thee.

Direct. III. Strive to affect thy Heart with a deep Sense of thy present
Misery. Read over the foregoing Chapter again and again, and get it out of the
Book, into thine Heart. Remember when thou lie down, that for aught thou
know, thou may awake in Flames, and when thou risest up, that by the next
Night thou may make thy Bed in Hell. Is it a jesting Matter to live in such a
fearful Case? To stand tottering upon the Brink of the Bottomless-pit, and to
live at the Mercy of every Disease, that if it will but fall upon thee, will
send thee forthwith into the Burnings? Suppose thou saw a condemned Wretch
hanging over Nebuchadnezzar's burning fiery Furnace, by nothing but a
Twine-Thread, which were ready to break every Moment, would not thy Heart
tremble for such an One? Why, thou art the Man. This is thy very Case, O Man,
Woman, that read this, if thou be yet unconverted. What if the Thread of thy
Life should break? (Why, thou know not but it may be the next Night, yea,
the next Moment) Where would thou be then? Whither would thou drop? Verily
upon the Crack but of this Thread, thou fallest into the Lake that burns with
Fire and Brimstone; where thou may lie scalding and sweltering in a fiery
Ocean, while God has a Being, if thou die in thy present Case. And does not
thy Soul tremble as thou read? Does not thy Tears bedew the Paper, and thy
Heart throb in thy Bosom? Do thou not yet begin to smite on thy Breast, and
bethink thy self what Need thou have of a Change? Oh, what is thy Heart made
of? Have thou not only lost all Regard to God, but art without any Love and
Pity to thy self?

Oh, study thy Misery, till thy Heart do cry out for Christ, as earnestly as
ever a drowning Man did for a Boat, or the Wounded for a Surgeon: Men must
come to see the Danger, and feel the Smart of their deadly Sores and Sickness,
or else Christ will be to them a Physician of no Value, Matthew. 9.12. Then the
Manslayer hastens to the City of Refuge, when pursued by the Avenger of Blood.
Men must be even forced and fired out of themselves, or else they will not come
to Christ. 'Twas Distress and Extremity that made the Prodigal ^^nk of
returning, Luke 15.16, 17. While Laodicea thinks herself rich, increased in
Goods, in need of Nothing, there is little Hope. She must be deeply convinced
of her Wretchedness, Blindness, Poverty, Nakedness, before she will come to
Christ for his Gold, Raiment, Eye salve, Rev. 3.17, 18 Therefore hold the Eyes
of Conscience open, amplify thy Misery as much as possible, do not fly the
Sighs of it, for fear it should fill thee with Terror. The Sense of thy Misery
is but (as it were) the Supputation of the Wound, which is necessary to the
Cure. Better fear the Torments that abide thee now, than feel them hereafter.

Direct. IV. Settle it upon thy Heart, that thou art under everlasting
Inability ever to recover thy self. Never think thy Praying, Reading, Hearing,
Confessing, Amending, will do the Cure. These must be attended, but thou art
undone if thou restest in them, Romans 10.3. Thou art a lost Man, if thou hopest
to escape drowning upon any other Plank, but Jesus Christ, Acts 4.12. Thou must
unlearn thy self, and renounce thine own Wisdom, thine own Righteousness, thine
own Strength, and throw thy self wholly upon Christ, as a Man that swimmeth
casts himself upon the Water, or else thou can not escape. While Men trust
in themselves, and establish their own Righteousness, and have Confidence in
the Flesh, they will not come savingly to Christ, Luke 18.9. Philip 3.3. Thou
must know thy Gain to be but Loss and Dung, thy Strength but Weakness, thy
Righteousness Rags and Rottenness, before there will be an effectual Closure
between Christ and thee, Philip. 3.7, 8, 9. 2 Cor. 3.5. Isa. 64.6. Can the
lifeless Carcass shake off its Grave-cloaths, and loose the Bonds of Death?
Then may thou recover thy self, who (...) dead in Trespasses and Sins, and
under an Impossibility of serving thy Maker (acceptably) in this Condition,
Romans 8.8. Heb. 11.6. Therefore when thou go to pray, or meditate, or to do
any of the Duties to which thou art here directed, go out of thy self, call in
the Help of the Spirit, as despairing to do any Thing pleasing to God, in thine
own Strength: Yet neglect not thy Duty, but lie at the Pool, and wait in the
Way of the Spirit. While the Eunuch was reading, then the Holy Ghost sent
Philip to him, Acts 8.28, 29. When the Disciples were praying, Acts 4.31. when
Cornelius and his Friends were hearing, Acts 10.44. then the Holy Ghost fell
upon them, and filled them all. Strive to give up thy self to Christ, strive to
pray, strive to meditate, strive an hundred and an hundred Times, try to do it
as well as thou can; and while thou art endeavoring in the Way of thy Duty,
the Spirit of the Lord will come upon thee, and help thee to do what of thy
self thou art utterly unable unto, Prove. 1.23.

Direct. V. Forthwith renounce all thy Sins. If thou yield thyself to the
constant Practice of any Sin, thou art undone, Romans 6.17. In vain do thou
hope for Life by Christ, except thou depart from Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. Forsake
thy Sins, or else thou can not find Mercy, Prove. 18.13. Thou can not be
married to Christ, except divorced from Sin. Give up the Traitor, or you can
have no Peace with Heaven. Cast the Head of Sheba over the Wall: Keep not
Dalilah in thy Lap. Thou must part with thy Sins, or with thy Soul: Spare but
one Sin, and God will not spare thee: Never make Excuses, thy Sins must die, or
thou must die for them, Psalm 86.21. If thou allow of one Sin, though but a
little, a secret one, though thou may plead Necessity, and have a hundred
Shifts and Excuses for it, the Life of thy Soul must go for the Life of that
^in, Ezekiel. 18.21. And will it not be dearly bought?

O Sinner! hear and consider. If thou will part with thy Sins, God will give
thee his Christ. I^ not this a fair Exchange? I testify unto thee thi^ Day,
that if thou perish; it is not because there wa^ never a Savior provided, nor
Life tendered, but because thou preferredst (with the J^^s) thy Murderer before
thy Savior, Sin before Christ, and lovedst Darkness rather than Light, John
3.19. Search thy Heart therefore with Candles, a^ the Jews did their Houses for
Leaven, bef^ the Pass over: Labor to find out thy Sins, (...) into thy Closet,
and consider, What Evil have I lived in? What Duty have I neglected toward
God? What Sin have I lived in against my Brother? And now strike the Darts
through the Heart of thy Sin, as Joah did through Absalom's, 2 Samuel 18.14 Never
stand looking upon thy Sins, nor rolling the Morsel under thy Tongue, Job
20.11. but spit it out as Poison, with Fear and Detestation: Alas! What will
thy Sins do for thee that thou should stick at pa^ting with them? They will
flatter thee, but they will undo thee, and cut thy Throat, while they smile
upon thee, and poison thee, while they please thee, and arm the Justice and
Wrath of the infinite God against thee. They will open Hell for thee, and pile
up Fuel to burn thee: Behold the Gibbet that they have prepared for thee. Oh,
serve them like Haman, and do upon them the Execution they would else have done
upon thee: Away with them, crucify them, and let Christ only be Lord over thee.

Direct. VI. Make a solemn Choice of God for thy Portion and Blessedness, Deuteronomy.
26. With all possible Devotion and Veneration avouch the Lord for thy God. Set
the World, with all its Glory, and Paint, and Gallantry, with all its Pleasures
and Promotions, on the one Hand; and set God with all his infinite Excellencies
and Perfections, on the other; and (...) that thou deliberately make thy
Choice, Josh. (...) Take up thy Rest in God, John 6.68. Set (...) down under
his Shadow, Cant 2.3. Let his ^ses and Perfections turn the Scale against all
(...) World. Settle it upon thy Heart, that the Lord ^an all-sufficient
Portion, that thou can not be ^iserable while thou have a God to live upon:
Take ^im for thy Shield, and exceeding great Reward. ^od alone is more than all
the World, content thy self with him: Let others carry the Preferments and
Glory of the World: place thou thy Happiness in his Favor, and the Light of
his Countenance, Psalm. 4.6, 7.

Poor Sinner! thou art fallen off from God, and ^st engaged his Power and Wrath
against thee: Yet know, that of his abundant Grace, He does offer to be again
thy God in Christ, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. What say thou, Man? Will thou have the
Lord for thy God? Why take this Counsel and thou shall have him, come to him by
his Christ, John 14.6. Renounce the Idols of thine own Pleasures, Gain,
Reputation, 1 Thessalonians. 1.9. Let those be pulled out of the Throne, and let God's
Interest be uppermost in thine Heart: Take him as God, to be Chief in thine
Affections, Estimations, Intentions; for he ^ill not endure to have any set
above him, P^m. 1.24. Psalm 73.25. In a Word, thou must take him in all his
Personal Relations, and in all his Essential Perfections.

First, In all his Personal Relations. God the Father must be taken for thy
Father, Jer. 3.4, 19, 22. Oh, come to him with the Prodigal, Father, I have
sinned against Heaven, and in thy Sight, and am not worthy to be called thy
Son; but since of thy wonderful Mercy, thou art pleased to take me, that am of
myself a Dog, a Swine, a Devil, to be thy Child; I solemnly take thee for my
Father, commend myself to thy Care, and trust to thy Providence, and cast my
Burden on thy Shoulders, I depend on thy Provision, and submit to thy
Corrections, and trust under the Shadow of thy Wings, and hide in thy Chambers,
and fly to thy Name. I renounce all Confidence in myself, I repose my
Confidence in thee, I depose my Concernments with thee: I will be for thee, and
no other. Again, God the Son must be taken for thy Savior, for thy Redeemer
and Righteousness, Joh. 1.2. He must be accepted as the only Way to the Father,
and the only Means of Life, Heb. 7.25. Oh then, put off the Raiment of thy
Captivity, on with the Wedding Garment, and go and marry thyself to Jesus
Christ. Lord, I am thine, and all that I have, my Body, my Soul, my Name, my
Estate. I send a Bill of Divorce to my other Lovers: I give my Heart to thee, I
will be thine undividedly, thine everlastingly. I will set thy Name on all I
have, and use it only as thy Goods, as thy Loan during thy Leave, resigning all
to thee. I will have no King but thee; reign thou over me. Other Lords have had
Dominion over me; but now I will make mention of thy Name only, and do here
take an Oath of Fealty to thee, promising and vowing to serve, love and fear
thee, above all Competitions. I disavow mine own Righteousness, and despair of
ever being pardoned and saved for mine own Duties or Graces, and le^ only on
thine all-sufficient Sacrifice and Intercession, for Pardon, and Life, and
Acceptance before God. I take thee for mine only Guide and Instructor,
resolving to be led and directed by thee, and to wait for thy Counsel; and that
thine shall be the casting Voice with me. Lastly, God the Spirit must be taken
for thy Sanctifier, Romans 8.9, 14. Gal. 5.16, 18. for thine Advocate, thy
Counselor, thy Comforter, the Teacher of thine Ignorance, the Pledge and
Earnest of thine Inheritance, Romans 8.26. Psalm 73.24. John 14 16. Ephesians. 1.14.
John 14.26. Ephesians. 4 30. Awake thou North Wind, and come thou South, and blow
upon my Garden, Cant. 4 16. Come thou Spirit of the most High; here is a House
for thee, here is a Temple for thee; here do thou rest forever; dwell here, and
rest here: Lo I give up the Possession to thee, full Possession. I send thee
the Keys of my Heart, that all may be for thy Use, that thou may put thy
Goods, thy Grace into every Room. I give up the Use of all to thee, that every
Faculty, and every Member may be thine Instrument, to work Righteousness, and
do the Will of my Father which is in Heaven.

Secondly, In all his essential Perfections. Consider how the Lord has
revealed himself to you in his Word: Will you take him as such a God? O Sinner,
here is the blessedest News that ever came to the Sons of Men: The Lord will be
thy God, Genesis 17.7: Rev. 21.3. if thou will but close with him in his
Excellencies. Will thou have the merciful, the gracious, the Sin pardoning God
to be thy God? Oh, yes (says the Sinner) I am undone else But he farther tells
thee, I am the holy and sin-hating God: If thou will be owned as one of my
People, thou must be holy, 1 Pet. 1.16. holy in Heart, holy in Life. Thou must
put away all thine Iniquities, be they never so near, never so natural, never
so necessary to the maintaining thy fleshly Interest. Unless thou will be at
Defiance with Sin, I cannot be thy God. Cast out the Leaven, put away the Evil
of thy Doings, cease to do Evil, learn to do well, or else I can have nothing
to do with thee, Isa. 1.16, 17.18. Bring forth mine Enemies, or there is no
Peace to be had with me: What does thine Heart answer? Lord I desire to have
thee as such a God; I desire to be holy, as thou art holy, to be made Partaker
of thy Holiness. I love thee, not only for thy Goodness and Mercy, but for thy
Holiness and Purity I take thy Holiness for my Happiness. Oh, be to me a
Fountain of Holiness, set on me the Stamp and Impress of thy Holiness, I will
thankfully part with all my Sins at thy Command: My wilful Sins I do forthwith
forsake; and for my Infirmities that I cannot get rid of, though I would, I will
strive against them in the Use of the Means. I detest them, and will pray and
war against them, and never let them have quiet Rest in my Soul. Beloved,
whosoever of you will thus accept of the Lord for his God, he shall have him.

Again, He tells you, I am the all-sufficient God, Gen 17.1. Will you lay All
at my Feet, and give it up to my Dispose, and take me for thine only Portion?
Will you own and honor mine All Sufficiency? Will you take me as your
Happiness and Treasure, your Hope and Bliss? I am a Sun, and a Shield, all in
one: Will you have me for your All? Genesis 15.1. Psalm. 84.11. Now, what do thou
say to this? Does thy Mouth water after the Onions and Fleshpots of Egypt? Art
thou loath to exchange the earthly Happiness for a Part in God; and though thou
would be glad to have God and the World too, yet can thou not think of
having him, and nothing but him, but had rather take up^ ^ith the Earth
below, if God would but let thee keep it as long as thou would? This is a
fearful Sign. But now, if thou art willing to sell all for the Pearl of great
Price, Mat. 13.47. If thine Heart answer, Lord, I desire no other Portion but
thee. Take the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, whosoever will, so I may have the
Light of thy Countenance: I pitch upon thee for my Happiness, I gladly venture
myself on thee, and trust myself with thee. I set my Hopes in thee, I take up
my Rest with thee. Let me hear thee say, I am thy God, thy Salvation, and I
have enough, all I wish for. I will make no Terms with thee, but for thyself:
Let me but have thee sure, let me be able to make my Claim, and see my Title to
thyself; and for other Things, I leave them to thee; give me more or less, any
thing, or nothing, I will be satisfied in my God. Take him thus and he is thine
own.

Again, He tells you, I am the sovereign Lord: If you will have me for your
God, you must give me the Supremacy, Matthew. 6.24. I will not be an Underling:
You must not make me a Second to Sin, or any worldly Interest. If you will be
my People, I must have the Rule over you; you must not live at your own List.
Will you come under my Yoke? Will you bow to my Government? Will you submit to
my Discipline, to my Word, to my Rod? Sinner, What say thou to this? Lord, I
had rather be at thy Command, than live at mine own List: I had rather have thy
Will to be done, than mine: I approve of, and consent to thy Laws, and account
it my Privilege to lie under them. And though the Flesh rebel, and often break
over Bounds, I am resolved to take no other Lord but thee, I willingly take the
Oath of thy Supremacy, and acknowledge thee for my Liege Sovereign, and resolve
all my Days to pay the Tribute of Worship, Obedien^, and Love, and Service to
thee, and to live to thee, as the End of my Life. This is a right accepting of
God.

To be short, He tells you, I am the True and Faithful God. If you will have me
for your God, you must be content to trust me, 2 Timothy 1 12. Prove. 3.5. Will you
venture yourselves upon my Word, and depend on my Faithfulness, and take my
Bond for your Security? Will you be content to follow me, in Poverty, and
Reproach, and Affliction here, and to see much going out, and little coming in,
and to tarry till the next World for your Preferment? Matthew. 9.21. I deal much
upon Trust: Will you be content to labor, and suffer, and to tarry for your
Returns till the Resurrection of the Just? Luke 14.14. The Womb of my Promise
will not presently bring forth: Will you have the Patience to wait? Heb. 10.36.
Now, Beloved, What say you to this? Will you have this God for your God? Will
you be content to live by Faith, and trust him for an unseen Happiness, an
unseen Heaven, an unseen Glory? Do your Hearts answer, Lord, we will venture
ourselves upon thee, we commit ourselves to thee, we roll upon thee, we know
whom we have trusted, we are willing to take thy Word, we will prefer thy
Promises before our own Possessions, and the Hopes of Heaven before all the
Enjoyments of the Earth, we will wait thy Leisure: What thou will here, so that
we may have but thy faithful Promise for Heaven hereafter? If you can in Truth,
and upon Deliberation, thus accept of God, he will be yours. Thus there must
be, in a right Conversion to God, a Closing with him suitable to his
Excellencies. But when Men close with his Mercy, but yet love Sin, hating
Holiness and Purity; or will take him for their Benefactor, but not for their
Sovereign; or for their Patron, but not for their Portion; this is no through,
and no sound Conversion.

Direct. VII. Accept of the Lord Jesus in all his Offices, with all his
Inconveniences as thine. Upon Terms Christ may be had. Sinner, thou have
undone thyself, and art plunged into the Ditch of most deplorable Misery, out
of which thou art never able to climb up: But Jesus Christ is able and ready to
help thee, and he freely tenders himself to thee, Heb. 7.25. John 3.^6. Be thy
Sins never so many, never so great, of never so long Continuance, yet thou
shall be most certainly pardoned and saved, if thou do not wretchedly neglect
the Offer that in the Name of God is here made unto thee. The Lord Jesus
calls unto thee, to look unto him and be saved, Isa. 45.22. to come unto him,
and he will in no wise cast thee out, John 6.37. Yea, he is a Suitor to thee,
and beseeches thee to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20. He cries in the Streets, he
knocks at thy Door, he wooeth thee to accept of him, and live with him, Prove.
1.20 Rev. 2.30. If thou die, it is because thou would not come to him for
Life, John 5.40. Now accept of an offered Christ, and thou art made up for
ever: Now give up thy Consent to him, and the Match is made, all the World
cannot hinder it. Do not stand off because of thine Unworthiness. Man, I tell
thee, nothing in all the World can undo thee, but thine own Unwillingness
Speak, Man; Art thou willing of the Match? Will thou have Christ in all his
Relations to be thine; thy King, thy Priest, thy Prophet? Will thou have him
with all his Inconveniences? Take not Christ Hand over Head, but sit down
first, and count the Cost. Will thou lay all down at his Feet? Will thou be
content to run all Hazards with him? Will thou take thy Lot with him, fall
where it will? Will thou deny thyself, take up thy Cross, and follow him? Art
thou deliberately, understandingly, freely, fixedly, determined to cleave to
him in all Times, and Conditions? If so, my Soul for thine, thou shall never
perish, John 3.16. but art passed from Death to Life. Here lies the main Point
of thy Salvation, that thou be found in thy Covenant-closure with Jesus Christ:
and therefore, if thou love thyself, see that thou be faithful to God and thy
Soul here.

Direct. VIII. Resign up all thy Powers and Faculties, and thy whole Interest
to be his: They ga^ their own selves unto the Lord, 2 Cor. 8.5. Present your
Bodies as a living Sacrifice, Romans 12.1. The Lord seeks not yours, but you:
Resign therefore thy Body with all its Members, to him; and thy Soul, with all
its Powers, that it may be glorified in thy Body, and in thy Spirit, which are
his, 2 Cor. 6 20. In a right Closure with Christ, all thy Faculties give up to
him. The Judgment subscribes, Lord, thou art worthy of all Acceptance, chief
of Ten Thousand: Happy is the Man that finds thee. All the Things that are to
be desired, are not to be compared with thee, Prove. 3.13, 14, 15. The
Understanding lays aside its corrupt Reasonings and Cavils, and its Prejudices
against Christ, and his Ways. It it now past questioning and disputing, and
casts it for Christ against all the World. It concludes, it is good to be here;
and sees such a Treasure in this Field, such a Value in this Pearl, as is worth
all, Matthew. 13.44. Oh, here is the richest Bargain that ever I made, here is
the richest Prize that ever Man was offered, here is the sovereignest Remedy
that ever Mercy prepared; He is worthy of my Esteem, worthy of my Choice,
worthy of my Love, worthy to be embraced, adored, admired for evermore, Rev.
5.12. I approve of his Articles, his Terms are righteous and reasonable, full
of Equity and Mercy. Again, the Will resigns: It stands no longer wavering, nor
wishing and woulding, but it is peremptorily determined: Lord, thy Love has
overcome me, thou h^ won me, and thou shall have me: Come in, Lord; to thee I
freely open, I consent to be saved in thine own Way, thou shall have any Thing,
thou shall have all, let me have but thee. The Memory gives up to Christ (...),
here is a Storehouse for thee; out with this Trash, lay in thy Treasure: Let
me be a Granary, a Repository of thy Truth; thy Promises, thy Providence. The
Conscience comes in: Lord, I will ever side with thee, I will be thy faithful
Register, I will warn when the Sinner is tempted, and smite when thou art
offended. I will witness for thee, and judge for thee, and guide into thy Ways,
I will never let Sin have quiet in this Soul. The Affections also come unto
Christ: Oh, says Love, I am sick of thee: Oh, says Desire, now I have my
longing: Here is the Satisfaction I sought for; here is the Desire of Nations;
here is Bread for me, and Balm for me, all that I want. Fear bows the Knee with
Awe and Veneration: Welcome Lord, to thee will I pay my Homage, thy Word and
thy Red shall command my Motions; Thee will I reverence and adore, before Thee
will I fall down and worship: Grief likewise puts in: Lord, thy Displeasure and
thy Dishonor, thy Peoples Calamities and mine own Iniquities shall be that
that shall set me abroach: I will mourn when thou art offended, I will weep
when thy Cause is wounded. Anger likewise comes in for Christ: Lord, nothing so
enrages me as my Folly against thee; that I should be so befooled and bewitched
as to hearken to the Flatteries of Sin and Temptations of Satan against thee.
Hatred too will side with Christ: I protest mortal Enmity with thine Enemies,
that I will never be Friends with thy Foes; I vow an immortal Quarrel with
every Sin, I will give no Quarter, I will make no Peace. Thus let all thy
Powers give up to Jesus Christ.

Again, Thou must give up thy whole Interest to him: If there be any Thing that
thou keep back from Christ, it will he thine undoing, Luke 14.33. Unless
thou will forsake all, (in Preparation and Resolution of thy Heart) thou can
not be his Disciple. Thou must hate Father and Mother, yea and thing own Life
(...) in Comparison of him, and as far as it stands in Competition with him.
Matthew. 10.37. Luke 14 26, 27. etc. In a Word, Thou must give him thy self and
all that thou have without Reservation, or else thou can have no Part in him.

Direct. IX. Make Choice of the Laws of Christ, as the Rule of thy Words,
Thoughts and Actions, Ps. 119.30. This is ^he true Convert's Choice. But here
remember these three Rules, 1. You must choose them all. There is no coming to
Heaven by a partial Obedience; read Psalm. 11.6.128.160. Ezekiel. 18.21. None may
think it enough to take up with the cheap and easy Part of Religion, and let
alone the Duties that are costly and self denying, and grate upon the Interest
of the Flesh: You must take all or none. A sincere Convert, though he makes most
Conscience of the greatest Sins, and weightiest Duties, yet he makes true
Conscience of little Sins, and of all Duties, Psalm. 119.6, 113. Matthew. 23.23.
2. For all Times: For Prosperity and for Adversity; whether it rain or shine. A
true Convert is resolved in his Way, he will stand to his Choice, and will not
set his Back to the Wind, and be of the Religion of the Times. I have stuck to
thy Testimonies, I have inclined my Heart to perform thy Statutes always, even
to the End. Thy Testimonies have I taken, as an Heritage for ever, Psalm
119.31, 111.117, 44, 93. I will have respect unto thy Statutes continually.
This must not be done Hand over Head, but deliberately and understandingly.
That disobedient Son said, I go, Sir; but he went not. Matthew. 24.30. How fairly
did they promise; All that the Lord our God shall speak unto thee, we will do
it: And it is like they spoke as they meant; but when it came to Trial, it was
found that there was not such a Heart in them, as to do what they had promised,
Deuteronomy. 5.27, 29. If you would be sincere in closing with the Laws and Ways of
Christ, First, Study the Meaning, and Latitude, and Compass of them: Remember
that they are very spiritual, they reach the very Thoughts and Inclinations of
the Heart; so that if you will walk by this Rule, your very Thoughts, and
inward Motions must be under Government. Again, That they are very strict and
self-denying, quite contrary to the Grain of your natural Inclinations, Matthew.
16.24. You must take the Strait-Gate, the Narrow-way, and be content to have
the Flesh curbed from the Liberty it desires, Matthew 7.14. In a Word, That they
are very large: For thy Commandment is exceeding bread, Psalm. 119.96. Secondly,
Rest not in generals, (for there is much Deceit in that) but bring down thy
Heart to the particular Commands of Christ: Those Jews in the Prophet seemed as
well resolved as any in the World, and called God to Witness, that they meant
as they said: But they stuck in generals. When God's Command crosses their
Inclination, they will not obey, Jer. 41.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. compared with Chapter
43. v. 3 Take the Assembly's larger Catechism, and see their excellent and most
compendious Exposition of the Commandments, and put thy Heart to it. Art thou
resolved, in the Strength of Christ, to set upon the conscientious Practice of
every Duty that thou find to be there required of thee, and to set against
every Sin that thou find there forbidden? This is the Way to be found in
God's Statutes, that thou may never be ashamed, Psalm 119.80. 3dly, Observe
the special Duties that thy Heart is most against, and the special Sins it is
most inclined to; and see whether it be truly resolved to perform the one, and
forego the other. What say thou to thy Bosom-sin, thy gainful Sin? What
say thou to costly and hazardous, and Flesh displeasing Duties? If thou
haltest here, and do not resolve, by the Grace of God, to cross thy Flesh,
and put to it, thou art unsound, Psalm. 18.23. and 119.6.

Direct. X. Let all this be completed in a solemn Covenant between God and thy
Soul, Psalm 119.10^. Nch. 10.29. For thy better Help therein, take these
following Directions.

First, Set apart some time, more than once, to be spent in secret before the
Lord.

1. In seeking earnestly his special Assistance, and gracious Acceptance of
thee.

2. In considering distinctly all the Terms or Conditions of the Covenant,
expressed in the Form hereafter proposed.

3. In searching thine Heart, whether thou art sincerely willing to forsake all
thy Sins, and resign up thy (...) Body and Soul, unto God and his Service, to
serve him in Holiness and Righteousness, all the Days of thy Life.

Secondly, Compose thy Spirit into the most serious Frame possible, suitable to
a Transaction of so high Importance.

Thirdly, Lay hold on the Covenant of God, and ^ly upon the Promise of giving
Grace and Strength, whereby thou may be enabled to perform thy Promise.
Trust not to thine own Strength, to the Strength of thine own Resolutions, but
take hold on his Strength.

Fourthly, Resolve to be faithful; having engaged thine Heart, opened thy
Mouth, and subscribed with my Hand unto the Lord, resolve in his Strength never
to go back.

Lastly, Being thus prepared, on some convenient Time set apart for that
Purpose, set upon the Work, and in the most solemn Manner possible, as if the
Lord were visibly present before thine Eyes, fall down on thy Knees, and
spreading forth thine Hands toward Heaven, open thine Heart to the Lord in
these, or the like Words.

O Most dreadful God! For the Passion of Thy Son, I beseech Thee accept of thy
poor Prodigal, now prostrating himself at thy Door: I have fallen from Thee by
mine Iniquity, and am by Nature a Son of Death, and a Thousand-fold more the
Child of Hell, by my wicked Practice; but of thine Infinite Grace, thou have
promised Grace to me in Christ, if I will but turn to thee with all my Heart:
The Terms of our Communion are either from which, or to which.
therefore upon the Call of thy Gospel, I am now come in; and, throwing down my
Weapons, submit my self to thy Mercy.

And because thou requirest, as the Condition of my Peace with thee, that I
should put away mine Idols, and be at Defiance with all thine Enemies, The
Terms from which we must turn: Sin, Satan, the World, and our own
Righteousness, which must be thus renounced.
which I acknowledge I have wickedly sided with, against thee; I here from the
Bottom of my Heart, renounce them all, firmly covenanting with thee not to
allow my self in any known Sin, but conscientiously to use all the Means that I
know thou have prescribed for the Death and utter Destruction of all my
Corruptions. And whereas I have formerly inordinately and idolatrously let out
my Affection upon the World, I do here resign up my Heart to thee that made
it, humbly protesting before thy glorious Majesty, that it is the firm
Resolution of my Heart; and that I do unfeignedly desire Grace from thee, that
when thou shall call me hereunto, I may practice this my Resolution, through
thy Assistance, to forsake all that is dear unto me in this World, rather than
to turn from thee, to the Ways of Sin; and that I will watch against all its
Temptations, whether of Prosperity, or Adversity, left they should withdraw my
Heart from thee; beseeching thee also to help me against the Temptations of
Satan, to whose wicked Suggestions I resolve by thy Grace, never to yield my
self a Servant. And because my own Righteousness is but menstruous Rags, I
renounce all Confidence therein, and acknowledge that I am of my self a
hopeless, helpless, undone Creature, without Righteousness or Strength.

The Terms to which we must turn, are either ultimate, or mediate.
And for as much as thou have of thy bottomless Mercy offered most graciously to
me wretched Sinner, to be again my GOD, through Christ, if I would accept of
thee; I call Heaven and Earth to record this Day, that I do here solemnly
avouch thee for the Lord my God; and with all possible Veneration, bowing the
Neck of my Soul under the Feet of thy most sacred Majesty, I do here take thee,
Lord Jehovah, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for my Portion, and chief Good; The
ultimate is God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, who must be thus accepted.
and to give up my self, Body and Soul for thy Servant, promising and vowing to
serve thee in Holiness and Righteousness all the Days of my Life.

And since thou have appointed the Lord Jesus Christ, The medate Terms are
either principal, or less principal.

The principal is Christ the Mediator who must be thus embraced.


the only Means of coming unto thee, I do here, upon the bended Knees of my
Soul, accept of him, as the only new and living Way, by which Sinners may have
Access to thee; and do hereby solemnly join my self in Marriage-Covenant to him.

O blessed Jesus, I come to thee hungry and hardly bestead, poor and wretched,
and miserable, and blind and naked, a most loathsome polluted Wretch; a guilty,
condemned Malefactor, unworthy for ever to wash the Feet of the Servants of my
Lord, much more to be solemnly married to the King of Glory: But such is thine
unparalled Love, I do here with all my Power accept thee, and do take thee
for my Head and Husband; for better, for worse; for richer, for poorer; for all
Times and Conditions, to love, honor and obey thee before all others; and this
to the Death. I embrace thee in all thy Offices: I renounce mine own
Unworthiness, and do here avow thee to be the Lord my Righteousness: I renounce
mine own Wisdom, and do here take thee for mine only Guide. I renounce mine own
Will, and take thy Will for my Law.

And since thou have told me that I must suffer if I will reign, I do here
covenant with thee to take my Lot, as it falls, with thee: and, by thy Grace
assisting, to run all Hazards with thee; verily supposing that neither Life nor
Death shall part between thee and me.

And because thou have been pleased to give me thy Holy Laws as the Rule of my
Life, The least principal are the Laws, of Christ, which must be thus observed.
and the Way in which I should walk to thy Kingdom, I do here willingly put my
Neck under thy Yoke, and set my Shoulder to thy Burden; and subscribing to all
thy Laws, as holy, just, and good, I solemnly take them as the Rule of my
Words, Thoughts and Actions, promising, that though my Flesh contradict and
rebel, yet I will endeavor to order and govern my whole Life according to thy
Direction, and will not allow my self in the Neglect of any Thing that I know
to be my Duty.

Only because, through the Frailty of my Flesh, I am subject to many Failings,
I am bold humbly to protest, that unallowed Miscarriages, contrary to the
settled Bent and Resolution of my Heart, shall not make void this Covenant; for
so thou have said.

Now, Almighty God, Searcher of Hearts, thou know that I make this Covenant
with thee this Day, without any known Guile or Reservation, beseeching thee,
that if thou espiest any Flaw or Falsehood therein, thou would discover it to
me, and help me to do it aright.

And now, Glory be to thee, O God the Father, whom I shall be bold from this
Day forward, to look upon as my God and Father, that ever thou should find
out such a Way for the Recovery of undone Sinners. Glory be to Thee, O God the
Son, who have loved me, and washed me from my Sins, in thine own Blood, and art
now become my Savior and Redeemer. Glory be to Thee, O God the Holy Ghost, who
by the Finger of thine Almighty Power, have turned about my Heart from Sin to
God.

O dreadful Jehovah, the Lord God Omnipotent, Father, Son and Holy Ghost! Thou
art now become my Covenant Friend, and I, through thine infinite Grace, am
become thy Covenant Servant, Amen, So be it. And the Covenant which I have made
on Earth, let it be ratified in Heaven.

The AUTHOR's Advice.
THIS Covenant I advise you to make, not only in Heart, but in Word; not only
in Word, but in Writing; and that you would, with all possible Reverence,
spread the Writing before the Lord, as if you would present it to him as your
Act and Deed: And when you have done this, set your Hand to it; keep it as a
Memorial of the solemn Transactions that have passed between God and you, that
you may have Recourse to it in Doubts and Temptations.

Direct. XI. Take Heed of delaying thy Conversion, and set upon a speedy and
present Turning. I made haste and delayed not, Psalm. 119.60. Remember and
tremble at the sad Instance of the foolish Virgins, that came not till the Door
of Mercy was shut, Matthew. 21. and of a convinced Felix, that put off Paul to
another Season; and we never find that he had such a Season more, Acts 94.25.
Oh, come in while it is called to Day, lest thou should be hardened through the
Deceitfulness of Sin; left the Day of Grace should be over, and the Things that
belong to thy Peace should be hid from thine Eyes. Now Mercy is wooing of thee:
Now Christ is waiting to be gracious to thee, and the Spirit of God is striving
with thee: Now Ministers are calling; now Conscience is stirring: Now the
Market is open, and Oil may be had, thou have Opportunity for the Buying: Now
Christ is to be had for the Taking. Oh! strike in with the Offers of Grace: Oh,
now or never. If thou make light of this Offer, God may swear in his Wrath,
thou shall never taste of his Supper, Luke 14.24.

Direct. XII. Attend conscientiously upon the Word as the Means appointed for
thy Conversion, James 1.18, 19. 1 Cor. 4.14. Attend, I say, not customarily,
but conscienciously; with this Desire, Design, Hope and Expectation, that thou
may be converted by it; To every Sermon thou hear, come with this
Thought; Oh, I hope God will now come in; I hope this Day may be the Time, this
may be the Man by whom God will bring me Home. When thou art coming to the
Ordinances, lift up thy Heart thus to God: Lord, let this be the Sabbath, let
this be the Season, wherein I may receive renewing Grace. Oh, let it be said,
that to Day such a One was born to thee.

Object. Thou will say, I have been long a Hearer of the Word, and yet it has
not been effectual to my Conversion? Answ. Yea, but thou have not attended upon
it in this Manner, as a Means of thy Conversion, nor with this Design, nor
praying for, and expecting of this happy Effect of it.

Direct. XIII. Strike in with the Spirit, when he begins to work upon thy
Heart. When he works Convictions, oh do not stifle them, but join in with him;
and beg the Lord to carry on Convictions, to Conversion. Quench not the Spirit,
do not outstrive him, do not resist him. Beware of putting out Convictions by
evil Company or Worldly Business. When thou find any Troubles for Sin, and
Fears about thy eternal State, beg of God, that they may never leave thee, till
they have wrought off thy Heart thoroughly from Sin, and wrought it over to
Jesus Christ. Say to him, Strike home, Lord; leave not the Work in the Midst.
If thou see that I am not yet wounded enough, that I am not troubled enough,
wound me yet deeper, Lord: Oh, go to the Bottom of my Corruption, let out the
Lifeblood of my Sins. Thus yield up thy self to the Workings of the Spirit,
and hoist thy Sails to his Gusts.

Direct XIV. Set upon the constant and diligent Use of serious and fervent
Prayer. He that neglects Prayer, is a profane and unsanctified Sinner, Job
15.4. He that is not constant in Prayer, is but an Hypocrite, Job 27.10.
(unless the Omission be contrary to his ordinary Course, under the Force of
some instant Temptation.) This is one of the Things Conversion appears in, that
it sets Men on praying. Acts 9.11. Therefore set to this Duty; let never a Day
pass over thee, wherein thou have not, Morning and Evening, set apart some Time
for set and solemn Prayer in secret. Call thy Family also together daily and
duly, to worship God with thee. Woe be unto thee, if thine be found amongst the
Families that call not on God's Name, Jer 10.25. But cold and lifeless
Devotions will not reach half Way to Heaven; Be fervent and importunate;
Importunity will carry it, but without Violence the Kingdom of Heaven will not
be taken, Matthew. 11.12. Thou must strive to enter, Luke 13.24. and wrestle with
Tears and Supplications, as Jacob, if thou meanest to carry the Blessing, Genesis
32.24. compared with Hos. 12.4. Thou art undone for ever without Grace, and
therefore thou must put to it, and resolve to take no Denial. That Man that is
fixed in this Resolution, Well, I must have Grace; and I will never give over
till I have Grace, and I will never leave seeking and waiting, and striving
with God, and mine own Heart, till he do renew me by the Power of his Grace;
This Man is in the likeliest Way to win Grace.

Object. But God hears not Sinners, their Prayer is an Abomination?

Answ. Distinguish between Sinners. 1. There are Resolved Sinners: Their
Prayers God abhors. 2. Returning Sinners: These God will come forth to, and
meet with Mercy, though yet affar off, Luke 15.20. Though the Prayers of the
Unsanctified cannot have full Acceptance, yet God has done much at the Request
of such; as at Ahab's Humiliation, and Nineveh's Fast; 1 Kings 21.26. Jonah
3.8, 9, 10. Surely thou may go as far as these, though thou have no Grace: And
how do thou know but thou may speed in thy Suit, as they did in theirs?
Yea, is he not far more likely to grant thee, than them; since thou ask in
the Name of Christ, and that not for temporal Blessings, as they, but for
Things much more pleasing to him, viz. For Christ, Grace, Pardon, that thou
may be justified, sanctified, renewed and fitted to serve him? Turn to these
Soul-encouraging Scriptures, Prove. 2.1. to 6. Luke 11.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Prove.
8.34, 35.

Is it not good Comfort that he calls thee? Mark 10, 49. Does he set thee on
the Use of Means, and do thou think he will mock thee? Doubtless, he will not
fail thee, if thou be not wanting to thy self. Oh, pray and faint not, Luke
18.1. A Person of great Quality having offended the Duke of Buckingham, the
King's great Favorite, being admitted into his Presence, after long waiting,
prostrates himself at his Feet, saying, I am resolved never to rise more till I
have obtained your Grace's Favor. With which Carriage he did overcome him.
With such a Resolution do thou throw thy self at the Feet of God: It Is for thy
Life, and therefore follow him, and give not over: Resolve thou will not be put
off with Bonds, with common Mercies. What though God do not presently open to
thee? Is not Grace worth the Waiting for? Knock, and wait; and no Doubt but
sooner or later Mercy will come.

And this know, That thou have the very same Encouragement to seek and wait,
that the Saints now in Glory once had; for they were once in thy very Case. And
have they sped so well, and will thou not go to the same Door, and wait upon
God in the same Course?

Direct. XV. Forsake thy evil Company; Prove. 9.6. and forbear the Occasions of
Sin, Prove. 23.31. Thou will never be turned from Sin, till thou will decline
and fore-go the Temptations of Sin.

I never expect thy Conversion from Sin, unless thou art brought to some
Self-denial, as to fly the Occasions. If thou will be nibling at the Bait, and
playing on the Brink, and tampering and meddling with the Snare, thy Soul will
surely be taken. Where God does expose Men in his Providence, unavoidably to
Temptations, and the Occasions are such as we cannot remove, we may expect
special Assistance in the Use of his Means: But when we tempt God, by running
into Danger, he will not engage to support us when we are tempted. And of all
Temptations, one of the most fatal and pernicious, is evil Company. Oh, what
hopeful Beginnings have these often stifled. Oh, the Souls, the Estates, the
Families, the Towns, that these have ruined! How many a poor Sinner has been
enlightened, and convinced, and has been just ready to give the Devil the Slip,
and has even escaped the Snare, and yet wicked Company have pulled him back at
last, and made him Seven fold more the Child of Hell. In one Word, I have no
Hopes of thee, except thou will shake off thy evil Company. Christ speaks to
thee, as to them in another Case; If thou seek me, then let these go their Way,
Job 18.8. Thy Life lies upon it: Forsake these, or else thou can not live,
Prove. 9.9. Will thou be worse than the Beast, to run on when thou see the
Lord with a drawn Sword in the Way? Numb. 22.23. Let this Sentence be written
in Capitals upon thy Conscience, A COMPANION OF FOOLS SHALL BE DESTROYED, Prove.
13.20. The Lord has spoken it, and who shall reverse it? And will thou run
upon Destruction, when God himself does forewarn thee? If God do ever change
thy Heart, it will appear in the Change of thy Company. Oh, fear and fly this
Gulf, by which so many thousand Souls have been swallowed into Perdition. It
will be hard for thee, indeed, to make thine Escape: Thy Companions will be
mocking thee out of thy Religion, and will study to fill thee with Prejudices
against Strictness, as ridiculous and comfortless: They will be flattering
thee, and alluring thee, but remember the Warnings of the Holy Ghost, My Son,
if Sinners entice thee, consent thou ^ot. If they say, Come with us, cast in
thy Lot among us; walk not thou in the Way with them, refrain thy Feet from
their Path; avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away: For the Way
of the Wicked is as Darkness, they know not at what they stumble. They lay wait
for their own Blood, they lurk privily for their own Lives, Prove. 1.10, to 18.
and 4.14. to 19. My Soul is moved within me, to see how many of my Hearers are
like to perish, both they and their Houses, by this wretched Mischief, even the
Haunting of such Places and Company, whereby they are drawn into Sin, Once more
I admonish you, as Moses did Israel, Numb. 16.26. And he spoke unto the
Congregation, saying, Depart, I pray you, from the Tents of these wicked Men.
Oh! flee them as you would those that had the Plague sores running in their
Foreheads. These are the Devil's Panders and Decoys; and if thou do not make
thine Escape, they will toll thee into Perdition, and will prove thine eternal
Ruin.

Direct. XVI. Lastly. Set apart a Day to humble thy Soul in secret, by Fasting
and Prayer, to work the Sense of thy Sins and Miseries upon thy Heart. Read
over the Assembly's Exposition of the Commandments, and write down the Duties
omitted, and Sins committed by thee against every Commandment, and so make a
Catalogue of thy Sins, and with Shame and Sorrow spread them before the Lord.
And if thy Heart be willing to the Terms, join thy self solemnly to the Lord in
that Covenant set down in the ninth Direction, and the Lord grant thee Mercy in
his Sight.

Thus I have told thee, what thou must do to be saved. Will thou not now obey
the Voice of the Lord? Will thou arise, and set to thy Work? O Man, what Answer
will thou make, what Excuse will thou have, if thou should perish at last
through very Wilfulness, when thou had known the Way of Life? I do not fear
thy miscarrying, if thine own Idleness do not at last undo thee, in neglecting
the Use of the Means that are so plainly here prescribed. Rouse up, O Sluggard,
and ply thy Work: Be doing, and the Lord will be with thee.

A short Soliloquy for an Unregenerate Sinner.
AH Wretched Man that I am! What a Condition have I brought myself into by Sin?
Oh! I see my Heart has but deceived me all this while, in flattering me that
my Condition was good. I see, I see, I am but a lost and undone Man, for ever
undone, unless the Lord help me out of this Condition My Sins! my Sins! Lord,
what an unclean, polluted Wretch am I! More loathsome and odious to thee* than
the most hateful Venom, or noisome Carcas^ can be to me. Oh! what a Hell of Sin
is in this Heart of mine, which I have flattered myself to be a good Heart.
Lord, how universally am I corrupted, in all my Parts, Powers, Performances!
All the Imaginations of the Thoughts of my Heart are only evil continually. I
am under an Inability to, Averseness from, and Enmity against any Thing that is
good; and am prone to all that is evil. My Heart is a very Sink of all Sin: And
Oh the innumerable Hosts and Swarms of sinful Thoughts, Words and Actions, that
have flown from thence! Oh the Lord of Guilt that is on my Soul! My Head is
full, my Heartfull, my Mind and my Members, they are full of Sin. O my Sins!
how do they stare upon me? How do they witness against me? Woe is me, my
Creditors are upon me, every Commandment takes hold upon me, for more than ten
Thousand Talents, yea, ten Thousand times ten Thousand. How endless then is the
Sum of all my Debts! If this whole World were filled up from Earth to Heaven
with Paper, and all this Paper written over, within and without, by
Arithmeticians; yet when all were cast up together, it would come unconceivably
short of what I owe to the least of God's Commandments. Woe unto me, for my
Debts are infinite, and my Sins are increased; they are Wrongs to an infinite
Majesty: And if he that commits Treason against a silken Mortal, is worthy
to be racked, drawn, and quartered; what have I deserved, that have so often
lifted up my Hand against Heaven, and have struck at the Crown and Dignity of
the Almighty?

O my Sins! my Sins! Behold, a Troop comes! Multitudes, Multitudes! there is
no Number of their Armies. Innumerable Evils have compassed me about: Mine
Iniquities have taken hold upon me; they have set themselves in Array against
me. Oh! it were better to have all the Regiments of Hell come against me, than
to have my Sins to fall upon me, to the spoiling of my Soul. Lord, how am I
surrounded? how many are they that rise up against me? They have beset me
behind and before: They swarm within me, and without me: They have possessed
all my Powers, and have fortified mine unhappy Soul as a Garrison, which this
Brood of Hell does man, and maintain against the God that made me.

And they are as mighty, as they are many: The Sands are many, but then they
are not great: The Mountains great, but then they are not many: But woe is me!
my Sins are as many as the Sands, and as mighty as the Mountains; their Weight
is greater than their Number. It were better that the Rocks and the Mountains
should fall upon me, than the crushing and insupportable Load of my own Sins.
Lord, I am heavy laden; let Mercy help, or I am gone. Unload me of this heavy
Guilt, this sinking Load, or I am crushed without Hope, and must be pressed
down to Hell. If my Grief were thoroughly weighed, and all my Sins laid in the
Balances together, they would be heavier than the Sand of the Sea; therefore
my Words are swallowed up; the would weigh down all the Rocks, and the Hills,
and turn the Balance against all the Isles of the Earth O Lord, thou know
my manifold Transgressions and my mighty Sins.

Ah, my Soul! Alas, my Glory! Whither art thou humbled? Once the Glory of the
Creation, and the Image of God; now a Lump of Filthiness, a Coffin of
Rottenness, replenished with Stench and Loathsomness. Oh, what Work has Sin
made with thee! Thou shall be termed Forsaken, and all the Rooms of thy
Faculties Desolate, and the Name that thou shall be called by, it is Ichabod,
or, Where is the Glory? How art thou come down mightily? My Beauty is turned
into Deformity, and my Glory into Shame. Lord, what a loathsome Leper am I? The
ulcerous Bodies of Job or Lazarus were not more offensive to the Eyes and
Nostrils of Men, than I must needs be to the most Holy God, whose Eyes cannot
behold Iniquity.

And what Misery have my Sins brought on me? Lord, what a Case am I in! Sold
under Sin, cast out of God's Favor, accursed from the Lord, cursed in my Body,
cursed in my Soul, cursed in my Name, my Estate, my Relations, and all that I
have. My Sins are unpardoned, and my Soul within a Step of Death. Alas! what
shall I do? Whither shall I go? Which Way shall I look? God is frowning on me
from above; Hell gaping for me beneath; Conscience smiting me within;
Temptations and Dangers surrounding me without. Oh, whither shall I flee? What
Place can hide me from Omnisciency? What Power can secure me from Omnipotency?

What meanest thou, O my Soul, to go on thus? Art thou in League with Hell?
Have thou made a Covenant with Death? Art thou in Love with thy Misery? Is it
good for thee to be here? Alas! what shall I do? Shall I go on in my sinful
Ways? Why then certain Damnation will be mine End. And shall I be so besotted
and be^dded, as to go and sell my Soul to the Flames for a little Ale, and a
little Ease; for a little Pleasure, or Gain, or Content to my Flesh? Shall I
linger any longer in this wretched Estate? No, if I tarry here, I shall die.
What then? Is there no Help, no Hope? None, except I turn. Why, but is there
any Remedy for such woeful Misery? Any Mercy after such provoking Iniquity? Yes,
as sure as God's Oath is true, I shall have Pardon and Mercy yet, if presently,
unfeignedly and unreservedly I turn by Christ to him.

Why then I thank thee upon the bended Knees of my Soul, O most merciful
Jehovah, that thy Patience has waited upon me hitherto: For had thou took me
away in this Estate, I had perished for ever. And now I adore thy Grace, and
accept the Offers of thy Mercy: I renounce all my Sins, and resolve, by thy
Grace, to set myself against them, and to follow thee, in Holiness and
Righteousness, all the Days of my Life.

Who am I, Lord, that I should make any Claim unto thee, or have any Part or
Pottion in thee, who am not worthy to lick up the Dust of thy Feet? Yet since
thou hold forth the golden Scepter, I am bold to come and touch. To despair,
would be to desparage thy Mercy; and to stand off when thou biddest me come,
would be at once to undo myself, and rebel against thee, under the Pretense of
Humility. Therefore I bow my Soul to thee, and with all possible Thankfulness
accept thee as mine, and give up myself to thee as thine. Thou shall be
Sovereign over me, my King, and my God: Thou shall be in the Throne, and all my
Powers shall bow to thee, they shall come and worship before thy Feet: Thou
shall be my Portion, O Lord, and I will rest in thee.

Thou call for my Heart: O that it were any Way fit for thine Acceptance! I
am unworthy, O Lord, everlastingly unworthy to be thine: But since thou will
have it so, I freely give up my Heart to thee; take it, it is thine: Oh that it
were better. But, Lord, I put it into thine Hand, who alone can mend it:
Mould it after thine own Heart; make it as thou would have it, holy, humble,
heavenly, soft, tender, flexible; and write thy Law upon it.

Come, Lord Jesus; come quickly; enter in triumphantly: Take me up to thee for
ever. I give up to thee, I come to thee, as the only Way to the Father, as the
only Mediator, the Means ordained to bring me to God. I have destroyed myself,
but in thee is my Help: Save, Lord, or else I perish: I come to thee with the
Rope about my Neck; I am worthy to die, and to be damned. Never was the Hire
more due to the Servant, never was the Penny more due to the Labourer, than
Death and Hell, my just Wages, is due to me for my Sins: But I fly to thy
Merits, I trust alone to the Value and Virtue of thy Sacrifice, and Prevalency
of thy Intercession: I submit to thy Teaching, I make choice of thy Government.
Stand open, ye everlasting Doors, that the King of Glory may come in.

O Thou Spirit of the Most High, the Comforter and Sanctifier of thy chosen;
come in with all thy glorious Train, all thy courtly Attendants, thy Fruits,
and Graces. Let me be thine Inhabitation. I can give thee but what is thine own
already; but here with the poor Widow, I cast my two Mites, my Soul and my
Body, into thy Treasury; fully resigning them up to thee, to be sanctified by
thee, to be Servants to thee. They shall be thy Patients, cure thou their
Malady; they shall be thy Agents, govern thou their Motions. Too long have I
served the World, too long have I hearkened to Satan; but now I renounce them
all, and will be ruled by thy Dictates and Directions, and guided by thy
Counsel.

O Blessed Trinity! O glorious Unity! I deliver up myself to thee, receive me;
write thy Name, O Lord, upon me, and upon all that I have, as thy proper Goods:
Set thy Mark upon me, upon every Member of my Body, and every Faculty of my
Soul. I have chosen thy Precepts, thy Law will I lay before me: This shall be
the Copy which I will keep in my Eye, and study to write after. According to
this Rule do I resolve, by thy Grace, to walk; after this Law shall my whole
Man be governed; and though I cannot perfectly keep one of thy Commandments, yet
I will allow myself in the Breach of none. I know my Flesh will hang back, but
I resolve, in the Power of thy Grace, to cleave to thee, and thy holy Ways,
whatever it cost me. I am sure I cannot come off a Loser by thee, therefore I
will be content with Reproach, and Difficulties, and Hardships here; and will
deny myself, and take up my Cross, and follow thee. Lord Jesus, thy Yoke is
easy, and thy Cross is welcome, as it is the Way to thee. I lay aside all Hopes
of worldly Happiness, I will be content to tarry till I come to thee: Let me be
poor and low, little and despised here, so I may be but admitted to live and
reign with thee hereafter. Lord, thou have my Heart and Hand to this Agreement:
Be it as the Laws of the Medes and Persians, never to be reversed: To this I
will stand, in this Resolution, by Grace, I will live and die. I have sworn,
and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments; I have given
my free Consent, I have made my everlasting Choice: Lord Jesus confirm the
Contract, Amen.

Chap. VIII. Containing the Motives to Conversion.
THOUGH what is already said of the Necessity of Conversion, and of the Miseries
of the Unconverted, might be sufficient to induce any considering Mind to
resolve upon a present Turning, or Conversion unto God; yet knowing what a
Piece of desperate Obstinacy and Untractableness the Heart of Man naturally is,
I have thought it necessary to add to the Means of Conversion, and Directions
for a Covenant closure with God in Christ, some Motives to persuade you hereunto

O Lord, fail me not now, at my last Attempts. If any Soul have read hitherto,
and be yet untouched, now, Lord, fasten in him, and do thy Work. Now take him
by the Heart, overcome him, persuade him, till he say, Thou have prevailed, for
thou were stronger than I. Lord, did thou not make me a Fisher of Men? And
have I toiled all this while, and caught nothing? Alas, that I should have
spent my Strength for naught! And now I am casting my last; Lord Jesus, stand
thou upon the Shore, and direct how and where I shall spread my Net; and let me
so enclose with Arguments the Souls I seek for, that that may not be able to
get out. Now, Lord, for a Multitude of Souls! Now for a full Draught! O Lord
God, remember me, I pray thee, and strengthen me this once, O God.

But I turn unto you.

Men and Brethren, Heaven and Earth does call upon you; yea, Hell itself does
preach the Doctrine of Repentance unto you: the Angels of the Churches travail
with you, Gal. 4.19. the Angels of Heaven wait for you, for your repenting, and
turning unto God. O Sinner, why should the Devil make merry with thee? Why
should thou be a Morsel for that devouring Leviathan? Why should Harpies and
Hellhounds tear thee, and make a Feast upon thee; and when they have got thee
into the Snare, and have lastned their Talons in thee, laugh at thy
Destruction, and deride thy Misery, and sport themselves with thy damnable
Folly? This must be thy Case, except thou turn. And were it not better thou
should be a Joy to Angels, than a Laughing Stock and Sport for Devils?
Verily, if thou would but come in, the heavenly Host would take up their
Anthems, and sing, Glory be to God in the Highest; the Morning-Stars would sing
together, and all the Sons of God shout for Joy, and celebrate this new
Creation as they did the first. Thy Repentance would, as it were, make Holy Day
in Heaven, and the glorious Spirits would rejoice in that there was a new
Brother added to their Society, Rev. 22.9. another Heir born to their Lord, and
the lost Son received safe and sound. The true Penitent's Tears, are indeed the
Wine that cheareth both God and Man.

If it be little, that Men and Angels would rejoice at thy Conversion, know
that God himself would rejoice over thee, even with singing, and rest in his
Love, Luke 15.9. Isa. 62.5. Never did Jacob with such Joy weep over the Neck of
his Joseph, as thy heavenly Father would rejoice over thee, upon thy coming in
to him. Look over the Story of the Prodigal; methinks I see how the aged Father
lays aside his Estate, and forgets his Years. Behold how he runs, Luke
15.20. Oh the Haste that Mercy makes! the Sinner makes not half that Speed.
Methinks I see how his Bowels turn, how his Compassions yearn. (How
quick-sighted is Love!) Mercy spies him a great Way off, forgets his riotous
Courses, unnatural Rebellion, horrid Unthankfulness, debauched Practice (not a
Word of these) but receives him with open Arms, clasps about his Neck, forgets
the Nastiness of his Rags, kisseth the Lips that deserve to be loathed, the
Lips that had been joined to Harlots, that had been Commoners with the Swine;
calls for the fatted Calf, the best Robe, the Ring, the Shoes, the best Cheer
in Heaven's Store, the best Attire in Heaven's Wardrobe, Luke 15.6, 9, 23. Yea,
the Joy cannot be held in one Breast, etc. others must be called to
participate; the Friends must meet, and make merry: Angels must wait, but the
Prodigal must be set at the Table, under his Father's Wing: He is the Joy of
the Feast; he is the sweet Subject of the Father's Delight: The Friends
sympathize, but none knows the Felicity the Father takes in his newborn Son,
whom he has received from the Dead. Methinks I hear the Music and the Dancing
at a Distance. Oh the Melody of the heavenly Choristers! I cannot learn the
Song, Rev. 14.3. but methinks I over-hear the Burden, at which all the
Harmonious Quire with one Consent strike sweetly in; for thus goes the Round at
Heaven's Table, For this my Son was dead, and is alive again, was lost, and is
found, Luke 15.23, 24, 32. I need further explain the Parable; God is the
Father, Christ is the Cheer, his Righteousness the Robe, his Graces the
Ornaments, Ministers, Saints, Angels, the Friends and Servants, and thou that
read (if thou will but unfeignedly repent and turn) the welcome Prodigal,
the happy Instance of this Grace, and blessed Subject of this Joy and Love.

O Rock! O Adamant! What! Not moved yet? Nor yet resolved to turn forthwith,
and to close with Mercy; I will try thee yet once again: If one were sent to
thee from the Dead, would thou be persuaded? Why, hear the Voice from the
Dead, from the Damned, crying to thee that thou should repent. I pray thee,
that thou would send him to my Father's House; for I have five Brethren, that
he may testify unto them, lest they also come into this Place of Torment. If
one went unto them from the Dead, they will repent, Luke 16.27, 28, etc. Hear,
O Man! thy Predecessors in Impenitence preach to thee from the infernal
Gibbets, from the Flames, from the Rack, that thou should repent. Oh, look
down in the Bottomless pit: See thou how the Smoke of their Torment ascends
for ever and ever? Rev. 14.11. How black are the Fiends? How furious are their
Torments! It Is their only Music to hear how their miserable Patients roar, to
hear their Bones crack: It Is their Meat and Drink to see how their Flesh
frieth, and their Fat droppeth; to drench them with burning Metal, and to rip
open their Bodies, and to pour in the fierce burning Brass into their Bowels,
and the Recesses and Ventricles of their Hearts. What think thou of those
Chains of Darkness, of those Instruments of Cruelty? Can thou be content to
burn? See thou how the Worm gnaweth, how the Oven gloweth, how the Fire
rages? What say thou to that River of Brimstone, that dark and horrible
Vault, that Gulf of Perdition? Will thou take up thy Habitation here? Oh, lay
^hine Ear to the Door of Hell: Hear thou the Curses and Blasphemies, the
Weepings and the Wailings; how they lament their Folly, and curse their Day?
Mat. 22.13. Rev. 16.9. How do they ^oar and yell, and gnash their Teeth? How
deep are their Groans? How feeling are their Moans? How unconceivable are their
Miseries? If the Shrieks of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, were so terrible (when
the Earth clave asunder, and opened her Mouth, and swallowed them up, and all
that appertained to them) that all Israel fled at the Cry of them, Numb. 19.33,
34. Oh, how fearful would the Cry be, if God should take off the Covering from
the Mouth of Hell, and let the Cry of the Damned ascend in all its Terror
amongst the Children of Men? And of all their Moans and Miseries, this is the
piercing, killing Emphasis and Burden, For ever, for ever.

Why, as God lives, that made thy Soul, thou art but a few Hours distant from
all this, except thou repent, and be converted.

Oh! I am even lost and swallowed up in the Abundance of these Arguments that I
might suggest: If there be any Point of Wisdom in all the World, it is to
repent, and come in; if there be any Thing righteous, any Thing reasonable,
that is it: If there be any Thing in the World that may be called Madness and
Folly, and any Thing that may be counted sottish, absurd, brutish,
unreasonable, it is this, to go on in thine unconverted Estate. Let me beg of
thee, as thou would not wilfully destroy thy self, to sit down and weigh,
besides what has been said, these following Motives, and let Conscience speak,
if it be not Reason that thou should repent and turn.

I. The God that made thee does most graciously invite thee.

1. His most sweet and merciful Nature does invite thee. O the Kindness of God,
his working Bowels, his tender Mercies! They are infinitely above our Thoughts:
Higher than Heaven, what can we do? Deeper than Hell, what can we know? Job
11.^, 8, 9. He is full of Compassion, and gracious; long-suffering, and
plenteous in Mercy, Psalm 86.15. This is a great Argument to persuade Sinners
to come in, Turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious and merciful, slow
to Anger, and of great Kindness, and repents him of the Evil. If God would
not repent him of the Evil, it were some Discouragement to us, why we should
not repent. If there were no Hope of Mercy, it were no such Wonder if Rebels
should stand out; But never had Subject such a gracious Prince, such Piety,
Patience, Clemency, Pity, to deal with, as you have. Who is a God like unto him
that pardons Iniquity, etc. Micah 7.18. O Sinners, see what a God you have to
deal with! If you will but turn, He will turn again, and will have Compassion
on you; He will subdue your Iniquities, and cast all your Sins into the Depth
of the Sea, Verse 19. Return unto me, says the Lord of Hosts, and I will
return unto you, Mal. 2.17. Zeth. 1.3. Sinners do not fail in that they have
^oo high Thoughts of God's Mercies, but in that, ^. They overlook his Justice.
2. They promise themselves Mercy out of God's Way. His Mercy is beyond all
Imagination, Isa. 55.9. great Mercies, 1 Chronicles. 21.13. manifold Mercies, Neh.
9.19. tender Mercies, Psalm 25.6. sure Mercies, Isa 55.3. everlasting Mercies,
Psalm 103.17. Isa. 54.8. and all thine own, if thou will but turn. Art thou
willing to come in? Why the Lord has laid aside his Terror, erected a Throne
of Grace, holds forth the Golden Scepter: Touch, and live. Would a merciful Man
slay his Enemy, when prostrate at his Feet, acknowledging his Wrong, begging
Pardon, and offering to enter with him into a Covenant of Peace? Much less will
the merciful God. Study his Name, Exodus 34.7. Read their Experience, Neh. 9.17.

2. His Soul encouraging Calls and Promises do invite thee. Ah, what an earnest
Suitor is Mercy to thee! How lovingly, how instantly it calls after thee! How
passionately it wooeth thee: Return, thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord,
and I will not cause mine Anger to fall upon you; for I am merciful, says the
Lord, and I will not keep Anger for ever: Only acknowledge thine Iniquity.
Turn, O backsliding Children, says the Lord, for I am married unto you:
Return, and I will heal your Backslidings. Thou have played with many Lovers,
yet return unto me, says the Lord, Jer. 3 11, 12, 13, 14, 22. As I live, says
the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but that he turn
from his Way, and live: Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil Ways; for why will ye
die, O House of Israel? Ezekiel. 33.11. If the Wicked will turn from all his Sins
that he has committed, and keep all my Statutes, and do that which is lawful
and right, he shall surely live, he shall not die. All his Transgressions that
he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him: In his Righteousness
that he has done, shall he live. Repent and turn yourselves from all your
Transgressions, so Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. Cast away from you all your
Transgressions, and make you a clean Heart, and a new Spirit; for why will ye
die, O House of Israel? For I have no Pleasure in the Death of him that dies,
says the Lord God: wherefore turn yourselves, and live ye, Ezekiel. 18.21, 23,
30, 31, 32.

O melting, gracious Words! The Voice of a God, and not of a Man! This is not
the Manner of Men, for the offended Sovereign to sue the offending, traitorous
Varlet. Oh, how does Mercy follow thee, and plead with thee! Is not thy Heart
broken yet? Oh, that to Day you would hear his Voice!

2. The Doors of Heaven are thrown open to thee, the Everlasting Gates are set
wide for thee, and an abundant Entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven administered
to thee. Christ now speaks to thee, (as she her Husband) Arise, and take
Possession, 1 Kings 21.15. View the Glory of the other World, as set forth in
the Man of the Gospel. Get thee up into Pisgah of the Promises, and lift up
thine Eyes Westward, Northward, Southward, and Eastward, and see the good Land
that is beyond Jordan, and that goodly Mountain. Behold the Paradise of God,
watered with the Streams of Glory. Arise, and walk through the Land, in the
Length of it, and in the Breadth of it; for the Land which thou see, the Lord
will give it to thee for ever, if thou will but return, Genesis 13.14, 15, 17. Let
me say to thee, as Paul to Agrippa, believe thou the Prophets? If thou
believe indeed, do but view what glorious Things are spoken of the City of
God, Psalm 87.3. and know that all this is here tendered in the Name of God to
thee: As verily as God is true, it shall be for ever thine, if thou will but
thoroughly turn.

Behold the City of pure transparent Gold, whose Foundations are garnished with
all Manner of precious Sons, whose Gates are Pearls, whose Light is Glory,
whose Temple is God. Believe thou this? If thou do, art thou not worse than
distracted, that wilt not take Possession, when the Gates are flung open to
thee, and thou art bid to enter? O ye Sons of Folly, will ye embrace the
Dunghills, and refuse the Kingdom? Behold, the Lord God takes you up into the
Mountain, shows you the Kingdom of Heaven, and all the Glory thereof; and tells
you, All this will I give you, if you will fall down and worship ^e: If you
will submit to Mercy, accept my Son, and serve me in Righteousness and
Holiness. O Fools, and slow of Heart to believe! Will you court the Harlot?
Will you seek and serve the World, and neglect the Eternal Glory? What! Not
enter into Paradise, when the Flaming-Sword that was once set to keep you out,
is now used to drive you in: But you will say, I am uncharitable to think you
Infidels and Unbelievers. Why, what shall I think you? Either you are desperate
Unbelievers, that do not credit it, or stark distracted, that you know and
believe the Excellency and Eternity of his Glory, and yet do so ^ea^u^y neglect
it. Surely you have no Faith, or no Reason; and I had almost said, Conscience
should tell you so, before I leave you

Do but attend what is offered you: O blessed Kingdom! A Kingdom of Glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2.1. A Kingdom of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 3.13. A Kingdom of Peace, Rom
14.17. An everlasting Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1.11. Here thou shall dwell, here thou
shall reign for ever, and the Lord shall set thee in a Throne of Glory, Matthew
19.18. and with his own Hand shall he set the Royal Diadem upon thine Head, and
give thee a Crown, not of Thorns (for there shall be no sinning nor suffering
there, Rev. 21.27.23. 3, 4, 5) not of Gold (for this shall be viler than the
Dirt in that Day) but a Crown of Life, James 1.12. A Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8 A Crown of Glory, 1 Peter 5 4. Yea, thou shall put on Glory as a Robe,
1 Cor. 15.53. and shall shine like the Sun in the Firmament, in the Glory of
thy Father, Matthew. 13.43. Look now upon thy dirty Flesh, thy Clay, thy Worms
Meat: This very Flesh this Lump, this Carcass shall be brighter than the Stars,
Dan. 12.3. In short, thou shall be made like unto the Angels of God, Luke
26.36. and behold his Face in Righteousness, Psalm 17.15. Look in now, and tell
me, Do thou yet believe? If not Conscience must pronounce thee an Infidel;
for it i^ the very Word of God that I speak.

But if thou say thou believe, let me next kno^ thy Resolutions. Will thou
embrace this for the Happiness? Will thou forego thy sinful Gains, the
forbidden Pleasures? Will thou trample on the World's Esteem, and spit in the
Harlot's Face, an^ stop thine Ears at her Flatteries, and wrest thee o^ of her
Embraces? Will thou be content to take u^ with present Reproach and Poverty, if
it lie in the Way to Heaven, and follow the Lord with humb^ Self-denial, in a
mortified and Flesh-displeasing Lif^ If so, all is thine, and that for ever.
And art n^ thou fairly offered? Is it not Pity but he should (...) damned, that
will needs go on and perish, when all this may be had for the taking? In a
Word, Will thou now close with these Proffers? Will thou take God at his Word?
Will thou let go thy Hold-fast of the World, and rid thy Hands of thy Sins, and
lay hold on eternal Life? If not, let Conscience tell thee, whether thou art
not distracted or bewitched, that thou should neglect so happy a Choice, by
which thou might be made up for ever.

3. God will se^le unspeakable Privileges at present upon thee, 1 Cor. 3.2.
Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. Though the full of your Blessedness shall be deferred till
hereafter, yet God will give you no little Things in Hand.

He will redeem you from your Thraldom, John 8.36. He will pluck you from the
Paw of the Lion, Col. 1.13. The Serpent shall bruise your Heel, but you shall
bruise his Head, Genesis 3.15. He shall deliver you from the present evil World,
Gal. 1.4. Prosperity shall not destroy you: Adversity shall not separate
between him and you, Romans 8.35, 37, 38. He will redeem you from the Power of
the Grave, Psalm 49.15. and make the King of Terrors a Passenger of Peace to
you. He will take out the Curse from the Cross, Psalm 119.71. and make
Affliction the Fining-pot, the Fan, the Physic, to blow off the Chaff, purify
the Metal, and purge the Mind, Dan. 12.10. Isa. 27.9. He will save you from the
Arrest of the Law, and turn the Curse into a Blessing to you, Romans 6.14. Gal.
3.24. He has the Keys of Hell and Death, and shuts that no Man opens,
Rev. 3.7. and 1.18. and he will shut its Mouth, as once he did the Lions, Dan.
6.21, that you shall not be hurt of the second Death, Rev. 2.11.

But he will not only save you from Misery, but instal you into unspeakable
Prerogatives: He will bestow himself upon you, he will be a Friend unto you,
and a Father to you, 2 Cor. 6.18. He will be a Sun and a Shield to you, Psalm
84.11. In a Word, He will be a God to you, Genesis 17.7. And what can be said
more? What may you expect that a God should do for you, and be to you, that he
will not be, and will not do? She that marries a Prince, expects he should do
for her like a Prince, that she may live in a suitable State, and have an
answerable Dowry. He that has a King for his Father, or Friend, expects he
should do for him like a King. Alas! the Kings and Monarchs of the Earth, so
much above you, are but like the painted Butter-flies amongst the rest of their
Kind, or the fair-coloured Palmer-Worm amongst the rest of the Worms, if
compared with God. As he does infinitely exceed the Glory and Power of his
glittering Dust, so he will, beyond all Proportion, exceed in doing for his
Favorites, whatever Princes can do for theirs. He will give you Grace and
Glory, and withhold no good Thing from you, Psalm 84.11. He will take you for
his Sons and Daughters, and make you Heirs of his Promises, Heb. 6.17. and
establish his Everlasting Covenant with you, Jer. 32.40. He will justify you
from all that Law, Conscience, Satan, can charge upon you, Romans 8.33, 34. He
will give you free Access into his Presence, and accept your Person, and
receive your Prayers, Ephesians. 3.12: and 1.6. 1 John 5.14. He will abide in you,
and make you the Men of his Secrets, and hold a constant and friendly Communion
with you, John 14.23. and 15.15. 1 John 1.3. His Ear shall be open, his Door
open, his Store open at all Times to you. His Blessing shall rest upon you, and
he will make your Enemies to serve you, and work about all Things for good unto
you, Psalm 115.13. Romans 8.28.

4. The Terms of Mercy are brought as low as possible to you. God has stooped
as low to Sinners, as with Honor he can. He will not be thought a Fauto^ of
Sin, nor strain the Glory of his Holiness: And whither could he come lower than
he has, unles^ he should do this? He has abated the impossible Terms of the
first Covenant, Jer. 3.13. Mark 5.36. Acts 16.31. and 3.19 Prove. 28.13. He does
not impose any Thing unreasonable or impossible, as a Condition of Life upon
you. Two Things were necessary to be done, according to the Tenor of the first
Covenant, by you: 1. That you should fully satisfy the Demands of Justice for
past Offenses. 2. That you should perform personally, perfectly and perpetually
the whole Law for the Time to come. Both these are to us impossible, Romans 8.3.
But behold God's gracious Abatement in both: He does not stand upon
Satisfaction, he is content to take of the Surety (and he of his own providing
too) what he might have exacted from you, 2 Cor. 5.19. He declares himself to
have received a Ransom, Job 33.24. 1 Timothy 2.6. and that he expects nothing but
that you should accept his Son, and he shall be Righteousness and Redemption to
you, John 1.12. 1 Cor. 1.30. And for the future Obedience, here he is content
to yield to your Weakness, and omit the Rigor. He does not stand upon
Perfection (as a Condition of Life, though he still insists upon it as due) but
is content to accept of Sincerity, Genesis 17.1. Prove. 11.20. Though you cannot pay
the full Debt, he will accept you according to that which you have, and take
willing for doing, and the Purpose for the Performance, 2 Cor. 8.12. 2 Chronicles.
6.8. Heb. 11.17. And if you come in his Christ, and set your Hearts to please
him, and make it the Chief of your Cares, he will approve and reward you, though
the Vessel be marred in your Hands.

Oh, consider your Maker's Condescension. Let me say to you, as Naaman's
Servant to him, My Father, if the Prophet had bid thee do some great Thing,
would thou not have done it? How much rather when he says unto thee, wash
and he clean? 2 Kings 5 13. If God had demanded some terrible, some severe and
rigorous Thing of you, to escape eternal Damnation, would you not have done it?
Suppose it had been to spend all your Days in Sorrow in some howling
Wilderness, or pine your selves with Famine, or to offer the Fruit of your
Bodies for the Sin of your Souls, would you not have thankfully accepted
Eternal Redemption, though these had been the Conditions? Yea, further, if God
should have told you, you should have fried in the Fire for Millions of Ages,
or been so long tormented in Hell, would you not have gladly accepted it? Alas!
all these are not so much as one Sand in the Glass of Eternity. If your
offended Creator should have had you but one Year upon the Rack, and then bid
you come and forsake your Sins, accept of Christ, and serve him a few Years in
Self-denial, or lie in this Case for ever and ever: Do you think you should
have stuck at the Offer, and disputed the Terms, and have been unresolved
whether you were best to accept of the Motion? O Sinner, return and live: Why
should thou die, when Life is to be had for the Taking, and Mercy should be
beholding to thee (as it were) to be saved? Could thou say indeed, Lord, I
knew that thou wast an hard Man, Matthew. 25.24. thou had some little Excuse:
But when the God of Heaven had stooped so low, and bated so far, i^ now thou
should stand off, who shall plead for thee?

Object. Notwithstanding all these Abatements I am no more able to perform
those Condition (in themselves so easy) of Faith and Repentance and sincere
Obedience, than to satisfy and fulfill the Law.

Answ. These you may perform, by God's Grace enabling, whereas the others are
naturally impossible in this State, even to Believers themselves But let the
next Consideration serve for a fulle Answer.

5. Wherein you are impotent, God does offer Gra^ to enable you. I have
stretched out my Hand, and no Man regarded, Prove. 1.24. What though you are
plunge into the Ditch of that Misery, from which you can never get out? Christ
offers to help you out: He stretches his Hand to you, and if you perish, it
is for refusing his Help. Behold, I stand at the Door, and knock: If any Man
open to me, I will come in, Rev. 3.20. What though you are poor, and wretched,
and blind, and naked, Christ offers a Cure for your Blindness, a Cover for
your Nakedness, a Remedy for your Poverty, he tendereth you his Righteousness,
his Graces: I counsel thee to buy (...) me Gold, that thou may be rich; and
white Raiment, that thou may be clothed; and anoint thine Eyes with
Eye Salve that thou may see, Rev. 3.17.18. Do you say, The Condition is
impossible, for I have not wherewith to buy? You must know, that this buying is
without Money, and without Price, Isa. 55.1. this buying is by begging, and
seeking with Diligence and Constancy in the Use of God's Means, Prove. 2.3, 4.
God commands thee to know him, and to fear him. Do thou say, Yea, but my
Mind is blinded, and my Heart is hardened from this Fear? I answer, God does
offer to enlighten thy Mind, and to teach thee his Fear, that is presented to
thy Choice, Prove. 1.29. For that ^ey hated Knowledge, and did not choose the
Fear of the Lord. So that now, if Men live in Ignorance and Estrangement from
the Lord, it is because they will not understand, and desire not the Knowledge
of his Ways, Job 21.14. If thou criest after Knowledge, if thou seek her as
Silver, etc. Then shall thou understand the Fear of the Lord, and find the
Knowledge of God, Prove. 2.3, 4, 5. Is not here a fair Offer? Turn you at my
Reproof: Behold, I will pour out my Spirit unto you, Prove. 1.23. Though of your
selves you cannot do nothing, yet you may do all through his Spirit enabling
you; and he does offer Assistance to you. God bids you wash, and make you
clean, Isa. 1.16. You say, you are unable, as much as the Leopard to wash out
his Spots, Jer. 13.23. Yea, but the Lord does offer to purge you; so that if
you be filthy still, it is through your own Wilfulness, Ezekiel. 24.13. I have
purged thee, and thou wast not purged. Jer. 13.27. O Jerusalem, will thou not
be made clean, when shall it once be? God does wait when you will be made
clean, when you will yield to his Motions, and accept of his Offers, and let
him do for and in you, what you cannot do for your selves. You do not know how
much God will do upon your Importunity, if you will be restless, and instant
with him, Luke 11.8. and 18.5.

If God has not bound himself by express Promise to wicked Men, to give them
Grace in the diligent Use of the Means, yet he has given then abundant
Encouragement to expect it from him, if they seek it earnestly in his Way. His
mo^ gracious Nature is abundant Encouragement. I^ a rich and most bountiful Man
should see thee in Misery, and bid thee come to his Door; would thou not,
with Confidence, expect, at thy coming, to find some Relief? Thou art not able
to believe, nor repent; God appoints thee to use such and such Means in order
to thy obtaining Faith and Repentance: Does not this argue that God will bestow
these upon thee, if thou do ply him diligently in Prayer, Meditation,
Reading, Hearing, Self-Examination, and the rest of his Means* Otherwise God
should but mock his poor Creatures, to put them upon these Self-denying
Endeavors and then, when they have put hard to it, and continued waiting upon
him for Grace, deny them at last. Surely if a sweet natured Man would not deal
thus, much less will the most merciful and gracious God.

I intended to have added many other Arguments, but these have swollen under my
Hands; and I hope the judicious Reader will rather look upon the Weight, than
Number.

The Conclusion of the Whole.
AND now, my Brethren, let me know your Minds: What do you intend to do? Will
you go on and die? or will you set upon a thorough and speedy Conversion, and
lay hold on Eternal Life? How long will you linger in Sodom? How long will you
halt between two Opinions? 1 Kings 18.21. Are you not yet resolved whether
Christ o^ Barabbas, whether bliss or torment, whether the Land of Cabul, 1
Kings 9.13. or the Paradise of God, be the better choice? Is it a disputable
Case, whether the Abana and Parphar of Damascus, be better than all the Streams
of Eden? or whether the vile puddle of Sin be to be preferred before the Water
of Life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the
Lamb? Can the World in good earnest, do that for you, that Christ can? Will it
stand by you to Eternity? Will Pleasures, Titles, Lands, Treasures, descend
with you? Psa. 49.17. 1 Timothy: 6.7. If not, had you not need look after somewhat
that will? What mean you to stand wavering, to be off and on? Foolish Children!
how long will you stick between the womb and the world? Shall I leave you at
last no farther than Agrippa, but almost persuaded? Why, you are forever lost,
if left here: As good not at all, as not altogether Christians. You are half of
the mind to give over your former negligent Life, and to set a strict and holy
course; you could wish you were as some others be, and could do as they can do:
How long will you rest in idle Wishes, and fruitless Purposes? When will you
come to a fixed, full and firm Resolve? Do not you see how Satan gulls you, by
tempting you to Delays? How long has he tolled you on the Way of Perdition?
How many Years have you been purposing to amend? What if God should have taken
you off this while?

Well, put me not off with a dilatory Answer: Tell me not of hereafter, I must
have your present Consent. If you be not now resolved, while the Lord is
treating with you, and wooing of you, much less are you like to be hereafter,
when these Impressions are worn out, and you are hardened through the
Deceitfulness of Sin. Will you give me your Hands? Will you set open the Doors,
and give the Lord Jesus the full and present Possession? Will you put your
Names into his Covenant? Will you subscribe? What do you resolve upon? If you
are still upon your Delays, my labor is lost, and all is like to come to
nothing. Fain I would, that you should now put in your adventures: Come cast in
your Lot, make your choice: Now is the accepted Time, now is the Day of thy
Salvation: To Day if you will hear his Voice. Why should not this be the Day
from whence thou should be able to date thine Happiness? Why should thou
venture a day longer in this dangerous and dreadful condition? What if God
should this Night require thy Soul? Oh that thou might know in this thy day
the things that belong unto thy peace, before they be hid from thine eyes, Luke
19.42. This is the day, and it is but the day, John 9.4. Others have had their
day, and have received their doom; and now art thou brought upon the stage of
this World, here to act thy part for the whole Eternity. Remember thou art now
upon thy good Behavior for everlasting; if thou make not a wise Choice now,
thou art undone forever. Look what thy present choice is, such must thine
Eternal Condition be, Luke 10.24. and 16.25. Prove. 1.27, 28, 29.

And is it true indeed? Is Life and Death at thy choice? Yea, it is as true as
Truth is, Deuteronomy. 30.19. Why then, what hinders but that thou should be happy?
Nothing does or can hinder, but thine own wilful neglect, or refusal. It was
the passage of the Eunuch to Philip, See, here is Water: What does hinder me to
be baptized? So I may say to thee, See, here is Christ, here is Mercy, Pardon,
Life: What hinders, but that thou should be pardoned and saved? One of the
Martyrs, as he was praying at the stake, had his Pardon set by in a Box, which
indeed he refused deservedly, because upon unworthy terms: But here the terms
are most honorable and easy. O Sinner! will thou burn with thy Pardon by thee?
Why, do but forthwith give up thy Consent to Christ, to renounce thy Sins, deny
thyself, take up the Yoke, and the Cross, and thou carriest the Day, Christ is
thine, Pardon, Peace, Life, Blessedness, all are thine: And is not this an
offer worth embracing? Why should thou hesitate, or doubtfully dispute about
the Case? Is it not past controversy, whether God be better than Sin, and Glory
better than Vanity? Why should thou forsake thine own mercy, and sin against
thine own Life? When will thou shake off thy Sloth, and lay by thine Excuses?
Boast not thyself of to Morrow, thou know not where this Night may lodge
thee, Prove. 27.1.

Beloved, now the holy Spirit is striving wi^ you: He will not always strive.
Have thou not felt thy Heart warmed by the Word, and been almost persuaded to
leave off thy Sins, and come into God? Have thou not felt some good motions in
thy mind, wherein thou have been warned of thy Danger, and told what thy
careless Course would end in? It may be thou art like young Samuel, who when
the Lord called once and again, he knew not the Voice of the Lord, 1 Samuel 3.6,
7. But these Motions and Items are the offers, essays, calls and strivings of
the Spirit: Oh, take the Advantage of the Tide, and know the Day of thy
Visitation.

Now the Lord Jesus stretches wide his Arms to receive you; he beseeches you
by us. How movingly, how meltingly, how pitifully, how passionately he calls!
The Church is put into a sudden ecstasy upon the sound of his Voice, The Voice
of my Beloved, Cant. 2.8. Oh, will thou turn a deaf Ear to his Voice? It is not
the Voice that breaks the Cedars, and makes the Mountains to skip like a
Calf; that shakes the Wilderness, and divides the Flames of Fire: It is not
Sinai's Thunder, but the soft and still voice. It is not the voice of Mount
Ebal, a voice of cursing and terror, but the Voice of Mount Geriz^n, the Voice
of Blessing and of glad Tidings of good Things. It is not the Voice of the
Trumpet nor the Noise of War; but a Message of Peace from the King of Peace,
Ephesians. 6.2. 2 Cor. 5.18, 20. Methinks it should be with thee, as with the Spouse,
My Soul failed when he spoke Cant. 5 6. I may say to thee, O Sinner, as Martha
to he^ ^ister, The Master is come, and he calls for thee, John 11.28. Oh,
now, with Mary, arise quickly, and come unto him. How sweet are his
Invitations! He cries in the open Concourse, If any Man thirst, let him come
unto me and drink, John 7.37. Prove. 1.21. He broacheth his own Body for thee:
Oh, come and lay thy Mouth to his Side. How free is he! He excludes none:
Whosoever will, let him come and take the Water of Life freely, Rev. 22.17. Who
is simple, let him turn in hither. Come eat of my Bread, drink of the Wine
which I have mingled. Forsake the Foolish, and live, Prove. 9.4, 5, 6. Come unto
me, etc. Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, and ye shall find Rest unto
your Souls. Matthew. 11.28, 29. Him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast
out, John 6, 37. How does he bemoan the obstinate Refuser? O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem! How often would I have gathered thy Children, as a Hen gathers her
Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not? Matthew. 23.37. Behold me, behold me:
I have stretched out my Hands all the Day to a rebellious People, Isa. 65.1, 2.
Oh, be persuaded now at last, to throw yourselves into the Arms of Love.

Behold, O ye Sons of Men, the Lord Jesus has thrown open the Prisons, and now
he comes to you (as the Magistrates once to them, Acts 16.39.) and beseeches
you to come out. If it were from a Palace, or a Paradise, that Christ did call
you, it were no wonder if you were unwilling: (and yet, how easily was Adam
tolled from thence!) but it is from your Prison, Sirs, from your Chains, from
the Dungeon, from the Darkness that he calls you, Isa. 41.6, 7. and yet will
you not come? He calls you unto Liberty, Gal. 5.13. and yet will you not
hearken? His Yoke is easy, his Laws are liberty, his Service Freedom, Matt. 11
30. James. 1.25. 1 Cor. 7.22. and (whatever Prejudices you have against his
Ways) if a God may be believed, you shall find them all Pleasure and Peace, and
shall taste Sweetness and Joy unutterable, and take infinite Delight and
Felicity in them, Prove. 3.17. Psalm 119.161. 1 Pet. 118. Psalm 119.103, 111.

Beloved, I am loath to leave you: I cannot tell how to give you over: I am now
ready to shut up, but fain I would drive this Bargain between Christ and you,
before I end. What! shall I leave you as I found you at last? Have you read
hitherto, and are not yet resolved upon a present Abandoning all your Sins, and
closing with Jesus Christ! Alas, what shall I say, What shall I do! Will you
turn off all my Importunity! Have I run in vain! Have I used so many Arguments,
and spent so much time to persuade you, and yet must sit down at last in
Disappointment? But is it a small Matter that you turn me off? You put a Slight
upon the God that made you; you reject the Bowels and Beseechings of a Savior,
and will he sound Resisters of the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.41. if you will not now
be prevailed with to repent and be converted.

Well, though I have called you long, and ye have refused, I shall yet this once
more lift up my Voice like a Trumpet, and cry from the highest Places of the
City, before I conclude with a miserable Conclamatum est. Once more I shall
call after regardless Sinners, that, if possible, I may awaken them. O Earth,
Earth, Earth, hear the Word of the Lord, Jer. 22.29. Unless you be resolved to
die, ^end your Ears to the last Calls of Mercy. Behold, in the Name of God, I
make open Proclamation to you: Hearken unto me, O ye Children: Hear
Instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not, Prove. 8.32, 33.

Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters; and he that has no
Money, come ye, buy and eat: Yea, come, buy Wine and Milk, without Money, and
without Price. Wherefore do ye spend your Money for that which is not Bread,
and your Labor for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and
eat ye that which is good, and let your Soul delight itself in Fatness Incline
your Ear, and ^me ye unto me; hear, and your Soul shall live, and I will make
an Everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies of David, Isa. 55.1, 2,
3.

Ho, every one that is sick of any manner of Disease, or Torment, Matthew. 4.23,
24. or is possessed with an evil Spirit, whether of Pride, or Fury, or Lust, or
Covetousness, come ye to the Physician, bring away your Sick: Lo, here is he
that heals all manner of Sickness, and all manner of Diseases among the
People.

Ho, every One that is in Debt, and every One that is in Distress, and every
One that is discontented; gather yourselves unto Christ, and he will become a
Captain over you, he will be your Protection from the Arrests of the Law, he
will save you from the Hand of Justice. Behold he is an open Sanctuary to you,
he is a known Refuge, Heb. 6.18. Psalm. 48.3. Away with your Sins, and come in
unto him, lest the Avenger of Blood seize you, lest devouring Wrath overtake
you.

Ho, every ignorant Sinner, come and buy Eye Salve that thou may see, Rev.
3.18. Away with thine excuses, thou art forever lost if thou continuest in this
Estate, 2 Cor. 4.3. But accept of Christ for thy Prophet, and he will be a
Light unto thee, Isa. 42 6. Ephesians. 5.14. Cry unto him for Knowledge, study his
Word take pains about the Principles of Religion, humble thyself before him,
and he will teach thee his Way, and make thee wise unto Salvation, Matthew 13.36.
Luke 8.9. John 5.39 Psalm. 5.2. But if thou will not follow him in the painful
use of his Means, but sit down because thou have but one Talent, he will
condemn thee for a wicked and slothful Servant, Matthew. 25.24, 26.

Ho, every profane Sinner, come in and live: Return unto the Lord, and he will
have Mercy upon thee: Be entreated. Oh, return, come, thou that have filled thy
Mouth with Oaths and Execrations, all manner of Sins and Blasphemies shall be
forgiven thee Matthew. 3.28. if thou will but thoroughly turn unto Christ and come
in. Though thou wast as unclean as Magdalene, yet put away thy Whoredoms out of
thy sight, and thine Adulteries from between thy Breasts, and give up thyself
unto Christ, as a Vessel of Holiness alone for his Use, and then though thy Sins
be as Scarlet, they shall be as Wool; and though they be as Crimson, they shall
be as white as Snow, Luke 7.27. Hosea 2.2. 1 Thessalonians. 4 4. Isa 1.18.

Hear O ye Drunkards! How long will ye be drunken? Put away your Wine, 1 Samuel
1.14. Though you have rolled in the Womb of your Sin, take the Vomit of
Repentance, and hereby disgorge your beloved Lusts, and the Lord will receive
you, 2 Cor. 6.17. Give up yourselves unto Christ, to live soberly, righteously,
and godly: embrace his Righteousness, accept his Government, and though you have
been Swine he will wash you, Rev. 3.6.

Hear, O ye loose Companions! whose delight is in vain and wicked Society, to
sport away your time in carnal Mirth and Jollity with them; come in at Wisdom's
Call, and choose her and her ways, and you shall live, Prove. 9.5, 9.

Hear, O ye Scorners! hear the Word of the Lord: Though you have made a sport at
Godliness, and the Professors thereof; though you have made a Scorn of Christ,
and of his Ways; yet even to you does he call, to gather you under the Wings of
his Mercy, Prove. 1.22, 23. In a Word, though you should be found amongst the
worst of that black Roll, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. yet, upon your thorough Conversion,
you shall be washed, you shall be justified, you shall be sanctified in the
Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, V. 11.

Ho, every formal Professor, that are but a lukewarm and dough-baked Christian,
and rested in the form of Godliness; give over thy halving and thy haling, be a
throughout Christian, and be zealous, and repent; and then, though thou had
been an Offense to Christ's Stomach, thou shall be the Joy of his Heart, Rev.
3.16, 19, 20.

And now bear Witness that Mercy has been offered you: I call Heaven and Earth
to record against you this Day, that I have set before you Life and Death,
Blessing and Cursing; therefore choose Life, that you may live, Deuteronomy. 30.19. I
can but woo you and warn you, I cannot compel you to be happy; if I could I
would. What Answer will you send me with to my Master? Let me speak unto you as
Abraham's Servant to them; And now, if you will deal kindly and truly with my
Master, tell me, Genesis 24.49. Oh, for such a happy Answer as Rebecca gave to
them, Genesis 24 57, 58. And they said, We will call the Damsel and enquire at her
Mouth. And they called Rebecca, and said unto her, Will thou go with this Man?
And she said, I will go Oh that I had but that from you? Why should I be your
Accuser, Mat. 10.14, 15. who thirst for your Salvation? Why should the
passionate Pleadings and Wooing of Mercy be turned into the horrid Aggravations
of your Obstinacy, and Additions to your Misery? Judge in yourselves: Do you
not think their Condemnation will be be doubly deceitful, that shall still go
on in their Sins, after all Endeavors to recall them? Doubtless, it shall be
more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, yea, for Sodom and Gomorrah, in the Day of
Judgment, than for you, Mat. 11.22, 24.

Beloved, if you have any Pity for your perishing Souls, close with the present
Offers of Mercy: If you would not continue and increase the Pains of your
travailing Ministers, do not stick in the Birth. If the God that made you have
any Authority with you, obey his Command and come in. If you are not the
Despisers of Grace, and would not shut up the Doors of Mercy against
yourselves, repent and be converted. Let not Heaven stand open for you in vain:
Let not the Lord Jesus open his Wares, and bid you buy without Money, and
without Price, in vain: Let not his Ministers, and his Spirit strive with you
in vain, and leave you now at last unpersuaded, lest the Sentence go forth
against you, The Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed of the Fire, the
Founder melts in vain. Reprobate Silver shall Men call them, because the Lord
has rejected them, Jer. 6.29, 30.

Father of Spirits, take the Heart in Hand that is too hard for my Weakness: Do
not thou have ended though I have done; half a Word from thine effectual Power,
will do the Work. O thou that have the Key of David, that openest when no Man
shuts: Open thou his Heart, as thou did Lydia's and let the King of Glory
enter in, and make this Soul thy Captive. Let not the Tempter harden him in
Delays: Let him not stir from this Place, nor take his Eyes from these Lines,
till he be resolved to forgo his Sins, and to accept of Life upon thy
self-denying Terms: In thy Name, O Lord God, did I go forth to these Labors:
In thy Name do I shut them up: Let not all the Time they have cost, be but lost
Hours: Let not all the Thoughts of Heart, and all the Pains that has been
about them, be but lost Labor. Lord, put thine Hand into the Heart of this
Reader, and send thy Spirit, as once thou did Philip, to join himself to the
Chariot of the Eunuch, while he was reading the Word: And though I should never
know it it while I live, yet I beseech thee, Lord God, let it be found at the
last Day, that some Souls are converted by these Labors: And let some be able
to stand forth, and say, That by these they were won unto Thee. Amen, Amen. Let
him that reads say, Amen.

Mr. Allein's Counsel for Personal and Family Godliness.
BEloved, I despair of ever bringing you to Salvation, without Sanctification;
or possessing you of Happiness, without persuading you to Holiness. God knows,
I have not the least Hope ever to see one of your Faces in Heaven, except you
be converted and sanctified, and exercise yourselves unto Godliness. I beseech
you, study Personal-Godliness, and Family-Godliness.

1. Personal-Godliness. Let it be your first Care to set up Christ in your
Hearts: See that you make all your worldly Interests to stoop to him, that you
be entirely and unreservedly devoted unto him. If you wilfully, and
deliberately, and ordinarily harbor any Sin, you are undone, Psa. 68.21. Ezekiel.
18.20. See that you unfeignedly take the Law of Christ as the Rule of your
Words, Thoughts and Actions; and subject you* whole Man, Members and Mind
faithfully to him, Psalm. 119.34. Romans 6.13. If you have not a due Respect to
all God's Commandments, you are unsound at Heart, Psalm. 119 6. Oh, study to get
the Image and Impress of Christ upon you within. Begin with your Hearts, else
you would build without Foundation. Labor to get a saving Change within, or
else all external Performances will be to no Purpose: And then study to show
forth the Power of Godliness in the Life. Let Piety be your first and great
Business: It Is the highest Point of Justice to give God his due. Beware that
none of you be a prayerless Person; for that is a most certain Discovery of a
Christless and a Graceless Person; if one that is a very Stranger to the Fear
of God, Psalm. 14.4. Job. 15.4. Suffer not your Bibles to gather Du^ see that
you converse daily with the Word, John 5.39. That Man can never lay claim to
Blessedness, whose delight is not in the Law of the Lord, Psalm. 1.1, 2. Let
Meditation and Self-Examination be your daily Exercise.

But Piety, without Charity, is but the Half of Christianity, or rather impious
Hypocrisy. We may not divide the Tables: See therefore that you do justly and
love Mercy, and let Equity and Charity run like an even Thread, throughout all
your Dealings. Be you temperate in all things, and let Chastity and Sobriety be
your undivided Companions. Let Truth and Purity, Seriousness and Modesty,
Heaviness and Gravity, be the constant Ornaments of your Speech. Let Patience
and Humility, Simplicity and Sincerity shine out in all the Parts of your
Conversations. See that you forget and forgive Wrongs, and requite them with
Kindness, as you would be found the Children of the Most High. Be merciful in
your Censures, and put the most favorable Construction upon your Brethren's
Carriage, that their Actions will reasonably bear. Be slow in promising,
punctual in fulfilling. Let Meekness and Innocence, Affableness, Yieldingness
and Courtesy commend your Conversations to all Men. Let none of your
Reflections want that Love and Loyalty, that Reverence and Duty, that
Tenderness, Care and Vigilance, which their several Capacities call for. This
is throughout Godliness. I charge you before the Most High God, that none of
you be found a Swearer or a Lyat, or a lover of evil Company, or a Scoffer, or
Malicious, or Covetous, or a Drunkard, or a Glutton, unrighteous in Dealing,
unclean in his Living, or a Quarreller, or a Thief, or a Backbiter, or a
Railer: For I denounce unto you, from the Living God, that Destruction and
Damnation is the End of all such, Prove. 13.20. Jam. 5.12. Rev. 21.8. 1 Cor. 6,
9, 10. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.

2. Family-Godliness. He that has set up Christ in his Heart, will be sure to
study to set him up in his House. Let every Family with you be a Christian
Church, 1 Cor. 16.19. every House a House of Prayer: Let every Householder say,
with Joshua, I and my House will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. and resolve with
David, I will walk within my House with a perfect Heart, Psalm. 101.2. Let me
press upon you a few Duties in general.

First, Let Religion be in your Families, not as a Matter by the by (to be
minded at Leisure, when the World will give you leave) but the standing
Business of the House: Let them have your Prayers as your Meals: Is there any
of your Families but have time for their taking Food? Wretched Man! Can thou
find Time to eat in, and not find Time to pray in?

Secondly, Settle it upon your Hearts, that your Souls are bound up in the
Souls of your Families. They are committed unto you, and if they be lost
through your Neglect, will be required at your Hands. Sirs, if you do not, you
shall know, that the Charge of Souls is a heavy Charge, and that the Blood of
Souls is a heavy Guilt. O Man! have thou a Charge of Souls to answer for, and
do thou not bestir thy self for them, that their Blood be not found in thy
Skirts? Will thou do no more for immortal Souls, than thou will do for thy
Beasts that perish? What do thou do for thy Children and Servants? Thou
providest Meat and Drink for them, agreeable to their Natures; and do thou
not the same for thy Beast? Thou give them Medicines, and cherishest them
when they be sick: And do thou not as much for thy Swine? More particularly.

1. Let the solemn Reading of the Word and singing of Psalms, be your
Family-Exercises, Isa. 34.26. Joh. 5.39 Psalm. 118.15. See Christ singing with
his Family, viz. His Disciples, Mat. 26.30. Luke 6 18.

2. Let every Person in your Families be duly called to an Account of their
profiting by the Word heard or read, as they be about doing your own Business:
This is a Duty of Conscience unspeakable, and would be a Means to bring those
under your Charge, to remember and profit by what you receive. See Christ's
Example in calling his Family to an Account, Matt. 16.11, 13, 15.

3. Often take an Account of the Souls under your Care, concerning their
Spiritual Estates; (herein you must be Followers of Christ, Matthew, 13.10, 36,
51. Mark 4.10, 11.) make Inquiry into their Conditions, insist much upon the
Sinfulness and Misery of their natural Estate, and upon the Necessity of
Regeneration and Conversion, in order to their Salvation. Admonish them gravely
of their Sins, encourage their Beginnings. Follow them earnestly, and let them
have no quiet for you, till you see them in a saving Change. This is a Duty of
high Consequence, but (I am afraid) fearfully neglected. Does not Conscience
say, Thou art the Man?

4. Look to the strict Sanctifying of the Sabbath by all your Household, Exodus
20.19. Lev. 23.3. Many poor Families have little Time else. O improve but your
Sabbath Days as diligently in laboring for Knowledge, and doing your Master's
Work, as you do the other Days in doing your own, and I doubt not but you may
come to some Proficiency.

5. Let the Morning and Evening-sacrifice of solemn Prayer, be daily offered up
in all your Families, Psalm. 92.1, 2 Exodus 30.7.8. Luke 1.9, 10. Beware they be
found among the Families that call not upon God's Name, for why should there be
Wrath from the Lord, upon your Families? Jer. 10.25. O miserable Families,
without God in the World, that are without Family Prayer! What! have you so
many Family-Sins, Family Wants, Family Mercies? Wha^ and yet no Family-Prayers?
Ho^ do yo^ ^y with all Prayer and Supplication, it you do not with
Family Prayer? Ephesians 6.18. Say not, I have no Time What, have thou all thy Time,
on purpose to serve God, and save thy Soul? and yet is this it for which thou
can find no Time? Find but a Heart, and I will find Time. Pinch out of your
Meals and Sleep, rather than want for Prayer. Say not, my Business will not
give Leave. This is the greatest Business to save thyself, and the Souls
committed to thee. Business, a Whet will be no Let. In a Word, the Blessing of
all is to be got by Prayer, Jer. 29.11, 12. 2 Samuel 7 29. And what is thy
Business without God's Blessing? Say not, I am not able: Use the one Talent,
and God will increase, Matt. 25.24, etc. Helps are to be had, till thou art
better able. But if there be no other Remedy, thou must join with thine abler
Neighbor, GOD, has special Regard to joint Prayer, James 5.4. to 19. Acts
12.5, 10, 12. 2 Corinthians 1.11. and therefore you must improve
Family-Advantages for the performing of it.

6. Put every one in your Familes upon private Prayer. Observe whether they do
perform it. Get them the Help of a Form, if they need it, till they are able to
go without it. Direct them how to pray, by minding them of their Sins, Wants
and Mercies, the Materials of Prayer. This was the Practice of John, and of
Jesus, Luke 11.1, 2, etc.

7. Set up Catechizing in your Families, at the least once every Week. Have you
no dread of the Almighty's Charge, that you should teach these Things
diligently to your Children, and talk of them as you sit in your Houses. etc.
Deutero^omy 6.6, 7, 8, 9. and 4.9, 10. and 11 18, 19, 20. and train them up in
the Way wherein they should go. Prove. 22.6. the Margin. Has God so commanded
Abraham, that he would teach his Children and Household, Genesis 18.19. and that he
had many instructed Servanti, Genesis 14.14. see the Margin, and given such a
Promise thereupon; and will not you put in for a Share, neither in Praise, nor
the Promise? Has Christ honored Catechizing with his Presence, Luke 2.46. and
will you not own it with your Practice? Say not, they are careless, and will
not learn: What have you your Authority for, if not to use it for God, and the
good of their Souls? You will call them up, and force them to do your Work; and
should not you at least be as zealous in putting them upon God's Work? Say not,
they are dull, and are not capable: If they be dull, God requires of you the
more Pains and Patience; but so dull as they are, you will make them learn how
to Work; and can they not learn as well how to live? Are they capable of the
Mysteries of your Trade, and are they not capable of the plain Principles of
Religion? Well, if ever you would see the Growth of Religion, the Cure of
Ignorance, the Remedy of Profaneness, the Downfall of Error, fulfill you my Joy
in going thorough with this Duty.

Will you answer the Calls of divine Providence? Would you remove the
incumbent, or prevent the impending Calamities? Would you plant Nurseries for
the Church of God? Would you that God should build your Houses, and bless your
Substance? Would you that your Children should bless you? O then set up Piety
in your Families, as ever you would be blessed, or be a Blessing: Let your
Hearts and your Houses be the Temples of the living God, in which his Worship
(according to all the said mentioned Directions) may be with Constancy
reverendly performed, Prove. 29.1. He that being often reproved, hardneth his
Heart, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without Remedy. Oh! be wise in
Time, that you be not miserable to Eternity.

DIVERSE Practical Cases OF CONSCIENCE Satisfactorily Resolved.
I. Wherein should Christians be singular in their Obedience; or what may they,
and must they do, more than others?

II. What may and must a Christian be and do that he may please God?

III. Whether any Man is able in this Life to come up to the Example of Christ
in this, to do always those things that please God?

IV. What Weariness in, and Unwillingness to Duties may stand with Grace, and
what not?

To which are added some COUNSELS and CORDIALS.

CHAP. I. The singular Duties of Christians.
1. Case of Conscience. On Matthew. v. 47. What do you more than others?
Quest. 1. WHEREIN should Christians be singular in their Obedience? or what
may they, and must they do more than others?

Answ. Take the answer in these 16 Rules: Containing the Character and Compass
of a Christian:

Rule I. Heartily to love them that slight you, and to wish and seek the good
of those that hate you, and seek to hurt you: This is the very thing urged in
the Text. If you salute your Brethren, only, and love them that love you, do
not even the Publicans the same? Matthew. 5.46, 47. To love them that do respect
and value us, this every one can do; but to love them truly that think meanly
of us, and have Prejudices and hard Thoughts against us, and to speak well of
them that speak Evil of us, (as the sweet-spirited Calvin) Let Luther call me
Dog or Devil, I will say of him nevertheless, he is a precious Servant of
Christ Jesus. This is to do more than others. Thus the Martyr Cranmer, of whom
it was a Proverb (Do the Bishop of Canterbury a Displeasure, and you shall ever
have him your Friend.) Thus that Holy Man, in his much to be admired parting
Words, (I had never any greater Pleasure in all my Life than to forget and
forgive Injuries, and to show Kindness to them that sought Evil to me.) Study
who have offended you, and disobliged you, and slighted you, and keep up good
Thoughts of them (if the Case will bear it) and speak nothing but good of them,
and think what Kindness you may show them: Pray for them, wish well to them, so
shall ye be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 5.45.

Rule II. To swim against the Stream of the Multitude: The dead Fish will swim
with, but the Living, against the Stream. Many will tu^ Jews, when their
Interest will carry it in the World. When Religion is in Fashion, every one
will be in it. But to bear Head against the Current of the Times, and to be for
strict Godliness in all your Ways, when the Stream runs quite against it, to
bear it down, and to resolve as David did, to be yet more vile; this is to be,
and to do more than others. The Samaritans will need be Jews, when Alexander
favors and helps them; but when Antiochus bloodily rages against them, (as in
the Time of the Maccabees) then they will be none of the Kin, but pretend
themselves to be of another Stock (which, by the Way, was the Reason of the
deadly Hatred afterward between the Jews and them.) But to be singular in your
good Choice and Resolutions, with Joshua; though all should vote against you
with one Consent; and with Noah to be perfect in our Generation, when never so
adulterous, and to walk with God when all Flesh have corrupted their Way, and
tread a contrary Course, this is to do more than others. Thus the three
Children, or rather the three Champions (who would not fear the Flouts of the
Multitude, nor the Frowns of the great Ones, nor the Charge of Singularity, but
when all the Princes, Governors, Captains, Counselors, Sheriffs, and all the
People, Nations and Languages fell down and worshipped, they stood by
themselves, and would not sinfully comply, Dan. 3.3, 7, 18.

Rule III. To take most care of that which is most out of Sight. A Christian's
Eye is most on the Things least seen; first upon his Heart, herein he does
exceed the Righteousness of the Pharisees, whose great Care was to keep all
fair and clean that came to view, but looked no farther: Make great Conscience
of your Carriage in secret, and let your main Guard be upon your Hearts, and
this will be more than others reach to. This was Paul's Care, to keep his
Conscience, his Inside, clean and undefiled, Acts 24.16. and Job's Care, that
though all the World did reproach him, he might not put a Reproach in the Mouth
of his Conscience, Job 27.6. and David's Care that his Heart might be clean. 2.
Upon his Hope. Others look to the Things seen, Things in Hand; but the true
Believer eyes his Hopes, walks by Faith, not by Sight, and lives a quite
different Life from many others in the World besides; as living upon the Hope
of Heaven does differ from living on the Pleasures, Profits and Honors of the
World.

Rule IV. To be merciful to others Failings, and very severe to our own. The
noble Roman Cato, could more easily forgive any than himself To aggravate our
own Evils, and to have an Excuse ready for our Brothers, and to censure
ourselves freely, and to come with the Mantle behind us to cover our Brother;
this is to do more than others. The Hypocrite is a Censurer abroad; he is like
the Eye that can see any thing but itself: He can discern a Mote in his
Brother's Eye, but not a Beam in his own. But the Servant of God rebukes others
with Meekness, but falls out easily and bitterly with himself.

Rule V. To suffer rather than to sin. This was Moses's choice, but the
Hypocrite is quite contrary: He chooses Iniquity rather than Affliction. To go
so far with Christ as our Way lies together, is to do no more than an unsound
Professor may reach to: The Trial is when Christ's Interest and ours do cross,
and we must either baulk our Duty, or our Safety and Advantage. The famous
Martyr under Julian, would not give one Halfpenny toward the Building of the
Idol's Temple, though he was offered his Life by the Emperor on those Terms: The
godly high Priest Eleazer, when the Nobles persuaded him to eat other Meat
under Color of Swine's Flesh, and they would persuade the King Antiochus that
he had eaten Swine's Flesh, would die rather than stain his Profession with the
Appearance of Evil. When a Man shall lie in outward Misery, and have a Door of
Deliverance opened, if he would but sin, and yet he will not accept of it, as
those Worthies in Paul's Martyrology: This is to do more than others, Heb.
11.36.

Rule VI. To rejoice for Losses in Christ, and glory in the Cross. When others
be discouraged at the News of Hardship, as that forward and seemingly resolved
Disciple, or shall be offended as soon as the Sun of Persecution is up. When we
shall take pleasure in Infirmities, in Tribulations, and rejoice that we are
counted worthy to suffer Shame for the Name of Christ; this is to do more than
others. When the Servants of God shall not only patiently and triumphantly
undergo the Crosses that crack the Brains, and break the Hearts of others, and
shall shake off the Viper without receiving any hurt, when Paul and Silas shall
sing in the Stocks, and the resolved Martyr shall embrace the Faggots, and kiss
the Stake: When the valiant Philpot shall say of his Prison (In the Judgment of
the World we are in Hell, but I find in it the sweet Consolation of Heaven) and
the Holy Bradford (My Prison is sweeter to me than any Parlour, than any
Pleasure I have had in all my Life.) This is indeed to exceed others.

Rule VII. To be good when we shall be evil spoken of for our Labor. A
Pharisee will do those Duties that will gain Applause with Man, but to take up
with despised Duties, disgraceful Duties, and with Davia to be religious, when
it shall render him vile: This is to do more than others. The Philosopher could
say, It is noble indeed for a Man to do Well, when he knows he shall bear Ill
for it. To take up Religion when every one kicks it off, to stand up alone with
Luther for the Truth, when the whole World is gone a Wandering after the Whore.
To have his Hand against every Man, and to be for Christ with Athanasius,
against the whole Universe: This is indeed to do some singular Thing.

Rule VIII. To strike in with God's Interest when it is falling. To join
ourselves with the Lord's People, when it is the weakest, to espouse their
Interest with Moses, when they were in deep Affliction, Heb 11.25, 26. To own
ourselves to be some of them undauntedly, when this Way is every where spoken
against, this is to tread Antipodes to the Course of this World.

Rule IX. To be most cruel to the Sin that is naturally most dear. The
Hypocrite hide* his sweet Morsel under his Tongue, he spares as it were the
fattest of the Cattle, he says, The Lord pardon (...) Servant concerning this
Thing. But when a M^n shall off with his right Hand, out with his right Eye,
serve his Absalom, as Joab did, when he took three Darts and thrust thorough
his Heart: This is to do more than others. The sincere Christian is mo^ angry
with the Sin of his Temper, against this he aims the Arrows of all his Prayers.
He keeps him from his Iniquity, he drives the whole Herd of Sin before him, but
especially shoots at, singles out this to run it down.

Rule X. To live upon the divine Promises when others live upon their
Possessions. Others are all for what is in Hand, with them Words are but Wind,
they cannot live upon them, the Promises are to them a barren Heath and dry
Breasts. But when we make the Promises our Heritage, the Staff of our Life, the
Life of our Hearts, when the Promises are the Bottle we run to in all our
Fainting; and while others hope to their Wealth, our Hope is in the Word. This
is to do more than others.

Rule XI. To love that best and choose that soonest which does cross the Flesh
most. The godly Man's Rule is to take the Self-denial aside, so he be sure it
be safe; when others Study is to please themselves, his is to curb himself: The
Life of others is a Flesh-pleasing, his a Self denying Life; others Joy is,
when they can gratify themselves, his, when he can get victory over himself.

Rule XII. To be most hot in that wherein Self i^ least concerned. Paul is meek
as a Lamb under personal Injuries, 1 Cor. 4.12. Acts 7.16. But how is his
Spirit stirred when God is dishonored? A Man of Understanding is of a cool
Spirit, that is in his own Concern; but Moses the Meek waxes hot with
Indignation at the Sight of the Calf. To be hot and forward in those Duties
where the Flesh's Interest is concerned, is to do more than Jehu, 2 Kings
10.16, 20.

Rule XIII. To make a true Conscience of the least Sins, but most Conscience of
the greatest. In one of these will the Hypocrite be found tardy. It may be he
will fly from open Sins, and startle at gross staring Sins; but of little Sins
he makes little Conscience; this he allows of, and connives at. Or else he will
be very tender of little Things, scruple the Plucking the Ears of Corn on the
Sabbath Day, or the Curing of the Sick, and strain at the Gnat; when he will in
other Things swallow a Camel, devour Widows Houses. The Sincere will indulge no
Sin; grieves for, groans under, cries out feelingly against his very
Infirmities; but most dreads what God most hates.

Rule XIV. To allow yourselves in the Neglect of no Duty, but to reserve your
Zeal for the Duties of most Weight. To tithe Mint and C^min, and neglect
Judgment, Mercy and Faith, to be zealous for Human Ceremonies, Ordinances, and
Men's Traditions, and omit the weightier Matters of the Law, is right the
Pharisees guise, Matthew. 23.23^ Matthew. 15.2. To eye both the Tables, to join
sweetly together Morality and Piety, to be punctual with Men, but not careless
of God, to give to Caesar the Things that are Cesar's, but first to give to God
the Things that be God's, this is to do more than others. The sincere Christian
has Respect to all God's Commandments; walks in all his Statutes; He is
throughout with God, but he is most zealous in those Things that lie next the
Heart of Religion.

Rule XV. To love your Reprovers. Herein David does more than Ahab, see their
contrary Frames, 1 Kings 22.8. Psa. 141.5.

Rule XVI. To subject all your worldly Interests to your Maker's Glory, and
perform holy Duties with Holy Ends, and while others do their best Actions with
carnal Aims; you must do your common and civil Actions with heavenly Aims.

Q. How may we know whether we be, and do more than others that are unsound?

I shall answer this Question by propounding eight Questions to you, beseeching
you to retire to the most solemn and strict Examination, and make Conscience to
give a clear Answer to these few Interrogatories, and that will resolve the
Case.

Q. I. When others do pick and choose, have you respect to all God's
Commandments? The Hypocrite may have great respect to the Comforts, but he has
little to the Commands of Religion: He is much for the Privilege and Promises:
little for the Precepts and Duties: He is partial in the Law; he will take but
here and there where he likes, and where God's Commands will serve his
Interest, or at least will not pinch too hard upon the Flesh. The sound
Christian sets all God's Commands before him; he eyes all his Copy; and
heartily designs and studies a throughout Conformity: He has no starting
Holes, no contrived Haunts; nor does he halt between the Lord and Baal, nor
serve two Masters: He does not fear the Lord, and serve other Gods, nor divides
his Service between God and Mammon, but he is all for Uniformity and entirely
devoted to God's Service, and Fear alone; he has a good Conscience willing in
all Things to live honestly, and does truly, though not perfectly forsake all
his Sins, and keep all his Statutes that are known to him. Let me therefore ask
you two Questions: (1. When others divide the Tables, do you sweetly conjoin
them in your Practice? The Hypocrite, may be, is just and square toward Men,
but follow him to his Family or Closet, you shall find but little of God: His
Family is neglected, his Soul is neglected; or it may be he is a forward
First-Table-Man, but you shall find him tardy in the Second. He will make many
Prayers and long Prayers, yet make no Conscience of devouring Widows Houses. He
is a great Pretender to Piety, but mean while neglects Judgment and Mercy. The
Sincere join all together. He is so far careful of Justice with Men, that
meanwhile he will not neglect the first and great Part of Justice, viz To give
God his Due: He does justly, he loves Mercy, but withal walks humbly with God:
He walks soberly with respect to himself, righteously toward his Neighbor,
and godly toward his Maker. He is not one of those that are good only on their
Knees, but you shall find him every where conscientious: You shall have
Temperance at his Table, Chastity and Modesty in his Behavior, Grace and Truth
in his Works, Charity in his Deeds, Faithfulness in his Trust, Justice in his
Dealings. He does not only seem to be religious, but bridleth his Tongue; He is
not only a good Christian, but a good Neighbor, not only a good Man, but a
good Husband, a good Master, a dutiful Child, a diligent and faithful Servant,
a good Subject: In a Word, he makes a great Conscience of discharging the
Duties of his Relations among Men. (2) When others stick in Externals, do you
look to the spiritual Part of every Command, and principally mind the Inwards
and Virals of Religion? Do you not only make Conscience of performing Duties,
but do you carefully look to the Manner of performing of them, and the Ends for
which we do perform them? Do you not only make Conscience of open, but of
secret Sins? Do you abound above all in secret Duties? Do you keep a Watch upon
your Hearts, and make Conscience, not only of the gross Acts of Sin, but even
of sinful Thoughts, Inclinations and Desires; and are grieved even with your
very Infirmities, and the corrupt Dispositions of your Natures, which you
cannot help, though you would?

Q. II. When others have their Reserves in Closing with Christ, do you give up
all to him entirely? Have you taken Christ not Hand over Head, but
deliberately, understandingly, sitting down first, and counting the Cost? Have
you not secret Reserves for your own Ease, Safety, Estates, Esteem, on some
beloved Sin? Have you, upon solemn Consideration, accepted Christ as the Lord
your Righteousness, for better, for worse, for all Changes of Times and
Conditions, to run all Hazards with him, and to take your Lot with him, fall as
it will?

Q. III. When others are for a little of Religion ^y the by, do you make
Religion your Business? Do you not put off God with the World's Leavings, and
serve him when you are at Leisure? Must not God stand by, while the World is
first served: And are not your Souls the least of your Cares? And put off with
some by Scraps and Ends of your time? Is Religion your Trade, and your
Conversation in Heaven? Do you walk with God? Or have you only now and then a
Turn with him? When you have ended your Prayers, is there an End of your
Religion till you come to them again? Or do you carry on a Design of Religion
throughout your whole Course? Have you only a List of Religion at the outside
of the Piece? Or is the Woof of Religion woven into the whole Cloth, into Heart
and Life, into your Discourse, and Trades, and Table? Do you first seek the
Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof? Is it the chief Care of your
Lives, that God be served, and your Souls be saved? And is this the one Thing
necessary with you, that you chiefly mind, and are most solicitous about? Do
your very Hearts say with David, One thing have I desired of the Lord, that I
will seek after, etc.

Q. VI. When are others are for the Wages of Religion, are you for the Work?
Can you say with David, I have chosen thy Precepts? Do your Hearts come off
freely in this Choice? Had you rather be Holy than otherwise, if you were at
your Choice? Had you rather be God's Servants, and live at his Command, than at
your own Lusts? Do you count the Laws of Christ your Heritage, or rather do you
no count them your Bondage? Do you choose not only the Wages of Righteousness,
but the Ways of Righteousness? Are God's Commandments your Delight? And are the
sweetest Hours of your Lives the Hours ye spend with him? Do you never enjoy
yourselves so much as when you most enjoy God? Is his Service the greatest
Comfort, and is it Meat and Drink to you to do his Will, unless when you are
not yourselves in the time of Temptation and Desertion? Do you make Use of holy
Duties only as Men do of Physic, when they are ill at Ease, when Conscience
lasheth, or Affliction stings, as it were, to conjure down the frightful
Furies? Or to pacify God, that he may not hurt you? Or else do you use them as
your daily Bread, and the very Staff of your Life, and Means of your Comforts?

Q. V. When others are for the cheap and easy Religion, are you for
Self-Denial? When others are for the Religion that will serve them best, are
you for that which will serve God best? When others are all upon the sparing
Hand, and will spare what may be spared, and study how they may best save
Charges in going to Heaven, are you of princely Spirits, to resolve not to
serve the Lord with that which will cost you nothing? Is your Course of
Religion such as does put your Flesh to it, and cross and curb its Desires, or
do you love to give it what it craves, and suffer it to make its own Way? Have
you no Enemy you dread so much as Self? Do you pamper and please it and make
Provisions for it? or do you pray and watch against it, and grieve for its
unhappy Infirmities in your Actions? And had rather than all the World that
this Enemy were under your Feet?

Q. VI. When others are for no more of Religion than needs must, are you for
the Height of Religion? The Hypocrite (as one well) is very inquisitive what is
the lowest Pitch that a Man may have and go to Heaven; and upon this Design, if
he could find but this, he would look no farther: But the sincere Christian,
though satisfied that his State is safe, will rest in no Seize in Grace,
but reaches forward and presses on, if it were possible, to attain to the
Resurrection of the Dead. He that does not desire, and design, and endeavor
Perfection, never yet came up to Sincerity. A true Believer desires Holiness
for Holiness sake, and therefore is set upon perfecting Holiness: Others desire
it only for Heaven sake, and therefore only for so much as will bear their
Charges thither; others make use of Holiness only as a Bridge to Heaven, and
therefore are for no more than will just serve their turn. And they have a
false Notion of Heaven itself, else they might justly desire it as the End of
their present Holiness, it being the Fruition of God in perfect Holiness.
The true Believer has a holy Nature, and therefore Holiness is his Element;
and natural Employment; and he must needs desire Holiness in its Height because
every Nature reaches after Perfection in its Kind; the godly Man desires not
Holiness, because it is the Way to Heaven, but he he loves Heaven the better
for the holy Way that leads to it, and for the perfect Holiness which is there.

Q. VII. When others are all for the Salvation of Christ, are you as truly by
Sanctification for Christ? Do you take Christ as God offers him, with all his
Offices and Benefits, to be both a Prince and a Savior, to give you Repentance
as well as Remission of Sins? Are you willing of the Dominion of Christ, as
well as Deliverance by Christ? Do you close with his Burden, as well as his
Benefits? Do you count his Laws your Liberty? His Government not your Bondage,
but your Privilege? His Service your Freedom? Do you go in Christ's Ways, as in
Goals and Fetters? Or do you run with Enlargement of Heart, Delight, or real
Willingness?

Q. VIII. When others do make Self their Ends do you set up God above all, as
your highest End? The Hypocrite does the same Duties with the Godly, but with
different Ends; He eats for himself, and fasts for himself, and prays with no
better than Self Ends, and therefore is rejected. Now is it your great Design
in your whole Course to glorify God, and enjoy God: Do you count this your
whole Business and Blessedness? Do you make other Business to stoop to this?
Other Interests to yield to this? Do your Souls breath after this above all
worldly Good, that Christ may be magnified in you? Do you count your Name and
your Estate as Loss, and the Delights of Sense but Puddle-Water in Comparison
of Christ? If Conscience give a comfortable and clear Answer to these
Questions, go in Peace: Blessed are you of the Lord, God is your Friend, Heaven
is your Heritage, the Promises are your Portion, Christ is yours, all is yours;
for he that does these Things shall never be moved, Psalm 15.5.

A Necessary Case on 1 Thessalonians 4.1.
Q. WHAT may and must a Christian be, and do, that he may please God:

A. To your Pleasing of God something is necessary, as to your Persons and
Estates, and something as to your Performance and Acts.

First, As to your Persons or Estates, it is necessary in general, that you be
in a State of Reconciliation with God: If you would walk worthy of the Lord
unto All-pleasing, you must first be Friends with him, for how can two walk
together except they be agreed? Get the Controversy taken up between God and
thee, and then thou shall with Levi, walk with God in Peace. Labor to get the
Breaches made up, to have the Enmity slain, to have divine Displeasure removed.
Till thy Pardon be obtained, and thy Peace made, nothing thou can do will
please God, he will be angry with thy Person, and angry with thy Prayers. What
a fart Message is that to impenitent Sinners, Mal 1.10. God cannot take
Pleasure in their Persons; I have no Pleasure in you, says the Lord of Hosts,
nor in any of their Performances; neither will I accept an Offering at your
Hand: He professes that his Soul had no Delight in them, and tells them that
they are unto him as a Vessel wherein there is no Pleasure, Jer. 22.28. It Is
the modest Expression of that Vessel into which Nature empties itself. Come in
then, and touch the golden Scepter, yield to Mercy, kiss the Son, resign to
Christ; accept of the Peace tendered you in the Word of Reconciliation, and
then God will be friends. More particularly, that you may be in a State of
Reconciliation, and so in a Capacity of pleasing God, you must follow these
Directions.

1. Put off every Sin: It is your Iniquity that separateth between you and your
God, this is the Make bate. If thou would have God pleased, turn every Sin
out of Doors, pluck it out, cast it from thee: If thou regard Iniquity in thine
Heart, God will not h^ thee, nor regard thee, Psalm. 66.1. If thou art of them
that have Pleasure in Unrighteousness, the Lord has no Pleasure in thee. He is
not a God that has Pleasure in Wickedness, Evil shall not dwell with him: The
Foolish shall not stand in his Sight: He hates all the Workers of Iniquity.
See that thou abandon every Sin that thou know, spare not one Agag, not a
right Eye, not an Herodias; for then God will not spare thee, give the Darling
of thy Bosom a Bill of Divorce, say to all thy Idols, Get thee hence. God will
not look to that Man that looks pleasantly upon any Sin; the jealous God will
not endure to see thee Hankering on the Harlot's Lips, embracing any Sin with
Delight. He will not bear it to see thee smile upon any Sin: He holds thee for
a Traitor to his Crown, if thou willingly harbor his Enemy. Though thou be very
diligent in God's Service, and presentest him with Multitudes of Sacrifices,
and many Prayers, he will be pleased with nothing, but hides his Face, and
stops his Ears, whilst thou keep thine Iniquities in thine Hands, Isa. 1.16,
17, 18. God will not amicably treat with them, that will not put away the Evil
of their Doings. O look not into thine Hands, look into thy Heart, look into
thy House! into thy Shop! thy Trade! thy Calling! see if there be not some Way
of Wickedness that thou art found in. Thou can not have Peace with God, nor
he Pleasure in thee, till this be removed; put off therefore the old Man with
his Deeds.

2 Put on the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13.

First, The red Robe of his Righteousness for Justification. The Lord will
never give thee a good Look, nor a good Word but in Christ: He is a revenging,
a consuming Fire out of Christ, but get on his Robes, and he will be well
pleased. Enoch had his Testimony that he pleased God; but Christ had much more,
that God was well pleased with Sinners, in and for him. Away with these Rags,
and with these Fig Leaves. How can the Righteous Soul of God but abhor you,
whilst in the menstruous Cloths of your own Righteousness? Dare not to come to
God, but with Christ in your Arms. Approach him not but in the Garments of your
elder Brother, lest you carry away the Curse. Joshua's filthy Garments must be
put off, and Christ's Raiment put on; or else there is no standing before the
bright and burning Eyes of infinite Holiness. Put on the Lord Jesus in
Believing; that is, accept of him in all his Offices, with all his
Inconveniences, and deliver up thyself to him, and this will entitle thee to
his Merit and Righteousness: Without this, nothing will avail. If thy Head were
Waters, and thine Eye a Fountain of Tears, if thou should wear thy Tongue to
the Roots with Praying, if thou should weep an Ocean, and wash thyself in
thine own Brine; all could not get out one Spot; nothing can be accepted, while
thou art out of Christ; and therefore in the first Place apply thyself to him.
God will accept of no Gift but off his Altar.

2. The white Robe of his Grace of Sanctification, Rev. 5.11. Thou that art in
the Flesh, that is, unrenewed, unsanctified, can not please GOD, Romans 8.8.
Never think to make up the Matter by a little mending and reforming particular
Acts: Man, thy Heart must be renewed, thy State must be clean altered, or God
cannot be pleased, Matthew. 16.17, 18. The Tree must be made good, the Fountain
must be healed, or else the Stream will be salt, and the Fruit sour. If Christ
be once formed in thee, that is, his Image in his Grace: Likeness is the Ground
of Love: Similitude and Suitableness of Nature is the Lead-stone of Affection.
God cannot but love his own Likeness: Would thou have his Favor? Would
thou be his Delight? then conform to his Pleasure, study to be like him, purify
thyself as he is pure. The righteous Lord loves Righteousness; he desires
Truth in the inward Parts, and takes infinite Complacency in the Graces of his
People. These are the Spikenard and Saffron, the Spices, the Beds of Lillies;
the sweet Ointment that Christ is so taken up with: These are the Cinnamon and
the Trees of Frankincense; the Calamus and Camphire, the Myrrh and the Aloes;
the Chains of the Neck, and the precious Pearls, that he is so ravished withal,
and does so superlatively commend, Cant. 4.9. This is the Raiment of
Needle Work, and Gold of Ophir, wherein the Queen is presented to her Royal
Husband, Psalm 45.9, 3. Therefore as the Elect of God, Holy and Beloved, Col.
5.12, 13. Put ye on Bowels of Mercy, Kindness; put off all these, Anger, Wrath,
Malice, filthy Communication, and put on the New-Man, Coloss. 3.9, 10.
Particularly, let me commend to you some special Graces which God does manifest
himself to be wonderfully pleased withal. As ever you would please God, get on
these.

I. Be clothed with Humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. This is a Garment which must be put
on, or else you cannot be accepted or saved, Mat. 18.3. Here is the Dress that
you must come to God in: He must be served in humility of Mind, Acts 20.14. You
must humble yourselves to walk with him, Mic. 6.8. Humility is a plain, but yet
a comely Garment: This Grace does eminently honor God; and therefore God does
put a peculiar honor upon, and manifest a most special Delight in this: Of all
the Men in the World, this is the Man that God will look unto; even he that is
pure, and of a contrite Spirit, that trembles at his Word, Isaiah 66.2. Though
he be the high and lofty One, who inhabiteth Eternity, whose Name is holy: From
whence the trembling Soul is ready to conclude, that surely such a fearful
Majesty cannot but despise him; such sin-hating Purity cannot but abhor him;
yet he will lay, Isaiah 47.15, aside his Majesty, and bear with Man's impurity,
and condescend to most familiar and constant Communion and Cohabitation with
his poor Dust, when contrite at his Feet, and prostrate in Humility: If thou
would be accepted of God, come as Benhadad's Servants to the King of Israel,
with a Rope about thy Neck, and Ashes on thy Head, 1 Kings 20.32. think meanly
on thy self, and God will honor thee, 1 Samuel 2.30. Put thy self in the lowest
Rooms, and God will set thee higher: Be little in thine own Eyes, and thou
shall be high in his: A proud Heart and a proud Look is with God the firstborn
of Abomination: As ever thou would have God well pleased with thee, be
thoroughly displeased with thyself. If thou do thoroughly loath thy self, God
does love thee, if thou abhorrest thyself, God delights in thee: Be angry
with thy self, and the Almighty will turn away his Anger from thee: Condemn
thyself, and God will acquit thee. In no wise extenuate thy Sins, nor justify
thyself. Think the worse of thyself and be willing that others should think
meanly of thee, and heartily love them that slight thee. This is the Frame in
which God is well pleased: Pass Sentence on thyself, and God will absolve thee:
Set thyself at his Footstool, and he will lift thee up into the Throne, Rev. 2.

II. Labor for sincerity. This is not a distinct Grace from the rest, yet for
Doctrine-sake I speak to it distinctly. Uprightness is the great thing that God
looks after, and covenants for, Genesis 17.1. It renders all our Persons and
Performances acceptable before God, Prove. 15.8. Such as are upright in the Way,
are God's delight, Prove. 11 20. To these are all the Promises of Peace,
Salvation, Pardon, Preservation, Blessedness, Psalm. 87.10. In a Word, there is
no good thing God will withhold from them that walk uprightly, Prove. 28.10.
This was Noah's Praise that he was upright in his Generation. This was that
which set off Job at such a Rate, that God does so extol him for, and as it
were, makes his Boast of him: The singular sincerity and integrity of his
Heart. Study to be upright: that the main bent of your Hearts be to please God,
and honor him; that God's interest be uppermost with you; that he has the
chief Share in you, and the Eye of the Soul be principally to him; for in this
sincerity does consist, as to your State. Let your great care be your Heart;
here is a Christian's great Work. The Lord sees not as Man sees, for Man
looks on the outward Appearance, but the Lord looks to the Heart; see
therefore that thou look to it. Let thine Eye be chiefly there where God's Eye
is. He looks not so much what thou do, as with what a Heart go then and do
likewise. Yet be not satisfied in this, that you are upright as to your State,
but labor to approve yourselves in Uprightness to God in spiritual Actions. Do
common, as well as spiritual Actions, with holy Ends. Much of our Lives are
lost for want of this. So much is done for God; of his strange Grace, he
accounts himself our Debtro. But what is done for no higher End than Self, is
lost from our Account.

III. Put on a Spirit of Zeal and Activity. How wonderfully is God pleased with
Phineas's Zeal Numb 15 11, 12, 13, What great Approbation does he manifest of
him? What Attestation does he give to him? He is so greatly pleased with his
zealous Appearance for him, that he turns away his Displeasure from the whole
Congregation of Israel, and overlooks their Crimson Provocations against him:
On the contrary, there is nothing that God is more displeased with, than the
remissness, and lifelessness, and indifference in Religion. The Lukewarm Water
is not a greater Offense to the Stomach, than the Lukewarm Professor is to
God: And therefore he will Spew such a one out of his Mouth, Rev. 3.16.
Christians, where is your Zeal for the Lord of Hosts? Christ's redeemed must be
zealous of good Works, Tit. 2. not slothful in Business, but fervent in Spirit,
serving the Lord, Acts 18.24. Romans 12, 11. Acts 26.6.7. instantly Night and Day
for the hope of the Promise. Do not only that which is right in the sight of
the Lord, but do it with all your Heart; the Lord loves a willing Servant:
Bestir yourselves for the Lord. Be ye followers of Christ, who went up and down
doing good. Every Christian should be a common Blessing, a public Good. This
is to be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven, who is good unto all,
and his tender Mercies are over all his Works. And be sure the Father does best
love that Child that is most like him. A private narrow Spirit is a low and a
base Spirit, unworthy of a Christian. A Catholic communicative Spirit is full
of great Desires, and great Designs: A large Heart set upon doing good, whose
Fire, though ever hottest within, will be breaking forth of his Breast and
provoking others; whose Love will not be confined to a Party, but gladly and
thankfully owneth Christ wherever he sees him: This Catholic Spirit, I say, is
the Glory of Religion, the Church's Blessing, and God's Delight.

IV. Live by Faith, Heb. 10.38. This is a precious Grace in God's Account, 2
Peter 1, 1. 1 Peter 1.7. It gives Glory to God, and therefore God takes no
small pleasure in it. By Faith Enoch obtains that Testimony, that he pleased
God, Romans ^.20. Heb. 11.5. 2 Cor 4 18. Heb. 11.39. Matthew. 8.10.11. If you would
so walk as to please God, you must walk by Faith. Christians must look to the
things unseen; they must not live at the common Rate. Christ must be their Life
and Breath, their Prayers and their Promises, their daily Bread. By Faith did
the Elders obtain that good Report; 'twas Faith that Christ was so greatly
taken with in the Centurion, which made him to commend him for a none such.
This was that which won such a singular Praise and Approbation from our Savior
to the Woman of Canaan; even her Victorious Faith, Matthew. 15.28. Thou have
taken away my Heart, my Sister, my Spouse, thou have taken away my Heart with
one of thine Eyes, Cant. 4.9. that is, with thy Faith. Live in the Power of
Faith, and thou will please him to the Heart, give Glory to him by believing.
Let the Life that thou now live in the Flesh, be by the Faith of the Son of
God: Faith, as one well says, is the Navel of Morality.

Live by Faith in Prosperity: Though thou have the World about thee, let it not
be above thee, keep it at thy Feet, use it as thy Servant: Be much in the views
of Glory and Contemplation of Eternity: Buy as though thou possessest not,
rejoice as though thou rejoicest not, love as though thou love not, use this
World as not abusing it. It is but a Fashion, not a Substance, and that which
passes away, 1 Cor. 7.30, 31. Use it therefore with mortified Affections, and
prove the Sincerity of your Faith by the Victory over your inordinate Content
and Delight in, and Desires after, and Cares for, the Things of this World, 1
John 5.4.

Live by Faith in Adversity: Weep as though thou wept not, enduring the Cross,
and despising the Shame, as looking unto Jesus, Heb. 12.2 Heb. 11.26.
accounting Christ's Reproaches your Riches, his Shame your Glory, Acts 5.41.
Compare these light Afflictions with the weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. Romans
8.18. Ply your Hearts with the Promises; count if you can get the Riches that
are laid up in them; roll yourselves upon the Lord, Psalms 37.1. and know that
your Heavenly Father has no greater Delight, than to see his Children trust
him with Confidence, when all visible Helps are out of sight, and he seems to
be their Enemy, Joh. 13.15.

V. Put on the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit; this is in the sight of God
of great Price: Study to be (1 Peter 3.3.) like your Father, slow to Anger,
ready to forgive, Psalm 130.1, 8. forgetting Injuries, loving Enemies,
requiting Ill Will with Kindness, Ill words with Courtesies, Neglects with
Benefits; and if any wrong you, do him Kindness the sooner; so shall you bear
his Likeness, and be his Delight: And know ye that are of unmortified Passions,
and unbridled Tongues, God has an especial hatred and displeasure against a
Froward Heart, and a Froward Tongue, Prove. 3.32.1.20.1.12.8.12. Oh seek
Meekness: How can the Holy Dove rest in a wrathful Heart? Christ is a Lamb of
Meekness, how can he take Pleasure in an unquiet and contentious Spirit!
Verily, with the Froward, he will show himself froward, Psalm 18.26. If you
will nor forgive others, he will not forgive you. Art thou hard to be pleased,
a froward Wife, a froward Master, a cross and wilful Servant? Surely God will
not be pleased with thee; he will mete to you as you Measure to others, Matthew.
16.24.

VI. Get a Spirit of Self denial. God is then pleased best, when Self is
displeased most. When we can be content to be empty, content to be abased, that
God might be honored, and with the Holy Baptist, are willing to be eclipsed by
Christ: willing to decrease that he may increase; counting ourselves no Losers,
whilst his Interest is a Gainer, John 3.29, 30. rejoicing that we are made low
for Christ's Advancement; this is well-pleasing unto God; how greatly was he
pleased with Solomon's Self-denying Choice, and gives him his Asking, throwing
in Riches, and Honor into the Bargain? 1 Kings 3.10, 11, 12. Strange was
Abraham's Self-denial. What? to sacrifice with his own Hand, the whole Hope of
his Family? the Heir of Promise! the Child of his Years! a Son! and only Son!
when his Life was bound up in the Lad's Life! Was ever Mortal thus put to it?
But Abraham shall not be a Loser. God gives him a Testimony from Heaven,
blesses him, blesses his Seed, blesses all Nations in him, Genesis 22.15, 16, 17,
18. Wonderful was Moses his Self denial, but more wonderful was his Acceptance
and Reward, Heb. 11.24. None like Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.20 God prefers him in
another manner than Pharaoh could. He must speak with him Face to Face, as a
Man with his Friend; his Word shall be as it were a Law with God. Speak for
whom he will, they shall be spared, though they seem to be devoted to
Destruction. But speak against him who duist, he shall be sure to bear his
Iniquity, Numb. 12.8. Forget Self: Renounce thine own Wisdom, thine own
Worthiness, thine own Will: Bite in thy Passions, curb thine Appetite; bridle
thy Tongue: This do, and thou shall be gently accepted, and shall find that
God's Favor will infinitely reward thee, for all the murmuring Oppositions,
and discontents of thy Flesh, which will be ready to be impatient to have the
Reins held so hard.

VII. Maintain a Spirit of Resolution and Constancy in the Ways of God, Heb.
10.38. This was the Renown of the three Worthies, Daniel 3. They feared not the
Fierceness of Nebuchadnezzar's Rage, nor yet the Fire of the Furnace: All the
World could not make them bow; and how gloriously did God own them, and
miraculously evidence his Pleasure in them: Stand your Ground. Resolve to live
and die by substantial Godliness. Cleave to the Lord with full Purpose of
Heart. Let no Difficulties make you change your Station: Then shall you be an
Honor and a Pleasure to the God that made you. Well then, would you know what
Frame of Heart is pleasing to God? Why, this Humble, Sincere, Zealous Active
Frame, this Believing, Meek, Self-denying, resolved Frame, this is the Frame
that is well pleasing in the sight of GOD.

Secondly, As to your Performances, more briefly that those may please God, you
must heedfully look to these five things.

1. That they be done by the right Rule; which is God's Word: You must not
follow the Imaginations of your own Hearts, Numb. 15.39. You must not do that
which is right in your own Eyes; in all Sacred-Actions, you must have God's
Command to warrant you. You may not offer to God of that, of which you are not
able to say, Thou requirest these things at our Hands, Isa. 1.12. In all civil
Actions you must have God's Allowance. Be sure he will never accept that which
his Word condemns; under pain of God's Displeasure, dare not to set your Hands
to what the Word forbids.

2. That they be done to the right End, which is God's Glory: How damnably did
the Pharisees ^r^? How miserably did Jehu miscarry? And both in Acts for the
Matter commanded, for want of aiming at this End.

3. That they proceed from right Principles, (1.) Faith, without which, it is
impossible to please God. Prayer will not avail, except it be the Prayer of
Faith, Heb. 11.6. We believe, and therefore we speak. (2) Love: If we should
give our Goods to the Poor, and Bodies to the Fire, and not from Love, it would
profit us nothing; where the slavish Fear of Hell only, or of the Lashes of
Conscience, or the Love of Man's Praise, carries Men to Duties; where any other
carnal Principle is Predominant in the Act, it cannot please God. (3) Fear: We
cannot serve God acceptably, without Reverence and godly Fear, (no slavish
Fear) The Lord takes Pleasure in them that fear him, in them that hope in his
Mercy. Observe the happy mixture; where these two are conjoined, that is a true
filial Fear, Says David, I will come to thy House in the Multitude of thy
Mercy; (Behold his Faith) and in thy Fear will I worship toward thy holy
Temple; there is his Fear with Faith) Faith without Fear were bold Presumption:
Fear without Faith is sinful Despair; join them together and God is well
pleased.

4. That they may be done in a right Manner; preparedly, not rashly and
inconsiderately, in the Presence of so dreadful a Majesty: Prudently, for
lawful Acts may be spoiled and be done unlawfully, without consideration had to
the Offense that may (in some Cases) attend them; yea holy Duties as well as
common Actions may be turned into Sins, by being ill timed, and for want of a
due attending the present Circumstances. Holily; not rashly uttering any thing
with our Months before God; but behaving ourselves as in his Sight: Heartily,
not feignedly with our Lips going, when our Minds are gadding.

1. That they be directed through the right Means, that is, Jesus Christ the
only Way to the Father. Bring all thy Sacrifices to the High Priest, offer all
upon this Altar, else all is lost; not that it is enough to say (Through our
Lord Jesus Christ, Amen) at the end; but in every Duty you must come with
lively dependence on him for Righteousness and Strength, for Assistance and
Acceptance. Remember to do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, to come leaning
upon his Hand, without this, all your Services will be rejected at last.

CHAP. II. A third Case of Conscience, grounded upon the Words of our SAVIOR.
John 8.29. For I do always those things that please him.


Qu. 1. IS any Man able in this Life to (...) up to the Example of Christ in
this, to do always those things that please God?

Answ. In Regard there is none that does good and sins not, and God is not,
not can be pleased with Sin, no not in his own People, but most of all hates it
in them, it cannot be that any Man in this Life should fully come up to
Christ's Example in this; yet may we come on so far toward it as that not only
in our immediate Addresses to God, but in the general course of our Lives, we
may come to please God. Thus Enoch and Noah walked with God, i. e. in their
general Course they walked so as to please God, and approve themselves in his
Sight: Thus the meanest of Actions, if done by us unto the Lord as the Servants
of Christ, have a Promise of Acceptance and Reward, Col. 3.22.23.24.

Q. II How may we come in our Measure to be followers of Christ, in this, to do
always those things that please God?

Answ. In order to this, there is something necessary, with reference, 1. To
our Persons. 2. To our Principles. 3. To our Practices. 1. With Reference to
our Persons. And here it is necessary, 1. That there be an Alteration of our
Natures by renewing Grace, for they that are in the Flesh cannot please God,
Romans 8.8.

These wild Vines must needs bring forth sower Grapes, Isa. 5.4. The Fruit that
they bear (how specious and fair soever to the Eye) is evil Fruit, Matthew. 7,
16. Where there is not a good Treasure of Grace in the Heart, a Man cannot in
his Actions bring forth good things, Matthew. 12.36.

Many enlightened Sinners think by Reading and Praying, and forsaking some gross
and foul Sins, to pacify God, and set all Right: Mistaken Souls, ^t me
undeceive you; you begin at the wrong End, your first and greatest Care must be
to get your Hearts and Natures changed, and renewed by the Power of converting
Grace; you labor in vain at the Streams, while the Fountain of Corruption in
the Heart remains in its Strength: You must not think it is with you, as it is
with a ruinous House, where the mending of here and there a little will make up
all again; but the old Building must be quite taken down, and the Foundation
Stone laid anew in a sound Repentance from dead Works, and thorough Conversion
unto God. Till this be done, you must know, that God has no Pleasure in you,
neither will accept an Offering at your Hand, Malachy 1.10. as he does from
those that are Friends.

2. That there be the Acceptance of your Persons through Faith in Christ
Jesus. For in him alone it is that God is well pleased, Matthew. 3. last. So that
without Faith interesting us in him, it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6.

For the better understanding both these Particulars, know that there are two
Attributes of God to which you must bear a Conformity, or else you cannot
please him.

1. The Holiness of God: For he is not a God that has pleasure in Iniquity: He
hears no Sinner: The Foolish shall not stand in his Sight. He hates all the
workers of Iniquity, Psalm. 5.4, 5. John 9.31. God can no more take Pleasure in
the unsanctified, than we in Swine or Serpents.

2. The Justice of God: For he will by no means clear the Guilty, Exodus 34, 7.
Could we have inherent Holiness in us; in our unpardoned State, yet Justice
could not but be infinitely offended while Guilt lies unremoved; as you may
see in Christ, for though he were perfectly holy, yet being under the Guilt of
our Sins imputed to him, the severity of God's Justice broke out against him.

Now, Man being naturally an Offense both to the Holiness and Justice of God,
there must of necessity pass upon him in order to his pleasing God, this two
fold Change.

1. The real change of Sanctification: I call this a real change, because by
this there is a real change ensuing of new Qualities and Dispositions, making
him of proud, humble, of carnal, spiritual and heavenly, etc.

2. The Relative Change of Justification: I call this a relative Change,
because there is not a real Change in a Man's Nature, but in his Condition,
making him to stand in a new Relation to the Law, with Reference to which he
was before guilty and condemned, but now the Law pronounces the same Man clear
and acquitted, and this not for any Righteousness infused into him, but for the
Satisfaction and Payment of another laid down for him; Satisfaction there must
be, and Righteousness must be tendered, or else God cannot be at Peace. We have
nothing to pay, Luke 7.49. Oh Sinner, away to Christ for it; hide thee in the
Clifts of that Rock; run to the Fountain opened for Sin and Uncleanness. Appear
not before God, but in the Robe of Christ's Righteousness. He sends you to
Jesus, as he did them to Job, Chap, 42. last. Go to my Servant Job. be shall
pray for you, him will I accept: Get out of yourselves: Flee to Christ, labor
to be found in him, else all your Endeavors in rinsing and washing yourselves
will be to no Effect.

2. With Reference to our Principles. And here it is necessary that some
corrupt Principles be unlearned, and some holy Principles be received and
retained.

Some corrupt Principles must be unlearned. As 1. That it is enough if we serve
God on the Lord's Day, and we may serve ourselves all the rest of the Week.
Though God has reserved one Day in seven wholly for his immediate Service, which
is therefore in a peculiar Sense called the Lord's Day, yet we must know that
every Day is His, and that he has not allowed us one Hour nor Inch of Time,
but only for His Service. Indeed he has Service of more sorts than one; but we
must know that the Business of our ordinary Affairs, if rightly done, is a
Serving of the Lord Christ, Col. 3, 24 God is as truly served by you in the
working Days Labor, as the Sabbath Days rest, if you do it in a right Manner,
and to holy Ends.

There is a Generation whose Religion is but a Sunday's Religion, which they
put on and off with their Sunday's Clothes, and then they think God is fairly
served for the Week; although God knows, that little they do then is but poorly
done neither. Never think God will accept it at thy Hands, when thou live six
Days to the World and thyself, for One that thou spendest for him. This shows
thee to be under the mortified Power of Self-love, and not to be the Lord's,
for none of us lives to himself, Romans 14.7. You must remember, that you are
but to learn upon the Sabbath, how to serve God all the Week; and not think
when the Lord's Day is ended, his Work is done.

2. That if God be served Morning and Evening, it is enough, though we serve
ourselves the rest of the Day; God must be served every Day, and all the Day,
Prove. 23.17. You must be serving him not only in your Feasts, but at your
Meals; not only on your Knees, but in your Callings.

Some think that if they keep up Religious Duties, ^hey may do what they list
at other times; that if ^hey be Intemperate, Lascivious, Unrighteous, it (...)
but to make even again with God at Night, and ^l will he well: Like the Whore
in the Proverbs, that having made her Offering, was presently ready of new
Wickedness, Prove. 7.14. as if she had paid ^ff the old Score, and might now
boldly run upon ^new.

Others think, that though they may not serve the ^evil at any time, yet giving
God his Dues Morn^g and Evening, they may serve themselves the ^est of the
Time. But in vain do they lay claim to ^od, who live more to themselves than
they do to ^im. This will be found horrible Sacrilege to put ^ff God but with
the Tenth. God is to be eyed, and served in all that you do; and this is that I
^rive at, that we may not divide ourselves between ^od and the World; between
his Service and our ^wn Ends, and so put him off with a Partial ^ervice; but
that we may do all in Obedience to ^m, and we may be entirely the Lord's. That
he (...) all Things may be glorified by us, and that we may ^ot lose our Reward.

2. Some Holy Principles must be received and re^ined. As,

Pr. 1. That the pleasing of God is our only Business, ^d our highest
Blessedness. First. our only Business, that is it that we call or count our
Business?

1. That is a Man's Business which his Liveli^od and Subsistence depends upon:
The Lawyer ^unts his Law his Business, and the Tradesman ^unts his Trade his
Business; because upon this ^ir Livelihood and Subsistence depends: Brethren,
our Whole depends upon the Pleasing of God. Do this, and do all: Miss in this,
and you mar all; please him, and you are made up for ever. If he be not
pleased, you are undone for ever. How careful is the Selfish-Courtier to please
his Prince? How will he crouch and Flatter? and if he can but divine what will
gratify and please him, he thinks himself happy: And why? But because all his
Dependence is upon his Prince's Favor; much more do we depend upon the Favor
of God. Blessed is the Man whom he chooses, Psalm 65.4. In his Favor is Life,
Psalm 30.5. But woe to them that have God against them, these are perfectly
miserable: Reprobate Silver shall Men call them, because the Lord has rejected
them, Jer. 6.30. If the Lord do but say to a Man as he did to Moses, Thou have
found Grace in my Sight, and I know thee by Name, Happy is that Man. But if he
thus say, I have no Pleasure in thee, you may cover the Face of that Man, as
they did Haman's, and carry him away: Miserable must his End be, if he continue.

2. That is a Man's Business which he has his Stock and Talents for. If a Man
be entrusted as a Steward or a Factor, his Business is to buy in the
Commodities that are useful. Beloved, all our Time, Parts, Interest, Food,
Raiment, and whatever Mercies, Spiritual or Temporal, are the Stock wherewith
God has entrusted us, and all for his own Use and Service, And is it not a sad
and fearful case, that God should have so great a Stock going, as lies in the
Hands of all the Sons of Men, and yet have (if I may so speak) so little profit
of it? I mean so little Glory by it: That he should sow so much, and reap so
little? straw so much, and gather so little: Is it not sad, that Men should
have so much in vain? Have thou Health and Wealth, and do not use it for God?
It is all in vain. Have thou understanding, and yet improvest it but for
contriving thine own Affairs, and worldly Designs? thy Reason and Understanding
are become vain. Oh, how will thou answer it, that thou have had so great Stock
in thine Hands, and made so little Improvement of it? It had been good for some
Men, if they had never had a Foot of Land, or an Hour's Ease, if they never had
the Understanding of Men, because they have not used their Talents for God, and
for the Ends for which they were put into their Hands.

3. That is a Man's Business which his Capacities do call for, It is a Man's
Business if in the Capacity of a Judge, to do Justice, or of a Servant, to do
his Master's Will: Brethren, all your Capacities do evidence it to be your
Business to please God you are his Friends, you are his Servants, therefore you
must please him well in all Things, Titus 2.9. His Children, and therefore must
set yourselves to honor him. Malachi 1.6. His Spouse, and therefore it is your
Business to please your Husbands, 1 Cor. 7.34.

4. That is a Man's Business which he has his Maintenance for. If a Man be
maintained in the Place of a School master, it is his Business to teach; If of
a Soldier, it is his Business to fight. Belov^ do you not know at whose Feeding
you are: And do you think God keeps so many Servants to be idle, or to mind
their own Designs and Pleasures? God has cut you out every one his Work, every
Man his Hands full: So much work is to be done within Doors, and so much
without Doors: So much toward God, toward your Neighbor, toward your own
selves, that you have no Time to be idle in. And you shall dearly reckon for
it, if you will eat his Bread, and will not do his Work. And as pleasing God is
our chiefest Business,

Secondly, So it is also our highest Blessedness: For Man's Happiness lies in
God's Favor, Psalm 4.6. Our Happiness is in attaining the End of our Being,
and therefore the great Query amongst the Philosophers still was, What was the
End or the Happiness of Man? now the true End of our Being is, that we may
please God: for his Pleasure we are and were created Rev. 4.11. And for this
End also we are new created, that we should yield ourselves unto God, Romans
6.13. and being built up a spiritual House, should offer up to him spiritual
Sacrifice acceptable through Christ, 1 Peter 2.5. This is the End of our
Redemption, that we should serve not ourselves, but him in Holiness and
Righteousness all the Days of our Lives. Luke 2.75. And that we should not
henceforth live to ourselves, but to him that died for us, 2 Cor 5.15. 'T^ the
End likewise of our Justification, that our Consciences being purged, we should
acceptably serve the living God. In a word, it is the End of our Glorification,
that being translated into Heaven, we should perfectly please God, and serve
him Night and Day in his Temple, Rev. 7.15. and 22.3. So that the Pleasing of
God, is the whole End or whole Happiness of Man, Eccles. 12. And this will be
clear, because we do then promote ourselves most, when we please God best. For
by this you shall have this twofold Advantage.

First, You shall be the Favorite of God. O glorious Promotion! Haman thought
himself no little Man when he was on Ahafuerus Right Hand, and yet he was at
length but preferred to the Gallows, Esther 5.11. and 7.10. But what shall be
done to the Man whom God delights to honor? O blessed is that Man! woe be to
him that touches him: It had been better for him that a Millstone had been
hanged about his Neck, and drowned in the midst of the Sea, than that he should
offend such a one, Luke 17.2. God is infinitely chary of his Favorites. The
Apple of his Eye is touched when they are injured, Zech. 2.8. Whosoever
touches them shall not be innocent, Psalm. 107.15. God has a Blessing for
these that show them Kindness, Genesis 12.3. He will render Vengeance upon the
ungodly for every hard Speech they utter against them, Jude 15.

O Man, does not thy Soul say, Happy is the People that is in such a Case; Will
not thy Condition be most blessed, when God shall be thus infinitely tender of
thee, to take all the Kindnesses done to thee, as done to himself? Matthew 25.45.
And all the Injuries done to thee, as Affronts to himself, Acts 2.4. This is
the happy Case of his Favorites.

Secondly, Every thing you do shall be found upon your Account with God.
Brethren, are you Believers, or are you not? Do you believe the Immortality of
the Soul, and the Life to come, or do you not? the Ways of the most do declare
them to be real Infidels, though professed Christians. If you think there be an
Eternal State to come, will it not be your highest Wisdom to be providing for
it, and laying up what possible you can, that you may inherit it in the other
World. Will not every wise Man, that knows, he is shortly to be removed into
another Country, be careful to transport all that he can, that he may enjoy it
at his coming? Beloved, if you do believe indeed, that you must be forever in
another World, will it not be your best course to be doing that, the Fruit
whereof you shall enjoy forever? Were not he a Mad man, that having but a very
short Term upon a Living, should yet go to building and planting there, when he
had Land of Inheritance to build upon? Infinite is the Mischief that comes of
Self ^eeking and Self-pleasing.

You are eternal Losers by it: God will say, You have your Reward, Matthew. 6.5.
Something you may have in Hand, but the Eternal Reward is lost. Brethren, I am
ambitious for you that what you do, you should do for ever, that all should
meet you in the other World, and that there you should reap the Everlasting
Fruit of what you are doing now. A wise Builder will build forever, and not
only that which shall last for a Day, o^ for a Year. O that you would be wise
Builders. Do all for God, and you shall have eternal Advantage. Learn but this
Lesson, To set your selves in all things to please God, and you will be
promoting and advancing yourselves in all that ever you do, always laying up a
Treasure in Heaven, still adding to the Heap. And O what Riches will you come
to, when by every Day and every Hour, and every Action you are Gainers? For God
will not let the least thing that is done for him, no not a Cup of cold Water,
go without an everlasting Reward, Matthew. 10.42. nor your Labor be in vain, 1
Cor. 15.58.

Pr. ^. That when you have done all, if God be not pleased, you have done
nothing. Settle it upon your Hearts, that all is in vain that is not done for
God: when you do not please God, you do not profit yourselves. When Men offer
never so richly and freely, if not in such a manner as is pleasing to God, all
is but a vain Oblation, Isa. 1.13. If Men will do more than ever God required,
and be zealous in Things that God has not commanded, it is but in vain that
they Worship him, Matthew. 15.9. Beloved, so much time as you have lived to
yourselves, you have lived in vain, because it was quite besides your End. O it
is a Heart-cutting Consideration to a tender Christian to think of this, that
when his Life is so short, and Time so little in all, yet he must be fain to
cut off so much! Why Man, so many Hours must thou cut off from thy Days, and so
many Years from thy Life, as thou have lived not to God, but to thyself; they
are all lost as to the Ends of Life and Time. If on Repentance thou be
forgiven, thou art not rewarded for them.

Beloved, you must count that you have lived no longer than you have lived unto
God, Philip. 1.21. To me to live is Christ, I should account I did not live, if
I did not live to him! It Is the only Employment of my Life to serve him. I
should not tell what to do with my Life, unless it were to spend it for him.

Christian, Thus thou must reckon: So much Time as I have li^ed to Christ, so
much have I lived; and so much as I have lived to myself, so much I have lost.
It Is not the Man but the Beast that lives, while we live below our Reason,
which distinguishes the Human Life from that of B^tes. Now while we live not to
God, we live utterly below our Reason it self, which is sufficiently
discovered, in that God is the Author and End of Man. Does not Reason dictate
that GOD should have the Glory of his own Work, and the Vessel should be to the
Potter's Use? Does any plant a Vineyard, or keep a Flock, and not expect the
Fruits or Milk? 1 Cor. 9.7. GOD has made thee, O Man, for himself. Prove. 16.4.
And have thou the Face of a Man, and do not blush at this, to think that God
should make and maintain thee in vain? If thou have one Grain of Ingenuity,
thou will abhor the thought of this, that thou should be in vain. Why, so
much as thou art for thy self, thou art for nothing. It may be thou live a
very busy Life; but thou actest not for God, thou art all this while but busily
doing nothing. Thou may set down in the Evening, and say, I have been all
this Day doing nothing. Thou will find a blank in God's Book for that Day,
nothing upon thine Account: on this sad Record such a Day spent and nothing
done. God has his Day-book, and takes Notice of all your Carriages, how you
rise, and how you go forth to your Labors: how you speak, how you eat, and
whether you eye him and his Glory, in all, or look no higher than yourselves,
Luke 5.5. We have been toiling all Night, and caught nothing. May not this be
the sad Co^mplaint of many a Man? I have been toiling all my Life, and ye I
have done nothing, because what I did was not done unto the Lord. How would you
take it of your Servants, if coming home in the Evening, you should find every
one of them minding their own Business and Pleasure, and your Work left undone.
Is it not sad, Sirs, that so many Hours and Days should pass over us, and we no
nearer our End than ever we were before? Your little Children are busy from
Morning to Night, and yet all the while have been doing nothing: And so are
you, when you are but seeking your carnal Selves, and not serving and pleasing
God in what you undertake.

Pr. That the Favor of all the World can nothing stead you, if God be not
pleased with you, and by you. If there were any that could save you from his
Wrath, you need not be so so licitous to please him, but if he be not pleased,
we are all undone. Thou, even thou, art to be feared, and who shall stand when
once thou art angry? Psalm 79.7. Isa. 43.13. When Men have flight thoughts of
God's anger, and the Fear and Dread of him is not upon their Hearts, no wonder
if they be not, careful to please him. You must be convincede that the
displeasure of God is the most formidabln thing in the World, or else you will
never leare this great Lesson. Beloved, if you should pleas, Men, and all the
World should be on your side what would this avail while God is your Enemy? If
all Men should bless you, and speak well of you, what would this profit, when
God should rise up in Judgment against you, and condemn you? It is nor at Man's
Bar, but God's that you must stand: It is not at Men's Votes that you must be
cast or quitted: It will not go by most Voices, but God himself is the Judge,
Psalm. 75.7. In his Breast it is, whether you shall live or die: If a Man were
upon a Trial for his Life, what would it avail him, that all his
Fellow Prisoners, and the whole Crowd about him, were for him, when the whole
Bench and Jury were against him? If your Lives and Estates were in Question, to
whom would you go to make your Friend? The Judge of the People? Sirs, be
convinced, that if God be against you, it is as bad as if God and all the World
were against you, for all signifies nothing without him. Oh, whatever you do,
study to get in, and keep in with him; I tell you, the Time is coming, when the
Breath of Men will signify nothing; when their Condemnation will do you no
good, O Man! though all the World should give thee their Hands, and subscribe
thy Certificate, it should signify nothing in God's Account, or his Court. Many
build their Hopes for Heaven upon the good Opinion that others have of them;
But I tell thee, Man, though thou could carry Letters of Commendation with
thee when thou die, and all the Ministers of the Gospel should give thee
their Been decessit, all would be no more than a Blank-paper, and he would not
save thee a Jot the sooner, if he should find thee to have been but a secret
Hypocrite, a rotten hearted Professor all the while.

P^. 5 That God would not be pleased with you in any Thing, except you make it
your Care to please him well in every Thing. You will be one Day ashamed,
except you have Respect to all God's Commandments, Psalm 119.6. You have not a
good Conscience, except it be your Care in all Things to live honestly, Heb.
13.18. If Naaman must be excused in one Thing, to bow in the House of Rimmon,
that he might not displease his Master, this is enough to spoil every thing, 2
Kings 5.18. Some will needs keep God's Good Will, and the World's too, and so
will give both their turn; they will serve God at home, and conform to the
World abroad; and it shall be a great thing indeed that they will not swallow,
rather than lose the Good Will of Men, especially great Men. These Men have two
Faces, and two Tongues; the one of the Good and the other for the bad Company
that they come into. Some held two first Principles, the one the common
Fountain of all Good (which is God) and the other the Cause of all Evil, and
they worshipped both, the good Principle for Love, and the evil for Fear. Just
such a Religion are many among us now of. But let them know, whoever they are,
that while they grasp all, they lose all: For God will never own Time-servers,
nor Men-pleasers, for the Servants of Christ, Ephesians. 6.6. Gal. 1.10.

3. With Reference to your Practices. And here as ever you desire to come to
this blessed Life of doing always those Things that please God, you must
carefully follow these six Rules.

Rule 1. Look round about you to the whole Latitude and Compass of your Duty.
Great is the Latitude of Christianity: the Commandment is exceeding broad,
Psalm 119.96. And many Professors do scarce look more than one Way, but while
they intensly mind one Thing, they neglect another. It may be while they are
taken up with the Care of religious Duties, they forget relative Duties: or
they are careful of personal Duties, but very remiss in the Duties that they
owe to the Souls of their Families; or they complain and mourn over their own
Sins, but lay not to heart other Sins: It may be they are more punctual in
their more immediate Duties toward God, but are very negligent in their Duties
toward Men; or they will spend much time for their Souls, but do little lay to
heart the Case of the Church, and the Misery of perishing Souls that are round
about them; possibly they keep the Sabbath strictly, and pray and hear, and
fear an Oath, but in the mean Time make little Conscience of breaking their
Promises, passing hasty and uncharitable Censures, spending time vainly, being
unprofitable in their Discourse, close-handed to godly uses; suffering Sin to
go unreproved; letting out their Passion at every petty Cross. Many will mind
their Duty to them that are within, and in the the mean Time are very short in
their Duties to them that are without: This is too common a Case. Where is the
Christian almost that seriously bethinks himself, what might I do to win Souls?
It may be you will go on in the Company of the Godly where you may be edified,
but when do you go to your poor Neighbor, whom you see to live in a sinful
State, and tell him of his Danger, and Labor to gain him to Christ, Yea, so
much is this great Duty neglected and out of Fashion, that I am afraid, many
question whether it be a Duty or no. As if you might let Sin lie upon the Soul
of your Brother, and yet be innocent, Lev 19.17. If it were but his Ox or Ass
that lay ready to perish, you would make no question but it were your Duty to
help him out of the Ditch: And do you think in earnest that you owe more to
these than you do to his Soul? Is it to Ministers only, or to all Believers
that Scripture belongs Prove. 11.30. The Fruit of the Righteous is a Tree of
Life, and he that wins Souls is wise. Surely the Lives of too many
Christians do speak the same Language that Cain spoke with his Mouth. Am I my
Brother's Keeper? Genesis 4.9. It Is true, God will have you keep every one within
the Bounds of your proper Stations, but so as to take Occasions, yea, to seek
Occasions, as you are able, to be doing good to others. Do you not know how to
get within your poor Neighbors? carry an Alms with you, do him a Kindness.
oblige him by your courteous and wi^ning Carriage. Then I shall look to see the
Kingdom of Christ flourish gloriously, when every one ^at professes Godliness,
shall arise and take ho^ of the Skirt of his Neighbor. Oh see ^our Night^ in
this, do not think it enough to keep your ^wn Vineyard; Let your Friends and
Neighbors have no quiet for you, till you see them setting in good earnest to
seek after Heaven. Oh if you might bring in but every one his Man to Christ,
what a blessed thing were this, I lose myself in this A^gument, but I am
content to do so, this Duty being so miserably neglected.

Too many live as if Religion lay all in praying and hearing, holy Conference,
and the like, forgetting that pure Religion and undefiled is this, To visit the
Fatherless and the Widow in their afflictions, James 1.17. The other should be
so done, as that this should not be left undone. You make Conscience of being
just and true, and faithful, but do you not forget to win upon others by your
Kindness and Affableness? As if it were not written in your BIBLES: Be pitiful,
be courteous, having Compassion one of another, 1 Peter 3.8. Say not, it is not
my Nature? What does Grace serve for, but to correct the Evils of your Temper?
Is not ours a Religion of Self-denial? Do not the Rules of our Religion enjoin
us to be followers of whatsoever is lovely and of good Report, and may render
Religion amiable to the World? Phil 4.8.

Rule II. Use a wise Fore cast, that every Duty may fall in its Time and Order,
and every Work may have its Room. It is not enough to do God's Work, but it
must be done in his Order. That which in itself is good and necessary, may be
so ill-timed, as to become a Sin: It is a Duty to tell your Brother of his Sin:
But to rip up in your Passion, or to be retorting upon him when he is
Christianly admonishing you, is a Sin. Your worldly Business must not shut out
Religion, nor religious Duties take you so up, as to neglect your Callings, but
every Duty must have its Place. But for the doing all in God's Order, take
these five Directions.

Direct. I. Begin at Home in provoking to good. Why should God plead with you?
Thou that teach another, Teaches thou not thyself? Romans 2.21. Be an Example
of thine own Rule, else the Hypocrites Charge will come in against thee, Mat.
23.4. They bind heavy Burdens, but evil not touch them with one of their
Fingers. Observe God's Order, Deuteronomy 6.6, 7. These Words which I command thee,
shall be in thine Heart. That must be our first Care. And then having got our
Lesson well ourselves, we must then teach it to others. And thou shall teach
them diligently to thy Children, and tell of them what thou, etc. At least if
thou have not already attained it, be sure to learn with the first; and when
thou pressest a Duty, intend thyself first, and speak most to thine own Heart.

2. In reproving Evil; otherwise thou will be branded for an Hypocrite, Matthew.
7 5. First cast the Beam out of thine own Eye. We may not think, as many do
mistakenly, that we must not reprove another when we are guilty of the same
Sin: But we must in such a Case be sure to cast the first Stone at ourselves.
Be soonest angry with thyself, and more severe to thine own Sins, than any
others. It Is strange to see the great Censoriousness of Professors to others,
and how tender they are of their own Corruptions, and impatient of Reproof.
Reader, fear and avoid this Sin.

Direct. 2 Let God be first served. Let God have the first of thy Thoughts, the
first of the Day, the first of thy Strength: How heavily is God displeased with
the profane Priests, because they will serve themselves first with Sacrifices
before him, 2 Samuel 2.15, 16. And it is the Holy Council that one gives, hold
the Door of thy Heart fast against the World in the Morning, till thy Heart
has been first in Heaven, and seasoned and fortified from thence, against the
Temptations that thou art like to meet with as soon as thou come down below.
Indeed, all must be done as God's Service, but so as that his immediate Service
must be done first. It is the Council of several Heathens, That all
undertakings should be begun with Prayer. Says Arra^s, let us begin with God.
And the very Mahometons began their Books always as Men do use to do their
Wills, In the Name of GOD.

Direct. III. First, cleanse the Inside, Matthew. 23.26 Cleanse first that which
is within the Cup. Though they are much out that live as if all their Work were
within Door, yet remember that it lies chiefly here. It Is a most preposterous
Course in Religion, to begin first with the Outside, Jer. 4.14. O Jerusalem,
wash thine Heart! When once this is done, Reformation will soon follow in the
Life: but not otherwise: Many are careful that all that appears to Men should
be beautiful, but their Hearts are neglected. These carry upon them the Marks
of the Hypocrite, Matthew. 23.27.28. And what will it profit thee, O vain Man, to
have all kept secret from Men, since God knows and detects thee? And has
appointed a Day wherein he will rip open thy Pack, and anatomize thy Heart
before the World, 1 Cor. 4.5. Eccles. 12.23. Romans 2 16.

Direct. IV. Eye those Duties most that are of most Importance, Matthew 22.23.
The Hypocrite is very punctual in lesser Matters, but neglects the weightiest
Things of the Law, Judgment and Mercy, and Faith. He is for a Religion, that
will cost him little: And therefore Words being good cheap, he will be forward
in talk as a mighty Zealot in Circumstantials of Religion, and marvelous
censorious of others that come not up to his Mind, as Men of wide Principles
and large Consciences: But in the mean time he is very negligent in secret
Duties, a great Stranger to Self-denial, and walking humbly with God. He
strains wonderfully at a Ceremony? But it may be he can swallow the Gains of
Unrighteousness, or the Baits of Intemperance fast enough. It may be he will
decry Superstition, and never want a Stone to fling at a profane Churchman:
But in the mean time walks loosly in his Family, makes little Conscience of his
Dealings, or will take up his Cups as freely as another, so he be not drunk. Or
if he will not take a Penny of his Neighbor's Estate, he is most unmerciful to
his good Name, and will take up any Report that is going. Brethren, you must
make Conscience of the least Sin and of the least Duty. But it is a fearful
Sign when Men are zealous against lesser Sins, and yet connive at greater, as
these are, Matthew. 20.24.

Direct. V. Take the first Opportunity when God gives a fit season for any
Duty. Let not Satan beguile you, by telling you of another or better Time. It
may be thou have a Purpose to reprove thy Brother for his Sin, but how long
will thou be a Purposing? Now God gives thee an Opportunity, it may be thy
backward Heart says, [not now, but another time.] And so it is put off, till
he or thyself are removed, or he is hardened, or at least thou art guilty of the
Sin that he commits in the mean while; because thou have not done thy Duty to
prevent it. It is in thine Heart to deal with thine unconverted Friend or
Neighbor about his spiritual Estate, but it may be while thou art delaying,
Death comes and snatches him away in his Sins, or takes thee off, and so
farewell for ever to any Opportunity for doing the Soul of thy Brother any
good. How often are our Closet Duties hindered or miserably disturbed, for want
of Care to lay hold on the first Opportunity? We think another Hour in the Day
may do as well, but then one thing or another unexpectedly falls in, that
nothing is done, or nothing to purpose. Therefore beware of this Cheat. A Man
scarce peeps into the World, but one Briar or Thorn, or another will catch him.
Therefore, take Opportunity by the Fore-top. Our Savior would take his Season
for Prayer before Day, when his other Work was pressing, Mark 1.35.

Rule III. Do nothing of Things Sacred without GOD's Command: Nothing in Things
civil without God's Allowance. Offer not with strange Fire; In God's Worship
you must see you be well able to answer that Question, Who has required these
Things at your Hands? Here the Command must be observed, without adding or
diminishing, Deuteronomy. 12.32, yet understanding this with Two Cautions.

1. Though Men may not stamp their invented Ceremonies with a moral
Signification, nor impose, nor use them, though with good Intentions of edifying
the People by devised Means, Mat. 15.2. as if Christ had not sufficiently
provided for the edyfying his People without their Devises. And though nothing
may be used as a Part of Worship that God has not commanded, Col. 2.23. (for
it is enough to make any thing rejected of the Lord of divine Worship, if he
shall say, I commanded it not, spoke it not, neither came it into my Mind,)
Jeremiah 7.31 and 19.5. Yet nevertheless those things that are merely
circumstantial, and are in their general kind necessary, and not intended as
any Part or Means of Worship, may be determined of by humane Prudence,
according to the general Rules of the Word) which must always be observed, 1
Cor. 14.26 42. And for want of Understanding, many have ignorantly condemned
Preaching by an Hourglass, in a high Place, in Churches, by way of Doctrine
and Use, etc. running from the one Extreme to another.

2. We may not think that God's Ordinanee remaining for substance may be
forsaken, because of some Faults of the Administrators, or in the Way of their
Administration. The Administering of God's Ordinanees belong not to the People,
but to the Minister:: And if he fail in his Duty by Administering them in a way
that is not, and is less edyfying, N. B.
it is my Grief, but his Sin. Hophni and Phineas were corrupt in their Lives,
and brought in much Corruption and Rudeness into the Service of God. Yet
Elkannah and Hannah, with others of the Godly, did nevertheless attend God's
Worship and Sanctuary, 1 Samuel 1.2 much Corruption was crept in, both into the
Doctrine and Worship, and Lives of the Administrators of the Church of the
Jews. N. B.
Yet our Savior (though he still cried down the Corruptions, and would not
join in them) never prohibited Communion with them in God's Worship, but
enjoins it, Matthew 5.24. Mark 4. Luke 5 4. and practice it, both he, and his
Parents, and Apostles, Luke 2.21, 22, 24, 39, 41, 46 Acts 21.23, 24, 26

But now, in Things civil, it is sufficient, that you have the Allowance of the
Word, though not the Commands, always provided, that the general Rules he here
observed, to do all to the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. And not to abuse our
lawful Liberty to the Offense of others, Romans 14.2. Now your Actions being thus
justifiable, as to the Matter of them (without which it is impossible, had you
never so good Intentions to please God) the Influence and Virtue of holy Ends
into them will be effectual, as to turn all into religious Duties, as the Touch
of the Philosophers-Stone turns the baser Metal into Gold.

Rule IV. In every Action let God be uppermost, but in religious Actions, let
God be All. Let none of your Actions terminate in yourselves, but labor to be
able in Sincerity, to give this Account of any Thing you set (...), that this
you do, because it is pleasing un^ (...) ^cause this is his Will concerning
you. S^ upon this Caution. Beware in ^se Actions wherein Self may bear a Part,
lest it should sweep Stakes and carry all. You may in you common Actions have
an Eye to your outward Commodity, and comfortable Being in the World; but this
must not be the chief Thing, much less the All that you design herein: For by
looking no higher than Self, you incur this double Mischief. 1. You lose so
much from your own Account. 2. You usurp upon the great Prerogatives of God. I
fear we are not aware of the fearful Evil that is in Self-seeking; It is no
less than jostling God beside the Throne, and setting ourselves in his Room. It
is God's great Prerogative, and the proper Worship that is due to Him as GOD,
that he should be the last End of all the Operations of us his Creatures, and
that all our Motions should terminate in him. Now, when we eye our own
Commodity, and not God, and look to this more than unto GOD, we arrogate the
Divine Prerogative to ourselves, and set ourselves above him, which is no less
than heinous Idolatry. And if it be such an heinous Sin to bow down to an
Image, which is but the giving God's outward Worship to the Creature, how much
more to seek and honor ourselves before GOD, which is to give his inward
Worship? which of all is the Principal, to the Creature: Oh! how many, that
pass for good Christians, will be found heinous Idolaters? Because they have
sought their own carnal Ends more than God and his Glory. And many real
Christians, though they mainly design GOD and his Glory; yet, in many particular
Actions, contract great Guilt, by looking no higher than themselves in what
they do. I know you cannot be always thinking of God, yet I would have you
never to forget what you have been taught; in the Entrance of every solemn
Action, to remember. GOD, and make him your End. Lie down in the Name of GOD
every Evening: Go f^ in his Name every Morning, resolving to ^rtake All for
him. When you enter upon your Callings, sit down at your Meals, make any
Journey or Visit, do it as unto the LORD, with Design to please him therein.
This you may come to, with Care and Watchfulness.

Again, In religious Actions let God be All. Here Self (I mean carnal Self)
must be shut out, otherwise this dead Fly will spoil the Box of most precious
Ointment. It Is true, self will be crowding in, but you must knock it down
carefully; otherwise, if this be the predominant Ingredient, all your Duties
will be but lost Labor. What is more pleasing to God than Prayer? This is
Incense before him, Psalm 1.1, 2. What more delightful than Alms? This is a
Sacrifice acceptable and well pleasing unto him, Phil. 4.8. How happy a
Testimony had Conelius? Thy Prayers and Alms are come up as a Memorial before
God, Acts 10.4. Yet when Self is predominant in those Duties, Prayers, Alms,
etc. are all Lost, Matthew. 6.7. and 23.5.

Rule V. When you have done all, be careful to deny all, Luke 7.10. or not deny
God's Mercy in enabling and assisting you. This must be with all Thankfulness
observed: But attributing Nothing to yourselves, and giving God all the Glory.
Take the Pattern of holy David, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. But who am I, and what is my
People, that we should offer so willingly? Of thine own have (...) given thee,
[And of blessed Paul, 1 Cor. 15.10. Not I, but the Grace of God which was with
me.] And of good Nehemiah, who when he had done most eminent Service for God,
flies at last for pardoning Mercy, Nehem. 13.22. Remember me, O God, concerning
this also, and spare me according to the Greatness of thy Mercy.

Rule VI. Do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, Col. 3.17. Having carefully set
out for God in the Morning, and directed your common Actions to Him as your End
throughout the Day, doing all in his Sight, and with a Desire to please him
therein, bring all to Christ in the Evening, and present all unto God by him,
confidently expecting God's Acceptance and Reward for all that you have done.
For this he has promised, be your Actions never so mean, because they were
done as his Service, Col. 5 21, 23, 24. Ephesians. 6.6, 7, 8. If you neglect this,
you lose all at last: For God will accept of no Sacrifice but from the hand of
the Priest, and therefore you must look for no Acceptance with God, nor any
reward from him, but only through, Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5 John 14.6. You must be
sure therefore not only to make a formal Mention of Christ's Name, but to build
all your Hope of Success only upon him, and to come to GOD, with an actual and
lively dependence upon him.

Thus I have resolved the Case propounded, I will but answer an Objection, and
briefly press your Duty by some Motives, and so conclude.

Object. You bind heavy Burdens; What must we be always in the traces? Surely
this Severity of Religion is more than needs.

Answ. 1. Burden Man! why, it is thy Happiness. If Holiness and pleasing God be
a Burden, Health is a Burden, Heaven and Happiness are Burdens.

Ans. 2. This is no other Burden than what God himself has bound upon your
Consciences, Romans 9.20. Who art thou, O Man, that replyest against God! Have I
put upon you a devised and unnecessary strictness? Or bound that Burden upon
you which I will not touch with one of my Fingers? 1 Cor. 9.8. Say I this as a
Man, or says not the Law the same also? I pray you, whose words is this? Be
thou in the Fear of the Lord all the Day long, 10.3. Exercise thy ^f unto God,
^ Tim. 4.7. What have I pressed but wh^ (...) Saints have practiced, Philip.
3.13, 14 (...) ^ing I do, I press toward the Mark. Psalm. 27.4. One the have I
desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, And Psalm. 119.38. Thy Servant that
is devoted to thy Fear. Genesis 5 22 Enoch walked with God Three Hundred Years,
What is this, but what the Scripture ^ath foretold shall be? They shall walk up
and down in the Name of the Lord. Zach. 10 12. Then shall be upon the Bells of
the Horses, and on every P^t in Jerusalem, Holiness to the Lord, Zech. 14. 20,
11. Dispute not against God, but up and be doing It is an ill Sign when the
Heart rises against the Strictness of the Duty: You utterly mistake in thinking
this Life of Strictness to be a Bondage. Who have Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory? Who do know the Peace that passes all Understanding, if not those that
do thus walk with GOD?

Now, my Brethren, let me beseech you to be the conscientious Practitioners of
this great Lesson. Study to do always those Things that are pleasing unto God.
Oh that I knew, how but to engage you; that I co^ but get you to set these
Rules before you, all the Days of your Lives, for your Practice! It Is not
enough that you give the Hearing, and (...) the Preacher, and approve the
Doctrine. B^ (...) what will you do? Too many of my Hea^ (...) Ezekiel's,
Chapter 33.32. What say you Bre^, will you learn with me? O that I might ^ad
you on to a thorough Acquaintance with the St^tness and Power of Religion, and
that holy Frame that will be God's Delight, and your Felicity. Brethren, what
seek I for? God knows this is my Ambition, that I may but help you on in the
way of Holiness. I would not that you should be such bad Proficients as to be
always of the lower Form, and keep on merely in a dull and barren Course: My
Desire for you is, that you should not be Shrubs, but Cedars of tall Growth,
choice Experience, singular Communion, walking with God, shining to the
Conviction of the World. Will you let me but prevail with you in so good a
Design? Why should you mourn at the last and say, How have I hated Instruction
and my Heart despised Reproof? I have not obeyed the Voice of my Teachers, nor
inclined mine Ears to them that instructed me, Prove. 4.11, 12, 13. That I may
invite you to this holy Cou^ consider,

I. It is very possible: (...) God is very easy to be pleased: He is not (...)
^ward Master that cannot, that will not be pleased. If you do but make it your
Study and your Care to please him, and thoroughly set your Hearts to it, you^
willing Mind shall be accepted, 2 Cor. 8.12. And though you should not go through
with the Work, God will say, Thou did well that it was in thy Heart, 2 Chr.
6.8. When the Heart is set to please the Lord, and we do unfeignedly put to it,
though there be very many Failings, God will overlook them, 2 Cor. 30.18, 19, 20.

Secondly, God has told you what will please him, and has cut out your Work
to your Hand. You need not say, Wherewith shall we come before the Lord? He
has showed you what is good, and what he requires of you, Mic 6.6, 7, 8. You
need not say, Who shall ascend into Heaven to bring down the Mind of God from
Heaven? No, the Word is nigh you, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. God has set before you in
his Law, as in a Table, on one Side the Things that please; on the other, those
that displease him. Oh, that ye may ^e ^ound among those that choose the Things
that please him, Isa. 56.4, 5. Otherwise since you know your Master's Will, and
do it not, you will be found worthy of many Stripes, Luke 12.47.

Thirdly, God has given particular Rules for the doing of all your Work in
that manner that will please him. Had God told you only what must be done, and
not how it must be done, you might have been at a Loss: But he has prescribed
the very Manner how every Thing must be done, that you might have full
Direction (...) Romans 12.8. 1 Peter 4.1. He has showed yo^ (...) ^ou must
pray, and hear, and give Alms: How y^ must carry it in all your Relations. He
has told you not only how you must fast, but how you must ear, to wit, with
Watchfulness and Temperance, not as those who have Nothing to do, but to fill
their Paunches; but with an Eye to his Glory, as those that are feeding and
refreshing the Servants of JESUS CHRIST. He has showed you, not only how you
should rest on the Lord's Day, but how you must follow your Calling on the
rest, to wit, with Diligence and Discretion, minding him as your End, as those
that herein serve the LORD CHRIST. He has ^old you, how you must manage your
Dealings (...) Equity and Charity, doing the very same to others, that your
Consciences tell you, you would have them in the like Case to do unto you: How
you must sleep, even as those that know he compasses your Path, and your lying
down, and how you must awake, to wit, so as to be still with him.

Fourthly, God has given you special Helps to this End. You have the Mind of
Christ, 1 Corinthians 2.16. And you have the Spirit of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.12.
Indeed, they that are in the F^h cannot please GOD. But you are not in the
Flesh, but in the Spirit, Romans 8.8, 9. You that are Believers, have not the Law
only in your Bibles, but in your Hearts, Heb. 8.16.

II. It is very profitable Glorious Advantages shall you have by this Course.
First, This is the most speedy and certain Way to Assurance, for Want of which
many of you complain; but henceforth you most complain no more: For either you
will follow this Course, and then you will have it: Or you will not, and then
cease your hypocritical Complaints, when it is through your own wilful
Disobedience that you are without. When once you are habituated to this Course,
and do find it to be the Chief of your Care, and that which your very Hearts
are set upon above all Things else, to glorify and please God, and approve your
selves in his Sight, you cannot want Assurance, unless through your own
Ignorance: For this is the most undoubted Evidence in the World, that you are
the Children of God, whatever unallowed Failings you may be guilty of.

Secondly, Hereby you shall be certain of God's gracious and favorable
Presence always with you: See the Text, H^ that sent me is with me, for I do
always those Things that please him.

Thirdly, By this means you shall be always laying up a Treasure in Heaven.
Brethren, What are you for? Are you Men for Eternity, or are you for present
Things? Is your Design for Glory, Honor and Immortality? Are you for Riches in
the other World? Or, of Dung hill Spirit, preferring your Part in Paris, before
your Part in Paradise: If you are for True Riches, here is your Way: By this
you shall be daily and hourly increasing the Stock of your own Glory. My
Vehemence is only that Fruit may abound to your account, that all you do might
meet you in Heaven, and CHRIST may show your good Works another Day, as the
Widows did Dorcas her Garments, Acts 9.39.

CHAP. III. A Fourth Case of Conscience.
WHat Weariness in, and Unwillingness to Duties, may stand with Grace, and what
not? For the Resolving this, some Distinctions must be premised, and then some
Conclusions elicited.

Distinction. This Weariness and Unwillingness must be distinguished, 1.
According to the Degrees of it, and so it is either Partial and Gradual, or
else Prevalent and Plenary. 2. According to the Subject of it: And so this
Weariness is either of the Members, or else of the Mind. 3. According to the
Prevalency of it; and so it is either transient and occasional, or else settled
and habitual. 4. According to the Sense we have of it; and so it is either
Matter of Allowance to us, or Matter of Annoyance. 5. According to the Cause of
it; and so it is either from a fixed Dislike of Food, or else from an
accidental Distemper of the Stomach. 6. According to the Effects of it; for it
is either victorious, and makes us give ove^ Duties (...) el^ abhorred, and
repulsed by Grace, the Christian still holding on in the Way of Duty.

Conclusion 1. Where his Weariness is only in the Members (or at least chie^)
but there is still a Willingness of the Mind; this is no Matter of questioning
our Estate. Where the Mind o^goes and outdoes the Body, and the Appetite ^o
Duties continues in Vigor, though there be a languishing of the natural
Strength, and weariness of the bodily Organs; this is not our Sin, but
Affliction. But too commonly the Body has so much Influence upon the Mind, and
causes a Listlesness and Sluggishness there, and makes it negligent in its
Office: Yet when this does proceed from the failing of the Spirits, tired with
bodily Labor and Exercise, and from the Distempers of the Parts, our most
pitiful Father considers our Frame, and remembers we are but Dust: And our
merciful High Priest, that is not untouched with the Sense of our Infirmities,
is ready to frame our Excuse, That the Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak.

2. Where our Weariness in and Unwillingness to Duties, is only gradual and
partial, not plenary and prevalent, it is not sufficient to conclude our selves
graceless: While the Twins are together in the Womb, and two Nations within our
Bowels, there will be contrary Inclinations. The Flesh will never say Amen, to
a good Motion as such, but will be lusting against the Spirit, and will hang
back when the Spirit puts forward, and pulls down when the Spirit bends
upwards: So that while Corruption remains, there will be always a dissenting
Party, and continual Conflicts; from whence it is no Wonder there should arise
some Weariness: Yet the Spirit is the prevailing Interest, and though often times
foiled, yet has mostly the Mastery in the Combat, and carries it against the
Flesh, though not without much Resistance and Reluctance from the Rebel
Opponent.

3. When this Weariness is only transient, during the present Temptation or
Defection, which as soon as the tired Soul can get out of it, returns to its
former Temper and Pleasure in Holy Duties, there is only Matter of Humiliation.
But when it is the settled permanent and habitual Frame of the Mind, it is a
Matter of questioning our Condition. The Holy Psalmist under a Desertion, was
even almost persuaded to give over with Religion; but when he is himself,
nothing is so sweet, nothing is so lovely and desirable to him, as the Duties
of Holiness. But for them who have in their ordinary settled Course and Frame,
no Mind of Duties, but are called to them by Conscience, or engaged by Company,
as Custom or the like, their Case is fearful in that measure, that Duty is
unpleasing and not loved.

4. Where this Weariness of and Unwillingness to Duties is painful and
grievous, as a Sore in the Eye, as a Sickness in the Heart, the State is good,
but where it is naturally allowed, and meets with little or no Resistance, it
is a black Mark. For this argues there is nothing but Flesh, that there is no
contrary Principle in such a Heart. For if there were, the Spirit would at
least make Opposition: This was the very Frame of those unsanctified Sinners
that counted the Sabbaths and Services of God an unprofitable Burden, a very
Weariness, a Bondage not to be born, Mal. 1.13. A gracious Heart, when under
such a Distemper, as that God's Service seems a Weariness, is even weary of
himself, whiles this is burdensome, he is a Burden to himself. He cannot enjoy
himself while in such a Frame wherein he cannot enjoy God: and if this be the
Case, our State is good, though the Frame be bad.

5. Where this Weariness and Unwillingness is not from a rooted Dislike of the
Food, but an accidental and pre^ematural Indisposition of the Stomach, or being
disappointed of God's Presence in Duties, the main State is safe. You know
under a Distemper, the Appetite may disgust, and nauseate the Food that a Man
does love above all other Meats when he is well, and so it is here. Do you when
you are your selves relish more Sweetness in God's Service than in your Meats
and Drinks? Are no Sweets so delightful to you as Fellowship and Communion with
God, when you can attain to it in Duties? Do you come away discontented,
because you cannot meet with God? Is the Ground why your Countenances fall, and
your Hearts be discouraged, because you have (with them) toiled and spread the
Net, and have not caught what you went for: because you have no Answer nor
Income from God? If it be thus, it is a Sign your Hearts be set upon God; and
that you place the Happiness and Comfort of your Lives in God; and so that your
State is safe: Otherwise when there is a fixed Antipathy to Duties, and an
habitual Dislike of them, and Contrariety to them, the Case is very sad.

6. Where our Weariness and Unwillingness is such as makes us to give over our
Duties, so as to live in the ordinary Neglect of them, it is a fearful Sign:
But where notwithstanding present Discouragements, we hold on in the
Performance of our Duties, and a humble waiting upon God, for Removal of our
Difficulties, till we are brought to a better Frame; this argues well The
Church herself may be greatly deserted, but then she gives not over Duties, but
seeks after her Beloved, and makes diligent Enquiring, and will not be at rest
until she has found him, but the Hypocrite gives up, and will not wait upon
the Lord any longer. Not but that a deserted Soul, may under the Violence of
Temptations omit Duties for a time; but his Condition this while is most
painful, restless and grievous to him, and he quickly returns again, and never
comes to live quiet, in the ordinary Omission of known Duties.

Conclu 7. When our Weariness and Unwillingness is such as makes us fall out
with the Service of Christ, and willing to ease ourselves of his Yoke, and to
throw off his Burden: This is a bad Sign: But when we fall out with ourselves,
and justly and approve Christ's Ways and Service, it is well. Thus it was with
Paul: He does not quarrel with the Law, as too strict and too severe, nor think
of breaking off his Bonds, and taking his Liberty, but he pleads for the Law,
and greatly approves it, and commends it, and condemns the Backwardness of his
own Nature, Rom, 7.12, 25. When Men are more willing to be rid of CHRIST's
Burden, than of the Distemper that makes it grievous, and cast about for Ease,
by winding their Bonds, and not by bringing their Minds to them, it is a woeful
Discovery of an unsound (...) And thus much for this Case.

Awakening Questions propounded to the Unconverted; and Counsels to the
Converted.
THat I may rea^h every Man's Case, I shall speak something to the Unconverted,
and something to the Converted.

For the Unconverted, there are these six Questions which I would advise them
to put to their Souls

Quest. I. What Estate did my Soul come into the World first in? Was it not in
a State of Death, Ephesians. 2.1. An Estate of Wrath, verse 3. Sirs, Awake and
bethink yourselves where you are, and whither you are going. While you are in
your natural unconverted, unbelieving State, all your Sins are unpardoned, and
the Wrath of GOD abides on you, Acts 3.19. John 3.3, 36. Suppose you saw a
poor Creature hanging over a burning fiery Furnace, by nothing but a twined
Thread, like to break every Moment, would not your Hearts shake for such an
one? Sirs, it is your very Case; you hang over the infernal Burnings by Nothing
but the small Thread of your Lives, which you know not but it may crack the
next Moment, and then where are you? Is this a Case for you to go on merrily
and contentedly in?

Q. II. What Condition is your Soul now in? Am I changed and renewed by
Conversion, or am I not? Speak Conscience, has this Man, this Woman, been
soundly and savingly changed both in Heart and Life? Where are your Evidences?
Can you show the Marks of the Lord Jesus upon your Souls? Let your Conscience
answer, where was the Place? What was the Means? When was the Time that thy
Soul was thoroughly renewed? At least if thou cannot show the Time, Place nor
Means, can you prove the Thing? Can you say, with him, [one Thing I know, that
whereas I was blind, I now see] Sirs, be not deceived, I tell you, whatever you
be, and whatever you do, nothing will avail you to Salvation, except you be new
Creatures, Gal. 6.15.

Q. III What if I should lose my Soul? What fair Work should I make of it then?
This is very possible, Mat. 16 26. Yet it is the Case of the most: There are
but few, few of the Children of Men, that do escape safe to Heaven, Mat. 6.14.
Sirs, be aware of your Danger, and fear, lest a Promise being left of entering
into his Rest, any of you should at last come short of it, Heb. 4.1. Suppose a
Man were to travel through some perilous Wood or Wilderness, having but one
Jewel in all the World, in which his All was bound up, and should see some
stand on one Hand, and some on the other, and hear one Company in this Place,
and another in that, crying out under the Hands of some cruel Robbers: Oh, in
what Fear would this Traveller go, lest he should lose his Jewel, and be robbed
of all at once? Why, thou art the Man. This Traveller is thy self: This Jewel
is thy Soul: This Wilderness, or Wood, is this World; thou art to travel
through Swarms of Sins, Legions of Devils, a whole World of Temptations. These
are the Robbers that lie in wait for thy Soul, and if all that these can do,
can keep thee out of Heaven, thou shall never come there. Oh, what if thy Pride
or Worldliness, thy Delays, and Triflings in Religion, should at last betray
thy Soul into the Robbers Hands! Other Losses may be repaired, but thy Soul
being once lost, GOD is lost, CHRIST is lost, Heaven, all lost for evermore!

Q. IV. What do I do for my Soul? What, have I a Soul, an immortal Soul to care
for, and look no better after it, nor bestow no more of my Time or Pains upon
it, no more of my Thoughts about it? When Augustus the Emperor saw the
outlandish Women carrying Apes, and such kind of strange Creatures, in the
Streets in their Arms, he asked, What! have the Women in these Countries no
Children? So it may be said of many among us that are early and late at their
Worldly Business, but let the Care of Religion lie by neglected; What! have
these Men no Souls? Why Man, have thou a Soul, and yet do so little in thy
Closet, so little in thy Family, from Day to Day for it? What meanest thou, O
Sleeper? Arise, call upon thy GOD, that thou perish not, Jonah 1.6. What will
become of thy Soul, if thou look to it only at this careless Rate?

Q. V. What if God should this Night require thy Soul? Where would Death land
thee? Luke 12.19, 20. There was one that promised himself many merry Days and
Years, as it is like thou do; but that same Night God called for his Soul.
Sirs, are you in your Postures? Are you ^it to die? Oh, dare not to live in
such a Case, nor in that Course, in which you would not dare to die?

Q. VI. What a happy Case were I in, if I had but secured my Soul? Oh, if this
were but once done, how sweetly might thou live! then thou might eat thy
Bread, and drink thy Wine with a merry Heart, when assured that God accepts
thee and thy Works, Eccles. 9.7. Then thou might lie down in Peace, and rise
up in Peace, go out and come in in Peace; then thou might look Death in the
Face, thou might look Dangers in the Face, yea, look Devils in the Face, and
never be afraid. Oh, Sirs, if there be any Insurance Office for Souls in all
the World, one would think you should be seeking of it. And thus much for the
Questions, which though of Use to all, yet were intended chiefly for
unconverted, impenitent Souls.

Counsels and Cordials for the Converted. The Counsels are these.
C^^. I. THat you put hard to it, to get that by these hazardous Opportunities
that may quit all your Cost.


What Pity is it that you should adventure much, and yet gain but little? How
sad would it be, if you should at last suffer deeply for your Conscientious
Attendance upon God in such Seasons, and when you come into a Prison, or into
Banishment should find that you had not got that by them that would bear you
out.

Coun. II. That you value no Mercy barely as it serves in content to your
Flesh, but as it stands in order to Eternity, and may serve to the furthering
your Maker's Glory. God has preserved your Liberties, and has restored mine:
But what of all this, Unless we improve our Liberties for Eternity, what are we
better than those that are in Prison, if this be all the Advantage we have a
little more Content to our Flesh? The Cipher put to the Figure is of great
Consideration, but put it by it self, it signifies nothing at all. These
Creature Comforts separated from their Respect to God and Eternity, are of no
Value: But in order to these Ends they signify much. We have Ease and Fullness,
when many others are in Pain, and in Poverty; and we have much the Start of
them, if we be wise to improve our Health, in saying in a-pace against a wet
Day, and preparing a pace for Eternity. And if we serve the Lord with the more
abundant Diligence and Cheerfulness, and Gladness of Heart in the Abundance of
all Things But if this be all we have by it, that our Bones do lie a little
softer, and our Palates are tickled with a little the more Delight, what Profit
have we by our Health, or our Estates? If they that be sick or poor do love the
Lord as well, or serve the Lord as much as we; they have the Advantage of us,
and better were it for us to be poor and sick as they be.

Coun. III. Rest not in Probabilities for Heaven, but labor for Certainties.
Beloved, Certainty may be had, else the Counsel of God to make our Calling and
Election sure were in vain, 2 Pet. 1.10 Else the Experience of the Saints were
but a Delusion, who tell us they know they are passed from Death to Life, 1
John 3.14. 2 Cor. 5.1. Job 19.25, 26. Else the Power of Self-reflection were to
no Purpose, and the Spirit which is in Man should not know the Things of the
Man, 1 Cor. 2 11. Now if a Certainty may be had, will you not put in for it,
and turn every Stone, but you will get it? Sirs, now, if ever, you have need to
put hard to it to get Assurance. We are at miserable Uncertainties for all
outward Enjoyments; we know not how soon we may be called to part with them
all: Christians, What do you mean? Will you be content to have nothing sure?
Will you not settle your everlasting Condition, now you are so unsettled as to
your outward Condition? What will you do in the Day of Visitation, when
Extremity comes in upon you, if you have no Assurance that God will receive
you? It would make ones Heart tremble to think of being put upon such a fearful
Temptation to part withal for Christ, and not to be sure of him neither? O
Man! what an Advantage will the Tempter now have upon thee, when he shall
suggest, Will thou be such a Fool as to let go all at once? Thou see Heaven
is not sure, Christ is not sure, therefore keep the World while thou have it,
and hold what thou have sure: Beloved, what a fearful slighting of God, and
Contempt of Heaven, and Glory, and all the Promises, does this argue, that you
can be content to be at Uncertainties whether they be yours or no? How many of
you be there that do not know whether you be going to Heaven or to Hell? And
what desperate Carelessness does this argue, to go on from Week to Week in such
a Case? Some Hopes (...) have that you shall do well, but put not me off with
Hopes, never be satisfied, till you are able to say, not only, I hope I shall
be saved; but, I know I am passed from Death to Life; I know that when the
earthly House of this Tabernacle shall be dissolved, I have a Building not made
with Hands, etc. 2 Cor. 5.1.

Couns. IV. Be not satisfied with the Truth of Grace, but reach after the
Growth. Do not think all is done, when you have attained the Evidence of Grace,
but put on hard toward the Increase. That Person that does not desire and
design Perfection, never came up to Sincerity. He that desires Grace truly,
desires it not barely as a Bridge to Heaven, and so to seek no more than will
just bear his Charges thither: But he desires it for its own Sake; and
therefore desires the Height of it: That Person that desires Grace only for
Heaven's Sake, and enquires what is the lowest Measure of Grace that any one
may have and come to Heaven, (by which he means but to be saved from Misery)
upon this Design, that if he could but come to that Pitch, he would desire no
more; that Person is rotten at the Heart. Christians, the Lord does expect of
you, that you should not be Babes and Dwarfs; He looks now, especially that you
should make some Progress: What do you more than heretofore? What! Do you feel
his Spurs in your Sides, and his Whip at your Backs; and yet never mend your
Pace in Religion, not stir one Jot the faster? Let me commend to you Paul's
Study, Phil. 3 12, 13, 14. It argues a base and unworthy Spirit to content
ourselves with little Things in Religion.

Couns V Labor that Holiness may become your Nature, and Religion your
Business. Then you are come to somewhat indeed in Religion, when the Work of
God is become your natural and beloved Employment, your Meat and Drink, your
Work and Wages When your Tongues and Hearts do as naturally run on God, as
others on, and of the World: Much of that may be attained by constant Care and
Prayer. Brethren, let God's Work be done by you, not by the Bye, but as your
greatest Business: Seek first the Kingdom of God, Mat. 6.33. And so whatsoever
you be, you may be able to give that Account of yourselves, that our Savior
did when they enquired of him, that you are about your Father's Business, Luke
2.59.

Couns. VI. Confine not your Religion to your Knees, but carry on an even spun
Thread of Holiness through your whole Course Brethren, it is the Disgrace of
Religion, that Christians are so unlike themselves, unless it be when they are
in Holy Duties. This wounds Religion to the Quick, when it shall be said of
Professors, These Men indeed, will pray like Angels, but for aught we can see,
they are as peevish, and as touchy, as any other Men, and they are as hard in
their Dealings, and make as little Conscience of their Words, as others do.
Beloved, think not Religion lies only, or chiefly, in praying, hearing,
reading: No, you must be throughout religious. Sirs, bring forth your Religion
out of your Closers into your ordinary Course. Let there not be a List of
Holiness on the Outside of the Cloth, but let Holiness be woven into the Whole
of your Conversations. Here lies the Excellency and Difficulty of Religion:
When you have the Baits of Intemperance before you, then hold the Reins hard,
and deny your Flesh; and when you have Provocation before you, then to bite in
your Passions, and bridle the unruly Members: When you have Dealings with
others, then to proceed by that Golden Rule of Equity and Charity, To do to
others as your Conscience tells you, you would have them do in like Case to
you. When you are called upon in your several Relations, then to behave
yourselves with that Tenderness and Love, with that Reverence and Obedience,
with that Courtesy and Condescension, and Kindness that becomes you in your
various Capacities: In this I say, lies the Excellency of Religion.

Couns. VII. Ever walk with your End in your Eye: It is true, according to the
usual Similitude, The Traveller thinks not of his Journey's End in every Step,
nor need he; yet there is no Traveller but thinks of it at his setting out:
Brethren, there is nothing hinders, but that with Prayer and Watchfulness you
might come to this, in every solemn Action to mind GOD as your End: Impose this
upon yourselves as your daily Rule to walk by, never to lie down but with these
Thoughts, [Well, I will make use of my Bed as an Ordinance of God for my
natural Refreshment, that a Servant of his may he fitted for his Work.] Never
to rise up but with these Thoughts. [I will set forth this Day in the Name of
the Lord, and make it my Business this Day throughout to please him.] Never to
set about our Callings, but in the Entrance to think thus, [I will set about my
Employment in Obedience to God, because this is his Will, that I should walk
with him in my Place and Station.] Never to sit down to your Tables but
thinking, [I will now eat and drink not merely to feed my Flesh, but to cherish
a Servant of Christ Jesus, that he might have Strength for his Service.] Charge
this upon yourselves, and examine in the Evening, how you have minded it, and
check yourselves wherein you come short. Once learn this, and you are come to
something: And you shall have the undoubted Evidence of your Sincerity, and
shall know the Inside of that blessed Mystery of walking with God.

Couns. VIII. Be and do more than ordinary in your Families and Closets, now in
the Defects of the more public Ordinances.

1. In your Closets see that your Consciences be able to bear you witness, that
under GOD's extraordinary Providence, you do more than ever in Answer
thereunto. It may be you prayed twice in the Day before; Why should you not at
such a Time as this is, make one Visit more than ordinary to Heaven, daily to
represent before God the Calamities of his Church. This be sure of, that
somewhat more than heretofore must be done, else God must look upon himself as
intolerably slighted, and upon his Church as most unnaturally neglected, if we
do not now put to it. Be more than ever, in Self-Examination God does look,
that when he is trying of us, we should be much in the Trial of ourselves. And
here let me put it to your Consciences, How are your Rules for daily
Examination looked after? Do you try yourselves by them from Day to Day? Ah
wretched Negligence! What have you given your Approbation, and passed your
Promise, and yet even in such a Day as this, so much forget your Duty? God
expects it of you, that now you see him angry, you should with more jealous
Fear, and tender Circumspection, and holy Watchfulness and Self-denial, walk
before him, else you will greatly incense his Indignation, when he shall see
that you slight his Anger.

2. In your Families; Christians, now the Lord calls aloud upon you, to set
your Houses in Order. Oh see what is amiss in them, and strive to cast out that
which may be a Provocation. Three Things I advise ^ou in reference to your
Families.

1. That you set up the solemn Exercise of Catechizing Weekly among you:
Methinks I would not question. but that in every Godly Family there is a Care
of the Catechism. But when Governors do only impose it in general upon their
Families, and occasionally take an Account, I find little Progress is made: and
therefore I beseech you to make it a solemn, standing, and constant Exercise,
and to expect of your Children and Servants as due an Account Weekly of what
they have learned in the Principles of Religion, as of any Business of your
own. Oh the incredible Benefit that would speedily come of this, if I could but
persuade, and prevail with my Hearers in so small a Request as this.

2. That you be often enquiring into their Spiritual Estates: Follow them
close, and let them have no Quiet, till you see they seriously mind and seek
spiritual Things. Put them upon secret Prayer, provide Helps for them till they
are able to go without them: Show them often the Necessity of Regeneration, and
Conversion, and the Nature thereof. Put them in mind of the fearful Misery of
an unregenerate Estate. Ask them often, Whether they are converted or not? Show
them the Danger of delaying in such a Case. Beloved, it is too sadly evident,
that as the Ordinances are now some-where managed, there is little
Conversion-work like to be done. Oh you Governors of Families, do but your
Duties in your several Places, and I doubt not but many Souls will nevertheless
be born to CHRIST, even in such a Day as this.

3. Call them to an Account of their Proficiency by every Opportunity. If there
be but a Sermon, or a Chapter read, let them give you some Account of it. Thus
our Savior, when the Disciples (his Family) were in private, he was asking
them Whether they did understand, and profit by what they heard in Public,
Mat. 13.1.

Couns. IX. Be not discouraged by the present Difficulties of Religion, but
rather rejoice in the Opportunity, to show your Love and Loyalty to your Lord.
Do not think that God has dealt hardly with you, now your Religion is like to
cost you something, and and presently think of your shrinking and drawing back
to preserve your Safety. If you do love the Lord Jesus, you should rejoice, and
be exceeding glad in the Opportunity to show it. Brethren, what has your
Religion cost you hitherto? And for Shame suffer not your shrinking, and
withdrawing to tell the World that you have not Love enough to Christ, to
engage you to run any Hazard for him. Do you indeed love the Lord? Oh then, now
rejoice and be exceeding glad, for never had you such an Opportunity, in all
your Lives, to show your Love as now; for never were you called to adventure so
for him, and his Service, as now you be. Now resolve, that if Religion will
make you vile, you will be yet more vile; and let your Zeal and Resolution for
God be intended and heightened by Opposition.

The Cordials follow, which are Sacramental-Cordials.
Most dearly beloved Brethren,
THIS Holy Sacrament is appointed as a Sealing Ordinance betwixt Christ and
you. The Covenants are made, the Terms are agreed to on both sides; God is
willing to be yours, to all Intents and Purposes; your Shield, and exceeding
great Reward, your Refuge and your Rest, your God and your Guide, while Christ
has it, you shall never want; and what God is to him, that he (in order) will
be to you.

You again (through Grace) are willing to be His, his in his own Way; and on
his own Terms: Willing to serve him; willing to fashion yourselves after him.
Willing to be betrothed to him, and to be commanded by him; to use his
Remedies, to follow his Counsels, and to acquiesce in him as your Blessedness:
Thus all are agreed; the Articles are drawn; the Covenants, both on God's Part
and yours are ready written: And here you are come to put all past Controversy,
and mutually to seal and subscribe: Oh happy and blessed Meeting! Christians,
do not forget your Errand; remember where you are, and what you are come for,
and know that you are upon the solemnest Transaction that ever passed between
the Creator and the Creature. It is God's admirable Condescension, that he will
be tied to us, and enter into Bonds with us, to bless us, and reward us. And
because our Faith is weak, he has brought his Surety with him, the LORD JESUS
CHRIST, who is a Surety on his Part, as well as ours, to undertake for the
fulfilling of the Promises. And he has brought the visible Signs, and Pledges
by which all shall be firmly past and ratified before your Eyes. This is the
New Testament in my Blood, Luke 22.20. Written in my Blood: Ratified in my
Blood. Oh Sirs, this is that which GOD does here reach forth unto you with his
own Hand this Day! The New Testament in Christ's Blood. Christians, prepare
your Ears, and rouse up your Faith, and now believe, and hear some of the
blessed Articles of that Covenant that GOD does here Sign and Seal to you. I
shall mention only Nine, which I advise you to lay next your Hearts, while you
have a Day to live. And you shall find the Virtue of these Cordials strong and
operative in all Conditions.

Art. I. That he will fulfill to you the Place of all Relations, 1 Cor. 6.18. I
will be a Father to you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters. Whatever
Children may expect from a Father, that you may look for from me: I will find
you Meat, be not thoughtful, I know that you have need of all these Things,
Matthew 26.31, 32. You shall be clothed out of my Wardrobe, Matt. 6.28, 29, 30.
and wear my Livery: And when you have need of Correction, I will remember to do
it in Mercy, and you shall find, that as a Man chastneth his Son, so the Lord
your God chastneth you, Deuteronomy. 8.5.

I will be a Husband to you, and will betroth you unto me forever, Hosea 2.19.
You shall not need to fear, your Maker is your Husband: I will give you my
choice Love; I will give you my Heart.

I will be a Lord and Sovereign to you: The Lord is your Judge; the Lord is
your Lawgiver; the Lord is your King. Fear not the Unrighteousness of Men.

I will judge your Cause, I will defend your Rights, you shall not stand nor
fall at Man's Bar; you shall not be cast at their Votes: Let them curse, I will
bless; let them condemn, I will justify: Who shall accuse when I shall acquit
you? Who shall lay any thing to your Charge, when I do discharge you? When you
come upon your Trial for your Life to have your eternal State decided, you
shall see your Friend, your Father upon the Bench: And you shall surely stand
in Judgment, and be found at the Right Hand amongst the Sheep, and hear the
King say, Come ye blessed.

I will be a Shepherd to you; fear no evil, for I am with you, you shall not
want, for I will feed you: You shall not wander to be lost, for I will restore
you: I will cause you to lie down in green Pastures, and lead you beside the
still Waters: If my Officers be careless, I will do it myself. As for you, Oh
my Flock, thus says the Lord God, I will judge between Cattle and Cattle, I
will feed my Flock says the Lord God, and cause them to lie down; and I will
seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and bind
up that which is broken, and strengthen that which is sick, but I will destroy
the Fat and the Strong, and will feed them with Judgment.

I will be a Physician to you. I will heal your Backslidings, and cure all your
Diseases, fear not, never did Soul miscarry that left itself in my Hands, and
would but follow my Prescription.

Well, this is one of the Articles that God here seals to, that he will be to
you in the Place of all Relations: Silence thou quarreling Unbelief; methinks I
hear thy Whispers, That this is too good to be true, that it were Presumption
in us to count upon all this. What; shall they that must say to Corruption,
that thou art my Father, be able to say to the incorruptible God, Thou art my
Father? Shall they that must say to the Worm, thou art my Mother and my Sister,
be able to say to the Angels of Light, Ye are my Fellow Servants? And to the
King of Glory, Thou art my Brother, and my Kinsman? Shall Majesty espouse
himself to Misery? and the Worms Meat be married to Immortality and Life? How
can these Things be?

Nay, but O Heart of Infidelity, what art thou that reply against God? Do
thou, under a sly Pretense of Humility, question with thy Master, and call his
Veracity into Doubt? Is not this his Word, his Promise, his Covenant? And is
not there of his Seal? Why then do thou doubt, O thou little Faith?

Art. II. That he will entitle you to all the divine Persons and Perfections,
Genesis 17.7. I will be a God unto thee: Mark, God gives away himself, and he
gives his Son to you, Isa. 42.6. I will give thee for a Covenant of the People.
This is the Church's Triumph, Isa. 9.6. Unto us a Son is given. And he gives
his Spirit to you, Joh. 14.16. He shall give you another Comforter. And
Believers acknowledge the Receipt. 1 Cor. 2.12. We have received the Spirit
which is of God. Thus you see all the Persons of the Godhead are made over to
you, and so are all the Perfections of the Godhead; and all the Covenant runs,
Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God, or, the All-sufficient God, walk before me
and be upright: These are the Terms between God and a Believer. Be thou upright
before me, and I will be All-sufficient to thee: The All Sufficiency of God is
the Comprehension of all his Perfections. Truth without Power, or Power without
Wisdom, or both, without Goodness, would not be All Sufficiency.
All Sufficiency takes in all that is in God, (if we may speak of Good most
simple Essence according to the shallow reach of our present Capacity) yea, it
comprehends infinitely more than can be said or thought. Why now this is the
Covenant of Grace, which God establishes with you this Day; that he will be a
God All sufficient to you.

Christians, rouse up your Faith: Now appropriate and apply the Promises: Now
believe strongly, and steadfastly, and Believing will fill you with Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory. I do not wonder if your Faith be put to it in so
high and great a Mystery; to draw nigh to infinite Majesty, and consideringly
and without Hesitancy to say, Thou art mine and all that thou have; this is no
easy thing. But thou may not dare to doubt it: Can thou question him who
is the Truth? Can the Strength of Israel lie, or in his Word deceive thee? But
the Soul is ready to reply, Oh the Things are too high and too great for me to
presume to believe, and is ready with Peter astonished, to cry out, Depart
Lord, for I am a sinful Man. But why does thine Hand tremble and thine Heart
fail thee: And thy Feet (with Peter's when walking on the Waters) begin to
sink? What do thou stick at? Is it at the Truth of the Promise? No, says the
trembling Soul, but sure so much can never belong to one so sinful. I am afraid
it is not mine. Why, what says the Promise? Only be upright. What though thou
have an hundred Failings, yet thy Heart is upright: The Bent of thy Heart is
mainly for God and Holiness; thou make Conscience of all Sin, little as well
as great, secret as well as open; and do thou deliberately allow thyself in
any: Thou do in the settled Frame of thy Heart prefer the Pleasing of God,
and value his Favor and Fellowship above all worldly Good; therefore thou art
upright: These Marks are infallible. What, do thou object thy Failings? Art
thou under a Covenant of Works? Do you think God now stands upon Perfection?
The Covenant is plain: God accepts of Uprightness: And God has wrought in
thee that Condition that he requires of thee. What can be more plain? Will thou
suffer the Devil and Unbelief to catch the Bread out of thy Hand, when God
tells thee it is thine? Will thou be against thyself, and refuse thine own
Peace, when God is come to seal thee up to the Day of Redemption? This is that
which the Lord here seals to thee, That he will be God All-sufficient to thee.
O believe and be thankful, and rejoice in thine own Blessedness! Oh happy,
thrice happy Souls, whom the living God thus signifies and seals to, and
assigns over all his infinite Perfections as its everlasting Possession.

Art. III. That he will discharge you from all your Debts, Heb. 8.10, 12. This
the Covenant, I will be merciful to their Unrighteousness, and their Sins and
Iniquities will I remember no more, Isa. 1.18. Though your Sins be as Scarlet,
they shall be as white as Snow. Believe thou this? Cone near beloved
Christian, approach believingly, and here thou shall see the Lord crossing out
all thy Debs, taking away the Handwriting that is against thee, declaring that
he has received a Ransom, and i^ is satisfied, contented and paid. O happy Man
that shall leave all thy Sins behind thee; why, this is the very thing that the
faithful God does here sea^ unto thee: Thy Pardon is written in his most sacred
Blood, which is here shed for the Remission of Sins. So that thou may
triumph with the Apo^le, Who is he that condemns, it is Christ that died,
Romans 8.34.

Art. IV. That he will save you from your Enemies; not from the Combat, but
from the Conquest. The Victory shall be sure, so far as God is engaged. So the
Covenant runs in the first Discovery, that the Seed of the Woman shall break
the Serpent's Head, though he should brui^ his Heel, Genesis 3.15. by the Seed of
the Woman, understand not Christ only, but all Believers, by the Serpent
understand not Satan only, but all his Party, the ungodly persecuting World,
which are his Children; and all our tyrranous Lusts, which are his Brood, his
Works. By his bruising our Heel, understand his Molesting and Wounding of us,
but not mortally. By our breaking his Head, understand the total and final
Victory which we shall most certainly obtain over him and his Party at last.
Christians, what should we fear! Death? The Covenant here sealed, makes over
Death as a Legacy to you, and behold it brings you the Head of your conquered
Enemies in a Charger, 2 Cor 3.22. Death is yours. O blessed and most grateful
Present. Satan? The Covenant assures you God will bruise him under your Feet
shortly, Romans 16.20. The World? Be of god cheer, Christ has overcome the
World, Joh. 16.2^. Hell? There is no Condemnation for them that are in Christ
Jesus, Romans 8.1. Sin? This indeed is to be dreaded, but with a watchful and
cautious For, not with a fainting discouraging Fear: Sin shall not have
Dominion over you, Romans 6.13, 14.

Christians, here is now Meat for your Faith. What do all these Holy Promises
nothing move you? Or carry little savor or relish with them? What shall the
Almighty God give it to thee un^er his own Hand, that thou art a Freeman, and
thou make little Account of it? Shall he give tlee thy Protection, and thou lay
it by as as useless Paper that signifies little? Oh Sirs, when your Hearts are
ready to faint because of the Sons of A^ that be in the Way; when you see the
Black Guad gaping upon you, and the King of Terrors leveling at you, and a
wicked World armed with Rage against you, and full of Malice, and the Thieves
and Conspirators in the Bosom, watching their Opportunity to betray all to
them, yet let not this discourage you. These were enough indeed to make a
considering Man's Heart to melt and die within him, but that the Covenant of
Grace yields such ^mple Relief against all. Oh be ever mindful of the Covenant:
Remember what has past this Day between the living God and your Souls: Watch,
O Christian, and stand fast, quit thee like a Man. The Conquest is sure: Who
would not fight with Courage, hat has Assurance of the Victory?

Art. V. That He will befriend you in all Conditions. He will be a fast Friend
to you in every Change, and turn all Things to your good, and when you are
ready to say unbelievingly, with Jacob, All these Things are against me, Romans 8
28. Gen 42.36. If he bring you into the Wilderness; There he will speak
comfortably unto you, Hos. 2.14. In the Fire, and in the Water, He will be with
you, Isa. 43.2. He will be a Strength to the Poor, a Strength to the Needy in
his Distress, a Refuge from the Storm, and a Shadow from the Heat, when the
Blast of the terrible Ones is as a Storm against the Wall, Isa. 25.4.

Beloved, here the Lord is come to seal all these Promises to you. Oh go home,
and bless yourselves in the sweet Security of your Estate. God has promised
you, that whatever Condition you be in, you shall have Succor and Support from
him, and enjoy his Presence with you; and see his Finger in all your Troubles,
sweetly turning all to the best: Go away, and live like Believers, be not
afraid of Sufferings, but show that you believe what God has promised, that
Affliction shall not hurt you. The next time any Trouble comes upon you,
remember what a Promise GOD has passed unto you this Day, and wait on him
believingly for the happy Issue and Event of every Trial that shall befall you.

Art. VI. That he will take upon him the Care of all of all your Concernments.
You must be careful in nothing, Philip. 4.5. He cares for you, Pet. 5.7. Take
no Thought what you shall eat or drink, neither be of doubtful Mind, but rather
seek you the Kingdom of God, and all these Things shall be added to you, Luke
12.29, 31. Come you to this Holy Ordinance in any Distress or Trouble? Methinks
you should go from it as Hannah, and your Countenance be no more sad. God will
number your Hairs: And will take care that nothing be lost, Joh. 6.26. Luke
12.7. He will take care of your Names, and bring forth your Righteousness as
the Light, Psa. 37.5, 6. Of your Subsistence; He will give Meat to them that
fear him, and be ever mindful of his Covenant, Psa. 111.5. Of your Seed, for he
will be a God unto them, and will entail the Blessing upon them, Genesis 17.7. He
commands that your Widows and fatherless Children should be left on him. He is
by Covenant to look after their Concerns, you need not be solicitous. He is
tender of you, when he seems most to neglect you, as Moses's Sister that was
secretly watching behind the Bush, and wishly looking on, to see what was done
to the Child, though to the Finders it seemed exposed to Famine and Death in
the Flags.

Art. VII. That he will give you, or be himself to you Instead of all Comforts.
He will be a Sun and a Shield, and will give Grace and Glory, and no good Thing
will he withold from them that walk uprightly, Psa 84.11. Oh! the Treasure in
these Words, I am thy Shield, and exceeding great Reward. I will undertake both
for thy Protection and Provision. When Evil assails thee, I will be a Shield to
thee: When any good is wanting, I will be a Supply. Thou shall have Children,
or I will be better to thee than ten Children. Thou shall have Riches, or I
will be thy Store: Thou shall have Friends, if best for thee, or else I will be
thy Comforter in thy Solitude, thy Counselor in thy Distress. My Secrets, my
Ear, and my Door shall ever be open unto thee, Mark 10 ^0. He shall receive an
hundred fold in this time: Though he have not the Things themselves, yet he shall
have all these, and more than all in me: I will be House, and Friend, and
Father to him, all in one If you should have an hundred Candles burning in the
Room, and should put out every one, and open the Window and let in the Sun,
this would be better than the hundred Lights that were put out: So here, though
thou still be called to forsake all, 'twill be but as letting the Cistren run,
and open the Fountain.

Art. VIII. That he will maintain you all your Days, in his Service. [He will
be your Guide even unto Death, Psalm 48.14. Christians, whilst you have a Day
to live, God will stand by you. He will never leave you nor forsake you,
Hebrews 13.5. Surely Goodness and Mercy shall follow you all the Days of your
Lives, Psalm 23.26. And the Lord will never turn away from you, to do you good,
Jer. 32.40.] O happy Covenant that the Lord seals to you.

Art. IX That when you come to Age, he will give the Kingdom to you. God says
to the Believer here, Thine is the Kingdom; What ever is promised in the
Covenant, is sealed in the Sacrament, Luke 12.32. It is your Father's good
Pleasure to give you the Kingdom, Luke 22.29. I appoint unto you a Kingdom.
Mark the Promises pregnant with a Kingdom. It Is no less than a Crown, a Kingdom
that is here delivered unto you, Luke 19.12. A certain Nobleman went into a far
Country, to receive to himself a Kingdom, and to return, This is the Business
you are come for hither, To receive te your selves a Kingdom, and so to return.
Oh! methinks you should forget what ground you go upon, as you are going home,
to think what you have received here. Methinks you should go forth as Haman
from the Banquet joyful, and with a glad Heart. Sirs, do you know what you are
doing? Why the Lord does by these Signs give you the Kingdom, as a Man by the
delivering unto you a Turs, or a Key gives possession of an House or Land.
Brethren, have you ever read of the Kingdom of Glory, of the Crown of Life. of
the Robes of Righteousness, of the Throne of Glory? Why all this God here makes
all over to you. I tell you, Sirs, these are not big Words, nor cunningly
devised Fables. God Almighty is here come to certify you of the Reality of his
Promises. As sure as you do now sit on your Seats, you shall shortly sit on
your Thrones. As sure as you are now clothed with Flesh so surely shall you be
clothed with Glory. Are you sure you are now on Earth? So sulely shall you be
in Heaven: The Lord intends you but for a very little while in this lower
Region, you must dwell above; where Christ is, there you must be also. As sure
as you now see a crucified Christ, so surely shall you see a glorified Christ.
The Lord Jesus does anticipate his Sentence here, and calls to you Guests; Come
ye Blessed, inherit the Kingdom. Take the Writing, behold the Seals, there are
the Conveyances of the Kingdom. The Donation is sure and full, unalterable,
irrevocable.

Christians, Do you believe? If you do methinks you should be ravished:
Methinks you should be filled with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory! But do
you stagger at the Promise, through unbelief? Do you say, O it is to much, and
too great? Why, how can this be? What, too great for God to make good? Thou
dare not think so. But it is too great for me to think upon. Why, but Man,
do thou not bear upon thee the Mark of the Lord Jesus; Whose Image and
Superscription is this? Does not your very Heart prize Christ above all the
World? Have thou not made a deliberate Choice of him, for thy head and Husband?
Have thou not entered into a solemn Contract with him, to be his in all Times
and Conditions, and love, honor, and obey him, before all others to the Death?
And does not thy Heart stand to all his choice? Have not thou taken him with
his Yoke, and with his Cross? And do not thou in thy Prastice first seek the
Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof? And have not thou chosen the Way
of the Kingdom? Art thou not in Love with the Holiness? And desire Grace more
than Gold? Do not thou prefer an Holy Spiritual Life, before all the Grandeur
of the World, and Pleasure of the Flesh? And all this not only for a Fit or
Flash, but in the settled Frame and Disposition of thy Heart? Surely thou must
wrong God and thy self, if thou deniest it to be thus with thee. Why these are
the Marks of the Lord Jesus upon thee, the sure Marks: Fear not, these cannot
deceive thee: The^ evidence that thou art born of God, that thou art a Son, and
so an Heir; and therefore lay claim to the Inheritance.

Come then, Beloved Christian, be of good Comfort, why should thou doubt?
Thou have the Mark of the Sheep, and therefore thy Portion shall be at the
Right Hand, thy Sentence among the Blessed. Well then, receive this Holy
Sacrament as the Pledge of all this. Go home and look over all these Blessed
Promises, and count them thine. Do not read them (as too often heretofore) as
if they did not concern thee. Remember what GOD has here promised under Hand
and Seal to thee, and let not all be left behind thee, when thou go hence,
but let the Remembrance, the Fruit and Sweet of this abide upon thee whilst
thou have a Day to live. Never forget what the Lord has here spoken to thy
Soul: Make more of the Promises than ever in thy Life before: Bless thy self in
them. Remember how the Lord delivered thee the Promises: How he sealed to the
several Articles, how he sprinkled the Blood upon the Book of the Covenant, and
gave it thee, and said, This is the New Testament in my Blood: Oh live
henceforth a Life of Joy and Faith, as a Man that is elevated above the World.
Do not live at the old, dull and slothful Rate, carry it like a Believer; and
in a Word, walk as one that does indeed take all for Truth that the Lord has
spoken to thee this Day. Let that of the Apostle be a Close to all, 2 Cor. 7.1.
Having therefore these Promises, Dearly Beloved, let us cleanse our selves from
all Filthiness, both of Flesh and Spirit. Perfecting Holiness in the Fear of
GOD.

FINIS.
Reading Mr. JOSEPH ALLEIN his Book, Entitled An Alarm to the Unconverted.
REader, who'ere thou art do chance to look,
Bless God directed thee to such a Book:
Be serious when thou read: it is no drull,
But that which aims to convert thy Soul:
What mad besotted Desperado can
Take Prejudice against this holy Man?
Who did sincerely nothing else desire,
But to prevent thy Leaping in the Fire;
And Penned this Book out of a true Endeavor,
To keep thee from that Lake which burns for ever.
I do beseech you read it over, why
Will you be obstinate, and choose to die?
Know you what Heaven is, or can you tell
The Torments of those damned Souls in Hell?
Now read and pray, O pray that God would give
A true Repentance, that your Soul may live;
This Book needs no Commendum, for no doubt,
You will commend it, if you read it out.
What did I care, so Sinners understood,
If each Word were a Tear or Drop of Blood.

