Dr. Sewall's SERMON BEFORE THE General Court.

Nineveh's Repentance and Deliverance.

A SERMON Preached before His EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR The HONORABLE COUNCIL
AND Representatives of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, on
a Day of FASTING and PRAYER in the Council Chamber, Dec. 3. 1740.

By Joseph Sewall, D.D. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston.

Jer. xviii. 7, 8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and
concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that
nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of
the evil that I thought to do unto them.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND; Printed by J. DRAPER, Printer to His Excellency the
GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhil. 1740.

In the House of Representatives, November 29th 1740.
THE House taking into consideration the many Tokens of Divine Displeasure upon
this Province, and more especially the pressing Difficulties which have long
attended and do still attend the public Affairs thereof, and which are likely
to increase upon us, unless the Government be led into some Measures for the
speedy Remedy thereof;

Voted, That His Excellency be desired to appoint, as soon as may be, a Day of
Fasting and Prayer, to be solemnized by this Court, as well for Themselves, as
in behalf of the People of this Province, in order to confess our Unworthiness,
to implore the Divine Forgiveness of our Sins, and the Assistance and Blessing
of Heaven upon all the Administrations of Government; and in particular, That
in the present unhappy Juncture of our Affairs, GOD would please to give such
Direction to the General Court, that they may be the happy Instruments, under
GOD, of delivering this People in some measure from their great Distress and
Danger.

And that the Rev. Ministers of the Town of Boston be desired to assist in the
Solemnity.

Sent up for Concurrence, I. Quincy, Speaker.
In Council, Nov. 29. 1740. Read and concurred, I. Willard, Secr.
Copy Examined, per I. Willard, Secr.
His Excellency has appointed Wednesday the Third of December for this
Solemnity in the Council Chamber; the Exercise to begin at Eleven a Clock in
the Forenoon.



In Council, December 4. 1740. Ordered,
THAT John Osborne and Ezekiel Lewis, Esqrs with such as shall be joined by the
Honorable House of Representatives, be a Committee to return the Thanks of
this Court to the Rev. Dr. Joseph Sewall for his Sermon preached Yesterday
before the Court, on the Day of Fasting and Prayer, and Desire a Copy thereof
for the Press.

Sent down for Concurrence, I. Willard, Secr.
In the House of Representatives, December 4th 1740. Read and concurred; and Mr.
Speaker, Mr. Cotton and Dr. Greaves are joined in the Affair.
J. Quincy, Speaker. Consented to, J. BELCHER.
Copy examined, per I. Willard, Secr.

Nineveh's Repentance AND Deliverance.
JONAH III. 10. And God saw their Works, that they turned from their evil Way,
and God repented of the Evil that he had said that he would do unto them, and
he did it not.


IN this Book we have a very memorable and instructive History. The Prophet
Jonah, whose Name the Book bears, was called of GOD to go to Nineveh, the
Capital of the Assyrian Monarchy, and cry against it --: He criminally
attempted to fly from the Presence of the Lord, by going to Joppa, and from
thence to Tarshish; but that GOD whom the Winds and Sea obey, raised such a
Storm as made the Heathen Mariners conclude there was something very
extraordinary, and accordingly they propose to cast Lots, that they might know
for whose Cause this Evil was upon them. Jonah is taken, and cast into the Sea;
upon which it ceased from raging: And thus, by the wonderful Providence of GOD,
he became a Type of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who having appeased the
Wrath of GOD by his Obedience unto Death, lay buried in the Earth three Days,
Matthew. 12.40. For as Jonas was three Days and three Nights in the Whale's
Belly: So shall the Son of Man be three Days and three Nights in the Heart of
the Earth. Jonah having cried to GOD, as out of the Belly of Hell, was
delivered from his dreadful Confinement. Chap. 2. v. 10. The Lord spoke unto
the Fish, and it vomited Jonah upon the dry Land. Thus the brute Creation, even
the mighty Whales, obey the Word of GOD's Power, while Men transgress his Law.
Jonah, being thus delivered from the Depth of Distress, obeys the second Call
of GOD to him, Chapter 3. v. 1. Happy is that Rebuke, how sharp soever, which is
sanctified to make us return to GOD and our Duty. And here it is observed, in
the third Verse, that Nineveh was an exceeding great City, great to or of GOD,
Urb^ magna Dei. Calvin.
Things great and eminent have the Name of GOD put upon them in Scripture. of
three Days Journey. It is computed to have been sixty Miles in Compass, which
may well be reckoned three Days Journey for a Footman, twenty Miles a Day, says
Mr. Henry; or as the same Author observes, walking slowly and gravely, as
Jonah must, when he went about preaching, it would take him up at least three
Days to go through all the principal Streets and Lanes of the City, to proclaim
his Message, that all might have Notice of it" However, no Greatness or worldly
Glory will be any Security against GOD's destroying Judgments, if such Places
go on obstinately in their Sins. O let not LONDON! let not Boston, presume to
deal unjustly in the Land of Uprightness, lest the holy GOD say of them as of
his ancient People, You have I known of all the Families of the Earth:
Therefore I will punish you for all your Iniquities, Amos 3.2. But to return,
Jonah, in Obedience to the divine Command, cries against this great City, Yet
forty Days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown, v. 4. In the five following
Verses, we have the Faith and Repentance of the Ninevites described, which our
Lord takes particular Notice of, Matthew. 12.41. The Men of Nineveh shall rise in
Judgment with this Generation, and shall condemn it, because they repented at
the preaching of Jonas, and behold, a greater than Jonas is here. Let us then
attend to these Words with Reverence and godly Fear, lest they also rise up in
Judgment against us in the terrible Day of the Lord. And here I would more
particularly observe, 1. The People of Nineveh believed GOD, v. 5 Jonah, we may
suppose, declared to them the true and living GOD, who made Heaven and Earth,
and published his Message in his Name* and GOD wrought such a Faith in them as
excited a Fear of his Judgments, and made them deeply concerned to put away
their provoking Sins, that they might escape the threatened Destruction. And
this Impression of Fear and Concern was general; for we find, 2dly, That they
proclaimed a Fast, and put on Sackcloth from the greatest of them even to the
least of them. Yea, there was a royal Proclamation for this by the Decree of
the King and his Nobles, v. 7. And this great Monarch humbled himself before
the Most High, who cuts off the spirit of Princes, and is terrible to the Kings
of the Earth. The King of Nineveh arose from his Throne, and laid his Robe from
him, and covered him with Sackcloth, and sat in Ashes, v. 6. Thus did he
practically confess, that he had behaved unworthy his royal Dignity, and
deserved to have it taken from him. And the Proclamation required the strictest
Abstinence, Let neither Man nor Beast taste any Thing Not as if the Beasts were
capable of moral Good or Evil; but as these had been abused by them, they would
have their Moans and Cries under the Want of Food, further to excite
penitential Sorrow in themselves* And all are commanded to cry mightily to God,
v. 8. Yea, all are exhorted to turn every one from his evil Way, and from the
Violence that is in their Hands. The Ninevites were sensible, that to outward
Signs and Means of Humiliation, they must add Repentance and Reformation. 3. We
have their Encouragement to attend this Duty, in a Time of impending Judgment,
v. 9. Who can tell if God will turn and repent --. We may suppose that Jonah
declared to them the Grace and Mercy of the GOD of Israel, and showed them the
Way of Salvation through the then promised Messiah; that though their Bodies should
be destroyed, their Souls might be saved in the Day of the Lord. And they might
well infer some Ground of Hope as to their temporal Deliverance from this, that
the Judgment was not presently executed; but the Space of forty Days was given
them for Repentance. However, as it does not appear they had any particular
Promise respecting this Matter, so their Faith and Hope are here expressed as
attended with Doubt and Fear Who can tell? A like Expression we have, even
respecting GOD's covenant People Who knows if he will return and repent --?
Joel 2.14 4. We have an Account of Nineveh's Repentance, and GOD's gracious
Deliverance, v 10. GOD saw their Works, i. e with Approbation and gracious
Acceptance. Their Works "whereby they testified the Sincerity of their Faith
and Repentance." Dutch Annotations.
Our Savior says, they repented at the preaching of Jonas, Luke 11.32. We may
conclude therefore that his Preaching was accompanied with the powerful
Influences of the Spirit of GOD convincing them of their many heinous
Transgressions, awakening them with Fears of GOD's Judgments, and prevailing
upon them to turn from their Sins to the Lord. Had it not been for this
wonderful Work of Grace upon them, they had been like to the Sinners of the old
World, who went on securely, though Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness to them,
'till the Flood came, and took them all away. Here were some, I hope, and that
not a few, who had saving Repentance given them; and others were so terrified
and awakened, that they engaged at least in an outward and public Reformation.
And may we not suppose that in this wonderful Work GOD gave his ancient People
a Specimen and Earnest of the Call of the Gentiles? Now, upon this their
Repentance it is said, GOD repented of the Evil, and he did it not. Which Words
must be understood in such a Sense as is consistent with the divine
Perfections. It is not spoken of GOD, as if he could in a proper Sense be
grieved for what he had done in threatening the Ninevites; no, this was right,
and he had a gracious Design in it: Nor, as if he had altered his Counsels
concerning them* He is of one Mind, and who can turn him? Nor, as if he acted
contrary to Truth and Faithfulness; no, the Threatening was conditional. And
accordingly when they repented GOD turned from his fierce Anger, and gave them
Deliverance; which is agreeable to that Rule of his Government which we have
declared, Jer. 18.7.8. At what Instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and
concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If that
Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their Evil, I will repent of
the Evil that I thought to do unto them.

From the Words thus explained to you, I would observe the following Doctrines,

[1.] If we would seek the Lord in a right manner, we must believe Him; the
Threatenings and Promises of His Word. [2.] It is the Duty of a People to cry to
GOD in Prayer with Fasting, when He threatens to bring destroying Judgments
upon them; and their Rulers should be ready to lead in the right Discharge of
this Duty. [3.] Our seeking to GOD by Prayer with Fasting must be attended with
true Repentance, and sincere Endeavors after Reformation. [4.] When a People
do thus attend their Duty, GOD will repent of the Evil, and not bring
Destruction upon them.

I. If we would seek the Lord in a right Manner under his threatened Judgments,
we must believe Him; the Threatenings and Promises of his Word.
The People of Nineveh believed GOD, and proclaimed a Fast --. We are not told
what particular Credentials Jonah produced to prove that he was a true Prophet
sent from GOD. His Preaching might be more full and particular than is here
recorded; and GOD set it home, so that they were made sensible they had to do
with the true and faithful One, whose Name is Jehovah; and accordingly they set
themselves to entreat his Favor with great Seriousness. And thus we must
believe, that the Lord is that powerful, holy, faithful, and merciful GOD,
which he declares himself to be in his Word. We must realise it, that his Word
is sure and most worthy of Credit, whether he threatens Evil to the Impenitent,
or promises Mercy to such as confess and forsake their Sins; or we shall never
be concerned to seek his Face in a right Manner. Without Faith it is impossible
to please God, in our Approaches to him: For he that comes to GOD, must
believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him.
Heb. 11.6. Agreably, in a Time of Danger, that pious King Jehoshaphet, said to
GOD's ancient People, Hear me, O Judah, and ye the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established; believe his
Prophets, so shall ye prosper. 2 Chronicles. 20.20. Certainly then, we who are born
under the clear Light of the Gospel Dispensation, must believe the Lord our GOD
speaking to us in his Word, if we would attend the Duties of this Day, so as to
obtain Mercy for ourselves, and this distressed People. We must believe that if
we go on obstinately in our Sins, and despise the Warnings GOD has given us in
his Word and by his Providence, we shall after our hardness and impenitent
Heart treasure up unto our selves Wrath against the Day of Wrath; But if we
forsake the Way of Sin, and return unto the Lord, He will have Mercy and
abundantly Pardon. We must believe our Lord Jesus when he says to us, Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. And we must also receive it as a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the World to
save Sinners, and will cast out none that come to Him in the Exercise of Faith
and Repentance. O that there was such a Faith in us! Then we should fly to
GOD's Name, as to our strong Tower this Day, and find Him our Defense and
Refuge in the Day of Trouble. By Faith Noah being warnned of God of Things not
seen as yet, moved with fear, prepared an Ark to the saving of his House; by
the which he condemned the World, and became Heir of the Righteousness which is
by Faith, Heb. 11.7.

II. IT is the Duty of a People to cry to GOD in Prayer with Fasting, when He
threatens to bring destroying Judgments upon them; and their Rulers should be
ready to lead in the right Discharge of this Duty.
Thus did the Men of Nineveh, nor did their King refuse to humble himself and
lie in the Dust before that Almighty GOD who threatened to destroy them. The
Order given was, Let Man and Beast be covered with Sackcloth, and cry mightily
to GOD This then is a moral Duty incumbent on all as GOD shall call. GOD's
ancient People practiced it. Thus when the Children of Moab and Ammon came
against Jehoshaphat to Battle, he feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and
proclaimed a Fast, 2 Chronicles. 20.1, -- 3. And we have an Account in Scripture of
more private Fasting, Mark 2.18, 20. Where we are informed that the Disciples
of John, and of the Pharisees used to Fast. And our Lord declares that after
his departure, His Disciples should also Fast. And we have particular Direction
about religious Fasting, 1 Cor. 7.5. Here then, I would be a little more
particular in describing the Duty of Fasting and Prayer, in which we are this
Day engaged.

1. IN religious Fasting we must chasten our Bodies, by abstaining from Meat
and Drink, and other Pleasures which gratify the outward Man.

Thus must we acknowledge that we have abused GOD's good Creatures, and are
unworthy of the least Drop and Crumb even of the Blessings of his common
Providence. And in this Way we ought to afflict and keep under our Bodies, that
our animal Appetites may be bro't into Subjection, and that our Souls may be
the more deeply humbled before GOD. Indeed the Necessity of Persons, respecting
the Weakness of some Constitutions, is here to be regarded. However, When
Persons want only indulge their Appetites, and find their own Pleasures when
GOD calls to weeping and mourning, is sinful and shameful* And GOD declares in
his Word, that this is a provoking Evil, Isai. 22.12, -- 14. In that Day did
the Lord God of hosts call to weeping and to mourning, and to girding with
Sackcloth: And behold Joy and Gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep, eating
Flesh, and drinking Wine; let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. And
it was revealed in mine Ears by the Lord of hosts, Surely this iniquity shall
not be purged from you till ye die, says the Lord God of hosts. And surely the
Men of Nineveh will rise up in Judgment against such, and condemn them; for we
find they were very strict in attending these outward Signs and Means of
Humiliation. But then, it must be granted that this bodily Abstinence will
Profit little, unless our Hearts are broken for Sin, and broken off from the
Pleasures of it.

2. IN religious Fasting we must afflict our Souls; have the Heart inwardly
pierced, and the Spirits broken upon the Account of our Sins.

That GOD who is a Spirit, and forms the Spirit of Man within Him, looks on the
Heart, and requires us to Worship Him in Spirit and Truth. The Sacrifices of
God are a broken Spirit: a broken and contrite Heart, O God thou will not
despise, Psalm. 51.17. The Call of GOD to his People on a Day of solemn Fasting,
was that, Rent your Heart, Joel 2.13. There must then be a deep and through
Conviction of Sin, and Contrition upon the Account of it. We must look to Jesus
whom our Sins have pierced, and mourn as one mourns for his only Son, and be
in bitterness, as one that is in bitterness for his Firstborn, Zech. 12.10.
There must be Hatred of Sin, and Indignation at it, as the accursed Thing which
stirs up GOD's holy Displeasure against us. There must be inward Grief, because
GOD has been dishonored and his Law broken by our Sins: That godly Sorrow
which works Repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10. There must be holy Fear of GOD's
Judgments. We must take Shame and Blame to our selves, and make that
Confession, Dan. 9.8. O Lord to us confusion of Face, to our Kings, to our
Princes, and to our Fathers, because we have sinned against thee. We must abhor
our selves, lie down before GOD in deep Abasement, and humble ourselves under
his mighty Hand: Thus must we go to GOD self-condemned, and willing to be
reconciled to Him upon his own Terms; looking to Jesus as our Advocate with the
Father, and depending on Him as the Propitiation for our Sins.

3. WE must cry mightily to GOD in Prayer. Earnest Prayer, in this and other
Places of Scripture, is expressed by crying to the Lord, Psalm. 130.1. Out of
the depths have I cried unto thee O Lord. Prayer is a great part of the Duty of
the Day; and we must take Care, that it be that effectual fervent Prayer that
avails much, Jam. 5.16. In-wrought Prayer, that Prayer which is wrought in
the Heart by the Holy Ghost. For this end, we must ask the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication to help our Infirmities, and stir up the Gift of GOD in us. Thus
must we pour out our Hearts before GOD and say, in most humble Importunity as
Jacob, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me. For GOD said not to the
Seed of Jacob, seek ye me in vain, Isa. 45.15. And therefore, if we approve our
selves the genuine Sons of that Patriarch, we shall also have Power with GOD,
and prevail through the Merits and Intercession of our Lord Jesus Christ: we
shall either obtain the Blessing for GOD's People, as Elias did, though a Man
subject to like Passions; or at least shall deliver our own Souls. I might
further set before you the Prophet Daniel, who has given Rulers a bright
Example of a public Spirit, greatly concerned for the Peace of Jerusalem. How
earnest was he when he set his Face to seek the Lord by Prayer with Fasting!
Hear his repeated Cries, Chapter 9.19. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord, hearken
and do, defer not, for thine own sake, O my God. And when GOD called his People
to sanctify a Fast, the divine Command is, Joel 2.17. Let the Priests, the
Ministers of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the Altar, and let them say,
Spare thy People, O Lord, and give not thy Heritage to Reproach; that the
Heathen should rule over them: wherefore should they say among the People.
Where is their God? May Moses and Aaron, lift up their Hands with their Hearts
to GOD in Prayer this Day, and receive the Blessing from the Lord.

4. WE must turn, each One from his evil Way. Thus when the Exhortation given
was to cry mightily to GOD, it follows; Yea, let them turn every one from his
evil Way, and from the Violence that is in their Hands. And indeed, unless this
be our Care, our Sins will cry louder than our Prayers, and provoke GOD to
cover himself as with a Cloud, Isa. 59.1, 2. Behold, the Lord's Hand is not
shortened that it cannot save: neither his ear heavy that he cannot hear. But
your Iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your Sins have hid
his Face from you, that he will not hear. And when GOD had declared to his
People that he rejected their Assemblies and solemn Meetings, He gives them
that Exhortation Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your Doings from
before mine Eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve
the Oppressed, judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widow, Isa. 1.16, 17.

But this brings me to the 3d general Head,

III. Our seeking to GOD by Prayer with Fasting, must be attended with true
Repentance, and sincere Endeavors after Reformation.
GOD saw their Works, that they turned from the evil Way. -- Here we may
consider, 1. What is implied in this Work of Repentance and Reformation. 2. Why
we should thus engage in the Work of Repentance and Reformation.


First, What is implied in this Work of Repentance and Reformation?

A. 1. It implies, An holy and prevailing Resolution to turn from those Sins
which we confess on the Day of Fasting. When we appear before GOD to confess
our Sins and ask Pardon for them; if we attend this Duty in Sincerity, we are
convinced that it is an evil and bitter thing that we have forsaken GOD by
transgressing his Law; and we shall accordingly resolve to put away this
accursed thing which separates between GOD and us, and engage to return to GOD
and our Duty. Thus did GOD's People on a solemn Fast. They entered into an Oath
to walk in God's Law, and solemnly promised, that they would reform the Evils
which had crept in among them; in taking strange Wives, in profaning the
Sabbath, in their cruel exacting upon their poor Brethren, etc. Neh. 9.38.
10.29, -- 31. And it is certainly seasonable and necessary for Persons on such
a Day to resolve, relying on GOD for Grace, to put away such and such Sins as
have more easily beset them, to take more Care to keep themselves from their
own Iniquity, and to reform whatever has been contrary to GOD's Law.

Which leads me to say,

2, It intends, That this Resolution be put in Practice in sincere Endeavors
to put away those Sins and reform those Evils, which have been confessed and
bewailed before God. This GOD requires of us. Thus says the Lord God, Repent
and turn your selves from all your Idols, and turn away your Faces from all
your Abominations, Ezekiel. 14.6. And after this manner did the Children of Israel
testify their Repentance, when they cried to the Lord under the Oppression of
their Enemies. And they put away the strange gods from among them, and served
the Lord: and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel, Judge. 10.16.
Agreeably, When we have fasted and prayed, we must bring forth Fruits meet for
Repentance, by engaging in a through Reformation of all Sins of Omission or
Commission. If we have omitted religious Duties, Secret or Family Prayer,
Self-Examination, the Ordinances of GOD's House; we must now conscienciously
attend upon them. If we have neglected the Duties of those Relations which we
sustain toward Men, in public or private Life; we must now with Care and
Diligence discharge them. If we have committed Sins contrary to the Laws of
Sobriety, Righteousness and Godliness; we must labor by the Spirit to mortify
them In a Word, We should cleanse our selves from all Filthiness of the Flesh
and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of GOD. And in order to these
Things, we ought earnestly seek to GOD to put his Laws into our Minds, and
write them in our Hearts; for it is He alone that can work in us to will and to
do, in beginning and carrying on this necessary Work of Reformation.

3. That We return to God by Jesus Christ; to believe in, love and obey Him.
The Prophet Hoseae complains, They return but not to the most High, 7.16.
Whereas, when a Reformation is sincere and general, we shall have a Regard to
the Lord our GOD in it, as to our chief Good and highest End. We shall not be
principally concerned to serve a turn, and Escape this or the other threatened
Judgment. As they, When he slew them, then they sought him: and they returned
and enquired early after God. And they remembered that God was their Rock, and
the high God their Redeemer. Nevertheless, they did flatter him with their
Mouth, and they lied unto him with their Tongues, Psalm. 7 8 34, -- 36. But
shall make it our great Business to obtain Peace with GOD through Jesus Christ
the only Mediator, who has made Peace through the Blood of his Cross. And then
shall we endeavor to be steadfast in his Covenant. The Language of our Hearts
must be as Hos. 6 1. Come and let us return unto the Lord: for he has torn,
and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up 14.3. Asshur shall
not save us, we will not ride upon Horses, neither will we say any more to the
work of our hands, Ye are our gods: for in thee the Fatherless finds mercy.
We must return to GOD as to our Lord and Lawgiver, to obey and serve him; as to
the Object of our Desire and Choice, to take our full Contentment in Him: Thus
it is said of GOD's People -- All Judah rejoiced at the Oath: for they had
sworn with all their Heart, and sought him with their whole desire, and he was
found of them, 2 Chr. 15.15. As to particular Persons, It is necessary that
they thus give up themselves to the Lord, and then keep the Covenant of their
GOD. And as to a People, considering them collectively, this must be their
prevailing Desire and Practice: If they are generally false and hypocritical,
they will give GOD reason to complain of them, as of his ancient People, O
Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee: O Judah, what shall I do unto thee: for
your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away. Hos.
6.4.

Secondly, Why should our Days of Fasting be thus attended with sincere
Endeavors after Reformation?

A. 1. GOD demands this of us. When that Inquiry was made, Wherewith shall I
come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high GOD? Shall I come before
him with Burnt-offerings? -- Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams or
with Ten Thousands of Rivers of Oil? The Answer is, He has showed thee, O Man,
what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to
love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Micah 6.8 And therefore, when
GOD's People fasted in a formal customary manner, without engaging in the
necessary Work of Reformation, GOD said to them, Did ye at all Fast unto me,
even to me? And then it follows, Execute true Judgment, and show Mercy and
Compassions every Man to his Brother. And oppress not the Widow, nor the
Fatherless, the Stranger, nor the Poor, and let none of you imagine Evil
against his Brother in your Heart, Zech. 7.8, 10.

2. GOD makes precious Promises to encourage and excite us to this Duty. Thus
when GOD had exhorted his People to put away the Evil of their Doings, he adds
for their Encouragement, Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord:
though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be white as Snow, though they be red
like Crimson, they shall be as Wool If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat
the good of the Land. And in the 55th Chapter we have that Exhortation enforced
with a Promise of full and free Pardon, V. 6, 7. Seek ye the Lord, while he may
be found, call ye upon him while he is near. Let the Wicked forsake his Way,
and the unrighteous Man his Thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Ver.
6, 7. Surely then, we must be basely ungrateful, if we are not drawn with these
Cords of a a Man, and Bands of Love. While we refuse to attend this great Duty,
we practically despise the Riches of GOD's Goodness whereby He leads Sinners to
Repentance. And this is another Reason why we should engage in the Work of
Repentance and Reformation.

3. If we refuse to repent and reform, we shall be condemned out of our own
Mouths, and fall under the threatened Judgments of GOD. One considerable Part of
the Duty of a Day of religious Fasting is to make an humble and penitent
Confession of our Sins whereby we have provoked a holy GOD to come out in
Judgment against us, and to cry to Him for Grace that we may turn from them.
Thus it is said of GOD's People on the Day of solemn Fasting recorded Neh. 9.
The Seed of Israel stood and confessed their Sins, and the Iniquities of their
Fathers: 2d v. But if there be no Care to put away the Sins which we have
confessed, we shall give our Lord and Judge reason to say to us as to the
wicked Servant, Out of thine own Mouth will I judge thee. Now this will be
dreadful indeed, and must aggravate our Condemnation, to be thus
Self-condemned; and so to fall under the righteous Judgment of GOD. We have the
Proof of this written for our Warning in the doleful Account which the
Scripture gives of the Sin and Punishment of GOD's ancient Covenant People.
Though they had their Days of Fasting, particularly on the seventh Month, when
the High Priest was to make an Atonement for himself and the People, and enter
into the holy Place within the Vail, Lev. 16. Notwithstanding this, GOD said to
his People, If ye will not be reformed, but will walk contrary to me, then will
I also walk contrary to you, and will punish you seven Times for your Sins. And
GOD fulfilled his Word. They mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his
Words, and misused his Prophets, until the Wrath of the Lord arose against his
People, till there was no Remedy, 2 Chronicles 36 16. Jerusalem and the Temple were
destroyed by Fire, and GOD's People led into Captivity to Babylon. And after
their merciful Restoration, when they had filled up the measure of their Sins
by disobeying and crucifying the Lord of Glory, and then by rejecting the
Offers of the Gospel made to them by His Apostles; the Wrath of GOD came upon
them to the uttermost by the Romans, and they are made an Execration and a
Curse unto this Day.

IV. When a People do thus turn from their evil Way to the Lord, He will repent
of the Evil, and not bring Destruction upon them.
GOD saw their Works -- and God repented of the Evil that he had said he would
do unto them, and he did it not. Judgment is GOD's strange Work; but he
delights in Mercy. And when GOD threatens, it is with a Reserve of Grace and
Favor to the Penitent. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen and
repent, and do the first Works; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will
remove thy Candlestick out of his Place, except thou repent. Rev. 2.5. Thus GOD
said to the Prophet Jeremiah, Take thee a Roll of a Book, and write therein all
the Words that I have spoken unto Thee against Israel, and against all the
Nations, from the Day I spoke unto thee, from the Days of Josiah, even unto
this Day. It may be the House of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose
to do unto them; that they may return every Man from his evil Way, that I may
forgive their Iniquity and their Sin, Jer. 36 2, 3. GOD knew perfectly well
what they would do; but then he here lets his People know how ready he was to
forgive the Penitent and receive them into Favor: It Is true, Such as repent
may be afflicted in this Life; but then it is with the tender Compassion of a
Father, not with the deadly wound of an Enemy. The first and purest Times of
Christianity were Times of Persecution; however, while the holy Martyrs
overcame by the Blood of the Lamb, not loving their Lives unto the Death; the
Church was preserved, yea increased and multiplied. And as to a People,
considering them collectively, I suppose no one Instance can be produced in
which GOD poured out his Fury to destroy them, while a Spirit of Repentance and
Reformation prevailed. And even in Times of abounding Iniquity, when the Glory
of GOD was departing from his People, and destroying Judgments breaking in like
a Flood; GOD was pleased to make a remarkable Distinction between the Penitent,
and such as were hardened in Sin. And the Lord said unto him, Go through the
midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a Mark upon the
Foreheads of the Men that sigh and that cry for all the Abominations that be
done in the midst thereof. And to the others he said in mine hearing, Go ye
after him through the City and smite: let not your Eye spare, neither have ye
Pity, Ezekiel 9.4, 5.

But the Time would fail me, should I attempt to speak particularly to this
Head; and I have in part prevented my self by what has been already said. I
shall therefore only give a few Hints further to confirm and illustrate the
Truth before us. The faithful and true GOD declares this in His Word. When I
say unto the Wicked, Thou shall surely die: If he turn from his sin, and do
that which is lawful and right; If the Wicked restore the Pledge, give again
that he had robbed, walk in the Statutes of Life, without committing Iniquity;
he shall surely live, he shall not die, Ezekiel 33.14, 15. When Ephraim bemoaned
himself and repented, GOD manifested his fatherly Compassions to him. I have
surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, Thou have chastised me, and I was
chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke: Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned; for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after that I was turned, I
repented; and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was
ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my Youth. Is
Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant Child? For since I spoke against him, I
do earnestly remember him still: Therefore my Bowels are troubled for him; I
will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. Jer. 31.18, -- 20. Again, When
a People do thus turn from their evil Way to the Lord, They are prepared to
receive and improve GOD's merciful Deliverance after a suitable manner. While a
degenerate People are impenitent they will be ready to despise the Riches of
GOD's Goodness and Forbearance, and to wax Wanton under sparing Mercy. Jeshurun
waxed fat and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art
covered with fatness; then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed
the Rock of his Salvation, Deuteronomy. 32.15. But when Sin is embitter'd by the godly
Sorrow which works Repentance we shall observe that Caution after GOD has
spoken Peace, Psalm. 84.8. -- Let them not turn again to Folly. Such a People
will be jealous over themselves and for the Lord of hosts, and be concerned to
improve all His gracious Appearances for them to the Honor of his great Name.
Accordingly, GOD says of his People, How shall I put thee among the Children,
and give thee a pleasant Land? And then returns this Answer, Thou shall call
me, My Father, and shall not turn away from me, Jer. 3.19. Again, This Truth is
evident from the happy Experience of the Penitent. We have a remarkable
Instance before us. Now, did GOD spare repenting Nineveh, and will he not spare
his repenting Vovenant People? Yes surely, -- If their uncircumcised Hearts be
humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of their Iniquity: Then will I
remember my Covenant with Jacob, and also my Covenant with Isaac, and also my
Covenant with Abraham will I remember; and I will remember the Land. And GOD
was pleased to fulfill his Promise to his People, 1 Samuel 7. and in other
Instances upon Record in Scripture. In a Word, The Lord JESUS our great High
Priest, has offered a Sacrifice of infinite Value to make Atonement for the
Congregation of his People, whether Jews or Gentiles; and He lives in Heaven to
interceed for them: And therefore, When GOD's People look to Him and mourn and
turn to the Lord, He will turn from his fierce Anger, and command Salvation.

APPLICATION.
USE 1. Learn that true Religion lays the surest Foundation of a People's
Prosperity. Righteousness exalts a Nation, Prove. 14.34. When we turn to GOD
by Jesus Christ, and do Works meet for Repentance; we take the best Way to
obtain Salvation from the Help of His Countenance, who is the Father of Lights,
from whom comes down every good and every perfect Gift. It Is Sin that
separateth between GOD and his People: When this accursed Thing is therefore
put away from among them, that GOD to whom belong the Issues from Death, will
draw nigh to them with His saving Health, and appear for their Deliverance. And
if GOD be for us, who can be against us? There is no Wisdom nor Understanding,
nor Counsel against the Lord. The Horse is prepared against the Day of Battle:
But Safety is of the Lord. Prove. 21.30, 31. Certainly then, the One Thing
needful is to secure the Presence and Favor of GOD; and this we do when we
return to Him in hearty Repentance, and then walk before Him in New Obedience.
Blessed is that People whose GOD is the LORD: No Weapon formed against them
shall prosper, and that good Word shall be fulfilled unto them, God is our
Refuge and Strength, a very present Help in Trouble, Psalm. 46.1. and v. 5. God
is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved: God shall help her, and that
right early. O that GOD would impress on our Minds the firm Belief of these
Things! O that He would affect our Hearts suitably with them! That we might
strive together in our Prayers this Day, crying to GOD with the Prophet, O
Lord, revive thy Work in the midst of the Years, in the midst of the Years make
known; in Wrath remember Mercy. Hab. 3.2.

USE 2. Abounding Iniquity will be the Destruction of a People, except they
repent. If they persist and go on in the Ways of Sin, refusing to return to
GOD, Iniquity will be their Ruin. Sin is the Reproach of any People, Prove.
14.34. It has both a natural and moral tendency to lay them low, and expose
them to Shame. Sin in the Body-politick, is like some foul and deadly Disease
in the natural Body which turns the Beauty of it into Corruption, and weakens
all it is Powers. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and
more: the whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart is faint. From the Sole of
the Foot, even unto the Crown of the Head, there is no Soundness in it; but
Wounds and Bruises, and putrefying Sores: they have not been closed, neither
bound up, neither molified with Ointment, Isa. 1.5, 6. And then, this deadly
Evil provokes the holy GOD to pour Contempt upon a People, and lay their Honor
in the Dust. Thus GOD threatened His People, Thou shall become an Astonishment,
a Proverb, and a Byword, among all Nations whither the Lord shall lead thee.
Deuteronomy. 28.37. And in the 44th and 45th v. He shall lend to thee, and thou shall
not lend to him; he shall be the Head, and thou shall be the Tail. Moreover all
these Curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee till thou be destroyed
Because thou hearknedst not unto the Voice of the Lord thy God, to keep his
Commandments and his Statutes which he commanded thee. And the threatening was
fulfilled upon them. GOD said to his People, O Israel, Thou have fallen by
thine Iniquity. And the weeping Prophet laments their Sin and Ruin, Jerusalem
has grievously sinned: all that honored her, despise her, because they have
seen her nakedness: yea, she sigheth, and turns backward. Her filthiness is
in her skirts, she remembers not her last end, therefore she came down
wonderfully: she had no Comforter. Yea, After this remarkable Deliverance
granted to Nineveh, it is supposed about Ninety Years, when they returned to
their former Sins, the Prophet Nahum foretells their Ruin, Chap. 1.

USE. 3. Let us then be sensible of the destroying Evil of Sin, and the
Necessity of true Repentance.

GOD speaks to us this Day as to his People of old, Thine own wickedness shall
correct thee, and thy Backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore and see,
that it is an evil thing and bitter that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God,
and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of hosts, Jer. 2.19. And as
44.4. O do not this abominable thing that I hate. Most certainly they are
guilty of great Folly, who make a Mock at Sin. This is to cast Firebrarnds,
Arrows and Death; and say, Am I not sport? The wise Man observes, that One
Sinner destroys much Good, Eccl. 9.18. Thus Achan took of the accursed Thing;
and the Anger of the Lord was kindled against the Children of Israel, Josh.
7.1. Let us then fly from Sin as the most pernicious Evil, and see the
Necessity of our turning to the Lord by sincere Repentance. O let that Word of
the Lord sink deep into our Hearts this Day! Turn ye, turn ye, Why will ye die,
O House of Israel? Ezekiel. 33.11.

Which leads me to the last Use;

4. Let us all be Exhorted to turn, every One from his evil Way; and to engage
heartily in the necessary Work of Reformation.

This, This is our great Duty and Interest this Day, as we would hope to be
made Instruments in GOD's Hand of saving our selves and this People. Let us
then seriously consider that we have to do with that GOD who is able to save
and to destroy. And settle that Word in our Hearts as a certain Truth, When he
gives Quietness, who then can make Trouble? and when he hides his Face, who
then can behold him? whether it be done against a Nation, or against a Man
only. Job 34.29. And accordingly, let us turn from all Sin to the Lord, and in
this Way hope and wait for his Salvation. O let us take heed, lest there be in
any of us an evil Heart of Unbelief in departing from the living God. To Day,
let us hear his Voice, and not harden our Hearts. May each one of us say with
Job, Now mine Eye sees thee: Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in Dust and
Ashes. And as it has pleased the Father to commit all Judgment to the Son; let
us look to Him, and encourage our selves in Him whom GOD has exalted to be a
Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance to Israel, and Forgiveness of Sins.
May our ascended JESUS, who has received of the Father the Promise of the Holy
Ghost, pour out this great Blessing upon the whole Land, and fulfill that Word,
Then will I sprinkle clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your
filthiness and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. A new Heart also will I
give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the
stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I will give you an Heart of Flesh. And I
will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye
shall keep my Judgments, and do them. And ye shall dwell in the Land that I
gave to your Fathers, and ye shall be my People, and I will be your God. Ezekiel.
36.25 -- 28. Blessed be the Lord, His Spirit has been, we hope, moving on the
Hearts of many to convince and awaken them. O let us not resist and quench the
Spirit! lest the Threatening denounced against the Sinners of the old World,
should be fulfilled on us, My Spirit shall not always strive with Man, for that
he also is Flesh. Gen 6.3. Let us cherish his Motions, and pray the more
earnestly that he may be given in an extensive manner as a Spirit of saving
Conversion and through Reformation. And surely, If we duly consider the State
of this sinful, distressed People, we shall be constrained to say with the
Prophet. It is Time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain Righteousness upon
you. Hos. 10.12. And then with our fervent Prayers, let us unite our best
Endeavors with regard to ourselves, our Families, and this People; that all
Iniquity may be put far from us, and that we may become zealous of good Works.
In this Way we might hope GOD would say of us as of the Remnant of Judah; Then
will I build you, and not pull you down, and I will plant you, and not pluck
you up: for I repent me of the evil that I have done unto you. Or as Isa. 65.8.
-- Destroy it not, for a Blessing is in it.

BUT the Time requires me to draw to a Close. I would therefore proceed with
due Respect to make a particular Application of what has been said, unto our
Honored Rulers, who have called us to sanctify a Fast with them; and have set
apart this Day to humble themselves under the Sense of Sin, and the Tokens of
the divine Displeasure upon this Province.

My Fathers! Suffer the Word of Exhortation: Let GOD see your Works, that you
turn from every evil Way; that GOD may also repent of the Evil, and not bring
it upon us. For how dreadful must it be if the Example of the Nobles and Men of
Nineveh should rise up in Judgment against any of you: They repented at the
Preaching "of one Prophet sent to them by GOD, you have Moses and the
Prophets"; Yea in these last Days GOD has spoken to us by his Son that Prince
of the Prophets, who is GOD manifest in the Flesh. You have the sacred Writings
of the New Testament, in which GOD reveals his Wrath against all Ungodliness
and Unrighteousness of Men; and also his Grace and Mercy to the Penitent by a
Redeemer: And as the Judge of all the Earth has advanced you to rule over his
People; so he declares to you in his Word, That they who rule over Men must be
just, ruling is the Fear of GOD; and requires you to lead in the Work of
Reformation by your Example, and by the right Use of that Power with which He
has betrusted you.

This People have observed many Days of Fasting and Prayer, and yet there is
sorrowful Occasion to make that Complaint; For all this his Anger is not turned
away, but his Hand is stretched out still. You have also in this more private
Way sought the Lord some Years past, December. 10. 1736.
confessing your Sins, and the Sins of this People before Him; notwithstanding
which, the holy and faithful GOD goes on walking contrary to us, and threatens
to punish us seven Times more for our Sins. What means this Heat of his Anger?
Why do we still complain, Judgment is far from us, neither does Justice
overtake us: we wait for Light, but behold Obscurity; for Brightness, but we
walk in Darkness. We grope for the Wall like the Blind, and we grope as if we
had no Eyes. Isa. 59.9, 10. Alas! We must take up the Lamentation which
follows, v 12, -- 14 Our Transgressions are multiplied before Thee, and our
Sins testify against us: for our Transgressions are with us, and as for our
Iniquities, we know them: In transgressing and lying against the Lord, and
departing away from our God, speaking Oppression and Revolt, conceiving and
uttering from the Heart, Words of Falsehood. And Judgment is turned away
backward, and Justice stands afar off: for Truth is fallen in the Street, and
Equity cannot enter. O it is Time then, high Time, heartily to engage in
keeping the Fast which GOD has chosen, and we have described for our
Instruction and Reproof, Isa. ^8.6, 8. Is not this the Fast that I have chosen?
to loose the Bands of Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burdens, and to let the
Oppressed go free, and that ye break every Yoke? Is it not to deal thy Bread to
the Hungry, and that thou bring the Poor that are cast out to thy House? when
thou see the Naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from
thine own Flesh? Upon this GOD promises, Then shall thy Light break forth as
the Morning, and thine Health shall spring forth speedily: and thy
Righteousness shall go before thee; the Glory of the Lord shall be thy
Rereward. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shall cry, and
he shall say, Here I am. 8, 9. v. And 12 v They that shall be of thee, shall
build the old waste Places: thou shall raise up the Foundation of many
Generations; and thou shall be called, The Repairer of the Breach, the Restorer
of Paths to dwell in. Be entreated therefore to cry to GOD for Grace that you
may cleanse your Hearts and Hands from all Sin, and so turn to the Lord; and
then, let it be your constant Care and diligent Endeavor to do Works meet for
Repentance. As GOD has exalted you above your Brethren, let your Light shine
before them, that others seeing your good Works may glorify your heavenly
Father, and be excited to follow you. Let all that behold you, see your pious
Regards to GOD's Worship and Ordinances, his Day and House. Do your utmost that
the Worship of GOD may be maintained in the Power and Purity of it, among this
People. Let all due Care be taken that Men may Fear this glorious and fearful
Name, the LORD our GOD, and not presume to take it in vain; for because of
Swearing the Land mourns. Let the Lord's Day be strictly observed; for GOD has
set the Sabbath as a Sign between him and his People, that He is the Lord who
sanctifies them. Let the most effectual Means also be used that the great
Abuse of Taverns may be reformed, that these be not converted into tippling and
gaming Houses for Town-Dwellers, to the Dishonor of GOD and Hurt of the
Commonwealth. Let the Fountains of Justice be kept open and pure, that
Judgment may run down as Waters; and that such as thirst after Righteousness
may come freely, and be refreshed. And whereas the present Difficulties which
embarrass our Affairs, do very much arise from the Want of a suitable Medium of
Trade, and different Apprehensions in the Legislature about supplying the
Treasury, whereby the public Debts are, in part at least, left unpaid, and the
Country naked and defenseless, in this Day of Calamity and War: I cannot but
humbly apprehend, that this awful Frown of Providence calls aloud to you
further to consider, whether there has not been great Injustice and Oppression
with relation to the Bills of public Credit which have passed among us, from
their sinking and uncertain Value; and to use your best Endeavors that
whatever Bills shall pass for Time to come in lieu of Money, may be a just
Medium of Exchange; for a false Balance is abomination to the Lord; but a just
Weight is his Delight, Prove. 11.1. Whatever Methods may be proposed to
extricate us out of our present Distress, Justice and Equity must be laid in
the Foundation; or we may expect that the Lord who loves Righteousness and
hates Wickedness, will confound our Devices, and bring them to naught. But
then, I presume not in the least measure to determine whether this or that way
is right. May that GOD before whom all things are open and naked, direct Your
Excellency and the whole Court, into such Paths of Righteousness as shall lead
to our Deliverance and Safety; that we may neither oppress one another, nor
become a Prey to an insulting Enemy! May you be filled with the most tender and
fatherly Compassion for your People under the present Distress and Danger, and
do all you can to relieve them! And if there should be a Difference in your
Opinion about the Way, may you be enabled to keep the Unity of the Spirit in
the Bond of Peace, that the GOD of Peace may be with you, who has promised to
guide the Meek in Judgment!

But in vain is Salvation hoped for from the Hills, and from the multitude of
Mountains: Truly in the Lord our GOD is the Salvation of Israel!

O GOD! We know not what to do; but our Eyes are unto Thee. We wait upon Thee O
Lord, who hidest thy self from the House of Israel; confessing that we thy
Servants, and thy People have sinned. Thy Ways are equal, our Ways have been
very unequal. O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto Thee, but unto us Confusion
of Faces, as at this Day, because we have sinned against Thee. To the Lord our
GOD also belongs Mercies and Forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against
Him. O Lord, hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord, hearken and do, defer not, for thine
own sake, O GOD! for thy City, and thy People are called by thy Name. Look to
the Face of thine Anointed, O merciful Father! Behold thy SON in our Nature,
who on Earth offered a Sacrifice of infinite Merit to atone for the Sins of thy
People; and now appears in Heaven, as a Lamb that had been slain, interceeding
for us. We are unworthy; but the Name in which we now ask thy divine Help, is
most worthy. O hear us, for thy Son's sake, and speak Peace to thy People. Give
ear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a Flock, thou that
dwell between the Cherubims, shine forth. Before Ephraim and Benjamin and
Manasseh, stir up thy Strength, and come and save us. Turn us again O GOD; and
cause thy Face to shine, and we shall be saved. O remember not against us
former Iniquities: let thy tender Mercies speedily prevent us; for we are bro't
very low. Help us, O GOD of our Salvation, for the Glory of thy Name; and
deliver us, and purge away our Sins for thy Name's sake: So we thy People and
Sheep of thy Pasture, will give Thee Thanks for ever; we will show forth thy
Praise to all Generations.

And would you, Our honored Rulers, to whom I again address my self, have the
all-wise-GOD present to show you what his People ought to do in this very
critical Conjuncture, and to make you the joyful Instruments of our
Deliverance; then abide with GOD, by taking his Word for your Rule, by making
His Glory your highest End, and by seeking the public-Weal in all Things. Ask
of GOD a public Spirit, and by all Means labor to subdue a vicious Self-Love,
remembering the Warning given us, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2. In the last Days perilous Times
shall come. For Men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous. May you have
the Love of GOD and his People shed abroad in your Hearts by his Spirit; and be
ready to sacrifice private Views and personal Interests to the public Good!
Shake your Hands, front Bribes of every kind, and when called to give your
Vote, consider seriously what is Right in the Sight of GOD, with whom is no
respect of Persons, or taking of Gifts; and act accordingly. And if at any Time
you should be tempted to this great Evil, as the best of Men may; set that Word
of GOD in opposition to the Temptation. He that walks righteously, and
speaks uprightly, he that despises the Gain of Oppression, that shakes his
Hands from holding of Bribes, that stops his Ears from hearing of Blood, and
shuts his Eyes from seeing Evil: He shall dwell on high, his Place of
Defense shall be the Munition of Rocks; Bread shall be given him, his Waters
shall be sure. Isa. 33.15, 16. In this Way you shall obtain the gracious
Presence of GOD with you. The Lord is with you, while ye be with him, 2 Chronicles.
15.2. And if GOD be with you and for you, who can be against you? What can harm
you? What can be too hard for you, if the Almighty is pleased to own you as his
Servants, and command Deliverance for his People by you? Surely the Mountains
shall become a Plain, crooked Things straight, and the Night shine as the Day.
Let me say to you therefore as 2 Chronicles. 15.7. Be ye strong, and let not your
Hands be weak: for your Work shall be rewarded. GOD will be your Shield, and
exceeding great Reward. You shall see the Good of GOD's chosen, rejoice with
the Gladness of His Nation, and glory with his Inheritance. And when the Son of
Man shall come in his Glory, and all the holy Angels with Him, then shall He
say unto you, Inasmuch as ye have done it unto these my Brethren, ye have done
it unto me: Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom.

FINIS.

