SERMONS ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS.

In Two VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

CONTAINING,

I. On REGENERATION. II. Of Justification by CHRIST. III. On EARLY PIETY. IV.
The ALMOST CHRISTIAN, V. The Extent and Reasonableness of SELF-DENIAL. VI. The
Necessity and Benefits of RELIGIOUS SOCIETY. VII. Intercession every
CHRISTIAN'S Duty. VIII. The great Duty of FAMILY RELIGION. IX. The Heinous Sin
of profane CURSING and SWEARING. X. Thankfulness for Mercies received, a
necessary DUTY. XI. The Eternity of HELL TORMENTS. XII. Directions how to hear
SERMONS.
By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, A. B. Of Pembroke College, Oxford.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, in Market-street, 1740.

THE CONTENTS
SERMON I. 2 COR. V. 17. IF any Man be in CHRIST he is a new Creature. 1.
SERMON II. 1 COR. vi. 11. But ye are Justified. 22 SERMON III. ECCL. xii. 1.
Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth. 40 SERMON IV. ACTS xxvi. 28.
Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian. 57 SERMON V. LUKE ix. 23. And he
said unto them all, If any M^n will come after me, let him deny himself. 76
SERMON VI. ECCL. iv. 9, 10, 11, 12, ^^ Two are better than One, because they
have a good Reward for their Labor. For if they fall, the One will lift up his
Fellow. But wo^ ^e to him that is alone when he falls; for he has not
anoth^^ (...) help him up. Again, if Two lie together, then they have Ho^^^ but
how can One be w^rm alone? (...) if One prevail against him, Two shall
withstand him; and a Threefold C^rd is not quickly broken. 94
SERMON VII. 1 THESSALONIANS. V. 25. Brethren, Pray for us. Page 118 SERMON VIII.
JOSHUA xxiv. 15. As for me and my House, we will serve the LORD. 136 SERMON IX.
MATTHEW. V. 34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all. 156 SERMON X. PSALM cvii.
30, 31. Then are they glad, because they are at Rest, and so he brings them
unto the Haven where they would be. O that Men would therefore praise the LORD
for his Goodness, and declare the Wonders that he does for the Children of
Men! 173
SERMON XI. MATTHEW. xxv. 46. These shall away into Everlasting Punishment. 193
SERMON XII. LUKE viii. 18. Take Heed therefore how you hear. 210
SERMON I.
ON REGENERATION.
2 COR. V. 17. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature.
THE Doctrine of our REGENERATION, or NEW BIRTH in CHRIST JESUS, though one of
the most fundamental Doctrines of our Holy Religion; though so plainly and
often pressed on us in sacred Writ, that he that runs may read; nay, though it
is the very Hinge on which the Salvation of each of us turns, and a Point too
in which all sincere Christians, of whatever Denomination, agree; yet is so
seldom considered, and (...) little experimentally understood by the Generality
of Professors, that were we to judge of the Truth of it by the Experience of
most who call themselves Christians, we should be apt to imagine they had "not
so much as heard" whether there be any such Thing as Regeneration or no, It is
true, Men, for the most Part are Orthodox in the common Articles of their
Creed; they believe there is but one GOD, and one Mediator between GOD and Man,
even the Man CHRIST JESUS; and that there is no other Name given under Heaven,
whereby they can be saved, besides his: But then tell them, They must be
REGENERATE, they must be BORN AGAIN, they must be renewed in the very Spirit,
i. e. in the inmost Faculties of their Minds, ever they can truly call CHRIST
Lord, Lord or have any Share in the Merits of his precious Blood; and they are
ready to cry out wi^h Nicodemus, How can these Things be? Or with the
Athenians, on another Occasion, What will this Babbler say? He seems to be a
Setter-forth of strange Doctrines, because we preach unto them CHRIST, and the
New Birth.

That I may therefore contribute my Mite toward curing the fatal Mistake of
such Persons, who would thus put asunder what GOD has inseparably joined
together, and vainly expect to be justified by CHRIST, i. e. have their Sins
forgiven, unless they are also sanctified, i. e. have their Natures changed,
and made holy; I shall beg leave to enlarge on the Words of the Text in the
following Manner.

First, I shall endeavor to explain what is meant by Being in CHRIST, "If any
Man be in CHRIST." Secondly, What we are to understand by being a new Creature:
If any Man be in CHRIST, says the Apostle, he is a new Creature. Thirdly, I
shall produce some Arguments to prove Why we must be new Creatures ever we can
be in CHRIST*. Fourthly and Lastly, I shall draw some Inferences from what will
have been delivered, and then conclude with a Word or two of Exhortation from
the Whole.
And first then, I am to endeavor to explain what is meant by this Expression
in the Text, If any Man be in CHRIST.

Now a Person may be said to be in CHRIST two Ways. First, only by an outward
Profession. And in this Sense, every one that is called a Christian, or
baptized into CHRIST's Church, may be said to be in CHRIST. But that this is
not the sole Meaning of the Apostle's Phrase now before us, is evident, because
then every one that names the Name of CHRIST, or is baptized into his visible
Church, would be a new Creature. Which is notoriously false, it being too
plain, beyond all Contradiction, that comparatively but few of those that are
"born "of Water," are born of the Spirit" likewise; or, to use another
Scriptural way of speaking, Many are baptized with Water, which were never,
effectually at least, baptized with the Holy Ghost.

To be in CHRIST therefore, in the full Import of the Word, must certainly mean
something more than a bare outward Profession, or being called after his Name.
For, as this same Apostle tells us, All are not Israelites that are of Israel,
i. e. when applied to Christianity, all are not real Christians that are
nominally such. Nay, that is so far from being the Case, that our Blessed LORD
himself informs us, That many that have prophesied or preached in his Name, and
in his Name cast out Devils, and done many wonderful Works, shall
notwithstanding be dismissed at the last Day with a Depart from me, I know you
not, ye Workers of Iniquity.

It remains therefore, that this Expression, If any Man be in CHRIST, must be
understood in a second and closer Signification, viz. to be in him so as to
partake of the Benefits of his Sufferings. To be in him not only by an outward
Profession, but by an inward Change and Purity of Heart, and Cohabitation of
his holy Spirit. To be in him so as to be mystically united to him by a true
and lively Faith, and thereby to receive spiritual Virtue from him, as the
Members of the natural Body do from the Head, or the Branches from the Vine. To
be in him in such a Manner as the Apostle, speaking of himself, acquaints us he
knew a Person was, I know a Man in CHRIST, says he, i. e. a true Christian; or,
as he himself desires to be in CHRIST, when he wishes, in his Epistle to the
Philippians, that he might be found in him.

This is undoubtedly the full Purport of the Apostle's Expressions in the Words
of the Text; so that what he says in his Epistle to the Romans about
Circumcision, may very well be applied to the present Subject, viz. That he is
not a real Christian who is only one outwardly; nor is that true Baptism, which
is only outward in the Flesh. But he is a true Christian, who is one inwardly,
whose Baptism is that of the Heart, in the Spirit, and not merely in the Water,
whose Praise is not of Man but of GOD. Or, as he speaks in another Place,
Neither Circumcision or Uncircumcision avails any thing of itself, but a new
Creature. Which amounts to what he here declares in the Verse now under
Consideration, that if any Man be truly and properly in CHRIST, he is a new
Creature.

What we are to understand by being a New Creature, was the next and second
general Thing to be considered.

And here it is evident at the first View, that this Expression is not to be so
explained as though there was a Physical Change required to be made in us, i. e.
as though we were to be reduced to our primitive Nothings, and then created and
formed again. For, supposing we were, as Nicodemus ignorantly imagined, to
enter a "second Time into our Mother's Womb, and be born," alas! what would it
contribute toward rendering us spiritually new Creatures? since that which was
born of Flesh would be Flesh still, i. e. we would be the same carnal Persons
as ever, being derived from carnal Parents, and consequently receiving the
Seeds of all Manner of Sin and Corruption from them. No, it only means, that we
must be so altered as to the Qualities and Tempers of our Minds, that we must
entirely forget what Manner of Persons we once were. As it may be said of a
Piece of Gold that was in the Ore, after it has been cleansed, purified and
polished, that it is a new Piece of Gold; As it may be said of a bright Glass
that has been covered over with Filth, when it is wiped, and so become
transparent and clear, that it is a new Glass: Or, as it might be said of
Naaman, when he recovered of his Leprosy, and his Flesh returned unto him like
the Flesh of a young Child, that he was a new Man; so our Souls, though still the
same as to Essence, yet are so purged, purified and cleansed from their natural
Dross, Filth and Leprosy, by the blessed Influences of the Holy Spirit, that
they may properly be said to be made anew.

How this glorious Change is wrought in the Soul, cannot easily be explained.
For no One knows the Ways of the Spirit, save the Spirit of GOD Himself. Not
that this ought to be any Argument against this Doctrine; for, as our Blessed
LORD observed to Nicodemus, when he was discoursing on this very Subject, The
Wind, says he, blows where it lists, and thou hear the Sound thereof,
but know not whence it comes, and whither it goes; and if we are told of
natural Things, and we understand them not, how much less ought we to wonder,
if we cannot immediately account for the invisible Workings of the Holy Spirit?
The Truth of the Matter is this: The Doctrine of our Regeneration, or New Birth
in CHRIST JESUS, is "dark and hard to be understood" by the natural Man. But
that there is really such a Thing, and that each of us must be spiritually born
again, before we can enter into the Kingdom of GOD; or, to keep to the Terms
made use of in the Text, must be new Creatures before we can be in CHRIST, I
shall endeavor to show under my

Third general Head, in which I was to produce some Arguments to prove, Why we
must be new Creatures, in order to qualify us for being savingly in CHRIST.

And here one would think it sufficient to affirm, that GOD himself, in his
holy Word, has told us so. For, not to mention many Texts that might be
produced out of the Old Testament to prove this Point, (and indeed, by the way,
one would wonder how Nicodemus, who was a Teacher in Israel, and who was
therefore to instruct the People in the spiritual Meaning of the Law, should be
so ignorant of this grand Article, as we find he really was, by his asking our
Blessed LORD, when he was pressing on him this Topic, "How can these Things
be?" Surely, he could not forget how often the Psalmist had begged of GOD, to
make him a new Heart, and renew a right Spirit within him; as likewise, how
frequently the Prophets had warned the People to make them new Hearts, and new
Minds, and so turn unto the LORD their GOD. But not to mention these and such
like Texts out out of the Old Testament) this Doctrine is so plainly and often
repeated in the New, that, as I observed before, "He that runs may read." For
what says the great Prophet and Instructor of the World himself? Except a Man
(i. e. every one that is naturally engendered of the Offspring of Adam) be born
again of Water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of GOD. And
lest we should be apt to slight this Assertion, and Nicodemus - like, reject
the Doctrine, because because we cannot immediately explain, How this Thing can
be; our blessed Master therefore affirms it, as it were, by an Oath, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, or, as it may be read, I the Amen; I, who am Truth
itself, say unto you, that it is the unalterable Appointment of my heavenly
Father, that unless a Man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of
GOD.

Agreeable to this are those many Passages we meet with in the Epistles, where
we are commanded to be renewed in the Spirit, i. e. as was before explained, in
the inmost Faculties of our Minds; to put off the Old Man, which is corrupt;
and to put on the New Man, - which is created after GOD, in Righteousness and
true Holiness; That Old Things must pass away, and that all Things must become
New; That we are to be saved by the Washing of Regeneration, and the Renewing
of the HOLY GHOST. Or, methinks, was there no other Passage to be produced
besides the Words of the Text, it would be full enough, since the Apostle
therein positively affirms, that If any Man be in CHRIST, I must be a new
Creature.

Now what can be understood by all those different Terms of being born again,
of putting off the Old Man, and putting on the New, of being renewed in the
Spirit of our Minds, and becoming new Creatures; but that Christianity requires
a thorough, real, inward Change of Hear^? Do we think these, and suchlike
Forms of speaking, are mere Metaphors, Words of a bare Sound, without any real
solid Signification? Indeed, it is to be feared, some Men would have them
interpreted so; but alas! unhappy Men! they are not to be envied their
Metaphorical Interpretation: It will be well. if they do not interpret
themselves out of their Salvation.

Multitudes of other Texts might be produced to confirm this same Truth; but
those already quoted are so plain and convincing, that one would imagine no one
should deny it; were we not told, There are some, who having Eyes, see not, and
Ears hear not, and that will not understand with their Hearts, or hear with
their Ears, lest they should be converted, and CHRIST should heal them.

But I proceed to a second Argument to prove, Why we must be new Creatures, in
order to be rightly in CHRIST. And that shall be taken from the Purity of GOD,
and the present corrupt and polluted State of Man.

Now GOD is described in Holy Scripture (and I speak to those who profess to
know the Scripture) as a Spirit; as a Being of such infinite Sanctity, as to be
of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity; as to be so transcendently Holy, that it
is said the very Heavens are not clean in his Sight; and (...) Angels
themselves he charge wi^h Folly. On the other Hand, Man is described (and
every Regenerate Person will find it true by his own Experience) as a Creature
altogether conceived and born in Sin; as having no good Thing dwelling in him;
as being carnal, sold under Sin; nay, as having a Mind which is Enmity with
GOD, and such like. And since then there is such an infinite Disparity, can any
one conceive how such a filthy, corrupted, polluted Wretch can dwell with an
infinitely pure and holy GOD, before he is changed, and rendered, in some
Measure, like him? Can He, that is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity, dwell
with it? Can He, in whose Sight the Heavens are not clean, delight to dwell
with Uncleanness itself? No; we might as well suppose Light to have Communion
with Darkness, or CHRIST to have Concord with Belial. But I pass on to a

Third Argument to make good the Apostle's Assertion in the Text, which shall
be founded on the Consideration of the Nature of that Happiness GOD has
prepared for (...) that unfeignedly love him.

To enter indeed on a minute and particular Description of Heaven, would be
vain and presumptuous, since we are told, that Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive, the Things
that are there prepared for the sincere Followers of the Holy JESUS. However,
this we may venture to affirm in the general, that as GOD is a Spirit, so the
Happiness he has laid up ^or his People is spiritual likewise; and
consequently, unless our carnal Minds are changed, and become spiritualized, we
can never be made meet to partake of that Inheritance with the Saints in Light.

It is true, we may flatter ourselves, that, supposing we continue in our
natural corrupt Estate, and carry all our Lusts along with us, we should,
notwithstanding, relish Heaven, was GOD to admit us therein. And so we might,
was it a Mohammedan Paradise, wherein we were to take our full Swing in sensual
Delights. But since its Joys are only spiritual, and no unclean Thing can
possibly enter those blessed Mansions, there is an absolute Necessity of our
being changed, and undergoing a total Renovation of our depraved Natures,
before we can have any Taste or Relish of those heavenly Pleasures.

It is, doubtless, for this Reason, that the Apostle declares it to be the
irrevocable Decree of the Almighty, that without Holiness, i. e. without being
made pure by Regeneration, and having the Image of GOD thereby reinstamped upon
the Soul, no Man living shall see the LORD. And it is very observable, that our
Divine Master, in the famous Passage before referred to, concerning the
absolute Necessity of Regeneration, does not say, unless a Man be born again,
he SHALL NOT, but unless a Man be born again, he CANNOT enter into the Kingdom
of GOD. For it is founded in the very Nature of Things, that unless we have
Dispositions wrought in us suitable and answerable to the Objects that are to
entertain us, we can take no Manner of Complacency or Satisfaction in them. For
Instance; What Delight can the most harmonious Music afford a deaf* or what
Pleasure the most excellent Picture give a blind Man? Can a tasteless Palate
relish the richest Dainties, or a filthy Swine be pleased with the finest
Garden of Flowers? No: And what Reason can be assigned for it? An Answer is
ready; Because they have neither of them any Tempers of Mind correspondent or
agreeable to what they are to be diverted with. And thus it is with the Soul
hereafter. For Death makes no more Alteration in the Soul, than as it inlarges
its Faculties, and makes it capable of receiving deeper Impressions either of
Pleasure or Pain. If it delighted to converse with GOD here, it will be
transported with the Sight of his glorious Majesty hereafter. If it was pleased
with the Communion of Saints on Earth, it will be infinitely more so with the
Communion and Society of holy Angels, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect
in Heaven. But if the Opposite of all this be true, we may assure ourselves, it
could not be happy, was GOD himself to admit it (which he never will do) into
the Regions of the Blessed. But it is Time for me to ^asten to the

Fourth and last Argument, I shall offer to prove, that we must be new
Creatures e'e^ we can be in CHRIST, viz. because CHRIST's Redemption will not
be complete without it.

If we reflect indeed on the first and chief End of our Blessed LORD's Coming,
we shall find it was to save us from our Sins, to be a Propitiation for our
Sins, to give his Life a Ransom for many. But then, if the Benefits of our Dear
Redeemer's Death were to extend no further (...) barely to procure Forgiveness
of our Sins, we should have as little Reason to rejoice in it, as a poor
condemned Criminal that is ready to perish by some fatal Disease, would have in
receiving a Pardon from his Judge. For Christians would do well to consider,
that there is not only a legal Hindrance to our Happiness, as we are Breakers
of GOD's Law, but also a moral Impurity in our Natures, which renders us
incapable of enjoying Heaven, (as has been already proved) 'till some mighty
Change has been wrought in us. It is necessary therefore, in order to make
Christ's Redemption complete, that we should have a Grant of GOD's Holy Spirit
to change our Natures, and so prepare us for the Enjoyment of that Happiness
our Savior has purchased by his precious Blood.

Accordingly the holy Scriptures inform us, that whom CHRIST justifies, i. e.
(as we said before) whose Sins he forgives, those he also sanctifies, i. e.
purifies and cleanses, and totally changes their corrupted Natures. Nay, in
one Place of Scripture, Sanctification is put before Justification, on purpose,
as it were, to convince us that there is no Salvation to be had without it. But
ye are washed, says the Apostle, but ye are sanctified; and then follows, but
ye are justified. As the Scripture also speaks in another Place, CHRIST is to
us Justification, Sanctification and then Redemption. Let this therefore be
admitted as another indisputable Argument why we must be new Creatures, ever we
can be in CHRIST, because without it CHRIST is dead in vain.

Proceed we now to the next general Thing proposed, viz. To draw some
Inferences from what has been delivered.

And First then, if he that is in CHRIST must be a new Creature, this may serve
as a Reproof for some, who rest in a bare Performance of outward Duties,
without perceiving any real inward Change of Heart.

We may observe a great many Persons to be very punctual in the regular Returns
of public and private Prayer, as likewise of receiving the Holy Communion, and
perhaps, now and then too in keeping a Fast. And so far we grant they do well.
But then here is the Misfortune, they rest barely in the Use of the Means, and
think all is over, when they have just complied with these sacred Institutions;
Whereas, were they rightly informed, they would consider, that all the
instituted Means of Grace, as Prayer, Fasting, Hearing and Reading the Word of
GOD, Receiving the Blessed Sacrament, and such like, are no further serviceable
to us, than as they are found to make us inwardly better, and to carry on the
spiritual Life in the Soul.

It is true, they are Means, and Essential ones too; but then they are only
Means, they are Part, but not the Whole of Religion: For if so, Who more
religious than the Pharisee? who fasted twice in the Week, and gave Tithes of
all that he possessed, and yet was not justified, as our Savior himself
informs us, in the Sight of GOD.

You perhaps, like the Pharisee, may fast often, and make long Prayers; you
may, with Herod, hear good Sermons gladly; or as Judas himself, in all
Probability, did, receive the Blessed Sacrament. But yet, if you continue vain
and trifling, immoral or worldly-minded in your Conversations, and differ from
the rest of your Neighbors barely in going to Church, or in complying with
some outward Performances, are you better than they? No, in no wise; You are by
far much worse, because those that wholly neglect the Means, are answerable
only for omitting the Use of GOD's Ordinances; whereas if you use them, and at
the same Time abuse them, by not letting them produce their intended Effect,
you thereby encourage others to think there is nothing in them, and therefore
must expect to receive the greater Damnation.

But, Secondly, If he that is in CHRIST must be a new Creature, then this may
check the groundless Presumption of another Class of Professors, who rest in
the Attainment of some Moral Virtues, and falsely imagine they are good
Christians, if they are just in their Dealings, are temperate in their Diet,
and do Hurt or Violence to no Man.

But if this was all that is requisite to make us Christians, Why might not the
Heathens of old be good Christians, who were remarkable for these Virtues? Or
St. Paul, before his Conversion, who tells us, That then he lived in all good
Conscience, and was, touching the Law. blameless; and yet, after his
Conversion, we find he renounces all Dependence on Works of this Nature, and
only desires to be found in CHRIST, and to know the Power of his Resurrection,
i. e. to have an experimental Proof of receiving the HOLY GHOST, purchased for
him by the Death, and ensured and applied to him by the Resurrection of JESUS
CHRIST.

The Sum of the Matter is this: Christianity includes Morality, as Grace does
Reason; but if we are only mere Moralists, if we are not inwardly wrought upon,
and changed by the powerful Operations of the Holy Spirit, and our Moral
Actions, proceed from a Principle of a new Nature, however we may call
ourselves Christians, it is to be feared we shall be found naked at the Great
Day, and in the Number of those, who vainly depend on their own Righteousness,
and not on the Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, imputed to and inherent in them,
as necessary to their eternal Salvation.

Nor, Thirdly, will this Doctrine less condemn those, who rest in a partial
Amendment of themselves, without going on to Perfection, and experiencing a
thorough, real, inward Change of Heart.

A little Acquaintance with the World will furnish us with Instances of no
small Number of Persons, who, perhaps, were before openly profane; but seeing
the ill Consequences of their Vice, and the many worldly Inconveniences it has
reduced them to, on a sudden, as it were, grow civilized: and thereupon flatter
themselves that they are very religious, because they differ a little from
their former Selves, and are not so scandalously wicked as once they were;
Whereas at the same Time they shall have some secret darling Sin or other, some
beloved Dalilah or Her^dias, which they will not part with; some hidden Lust,
which they will not mortify; some vicious Habit, which they will not take pains
to root out. But would thou know, O vain Man! whoever thou art, what the Lord
thy God requires of thee, thou must be informed, that nothing short of a
thorough, ^ound Conversion will avail for the Salvation of thy Soul. It is not
enough to turn from Profaneness to Civility, but thou must turn from Civility
to Godliness. Not only some, but all Things must become new in thy Soul. It
will profit thee but little to do many Things, if yet some one Thing thou
lackest In short, thou must not be only only an almost, but altogether a new
Creature, or in vain thou hopest for a saving Interest in CHRIST.

Fourthly and Lastly. If he that is in CHRIST must be a new Creature, then this
may be prescribed as an infallible Rule for every Person of whatever
Denomination, Age, Degree or Quality, to judge himself by; this being the only
solid Foundation, whereon we can build a well grounded Assurance of Pardon,
Peace and Happiness.

We may indeed depend on the broken Reed of an external Profession; we may
think we have done enough, if we lead such sober, honest, moral Lives, as many
Heathens did. We may imagine we are in a safe Condition, if we attend on the
public Offices of Religion, and are constant in the Duties of our Closets. But
unless all these tend to reform our Lives, and change our Hearts, and are only
used as so many Channels of Divine Grace; as I told you before, so I tell you
again, Christianity will profit us nothing.

Let each of us therefore seriously put this Question to our Hearts: Have we
received the HOLY GHOST since we believed? Are we new Creatures in CHRIST, or
no? At least, if we are not so yet, is it our daily Endeavor to become such?
Do we make a constant and conscientious Use of all the Means of Grace required
thereto? Do we fast, watch and pray? Do we not only lazily seek, but
laboriously strive to enter in at the strait Gate? In short, Do we renounce
ourselves, take up our Crosses and follow CHRIST? If so, we are in that narrow
Way which leads to Life: We are, at least shall in Time, become new Creatures
in CHRIST. The good Seed is sown in our Hearts, and will, if duly watered and
nourished by a regular persevering Use of all the Means of Grace, grow up to
eternal Life. But on the contrary if we have only heard, and know not
experimentally, whether there be any HOLY GHOST; if we are Strangers to
Fasting, Watching and Prayer, and all the other spiritual Exercises of
Devotion; if we are content to go in the broad Way, merely because we see most
other People do so, without once reflecting whether it be the right one or not;
in short, if we are Strangers, nay Enemies to the Cross of CHRIST, by leading
Lives of Softness, Worldly-mindedness, and sensual Pleasure, and thereby make
others think, that Christianity is but an empty Name, a bare formal Profession;
if this be the Case, I say, then CHRIST is as yet dead in vain as to us; we are
yet under the Guilt of our Sins; we are unacquainted with that true and
thorough Conversion, which alone can entitle us to the Salvation of our Souls.

But Beloved, I am persuaded better Things of you, and Things that accompany
Salvation, though we thus speak; and humbly hope, that you are fully and heartily
convinced, that nothing but the Wedding Garment of a new Nature, can gain
Admission for you at the Marriage Feast of the Supper of the Lamb; that you are
sincerely persuaded, that he that has not the Spirit of CHRIST is none of his;
and that, unless the SPIRIT, which raised JESUS from the Dead, dwell in you
here, neither will your mortal Bodies be quickened by the same SPIRIT to dwell
with him hereafter.

Let me therefore (as was proposed in the last Place) earnestly exhort you, in
the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to act suitable to those Convictions, and to
live as Christians, that are commanded in Holy Writ, to put off their former
Conversation concerning the Old Man, and to put on the New Man, which is
created after GOD in Righteousness and true Holiness.

It must be owned indeed, that this is a great and difficult Work; but blessed
be GOD, it is not impossible. Many Thousands of happy Souls have been assisted
by a Divine Power to ^^ing it about, and why should We despair of Success? Is
GOD'S Hand shortened, that it cannot save? Was He the GOD of our Fathers, is He
not the GOD of their Children also? Yes, doubtless, of their Children also. It
is a Task likewise that will put us to some Pain; it will oblige us to part
with some Lust, to break with some Friend, to mortify some beloved Passion,
which may be exceeding dear to us, and perhaps as hard to leave, as to cut off
a right Hand, or pluck out a right Eye. But what of all this? Will not the
being made a real living Member of CHRIST, a Child of GOD, and an Inheritor of
the Kingdom of Heaven, abundantly make Amends for all this Trouble? Undoubtedly
it will. Lastly, Setting about and carrying on this great and necessary Work,
perhaps may, nay, assuredly will expose us to the Ridicule of the unthinking
part of Mankind, who will wonder, that we run not into the same Excess of Riot
with themselves; and because we may deny our sinful Appetites, and are not
conformed to this World, being commanded in Scripture to do the one, and to
have our Conversation in Heaven in Opposition to the other, they may count our
Lives Folly, and our End to be without Honor. But will not the being numbered
among the Saints, and shining as the Stars for ever and ever, be a more than
sufficient Recompense for all the Ridicule, Calumny, or Reproach, we can
possibly meet with here?

Indeed, was there no other Reward attended a thorough Conversion, but that
Peace of GOD, which is the unavoidable Consequence of it, and which, even in
this Life, passes all Understanding, we should have great Reason to rejoice.
But when we consider this is the least of those Mercies GOD has prepared for
those that are in CHRIST new Creatures; that this is but the Beginning of an
eternal Succession of Pleasures; that the Day of our Deaths, which the
unconverted, unrenewed Sinner must so much dread, will be, as it were, but the
first Day of our new Births, and open to us an everlasting Scene of Happiness
and Comfort; in short, if we remember, that they who are regenerate and born
again, have a real Title to all the glorious Promises of the Gospel, and are
infallibly certain of being as happy, both here and hereafter, as an All-wise,
All-gracious, All-powerful GOD can make them; methinks, every one that has but
the least Concern for the Salvation of his precious, his immortal Soul, having
such Promises, such an Hope, such an Eternity of Happiness set before him,
should never cease watching, praying, and striving, till he find a real,
inward, saving Change wrought in his Heart, and thereby knows of a Truth,
that he dwells in CHRIST, and CHRIST in him; that he is a new Cre^ture in
CHRIST; that he is therefore a Child of GOD; that he is already an Inheritor,
and will ever long, if he endure to the End, be an actual Possessor of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Which GOD of his infinite Mercy grant, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD.

To whom, etc.

SERMON II.
Of Justification by CHRIST.
1 COR. vi. 11. But ye are justified.
The whole Verse runs thus: -- And such were some of you, but ye are washed,
but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by the Spirit of our God.

IT has been objected by some, who are so unhappy as to dissent from, nay, I
may add by others also, who actually are Friends to the present Ecclesiastical
Establishment, That the Ministers of the Church of England preach themselves,
and not CHRIST JESUS our Lord, that they entertain their People with Lectures
of mere Morality, without declaring to them the glad Tidings of Salvation by
JESUS CHRIST. How well grounded such an Objection may be, is not my Business to
enquire: All I shall say at present to the Point is this; namely, that whenever
such a grand Objection is urged against the whole Body of the Clergy in
general, every honest Minister of JESUS CHRIST should do his utmost to cut off
all manner of Occasion from those that desire an Occasion to take Offense at
us; that so by hearing us continually sounding forth the Word of Truth, and
declaring with all Boldness and assurance of Faith, that there is no other Name
given under Heaven, whereby they can be saved, but that of JESUS CHRIST; they
may be ashamed of this their same confident Boasting against us.

It was an Eye to this Objection, joined with the Agreeableness and
Delightfulness of the Subject (for who can but delight to talk of that which
the blessed Angels desire to look into?) that induced me to discourse a little
on that great and fundamental Article of our Faith; namely, our being freely
justified from all our Sins by the precious Blood of JESUS CHRIST. But ye are
washed, says the Apostle, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the
Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and by the Spirit of our GOD.

The Words beginning with the Particle But, have plainly a Reference to
something that went before; it may not therefore be improper, before I descend
to Particulars, to consider the Words, as they stand related to the Context.
The Apostle, in the Verses immediately foregoing, had been reckoning up many
notorious Sins, such as Drunkenness, Adultery, Fornication, and such like, the
Commission of which, without a true and hearty Repentance, He tells them
plainly, would certainly shut them out of the Kingdom of GOD. But then, le^t
the sincere Corinthian Converts, who we find were once infamous for most or all
of these Vices, should either on the one hand grow spiritually proud by seeing
themselves differ from their unconverted Brethren, and therefore should be
tempted to set them at naught, and to say with the self-conceited Hypocrite in
the Prophet, Come not nigh me, for I am holier than thou: Or, on the other
hand, by looking back on the Multitude of their past offenses, should be apt to
think their Sins were too many and grievous to be forgiven: He first, in order
to keep them humble, reminds them of their sad Estate before Conversion,
telling them in plain Terms, Such (or as it might better be read, these things)
were some of you; that is, Not only one, but all that sad Catalogue of Vices I
have been before drawing up, some of you were once guilty of; but then, at the
same time, to preserve them from Despair, behold he brings them glad Tidings of
great Joy: But ye are washed, says he, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and by the Spirit of our GOD.

The former Part of which Text, namely our being Sanctified, I did, in some
measure, treat of, when I discoursed on the Nature and Necessity of the New
Birth: I come now, as was before proposed, to enlarge on the latter Part of it,
namely, of our being freely Justified from all our Sins, by the precious Blood
of JESUS CHRIST: But ye are Justified in the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

From which Words I shall endeavor to consider these Three Things: I. First,
What is meant by the Word Justified. II. Secondly, I shall endeavor to prove,
that all Mankind in general, and every individual Person in particular, stands
in need of being justified. III. Thirdly and Lastly, That there is no
possibility of obtaining this Justification, which we so much want, but by the
precious Blood of JESUS CHRIST. IV. First then, I am to consider what is meant
by the Word Justified.


But ye are justified, says the Apostle; which is all the same as though he had
said; You have your Sins forgiven, and are looked upon by GOD, as though you
never had offended him at all: For that is the Meaning of the Word justified,
in almost all the other Passages of Holy Scripture where this Word is
mentioned. Thus when this same Apostle writes to the Romans, he tells them,
that whom GOD calls, those he also justifies; that is, forgives them their
Sins: And again, speaking of Abraham's Faith, he tells them, that Abraham
believed on HIM that justifies the Ungodly: That is, who forgives the ungodly
Man his Sins: Which Expression the Apostle himself explains by a Quotation out
of the Psalms; Blessed is the Man, says he, to whom the LORD i^puteth no Sin.
From all which Proofs, and many others that might be urged it is evident, that
being justified, or having our Sins forgiven, are the same as to Signification:
So that what the Apostle here affirms of the Corinthian Converts, namely, that
they were justified, amount to what all of us profess to hold when we just now
repeated our Creed, and each of us declared in his own Person, I believe the
Forgiveness of Sins. Which leads me directly to the

II. Second Thing proposed, namely, To endeavor to prove that all Mankind in
general, and every individual Person in particular, stands in need of being
thus justified, or having his Sins forgiven.

And indeed the Apostle supposes this in the Words of the Text: But ye are
justified, says he, thereby implying, that the Corinthians (and consequently
all Mankind, there being no Difference, as will be shown hereafter) stood in
need of being thus justified.

But, not to rest in bare Suppositions, in my farther Enlargement on this
Second Head, I shall endeavor to prove that we all stand in need of being
justified, on two Accounts: First, as we stand chargeable with Original --
Secondly, as we have been guilty of Actual Sin.

And first, I affirm that we all stand in need of being justified, as we are
chargeable with Original Sin: Which, though a Proposition that might be denied
by a self-justifying Infidel, who will not come to CHRIST that he may have
Life, and stoop to those Terms GOD has graciously settled for his Salvation;
yet can never be denied by any one who believes that St. Paul's Epistles were
written by Divine Inspiration, where we are told, that in Adam all die; that
is, Adam's Sin was imputed to all: And lest we should forget to make a
particular Application, it is farther added in another Place, that there is
none that does good (that is, (...) Nature) no, not one: That we are all gone
out of the Way; namely, of Original Righteousness; and are by Nature the
Children of Wrath. And even David, who was the Man after GOD's own Heart, and
if any one could, might surely plead an Exemption from this universal
Corruption, yet he confesses, that he was shapen in Wickedness, and that in Sin
did his Mother conceive him. And, to mention but one more Text, as immediately
applicable to the present Purpose, St. Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans says,
that Death came upon all Men, for the Disobedience of one Man, namely, of Adam,
even upon those says he, (that is, little Children) who had not sinned after
the Similitude of Adam's Transgression; or, had not been guilty of actual Sin,
and therefore could not be punished with temporal, Death (which came into the
World, as this same Apostle elsewhere informs us, only by Sin) had not the
Disobedience of our first Parents been imputed to them. So that what has been
said on this Point, seems to be excellently summed up in that Article of our
Church, where she declares, That Original Sin stands not in the following of
Adam, but it is the Fault and Corruption of the Nature of every Man, that
naturally is engendered of the Offspring of Adam; whereby Man is very far gone
from Original Righteousness, and is of his own Nature inclined to Evil, so that
the Flesh lusts always contrary to the Spirit; and therefore in every Person
born into this World it deserves GOD's Wrath and Damnation.

I have been the more particular in treating of this Point, because it is the
very Foundation of the Christian Religion: For I am verily persuaded, that it
is nothing but a Want of being well grounded in the Doctrine of Original Sin,
and of the helpless, nay, I may say damnable, Condition each of us comes into
the World in, that makes so many Infidels oppose, and so many that call
themselves Christians, so very Lukewarm in their Love and Affections to JESUS
CHRIST. It is this, and I could almost say this only, that makes Infidelity
abound amongst us so much as it does: For alas! we are mistaken, if we imagine
that Men now commence or continue Infidels, and set up corrupted Reason, in
Opposition to Revelation, merely for want of Evidence, (for I believe it might
easily be proved, that a modern Unbeliever is the most credulous Creature
living;) No, it is only for want of an humble Mind, of a Sense of their
Original Depravity, and an Unwillingness to own themselves so depraved, that
makes them so obstinately shut their Eyes against the Light of the Glorious
Gospel of CHRIST. Whereas, on the contrary, were they but once pricked to the
Heart with a due and lively Sense of their natural Corruption and Liableness to
Condemnation, we should have them no more scoffing at Divine Revelation, and
looking on it as an idle Tale; but they would cry out with convicted Paul, --
LORD, what would thou have me to do? Or, with the trembling Jailor, on a like
Occasion, Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be saved? It was an Error in
this Fundamental Point, that made so many resist the Evidence the Son of GOD
himself gave of his Divine Mission, when he tabernacled amongst us. Every Word
he spoke, every Action he did, every Miracle he wrought, proved that he came
from GOD. And why then did so many harden their Hearts, and would not believe
his Report? Why, He himself informs us, when he tells us, They will not come to
me that they may have Life: They will obstinately stand out against those Means
GOD had appointed for their Salvation: And St. Paul tells us, that if the
Gospel he hid, it is hid to them that are lost: In whom the God of this World
has blinded the Minds of them which believe not, le^t the Light of the
Glorious Gospel of CHRIST, who is the Image of GOD, should shine upon them. --
2 Cor: iv. 3, 4.

But to return from this Digression, which I could not very well avoid making;
if it be asked, How it suits with the Divine Goodness, to impute the Guilt of
one Man's Sin, to an innocent Posterity? I should think it sufficient, to make
use of the Apostle's Words: Nay, but O Man; Who art thou that replied against
GOD? Shall the Thing formed say to him that formed it' Why have thou made me
thus? But, to come to a more direct Reply, -- Persons would do well to
consider, that in this first Covenant GOD made with Man, Adam acted as a
Public Person, as the common Representative of all Mankind, and consequently
we must stand or fall with him. Had he continued in his Obedience, and not
eaten the forbidden Fruit, the Benefits of that Obedience would doubtless have
been imputed to us: But since he did not persist in it, but broke the Covenant
GOD made with him, and us in him; who dares charge the righteous Judge of all
the Earth with Injustice, for imputing that to us also? But I shall have an
Occasion by and by, to vindicate the Divine Proceeding in this Point more
particularly, and therefore I choose to wave all farther Consideration of it in
this Place, and proceed to the other Thing proposed under this Second general
Head, namely,

II. To endeavor to prove, That we all stand in need of being justified, not
only as we are chargeable with Original but as we stand convicted of Actual Sin.

That GOD, as he made Man, has a Right also to demand his Obedience, I suppose,
is a Truth no one will deny: That He has also given us both a natural and a
written Law, whereby we are to be judged, cannot be questioned by any one who
believes St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans to be of Divine Authority: For in
this we are told of a Law written in the Heart, and a Law given by Moses; and
that each of us has broken these Laws, is too evident from our own sad and
frequent Experience. Accordingly the Holy Scriptures inform us that there is no
Man which lives and sins not; that in many things we offend all; that if we
say we have no Sin we deceive ourselves, and such like. And if we are thus
found Offenders against GOD, it follows that we stand in need of Forgiveness
for thus Offending Him; unless we suppose GOD should enact Laws, and at the
same Time not care whether they are obeyed or no; which is as absurd as to
suppose that a Prince should establish Laws for the proper Government of his
Country, and yet let every Violater of them come off with Impunity, But GOD has
not dealt so foolishly with his Creatures: No, as he gave us a Law, he demands
our Obedience to that Law, and has obliged us universally to obey it, under no
less a Penalty than incurring his Curse and eternal Death for every Breach of
it. For thus speaks the Scripture: Cursed is he that continues not in all
Things that are written in this Book to do them; as the Scripture also speaks
in another Place, The Soul that sins, it shall die. Now it has already been
proved that we have all of us sinned, and therefore, unless some Means can be
found out to satisfy GOD'S Justice, we must perish eternally.

Let us here then stand a while, and see in what a deplorable Condition each of
us comes into the World, and still continues, till we are put into a State of
Grace. For surely nothing can well be supposed more deplorable than to be born
under the Curse of GOD; to be charged with Original Guilt; and not only so, but
to be convicted as actual Breakers of GOD'S Law, the least Breach of which
justly deserves Eternal Damnation. Surely this can be but a melancholy Prospect
to view ourselves in, and must put us upon contriving some Means whereby we may
satisfy and appease our offended Judge. But what must those Means be? Shall we
Repent? Alas! there is not one Word mentioned about Repentance in the first
Covenant: The Day that thou eatest thereof, says GOD, thou shall surely die. So
that if GOD be true, unless there be some Way found out to satisfy his Justice,
we must perish, and there is no room left for us to expect a Change of Mind in
GOD, though we should seek it with Tears. Well then, if Repentance will not do,
shall we plead the Law of Works? Alas! By the Law shall no Man living be
justified: For by the Law comes the Knowledge of Sin. It is that which convicts
and condemns, and therefore can by no means acquit, much less justify us.
Wherewith then shall we come before the LORD, and bow down before the Most High
GOD; in order to procure the Forgiveness of our Sins? Shall we come before him
with Calves of a Year old, with Thousands of Rams, or ten Thousands of Rivers
of Oil? Alas! GOD has showed thee, O Man, that this will not avail. For he has
declared, I will take no Bullock out of thy House, nor He-Goat out of thy Fold:
For all the Beasts of the Forest are mine, and so are the Cattle upon a
Thousand Hills. Will not the LORD then be pleased to accept our Firstborn for
our Transgression, the Fruit of our Bodies for the Sin of our Souls? Even this
will not purchase our Pardon: For He has declared that the Children shall not
bear the Iniquities of their Parents. Besides, they are Sinners, and therefore,
being under the same Condemnation, equally stand in need of Forgiveness with
ourselves. They are impure, and will the LORD accept the Blind and Lame for
Sacrifice? O wretched Men that we are! Who shall deliver us from this. Body of
Death? Why, I thank GOD, our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Which naturally leads me to the
Third general Thing proposed, which was to endeavor to prove,

III. That there is no Possibility of our obtaining this Justification, which
we so much want, but by the precious Blood of our Lord JESUS CHRIST: But ye are
justified in the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

But this having been in some Measure, proved by what has been said under the
foregoing Head, wherein I have shown that neither our Repentance, Works or
Sacrifices could possibly take away, or make Atonement for our Sins; nothing
remains for me to do under this Head, but to show that the Death of JESUS
CHRIST has done it for us.

And here I shall still have Recourse to the Law and to the Testimony. For
after all the most subtle Disputations on either side, nothing but the lively
Oracles of GOD can give us any Satisfaction in this momentous Point: It being
such an inconceivable Mystery, that the Eternal, only begotten Son of GOD
should die for sinful Man, that we durst not have presumed so much as to have
thought of it, had no^ GOD revealed it in his Holy Word. It is true, Reason may
show us the Wound, but Revelation only can lead us to the Means of our C^re.
And though the Method God has been pleased to take to put us in a Way of being
happy, may be to the Infidel a Stumblick-block, and to the wise Opiniator and
Disputer of this World Foolishness; yet Wisdom, that is, the Dispensation of
our Redemption, will be justified, or approved of, and submitted to by all her
truly wise and holy Children, by every sincere and honest Christian.

But to come more directly to the Point before us. Two Things, as was before
observed, we wanted, in order to make our Peace with GOD.

1. To be freed from the Guilt of Original Sin. And, 2. From that Punishment we
had most justly deserved for our actual Breaches of GOD'S Law.
And both these ( Thanks be to GOD for this unspeakable Gift) are abundantly
secured to us by the Death and Passion of JESUS CHRIST. For what says the
Scripture?

1. As to the first, or our being freed from the Guilt of Original Sin. -- It
informs us, that as in Adam all die, even so in CHRIST shall all be made alive.
And again, As by the Disobedience of one Man, or by one Trasgression, namely,
that of Adam, many were made Sinners, so by the Obedience of one, JESUS CHRIST,
many were made righteous. And again, As by the Disobedience of one M^n,
Judgment came upon all Men unto Damnation; that is, all Men were condemned, on
having Adam's Sin imputed to them: So by the Obedience of one, that is, JESUS
CHRIST, the Free Gift of Pardon and Peace came upon all Men unto Justification
of Life. Which by the Way clears up (as I promised to do before) that seeming
Disagreement between GOD's Attributes, in imputing Adam's Sin (...) us,
(namely, his Justice and Mercy) and wholly takes off that Imputation of
Injustice, which wicked and ungodly Men would blasphemously cast upon the
Righteous Judge of all the Earth. Had GOD indeed imputed Adam's Sin to his
innocent Posterity, and left them to perish in it: Had he looked upon and
punished them all as Sinners, without providing them a Savior, we might
perhaps have had some Pretense to complain of his Severity, though we could not
even then but acknowledge his Justice in the Punishment of Sin. But since He
has not dealt with us after our Deserts, nor rewarded us according to our
Iniquity; since the same Revelation acquaints us, that As in Adam all die, even
so in CHRIST shall all be made alive: Since the same GOD that informs us that
Death came even upon those who had not sinned after the Similitude of Adam's
Transgression, declares likewise, that He that believes and is baptized shall
be saved, or put into a State of Salvation: I say since these Things are so,
What Reason have such Worms as we to quarrel with the most High GOD? Doubtless
no more than a condemned Criminal has to find fault with his Judge for
condemning him for breaking the Law, only that he might give him the Pleasure
of a Reprieve. No; as for GOD, his Ways are perfect, and his Dealings with his
Creatures are holy, just and good; and as in all his Dispensations, so more
especially in our Recovery from our fallen Estate by the Death of JESUS, we may
justly say, Mercy and Truth have met together, Righteousness and Peace have
kissed each other. But,

2. Pardon for our actual Transgression of GOD'S Law was another Thing which we
wanted to have secured to us, before we could be at Peace with GOD. And this
the Holy Scriptures inform us is abundantly done by the Death of JESUS CHRIST.
The Evangelical Prophet foretells that the promised Redeemer should be wounded
for our Transgressions, and bruised for our Iniquities; that the Chastisement
of our Peace should be upon him; and that by his Stripes we should be healed;
Isaiah liii. 6. The Angel at His Birth says, that he should save his People
from their Sins: And St. Paul declares, that this is a faithful saying, and
worthy of all Acceptance, that JESUS CHRIST came into the World to save
Sinners: And here in the Words of the Text, Such (or, as I observed before,
these Things) were some of you; but ye are washed, etc. -- And St. Peter,
alluding to the aforementioned Passage of Isaiah, testifies of CHRIST, that His
own Self bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, that we being dead to Sin,
should live unto Righteousness; by whose Stripes, says he, ye are healed, 1
Pet. ii. 24. And in another Place the same Apostle says, Neither is there
Salvation in any other; for there is none other Name under Heaven given among
Men, whereby we must be saved, but the Name of JESUS CHRIST, Acts iv. 12. How
GOD will be pleased to deal with the Gentiles who yet sit in Darkness and in
the shadow of Death, and on whom the Sun of Righteousness never yet arose, is
not for us to enquire. What have we to do to judge those that are without? To
God's Mercy let us recommend them, and wait for a Solution of this Point till
the Great Day of Accounts, when all GOD's Dispensations, both of Providence and
Grace, will be fully cleared up, by Methods to us, it may be, at present
unknown, because unrevealed. However, this we know, that the Judge of all the
Earth will, most assuredly, do right.

But it is Time for me to draw toward a Conclusion:

I have now then, Brethren, by the Blessing of GOD, discoursed on the Words of
the Text in the Method I proposed; and have in as plain a Manner as I could,
shown you what is meant by the Word Justified, that it signifies our having our
Sins forgiven: And have also in some measure proved that we all stand in need
of being thus justified, as we are chargeable with Original, and have been
guilty of Actual Sin: And lastly, that nothing but the Precious Blood of JESUS
CHRIST has, or can procure this inestimable Privilege for us.

Many useful Inferences might be drawn from what has been delivered; but as I
have detained you, I fear, too long already, permit me only to make a
Reflection or two on what has been said, and I have done.

If then we are freely justified by the Death of JESUS CHRIST, let us here
pause a while; and as before we reflected on the Misery, let us now turn aside
and admire the Happiness of Man. But alas! how am I lost to think that GOD the
Father, when we were in a State of Enmity by Original, and of Rebellion by our
Actual Sins, should notwithstanding yearn in his Bowels toward us his fallen,
his apostate Creatures: And because nothing but an infinite Ransom could
satisfy an infinitely offended Justice, should send his only and dear Son JESUS
CHRIST (who is GOD, blessed for ever, and who had lain in his Bosom from all
Eternity) to die a cursed, painful, ignominious Death, for us and for our
Salvation! O who can avoid crying out, on the Consideration of this great
Mystery of Godliness, -- Oh the Depth of the Riches of GOD's Love to us his
wretched, miserable, undone Creatures! How unsearchable is his Mercy, and his
Loving Kindness past finding out! Now know we of a Truth, O GOD, that thou have
love us, since thou have not withheld thy Son, thy only Son JESUS CHRIST,
from thus dying for us.

But as we admire the FATHER sending, let us likewise humbly and thankfully
adore the SON coming, when sent to die for Man. But alas! what Thoughts can
conceive, what Words express the infinite Greatness of that unparalleled Love,
which drew the Son of GOD down from the Mansions of his Father's Glory to die
for sinful Man! The Jews, when he only shed a Tear (...) poor Lazarus's
Funeral, said, Behold how he loved him: How much more justly then may we cry
out, Behold how he loved us, when he did not spare to shed not only a Tear, but
his his own precious Blood for us.

And can any poor returning Sinner, after this, despair of Mercy? What, can
they see their Savior hanging on a Tree, with Arms stretched out to embrace
them, and yet, upon their truly believing on him, doubt of finding Acceptance
with him? No, away with all such dishonorable, such desponding Thoughts. --
Look on his Hands, bored with Pins of Iron; look on his Side, pierced with a
cruel Spear, on Purpose to unloose the Sluices of his Blood, and open a
Fountain for Sin, and for Uncleanness. -- And then despair of Mercy if you can!
No, do but believe on him with your whole Hearts; Do not crucify Him afresh,
and put him again to open Shame, by leading wicked, lukewarm, ungodly Lives: In
short, do but labor to attain that Holiness, without which no Man shall see
the LORD; and then, though your Sins be as Scarlet, yet shall they be as Wool;
though they be as Crimson, yet shall they be whiter than Snow.

Which GOD of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

SERMON III.
On EARLY PIETY.
ECCL. xii. I. Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth.
THE Amiableness of Religion in itself, the innumerable Advantages that flow
from it to Society in general, as well as each sincere Professor of it in
particular, cannot but recommend it to the Choice of every considerate Person,
and make even wicked Men, as they wish to die the Death, so, in their more
sober Intervals, envy the Life of the Righteous. And indeed we must do the
World so much Justice as to confess, that the Question about Religion does not
usually arise from a Dispute whether it be necessary or not (for most Men see
the Necessity of doing something for the Salvation of their Souls) but when is
the best Time to set about it: Persons are convinced by universal Experience,
that the first Essays or Endeavors toward the Attainment of Religion are
attended with some Difficulty and Trouble, and therefore they would willingly
defer the beginning such a seemingly ungrateful Work as long as they can. The
wanton Prodigal, that is spending his Substance in riotous Living, cries, A
little more pleasure, a little more Sensuality, and then I Will be sober in
Earnest. The covetous Worldling, that employs all his Care and Pains in heaping
up Riches, though he cannot tell who shall gather them, does not flatter himself
that this will do always; but hopes, with the rich Fool in the Gospel, to lay
up Goods for a few more Years on Earth, and then he will begin to lay up
Treasures in Heaven. And, in short, thus it is that most People are convinced
of the Necessity of being religious some Time or another; but then, like Felix,
they put off the acting suitably to their Convictions, till (what they imagine)
a more convenient Season: Whereas, would we be so humble as to be guided by the
Experience and Counsel of the wisest of Men, we should learn that Youth is the
fittest Season for Religion; Remember now thy Creator, says Solomon, in the
Days of thy Youth. By which Word Remember, we are not to understand a bare
speculative Remembrance, or calling to Mind, (for that, like a dead Faith, will
profit us nothing) but such a Remembrance as will constrain us to Obedience,
and oblige us out of Gratitude to perform all that the LORD our GOD shall
require of us. For as forgetting GOD, in Scripture Language, implies a total
Neglect of our Duty, in like Manner remembering him signifies a perfect
Performance of it: So that, when Solomon says, Remember thy Creator in the Days
of thy Youth, it is the same as if he had said, keep GOD's Commandments; or in
other Words, Be religious in the Days of thy Youth; thereby implying that Youth
is the most proper Season for it.

I shall in the following Discourse, First, endeavor to make good the Wise
Man's Proposition implied in the Words of the Text, and to show that Youth is
the fittest Season for Religion. Secondly, By way of Motive, I shall consider
the many unspeakable Advantages that will arise from remembering our Creator in
the Days of our Youth. Thirdly and Lastly, I shall conclude with a Word or two
of Exhortation to the younger Part of this Audience.
And First then, I am to make good the Wise Man's Proposition implied in the
Words of the Text, and to show that Youth is the fittest Season for Religion:
Remember now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth. -- But in Order to proceed
more clearly in this Argument, it may not be improper, first, to explain what I
mean by the Word Religion. By this Term, then, I would not be understood to
mean a bare outward Profession or naming the Name of CHRIST; for we are told,
that many that have even prophesied in his Name, and in his Name cast out
Devils, shall notwithstanding be rejected by him at the last Day: Nor would I
understand by it barely being admitted into CHRIST'S Church by Baptism; for
then Simon Magus, Arius, and the Heresiarchs of old might pass for religious
Persons, for these were baptized; nor yet the receiving the other Seal of the
Covenant, for then Judas himself might be canonized for a Saint; nor indeed do
I mean any or all of these together, considered by themselves; but a thorough,
real, inward Change of Nature, wrought in us by the powerful Operations of the
Holy Ghost, conveyed to and nourished in our Hearts, by a constant Use of all
the Means of Grace, evidenced by a good Life, and bringing forth the Fruits of
the Spirit.

The attaining this real, inward Religion, is a Work of so great Difficulty,
that Nicodemus, a learned Doctor and Teacher in Israel, thought it altogether
impossible, and therefore ignorantly asked our Blessed LORD, how this Thing
could be? And truly to rectify a disordered Nature, to mortify our corrupt
Passions, to turn Darkness to Light, to put off the old Man, and put on the
new, and thereby to have the Image of GOD reinstamp'd upon the Soul, or in one
Word, to ^e born again, however light some may make of it, must, after all our
Endeavors, be owned by Man impossible. It Is true, in^^ed, CHRIST'S Yoke is
said to be an easy or a gracious Yoke, and his Burden light; but then it is to
those only who have been accustomed to bear and draw in it. For as the wise Son
of Sirach observes, At first Wisdom walks with her Children in crooked Ways,
and brings them into Fear; and torments them with her Discipline, and does not
turn to comfort and rejoice them, till she has tried them and proved their
Judgment. -- No; we must not flatter ourselves, that our depraved Natures can
be renewed, unless we submit to a great many Difficulties. The spiritual Birth
is attended with its Pangs, as well as the natural: For they that have
experienced it (and they only are the proper Judges) can acquaint you, that
frequent Acts of Self-denial must be exercised, a constant regular Discipline
kept up, left, after all, when we come to the Birth, we should want Strength to
bring forth.

But if these Things are so; if there are Difficulties and Pangs attending our
being born again, and Discipline must be called in, what Season more proper
than that of Youth; when, if ever, our Bodies are robust and vigorous, and our
Minds active and courageous, and consequently we are then the best qualified to
endure Hardness as good Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST.

We find in secular Matters People commonly observe this Method, and send their
Children abroad among the Toils and Fatigues of Business, in their younger
Years, as well knowing they are then fittest to undergo them. And why do they
not act with the same Consistency in the grand Affair of Religion? Because, as
our Savior has told us, the Children of this World are wiser in their
Generation, than the Children of Light.

But, Secondly, if pure Religion and undefiled consists in the total Renewal of
our corrupted Natures, then it is not only a Work of Difficulty, but of Time:
For, as the old was not, so neither is the new Creation completed in a Day.
No, good Men know, by certain Experience, that it is a long while ever old
Things can pass away, and all Things become new in them. The strong Man armed
has gotten too great Possession of their Hearts to be quickly driven out, and
they are obliged to combat many a weary Hour, ever their Corruptions, which is
the Armor in which the strong Man trusted, be wholly taken from him. Nay, they
find their whole Lives short enough to perfect the Work of Regeneration, which
they were sent into the World to do, and never expect to say it is finished,
till, with their blessed Master, they bow down their Heads, and give up the
Ghost.

And, if this be the Case, if the Renovation of our Nature be not only
difficult, but requires so long a Space to complete it in; then, it highly
concerns every one to set about it betimes, and to work their Work while it is
Day, before the Night comes, when no Man can work.

Could we, indeed, live to the Age of Methusalah, and had but little Business
to employ ourselves in, we might then be more excusable, if we made no other
Use of this World, than, what too many do, take our Pastime therein; but since
our Lives are so very short, and the working out our Salvation requires so much
Time, we have no Room left for trifling, lest we should be snatched away while
our Lamps are untrimmed, and we are entirely unprepared to meet the Bridegroom.

Did we know a Friend or Neighbor, who had a long Journey of the utmost
Importance to make, and yet should stand all the Day idle, neglecting to set
out till the Sun was about to go down, we could not but pity and condemn his
egregious Folly: And yet it is to be feared most Men are just such Fools; they
have a long Journey to take, nay, a Journey to Eternity, a Journey of infinite
Importance, and which they are obliged to dispatch before the Sun of their
natural Life be gone down; and yet they loiter away their Time allotted them to
perform their Journey in, till Sickness or Death surprises them; and then they
cry out, What shall we do to inherit eternal Life? But, alas! is this a proper
Season to ask such a Question? Is this a Time to begin their Journey, when they
should be at the End of it; or to enquire what they must do, when perhaps they
have hardly any Strength or Ability left to do any Thing to the Purpose, and
when they should be waiting with humble Patience, in hopes of speedily
receiving their Wages for Work already done? O foolish People and unwise! If
you offer the Blind for Sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye offer the Lame and
Sick, is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy Governor, will he be pleased with
thee, or accept thy Person? says the LORD of Hosts. But leaving such to the
Mercies of GOD, I pass on to

The Second general Thing proposed, viz. To show the Advantages that will arise
from Remembering our Creator in the Days of our Youth; which may serve as so
many Motives to excite and quicken all Persons immediately to set about it.

And the first Benefit resulting from thence is, that it will bring most Honor
and Glory to GOD. This, I suppose, every serious Person will grant, ought to be
the Point in which all our Actions should center; for to this End were we born;
to this End were we redeemed by the precious Blood of JESUS CHRIST, that we
should promote GOD'S Eternal Glory. And as the Glory of GOD is most advanced by
paying Obedience to his Precepts, they that begin soonest to walk in his Ways,
act most to his Glory: For the common Objection against the divine Laws in
general, and the Doctrines of the Gospel in particular, is, that they are not
practicable, that they are contrary to Flesh and Blood, and that all those
Precepts concerning Self-Denial, Renunciation of and Deadness to the World, are
but so many arbitrary Restraints imposed upon human Nature. But when we see
mere Striplings not only practicing, but delighting in such religious Duties,
and in the Days of their Youth, when, if ever, they have a Relish for sensual
Pleasures, subduing and despising the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye,
and the Pride of Life. -- This, this is acceptable with GOD; this vindicates
his injured Honor; this shows that his Service is perfect Freedom, that his
Yoke is easy, and his Burden light.

But, Secondly, as an early Piety redounds most to the Honor of GOD, so it
will bring most Honor to ourselves: For those that honor GOD, GOD will
honor. We find it therefore remarked to the Praise of Obadiah, that he served
the LORD from his Youth: Of Samuel, that he stood, when young, before GOD in a
linen Ephod: Of Timothy, that from a Child he had known the Holy Scriptures:
Of St. John, that he was the youngest and most beloved Disciple; and of our
Blessed LORD himself, that at Twelve Years old he went up to the Temple, and
sat among the Doctors, both hearing and asking them Questions.

Nor, Thirdly, will an early Piety afford us less Comfort than Honor, not only
because it renders Religion habitual to us, but also because it gives us a
well-grounded Assurance of the Sincerity of our Professions. Was there no other
Argument against a Deathbed Repentance but the Unsatisfactoriness and Anxiety
of such a State, that would be sufficient to deter all thinking Persons from
deferring the most important Business of their Life to such a dreadful Period
of it. For supposing a Man be sincere in his Professions of Repentance on a
Deathbed (which is very much to be doubted) yet he can take no great Comfort
in them, because he is uncertain whether his Convictions and Remorse proceed
from a true Sorrow for Sin, or a servile Fear of Punishment. But a young Saint
need fear no such Perplexity; he knows that he loves GOD for his own Sake, and
is not driven to him by a Dread of impending Evil: He does not decline the
Gratifications of Sense, because he can no longer bear the Voice of Singing-Men
and Singing-Women; but willingly takes up his Cross, and follows his blessed
Master in his Youth; and therefore must have great Confidence of his Sincerity
toward GOD. But farther, as an early Piety shows the Heart of its Sincerity,
so likewise it brings its present Reward with it, as it renders Religion, and
all its Duties, habitual and easy. A young Saint, was you to ask him, would
joyfully tell you the unspeakable Comfort of beginning to be good betimes: As
for his Part, he knows not what Men mean by talking of Mortification,
Self-Denial, and Retirement, as hard and rigorous Duties; for he has so
accustomed himself to them, that they are now become even natural, and he takes
infinitely more Pleasure in practicing the severest Precepts of the Gospel,
than a luxurious Dives in a Bed of State, or an ambitious Haman at a Royal
Banquet. And, oh! how happy must that Youth be, whose Duty is become a second
Nature, and to whom those Things, which seem terrible to others, are grown both
easy and delightful!

But the greatest Advantage of an early Piety is still behind, viz. That it
lays in the best Provision of Comfort and Support against such Times as we
shall stand most in Need thereof, viz. all Times of our Tribulation, and in
particular against the Time of old Age, the Hour of Death and the Day of
Judgment.

This is the Argument the Wise Man make^ Use of in the Words immediately
following the Text: Remember now, says he, thy Creator in the Days of thy
Youth, while the evil Days come not, nor the Years draw nigh, wherein thou
shall say, I have no Pleasure in them. Observe the Time of old Age is an evil
Time, Years wherein there is no Pleasure; and ask those that are grown old, and
they will inform you so. Cordials surely then most be exceeding proper to
support our drooping Spirits: And, oh! What Cordial comparable to the grateful
Review of a well-spent Life? When the Eyes, like Isaac's, are grown dim with
Age; when the Keepers of the House, i. e. the Hands, shall tremble; as the Wise
Man goes on to describe the Infirmities of old Age; when the strong Men bow
themselves, i. e. when the Legs grow feeble; and the Grinders, i. e. the Teeth,
shall cease to do their proper Office, because they are few; for a Person then
to hear the Precepts of the Gospel read over to him, and to be able to lay his
Hand on his Heart, and to say sincerely, All these have I kept from my Youth:
This must fill him with such unspeakable Comfort, that I want Words to express,
and Thoughts to conceive it. But, supposing it was possible for us to escape
the Inconveniences of old Age, yet still Death is a Debt we all must pay; and
what is worse, it generally comes attended with such dreadful Circumstances,
that it will make even a Felix tremble. But as for the Godly, that have served
the LORD from their Youth, it is not so with them; no, they look upon Death not
as a King of Terrors, but as a welcome Messenger, that is come to conduct them
to their wished for Home. All the Days of their appointed Time have they
waited, and it has been the Business of their whole Lives to prepare themselves
for the coming of their great Change; and therefore they rejoice to hear, that
they are called to meet the heavenly Bridegroom. Thus die the early (I mean the
early, if persevering) pious; whose Path has been as the shining Light that
shines mere and more, unto the perfect Day. But follow him beyond the Grave,
and see with what an holy Triumph he enters into his Master's Joy; with what an
humble Boldness he stands at the dreadful Tribunal of JESUS CHRIST; and can you
then forbear to cry out, Let me die the Death of the Righteous, and let my
latter End, and future State, be like his?

Need I then, after having shown so many Advantages to arise from an early
Piety, use any more Arguments to persuade the younger Part of this Audience, to
whom in the Third and last Place I address myself, to remember their Creator in
the Days of their Youth?

What! will not a Desire of bringing Glory to GOD, Honor and Comfort to
themselves; will not the Pleasure of an habitual Piety, and the comfortable
Assurance of being sincere; above all, will not the Hopes of an honorable old
Age, a peaceful Death, and a glorious Appearance at the tremendous Day of
Judgment; will not these, I say, prevail with them to leave their Husks, and
return home to eat of the fatted Calf? What will they thus requite their
Savior's Love? That be far from them! Did he come down and shed his precious
Blood to deliver them from the Power of Sin; and will they spend their youthful
Strength and Vigor in the Service of it, and then think to serve CHRIST, when
they can follow their Lusts no longer? Is i^ fit, that many who are endowed
with excellent Gifts, and are thereby qualified to be Supports and Ornaments of
our sinking Church, should notwithstanding forget the GOD that gave them, and
employ them in Things that will not profit? O why will they not arise, and,
like so many Phineas's, be zealous for the Lord of Hosts? Doubtless, when Death
overtakes them, they will wish they had: And what hinders them, but that they
may live as well now, as they will wish they had when they leave the World?
Think you that any one yet ever repented that they began to be good too soon?
But how many, on the contrary, have repented that they began to be good too
late? May we not well imagine, that young Samuel now rejoices that he waited so
soon at the Tabernacle of the LORD? Or young Timothy, that from a Child he knew
the Holy Scriptures? And if you wish to be Partakers of their Joy, let me
persuade you to be Partakers of their Piety.

I could still go on to fill my Mouth with Arguments; but the Circumstances and
Piety of those amongst whom I am now preaching the Kingdom of God, remind me to
change my Style; and instead of urging any more Dissuasives from Sin, to fill
up what is behind of this Discourse, with Encouragements to persevere in
Holiness.

Blessed, for ever blessed be GOD and the Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST! I am
not speaking to Persons inflamed with youthful Lusts, but to a Multitude of
young Professors, who, by frequently assembling together, and forming
themselves unto religious Societies, are in a ready Way to be of the Number of
those young Men who have overcome the wic^^d^ne.

Believe me, it gladdens my very Soul, to see so many of your Faces set
heavenwards; and the visible happy Effects of your uniting together, cannot but
rejoice the Hearts of all sincere Christians, and oblige them to wish you good
Luck in the Name of the LORD. The many Souls that are nourished weekly by the
spiritual Body and Blood of JESUS CHRIST by your Means; the weekly and monthly
Lectures that are preached by your Contributions; the daily Incense of
Thanksgiving and Prayer which is publicly sent up to the Throne of Grace by
your Subscriptions; the many Children which are trained up in the Nurture and
Admonition of the LORD, by your Charities; and lastly, the commendable and
pious Zeal you exert in promoting and encouraging divine Psalmody, are such
plain and apparent Proofs of the Benefit of your Religious Societies, that they
call for a public Acknowledgement of Praise and Thanksgiving to our blessed
Master, who has not only put into your Hearts such good Designs, but enabled
you also to bring the same to good Effect.

It is true, it has been objected, That young Men's forming themselves into
Religious Societies has a Tendency to make them spiritually proud, and think
more highly of themselves, than (...) ought to think. And perhaps the imprudent
imperious Behavior of some Novices in Religion, who, though they went out from
you, (...) not of you, may have given too much Occasion for such (...)
Aspersion.

But you, Brethren, have not so learned CHRIST. Far, far be it from you to look
upon yourselves as righteous, and (...) others, because you often assemble
yourselves together. No, this, instead of creating Pride, ought to beget an
holy Fear in your Hearts, lest your Practice should not correspond with your
Profession, and that, after you have benefited and edified others, you
yourselves should become Cast-aways.

Worldly-mindedness, my Brethren, is another Rock against which we are in
Danger of splitting. For, if other Sins have slain their Thousands of
professing Christians, this has slain its ten Thousands. I need not appeal to
past Ages; your own Experience, no doubt, has furnished you with many unhappy
Instances of young Men who, after (as one would have imagined) they had escaped
the Pollutions which are in the World through Lust, and had tasted the good Word
of Life, and endured for a Season, whilst under the Tuition and Inspection of
others; yet when they have come to be their own Masters, through a Want of Faith,
and through too great an Earnestness in laboring for the Meat which perishes,
have cast off their first Love, been again entangled with the World, and
returned like the Dog to his Vomit, and like the Sow that was washed to her
wallowing in the Mire. You would therefore do well, my Brethren, frequently to
remind each other of this dangerous Snare, and to exhort one another to begin,
pursue, and end your Christian Warfare, in a thorough Renunciation of the
World, and worldly Tempers; so that, when you are obliged by Providence to
provide for yourselves, and those of your respective Households, you may
continue to walk by Faith, and still seek first the Kingdom of GOD, and his
Righteousness; not doubting but all other Things, upon your honest Industry and
Endeavors, shall be added unto you.

And now What shall I say more? To speak unto you, Fathers, who have been in
CHRIST so many Years before me, and know the Malignity of Worldly-mindedness,
and Pride in the Spiritual L^fe, would be altogether needless. To you,
therefore, O young Men (for whom I am distressed, for whom I fear as well as
for myself) do I once more address myself in the Words of the beloved Disciple,
Look to yourselves, that we lose not those Things which we have wrought, but
receive a full Reward. Be ever mindful, then, of the Words that have been
spoken to us by the Apostles of the Lord and Savior. Give Diligence to make
your Calling and Election sure. Beware, lest ye also being led away by the
Error of the Wicked, fall from your own Stedfastness. Let him that thinks ^e
stands, take Heed le^t he fall. Be not high-minded, but fear. But we are
persuaded better Things of you, and Things that accompany Salvation; though we
thus speak. For GOD is not unrighteous, to forget your Works and Labors of
Love. And we desire that every one of you do show the same Diligence, to the
full Assurance of Hope unto the End: That ye be not slothful, but Follower^ of
them, who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. It Is true, we have
many Difficulties to encounter, many powerful Enemies to overcome, ever we can
get Possession of the promised Land. We have an artful Devil, an ensnaring
World, and above all, the Treachery of our own Hearts, to withstand and strive
against. For strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way that leads unto
eternal Life. But wherefore should we fear? since he that is with us is far
more powerful than all who are against us. Have we not already experienced his
Almighty Power, in enabling us to conquer some Difficulties which seemed as
insurmountable then, as those we struggle with now? And cannot he who delivered
us out of the Paws of those Bears and Lions, preserve us also from being hurt
by the strongest Goliahs?

Be steadfast therefore, my Brethren, be immovable. Consider the infinite
future Rewards as well as present Comforts that attend an early Piety. Be not
ashamed of the Gospel of CHRIST: For it is the Power of GOD unto Salvation.
Fear not Man; fear not the Contempt and Revilings which you must meet with in
the Way of Duty: For one of you shall chase a Thousand; and two of you put ten
Thousand of your Enemies to Flight. And if you will be content to be abused for
a short Time here, I speak the Truth in CHRIST, I lie not; then shall ye be
exalted to sit down with the SON of Man, when he shall come in the Glory of his
FATHER, with his holy Angels to Judgment hereafter. May Almighty GOD give every
one of us such a Measure of his Grace, that we may not be of the Number of
those that draw back unto Perdition, but of them that believe and endure unto
the End, to the Saving of our Souls.

Which GOD of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

SERMON IV.
The ALMOST CHRISTIAN.
ACTS xxvi. 28. Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.
THESE Words contain the ingenuous Confession of King Agrippa; which having
some Reference to what went before, it may not be improper to relate to you the
Substance of the preceding Verses, to which these Words are so closely
connected.

The Chapter then, out of which the Text is taken, contains an admirable.
Account the great St. Paul gave of his wonderful Conversion from Judaism to
Christianity, when he was called to make his Defense before Festus and another
Gentile Governor. Our blessed LORD had long since foretold, that When the Son
of Man should be lifted up, his Disciples should be brought before Kings, for
his Name's Sake, for a Testimony unto them. And very (...) was the Design of
infinite Wisdom in thus o^^aining, it: For Christianity being from the very
beginning (...) a Doctrine of the Cross, the Princes and Rule^ (...) of the
Earth th^^ght themselves too high to (...) instructed by such mean Teachers, or
too happy to be disturbed by such unwelcome Truths; and therefore would have
always continued Strangers to JESUS CHRIST, and him Crucified, had not the
Apostles, by being Arraigned before them, gained Opportunities of preaching to
them JESUS and the Resurrection. St. Paul knew full well that this was the main
Reason, why his Blessed Master permitted his Enemies at this Time to arraign
him at a public Bar: And therefore, in Compliance* with the Divine Will,
thinks it not sufficient, barely to make his Defense, but endeavors at the
same Time to convert his Judges. And this he did with such Demonstration of the
Spirit, and of Power, that Festus, unwilling to be convinced by the strongest
Evidence, cries out with a loud Voice, Paul, much Learning does make thee mad.
To which the brave Apostle (like a true Follower of the Holy JESUS) meekly
replies, I am not mad, most noble Festus, but speak forth the Words of Truth
and Soberness. But in all Probability seeing King Agrippa more affected with
his Discourse, and observing in him an Inclination to know the Truth, he
applies himself more particularly to him: (...) King, says he, knows of these
Things; before whom also I speak freely; for I am persuaded that none of these
Things are hidden from him. And then, that if possible he might complete his
wished-for Conversion, he with an inimitable Strain of Oratory, addresses
himself still more closely, -- King Agrippa, believe thou the Prophets? I
know that thou believe them. At which the Passions of the King began to work
so strongly, that he was obliged, in open Court, to own himself affected by the
Prisoner's Preaching, and ingenuously to cry out, -- Paul, almost thou
persuadest me to be a Christian.

Which Words, taken with the Context, afford us a lively Representation of the
different Reception the Doctrine of CHRIST'S Ministers, who come in the Power
and Spirit of St. Paul, meets with nowadays in the Minds of Men. For
notwithstanding they, like this great Apostle, speak forth the Words of Truth
and Soberness; and with such Energy and Power, that all their Adversaries
cannot gainsay or resist; yet, too many, with the most noble Festus before
mentioned, being, like him, either too proud (...) be taught, or too sensual,
too careless, or too worldly-minded to live up to their Doctrine, -- in order
to excuse themselves, cry out, that much Learning, much Study, or, what is more
unaccountable, much Piety, has made them mad. And though, blessed be GOD! all
do not thus disbelieve our Report; yet amongst those many others, who gladly
receive the Word, and confess that we speak the Words of Truth and Soberness,
there are so few, who arrive at any higher Degree of Piety than that of
Agrippa, or are any farther persuaded than to be almost Christians, -- that I
cannot but think it highly necessary to warn my dear Hearers of the Danger of
such a State. And therefore, from the Words of the Text, shall endeavor to
consider these three Things: First, What is meant by an Almost Christian.
Secondly, What are the chief Reasons, why so many are no more than Almost
Christians. Thirdly, I shall consider the Ineffectualness, Danger, Absurdity,
and Uneasiness that attends those that are but Almost Christians. Fourthly, I
shall conclude with a general Exhortation, to set all upon striving not only to
be Almost,. but Altogether Christians.


I. And First I am to consider, what is meant by an Almost Christian.

An Almost Christian then, if we consider him in respect to his Duty to GOD, is
one that halts between two Opinions, that wavers between CHRIST and the World;
that would reconcile GOD and Mammon, that is, Light and Darkness, CHRIST and
Belial. It is true, He has an Inclination to Religion, but then he is very
cautious how he goes too far in it: His false Heart is always crying out, Spare
thyself, d^ thyself no Harm. He prays indeed, that GOD' s Will may be done on
Earth, (...) it is in Heaven: But then, notwithstanding he is very partial in
his Obedience, and fondly hopes that GOD will not be extreme to mark every
Thing that he ^^^fully does amiss; though an inspired Apostle has told him,
that he that wilfully offends in one Point, is guilty of all. Above all, he is
one that depends much on outward Ordinances, and upon that account looks upon
himself as Righteous, and despises others; though at the same Time he may be as
great a Stranger to the Divine Life as any other Person whatsoever. In short,
he is fond of the Form, but never experiences the Power of Godliness in his
Heart: He goes on Year after Year, feeding and attending on the Means of Grace;
but then, like Pharaoh's Lean Kine, is never the better, but rather the worse
for them.

If you consider him in respect to his Neighbor, he is one that is strictly
just to all; but then this does not proceed from any Love to GOD or Regard to
Man, but only out of a Principle of Self-Love; because he knows Dishonesty will
spoil his Reputation, and consequently hinder his Thriving in the World.

He is one that depends much on being Negatively good, and contents himself
with the Consciousness of having done no one any Harm; though he reads in the
Gospel, that the unprofitable Servant was cast into outer Darkness, and the
barren Fig Tree cursed and dried up from the Roots, not for bearing bad, but no
Fruit.

He is no Enemy to charitable Contributions, if not too frequently recommended:
But then he is quite unacquainted with the kind Offices of Visiting the Sick
and Imprisoned, Clothing the Naked, and Relieving the Hungry. He thinks that
these Things belong only to the Clergy, though his own false Heart tells him,
that nothing but Pride keeps him from exercising these Acts of Humility, and
that JESUS CHRIST, in the 25th Chapter of St. Matthew, condemns Persons to
everlasting Punishment, not for being Fornicators, Drunkards, or Extor^^oners,
but merely for neglecting these charitable Offices, When the Son of Man; says
our blessed LORD himself, shall come in his Glory, He shall set the Sheep on
his Right Hand, and the Goats on his Left. And then shall He say unto them on
his Left Hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting Fire prepared for
the Devil and his Angels: For I was an Hungered, and ye gave me no Meat; I was
thirsty, and ye gave me no Drink; I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in;
Naked, and ye clothed me not; Sick and in Prison, and ye visited me not. Then
shall they also say, Lord, when saw we Thee an hungered, or a-thirst, or a
Stranger, or naked, or sick, or in Prison, and did not minister unto thee? Then
shall he answer them, Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have not done it
unto one of the least of these my Brethren, ye did it not unto me: And these
shall go away into everlasting Punishment. I thought proper to give you this
whole Passage of Scripture at large, because our Savior lays such a particular
Stress upon it; and yet notwithstanding it is so little regarded, that were we
to judge by the Practice of Christians, one should be tempted to think there
were no such Verses in the Bible.

But to proceed in our Character of an Almost Christian: If we consider him in
respect of himself: as before we said he was strictly honest to his Neighbor,
so he is likewise strictly sober in himself: But then both his Honesty and
Sobriety proceed from the same Principle of a false Self-Love. It is true, he
runs not into the same Excess of Riot with other Men; but then it is not out of
Obedience to the Laws of GOD, but either because his Constitution will not away
with Intemperance; or rather because be is cautious of forfeiting his
Reputation, or unfitting himself for temporal Business. But though he is so
prudent as to avoid Intemperance and Excess, for the Reasons before mentioned;
yet he always goes to the Extremity of what is lawful. It is true, he is no
Drunkard; but then he has no Christian Self-Denial to plead for him. He cannot
think our Savior to be so austere a Master, as to deny us to indulge ourselves
in some Particulars: And so by this Means he is kept out of a Sense of true
Religion, as much as if he lived in Debauchery, or any other Crime whatever. As
to settling his Principles as well as Practice, he is guided more by the World,
than by the Word of GOD. As for his Part, he cannot think the Way to Heaven so
narrow as some would make it: And therefore considers not so much what
Scripture requires, as what such and such a good Man does, or what will best
suit his own corrupt Inclinations. Upon this Account, he is not only very
cautious himself, but likewise very careful of young Converts, whose Faces are
set Heavenward; and therefore is always acting the Devil's Part, and bidding
them spare themselves, though they are doing no more than what the Scripture
strictly requires of them to do: The Consequence of which is, that he suffers
not himself to enter into the Kingdom of GOD, and they that are entering in he
^inders.

Thus lives (...) Almost Christian: Not that I can say, I have fully described
him to you; but from these Out-lines and Sketches of his Character, if your
Consciences have done their proper Offices, and made a particular Application
of what has been said to your own Hearts, I cannot but fear that some of you
may observe some Features in his Picture, odious as it is, too near resembling
your own; and therefore cannot but hope, at the same Time, that you join with
the Apostle in the Words immediately following the Text, and wish yourselves
not only almost, but altogether Christians.

II. But it is Time for me to proceed to the Second general Thing proposed;
namely, to consider the Reasons why so many are no more than Almost Christians.

1. And the first Reason I shall mention is, because so many set out with false
Notions of Religion; and though they live in a Christian Country, yet know not
what Christianity is. This perhaps may be esteemed a hard Saying, but
Experience sadly evinces the Truth of it; For some place Religion in being of
this or that Communion; more in Morality; most in a Round of Duties, and a
Model of Performances; and few, very few acknowledge it to be, what it really
is, a thorough inward Change of Nature, a Divine Life, a Vital Participation of
JESUS CHRIST, an Union of the Soul with GOD; which the Apostle expresses by
saying, He that is joined to the LORD is one Spirit. Hence it happens that so
many, even of the most knowing Professors, when you come to converse with them
concerning the Essence, the Life, the Soul of Religion, I mean our New Birth in
JESUS CHRIST, confess themselves quite ignorant of the Matter, and cry out with
Nicodemus, How can this Thing be? And no wonder then, that so many are only
Almost Christians, when so many know not what Christianity is: No Marvel so
many take up with the Form, when they are quite Strangers to the Power of
Godliness; or content themselves with the Shadow, when they know so little
about the Substance of it. And this is one Cause why so many are almost, why so
few are altogether Christians.

2. A Second Reason that may be assigned why so many are no more than almost
Christians, is a servile Fear of Man: Multitudes there are and have been, who,
though awakened to a Sense of the Divine Life, and have tasted and felt the
Powers of the World to come; yet out of a base sinful Fear of being counted
singular, or contemned by Men, have suffered all those good Impressions to wear
off again. It is true they have some Esteem for JESUS CHRIST; but then, like
Nicodemus, they would come to him only by Night: They are willing to serve him;
but then they would do it secretly, for Fear of the Jews: They have a Mind to
see JESUS, but then they cannot come to him, because of the Press, for fear of
being laughed at, and ridiculed by those with whom they used to sit at Meat.
But well did our Savior prophesy of such Persons, How can ye love me which
receive Honor one of another? Alas! have they never read, that the Friendship
of this World is Enmity with GOD; and that our LORD himself has threatened,
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me or of my Words, in this wicked and adulterous
Generation, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the Glory
of his Father and of his Holy Angels? But no Wonder that so many are no more
than almost Christians since so many love the Praise of Men more than the
Honor which comes of GOD.

3. A third Reason why so many are no more than Almost Christians, is a
reigning Love of Money. This was the pitiable Case of that forward young Man in
the Gospel, who came running to our Blessed LORD, and kneeling before him,
enquired what He must do to inherit Eternal Life; to which our blessed Master
replied, Thou know the Commandments, Do not Kill, Do not commit Adultery, Do
not Steal: To which the young Man replied (Oh that every young Man here present
could do so too) All these I have kept from my Youth. But when our LORD
proceeded to tell him, Yet lackest thou one Thing, Go sell all that thou have
and give to the Poor, -- he was grieved at that Saying, and went away
sorrowful, for he had great Possessions! Poor Youth! he had a good Mind to be a
Christian, and to inherit Eternal Life, but thought it too dear, if it could be
purchased at no less an Expense than of his whole Estate! And thus many, both
Young and Old, nowadays come running to worship our blessed LORD in public,
and kneel before him in private, and enquire at his Gospel, what they must do
to inherit Eternal Life: But when they find they must renounce the
Self-Enjoyment of Riches, and forsake all in Affection to follow Him, they cry,
The LORD pardon us in this Thing! -- We pray Thee, have us excused.

But is Heaven so small a Trifle in such Men's Esteem, as not to be worth a
little gilded Earth? Is Eternal Life so mean a Purchase, as not to deserve the
Temporary Renunciation of a few transitory Riches? Surely it is. But however
inconsistent such a Behavior may be, this inordinate Love of Money is too
evidently the common and fatal Cause why so many are no more than Almost
Christians.

4. Nor is the reigning Love of Pleasure a less uncommon, or a less fatal Cause
why so many are no more than almost Christians. Thousands and ten Thousands
there are, who despise Riches, and would willingly be true Disciples of JESUS
CHRIST, would parting with their Money make them so; but when they are told
that our Blessed LORD has laid it down as an indispensable Condition, that
Whosoever will come after Him must deny himself; -- like the pitiable young Man
before mentioned, they go away sorrowful: For they have too great a Love for
sensual Pleasures. They will, like Herod, perhaps send for the Ministers of
CHRIST, as he did for John, and hear them gladly: But touch them in their
Herodias, tell them they must part with (...) or such a darling Pleasure; and
with wicked Ahab they cry out, Have thou found us, O our Enemy? Tell them of
the Necessity of Mortification, Fasting and Self-Denial, and it is as difficult
to them to hear, as if you was to bid them cut off a Right Hand or pluck out a
Right Eye: They cannot think our Blessed LORD requires so much at their Hands,
though an inspired Apostle has commanded us to mortify our Members which are
upon the Earth: And he himself, even after he had converted Millions, and was
very near arrived to the End of his Race, yet professed that it was his daily
Practice to keep under his Body, and bring it into Subjection, lest after he
had preached to others, he himself should be a Castaway!

But some Men would be wiser than this great Apostle, and chalk out to us what
they falsely imagine an easier Way to Happiness. They would flatter us we may
go to Heaven without offering Violence to our sensual Appetites; and enter into
the strait Gate without striving against our carnal Inclinations. And this is
another Reason why so many are only almost, and not altogether Christians.

5. The fifth and last Reason I shall assign why so many are only almost
Christians, is a Fickless and Instability of Temper.

It has been, no doubt, the Misfortune that many a Minister and sincere
Christian has met with, to weep and wail over Numbers of promising Converts,
who seemingly began in the Spirit, but after a while have fell away, and basely
ended in the Flesh; and this not for want of right Notions in Religion, nor out
of a servile Fear of Man, nor out of Love of Money or sensual Pleasure, but out
of an Instability and Fickleness of Temper. They looked upon Religion merely
for Novelty, as something which pleases them for a while; but after their
Curiosity was satisfied, they have laid it aside again: Like the young Man that
came to see JESUS with a Linen Cloth about his naked Body, they have followed
him for a Season, but when Temptations have come to take hold on them, for want
of a little more Resolution, they have been stripped of all their good
Intentions, and fled away naked. They at first, like a Tree planted by the
Waterside, grew up and flourished for a while; but having no Root of
themselves, no inward Principle of Holiness and Piety, like Jonah's Gourd, were
soon dried up, cut down and withered. Their good Intentions are but too like
the violent Motions of the Animal Spirits of a Body newly beheaded, which though
impetuous, are not lasting. In short, they set out well in their Journey to
Heaven, but finding the Way either narrower or longer than they expected, --
through an Unsteadiness of Temper, they have made an eternal Halt, and so
returned like the Dog to his Vomit, or like the Sow that was washed to her
wallowing in the Mire!

But I tremble to pronounce the Fate of such unstable Professors, who having
put their Hands to the Plow, for want of a little more Resolution, shamefully
look back. How shall I repeat to them that dreadful Threatening, If any Man draw
back, my Soul shall have no Pleasure in him: And again, It is impossible, that
is, exceeding difficult at least, for those that have been once enlightened,
and have tasted the good Gift of GOD's Holy Spirit, and the Powers of the World
to come, if they should fall away, to be renewed again unto Repentance. But
notwithstanding the Gospel is so severe against Apostates, yet many that begun
well, through a Fickleness of Temper, (Oh that none of us here present may ever
be such) have been by this means of the Number of those that turn back unto
Perdition. And this is the fifth and last Reason I shall give, why so many are
only almost, and not altogether Christians.

But you, Brethren, have not so learned CHRIST. GOD forbid that a Fear of a
little Contempt, a love of a little worldly Gain, or a Fondness for a little
sensual Pleasure, or want of steady Resolution, should hinder you from entering
into Eternal Life, or make you so sottish as to think you may compound Matters
between GOD and your Souls.

III. Proceed we therefore now to the Third General Thing proposed, namely, to
consider the Folly of being no more than an almost Christian.

And the first Proof I shall give of the Folly of such a Proceeding is, -- that
it is ineffectual to Salvation. It is true, such Men are almost good, but
almost to hit the Mark, is really to miss it. GOD requires us to love him with
all our Hearts, with all our Souls, and with all our Strength* He loves us too
well to admit any Rival; because so far as our Hearts are empty of GOD, so far
must they be unhappy. The Devil, indeed, like the false Mother that came before
Solomon, would have our Hearts divided, as she would have had the Child; but
GOD, like the true Mother, will have all or none. My Son give me thy Heart, thy
whole Heart, is the general Call to all: And if we do not perform this
Condition, we never can expect the Divine Mercy.

Persons may indeed flatter themselves, that a partial Obedience will serve
their Turn; but GOD at the Great Day will strike them dead, as he did Ananias
and Sapphira by the Mouth of his Servant Peter, for pretending to offer him all
their Hearts, when they keep back from him the greatest Part. They may perhaps
impose upon their fellow Creatures for a while, but He that enabled Elijah to
cry out, Come in thou Wife of Jeroboam, when she came disguised to enquire
about her sick Son, will also discover them through their most artful
Dissimulations, and if their Hearts are not whole with him -- appoint them
their Portion with Hypocrites and Unbelievers.

But secondly, What renders an halfway Piety more inexcusable is, that it is
not only insufficient to our own Salvation, but also most prejudicial to that
of others.

An Al^^ost Christian is one of the most hurtful Creatures in the World: He is
a Wolf in Sheep's Clothing; he is one of those false Prophets our Blessed LORD
bids us beware of in his Sermon (...) the Mount, who would persuade Men, that
the Way to Heaven is broader than it really is; and thereby, as it was observed
before, enter not into the Kingdom of GOD themselves, and those that are
entering in they hinder. These, these are the Men that turn the World into a
lukewarm Laodicean Spirit; that hang out false Lights, and so shipwreck
unthinking benighted Souls in their Voyage to the Haven where they would be.
These are they that are greater Enemies to the Cross of CHRIST, than Infidels
themselves: For of an Unbeliever every one will be aware; but an Almost
Christian, through his subtle Hypocrisy, draws away many after him; and
therefore must expect to receive the greater Damnation.

But thirdly, as it is most prejudicial to ourselves and hurtful to others, so
it is the greatest Piece of Ingratitude we can express toward our Lord and
Master JESUS CHRIST. For did he come down from Heaven, and shed his precious
Blood, to purchase these Hearts of ours, and shall we only give him half of
them? Oh how can we say we love him, when our Hearts are not wholly with him?
How can we call him our Savior, when we will not endeavor sincerely to
approve ourselves to him* and so let him see the Travail of his Soul, and be
satisfied!

Had any of us purchased a Slave at a most expensive Rate, that was before
involved in the utmost Miseries and Torments, and so must have continued for
ever, had we shut up our Bowels of Compassion from him; and was this Slave
afterward to grow rebellious, or (...) giving us but half his Service: How,
how should we exclaim against his base Ingratitude! And yet this base
ungrateful Slave thou art, O Man, who acknowledgest thyself to be redeemed from
infinite unavoidable Misery and Punishment by the Death of JESUS CHRIST, and
yet wilt not give thyself wholly to him. But shall we deal with GOD our Maker
in a manner we would not be dealt with by a Man like ourselves? shall we mete
out a less Measure of Love to our Savior, than we would have dealt to
ourselves? GOD forbid!

IV. No, (that I may come to the last Thing proposed, namely, to add a Word or
two of Exhortation to be not only almost, but altogether Christians) let us
scorn all such base and treacherous Treatment of our King and Savior, nay our
GOD. Let us not take some Pains all our Lives to go to Heaven, and yet plunge
ourselves into Hell at last. Let us give GOD our whole Hearts, and no longer
halt between two Opinions: If the World be GOD let us serve That; If Pleasure
be a GOD let us serve That; but if the LORD He be GOD, let us, Oh let us serve
Him alone. Alas! why, why should we stand out any longer? Why should we be so
in Love with Slavery, as not wholly to renounce the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil, which, like so many spiritual Chains, bind down our Souls, and hinder
them from flying up to GOD. Alas! what are we afraid of? Is not GOD able to
reward our entire Obedience? If he is, as the almost Christian's (...) Way of
serving him seems to grant, -- Why then will we not serve him entirely? For the
same Reason we do so much, why do we not do more? Or do you think that being
only half Religious will make you happy, but that going farther will render you
miserable and uneasy? Alas! this, my Brethren, is Delusion all over: For what
is it but this half Piety, this wavering between GOD and the World, that makes
so many that are seemingly well disposed, such utter Strangers to the Comforts
of Religion? They choose just so much of Religion as will disturb them in their
Lusts, and follow their Lusts so far as to deprive themselves of the Comforts
of Religion. Whereas on the Contrary, would they sincerely leave all in
Affection, and give their Hearts wholly to GOD, they would then (and they
cannot till then) experience the unspeakable Pleasure of having a Mind at unity
with itself, and enjoy such a Peace of God, which even in this Life, passes all
Understanding, and which they were entire Strangers to before. It is true, if
we will devote ourselves entirely to GOD, we must meet with Contempt; but then
it is because Contempt is necessary to heal our Pride. We must renounce some
sensual Pleasure; but then it is because those unfit us for Spiritual ones,
which are infinitely better. We must renounce the Love of the World; but then
it is that we may be filled with the Love of GOD: And when that has once
enlarged our Hearts, we shall like Jacob when he served for his beloved Rachel,
think nothing too difficult to undergo, no Hardships too tedious to endure,
because of the Love we shall then have for our dear Redeemer. (...) easy, thus
delightful will be the Ways of GOD even in this Life: But when once we throw
off these Bodies, and our Souls are filled with all the Fullness of GOD, Oh!
what Heart can conceive, what Tongue can express, with what unspeakable Joy and
Consolation we shall then look back on our past sincere and hearty Services,
which have procured us so invaluable a Reward! Think you then, my dear Hearers,
we shall repent we had done too much; or rather think you not we shall be
ashamed that we did no more; and blush we were so backward to give up all to
GOD; when He intended hereafter to give us Himself?

Let me therefore, to conclude, exhort you, my Brethren, to have always the
unspeakable Reward of an entire Obedience set before you: And think withal,
that every degree of Holiness you neglect, every Instance of Piety you pass by,
is a Jewel taken out of your Crown, a degree of Blessedness lost in the Vision
of GOD. Oh! do but always think and act thus, and you will no longer be
laboring to compound Matters between GOD and the World; but on the contrary,
be daily endeavoring to give up yourselves more and more unto him; you will be
always Watching, always praying, always aspiring after farther degrees of
Purity and Love, and so consequently always preparing yourselves for a fuller
Light and Enjoyment of that GOD, in whose Presence there is Fullness of Joy, and
at whose Right Hand there are Pleasures for ever more. Amen! Amen!

SERMON V.
The Extent and Reasonableness of SELF DENIAL.
LUKE ix. 23. And he said unto them all, If any Man will come after me, let him
deny himself.
WHOEVER reads the Gospel with a single Eye, and sincere Intention, will find
that our blessed LORD took all Opportunities of reminding his Disciples that
his Kingdom was not of this World; that his Doctrine was a Doctrine of the
Cross; and that their professing themselves to be his Followers would call them
to a constant State of voluntary or Self-suffering and Self-denial.

The Words of the Text afford us one Instance among many, of our Savior's
Behavior in this Matter: For having in the preceding Verses revealed himself
to Peter, and the other Apostles, to be The Christ of God; le^t they should be
too much elated with such a peculiar Discovery of his Deity or think that their
Relation to so great a Personage would be attended with nothing but Pomp and
Grandeur, He tells them, in the (...) Verse, that the Son of Man was to suffer
many Things in this World though He was to be crowned with Eternal Glory and
Honor in the next: And that if any of them or their Posterity would share in
the same Honor, they must bear a Part with him in his Self-denial and
Sufferings. For He said unto them all, If any Man will come after me, let him
deny himself.

From which Words I shall consider these three Things: I, First, The Nature of
the Self-Denial recommended in the Text; and in how many Respects we must deny
ourselves, in order to come after JESUS CHRIST. II. Secondly, I shall endeavor
to prove the Universality and Reasonableness of this Duty of Self-Denial. III.
Thirdly and Lastly, I shall offer some Considerations, which may serve as so
many Motives to reconcile us to, and quicken us in the Practice of this
Doctrine of Self-Denial.


I. And first then, I am to show the Nature of the Self-Denial recommended in
the Text; or in how many Respects we must deny ourselves in order to follow
JESUS CHRIST.

Now as the Faculties of the Soul are distinguished by the Understanding, Will
and Affections; so in all these must each of us deny himself. We must not lean
to our own Under^^^^^ (...), being wi^e in our own Eyes, and prudent in our own
Sight; but we must submit our short sighted Reason to the Light of of Divine
Revelation: For there are Mysteries in Religion, which are above, though not
contrary to, our natural Reason: And therefore we shall never become Christians
unless we cast down Imaginations, and every high Thing that exalts itself
against the Knowledge of GOD, and bring into Captivity every Thought to the
Obedience of CHRIST. It is in this Respect, as well as others, that we must
become Fools for CHRIST' s Sake, and acknowledge we know nothing without
Revelation as we ought to know. We must then, with all Humility and Reverence,
embrace the mysterious Truths revealed to us in the Holy Scriptures; for thus
only can we become truly Wise, even Wise unto Salvation. It was Matter of our
Blessed LORD's Thanksgiving to his Heavenly Father, that he had hid these
Things from the Wise and Prudent, and had revealed them unto Babes. And in this
Respect also we must be converted and become as little Children, teachable, and
willing to follow the Lamb into what soever Mysteries he shall be pleased to
lead us; and believe and practice all Divine Truths, not because we can
demonstrate them, but because GOD, who can not lie, has revealed them to us.

Hence then we may trace Infidelity to its Fountain Head: For it is nothing
else but a Pride of the Understanding, an Unwillingness to submit to the Truth
of GOD, that makes so many, professing themselve wise, to become such Fools as
to deny the LORD, who has so dearly bought them; and dispute the Divin^^ of
that Eternal Word, in whom they live, (...), and have their Being: Whereby it
is justly to be feared, they will bring upon themselves sure, if not swift
Destruction.

But to return: As we must deny ourselves in our Understandings, so must (...)
deny, or, as it might be more properly rendered, renounce our Wills: That is,
we must make our own Wills no Principle of Action, but whether we eat or drink,
or whatsoever we do, we must do all, not merely to please ourselves, but to the
Glory of GOD. Not that we are therefore to imagine we are to have no Pleasure
in any Thing we do ( Wisdom's Ways are Ways of Pleasantness) but pleasing
ourselves must not be the principal, but only the subordinate End of our
Actions.

And I cannot but particularly press this Doctrine upon you, because it is the
Grand Secret of our Holy Religion. It is this, my Brethren, that distinguishes
the true Christian from the mere Moralist and formal Professor; and which alone
can (...) any of our Actions (...) in GOD's Sight: For if thine Eye be (...)
our Blessed LORD, Matthew. vi. 22, that is, if (...) aimest ^^mply to please GOD,
without any regard to thy own Will, thy whole Body, that is, all thy Actions,
will be f^ll of Light; agree able to the Gospel, which is (...) Light But if
thin^ Eye be evil, if thine Intention (...) v^^ted any other Way, thy whole
Body, all the Actions will be full of Darkness, unprofitable, and capable of no
Reward. For we must not only do the Will of GOD, but do it because it is his
Will; since we pray that GOD's Will may be done on Earth as it is in Heaven.
And no doubt, the blessed Angels not only do every Thing that GOD wills, but
do it cheerfully, out of this Principle, because GOD wills it: And if we
would live as we pray, we must go and do likewise.

But farther; as we must renounce our own Wills in doing, so likewise must we
renounce them in suffering the Will of GOD. Whatsoever befalls us, we must say
with good old Eli, It is the LORD, let Him do what seems him good; or with
one that was infinitely greater than Eli, Father, not my Will, but thine be
done. -- O JESU, thine was an innocent Will, and yet tho renouncedst it: Teach
us, even us also, O our Savior! to submit our Wills to thine, in all the Evils
which shall be brought upon us; and in every Thing enable us to give Thanks,
since it is thy blessed Will concerning us!

Thirdly and lastly, we must deny ourselves, as in our Understandings and
Wills, so likewise in our Affections. More particularly we must deny ourselves
the pleasurable Indulgence and Self-Enjoyment of Riches: If any Man will come
after me, says our blessed LORD, he must forsake all and follow me. And again
(to show the utter Inconsistency of the Love of the Things of this World with
the Love of the Father) he tells us, that unless a Man forsake all that he
has, he cannot be my Disciple.

Far be it from me to think that these Texts are to be taken in a literal
Sense, as though they obliged rich Persons to go sell all that they have and
give to the Poor, (for that would put it out of their Power to be serviceable
to the Poor for the future) but however they certainly imply thus much, That we
are to sit loose to, sell and forsake all in Affection, and be willing to part
with every Thing, when GOD shall require it at our Hands: That is, as the
Apostle observes, we must use the World as though we used it not; and though we
are in the World, we must not be of it. We must look upon ourselves as Stewards
and not Proprietors of the manifold Gifts of GOD; provide first what is
necessary for ourselves and for our Households, and expend the rest, not in
Indulgences and superfluous Ornaments, forbidden by the Apostle, but in
clothing, feeding, and relieving the naked, hungry, distressed Disciples of
JESUS CHRIST. This is what our Blessed LORD would have us understand by
forsaking all, and in this Sense must each of us deny himself.

I am sensible that this will seem an hard Saying to many, who will be offended
because they are covetous, and Lovers of Pleasure more than Lovers of God: But
if I yet pleased such Men, I should not be the Servant of CHRIST. No, we must
not, like Ahab's false Prophets, have a lying Spirit in our Mouths, nor fail to
declare (with St. Paul) the whole Will of God; and like honest Micajah, out of
Pity and Compassion, tell Men the Truth, though they may falsely think we
prophecy not Good, but (...) concerning them.

But to proceed: As we must renounce our Affection for Riches, so likewise our
Affections for our Relations when they stand in Opposition to our Love of, and
Duty to GOD: For thus says the Savior of the World: If any Man will come
after me, and hates not his Father and Mother, his Children, and Brethren, and
Sisters, yea and his own Life also, he cannot be a Disciple. -- Strange
Doctrine this! What, hate our own Flesh! What hate the Father that begat us,
the Mother that bare us! How can these Things be? Can GOD contradict himself?
Has he not bid us honor our Father and Mother? And yet we are here commanded
to hate them. How must these Truths be reconciled? Why, by interpreting the
Word hate, not in a rigorous and absolute Sense, but comparatively: Not as
implying a total Alienation, but a less degree of Affection. For thus our
blessed Savior himself (the best and surest Expositor of his own Meaning)
explains it in a parallel Text, Matthew. x. 37. He that loves Father or Mother
more than me, is not worthy of me: He that loves Son or Daughter more than me
is not worthy of me. So that when the Persuasions of such our Friends (as for
our Trial they may be permitted to be) are contrary to the Will of GOD, we must
say with Levi, we have not known them; or, agreeably to our blessed LORD'S
Rebuke to Peter, Get you behind me, my Adversaries; for you sav^ur not the
Things that be of GOD, but the Things that be of Man.

To conclude this Head: We must deny ourselves in Things indifferent: For it
might easily be shown that as many, if not more, perish by an immoderate Use of
Things in themselves indifferent as by any gross Sin whatever. A prudent
Christian therefore will consider not only what is lawful but what is expedient
also: Not so much what degrees of Self-denial best suit his Inclinations here,
as what will most effectually break his Will, and fit him for greater degrees
of Glory hereafter.

But is this the Doctrine of Christianity? and is not the Christian World then
asleep? If not, whence the Self-indulgence, whence the reigning Love of Riches
which we every where meet with? Above all, whence that predominant Greediness
of sensual Pleasure, that has so overrun this sinful Nation, that was a pious
Stranger to come amongst us, he would be tempted to think some Heathen Venus
was worshipped here; and that Temples were dedicated to her Service. But we
have the Authority of an inspired Apostle to affirm, that they who live in such
a Round of Pleasure, are dead while they live: Wherefore, as the Holy Ghost
says, Awake thou that sleep, and CHRIST shall give thee Light. But the
power of raising the spiritual Dead belongs only unto GOD. -- Do Thou
therefore, O Holy JESUS, who by thy almighty Word commandedst Lazarus to come
forth, though he had lain in the Grave so many Days, speak also as effectually to
these spiritually dead Souls, whom Satan for these many Years has so fast bound
by sensual Pleasures, that they are not so much as able to lift up their Eyes
or Hearts to Heaven.

II. But I pass on to the Second general Thing proposed, viz. To consider the
universal Obligation, and Reasonableness of this Doctrine of Self-Denial.

When our Blessed Master had been discoursing publicly concerning the
Watchfulness of the faithful and wise Steward, his Disciples asked him,
Speak thou this Parable to all, or only to us? The same Question I am aware
has been, and will be put concerning the foregoing Doctrine: For too many,
unwilling to take CHRIST'S easy Yoke upon them, in order to evade the Force of
the Gospel Precepts, would pretend that all those Commands concerning
Self-Denial, renouncing ourselves and the World, belonged only to our LORD's
first and immediate Followers, and not to ^s or to our Children. But such
Persons greatly err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of Godliness in
their Hearts. For the Doctrine of JESUS CHRIST, like his blessed Self, is the
same Yesterday, To Day, and for ever. What he said unto one, he said unto all,
even unto the Ends of the World; If any Man will come after me, let him deny
himself: And in the Text it is particularly mentioned that He said unto them
all. And le^t we should still absurdly imagine that this Word all was to be
confined to his Apostles, with whom he was then discoursing, it is said in
another Place, that JESUS turned unto the Multitude and said, If any Man will
come after me, and hates not his Father and Mother, yea and his own Life also,
he cannot be my Disciple. When our blessed LORD had spoken a certain Parable,
it is said, the Scribes and Pharisees were offended, for they knew the Parable
was spoken against them: And if Christians can now read these plain and
positive Texts of Scriptures, and at the same Time not think they are spoken of
them, they are more hardened than Jews, and more insincere than Pharisees. LAW'
s Christian Perfection.


In the former part of this Discourse I observed that the Precepts concerning
forsaking and selling all did not oblige us in a literal Sense, because the
State of the Church does not demand it of us, as it did of the Primitive
Christians; but still the same Deadness to the World, the same abstemious Use
of, and Readiness to part with our Goods for CHRIST'S sake, is as absolutely
necessary for, and as obligatory on us, as it was on them. For though the
Church may differ as to the outward State of it, in different Ages, yet as to
the Purity of its inward State, it was, is, and always will be invariably the
same. And all the Commands which we meet with in the Epistles, about mortifying
our Members which are upon the Earth, of setting our Affections on Things
above, and of (...) being conformed to this World; are but so many
incontestible Proofs that the same Holiness, Heavenly-mindedness, and Deadness
to the World, is as necessary for (...) as for our LORD's immediate Followers.

But farther, as such an Objection argues an Ignorance of the Scriptures, so it
is a manifest Proof that such as make it are Strangers to the Power of
Godliness in their Hearts. For since the Sum and Substance of Religion consists
in our Recovery from our fallen Estate in Adam, by a New Birth in CHRIST JESUS,
there is an absolute Necessity for us to embrace and practice the Self-denial
before recommended. Because we have not only a new House to build, but an old
one first to pull down; we must necessarily therefore be dead to the World,
before we can live unto God. In short, all Things belonging to the Old Man must
die in us, before the Things belonging to the Spirit can live and grow in us.

When JESUS CHRIST was about to make his public Appearance, and to preach the
glad Tidings of Salvation to a benighted World, his Harbinger John Baptist was
sent to prepare his Way before him. In like Manner, when this same JESUS is
about to take Possession of a converted Sinner's Heart, Self-denial, like John
the Baptist, must prepare the Way before him: For we must mourn before we are
capable of being comforted; we must undergo the Spirit of Bondage, in order to
be made meet to receive the Spirit of Adoption.

Were we indeed in a State of Innocence, and had we, like Adam before his Fall,
the Divine Image fully stamped upon our Souls, we then should have no need of
Self-denial; but since we are fallen, sickly, disordered Creatures, and this
Self-suffering, this Self-renunciation, is the indispensable Means of
recovering our primitive Glory; methinks, in that Case, to endeavor to shake
off and reject such a salutary Practice, on account of the Difficulty attending
it at first, is but too like the Obstinacy of a perverse sick Child, who
nauseates and refuses the Potion reached out to it by a skilful Physician or
tender Parent, because it is a little ungrateful to the Taste.

Had any of us seen Lazarus when he lay full of Sores at the Rich Man's Gate;
or Job when he was smitten with Ulcers, from the Crown of his Head to the Sole
of his Foot: And had we at the same Time prescribed to them some healing
Medicines, which, because they would put them to Pain, they would not apply to
their Wounds, should we not most justly think, that they were either fond of a
distempered Body, or were not sensible of their Distempers? But our Souls, by
Nature, are in an infinitely more deplorable Condition than the Bodies of Job
or Lazarus, when full of Ulcers and Boils: For, alas! our whole Head is sick,
and our whole Heart faint, from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot,
we are full of Wounds and Bruises and putrefying Sores, and there is no Health
in us. And JESUS CHRIST, like a good Physician, in the Gospel-Doctrine of
Self-denial, presents (...) with a spiritual Medicine to heal our Sickness: But
if we will neither receive nor apply it, it is a Sign we are not sensible of
the Wretchedness of our State, or else that we are unwilling to be made whole.

Even Naaman's Servants could say, when he refused, pursuant to Elisha's
Orders, to wash in the River Jordan, that he might cure his Leprosy, Father, if
the Prophet had bid thee do some great Thing, would thou not have done it?
How much rather then, when he says to thee, Wash and be clean? And may not I
very properly address myself to you in the same Manner, my Brethren? -- If
JESUS CHRIST, our great Prophet, had bid you to do some great and very
difficult Thing, would you not have done it? Much more then should you do it,
when he only bids you deny yourselves what would certainly hurt you if enjoyed,
and behold, you shall be made perfectly whole.

But to illustrate this by another Comparison: In the 12th Chapter of the Acts,
we read, that St. Peter was kept in Prison, and was sleeping between two
Soldiers, bound with two Chains: And behold an Angel of the LORD came upon him,
and smote Peter on the Side, saying, Arise up quickly: And his Chains fell off
from his Hands. But had this great Apostle, instead of rising up quickly, and
doing as the blessed Angel commanded him, hugged his Chains and begged that
they might not be let fall from his Hands, would not any one think that he was
in love with Slavery, and deserved to be executed next Morning? And does not
the Person who refuses to deny himself, act as inconsistently as this Apostle
would have done if he had neglected the Means of his Deliverance? For our
Souls, by Nature, are in a spiritual Dungeon, sleeping and fast bound between
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, not with Two but Ten Thousand Chains of
Lusts and Corruptions. Now JESUS CHRIST, like St. Peter's good Angel, by his
Gospel comes and opens the Prison Door, prescribes Self-denial, Mortification,
and Renunciation of ourselves and the World, as so many spiritual Keys which
will unlock our Shackles, make them fall off from our Hearts, and so restore us
to the glorious Liberty of the Sons of GOD. But if we will not arise quickly,
gird up the Loins of our Mind, and deny ourselves, as he has commanded, Are we
not in Love with Bondage, and deserve never to be delivered from it?

Indeed I will not affirm that this Doctrine of Self-Denial appears in this
just Light to every one. No, I am sensible that to the Natural Man it is
Foolishness, and to the young Convert an hard Saying. But what says our
Savior? If any Man will do my Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it
be of GOD, or whether I speak of myself. This, my dear Friends, is the best,
the only Way of Conviction: Let us up and be doing; let us arise quickly, and
deny ourselves, and the Lord JESUS will remove those Scales from the Eyes of
our Minds, which now, like so many Veils, hinder us from seeing clearly the
Reasonableness, Necessity, and inexpressible Advantage of the Doctrine that has
been now delivered. Let us but once thu^ (...) ourselves Men, and then the
Spirit of GOD (...) move on the Face of our Souls, as he did (...) upon the
Face of the great Deep; and cause (...) to ^^erge out of that confused Chaos,
in w^^^ they are most certainly now involved, if we (...) Strangers and Enemies
to Self-Denial and Cros^ of CHRIST.

But notwithstanding this Doctrine of Self-denial is, when rightly understood,
so reasonable and beneficial; yet many, it is to be feared, like the young Man
in the Gospel, are ready to go away sorrowful.

III. Proceed we therefore now to the Third and last general Thing proposed,
viz. To offer some Considerations, which may serve as so many Motives to
reconcile us to, and quicken us in the Practice of this Duty of Self-Denial.

1. And the first Means I shall recommend to you, in order to reconcile you to
this Doctrine is, to meditate frequently on the Life of our blessed Lord and
Master JESUS CHRIST. Oh! may we often think on Him our grand Exemplar! Follow
him from his Cradle to the Cross, and see what a self-denying Life He led! And
shall not we drink of the Cup that he drank of, and be baptized with the
Baptism that He was baptized with? Or think we that JESUS CHRIST did and
suffered every Thing in order to have us excused, and exempted from Sufferings?
No, far be it from any sincere Christian to judge after this Manner: For St.
Peter tells us, He suffered for us, leaving us an Example that we should follow
his Steps. Had CHRIST, indeed, like those that sat in Moses' s Chair, laid
heavy Burdens of Self-Denial upon us, (supposing they were heavy, which they
are not) and refused to touch them himself with one of his Fingers; we might
have had some Pretense to complain: But since he has enjoined us nothing but
what he has first put in Practice himself, Thou art inexcuseable, O Disciple,
whoever thou art, who would be above thy persecuted self-denying Master: And
thou art no good and faithful Servant, who art unwilling to suffer and
sympathize with thy mortified, heavenly-minded LORD.

2. Next to the Pattern of our blessed Master, think often on the Lives of the
glorious Company of the Apostles, the goodly Fellowship of the Prophets, and
the noble Army of Martyrs; who by a constant looking to the Author and Finisher
of our Faith, have fought the good Fight, and are gone before us to inherit the
Promises. View again and again, how holily, how self-denyingly, how unblameably
they lived: And if Self-denial was necessary for them, why not for us also? Are
we not Men of like Passions with them? Do we not live in the same wicked World
as they did? Have we not the same good Spirit to assist, support, and purify
us, as they had? And is not the same eternal Inheritance reached out, as a
Reward of our Self-denial and the Renunciation of the World, as was offered to
them? And if we have the same Nature to change, the same wicked World to
withstand, the same good Spirit to help, and the same Eternal Crown to reward
our Obedience; why should not we lead the same Lives as they did? Do we think
they did Works of Supererogation? If not, why don't we do as they did? Or why
does the Church set a part Festivals to commemorate the Deaths and Sufferings
of the Saints, but in order to excite us to follow them as they did CHRIST.

3. Thirdly, Think often on the Pains of Hell^ Consider, whether it is not
better to cut off a Right Hand or Foot, and pull out a Right Eye, if they
offend us (or cause us to sin) rather than to be cast into Hell, into the Fire
that never shall be quenched; where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not
quenched. Think how many Thousands there are now reserved with damned Spirits
in Chains of Darkness unto the Judgment of the great Day, for not complying
with the Precept in the Text. And think withal that this, this must be our own
Case shortly, unless we are wise in Time, and submit to those easy Conditions
our Savior has prescribed us, in order to avoid it. Think you they now imagine
JESUS CHRIST to be an hard Master; or rather think you not they would give ten
thousand times ten thousand Worlds, could they but return to Life again, and
take CHRIST'S easy Yoke upon them? and can we dwell with everlasting Burnings
more than they? No, if we cannot bear this Precept, Come, deny yourselves, take
up your Crosses; how shall we bear this irrevocable Sentence, Depart from me,
ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels? But I
hope those, amongst whom I am now preaching the Kingdom of GOD, are not so
disingenuous as to need to be driven to their Duty by the Terrors of the LORD,
but rather desire to be drawn by the Cords of Love.

Lastly therefore, and to conclude, often meditate on the Joys of Heaven:
Think, think with what unspeakable Glory those happy Souls are now incircled,
who when on Earth were called to deny themselves as well as (...) and were not
disobedient to that Call: Lift up your Hearts frequently toward the Mansions
of eternal Bliss, and with an Eye of Faith, like the great St. Stephen see the
Heavens opened, and the Son of Man with his glorious Retinue of departed Saints
sitting and solacing themselves in eternal Joys, and with unspeakable Comfort
looking back on the^ past Sufferings and Self-denials, as so many glorious
Means which exalted them to such a Crown. Hark! methinks I hear them chantin^
forth their everlasting Hallelujahs, and spending an eternal Day in ecchoing
forth triumphant Songs of Joy. And do you not long, my Brethren, to join this
heavenly Choir? Do not your Hearts burn within you? As the Har^ pants after
the Water Brooks, do not your Souls so long after the blessed Company of these
Sons of GOD? Behold then a heavenly Ladder reached down to you, by which you
may climb to this Holy Hill. (...) If any Man will come after them, let him
deny himself and follow them. It was this, my Brethren, exalted the Holy JESUS
himself, as Man, to sit at the Right Hand of his adorable Father. By this alone
every Saint that ever lived ascended into the Joy of their LORD: And by this
we, even we also may be lifted up into the same most blissful Regions, there to
enjoy an eternal ^est with the People of GOD, and join with them in singing
Doxologies and Songs of Praise, to the Everlasting, Blessed, All-glorious, most
Adorable Trinity, for ever and ever.

Which GOD of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

SERMON VI.
The Necessity and Benefits of RELIGIOUS SOCIETY.
ECCLES. iv. 9, 10, 11, 12. Two are better than One, because they have a good
Reward for their Labor.
For if they fall, the One will lift up his Fellow: But woe be to him that is
alone when he falls; for he has not another to help him up.
Again, if Two lie together, then they have Heat; but how can One be warm
alone?
And if One prevail against him, Two shall withstand him; and a Threefold Cord
is not quickly broken.

AMONG the many Reasons assignable for the sad Decay of True Christianity,
perhaps the neglecting to assemble ourselves together, in Religious Societies,
may not be one of the least. That I may therefore do my Endeavor toward
promoting so excellent a Means of Piety, I have selected a Passage of Scripture
drawn from the Experience of the wisest of Men, which being a little enlarged
on and illustrated, will fully answer my present Design; that being to show, in
the best Manner I can, the Necessity and Benefits of Society in general, and of
Religious Society in particular.

Two are better than One, etc.

From which Words I shall take Occasion to prove, First, The Truth of the Wise
Man's Assertion, viz. Two are better than One, and that in Reference to Society
in general, and Religious Society in particular. Secondly, To assign some
Reasons why Two are better than One, especially as to the last Particular. 1.
Because Men can raise up one another when they chance to slip: For if they
fall, the One will lift up his Fellow. 2. Because they can impart Heat to each
other: Again, if Two lie together, then they have Heat; but how can One be warm
alone? 3. Because they can secure each other from those that do oppose them:
And if One prevail against him, Two shall withstand him; and a Threefold Cord
is not quickly b^^ken. From hence, Thirdly, I shall take Occasion to show the
Duty incumbent on every Member of a Religious Society. Fourthly and lastly, I
shall draw (...) Inference or two from what shall have been said; and then
conclude with a Word or two of Exhortation from the whole.


First then, I am to prove the Truth of the Wise Man's Assertion, viz. that Two
are better than One, and that in Reference to Society in general, and Religious
Societies in particular.

And how can this be done better than by showing that it is absolutely
necessary for the Welfare both of the Bodies and Souls of Men? Indeed, if we
look upon Man as he came out of the Hands of his Maker, we imagine him to be
perfect, entire, lacking nothing. But GOD, whose Thoughts are not as our
Thoughts, saw something still wanting to make Adam happy. And what was that?
Why, an Help meet for him. For thus speaks the Scripture: And the LORD GOD
said, It is not good that the Man should be alone, I will make an Help meet for
him.

Observe, GOD said, It is not good, thereby implying that the Creation would
have been imperfect, in some sort, unless an Help was found out meet for Adam.
And if this was the Case of Man before the Fall; if an Help was meet for him in
a State of Perfection, surely since the Fall, when we come naked and helpless
out of our Mother's Womb, when our Wants increase with our Years, and we can
scarcely subsist a Day without the mutual Assistance of each other, well may we
say, It is not good for Man to be alone.

Society then, we see, is absolutely necessary in respect to our bodily and
personal Wants. If we carry our View farther, and consider Mankind as divided
into different Cities, Countries, and Nations, the Necessity of it will appear
yet more evident. For how can Communities be kept up, or Commerce carried on,
without Society? Certainly not at all, since Providence seems wisely to have
assigned a particular Product to almost each particular Country, on Purpose, as
it were, to oblige us to be social; and has so admirably mingled the Parts of
the whole Body of Mankind together, that the Eye cannot say to the Hand, I have
no Need of Thee; nor again, the Hand to the Foot, I have no Need of Thee.

Many other Instances might be given of the Necessity of Society, in Reference
to our bodily, personal, and national Wants. But what are all these when
weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, in Comparison of the infinite greater
Need of it, with respect to the Soul? It was chiefly in regard to this better
Part, no doubt, that GOD said, It is not good for the Man to be alone. For, let
us suppose Adam to be as happy as may be, placed as the Lord of the Creation in
the Paradise of GOD, and spending all his Hours in adoring and praising the
blessed Author of his Being; yet as his Soul was the very Copy of the Divine
Nature, whose peculiar Property it is to be communicative, without the Divine
All Sufficiency, he could not be completely happy, because he was alone and
incommunicative, nor even Content in Paradise for want of a Partner in his
Joys. GOD knew this, and therefore said, It is not good that the Man should be
alone, I will make a Help meet for him. And though this proved a fatal Means of
his falling; yet that was not owing to any natural Consequence of Society; but
partly to that cursed Apostate, who craftily lies in wait to deceive; partly to
Adam's own Folly, in rather choosing to be miserable with one he loved, than
trust in GOD to raise him up another Spouse.

If we reflect indeed on that familiar Intercourse our first Parents could
carry on with Heaven, in a State of Innocence, we shall be apt to think he had
as little Need of Society, as to (...) Soul, as before we supposed him to have,
in respect to his Body. But yet, as GOD and the Holy Angels were so far above
him on the one Hand, and the Beasts so far beneath him on the other, there was
nothing like having one to converse with, who was Bone of his Bone, and Flesh
of his Flesh.

Man, then, could not be fully happy, we see even in Paradise, without a
Companion of his own Species, much less now he is driven out. For, let us view
him a little in his natural Estate now, since the Fall, as having his
Understanding darkened, his Mind alienated from the Life of GOD; as no more
able to see his Way wherein he should go, than a Blind Man to describe the Sun:
That notwithstanding this, he must receive his Sight ever he can see GOD: And
that if he never sees him, he never can be happy. Let us view him, I say, in
this Light (or rather this Darkness) and deny the Necessity of Society if we
can. A Divine Revelation we find is absolutely necessary, we being by Nature as
unable to know, as we are to do our Duty. And how shall we learn except one
teach us? But was GOD to do this himself, how should we, with Moses,
exceedingly quake and fear? Nor would the Ministry of Angels in this Affair be
without too much Terror. It is necessary, therefore (at least GOD's Dealing
with us has showed it to be so) that we should be drawn with the Cords of a
Man. And that a Divine Revelation being granted, we should use one another's
Assistance, under GOD to instruct each other in the Knowledge, and to exhort
one another to the Practice of those Things which belong to our everlasting
Peace. This is undoubtedly the great End of Society intended by GOD since the
Fall, and a strong Argument it is, why Two are better than One, and why we
should not forsake the assembling ourselves together.

But farther, let us consider ourselves as Christians, as having this natural
Veil, in some measure, taken off from our Eyes by the Assistance of GOD's Holy
Spirit, and so enabled to see what he requires of us. Let us suppose ourselves
in some degree to have tasted the good Word of Life, and to have felt the
Powers of the World to come, influencing and moulding our Souls into a
religious Frame: To be fully and heartily convinced that we are Soldiers lilted
under the Banner of CHRIST, and have proclaimed open War at our Baptism,
against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and have, perhaps, frequently
renewed our Obligations so to do, by partaking of the Lord's Supper: That we
are surrounded with Millions of Foes without, and infested with a Legion of
Enemies within: That we are commanded to shine as Lights in the World, in the
midst of a crooked and perverse Generation: That we are traveling to a long
Eternity, and need all imaginable Helps to show us, and encourage us in our Way
thither. Let us, I say, reflect on all this, and then how shall each of us cry
out, Brethren, what a necessary Thing it is to meet together in Religious
Societies?

The Primitive Christians were fully sensible of this, and therefore we find
them continually keeping up Communion with each other: For what says the
Scripture? They continued steadfastly in the Doctrine and Fellowship, Acts ii.
42. Peter and John were no sooner dismissed by the Great Council, than they
haste away to their Companions. And being set at Liberty, says the Text, they
came to their own, and told them all these Things which the High Priest had
said unto them, Acts iv. 23. Paul, as soon as converted, tarried three Days
with the Disciples that were (...) Damascus, Acts ix. 19. And Peter afterward,
when released from Prison, immediately goes to the House of Mary, where there
were great Multitudes assembled, praying, Acts xii. 12. And it is reported of
Christians in After-Ages, that they used to assemble together before Daylight,
to sing a Psalm to CHRIST as GOD. So precious was the Communion of Saints in
those Days.

If it be asked, what Advantage we shall reap from such a Procedure now? I
answer, much every Way. Two are better than One, because they have a good
Reward for their Labor: For if they fall, the One will lift up his Fellow; but
woe be to him that is alone when he falls, for he has not another to help
him up. Again, if Two lie together, then they have Heat; but how can One be
warm alone? And if One prevail against him, Two shall withstand him; and a
Threefold Cord is not quickly broken.

Which directly leads me to my Second general Head, under which I was to assign
some Reasons why Two are better than One, especially in Religious Society.

1. As Man in his present Condition cannot always stand upright, but by Reason
of the Frailty of his Nature cannot but fall; one eminent Reason why Two are
better than One, or, in other Words, one great Advantage of Religious Society
is, That when they fall, the One will lift up his Fellow.

And an excellent Reason this, indeed! For alas! When we reflect how prone we
are to be drawn into Error in our Judgments, and into Vice in our Practice; and
how unable (...) how very unwilling, to espy or correct our own Miscarriages;
when we consider how apt the World is to flatter us in our Faults, and how few
there are so kind as to tell us the Truth; what an inestimable Privilege must
it be to have a Set of true, judicious, hearty Friends about us, continually
watching over our Souls, to inform us where we have fallen, and warn us that we
fall not again for the future. Surely it is such a Privilege that (to use the
Words of an eminent Christian) we shall never know the Value of, till we come
to Glory.

But this is not all; for supposing that we could always stand upright, yet
whosoever reflects on the Difficulties of Religion in general, and his own
Propensity to Lukewarmness and Indifference in particular, will find that he
must be zealous as well as steady, if ever he expects to enter the Kingdom of
Heaven. Here, then, the Wise Man points out to us another excellent Reason why
Two are better than One. Again, says he, If Two lie together, then they have
Heat; but how can One be warm alone?

Which was the next Thing to be considered under the Second general Head, viz.
to assign a second Reason why Two are better than One, because they can impart
Heat to each other.

It is an Observation no less true than common, That kindled Coals, if placed
asunder, soon go out, but if heaped together, quicken and enliven each other,
and afford a lasting Heat. The same will hold good in the Case now before us.
If Christians kindled by the Grace of GOD unite, they will quicken and enliven
each other; but if they separate and keep asunder, no marvel if they soon grow
cool or tepid. If Two or Three meet together in CHRIST'S Name, they will have
Heat; but how can One be warm alone?

Observe; How can One be warm alone? The Wise Man's expressing himself by way
of Question, implies an Impossibility, at least a very great Difficulty, to be
warm in Religion without Company, where it may be had. Behold here, then,
another excellent Benefit flowing from Religious Society; it will keep us
zealous, as well as steady, in the Ways of Godliness.

But to illustrate this a little farther by a Comparison or two. Let us look
upon ourselves (as was above hinted) as Soldiers lifted under CHRIST'S Banner;
as going out with ten thousand to meet One that comes against us with twenty
thousand: as Persons that are to wrestle not only with Flesh and Blood, but
against Principalities, against Powers, and spiritual Wickednesses in high
Places. And then tell me, all ye that fear GOD, if it be not an invaluable
Privilege to have a Company of Fellow Soldiers continually about us, animating
and exhorting each other to stand our ground, to keep our Ranks, and manfully
to follow the Captain of our Salvation, though it be through a Sea of Blood?

Lastly, Let us consider ourselves in another View before mentioned, viz. as
Persons traveling to a long Eternity; as rescued by the free Grace of GOD, in
some Measure, from our natural Egyptian Bondage, and marching under the Conduct
of our spiritual Joshua, through the Wilderness of this World, to the Land of
our Heavenly Canaan. Let us farther reflect how apt we are to startle at every
Difficulty; to cry; There are Lions! There are Lions in the Way* There are the
Sons of Anak to be grappled with, ever we can possess the Promised Land: How
prone we are, with Lot's Wife, to look wishfully back on our spiritual Sodom,
or with the foolish Israelites, to long again for the Fleshpots of Egypt, and
to return to our former natural State of Bondage and Slavery. Consider this, my
Brethren, and see what a blessed Privilege it will be to have a Set of
Israelites indeed about us, always reminding us of the Folly of any such
cowardly Design, and of the intolerable Misery we shall run into, if we fall in
the least short of the Promised Land.

More might be said on this Particular, did not the Limits of a Discourse of
this Nature, oblige me to hasten,

3. To give a Third Reason, mentioned by the Wise Man in the Text, why Two are
better than One; namely, because they can secure each other from Enemies
without. And if One prevail against him, yet Two shall withstand him; and a
Threefold Cord is not quickly broken.

Hitherto we have considered the Advantages of Religious Societies, as a great
Preservative against falling (at least dangerously falling) into Sin and
Lukewarmness, and that too from our own Corruptions. But what says the Wise Son
of Sirach? My Son, when thou go to serve the Lord, prepare thy Soul for
Temptation: And that not only from inward, but outward Foes; particularly from
those two grand Adversaries, the World and the Devil: For no sooner will thine
Eye be bent Heavenward, but the former will be immediately diverting it another
Way, telling thee thou need not be singular in order to be religious; that
one may be a Christian without going so much out of the Common Road.

Nor will the Devil be wanting in his artful Insinuations, or impious
Suggestions, to divert or terrify thee from pressing forwards, that thou may
lay hold on the Crown of Life: And if he cannot prevail this Way, he will try
another; and, in order to make his Temptation the more undiscerned, but withal
more successful, he will employ, perhaps, some of thy nearest Relatives, or
most powerful Friends (as he set Peter on our blessed Master) who will always
be bidding thee spare thyself; telling thee thou need not take so much
Pains; that it is not so difficult a Matter to get to Heaven as some People
would make of it, nor the Way so narrow as others imagine it to be^.

But see here the Advantage of Religious Company; for supposing thou find
thyself thus surrounded on every Side, and unable to withstand such horrid
(though seemingly friendly) Counsels, haste away to thy Companions, and they
will teach thee a truer and better Lesson; they will tell thee, that thou must
be singular if thou will be religious; and that it is as impossible for a
Christian, as for a City set upon a Hill, to be hid: That if thou will be an
almost Christian (and as good be none at all) thou may live in the same idle
indifferent Manner as thou see most other People do: But if thou will be not
only almost, but altogether a Christian, they will inform thee thou must go a
great deal farther: That thou must not only faintly seek, but earnestly strive
to enter in at the strait Gate: That there is but One Way now to Heaven as
formerly, viz. through the narrow Passage of a sound Conversion: And that in
order to bring about this mighty Work, thou must undergo a constant, but
necessary Discipline of Fasting, Watching, and Prayer. And that therefore, the
only Reason why these Friends give thee such Advice, is, because they are not
willing to take so much Pains themselves; or, as our Savior told Peter on a
like Occasion, because they savor not the Things that be of GOD, but the
Things that be of Men.

This then, is another excellent Blessing arising from Religious Society, that
Friends can hereby secure each other from those that oppose them. The Devil is
fully sensible of this, and therefore he has always done his utmost to
suppress, and put a Stop to the Communion of Saints. This was his grand
Artifice at the first planting of the Gospel; to persecute the Professors of
it, in order to separate them. Which, though GOD, as he always will, overruled
for the better; yet it shows what an Enmity he has against Christians
assembling themselves together. Nor has he yet left off his old Stratagem; it
being his usual Way to entice us by ourselves, in order to tempt us; where, by
being destitute of one another's Helps, he hopes to lead us captive at his Will.

But, on the contrary, knowing his own Interest is strengthened by Society, he
would first persuade us to neglect the Communion of Saints, and then bid us
stand in the Way of Sinners, hoping thereby to put us into the Seat of the
Scornful. Judas and Peter are melancholy Instances of this. The former had no
sooner left his Company at Supper, but he went out and betrayed his Master: And
the dismal Downfall of the latter, when he would venture himself amongst a
Company of Enemies, plainly shows us what the Devil will endeavor to do, when
he gets us by ourselves. Had Peter kept his own Company, he might have kept his
Integrity; but a single Cord, alas, how quickly was it broken? Our blessed
Savior knew this full well, and therefore it is very observable, that he
always sent out his Disciples Two by Two.

And now, after so many Advantages to be reaped from Religious Society, may we
not very justly cry out with the Wise Man in my Text, Woe be to him that is
alone; for when he falls, he has not another to lift him up: When he is
cold, he has not a Friend to warm him; when he is assaulted, he has not a
Second to help him to withstand his Enemy.

III. I now come to my Third general Head, under which was to be shown the
several Duties incumbent on every Member of a Religious Society, as such, which
are three. 1. Mutual Reproof: 2. Mutual Exhortation: 3. Mutual assisting and
defending each other.

1. Mutual Reproof. Two are better than One: for when they fall, the One will
lift up his Fellow.

Now, Reproof may be taken either in a more extensive Sense, and then it
signifies our raising a Brother by the gentlest Means, when he falls into Sin
and Error; or in a more restrained Signification, as reaching no farther than
those little Miscarriages, which unavoidably happen in the most holy Men living.

The Wise Man in the Text, supposes all of us subject to both: For when they
fall (says he, thereby implying that each of us may fall) the One will lift up
his Fellow. From whence we may infer, that when any Brother is overtaken with a
Fault, he that is spiritual (that is, regenerate, and knows the Corruption and
Weakness of Human Nature) ought to restore such a one in the Spirit of
Meckness. And why he should do so, the Apostle subjoins a Reason considering
thyself, lest thou also be tempted; i. e. considering thy own Frailty, lest
thou also fall by the like Temptation.

We are all frail unstable Creatures; and it is merely owing to the Free Grace
and good Providence of GOD, that we run not into the same Excess of Riot with
other Men. Every offending Brother, therefore, claims our Pity rather than our
Resentment; and each Member should strive who should be most forward, as well
as most gentle, in restoring him to his former State.

But supposing a Person not to be overtaken, but to fall wilfully into a Crime;
yet who art thou that deniest Forgiveness to thy offending Brother? Let him
that stands take heed lest be fall. Take ye, Brethren, the holy Apostles as
eminent Examples for you to learn by, how you ought to behave in this Matter.
Consider how quickly they joined the Right Hand of Fellowship with Peter, who
had so wilfully denied his Master: For we find John and him together but two
Days after, John xx. 2. And ver. 19, we find him assembled with the rest. So
soon did they forgive, so soon associate with their sinful, yet relenting
Brother -- Let us go and do likewise.

But there is another kind of Reproof incumbent on every Member of a Religious
Society; namely, a gentle Rebuke for some Miscarriage or other, which, though
not actually sinful, yet may become the Occasion of Sin. This indeed seems a
more easy, but perhaps will be found a more difficult Point than the former:
For when a Person has really sinned, he cannot but own his Brethrens Reproof to
be just; whereas, when it was only for some little Misconduct, the Pride that
is in our Natures, will scarce suffer us to brook it. But however ungrateful
this Pill may be to our Brother, yet if we have any Concern for his Welfare, it
must be administered by some friendly Hand or other. By all Means then let it be
applied; only, like a skilful Physician, gild over the ungrateful Medicine, and
endeavor if possible, to deceive thy Brother into Health and Soundness. Let
all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Malice, and Evil-speaking, be put away from it.
Let the Patient know his Recovery is the only Thing aimed at, that thou
delightest not causelessly to grieve thy Brother; and then thou can not want
Success.

2. Mutual Exhortation is the second Duty resulting from the Words of the Text.
-- Again, if Two lie together, then they have Heat.

Observe here again, the Wise Man supposes it as impossible for Religious
Persons to meet together, and not to be the Warmer for each other's Company, as
for two Persons to lie in the same Bed, and yet freeze with Cold. But now, how
is it possible to communicate Heat to each other, without mutually stirring up
the Gift of GOD which is in us, by (...) Exhortation? Let every Member then of
a Religious Society write that zealous Apostle's Advice on the Tables of his
Heart; See that ye exhort, and provoke one another to Love, and to good Works;
and so much the more as you see the Day of the LORD approaching. Believe me,
Brethren, we have Need of Exhortation to rouse up our sleepy Souls, to set us
upon our Watch against the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil;
to excite us to renounce ourselves, to take up our Crosses, and follow our
Blessed Master, and the glorious Company of Saints and Martyrs, who through
Faith have fought the good Fight, and are gone before us to inherit the
Promises. A third Part, therefore, of the Time wherein a Religious Society
meets, seems necessary to be spent in this important Duty: For what avails it
to have our Understandings enlightened by pious Reading unless our Wills are at
the same Time inclined, and inflamed by mutual Exhortation, to put it in
Practice? Add to this; that this is the best Way both to receive and impart
Light, and the only Means to preserve and increase that Warmth and Heat which
each Person first brought with him; GOD so ordering this, as all other
spiritual Gifts, that to him that has, i. e. improves and communicates what he
has, shall be given; but from him that has not, i. e. does not improve the
Heat he has, shall be taken away even that which he seemed to have. So
needful, so essentially necessary, is Exhortation to the Good of Society.

3. Thirdly and lastly, The Text points out another Duty incumbent on every
Member of a Religious Society, viz. To defend each other from those that do
oppose them. And if One prevail against him, yet Two shall withstand him; and a
Threefold Cord is not quickly broken.

Here the Wise Man takes it for granted, that Offenses will come, nay, and that
they may prevail too. And this is no more than our Blessed Master has long
since told us. Not indeed, that there is any Thing in Christianity itself that
has the least Tendency to give rise to, or promote such Offenses: No, on the
contrary, it breathes nothing but Unity and Love.

But so it is, that ever since the fatal Sentence pronounced by GOD, after our
first Parents Fall, viz. I will put Enmity between thy Seed and her Seed; He
that is born after the Flesh, that is, the unregenerate unconverted Sinner, has
in all Ages persecuted him that is born after the Spirit: And so it always will
be. Accordingly we find an early Proof given of this in the Instance of Cain
and Abel; and of Ishmael and Isaac; of Jacob and Esau afterward. And indeed,
the whole Bible contains little else but an History of the great and continued
Opposition between the Children of this World and the Children of GOD. The
first Christians were remarkable Examples of this; and though those troublesome
Times, blessed be GOD, are now over, yet the Apostle has laid it down as a
general Rule, and all that are sincere can experimentally prove the Truth of
it. That they that will live godly in CHRIST JESUS, must (to the End of the
World, in some Degree or other) suffer Persecution. That therefore this may not
make us desert our Blessed Master's Cause, every Member should unite their
Forces, in order to stand against it. And for the better effecting this, each
would do well, from Time to Time, to communicate his Experiences, Grievances,
and Temptations, and beg his Companions (first asking GOD's Assistance, without
which all is nothing) to administer Reproof, Exhortation or Comfort, as his
Case requires: So that if One cannot prevail against it, yet Two shall
withstand it; and a Threefold (much less a many-fold) Cord will not be quickly
broken.

IV. But it is Time for me to proceed to the Fourth general Thing proposed,
viz. To draw an Inference or two from what has been said.

1. And first then, if Two are better than One, and the Advantages of Religious
Society are so many and so great, then it is the Duty of every true Christian
to set on Foot, establish and promote, as much as in him lies, Societies of
this Nature. And I believe we may venture to affirm, that if ever a Spirit of
true Christianity is revived in the World, it must be brought about by some
such Means as this. Motives, surely, cannot be wanting, to stir us up to this
commendable and necessary Undertaking: For granting all hitherto advanced to be
of no Force, yet methinks the single Consideration that great Part of our
Happiness in Heaven will consist in the Communion of Saints; or that the
Interest as well as Piety of those Sectarists that differ from us, is
strengthened and supported by nothing more than their frequent Meetings; either
of these Considerations, I say, one would think, should induce us to do our
utmost to copy after their good Example, and settle a lasting and pious
Communion of the Saints on Earth. Add to this that we find the Kingdom of
Darkness established daily by such like Means; and shall not the Kingdom of
CHRIST be set in Opposition against it? Shall the Children of Belial assemble
and strengthen each other in Wickedness; and shall not the Children of GOD
unite, and strengthen themselves in Piety? Shall Societies on Societies be
countenanced for Midnight Revellings, and the promoting of Vice, and scarcely
one be found intended for the Propagation of Virtue? -- Be astonished, O
Heavens at this!

2. But this leads me to a second Inference; namely, to warn Persons of the
great Danger those are in, who either by their Subscriptions, Presence or
Approbation, promote Societies of a quite opposite Nature to Religion.

And here I would not be understood to mean only those Public Meetings which
are designed manifestly for nothing else but Revellings and Banquetings, for
Chambering and Wantonness, and at which a modest Heathen would blush to be
present; but also those seemingly innocent Entertainments and Meetings which
the politer Part of the World are so very fond of, and spend so much Time in:
But which notwithstanding, keep as many Persons out of a Sense of True
Religion, as Intemperance, Debauchery or any other Crime whatever. Indeed,
whilst we are in this World, we must have proper Relaxations, to fit us both
for the Business of our Profession, and Religion. But then, for Persons who
call themselves Christians, that have solemnly vowed at their Baptism, to
renounce the Vanities of this sinful World; that are commanded in Scripture to
abstain from all Appearance of Evil, and to have their Conversation in Heaven.
For such Persons as these to support Meetings, that (to say no worse of them)
are vain and trifling, and have a natural Tendency to draw off our Minds from
GOD, is absurd, ridiculous, and sinful. Surely Two are not better than One in
this Case: No; it is to be wished there was not One to be found concerned in
it. The sooner we forsake the assembling ourselves together in such a Manner,
the better; and no matter how quickly the Cord that holds such Societies (was
it a Thousand-fold) is broken.

But you, Brethren, have not so learned CHRIST: But, on the contrary, like true
Disciples of your LORD and Master, have by the Blessing of GOD (as this
Evening's Solemnity abundantly testifies) happily formed yourselves into such
Societies, which, if duly attended on and improved, cannot but strengthen you
in your Christian Warfare, and make you fruitful in every good Word and Work.

What remains for me to do, but, as was proposed, in the last Place, to close
up what has been said, in a Word or two, by Way of Exhortation from the whole,
and to beseech you, in the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST to go on in the Way
you have begun; and by a constant conscientious Attendance on your respective
Societies, to discountenance Vice, encourage Virtue, and build each other up in
the Knowledge and Fear of GOD.

Only permit me to stir up your pure Minds, by Way of Remembrance, and to
exhort you, if there be any Consolation in CHRIST, any Fellowship of the
Spirit, again and again to consider, that as all Christians in general, so all
Members of Religious Societies in particular, are in an especial Manner, as
Houses built upon an Hill; and that therefore it highly concerns you to walk
circumspectly toward those that are without, and to take heed to yourselves,
that your Conversation, in common Life, be as becomes such an open and
peculiar Profession of the Gospel of CHRIST: Knowing that the Eyes of all Men
are upon you, narrowly to inspect every Circumstance of your Behavior; and
that every notorious wilful Miscarriage of any single Member, will, in some
Measure, redound to the Scandal and Dishonor of your whole Fraternity.

Labor, therefore, my beloved Brethren, to let your Practice correspond to
your Profession: And think not that it will be sufficient for you to plead at
the last Day, LORD have we not assembled ourselves together in thy Name, and
enlivened each other, by singing Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs? For
verily, I say unto you, notwithstanding this, our blessed LORD will bi^ you
depart from him; nay, that you shall receive a greater Damnation, if, in the
midst of these great Pretensions, you are found to be Workers of Iniquity.

But GOD forbid that any such Evil should befall you; that there should be ever
a Judas, ever a Traitor amongst such distinguished Followers of our Common
Master. No, on the contrary, the Excellency of your Rules, the Regularity of
your Meetings, and more especially your pious Zeal in assembling in such a
public and solemn Manner so frequently in the Year, persuade me to think, that
you are willing, not barely to seem, but to be in Reality, Christians: and hope
to be found at the Last Day, what you would be esteemed now, viz. holy, sincere
Disciples of a Crucified Redeemer.

Oh, may you always continue thus minded! and make it your daily, constant
Endeavor, both by Precept and Example, to turn all you converse with, more
especially those of your own Societies, into the same most Blessed Spirit and
Temper. Thus will you adorn the Gospel of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, in all Things:
Thus will you anticipate the Happiness of a future State; and by attending on,
and improving the Communion of Saints on Earth, make yourselves meet to join
the Communion and Fellowship of the Spirits of just Men made perfect, of the
Holy Angels, nay, of the Ever Blessed and Eternal GOD in Heaven.

Which GOD of his infinite Mercy grant through JESUS CHRIST our Lord; to whom
with the FATHER, and the HOLY GHOST, Three Persons, and One Eternal GOD, be
ascribed, as is most due, all Honor and Praise, Mig^^, Majesty and Dominion,
now and for ever.

SERMON VII. INTERCESSION every CHRISTIAN'S DUTY.
I THESE. V. 25. Brethren, Pray for us.
IF we enquire, why there is so little Love to be found amongst Christians, why
the very Characteristick, by which every one should know that we are Disciples
of the Holy JESUS, is almost banished out of the Christian World, -- We shall
find it, in a great Measure, owing to a Neglect or superficial Performance of
that most God-like Part of secret Prayer Intercession, or imploring the Divine
Grace or Mercy in behalf of others.

Some forget this Duty of Praying for others, because they seldom remember to
pray for themselves: And even good People, who are constant in Praying to their
Father which is in Heaven, are often so constrained and selfish in their
Addresses to the Throne of Grace, that they do not enlarge their Petitions for
the Welfare of their Fellow Christians as they ought; and thereby fall short of
attaining that Christian Charity, that unfeigned Love of their Brethren, which
their sacred Profession obliges them to aspire after, and without which, though
they would bestow all their Goods to feed the Poor, and even give their Bodies
to be burned, yet it would profit them nothing.

Since then these Things are so, I shall from the Words of the Text (though
originally intended to be more confined) endeavor to show, I. First, That it
is every Christian's Duty to Pray for Others, as well as for himself. II.
Secondly, Who are Those that we ought to pray for, and in what Manner we should
do it. And, III. Thirdly, I shall offer some Motives to ex^ite all Christians
to abound in this great Duty of Intercession.


I. First then, I shall endeavor to show, That it is every Christian's Duty to
pray for Others, as well as for Himself.

Now Prayer is a Duty founded on Natural Religion; the very Heathens never
neglected it, though many Christian Heathens amongst us do: -- And it is so
essential to Christianity, that you might as reasonably expect to find a living
Man without Breath, as a true Christian without the Spirit of Prayer and
Supplication. -- Thus, no sooner was St. Paul converted, but behold he prays,
faith the Lord Almighty. And thus will it be with every Child of GOD, as soon
as he becomes such: Prayer being truly called, The natural Cry of the Newborn
Soul.

For in the Heart of every True Believ^^ there is a Heavenly Tendency, a Divine
Attraction, which as sensibly draws him to converse with GOD, as the Lodestone
attracts the Needle.

A deep Sense of their own Weakness, and of CHRIST'S Fullness; a strong
Conviction of their Natural Corruption, and of the Necessity of renewing Grace;
will not let them rest from crying Day and Night to their Almighty Redeem^^,
that the Divine Image, which they lo^^ in Adam, may through his All-powerful
Mediat^^^ and the Sanctifying Operations of his blessed Spirit, be begun,
carried on, and fully perfected both in their Souls and Bodies.

Thus earnest, thus importunate, are all sincere Christians in praying for
themselves: But then, not having so lively, lasting, and deep a Sense of the
Wants of their Christian Brethren, they are for the most Part too remiss and
defective in their Prayers for them -- Whereas, was the Love of GOD shed abroad
in our Hearts, and did we Love our Neighbor in that Manner in which the Son of
GOD our Savior loves us, and according to his Command and Example, we could
not but be as importunate for their Spiritual and Temporal Welfare, as for our
own; and as earnestly desire and endeavor that others should share in the
Benefits of the Death and Passion of JESUS CHRIST as we ourselves.

Let not any one think, that this is an uncommon Degree of Charity; an high
Pitch of Perfection, which every one cannot attain unto; since it is no such
Thing: -- For if we are all commanded to Love our Neighbor (that is every Man)
even as ourselves, nay to Lay down our Lives for the Brethren; then, it is the
Duty of all to pray for their Neighbors as much as for themselves, and by all
possible Acts and Expressions of Love and Affection toward them, at all Times,
to show their Readiness even to lay down their Lives for them, if ever it
should please GOD to call them to it.

Our Blessed Savior as He has set us an Example, that we should follow his
Steps in every Thing else, so has he more especially in This: -- For in that
most Divine, that most Perfect and inimitable Prayer (recorded in the 17th of
St. John) which he put up just before his Passion, we find but few Petitions
for his own, though many for his Disciples Welfare* And in that most perfect
Form which he has been pleased to prescribe us, we are taught to say, -- not
My, but Our Father, -- Thereby to put us in mind, that, whenever we approach
the Throne of Grace, we ought to pray, -- not in our own Name alone, but in the
Name of all our Brethren in CHRIST.

Intercession then is certainly a Duty incumbent upon all Christians.

II. Whom we are to intercede for, and How this Duty is to be performed, comes
next to be considered, -- under my Second general Head.

1. And first, our Intercession must be universal. I will, says the Apostle,
that Prayers, Supplications and Intercessions, be made for all Men: For as
GOD's Mercy is over all his Works, as JESUS CHRIST died to Redeem a People out
of all Nations and Languages; so, we should pray, that all Men may come to the
Knowledge of the Truth, and be saved. Many precious Promises are made in Holy
Writ, that the Gospel shall be published through the whole World, that the
Earth shall be covered with the Knowledge of the LORD, as the Waters cover the
Sea: And therefore it is our Duty not to confine our Petitions to our own
Nation, but to pray that all those Nations, who now sit in Darkness and in the
Shadow of Death, may have the glorious Gospel shine out upon Them, as well as
upon Us. But you need not that any Man should teach you this, since ye
yourselves are taught of GOD, even of JESUS CHRIST himself, to Pray, that his
Kingdom may come; Part of the Meaning of which Petition is, That GOD's Ways may
be known upon Earth, and his Saving Health among All Nations.

2. Next to the Praying for all Men, we should, according to St. Paul's Rule,
Pray for Kings; particularly, for our present Sovereign King GEORGE, and all
that are put (...) Authority under him: That we may lead quiet Lives, in all
Godliness and Honesty, -- For, if we consider how heavy the Burden of
Government is, and how much the Welfare of any People depends on the Zeal and
godly Conversation of those that have the Rule over them: If we set before us
the many Dangers and Difficulties, to which Governors by their Station are
exposed, and the continual Temptations they lie under to Luxury and
Self-Indulgence; we shall not only pity, but pray for them, -- That He who
preserved Esther, David, and Josiah, unspotted from the World, amidst the
Grandeur of a Court, and gave Success to their Designs, would also preserve
them Holy and Unblameable, and prosper all the Works of their Hands upon them.

3. But, Thirdly, you ought, in a more especial Manner, to pray for those, whom
the Holy Ghost has made Overseers over You. This is what: St. Paul begs, again
and again, of the Churches to whom he writes: -- Brethren, says he in the Text,
Pray for Us; and again, in his Epistle to the Ephesians, -- Praying always,
says he, with all Manner of Supplication; and for me also, that I may open my
Mouth boldly, to declare the Mystery of the Gospel. And in another Place, to
express his Earnestness in this Request, and the great Importance of their
Prayers to Him, -- He bids the Church Strive, (or, as the original Word
signifies, Be in an Agony) together with Him in their Prayers. And surely, if
the great St. Paul, that chosen Vessel, that Favorite of Heaven, needed the
most importunate Prayers of his Christian Converts; much more do the ordinary
Ministers of the Gospel stand in Need of the Intercession of their respective
Flocks.

And I cannot but in a more especial Manner, insist upon this Branch of your
Duty, because it is a Matter of such Importance: For no doubt, much Good is
frequently withheld from many, by Reason of their neglecting to pray for their
Ministers, which they would have received, had they prayed for them as they
ought. Not to mention, that People often complain of the Want of diligent and
faithful Pastors. -- But how do they deserve Good Pastors, who will not
earnestly pray to GOD for such?

The Church has set apart Four Seasons in the Year for this Purpose, and to
call down a Blessing on those who are to be ordained to any Holy Function: But
by how very few are the Ember Days observed! And if we will not pray to the
Lord of the Harvest, can it be expected, he will send forth Laborers into his
Harvest?

Besides, What Ingratitude is it, not to pray for your Ministers! For shall
they Watch and Labor in the Word of Doctrine for you, and for your Salvation,
and shall not you pray for them in Return? If any bestow Favors on your
Bodies, you think it right, meet, and your bounden Duty, to pray for Them; and
shall not they be remembered in your Prayers, who daily feed and nourish your
Souls? Add to all this, that praying for your Ministers, will be a manifest
Proof of your believing, -- That though Paul plant, and Apollos water, yet it
is GOD alone who gives the Increase. And you will also find it the best Means
you can use, to promote your own Welfare: Because GOD, in Answer to your
Prayers, may impart a double Portion of his Holy Spirit to them, whereby they
will be qualified to deal out to you larger Measures of Knowledge in Spiritual
Things, and be enabled more skilfully to divide the Word of Truth.

Would Men but constantly observe this Direction, and when their Ministers are
praying in their Name to GOD, -- humbly beseech him to perform all their
Petitions: Or, when they are speaking in GOD's Name to them, -- pray that the
Holy Ghost may fall on all them that hear the Word; we should then find a more
visible good Effect of their Doctrine, and a greater Mutual Love between
Ministers and their People. For Ministers Hands would then be held up by the
People's Intercessions, and the People will never dare to vilify or traduce
those who are the constant Subject of their Prayers.

4. Next to our Ministers, our Friends claim a Place in our Intercessions; but
then we should not content ourselves with Praying in general Terms for them,
but suit our Prayers to their particular Circumstances. When Meriam was
afflicted with a Leprosy from GOD, Moses cried and said, LORD heal her: And
when the Nobleman came to apply to JESUS CHRIST, in behalf of his Child, he
said, LORD, my little Daughter lies at the Point of Death, I pray th^^ come,
and heal her. In like Manner, when any of our Friends are under any afflicting
Circumstances, we should endeavor to pray for them, with a particular Regard
to those (...). For Instance, Is a Friend sick^ We should pray, That if it be
GOD's good Pleasure, it may not be unto Death; but if otherwise, That he would
give him Grace so to take his Visitation, that, after this painful Life ended,
he may dwell with him in Life everlasting. Is a Friend in Doubt in a Matter? We
should lay his Case before GOD, as Moses did that of the Daughters of
Zelophehad, and pray, That GOD's Holy Spirit may lead him into all Truth. Is he
in Want? We should pray, That his Faith may never fail, and that in GOD's due
Time he may be relieved. And in all other Cases, we should not pray for our
Friends only in Generals, but suit our Petitions to their particular Sufferings
and Afflictions; for otherwise, we may never ask perhaps for the Things our
Friends most want

It must be confessed, that such a Procedure will oblige us sometimes to break
from the Forms we use; but if we accustom ourselves to it, and have a deep
Sense of what we ask for, the most illiterate Christians will not want Words to
express themselves.

We have many noble Instances in Holy Scripture of the Success of this Kind of
particular Intercession; but none more remarkable than that of Abraham's
Servant, in the Book of Genesis, -- who being sent to seek a Wife for his Son
Isaac, prays in a most particular Manner in his Behalf. -- And the Sequel of
the Story informs us how remarkably his Prayer was answered. And did Christians
now pray for their Friends in the same particular Manner, and with the same
Faith as Abraham's Servant did for his Master; they would, no doubt, in many
Instances, receive as visible Answers, and have as much R^^^^n to bless GOD for
them (...) he had.

5. But farther, as we ought thus to intercede for our Friends, so in like
Manner must we also Pray for our Enemies. Bless them that Curse you, says JESUS
CHRIST, and pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you. Which
Commands he enforced in the strongest Manner by his own Example, when in the
very Agonies and Pangs of Death, he prayed even for his Murderers, -- Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do! -- This, it must needs be
confessed, is a difficult Duty, yet not impracticable to those, who have
renounced the Things of this present Life, (from an inordinate Love of which
alone all Enmities arise) and who knowing the terrible Woes denounced against
those who offend CHRIST's Little Ones, can, out of real Pity, and a Sense of
their Danger, pray for those by whom such Offenses come.

6. Lastly, and to conclude this Head, -- We should Intercede for all that are
any Ways afflicted in Mind, Body, or Estate; -- for all who desire, and stand
in need of our Prayers, -- and for all who do not pray for themselves.

And Oh! that all who hear me, would set apart some Time every Day for the due
Performance of this most necessary Duty! -- In Order to which,

I shall now proceed to the Third general Thing proposed; namely,

III. To show the Advantages, and offer some Considerations to excite you to
the Practice of Daily Intercession.

1. And First, it will fill your Hearts with Love one to another. -- He that
every Day intercedes at the Throne of Grace for all Mankind, cannot but in a
short Time be filled with Love and Charity to all: and the frequent Exercise of
his Love in this Manner, will insensibly enlarge his Heart, and make him
Partaker of that exceeding Abundance of it which is in CHRIST JESUS our LORD!
Envy, Malice, Revenge, and such like hellish Tempers, can never long harbor in
a gracious Intercessor's Breast; -- But He will be filled with Joy, Peace,
Meekness, Long Suffering, and all other Gifts and Graces of the Holy Spirit. By
frequently laying his Neighbor's Wants before GOD, He will be touched with a
Fellow-Feeling of them; -- He will rejoice with those that do rejoice, and weep
with those that weep. -- Every Blessing bestowed on Others, instead of exciting
Envy in him, will be looked on as an Answer to his particular Intercession, and
fill his Soul with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

Indeed I will not affirm, that this blessed Temper of Mind can be acquired all
at once: No, -- as other Graces, so must this Christian Love be obtained by
Degrees. But do you abound in Acts of general and particular Intercessions; and
when you hear of your Neighbor's Faults, instead of relating them to, and
exposing them before others, -- Lay them in secret before GOD. and beg of him
to correct and amend them. When you hear of a notorious Sinner, instead of
thinking, You do well to be angry; beg of JESUS CHRIST to convert and make him
a Monument of his Free Grace; and you cannot imagine what a blessed Alteration
this Practice will make in your Heart, and how much you will increase Day by
Day in the Spirit of Love and Meekness toward all Mankind!

But, further to excite you to the constant Practice of this Duty of
Intercession; consider the many Instances given us in Holy Scripture, of the
Power and Efficacy of it. Great and excellent Things are there recorded as the
Effects of this divine Employ. It has stopped Plagues, it has opened and shut
Heaven; and has frequently turned away GOD's Fury from his People. How was
Abimelech's House freed from the Disease GOD sent amongst them, at the
Intercession of Abraham! When Phineas stood up and prayed, how soon did the
Plague cease! When Daniel humbled and afflicted his Soul, and interceded for
the LORD's Inheritance, how quickly was an Angel dispatched to tell him, his
Prayer was heard! And to mention but one Instance more, how does GOD own
himself as it were quite overcome with the Importunity of Moses, when he was
interceding for his idolatrous People, -- Let me alone, says GOD!

This sufficiently shows, I could almost say the Omnipotency of Intercession,
and how we may, like Jacob, wrestle with GOD, and by an holy Violence prevail
both for ourselves and others. And no doubt it is owing to the secret and
prevailing Intercessions of the few righteous Souls who still remain among us,
that GOD has yet spared this miserably sinful Nation: For were there not some
such Faithful ones, like Moses, left to stand in the Gap, -- We should soon be
destroyed, even as was Sodom, and reduced to Ashes like unto Gomorrah.

But, to stir you up yet farther, to this Godlike Exercise of Intercession,
consider that, in all Probability, it is the frequent Employment even of the
glorified Saints: For though they are delivered from the Burden of the Flesh,
and restored to the glorious Liberty of the Sons of GOD, yet as their Happiness
cannot be perfectly consummated 'till the Resurrection of the last Day, when
all their Brethren will be glorified with them, -- We cannot but think they are
often importunate in beseeching our heavenly Father, shortly to accomplish the
Number of his Elect, and to hasten his Kingdom. And shall not we, who are on
Earth, be often exercised in this divine Employ with the glorious Company of
the Spirits of just Men made perfect? Since our Happiness is so much to consist
in the Communion of Saints in the Church Triumphant above, shall we not
frequently intercede for the Church Militant here below; and earnestly beg,
that we may all be one, even as the Holy JESUS and his Father are One; that we
may also be made perfect in one!

To provoke you to this great Work and Labor of Love, -- Remember that it is
the never ceasing Employment of the holy and highly-exalted JESUS himself, who
sits at the Right Hand of GOD to hear all our Prayers and to make continual
Intercession for us! So that he who is constantly employed in interceding for
others, is doing that on Earth, which the Eternal Son of GOD is always doing in
Heaven.

Imagine therefore, when you are lifting up holy Hands in Prayer for one
another, -- That you see the Heavens opened, and the Son of GOD in all his
Glory, as the Great High Priest of your Salvation, offering up and pleading for
you, the all-sufficient Merit of his Sacrifice before the Throne of his
heavenly Father! -- Join then Your Intercessions with his, and beseech him,
that they may through him come up as Incense, and be received as a
Sweet Smelling Savor, acceptable in the Sight of GOD! This Imagination will
strengthen your Faith, excite a holy Earnestness in your Prayers, and make you
wrestle with GOD, as Jacob did, when He saw him Face to Face and his Life was
preserved; as Abraham, when he pleaded for Sodom; and as JESUS CHRIST himself,
when he prayed, being in an Agony, so much the more earnestly the Night before
his bitter Passion!

And now, Brethren, What shall I say more, since you are taught of JESUS CHRIST
himself, to abound in Love, and in this good Work of Praying one for another?
-- However, I cannot but recommend to you one general Means in order (...) make
your intercession more effectual, that (...) To (...) such Lives as may make
your Prayers accepted in the Beloved. The effectual fervent Prayer of a
Righteous Man avails much, faith St. James. You shall go to my Servant Job,
says GOD, and he shall pray for you. It is this, it is this, my Brethren, must
make your Intercessions pierce the Clouds! For the Prayers of the Wicked are an
Abomination unto the LORD. Would you therefore prevail with GOD for Others, Be
holy even as GOD is holy yourselves: Labor daily after fresh Degrees of Grace,
and your Intercessions will acquire fresh Degrees of Acceptance and Efficacy in
Heaven. Do but walk as becomes the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST; Be but in Earnest
about Working out your own eternal Salvation; and your Intercessions will then
come forth as Incense before GOD, and the lifting up of your Hands be as an
Evening Sacrifice. -- Though ever so mean, though as poor as Lazarus, You will
then become Benefactors to all Mankind; Thousands, and Twenty-times Ten
Thousands, will then be blessed for your Sakes! and after You have employed a
few Years in this Divine Exercise here, You will be translated to that happy
Place, where you have so often wished others might be advanced; and be exalted
to sit at the Right Hand of our All-powerful, All-prevailing Intercessor, in
the Kingdom of His Heavenly Father hereafter!

However, I cannot but in an especial manner press this upon you now, because
all Ye, amongst whom I have now been Preaching, in all Probability will see me
no more: -- For I am now g^^ing (I trust under the Conduct of GOD's Most Holy
Spirit) from You, knowing not what shall befall me: I need therefore your most
importunate Intercessions, that nothing may move me from my Duty, and that I
may not count even my Life dear unto myself, so that I may finish my Course
with Joy, and the Ministry I have received of the Lord JESUS to testify the
Gospel of the Grace of GOD!

Whilst I have been here, to the best of my Knowledge I have not failed to
declare unto (...) the whole Will of GOD: -- And though my Preaching may have
been a Savor of Death unto Death to some; yet I trust it has been also (...)
Savor of Life unto Life to Others; and therefore I earnestly hope that those
will not fail to remember me in their Prayers. As for my own Part, the many
unmerited Kindnesses I have received from you, will not suffer me to forget
You: Out of the Deep, therefore, I trust shall my Cry come unto GOD; and whilst
the Winds and Storms are blowing over me, unto the LORD will I make my
Supplication for You. For it is but a little while, and We must All appear
before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST; where I must give a strict Account of the
Doctrine I have preached, and You of your Improvement under it. And Oh! that I
may never be called out as a swift Witness, against any of th^se my dear
Brethren in CHRIST, for whose Salvation I have sincerely though too faintly,
longed and labored! --

It is true, I have been censured by some as (...) and selfish View^^ (...) it
is a small Matter with me to be judged by Man's Judgment; -- I hope my Eye is
single, but I beseech you, Brethren, by the Mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS,
pray that it may be more so! -- and that I may increase with the Increase of
Grace in the Knowledge and Love of GOD through JESUS CHRIST our Lord.

And now, Brethren, what shall I say more? -- I could wish to continue my
Discourse much longer; for I can never fully express the Desire of my Soul
toward you! -- Finally, therefore, Brethren, Whatsover Things are Holy,
whatsoever Things are Pure, whatsoever Things are Honest, whatsoever Things are
of Good Report: if there be any Consolation in CHRIST, if any Fellowship of the
Spirit, if any Hopes of our appearing to the Comfort of each other at the awful
Tribunal of JESUS CHRIST, -- Think of the Things that you have heard, and of
these which Your Pastors have declared and will yet declare unto You; and
continue under their Ministry to work out your own Salvation with Fear and
Trembling: -- So that whether I should never see you any more, or whether it
shall please GOD to bring me back again at any Time, I may always have the
Satisfaction of knowing that your Conversation is such as becomes the Gospel
of CHRIST.

I almost persuade myself, that I could willingly suffer all Things, so that it
might any ways promote the Salvation of your precious and immortal Souls; --
And I beseech You, as my last Request, Obey them that have the Rule over You in
the Lord; and be always ready to attend on their Ministry, as it is your
bounden Duty. Think not that I desire to have myself exalted at the Expense of
another's Character; but rather think this -- Not to have any Man's Person too
much in Admiration; but esteem all your Ministers highly in Love, as they
justly deserve for their Work's Sake.

And now, Brethren, I commend you to GOD, and to the Word of his Grace, which
is able to build you up, and give you an Inheritance amongst all them that are
sanctified. May GOD reward you for all your Works of Faith, and Labors of
Love, and make you to abound more and more in every good Word and Work toward
all Men. May he truly convert all that have been convinced, and awaken all that
are Dead in Trespasses and Sins! May he confirm all that are wavering! And may
you all go on from one Degree of Grace unto another, till you arrive unto the
Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of CHRIST; and thereby be made meet to
stand before that GOD, in whose Presence is the Fullness of Joy, at whose Right
Hand there are Pleasures for ever more! Amen! Amen!

SERMON VIII.
The Great Duty of FAMILY-RELIGION.
JOSHUA xxiv. 15. As for me and my House, we will serve the LORD.
THESE Words contain the holy Resolution of pious Joshua, who having in a most
moving, affectionate Discourse recounted to the Israelites what great Things
GOD had done for them, in the Verse immediately going before the Text, comes to
draw a proper Inference from what he had been delivering; and acquaints them,
in the most pressing Terms, that since GOD had been so exceeding gracious unto
them, they could do no less than out of Gratitude for such uncommon Favors and
Mercies, dedicate both themselves and Families to his Service. Now therefore,
says he, Verse 14. fear the LORD, and serve him in Sincerity and Truth, and put
away the Gods which your Fathers served on the other Side of the Flood. And by
the same engaging Motive does the Prophet Samuel afterward enforce their
Obedience to the Commandments of GOD, 1 Samuel xii. 24. Only fear the LORD, and
serve him in Truth, with all your Heart; For consider (says he) how great
Things he has done for you. But then, that they might not excuse themselves
(as too many might be apt to do) by his giving them a bad Example, or think he
was laying heavy Burdens upon them, whilst he himself touched them not with one
of his Fingers, he tells them in the Verse out of which the Text is taken, that
whatever Regard they might pay to the Doctrine he had been preaching, y^^ he
(as all Ministers ought to do) was resolved to live up to and practice it
himself: Choose you therefore, says he, whom you will serve, whether the Gods
which your Fathers served, (...) the Gods of the Amorites, in whose Land (...)
dwell: But as for me and my House, we (...) serve the LORD.

A Resolution this worthy of Joshua, and no less becoming, no less necessary
for every true Son of Joshua, that is entrusted with the Care and Government of
a Family in our Day: And, if it was ever seasonable for Ministers to preach up,
or People to put in Practice Family Religion, it was never more so than in the
present Age; since it is greatly to be feared, that out of those many Households
that call themselves Christians, there are but few that serve GOD in their
respective Families as they ought.

It is true indeed, visit our Churches, and you may perhaps see something of
the Form of Godliness still subsisting amongst us; but even That is scarcely to
be met with in private Houses. So that were the blessed Angels to come, as in
the patriarchal Age, and observe our spiritual Economy at home, would they not
be tempted to say as Abraham said to Abimelech, Surely, the Fear of GOD is not
in this Place? Genesis xx. 11.

How such a general Neglect of Family-Religion first began to overspread the
Christian World, is difficult to determine. As for the primitive Christians, I
am positive it was not so with them: No, they had not so learned CHRIST, as
falsely to imagine Religion was to be confined solely to their Assemblies for
public Worship; but on the contrary, behaved with such Piety and exemplary
Holiness in their private Families, that St. Paul often styles their House a
Church: Salute such a One, says he, and the Church which is in his House. And,
I believe, we must forever despair of seeing a primitive Spirit of Piety
revived in the World, till we are so happy as to see a Revival of primitive
Family-Religion; and Persons unanimously resolving with good old Joshua, in the
Words of the Text, As for me and my House, we will serve the LORD.

From which Words I shall beg Leave to insist on these Three Things.

I. First, That it is the Duty of every Governor of a Family to take Care, that
not only he himself, but also that those committed to his Charge, serve the
LORD. II. Secondly, I shall endeavor to show after what Manner a Governor and
his Household ought to serve the LORD. III. Thirdly, and lastly, I shall offer
some Motives in order to excite all Governors, with their respective Households,
to serve the LORD in the Manner that shall be recommended.
And First, I am to show that it is the Duty of every Governor of a Family to
take Care, that not only he himself, but also that those committed to his
Charge, should serve the LORD.

And this will appear, if we consider that every Governor of a Family ought to
look upon himself as obliged to act in three Capacities: As a Prophet, to
instruct; as a Priest, to pray for and with; as a King, to govern, direct, and
provide for them. It is true indeed the latter of these, viz. their kingly
Office, they are not so frequently deficient in (nay in this they are generally
too sollicitous) but as for the two former, viz. their priestly and prophetic
Office, like Gallio, they care for no such Things. But however indifferent some
Governors may be about it, yet they may be assured, that GOD will require a due
Discharge of these Offices at their Hands. For if, as the Apostle argues, He
that does not provide for his own House, in temporal Things, has denied the
Faith, and is worse than an Infidel; to what greater Degree of Apostasy must he
have arrived, who takes no Thought to provide for the spiritual Welfare of his
Family.

But farther, Persons are generally very liberal of their Invectives against
the Clergy, and think they justly blame the Conduct of that Minister who does
not take heed to and watch over the Flock, of which the Holy Ghost has made him
Overseer: But may not every Governor of a Family be in a lower Degree, liable
to the same Censure, who takes no Thought for those Souls that are committed to
his Charge? For every House is as it were a little Parish, every Governor (as
was before observed) a Priest, every Family a Flock: And if any of them perish
through the Governor's Neglect, their Blood will GOD require at their Hands.

Was a Minister to disregard teaching his People publicly, and from House to
House, and to excuse himself by saying, that he had enough to do to work out
his own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, without concerning himself with that
of others; would not any one be apt to think such a Minister to be like the
unjust Judge, One that neither feared GOD, nor regarded Man? And yet, odious as
such a Character would be, it is no worse than that Governor of a Family
deserves, who thinks himself obliged only to save his own Soul, without paying
any Regard to the Souls of his Household. For (as was above hinted) every House
is as it were, a Parish, and every Master is concerned to secure, as much as in
him lies, the Spiritual Prosperity of every one under his Roof, as any Minister
whatever is obliged to look to the Spiritual Welfare of every individual Person
under his Charge.

What Precedents Men, who neglect their Duty in this Particular, can plead for
such Omission, I cannot tell: Doubtless not the Example of holy Job, who was so
far from imagining that he had no Concern, as Governor of a Family, with any
one's Soul but his own, that the Scripture acquaints us, When the Days of his
Children's Feasting were gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and
offered Burnt-Offerings according to the Number of them all; for Job said, it
may be that my Sons have sinned and cursed GOD in their Hearts: Thus did Job
continually. Nor can they plead the Practice of good old Joshua, whom, in the
Text, we find as much concerned for his Houshold's Welfare as his own. Nor
lastly, that of Cornelius, who feared GOD, not only himself, but with all his
House: And were Christians but of the same Spirit of Job, Joshua, and the
Gentile Centurion, they would act as Job, Joshua and Cornelius did.

But, alas! if this be the Case, and all Governors of Families ought not only
to serve the LORD themselves, but likewise to see that their respective
Households do so too; what will then become of those who not only neglect
serving GOD themselves, but also make it their Business to ridicule and scoff
at any of their House that do? Who are not content with not entering into the
Kingdom of Heaven themselves; but those also that are willing to enter in, they
hinder. Surely such Men are Factors for the Devil indeed. Surely their
Damnation slumbereth not: For although GOD, in his good Providence, may suffer
such Stumbling Blocks to be put in his Children's Ways, and suffer their
greatest Enemies to be those of their own Households, for a Trial of their
Sincerity, and Improvement of their Faith; yet we cannot but pronounce a Woe
against those Masters 'by whom such Offenses come: For if those that only take
Care of their own Souls can scarcely be saved, where will such monstrous
profane and wicked Governors appear?

But hoping there are but few of this unhappy Stamp, proceed we now to the

II. Second Thing proposed, viz. To show after what Manner a Governor and his
Household ought to serve the LORD.

1. And the first Thing I shall mention is reading the Word of GOD. This is a
Duty incumbent on every private Person. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have Eternal Life, is a Precept given by our Blessed LORD
indifferently to all: But much more so ought every Governor of a Family to
think it in a peculiar Manner spoken to himself, because (as has heen already
proved) he ought to look upon himself as a Prophet, and therefore, agreeably to
such a Character, as bound to instruct those under his Charge in the Knowledge
of the Word of GOD.

This we find was the Order GOD gave his peculiar People of Israel: For thus
speaks his Representative Moses, Deuteronomy vi. 6, 7. These Words, that is,
the Scripture Words, which I command thee this Day, shall be in thy Heart, and
thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, that is, as it is generally
explained, Servants, as well as Children, and shall talk of them when thou
sit in thy House. From whence we may infer, that the only Reason (...) so
many neglect to read the Words of (...) diligently to their Children is,
because (...) Words of Scripture are not in their Hearts: (...) if they were,
out of the Abundance of the Heart their Mouth would speak.

Besides, Servants as well as Children are, for the Generality, very ignorant,
and mere Novices in the Laws of GOD: And how shall they know, unless some one
teach them? And what more proper to teach them by, than the lively Oracles of
GOD, which are able to make them wise unto Salvation? And who more proper to
instruct them by these lively Oracles, than Parents and Masters, who (as has
been more than once observed) are as much concerned to feed them with spiritual
as with bodily Bread, Day by Day.

But if these Things be so, what a miserable Condition are those unhappy
Governors in, who are so far from feeding those committed to their Care with
the sincere Milk of the Word, to the Intent they may grow thereby, that they
neither search the Scriptures themselves, nor are careful to explain them to
others? Such Families must be in a happy Way indeed to do their Master's Will,
who take such prodigious Pains to know it! Would one not imagine that they had
turned Converts to the Church of Rome; that they thought Ignorance the Mother
of Devotion; that those were to be condemned as Heretics who read their
Bibles? And yet how few Families are there amongst us, who do not act after
this unseemly Manner! But shall I praise them in this? I praise them not:
Brethren, (...) Thing ought not so to be.

2. Pass we on now to the second Means whereby every Governor and his Household
ought to serve the LORD, viz. Family Prayer.

This is a Duty, though as much neglected, yet as absolutely necessary as the
former. Reading is a good Preparative for Prayer, as Prayer is an excellent
Means to render Reading effectual. And the Reason why every Governor of a
Family should join both these Exercises together, is plain, because a Governor
of a Family cannot perform his Priestly Office (which we before observed he is
in some Degree invested with) without performing this Duty of Family Prayer.

We find it therefore remarked, when mention is made of Cain and Abel's
offering Sacrifices, that they brought them. But to whom did they bring them?
Why, in all Probability to their Father Adam, who, as Priest of the Family, was
to offer Sacrifice in their Names. And so likewise ought every spiritual Son of
the second Adam, who is entrusted with the Care of an Household, to offer up the
spiritual Sacrifices of Supplications and Thangsgivings, acceptable to GOD
through JESUS CHRIST, in the Presence and Name of all who wait upon, or eat
Meat at his Table.

Thus we read our Blessed LORD behaved, when he tabernacled amongst us: For it
is said often, that he was alone praying with his twelve Disciples, which was
then his little Family. And he himself has promised a particular Blessing to
joint Supplications: For wheresoever, says he, two or three are gathered
together in my Name, there am I in the Midst of them. And again, If two or
three are agreed touching any Thing they shall ask, it shall be given them. Add
to this, that we are commanded by the Apostle to pray always, with all Manner
of Supplication, which doubtless includes Family Prayer. And holy Joshua, when
he set up the good Resolution in the Text, that he and his Household would serve
the LORD, certainly resolved withal to pray with his Family, which is one of
the best Testimonies they could give of their serving him.

Besides, there are no Families but what have some common Blessings, of which
they have been all Partakers, to give Thanks for; some common Crosses and
Afflictions, which they are to pray against; some common Sins which they are
all to lament and bewail: But how this can be done without joining together in
one common Act of Humiliation, Supplication, and Thanksgiving, is difficult to
devise.

From all which Considerations put together, it is evident, that Family Prayer
is a great and necessary Duty; and consequently, those Governors that neglect
it are certainly without Excuse. And it is much to be feared, if they live
without Family Prayer, they live without GOD in the World.

And yet such an hateful Character as this is, it is to be feared, that was GOD
to send out an Angel to destroy us, as he did once to destroy the Egyptian
Firstborn, and withal give him a Commission, as then, to spare no Houses but
where they saw the Blood sprinkled on the Lintel and Door-posts, so now to let
no Families escape but those that called upon him in Morning and Evening
Prayer; few would remain unhurt by his avenging Sword. Christians shall I term
such Families, or Heathens? Doubtless they deserve not the Name of Christians;
and Heathens will surely rise up in Judgment against such profane Families of
this Generation: For they had always their Household Gods, whom they worshipped,
and whose Assistance they frequently invoked. And a pretty Pass those Families
surely are arrived at, who must be sent to School to Pagans. But will not the
LORD be avenged on such profane Households as these? Will he not pour out his
Fury upon those that call not upon his Name?

3. But it is Time for me to hasten to the third and last Means I shall
recommend, whereby every Governor ought with his Household to serve the LORD,
viz. by catechizing and instructing their Children and Servants, and bringing
them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the LORD.

That this, as well (...) the two former, is a Duty incumbent on every Governor
of an House, appears from that famous Encomium or Commendation GOD gives of
Abraham. I know, says the Most High, that He will command his Children and his
Household after him to keep the Way of the LORD, to do Justice and Judgment. And
indeed scarce any Thing is more frequently pressed upon us in Holy Writ, than
this Duty of Catechizing. Thus says God in a Passage before cited, Thou shall
teach these Words diligently unto thy Children. And Parents are commanded in
the New Testament to breed up their Children in the Nurture and Admonition of
the LORD. The Holy Psalmist acquaints us, that one great End why GOD did so
great Wonders for his People was, to the Intent that when they grew up they
should show their Children or Servants, the same. And in Deuteronomy, Chap. vi.
at the 20th and following Verses, GOD stricty commands his People to instruct
their Children in the true Nature of the Ceremonial Worship, when they should
enquire about it, as he supposed they would do in Time to come. And if Servants
and Children were to be instructed in the Nature of Jewish Rites, much more
ought they now to be initiated and grounded in the Doctrine and first
Principles of the Gospel of CHRIST: Not only because it is a Revelation which
has brought Life and Immortality to a fuller and clearer Light, but also
because many Seducers are gone abroad into the World, who do their utmost
Endeavor to destroy not only the Superstructure, but likewise to sap the very
Foundation of our most Holy Religion.

Would then, the present Generation have their Posterity be true Lovers and
Honourers of GOD, Masters and Parents must take Solomon's good Advice, and
train up and catechize their respective Households in the Way wherein they
should go.

I am aware but of one Objection that can, with any Show of Reason, be urged
against what has been advanced; which is, That such a Procedure as this will
take up too much Time, and hinder Families too long from their Worldly
Business. But it is much to be questioned whether Persons that start such an
Objection are not of the same hypocritical Spirit as the Traitor Judas, who had
Indignation against devout Mary, for being so profuse of her Ointment, in
anointing our Blessed Lord, and asked Why it might not be sold for Two Hundred
Pence, and given to the Poor. For has GOD given us so much Time to work for
Ourselves, and shall we not allow some small Pittance of it, Morning and
Evening, to be devoted to his more immediate Worship and Service? Have not
People read, That it is GOD who gives Men Power to get Wealth, and therefore
that the best Way to prosper in the World is to secure His Favor? And has not
our blessed Lord himself promised, That if we seek first the Kingdom of God and
his Righteousness, all outward Necessaries shall be added unto us.

Abraham, no doubt, was a Man of as great Business as such Objectors may be;
but yet he would find Time, to command his Household to serve the LORD. Nay,
David, was a King, and consequently had a great deal of Business upon his
Hands; yet notwithstanding, He professes that he would walk in his House with a
perfect Heart. And, to instance but one more, Holy Joshua was a Person
certainly engaged very much in Temporal Affairs; and yet He solemnly declares
before all Israel, That, as for him and his Household, they would serve the
LORD. And did Persons but redeem their Time, as Abraham, David, or Joshua did,
they would no longer complain that Family Duties kept them too long from the
Business of the World.

III. But my Third and last General Head, under which I was to offer some
Motives, in order to excite all Governors with their respective Households, to
serve the LORD in the Manner before recommended, I hope, will serve instead of
a Thousand Arguments, to prove the Weakness and Folly of any such Objection.

1. And the first Motive I shall mention is the Duty of Gratitude, you that are
Governors of Families owe to GOD. -- Your Lot, every one must confess, is cast
into a fair Ground: Providence has given you a goodly Heritage, above many of
your Fellow Creatures, and therefore, out of a Principle of Gratitude, you
ought to endeavor, as much as in you lies, to make every Person of your
respective Households to call upon him as long as they live: (Not to mention
that the Authority, with which GOD has invested you as Parents and Governors of
Families, is a Talent committed to your Trust, and which you are bound to
improve to your Master's Honor.) In other Things we find Governors and Parents
can exercise Lordship over their Children and Servants readily, and frequently
enough can say to one Go, and he goes; and to another Come, and he comes; to
a third, Do this, and he does it. And shall this Power be so often employed in
your own Affairs, and never exerted in the Things of GOD? Be astonished, O
Heavens, at this.

Thus did not faithful Abraham; No, GOD says, that He knew Abraham would
command his Servants and Children after him. Thus did not Joshua: No, he was
resolved not only to walk with GOD himself, but to improve his Authority in
making all about him do so too: As for me and my Household we will serve the
LORD. Let us go and do likewise.

2. But, Secondly, if Gratitude to GOD will not, methinks Love and Pity to your
Children should move you, with your respective Families, to serve the LORD.

Most People express a great Fondness for their Children; nay so great, that
very often their own Lives are wrapped up in those of their Offspring. Can a
Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have Compassion on the Son
of her Womb? says GOD by his Prophet Isaiah. He speaks of it as a monstrous
Thing, and scarce credible. But the Words immediately following affirm it to be
possible, Yea, They may forget; and Experience also assures us they may. Father
and Mother may both forsake their Children: For what greater Degree of
Forgetfulness can they express toward them, than to neglect the Improvement of
their better Part, and not bring them up in the Knowledge and Fear of GOD.

It is true, indeed, Parents seldom forget to provide for their Children's
Bodies, (though, it is to be feared, some Men are so far sunk beneath the
Beasts that perish, as to neglect even that;) but then how often do they
forget, or rather when do they remember, to secure the Salvation of their
immortal Souls? But is this their Way of expressing their Fondness for the
Fruit of their Bodies? Is this the best Testimony they can give of their
Affection to the Darling of their Hearts? Then was Daltlah fond of Sampson,
when she delivered him up into the Hands of the Philistines: Then were those
Ruffians well-affected to Daniel, when they threw him into a Den of Lions.

3. But, Thirdly, if neither Gratitude to GOD, nor Love and Pity to your
Children, will prevail on you; yet let a Principle of common Honesty and
Justice move you to set up the holy Resolution in the Text.

This is a Principle which all Men would be thought to act upon. But certainly,
if any may be truly censured for their Injustice, none can be more liable to
such Censure than those who think themselves injured if their Servants withdraw
themselves from their bodily Work, and yet they in return take no Care of their
inestimable Souls. For is it just that Servants should spend their Time and
Strength in their Master's Service, and Masters not at the same time give them
what is just and equal for their Service.

It is true, some Men may think they have done enough when they give unto their
Servants Food and Raiment, and say, Did not I bargain with thee for so much a
Year? But if they give them no other Reward than this, What do they less for
their very Beasts; But are not Servants better than they? Doubtless they are:
And however Masters may put off their Convictions for the present, they will
find a Time will come, when they shall know they ought to have given them some
Spiritual, as well as Temporal Wages; and the Cry of those that have mowed down
their Fields will enter into the Ears of the LORD of Sabbath.

4. But, Fourthly, If neither Gratitude to GOD, Pity to Children, nor a
Principle of common Justice to Servants, are sufficient to balance all
Objections; yet let that darling, that prevailing Motive of Self-Interest turn
the Scale, and engage you with your respective Households to serve the LORD.

This weighs greatly with you in other Matters: Be then persuaded to let it
have a due and full Influence on you in this, and if it has, if you have but
Faith as a Grain of Mustard Seed, how can you avoid believing that promoting
Family-Religion would be the best Means to promote your own temporal as well as
eternal Welfare? For Godliness has the Promise of the Life that now is, as well
as that which is to come.

Besides, you all, doubtless, wish for honest Servants, and pious Children: And
to have them prove otherwise, would be as great a Grief to you as it was to
Elisha to have a treacherous Gehazi, or David to be troubled with a rebellious
Absalom. But how can it be expected they should learn their Duty, except those
set over them take Care to teach it them? Is it not as reasonable to expect you
should reap where you had not sown, or gather where you had not strawed?

Did Christianity, indeed, give any Countenance to Children and Servants to
disregard their Parents and Masters according to the Flesh, or represent their
Duty to them as inconsistent with their entire Obedience to their Father and
Master which is in Heaven, there might then be some Pretense to neglect
instructing them in the Principles of such a Religion. But since the Precepts
of this pure and undefiled Religion are all of them holy, just and good; and
the more they are taught their Duty to GOD, the better they will perform their
Duties to you; methinks then to neglect the Improvement of their Souls, out of
a dread of spending too much Time in religious Duties, is acting quite contrary
to your own Interest as well as Duty.

5. Fifthly and lastly, If neither Gratitude to GOD, Love to your Children,
common Justice to your Servants, nor even that most prevailing Motive
Self-Interest, will excite; yet let a Consideration of the Terrors of the Lord
persuade you to put in Practice the pious Resolution in the Text. Remember the
Time will come, and that perhaps very shortly, when we must all appear before
the Judgment Seat of CHRIST; where we must give a solemn and strict Account how
we have had our Conversation, in our respective Families in this World. How
will you endure to see your Children and Servants (who ought to be your Joy and
Crown of Rejoicing in the Day of our Lord JESUS CHRIST) coming out as so many
swift Witnesses against you; cursing the Father that begot them, the Womb that
bare them, the Paps which they have sucked, and the Day they ever entered into
your Houses? Think you not the Damnation which Men must endure for their own
Sins will be sufficient, that they need load themselves with the additional
Guilt of being accessory to the Damnation of others also? Oh consider this, all
ye that forget to serve the LORD with your respective Households, lest he pluck
you away, and there be none to deliver you!

But GOD forbid, Brethren, that any such Evil should befall you: No, rather will
I hope that you have been in some Measure, convinced by what has been said of
the great Importance of Family Religion; and therefore are ready to cry out, in
the Words immediately following the Text, God forbid that we should forsake the
LORD; and again, Verse 21, Nay but we will, with our several Households, serve
the LORD.

And that there may be always such a Heart in you, let me, to conclude, exhort
all Governors of Families, in the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, often to
reflect on the inestimable Worth of their own Souls, and the infinite Ransom,
even the precious Blood of JESUS CHRIST, which has been paid down for them.
(...), I beseech you remember, that you are (...) Creatures, that you are by
Nature lost to and estranged from GOD; and that you can never be restored to
your primitive Happiness, till by being born again of the Holy Ghost, you
arrive at your primitive State of Purity, have the Image of GOD re-instamped
upon your Souls, and are thereby made meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance
with the Saints in Light. Do, I say, but seriously and frequently reflect on,
and act as Persons that believe such important Truths, and you will no more
neglect your Family's Spiritual Welfare than your own. No, the Love of GOD,
which will then be shed abroad in your Hearts, will constrain you to do your
utmost to preserve them: And the deep Sense of GOD's free Grace in CHRIST
JESUS, (which you will then have) in calling you, will excite you to do your
utmost to save others, especially those of your own Household. And though, after
all your pious Endeavors, some may continue unreformed; yet you will have this
comfortable Reflection to make, that you did what you could to make your
Families religious: And therefore may rest assured of sitting down in the
Kingdom of Heaven with Abraham, Joshua and Cornelius, and all the godly
Householders, who in their several Generations shone forth as so many Lights in
their respective Households upon Earth.

SERMON IX.
The Heinous Sin of Profane Cursing and Swearing.
MATTHEW. V. 34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all.
AMONG the many heinous Sins for which this Nation is grown infamous, perhaps
there is no one more crying, but withal more common, than the abominable Custom
of profane Swearing and Cursing. Our Streets abound with Persons of all Degrees
and Qualities, who are continually provoking the Holy One of Israel to Anger,
by their detestable Oaths and Blasphemies: And our very Children, out of whose
Mouths, the Psalmist observes in his Days, was perfected Praise, are now grown
remarkable for the quite opposite ill Quality of Cursing and Swearing. This
cannot but be a melancholy Prospect for every sincere and honest Minister of
JESUS CHRIST, to view his Fellow Christians in; and such as will put him on
contriving some Means to prevent the spreading at least of so growing an Evil;
knowing that the LORD (without Repentance) will assuredly visit for these
Things. But alas! what can he do? Public Animadversions are so neglected
amongst us, that where shall we find a common Swearer punished as the Laws
direct? And as for private Admonition, Men are now so hardened through the
Deceitfulness of Sin, that to give them sober and pious Advice, and to show
them the Evil of their Doings, is but like casting Pearls before Swine, they
only turn again and rent you. Since Matters then are come to this Pass, all
that we can do is this, that as we are appointed Watchmen and Ambassadors of
the LORD, it is our Duty from Time to Time to show the People their
Transgression, and warn them of their Sin; so that whether they will hear, or
whether they will forbear, we however may deliver our own Souls. That I
therefore may discharge my Duty in this Particular, give me Leave, in the Name
of GOD, humbly to offer to your most serious Consideration, some few
Observations on the Words of the Text, in order to show the Heinousness of
profane Cursing and Swearing.

But before I proceed directly to the Prose^ution of this Point, it will be
proper to clear this Precept of our LORD from a Misinterpretation that has been
put on it by a Set of Men, who heedlesly infer from hence, that our Savior
prohibits Swearing before a Magistrate, when required on a solemn and proper
Occasion. But that all Swearing is not absolutely unlawful for a Christian, is
evident from the Writings of St. Paul, whom we often find upon some solemn
Occasions using several Forms of Imprecation and Swearing, as, I call GOD to
Witness, -- GOD is my Judge, -- By your rejoicing in CHRIST JESUS, and such
like. And that our Savior does by no Means forbid Swearing before a
Magistrate, in the Words now before us, is plain, if we consider the Scope and
Design he had in View, when he gave his Disciples this Command. Permit me to
observe to you then, that our Blessed Master had set himself, from the 27th
Verse of this Chapter, out of which the Text is taken, to vindicate and clear
the Moral Law from the corrupt Glosses and Misconstruction of the Pharisees,
who then sat in Moses's Chair, but were notoriously faulty in adhering too
closely to the literal Expression of the Law, without ever considering the due
Extent and spiritual Meaning of it. Accordingly they imagined, that because GOD
had said, Thou shall not commit Adultery, that therefore, supposing a Person
was not guilty of the very Act of Adultery, he was not chargeable with the
Breach of the Seventh Commandment. And likewise in the Matter of Swearing,
because GOD had forbidden his People in the Books of Exodus and Deuteronomy, to
take his Name in vain, or to Swear falsely by his Name; they therefore judged
it lawful to Swear by any Creature in common Discourse, supposing they did not
directly mention the Name of GOD. Our Blessed Savior therefore in the Words
now before us, rectifies this their Mistake about Swearing, as he had done in
the Verses immediately foregoing that concerning Adultery, and tells the
People, that whatever Allowances the Pharisees might give to swear by any
Creature, yet he pronounced it absolutely unlawful for any of his Followers to
do so. You have heard, says he, that it has been said by them of old Time
(namely by the Pharisees and Teachers of the Jewish Law) Thou shall not
forswear thyself, but perform unto the LORD thine Oaths: But I say unto you, (I
who am appointed by the Father to be the great Prophet and true Lawgiver of
his Church) Swear not at all, in your common Conversation neither by Heaven,
for it is GOD's Throne; and therefore to swear by That, is to swear by Him that
sits thereon; neither by the Earth, for it is his Footstool; nor by Jerusalem,
for it is the City of the Great King; neither shall thou swear by thy Head,
because thou can not make one Hair white or black: But let your
Communications (which plainly shows that CHRIST is here speaking of Swearing,
not before a Magistrate, but in common Conversation, let your Communications)
says he, be Yea, yea; Nay, nay, a strong Affirmation or Negation at the most;
for whatever is more than this comes of Evil; that is, comes from an evil
Principle, from the Evil One, the Devil, the Author of all Evil.

Which by the Way, methinks, should be a Caution to all such Persons, who,
though not guilty of Swearing in the gross Sense of the Word, yet attest the
Truth of what they are speaking of, though ever so trifling, by saying, Upon my
Life, -- As I live, -- By my Faith, -- By the Heavens, and such like: Which
Expressions, however harmless and innocent they may be esteemed by some sorts
of People, yet are the very Oaths which our Blessed LORD condemns in the Words
immediately following the Text; and Persons who use such unwarrantable Forms of
speaking, must expect to be convicted and condemned as Swearers, at our
Savior's second Coming to judge the World.

But to return: It appears then from the whole Tenor of our Savior's
Discourse, that in the Words of the Text he does by no Means disannul or forbid
Swearing before a Magistrate (which, as might easily be shown, is both lawful
and necessary) but only profane Swearing in common Conversation; the
Heinousness and Sinfulness of which I come now, as was above proposed, more
immediately to lay before you.

And here, not to mention that it is a direct Breach of our Blessed Master's
and great Lawgiver's Command in the Words of the Text, as likewise of the T^^rd
Commandment, wherein GOD positively de^^^res, he will not hold him guiltless
(that is, will assuredly punish him) that takes his Name in vain: Not to
mention that it is the greatest Abuse of that noble Faculty of Speech, whereby
we are distinguished from the Brute Creation; and the great Hazard the common
Swearer runs, of being perjured some Time or other: Not to mention those
Reasons against it, I say, which of themselves would abundantly prove the Folly
and Sinfulness of Swearing: -- I shall, at this Time, content myself with
instancing in four Particulars, which highly aggravate the Crime of profane
Swearing; and those are such as follow.

I. First, Because there is no Temptation in Nature to this Sin, nor does the
Commission of it afford the Offender the least Pleasure or Satisfaction. II.
Secondly, Because it is a Sin which may be so often repeated. III. Thirdly,
Because it hardens Infidels against the Christian Religion, and must give great
Offense, and occasion much Sorrow and Concern to every true Disciple of JESUS
CHRIST. IV. Fourthly, Because it is an Extremity of Sin, which can only be
matched in Hell.
I. The First Reason then, why Swearing in common Conversation is so heinous in
GOD's Sight, and why we should not swear at all, is, because it has no
Temptation in Nature; nor does the Commission of it, unless a Man be a Devil
incarnate, afford the Offender the least Pleasure or Satisfaction.

Now here, I presume, we may lay it down as a Maxim universally agreed on, that
the Guilt of any Crime is increased or lessened in Proportion to the Weakness
or Strength of the Temptation by which a Person is carried out to the
Commission of it. It was this Consideration that extenuated and diminished the
Guilt of Readiness taking upon him to offer Sacrifice before the Prophet Samuel
came, and of Uzza's touching the Ark, because it was in Danger of falling: As,
on the contrary, what so highly aggravated the Disobedience of our first
Parents and Lot's Wife, was, because the former had so little Reason to eat the
forbidden Fruit, and the latter so small a Temptation to look back on Sodom.

And now if this be granted, surely the common Swearer must of all Sinners be
the most without Excuse, since there is no Manner of Temptation in Nature to
the Commission of his Crime. In most of the other Commands, Persons perhaps may
plead the Force of Natural Inclination in Excuse for the Breach of them: One,
for Instance, may allege his strong Propensity to Anger, to excuse his
breaking of the Sixth: Another, his Proneness to Lust, for his Violation of the
Seventh. But now surely the common Swearer has nothing of this kind to urge in
his Behalf: For though he may have a natural Inclination to this or that Crime,
yet no Man, it is to be presumed, can say, he is born of a swearing
Constitution.

But farther, as there is no Temptation to it, so there is no Pleasure or
Profit to be reaped from the Commission of it. Ask the Drunkard why he rises up
early to follow strong Drink, and he will tell you, because it affords his
sensual Appetite some kind of Pleasure and Gratification, though it be no
higher an one than that of a Brute. Enquire of the covetous Worldling, why he
defrauds and over-reaches his Neighbor, and he has an Answer ready, -- To
enrich himself, and to lay up Goods for many Years. But it must certainly
puzzle the profane Swearer himself, to inform you what Pleasure he reaps from
Swearing: For alas! it is a fruitless, tasteless Thing, that he sells his Soul
for. But indeed he does not sell it at all: In this Case he prodigally gives it
away (without Repentance) to the Devil; and parts with a blessed Eternity, and
runs into everlasting Torment, merely for nothing!

II. But Secondly, what increases the Heinousness of profane Swearing, is, that
it is a Sin which may so often be repeated.

This is another Consideration which always serves to lessen or increase the
Guilt and Malignity of any Sin. It was some Excuse for the Drunkenness of Noah,
and the Adultery of David, that they committed these Crimes but once: As, on
the contrary, of the Patriarch Abraham's Distrust of GOD, that he repeated the
Dissembling of Sarah to be his Wife two several Times. And if this be admitted
as an Aggravation of other Persons Crimes, surely much more so of the Guilt of
common Swearing, because it is a Sin which may be and is for the generality
often repeated. In many other gross Sins it cannot be so: If a Man be overcome
in Drink, there must be a considerable Time ever he can recover his Debauch,
and return to his Cups again: Or if he be accustomed to profane the Sabbath, he
cannot do it every Day, but only one in seven. But alas! the profane Swearer is
ready for another Oath almost before the Sound of the first is out of our Ears:
Yea, some double and treble them in one Sentence, even so as to confound the
Sense of what they say, by an horrid Din of Blasphemy! Now if the great and
terrible Jehovah has expressly declared that he will not hold him guiltless,
that is, will assuredly punish him, that takes his Name but once in vain: What
a vast Heap of these heinous Sins lies at every common Swearer's Door! It would
be apt to sink him into an intolerable Despair, did he but see the whole Sum of
them. And Oh! what a ^eared Conscience must that Wretch have, that does not
feel this prodigious Weight!

III. But Thirdly, what makes the Sin of profane Swearing appear yet more
exceeding sinful, is, that it hardens Infidels against the Christian Religion.

It is the Apostle St. Peter's Advice to the married Persons of his Time, that
they should walk as became the Gospel of CHRIST, that those that were without,
might be won to embrace the Christian Religion, by seeing and observing their
pious Conversation coupled together with Fear. And what the Apostle presses on
married Persons we find elsewhere enjoined each particular Member of the
Church. Accordingly we are commanded by our Blessed LORD to let our Light so
shine before Men, that they may see our good Works, and glorify our Father
which is in Heaven: And the Apostle St. Paul bids us walk circumspectly toward
them that are without, redeeming the Time, that is embracing all Opportunities
to do them good, because the Days are evil. But alas! in what a direct
Contradiction does the profane Swearer live to this and such Precepts, who
instead of gaining Proselytes to CHRIST from the unbelieving Part of the World,
does all he can to oppose it! For how can it be expected, that Infidels should
honor our GOD, when Christians themselves despise him; or that any should
embrace our Religion, when Professors of it themselves make so light of one of
its strictest Commands? No, to our Grief and Shame be it spoken, it is by
reason of such Impieties as these that our holy Religion (the best and purest
in itself) is become a By word among the Heathen; that the sacred Authority of
the Holy JESUS and his Doctrine is despised; and GOD's Name, as it is written,
blasphemed among the Gentiles.

These cannot but be sad Blocks and Offenses in the Way of our Brethren's
Conversion: But woe be to those Men by whom such Offenses come: We may say of
them, as our blessed LORD did of Judas, It had been better for such Men that
they had never been born: Or, as he threatens in another Place, It shall be
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment than for such
Sinners.

But this is not all; as profane Swearing must undoubtedly harden those in
their Infidelity that are without, so must it no less grieve and give great
Offense to those honest and sincere Persons that are within the Church. We hear
of David's complaining and crying out, Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell
with Mesech, and to have my Habitation amongst the Tents of Kedar: That is,
that he was obliged to live and converse with a People exceedingly wicked and
profane. And St. Peter tells us, that Lot's righteous Soul was grieved day by
day, whilst he saw and observed the ungodly Conversation of the Wicked. And no
doubt it was one great Part of our blessed Master's Sufferings whilst on Earth,
that he was compelled to converse with a wicked and perverse Generation, and to
hear his heavenly Father's sacred Name profaned and scoffed at by unrighteous
and wicked Men. And surely it cannot but pierce the Heart of every true and
sincere Christian, of every one that does in any Measure partake of the Spirit
of his Master, to hear the Multitude of Oaths and Curses which proceed daily
and hourly out of the Mouths of many People, and those too whose liberal
Education and seeming Regard for the Welfare of Religion, one would think,
should teach them a more becoming Behavior. To hear the great and terrible
Name of GOD polluted by Men, which is adored by Angels; and to consider how
often that sacred Name is profaned in common Discourse, which we are not worthy
to mention in our Prayers: This, I say, cannot but make each of them cry out
with holy David, Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to
have my Habitation amongst the Tents of Kedar. And though the blasphemous and
profane Discourses of others will not be imputed to sincere Persons for Sin, so
long as they have no Fellowship with such hellish Fruits of Darkness, but
rather reprove them; nay, rather will be imputed to them for Righteousness, for
thus lamenting the Wickedness of Sion: yet it will greatly enhance the present
Guilt, and sadly increase the future Punishment of every profane Swearer, by
whom such Offenses come. For if, as our Savior tells us, it had been better
for a Man to have a Millstone tied about his Neck, than that he should offend
one of his little ones, that is, the weakest of his Disciples, how much sorer
Punishment will they be thought worthy of, who not only cause GOD's Name to be
blasphemed among the Gentiles, and the Religion of our dear Redeemer to be
abhorred; but who make his Saints to weep and mourn, and vex their righteous
Souls from day to day, by their ungodly, profane and blasphemous Conversation?
Surely as GOD will put the Tears of one into his Bottle, and recompense them
with eternal Glory at the great Day of Retribution, so it will be just in him
to punish the other with eternal Sorrow for all their ungodly and hard
Speeches, and cast them into a Lake of Fire and Brimstone, where they shall be
glad of a Drop of Water to cool those Tongues with which they have so often
blasphemed the LORD of Hosts, and grieved the People of our GOD.

IV. But it is Time for me to proceed to give my Fourth and last Reason, why
common Swearing is so exceeding sinful. And that is, because it is such an
Extremity of Sin, that can only be matched in Hell, where all are desperate,
and without Hope of Mercy.

The damned Devils and damned Souls of Men in Hell, may be supposed to rave and
blaspheme in their Torments, because they know that the Chains wherein they are
held can never be knocked off: But for Men that swim in the River of GOD's
Goodness, whose Mercies are renewed to them every Morning, and who are visited
with fresh Tokens of his infinite unmerited Loving Kindness every Moment: For
these favorite Creatures to set their Mouths against Heaven, and to blaspheme
a gracious, patient, all-bountiful GOD * is a Height of Sin which exceeds the
Blackness and Impiety of Devils and Hell itself.

And now, after what has been here offered, to show the Heinousness of profane
Cursing and Swearing in common Conversation, may I not very justly address
myself to you in the Words of the Text, Therefore I say unto you, swear not at
all; since it is a Sin that has no Temptation in Nature, nor brings any
Pleasure or Profit to the Committer of it; since it hardens Infidels in their
Infidelity, and affords sad Causes of Grief and Lamentation to every honest
Christian; since it is a Sin that generally grows into a Habit; and lastly,
such a Sin that can only be matched in Hell.

1. And first then, if these Things be so, and the Sin of profane Swearing, as
has been in some Measure shown, is so exceeding sinful, what shall we say to
such unhappy Men, who think it not only allowable, but fashionable and polite,
to take the Name of GOD in vain; who imagine that Swearing makes them look big
among their Companions, and really think it a Piece of Honor to abound in it?
But alas! little do they think that such a Behavior argues the greatest
Degeneracy of Mind and Fool-hardiness that can possibly be thought of: For what
can be more base than one Hour to pretend to adore GOD in public Worship, and
the very next Moment to blaspheme his Name: Indeed such a Behavior from
Persons who deny the Being of a GOD (if any such Fools there be) is not
altogether so much to be wondered at: But for Men, who not only subscribe to
the Belief of a Deity, but likewise acknowledge him to be a GOD of infinite
Majesty and Power; for such Men, I say, to blaspheme his holy Name by profane
Cursing and Swearing, and at the same Time confess, that this very GOD has
expressly declared He will not hold him guiltless, that is, will certainly and
eternally punish (without Repentance) him that takes his Name in vain; is such
an Instance of Fool-hardiness as well as Baseness, that can scarcely be
paralleled. This is what they presume not to do in other Cases of less Danger:
They dare not revile a General at the Head of his Army, nor rouse a sleeping
Lion when within reach of his Paw. And is the Almighty GOD, the Great JEHOVAH,
the Everlasting King, who can consume them by the Breath of his Nostrils, and
frown them to Hell in an Instant; is He, I say, the only contemptible Being in
their Account that may be provoked without Fear, and offended without
Punishment? No, though GOD bear long, he will not bear always: Time will come,
and that too perhaps much sooner than such Persons may expect, when GOD will
vindicate his injured Honor, when he will lay bare his Almighty Arm, and make
those Wretches feel the eternal Smart of his Justice, whose Power and Name they
have so often vilified and blasphemed. Alas! what will become of all their
Bravery then? Will they then wantonly sport with the Name of their Maker, and
call upon the King of all the Earth to damn them any more in Jest? No, their
Note will then be changed; indeed they shall call, but, alas! it will be for
the Rocks to fall on them, and the Hills to cover them from the Wrath of him
that sits upon the Throne, and from the Lamb forever. It is true, Time was
when they prayed, though without Thought perhaps, for Damnation both for
themselves and others: And now they will find their Prayers answered. -- They
delighted in Cursing, therefore shall it happen unto them; they loved not
Blessing, therefore shall it be far from them; they clothed themselves with
Cursing like as with a Garment, and it shall come into their Bowels like Water,
and like Oil into their Bones.

2. But farther, if the Sin of Swearing is so exceeding heinous and withal so
common, then it is every particular Person's Duty, especially those that are in
Authority, to do their utmost toward discountenancing and suppressing so
malignant a Crime. The Duty we owe both to GOD and our Neighbor requires this
at our Hands* By the one we are obliged to assert our Maker's Honor; by the
other to prevent our Neighbor's Ruin: Not to mention that it is the greatest
Proof we can give of our undissembled Love to our Master, and is but doing as
we would be done by, and as we ourselves act in Cases of lesser Consequence.
Were we to hear either our own or our Friend's good Name vilified and traduced,
we should think it our bounden Duty to vindicate the wronged Reputation of
each: And shall the great, terrible and holy Name of our best and only Friend,
our King, our Father, nay our GOD: Shall this, I say, be daily, nay every
Moment defied and blasphemed; and will no one dare to stand up in Defense of
his Honor and Holiness? Be astonished, O Heavens, at this! No, let us scorn
all such base and treacherous Treatment: Let us, for once at least, resolve to
support the Cause of Religion, and with a becoming prudent Courage manifest our
Zeal for the Honor of the LORD of Hosts. Men in Authority have double the
Advantages of ordinary Christians: Their very Office shows they are intended
for the Punishment of Evil Doers: And such is the Degeneracy of Mankind, that
the generality of them will be more influenced by the Power of Persons in
Authority, than by the most labored Exhortations from the Pulpit. To such
therefore* if there are any here present, I humbly address myself, beseeching
them in the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to do their utmost to put a stop to,
and restrain profane Cursing and Swearing. And though it must be confessed that
this is a Work which requires a great deal of Courage and Pains, yet they would
do well to consider it is for GOD they undertake it, who certainly will support
and bear them out in a due Execution of their Office here, and reward them with
an exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory hereafter. But it is Time to draw
toward a Conclusion.

3. Let me therefore once more address myself to every Person here present, in
the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST; and if any amongst them have been any way
guilty of this notorious Sin of Swearing, let me entreat them by all that is
near and dear to them, that they would neither give the Magistrate the Trouble
to punish, nor their Friends any Reason for the future to warn them against
committing the Crime; but keep a constant and careful Watch over the Door of
their Lips, and withal implore the Divine Assistance (without which all is
nothing) that they offend no more so scandalously with their Tongues. Let them
seriously lay to Heart what with great Plainness and Simplicity has here been
delivered: And if they have any Regard for themselves as Men, or their
Reputation as Christians; if they would not be a public Scandal to their
Profession, or a Grief to all that know or converse with them: In short, if
they would not be Devils Incarnate here, and provoke GOD to punish them
eternally hereafter, -- I say unto them in the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST,
Swear not at all.

SERMON X. Thankfulness for Mercies received a Necessary DUTY.
PSALM cvii. 30, 31. Then are they glad, because they are at Rest, and so he
brings them unto the Haven where they would be.
Oh that Men would therefore Praise the LORD for his Goodness, and declare the
Wonders that he does for the Children of Men!

NUMBERLESS Marks does Man bear in his Soul, that he is fallen and estranged
from GOD; but no one gives a greater Proof of it, than that Backwardness, which
every one finds within himself, to the Duty of Praise and Thanksgiving.

When GOD placed the first Man in Paradise, his Soul, no doubt, was so filled
with a Sense of the Riches of the Divine Love, that he was continually
employing that Breath of Life the Almighty had not long before breathed into
him, in blessing and magnifying that all-bountiful, all-gracious GOD, in whom
he lived, moved, and had his Being.

And the brightest Idea we can form of the Angelical Hierarchy above, and the
Spirits of just Men made perfect, is, that they are continually standing round
the Throne of GOD, and cease not Day and Night, saying, Worthy art thou, O
Lamb, that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength,
and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing, Rev. v. 12.

That then, which was Man's Perfection when Time first began, and will be his
Employment when Death is swallowed up in Victory, and Time shall be no more,
without Controversy, is part of our Perfection, and ought to be our frequent
Exercise on Earth: And I doubt not but those blessed Spirits, who are sent
forth to minister to them who shall be Heirs of Salvation, often stand
astonished when they encamp around us, to find our Hearts so rarely enlarged,
and our Mouths so seldom opened, to show forth the loving Kindness of the LORD,
or to speak of all his Praise.

Matter for Praise and Adoration can never be wanting to Creatures redeemed by
the Blood of the Son of GOD; and who have such continual Scenes of his infinite
Goodness presented to their View, that were their Souls duly affected with a
Sense of his universal Love, they could not but be continually calling on
Heaven and Earth, Men and Angels, to join with them in praising and blessing
that HIGH and LOFTY ONE, who inhabiteth Eternity, who makes his Sun to shine
on the Evil and on the Good, and daily pours down his Blessing on the whole
Race of Mankind.

But few are arrived to such a Degree of Charity, as to rejoice with those that
do rejoice, and to be as thankful for others Mercies as their own. This Part of
Christian Perfection, though begun on Earth, will be consummated only in
Heaven; where our Hearts will glow with such fervent Love toward GOD and one
another, that every fresh degree of Glory communicated to our Neighbor, will
also communicate to us a fresh degree of Thankfulness and Joy.

That which has a greater Tendency to excite the Generality of us fallen Men to
Praise and Thanksgiving, is a Sense of GOD's private Mercies and particular
Benefits bestowed upon ourselves. For as these come nearer our own Hearts, so
they must be more affecting; and as they are peculiar Proofs, whereby we may
know that GOD does in a more especial Manner favor us above others, so they
cannot but sensibly touch us; and if our Hearts are not quite frozen, like
Coals of a Refiner's Fire, must melt us down into Thankfulness and Love. It was
a Consideration of the distinguishing Favors GOD had shown to his chosen
People Israel, and the frequent and remarkable Deliverances wrought by him in
Behalf of those who go down to the Sea in Ships, and occupy their Business in
great Waters, that made the holy Psalmist break out so frequently as he does in
this Psalm, into this moving, pathetical Exclamation, O that Men would
therefore praise the LORD for his Goodness, and declare the Wonders that he
does for the Children of Men!

His expressing himself in so passionate, fervent a Manner, implies both the
Importance and Neglect of the Duty. As when Moses or another Occasion cries
out, Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they woull
practically consider their latter End? Deuteronomy xxxii. 29.

I say, Importance and Neglect of the Duty for out of those many Thousands that
receive Blessings from the LORD, how few give Thanks in Remembrance of his
Holiness? The Account given us of the ungrateful Lepers, is but too lively a
Representation of the Ingratitude of Mankind in general; who like them,
perhaps, when under any humbling Providence, can cry, JESUS Master, have Mercy
on us, Luke xvii. 13. but when healed of their Sickness, or delivered from
their Distress, scarce one in ten can be found returning to give Thanks to GOD.

And yet as common as this Sin of Ingratitude is, there is nothing we ought
more earnestly to pray against. For what is more absolutely condemned in Holy
Scripture than Ingratitude? Or what more peremptorily required than the
contrary Temper? Thus says the Apostle, Rejoice evermore, in every Thing give
Thanks, 1 Thef. v. 16 -- 18. Be careful for nothing: But in every Thing by
Prayer and Supplication, with Thanksgiving, let your Requests be made known
unto GOD, Phil. iv. 6.

On the contrary, the Apostle mentions it as one of the highest Crimes of the
Gentiles, that they were not thankful. Neither were they thankful, says he,
Romans i. 21. As also in another Place, he numbers the Unthankful, 2 Timothy iii.
2. amongst those unholy, profane Persons who are to have their Portion in the
Lake of Fire and Brimstone.

As for our Sins, GOD puts them behind his Back; but his Mercies he will have
acknowledged. There is Virtue gone out of me, says JESUS CHRIST, Luke viii.46.
And the Woman who was cured of her bloody Issue, must confess it: And we
generally find, when GOD sent any remarkable Punishment upon any particular
Person, he reminded him of the Favors he had received, as so many Aggravations
of his Ingratitude. Thus when GOD was about to visit Eli's House, he thus
expostulates with him by his Prophet, Did I plainly appear unto the House of
thy Fathers, when they were in Egypt, in Pharaoh's House? And did I choose him
out of all the Tribes of Israel, to be my Priest, to offer upon my Altar, to
burn Incense, and to wear an Ephod before me? Wherefore kick ye at my
Sacrifice, and at mine Offering which I have commanded in my Habitation, and
honor thy Sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of all
the Offerings of Israel my People? Wherefore the LORD GOD of Israel says, I
said indeed, that thy House, and the House of thy Father should walk before me
for ever; but now the LORD says, Be it far from me, for them that honor me
will I honor, and they that despise me, shall be lightly esteemed. I Sam. ii.
27, 28, 29, 30.

It was this and such like Instances of GOD's Severity against the Unthankful,
that inclined me to choose the Words of the Text as the most proper Subject I
could discourse on at this Time.

For these four Months, my good Friends, we have now been upon the Sea in this
Ship, and have occupied our Business in the great Waters. At GOD Almighty's
Word, we have seen the stormy Wind arise, which has lifted up the Waves
thereof. We have been carried up to the Heaven and down again to the Deep, and
some of our Souls melted away, because of the Trouble; but I trust we cried
earnestly unto the LORD, and he delivered us out of our Distress. For he made
the Storm to cease; so that the Waves thereof were still. And now we are glad
because we are at Rest, for GOD has brought us to the Haven where we would be
Oh that you would therefore praise the LORD for his Goodness, and declare the
Wonders that he has done for us, the unworthiest of the Sons of Men.

Thus Moses, thus Joshua behaved. For when they were about to take their Leaves
of the Children of Israel, they recounted to them what great Things GOD had
done for them, as the best Arguments and Motives they could urge to engage them
to Obedience. And how can I copy after better Examples? What fitter, what more
noble Motives to Holiness and Purity of Living can I lay before you than they
did?

Indeed I cannot say, that we have seen a Pillar of a Cloud by Day, or a Pillar
of Fire by Night, going visibly before us to guide our Course; but this I can
say, that the same GOD who was in that Pillar of a Cloud, and Pillar of Fire,
which departed not from the Israelites, and who has made the Sun to rule the
Day, and the Moon to rule the Night, has by his good Providence directed us in
our right Way, or else the Pilot had steered us in vain.

Neither can I say, that we have seen the Sun stand still, as the Children of
Israel did in the Days of Joshua. But surely GOD, during part of our Voyage,
has caused it to withold some of that Heat which it usually sends forth in
these warmer Climates, or else it had not failed but some of you must have
perished in the Sickness that has been, and does yet continue among us.

We have not seen the Waters stand purposely on a Heap, that we might pass
through, neither have we been pursued by Pharaoh and his Host, and delivered
out of their Hands; but we have been led through the Sea as through a
Wilderness, and were once remarkably preserved from being run down by another
Ship; which, had GOD permitted, the Waters, in all Probability, would
immediately have overwhelmed us, and like Pharaoh and his Host, we should have
sunk as Stones into the Sea.

We may indeed, Atheist like, ascribe all these Things to natural Causes, and
say, our own Skill and Foresight has brought us hither in Safety. But as
certainly as JESUS CHRIST, that Angel of the Covenant, in the Days of his Flesh
walked upon the Water, and said to his sinking Disciples, Be not afraid, it is
I, so surely has the same everlasting I AM, who decketh himself with Light as
with a Garment, who spreads out the Heavens like a Curtain, who claspeth the
Winds in his Fist, who holds the Waters in the Hollow of his Hands, and
guided the Wise Men by a Star in the East; so surely, I say, has he spoken, and
at his Command the Winds have blown us where we are now arrived. For his
Providence rules all Things, Winds and Storms obey his Word; He says to it at
one Time Go, and it goes; at another, Come, and it comes, and at a Third
Time, Blow this Way, and it blows.

It is he, my Brethren, and not we ourselves, that has of late sent us such
prosperous Gales, and made us ride, as it were on the Wings of the Wind, into
the Haven where we would be.

O that you would therefore praise the LORD for his Goodness, and by your Lives
declare, that you are truly thankful for the Wonders he has shown to us, who
are less than the least of the Sons of Men.

I say, declare it by your Lives. For to give him Thanks barely with your Lips,
while your Hearts are far from him, is but a mock Sacrifice, nay, an
Abomination unto the LORD.

This was the End, the Royal Psalmist says, GOD had in view, when he showed
such Wonders from Time to Time to the People of Israel, that they might keep
his Statutes and observe his Laws. Psalm. cv. 44. and this, my good Friends, is
the End GOD would have accomplished in us, and the only Return he desires us to
make him, for all the Benefits he has conferred upon us.

O then, let me beseech you, give GOD your Hearts, your whole Hearts, and
suffer yourselves to be drawn by the Cords of infinite Love to honor and obey
him.

Assure yourselves you never can serve a better Master, for his Service is
perfect Freedom, is Yoke, when worn a little while, exceeding easy, his Burden
light; and in keeping his Commandments there is great Reward, Love, Peace, Joy
in the Holy Ghost here, and a Crown of Glory that fades not away hereafter.

You may indeed let other Lords have Dominion over you, and Satan may promise
to give you all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them, if you will
fall down and worship him; but he is a Liar, and was so from the Beginning; and
has not so much to give you, as you may tread on with the Sole of your Foot; or
could he give you the whole World, yet that could not make you happy without
GOD. It is GOD alone, my Brethren, whose we are, in whose Name I now speak, and
who has of late showed us such Mercies in the Deep, that can give solid lasting
Happiness to your Souls; and he for this Reason only desires your Hearts,
because without him they must be miserable.

Suffer me not then to go away without my Errand; as it is the last Time I
shall speak to you, let me not speak in vain; but let a Sense of the Divine
Goodness lead you to Repentance.

Even Saul, that abandoned Wretch, when David showed him his Skirt, which he
had cut off, when he might have taken his Life, was so melted down with his
Kindness, that he lifted up his Voice and wept. And we must have Hearts harder
than Readiness, nay harder than the nether Millstone, if a Sense of GOD's late
loving Kindnesses, notwithstanding he might so often have destroyed us, does
not even compel us to lay down our Arms against him, and become his faithful
Servants and Soldiers unto our Lives End.

If they have not this Effect upon us, we shall of all Men be most miserable;
for GOD is just, as well as merciful; and the more Blessings we have received
here, the greater Damnation, if we do not improve them, shall we incur
hereafter.

But GOD forbid that any of those should ever suffer the Vengeance of eternal
Fire, amongst whom I have for these Four Months been preaching the Gospel of
CHRIST, but yet thus must it be, if you do not improve the Divine Mercies; and
instead of your being my Crown of Rejoicing in the Day of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, I must appear as a swift Witness against you.

But, Brethren, I am persuaded better Things of you, and Things that accompany
Salvation, though I thus speak.

Blessed be GOD, some Marks of a partial Reformation at least, have been
visible amongst all you that are Soldiers. And my weak, though sincere
Endeavors, to build you up in the knowledge and Fear of GOD, have not been
altogether in vain in the LORD.

Swearing, I hope, is in a great Measure abated with you; and GOD I trust has
blessed his late Visitations by making them the Means of awakening your
Consciences, to a more sollicitous Enquiry about the Things which belong to
your everlasting Peace.

Fulfill you then my Joy, by continuing thus minded, and labor to go on to
Perfection. For I shall have no greater Pleasure than to see, or hear that you
walk in the Truth.

Consider, my good Friends, you are now, as it were, entering on a new World,
where you will be surrounded with Multitudes of Heathens; and if you take not
heed to have your Conversation honest amongst them, and to walk worthy the Holy
Vocation wherewith you are called, you will act the Hellish Part of Herod's
Soldiers over again; and cause CHRIST's Religion, as they did his Person, to be
had in Derision of those that are round about you.

Consider farther, what peculiar Privileges you have enjoyed above many others
that are entering on the same Land. They have had, as it were a Famine of the
Word, but you have rather been in Danger of being surfeited with your Spiritual
Manna. And therefore, as more Instructions have been given you, so from you Men
will most justly expect the greater Improvement in Goodness.

Indeed I cannot say I have discharged my Duty toward you as I ought. No, I am
sensible of many Faults which I have been guilty of in my ministerial Office,
and for which I have not failed, nor, I hope, ever shall fail to humble myself
in secret before GOD. However, this I can say, that except a few Days that have
been spent necessarily on other Persons, whom GOD immediately called me to
write and minister unto, and the two last Weeks wherein I have been confined by
Sickness, all the while I have been aboard, I have been either actually engaged
in, or preparing myself for instructing you. And though you are now to be
committed to the Care of another (whose Labors I heartily beseech GOD to bless
amongst you) yet I trust I shall at all Seasons, if Need be, willingly spend,
and be spent, for the Good of your Souls, though the more abundantly I love
you, the less I should be loved.

As for your military Affairs, I have nothing to do with them. Fear God, and
you must honor the King. Nor am I better acquainted with the Nature of that
Land which you are now come over to protect; only this I may venture to affirm
in general, that you must necessarily expect upon your Arrival at a new Colony,
to meet with many Difficulties. But your very Profession teaches you to endure
Hardship; be not therefore faint-hearted, but quit yourselves like Men, and be
strong, Numb. xiv. Be not like those cowardly Persons, who were affrighted at
the Report of the false Spies, that came and said, that there were People tall
as the Anakims to be grappled with; but be like unto Caleb and Joshua, all
Heart; and say, we will act valiantly, for we shall be more than Conquerors
over all Difficulties through JESUS CHRIST that loved us. -- Above all Things, my
Brethren, take heed and beware of murmuring, like the perverse Israelites,
against those that are set over you; and learn, whatsoever State you shall be
in, therewith to be content. Phil. iv. 11.

As I have spoken to you, I hope your Wives also will suffer the Word of
Exhortation.

Your Behavior on Shipboard, especially the first Part of the Voyage, I choose
to throw a Cloak over; for, to use mildest Terms, it was not such as became the
Gospel of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. However of late, blessed be GOD, you have
taken more Heed to your Ways, and some of you have walked all the while, as
became Women professing Godliness. Let those accept my hearty Thanks, and
permit me to entreat you all in general, as you are all now married, to
remember the solemn Vow you made at your Entrance into the Marriage State; and
see that you be subject to your own Husbands, in every lawful Thing: Beg of GOD
to keep the Door of your Lips, that you offend not with your Tongues; and walk
in Love, that your Prayers be not hindered. You that have Children, let it be
your chief Concern to breed them up in the Nurture and Monition of the LORD.
And live all of you so holy and unblameable, that you may not so much as be
suspected to be unchaste; and as some of you have imitated Mary Magdalene in
her Sin, strive to imitate her also in her Repentance.

As for you that are Sailors, what shall I say? How shall I address myself to
you? How shall I do that which I so much long to do -- touch your Hearts?
Gratitude obliges me to wish thus well to you. For you have often taught me
many instructive Lessons, and reminded me to put up many Prayers to GOD for
you, that you might receive your spiritual Sight.

When I have seen you preparing for a Storm, and riefing your Sails to guard
against it, how have I wished that you and I were both as careful to avoid that
Storm of GOD's Wrath, which will certainly, without Repentance, quickly
overtake us? When I have observed you catch at every fair Gale, how have I
secretly cried, Oh that we were as careful to know the Things that belong to
our Peace, before they are hid from our Eyes! And when I have taken Notice how
steadily you eyed your Compass, in order to steer aright, how have I wished,
that we as steadily eyed the Word of GOD, which alone can preserve us from
making Shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience! In short, there is scarce any
thing you do, which has not been a Lesion of Instruction to me; and therefore
it would be ungrateful in me, did I not take this Opportunity to exhort you in
the Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to be as wise in the Things which Concern
your Soul, as I have observed you to be in the Affairs belonging to your Ship.

I am sensible that the Sea is reckoned but an ill School to learn CHRIST in:
And to see a devout Sailor is esteemed as uncommon a Thing, as to see a Saul
amongst the Prophets. But whence this Wondering? Whence this looking upon a
godly Sailor as a Man to be wondered at, as a speckled Bird upon the Earth? I
am sure for the little Time I have come in and out amongst you, and as far as I
can judge from the little Experience I have had of Things, I scarce know any
way of Life, that is capable of greater Improvements than yours.

The continual Danger you are in of being overwhelmed by the great Waters; the
many Opportunities you have of beholding GOD's Wonders in the Deep; the happy
Retirement you enjoy from worldly Temptations; and the daily Occasions that are
offered you to endure Hardships, are such noble Means of promoting the
Spiritual Life, that were your Hearts bent toward GOD, you would account it
your Happiness, that his Providence has called you, to go down to the Sea in
Ships, and to occupy your Business in the great Waters.

The royal Psalmist knew this, and therefore in the Words of the Text, calls
more especially on Men of your Employ, to praise the LORD for his Goodness, and
declare the Wonders, he does for the Children of Men.

And oh that you would be wise in Time, and hearken to his Voice to Day, whilst
it is called to Day! For ye yourselves know how little is to be done on a sick
Bed: And how GOD has in an especial Manner of late invited you to Repentance.
Two of your Crew he has taken off by Death, and most of you he has mercifully
visited with a grievous Sickness. The Terrors of the LORD have been upon you,
and when burnt by a scorching Fever, some of you have cried out, What shall we
do to be saved? Remember then the Resolutions you made, when you thought GOD
was about to take away your Souls. And see, that according to your Promises,
you show forth your Thankfulness not only with your Lips, but in your Lives.
For though GOD may bear long, he will not forbear always; and if these signal
Mercies and Judgments do not lead you to Repentance, assure yourselves there
will at last come a fiery Tempest from the Presence of the LORD, which will
sweep away you, and all other Adversaries of GOD.

I am positive neither you nor the Soldiers have wanted, nor will want any
Manner of Encouragement to Piety and Holiness of living from those two Persons
who have here the Government over you; for they have been such Helps to me in
my Ministry, and have so readily concurred in every thing for your Good, that
they may justly demand a public Acknowledgment of Thanks both from you and me.

Permit me then, my honored Friends, in the Name of both your People, to
return you hearty Thanks for the Care and Tenderness you have expressed for the
Welfare of their better Parts.

As for the private Favors you have shown my Person, I hope so deep a Sense of
them is imprinted on my Heart, that I shall plead them before GOD in Prayer as
long as I live.

But I have still stronger Obligations to intercede in your Behalf. For GOD,
for ever adored be his free Grace in CHRIST JESUS, has set a Seal to my
Ministry in your Hearts. Some distant Pangs of the New Birth I have observed to
come upon you; and GOD forbid that I should sin against the LORD, by ceasing to
pray, that the good Work begun in your Souls, may be carried on till the Day of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

The Time of our Departure from each other is now at Hand, and you are going
out into a World of Temptations. But though absent in Body, let us be present
with each other in Spirit; and GOD, I trust, will enable you to be singularly
good, to be ready to be accounted Fools for CHRIST's Sake: and then we shall
meet never to part again, in the Kingdom of our Father which is in Heaven.

To You, my Companions and familiar Friends, who came over with me to sojourn
in a strange Land, do I in the next Place address myself. For you I especially
fear, as well as for myself; because as we take sweet Counsel together oftener
than others, and as you are let into a more intimate Friendship with me in
private Life, the Eyes of all Men will be upon you, to note even the minutest
Miscarriage. -- and therefore it highly concerns you to walk circumspectly
toward those that are without. -- I hope nothing but a single Eye to GOD's
Glory and the Salvation of your own Souls, brought you from your native
Country. Remember then the End of your coming hither, and you can never do
amiss. -- Be Patterns of Industry, as well as Piety, to those who shall be
around you; and above all Things let us have such a fervent Charity amongst
ourselves, that it may be said of us, as of the Primitive Christians, See how
the Christians love one another.

And now I have been speaking to others particularly, I have one general
Request to make to all, and that with Reference to myself.

You have heard, my dear Friends, how I have been exhorting every one of you to
show forth your Thankfulness for the Divine Goodness, not only with your Lips,
but in your Lives: But Physician heal thyself, may justly be retorted on me,
For (without any false Pretenses to Humility) I find my own Heart so little
inclined to this Duty of Thanksgiving for the Benefits I have received, that I
had need fear sharing Hezekiah's Fate, who, because he was lifted up by, and
not thankful enough for the great Things GOD had done for him, was given up a
Prey to the Pride of his own Heart. I need therefore, and beg your most
importunate Petitions at the Throne of Grace, that no such Evil may befall me,
-- that the more GOD exalts me, the more I may debase myself, -- and that after
I have preached to others, I myself may not be a Castaway.

And now, Brethren, into GOD's Hands I commend your Spirits, who, I trust,
through his infinite Mercies in CHRIST JESUS, will preserve you blameless, till
his second Coming to judge the World.

Excuse my detaining you so long, it is the last Time I shall speak to you
perhaps; my Heart is full, and out of the abundance of it, I could continue my
Discourse till Midnight. -- But I must away to your new World, -- may GOD give
you new Hearts, and enable you to put in Practice what you have heard from Time
to Time to be your Duty, and I need not wish you any Thing better. For then GOD
will so bless you, that you will build you Cities to dwell in; then will you
sow your Lands and plant Vineyards, which will yield you Fruits of Increase,
Psalm. cvii. 36, 37. Then your Oxen shall be strong to labor, there shall be no
leading into Captivity, and no complaining in your Streets; then shall your
Sons grow up as the young Plants, and your Daughters be as the polished Corners
of the Temple: Then shall your Garners be full and plenteous with all Manner of
Store, and your Sheep bring forth Thousands and Ten Thousands in your Streets,
Psalm. cxliv. In short, then shall the LORD be your GOD; and as surely as he has
now brought us to this Haven, where we would be, so surely, after we have
passed through the Storms and Tempests of this troublesome World, will he bring
us to the Haven of eternal Rest, where we shall have nothing to do but to
praise him for ever for his Goodness, and declare in never-ceasing Songs of
Praise, the Wonders he has done for us, and all the other Sons of Men.

To which blessed Rest, GOD of his infinite Mercy bring us all, through JESUS
CHRIST our LORD; to whom with the FATHER, and the HOLY GHOST, he all Honor and
Glory, Might, Majesty and Dominion, now, henceforth, and for evermore.

Amen. Amen.
SERMON XI.
The ETERNITY of HILL-TORMENTS.
MATTHEW. xxv. 46. These shall go away into Everlasting Punishment.
THE Excellency of the Gospel ^^^pensation is evidenced by nothing more, than
those Sanctions of Rewards and Punishments, which it offers to the Choice of
all its Professors, in order to invite or compel them to be obedient to its
Precepts. -- For it promises no less than Eternal Happiness to the Good, and
denounces no slighter a Punishment than Everlasting Misery against the Wicked.
On the one Hand, it is a Savor of Life unto Life, on the other, a Savor of
Death unto Death. And though one would imagine the bare mentioning of the
former would be sufficient to draw Men to their Duty, yet Ministers in all Ages
have found it necessary frequently to remind their People of the latter, and to
set before them the Terrors of the LORD, as so many powerful Dissuasives from
Sin.

But whence is it that Men are so disingenuous? -- Why, the Reason seems to be
this. -- The Promise of Eternal Happiness on our Well-doing, is so agreeable to
the Inclinations and Wishes of Mankind, that all that call themselves
Christians, universally and willingly subscribe to the Belief of it. But then
there is something so shocking in the Consideration of Eternal Torments, and
seemingly such an infinite Disproportion between an endless Duration of Pain,
and a short Life spent in Pleasure, that Men (some at least of them) can
scarcely be brought to confess it as an Article of their Faith, that an
Eternity of Misery awaits the Wicked in a future State.

I shall therefore at this Time beg Leave, to insist on the Proof of this Part
of one of the Articles of our Creed; and endeavor to make good what our
blessed LORD has here threatened in the Words of the Text, that These, that is,
the Wicked, shall go away into Everlasting Punishment.

Accordingly, without considering the Words as they stand in Relation to the
Context, I shall resolve all I have to say into this one general Proposition,
-- That the Torments reserved for the Wicked hereafter are eternal.

But before I proceed to make good this, I must inform you that I take it for
granted,

All here present steadfastly believe, They have something within them, which we
call a Soul, and which is capable of surviving the Dissolution of the Body, and
of being miserable or happy to all Eternity.

I take it for granted farther, That you believe a Divine Revelation; that
those Books, emphatically called the Scriptures, were written by the
Inspiration of GOD, and that the Things therein contained, are founded upon
Eternal Truth.

I take it for granted lastly, That you believe, that the Son of GOD came down
to die for Sinners; that there is but one Mediator between GOD and Man, even
the Man CHRIST JESUS.

These Things being granted (and they were necessary to be premised) proceed we
now to make good the one general Proposition mentioned before, and asserted in
the Text, that The Torments reserved for the (...) hereafter are Eternal. --
These, says (...) LORD, shall go away into Everlasting Punishment.

The first Argument I shall advance to prove that the Torments reserved for the
Wicked hereafter are eternal (for I have taken it for granted, that you believe
those Books, emphatically called the Scriptures, were written by the
Inspiration of GOD, and that the Things contained therein are founded upon
Eternal Truth) is, That the Word of GOD himself, assures us, Line upon Line,
that it will be so.

To quote all the Texts that might be produced in Proof of this, would be
endless, -- Let it suffice to instance only in a few. -- In the Old Testament,
in the Book of Daniel, Chap. xii. ver. 2. we are told, that Some shall awake to
Everlasting Life, and others to Everlasting Contempt. -- In the Book of Isaiah,
it is said, that The Worm of those that have transgressed GOD's Law, shall not
die, nor their Fire be quenched. -- And in another Place, the Holy Prophet,
struck, no doubt, with Astonishment and Horror at the Prospect of the
Continuance of the Torments of the Damned, breaks out into this moving
Expostulation, Who can dwell with Everlasting Burnings?

The New Testament is still fuller as to this Point, it being a Revelation
which brought this and suchlike Particulars to a clear Light. -- The Apostle
Jude tells us of the profane Despisers of Dignities in his Days, that for them
was reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever. -- And in the Book of the
Revelations it is written, that The Smoke of the Torments of the Wicked
ascends for ever and ever -- And if we believe the Witness of Men inspired,
the Witness of the Son of GOD, who had the Spirit given him, as he was a
Mediator, without Measure, is still far greater. -- And he, in St. Mark's
Gospel, repeats this solemn Declaration three several Times. It is better for
Thee to enter into Life maimed; that is, it is better to forego the
Gratification of thy Lust, or incur the Displeasure of a Friend, which may be
as dear to thee as a Hand, or as useful as a Foot, than having two Hands and
Feet, that is, for indulging the one, or disobeying GOD to oblige the other, to
be cast into Hell, where the Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched.

And here again, in the Words of the Text, These, that is, the Wicked, says he,
shall go away into everlasting Punishment.

I know it has been objected by some who have denied the Eternity of Hell
Torments, That the Words Everlasting and Ever and Ever, are often used in the
Holy Scriptures, (especially in the Old Testament) when they signify not an
endless Duration, but a limited Term of Time.

And this we readily grant. But then we reply, That when the Words are used
with this Limitation, they either manifestly appear to be used so from the
Context -- or are put in Opposition to some occasional Types which GOD gave his
People on some special Occasions, as when it is said, it shall be a perpetual
or everlasting Statute, or a Statute for ever, that is, a standing Type, and
not merely transient or occasional, as was the Pillar of Cloud, the Manna, or
such like -- Or lastly, they have a Relation, to that Covenant GOD made with
his spiritual Israel, which, if understood in a spiritual Sense, will be
everlasting, though the Ceremonial Dispensation be abolished.

Besides, it ought to be observed, that, some of the Passages just now referred
to, have neither of these Words so much as mentioned in them, and cannot
possibly be interpreted so as to denote only a limited Term of Years.

But let that be as it will, it is evident even to a D^^^onstration, that the
Words of the Text however, will not admit of such a restrained Signification,
as appears from their being directly opposed to the Words immediately
following, viz. That the Righteous shall go into Life eternal. From which
Words, all are ready to grant, that the Life promised to the Righteous will be
Eternal; and why the Punishment threatened to the Wicked should not be
understood to be Eternal likewise, when the very same Word in the Original, is
used to express the Duration of each, no Shadow of a Reason can be given.

But Secondly, There cannot be one Argument urged, why GOD should reward his
Saints with everlasting Happiness, which will not equally prove that he ought
to punish Sinners with Eternal Misery.

For, since we know nothing (at least for a Certainty) how he will deal with
either, but by a Divine Revelation; and since, as was proved by the foregoing
Argument, he has as positively threatened eternally to punish the Wicked, as to
reward the Good; it follows that his Truth will be as much impeached and called
in Question, did he not inflict his Punishments, as it would be, if he did not
confer his Rewards.

To this also it has been objected, That though GOD is obliged by his Promise
to give his Rewards, yet his Veracity could not be called in Question,
supposing he should not execute his Threatenings, as he actually did not in the
Case of Nineveh, which GOD expressly declared by his Prophet Jonah, should be
destroyed in Forty Days; notwithstanding the Sequel of the Story informs us,
that Nineveh was spared.

But in answer to this Objection we affirm, That GOD's Threatenings, as well as
Promises, are without Repentance. -- And for this Reason, because they are both
founded on the eternal Laws of right Reason. -- Accordingly we always find,
that where the Conditions were not performed, on the Nonperformance of which
the Threatenings were denounced, GOD always executed the Punishment threatened.
-- The driving Adam out of Eden, -- The Destruction of the old World by a
Deluge of Water, and the Overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, are, and will be
always so many standing Monuments of GOD's executing his Threatenings when
denounced, though, to our weak Apprehensions, the Punishment may seem far to
exceed the Crime.

It is true, GOD did spare Nineveh, and that because the Inhabitants did
actually repent, and therefore performed the Conditions upon which it was
supposed by the Prophet's being sent to warn them, the threatened Punishment
should be withheld.

And so likewise in respect to Gospel Threatenings. If Men will so far consult
their own Welfare as to live (...) to the Gospel Terms, GOD certainly will not
punish them, but on the contrary confer upon them his Rewards, -- But to (...)
that HE will not punish, and that eternal (...) too, impenitent, obstinate
Sinners, according as he has threatened, if they do not perform the Terms of
the Gospel, what is it, in Effect, but to make GOD like a Man, that he should
lie, or the Son of Man that he should repent?

But the Absurdity of such an Opinion will appear still more evident from

The next and Third Argument I shall offer to prove, that the Torments reserved
for the Wicked hereafter are eternal, viz. From the Nature of the Christian
Covenant.

And here I must again observe, that it was taken for granted at the Beginning
of this Discourse, that, You believe the Son of GOD came down to save Sinners;
that there is but one Mediator between GOD and Man, even the Man CHRIST JESUS.

And here I take it for granted farther (unless you believe the absurd and
unwarrantable Doctrine of Purgatory) that you are fully persuaded, that this
Life is the only Time allotted by Almighty GOD for working out our Salvation,
and that after a few Years are passed over, there will remain no more Sacrifice
for Sin.

And if this be granted (and who dares deny it) it follows that if a wicked Man
dies in his Wickedness, and under the Wrath of GOD, he must continue in that
State to all Eternity. -- For, since there is no Possibility of his being
delivered out of such a Condition but by and through CHRIST; and since, at the
Hour of Death, the Time of CHRIST'S Mediation and Intercession for him is
irrecoverably gone; the same Reason that may be given, why GOD should punish a
Sinner that dies under the Guilt of his Sins for a single Day, will equally
hold good, why he should continue to punish him for a Year, an Age, nay, to all
Eternity.

But I hasten to the Fourth, and last Argument, to prove, That the Torments
reserved for the Wicked hereafter are Eternal, viz. Because the Devil's
Punishment is to be so.

That there is such a Being whom we call the Devil, that he was once an Angel
of Light, but for his Pride and Rebellion against GOD was cast down from
Heaven, and is now permitted with the rest of his spiritual Wickednesses, to
walk to and fro, seeking whom they may devour. -- That there is a Place of
Torment reserved for them, or, to use the Apostle's Words, that they are
reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness unto the Judgment of the Great
Day, are Truths all here present were supposed to be convinced of, when it was
taken for granted under the second Proposition at the Beginning of this
Discourse, that you believed the Holy Scriptures to be written by the
Inspiration of GOD, wherein these Truths are delivered.

But then if we allow all this, and think it no Injustice in GOD to punish
those Glorious Spirits for their Rebellion, how can we think it unjust in him,
to punish wicked Men for their Impenitency to all Eternity?

You will say perhaps, that they have sinned against greater Light, and
therefore deserve a greater Punishment. And so we grant that the Punishment of
the fallen Angles m^^ be greater as to Degree, than that of wicked Men. But
then we affirm, it will be equal as to the Eternal Duration of it. For in that
Day, as the lively Oracles of GOD inform us, shall the Son of Man say to them
on his left Hand, Depart from me ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. -- Where we find that impenitent Sinners are to be
cast into the same Everlasting Fire, With the Devil and his Angels, -- And that
too very justly. -- For though they may have sinned against greater Light, yet
Christians sin against greater Mercy. Since CHRIST took not hold of, did not
die for the fallen Angels, but of the ^eed of Abraham, for Men and for our
Salvation. So that if GOD spared not those Excellent Beings, assure thyself, O
obstinate Sinner, whoever thou art, he will by no means spare thee.

From what then has been said it plainly appears, that verily ^he Torments
reserved for the Wicked hereafter are Eternal. -- And if so, Brethren, how holy
ought we to be in all Manner of Conversation and Godliness, that we may be
accounted worthy to escape this Wrath to come!

But before I proceed to a practical Exhortation, permit me to draw an
Inference or two from what has been said.

And first, If the Torments reserved for the Wicked hereafter are Eternal, what
shall we say to those, who make an open Profession in their Creed to believe a
Life Everlasting, i. e. a ^^^e of Happiness as well as Misery, and yet dare to
live in the actual Commission of those Sins which will unavoidably, without
Repentance, bring them into that Place of Torment? Thou believe the
Punishments of the impenitently wicked in another Life, are Eternal: Thou do
well, The Devils also believe and tremble. But know, O vain Man, unless this
Belief does influence thy Practice, and makes thee bid Adieu to thy Sins, every
Time thou repeatest thy Creed, thou do in Effect say, I believe I shall be
undone for ever.

But Secondly, if the Torments reserved for the Wicked hereafter are Eternal,
then let this serve as a Caution to such Persons (and it is to be feared there
are some such) who go about to dissuade others from the Belief of such an
important Truth. There being no surer Way, in all Probability, to encourage and
promote Infidelity and Profaneness, than the broaching or maintaining such an
unwarrantable Doctrine -- For if the positive Threats of GOD concerning the
Eternity of Hell Torments are already found insufficient to deter Men from Sin,
what a higher Pitch of Wickedness may we imagine they will quickly arrive at,
when they are taught to entertain any Hopes of a Future Recovery out of them,
or, what is still worse, that their Souls are hereafter to be annihilated, and
become like the Beasts that perish? -- But Woe unto such blind Leaders of the
Blind. No Wonder if they both fall into the Ditch. -- And let such Corrupters
of GOD's Word know, that I testify unto every Man that hears me this Day,
that if any one shall add unto, or take away from the Words that are written in
the Book of GOD, GOD shall take his Part out of the Book of Life, and shall add
unto him all the Plagues that are in that Book.

Thirdly and Lastly, if the Torments reserved for the Wicked hereafter are
Eternal, then this may serve as a Reproof for those who quarrel with GOD, and
say it is inconsistent with his Justice, to punish a Person to all Eternity,
only for enjoying the Pleasures of Sin for a Season. But such Persons must be
told, that it is not their thinking or calling GOD unjust, will make him so, no
more than a condemned Prisoner's saying the Law or Judge is unjust, will render
either duly chargeable with such an Imputation. -- But know thou, O Worm,
what Blasphemy thou are guilty of, in charging GOD with Injustice? -- Shall the
Thing formed say to him that formed it, Why have thou made me thus? And will thou presume to arraign the Almighty at the Bar of thy shallow Reasoning? And
call him unjust, for punishing thee Eternally, only because thou wishest it may
not be so? But has GOD said it; and shall he not do it? He has said it: And
let GOD be true, though every Man be a Liar. -- Shall not the Judge of all the
Earth do right? Assuredly he will. And if Sinners will not own his Justice in
his Threatenings here, they will be compelled ever long to own and feel them
when tormented by him hereafter.

But to come to a more practical Application of what has been delivered.

You have heard, Brethren, the Eternity of Hell Torments plainly proved, from
the express Declarations of Holy Scriptures, and Consequences naturally drawn
from them. -- And now there seems to need no great Art of Rhetoric to persuade
any understanding Person to avoid and abhor those Sins, which without
Repentance will certainly plunge him into thi^ Eternal Gulf. -- The
Disproportion between the Pleasure and the Pain (if there be any Pleasure in
Sin) is so infinitely great, that supposing it was only possible, though not
certain, that the Wicked would be everlastingly punished, no one that has the
Reason of a Man, for the Enjoying a little momentary Pleasure, would, one would
imagine, run the Hazard of enduring Eternal Pain. -- But since the Torments of
the Damned are not only possible, but certain, (since GOD himself, who cannot
lie, has told us so) for Men, notwithstanding to persist in their Disobedience,
and then flatter themselves that GOD will not make good his Threatenings, is a
most egregious Instance of Folly and Presumption.

Dives himself supposed, that if one rose from the Dead, his Brethren would
amend their Lives; but Christians, it seems, will not repent, though the SON OF
GOD has died and rose again, and told them what they must expect, if they still
continue obstinate in Evil Doing.

Would we now and then draw off our Thoughts from sensible Objects, and by
Faith meditate a while on the Miseries of the Damned, I doubt not but we
should, as it were, hear many an unhappy Soul venting his fruitless Sorrows in
some such piteous Moans as these.

O Wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Death! O
foolish* Mortal that I was, thus to bring myself into these never-ceasing
Tortures, for the transitory Enjoyment of a few short-lived Pleasures, which
scarcely afforded me any Satisfaction, even when I most indulged myself in
them. -- Alas! are these the Wages, these the Effects of Sin? -- Are all the
Grand Deceiver's inviting Promises come to this? -- O Damned Apostate! First to
delude me with pretended Promises of Happiness, and after several Years
Drudgery in his Service, thus to involve me in Eternal Woe. -- Oh that I had
never hearkened to his beguiling Insinuations! Oh that I had rejected his very
first Suggestions with the utmost Detestation and Abhorrence! Oh that I had
taken up my Cross and followed CHRIST! Oh that I had never ridiculed serious
Godliness; and out of a false Politeness, condemned the truly Pious, as too
Severe, Enthusiastic, or Superstitious! For I then had been happy indeed,
happy beyond Expression, happy to all Eternity yonder in those blessed Regions
where they sit, clothed with unspeakable Glory, and chanting forth their
Seraphick Hallelujahs to the Lamb that sits upon the Throne, for ever. --
But, alas! these Reflections come now too late: These Wishes now are vain and
fruitless. I have not suffered, and therefore must not reign with them. -- I
have in Effect denied the LORD that bought me, and therefore justly am I now
denied by him.

But must I live for ever tormented in these Flames? -- Must this Body of mine
which not long since lay in State, was clothed in Purple and fine Linen, and
^^red sumptuously every Day, must this be h^^e eternally confined, and made the
Mockery of insulting Devils? Oh, Eternity! that Thought fills me with Despair.
I cannot, will not, yet I must be miserable for ever.

Come then, all ye self-deluding, self-deluded Sinners, and imagine yourselves
for once in the Place of that truly wretched Man I have been here describing.
-- Think, I beseech you by the Mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, think with
yourselves, how racking, how unsupportable the never dying Worm of a
self-condemning Conscience will hereafter be to you. Think how impossible it
will be for you to ^well with everlasting Burnings.

Come, all ye Christians of a Lukewarm Laodicean Spirit, ye Gallio's in
Religion, who care a little, but not enough for the Things of GOD, O think,
think with yourselves how deplorable it will be to lose the Enjoyment of
Heaven, and run into endless Torments, merely because you will be content to be
almost, and will not strive to be altogether Christians. -- Consider, I beseech
you, consider, how you will rave, and curse that fatal Stupidity, that made you
believe any Thing less than a Life of strict Piety, Self-Denial, and
Mortification, can keep you from those Torments, the Eternity of which I have
been endeavoring to prove.

But I can no more -- These Thoughts are too melancholy for me to dwell on, as
well as for you to hear, and GOD knows, as Punishing is his strange Work, so
denouncing his Threatenings is mine. But if the bare mentioning the Torments of
the Damned is so shocking, Good GOD! how terrible must the enduring of them be!

And now are not some of you ready to cry out, These are hard Sayings, who can
bear them?

But let not sincere Christians be in the least terrified at what has been
delivered. No, for you is reserved, a Crown, a Kingdom, an Eternal and
exceeding Weight of Glory. CHRIST never said the Righteous, the Upright, the
Sincere, but the Wicked, Merciless, negatively good Professors before
described, shall go into Everlasting Punishment. For you, who love him in
Sincerity, a new and living Way is laid open into the Holy of Holies by the
Blood of JESUS CHRIST. And an abundant Entrance will be administered unto you,
at the great Day of Account into Eternal Life. Take heed therefore, and beware
that there be not in any of you a Root of Bitterness springing up of Unbelief.
But, on the contrary, steadfastly and heartily rely on the many precious
Promises reached out to you in the Gospel, knowing that he who has promised is
faithful, and therefore will perform.

But let no obstinately wicked Professors dare to apply any of the Divine
Promises to themselves. For it is not meet to take the Childrens Bread and give
it unto Dogs, No, to such the Terrors of the LORD only belong. And as certainly
as CHRIST will say to his true Followers, Come, ye blessed Children of my
Father, receive the Kingdom prepared for you from the Beginning of the World,
so he will unalterably pronounce this dreadful Sentence against all that die in
their Sins, Depart from me, ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels.

From which unhappy State may GOD of his infinite Mercy deliver ^s all through
JESUS CHRIT; to whom with Thee, O FATHER, and Thee, O HOLY GHOST, Three Persons
and One Eternal GOD, be ascribed, as is most due, all Honor, Power, Might,
Majesty, and Dominion, (...) and for evermore.

SERMON XII.
DIRECTIONS how to hear SERMONS.
LUKE viii. 18. Take Heed therefore how you hear.
THE Occasion of our LORD's giving this Caution was this: Perceiving that much
People were gathered together, to hear him, out of every City, and knowing (for
he is GOD, and knows all Things) that many, if not most of them, would be
Hearers only, and not Doers of the Word, he spoke to them by a Parable,
wherein, under the Similitude of a Sower, that went out to sow his Seed, he
plainly intimated how few there were amongst them who would receive any saving
Benefit from his Doctrine, or bring forth Fruit unto Perfection.

The Application, one would imagine, should be plain and obvious: But the
Disciples, as yet unenlightened in any great Degree by the Holy Spirit, and
therefore unable to see into the hidden Mysteries of the Kingdom of GOD, dealt
with our Savior, as People ought to deal with their Ministers, -- discoursed
with him privately about the Meaning of what he had taught them in Public, and
with a sincere Desire of doing their Duty, asked for an Interpretation of the
Parable.

Our blessed LORD, as he always was willing to instruct those that were
teachable (herein setting his Ministers an Example to be courteous and easy of
Access) freely told them the Signification of it. And withal, to make them more
cautious and more attentive to his Doctrine for the future, He tells them, that
they were in an especial Manner to be the Light of the World, and were to
proclaim on the Housetop whatsoever he told them in Secret. And as their
improving the Knowledge already imparted, was the only Condition upon which
more was to be given them, it therefore highly concerned them to take heed how
they heard.

From the Context then it appears, that the Words were primarily spoken to the
Apostles themselves. But because they were the Representatives of the whole
Church, and it is to be feared out of those many Thousands that flock to hear
Sermons, but few comparatively speaking are effectually influenced by them; I
cannot but think it very necessary to remind you of the Caution given by our
LORD to his Disciples, and to exhort you with the utmost Earnestness to take
heed how you hear.

In Prosecution of which Design I shall in the following Discourse, I. First,
Prove that every one ought to take all Opportunities of hearing Sermons. And,
II. Secondly, I shall lay down some Cautions and Directions, in order to your
hearing them with Profit and Advantage.


I. And, First; I am to prove that every one ought to take all Opportunities of
hearing Sermons.

That there have always been particular Persons set apart by GOD to instruct
and exhort his People to practice what he should require of them, is evident
from many Passages of Scripture. -- St. Jude tells us, that Enoch the seventh
from Adam prophesied, or preached, concerning the LORD's coming with ten
Thousand of his Saints to Judgment. And Noah, who lived not long after, is
styled by St. Peter, a Preacher of Righteousness. And though in all the
intermediate Space between the Flood and Giving of the Law, we hear but of few
Preachers, yet we may reasonably conclude, that GOD never left himself without
Witness, but at sundry Times, and after diverse Manners, spoke to our Fathers by
the Patriarchs and Prophets.

But however it was before, we are assured that after the Delivery of the Law,
GOD has constantly separated to himself a certain Order of Men to preach to, as
well as pray for, his People; and commanded them to enquire their Duty at the
Priests Mouths. And though the Jews were frequently led into Captivity, and for
their Sins scattered abroad through the Face of the Earth, yet he never utterly
forsook his Church, but still kept up a Remnant of Prophets and Preachers, as
Ezekiel, Jeremiah, Daniel, and others, to reprove, instruct, and call them to
Repentance.

Thus was it under the Law. Nor has the Church been worse, but infinitely
better provided for under the Gospel: For when JESUS CHRIST, that great High
Priest, had through the Eternal Spirit offered himself as a full, perfect,
sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole
World, and after his Resurrection had all Power committed to him both in Heaven
and Earth, he gave Commission to his Apostles, and in them to all succeeding
Ministers, to go and preach his Gospel to every Creature; promising to be with
them, to guide, assist, strengthen and comfort them always, even to the End of
the World.

But if it be the Duty of Ministers to preach (and Woe be to them if they do
not preach the Gospel, for a Necessity is laid upon them) no doubt, the People
are obliged to attend to them; for otherwise, wherefore are Ministers sent?

And how can we here avoid admiring the Love and tender Care which our dear
Redeemer has expressed for his Spouse the Church? Who, because he could not be
always with us in Person, on account it was expedient he should go away, and as
our Forerunner take Possession of that Glory he had purchased by his precious
Blood, yet would not leave us comfortless, but first settled a sufficient
Number of Pastors and Teachers, and afterward, according to his Promise,
actually did and will continue to send down the Holy Ghost to furnish them and
their Successors with proper Gifts and Graces for the Work of the Ministry, for
the perfecting of the Saints, for the edifying of his Body in Love, till we all
come in the Unity of the Spirit, to the Fullness of the Measure of the Stature
of CHRIST.

Oh! how insensible are those of this unspeakable Gift, who do despite to the
Spirit of Grace, who crucify the Son of GOD afresh, and put him to an open
Shame, by wilfully refusing to attend on so great a Means of their Salvation?
How dreadful will the End of such Men be? How aggravating, that Light should
come into the World, that the glad Tidings of Salvation should be so very
frequently proclaimed in this City, and that so many should loath this
spiritual Manna, this Angels Food, and call it light Bread? How much more
tolerable will it be for Tire and Sidon, for Sodom and Gomorrah, than for such
Sinners? For better Men had never heard of a Savior's being born, than after
they have heard, not to give heed to the Ministry of those, who are employed as
his Ambassadors, to transact Affairs between GOD and their Souls.

We may, though at a Distance, without a Spirit of Prophesy, foretell the
deplorable Condition of such Men; and behold them cast into Hell, lifting up
their Eyes, being in Torment, and crying out, How often would our Ministers
have gathered us, as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings! -- But we
would not. -- Oh that we had known in that our Day, the Things that belonged to
our everlasting Peace! -- But now they are for ever hid from our Eyes.

Thus wretched, thus inconceivably miserable, will such be as slight and make a
Mock at the public Preaching of the Gospel. -- But taking it for granted,
there are but few, if any, of this unhappy Stamp, who think it not worth their
while to tread the Courts of the LORD's House, I pass on now to the

II. Second general Thing proposed, -- To lay down some Cautions and
Directions, in order to your hearing Sermons with Profit and Advantage.

And here, if we reflect on what has been already delivered, and consider that
Preaching is an Ordinance of GOD, a Means appointed by JESUS CHRIST himself,
for promoting his Kingdom amongst Men, you cannot reasonably be offended, if,
in order that you may hear Sermons with Profit and Advantage, I

First, direct or entreat you to come to hear them, not out of Curiosity, but
from a sincere Desire to know and do your Duty.

Formality and Hypocrisy in any religious Exercise is an Abomination unto the
LORD. And to enter his House merely to have our Ears entertained, and not our
Hearts reformed, must certainly be highly displeasing to the Most High GOD, as
well as unprofitable to our selves.

Hence it is, that so many remain Unconverted, yea, Unaffected with the most
Evangelical Preaching; so that like St. Paul's Companions, they only hear the
Preacher's Voice with their outward Ears, but do not experience the Power of it
inwardly in their Hearts. Or like the Ground near Gideon's Fleece, they remain
untouched; whilst others that came to be fed with the sincere Milk of the Word,
like the Fleece itself, are watered by the Dew of GOD's Heavenly Blessing, and
grow thereby.

Flee therefore, my Brethren, flee Curiosity; and prepare your Hearts by a
humble Disposition to receive with Meekness the engrafted Word, and then it
will be a Means, under GOD, to quicken, build up, purify, and save your Souls.

A Second Direction I shall lay down for the same Purpose, is, not only to
prepare your Hearts before you hear, but also to give diligent heed to the
Things that are spoken, whilst you are hearing the Word of GOD.

If an earthly King was to issue out a Royal Proclamation, on performing or not
performing the Conditions wherein contained, the Life or Death of his Subjects
entirely depended, how sollicitous would they be to hear what those Conditions
were? And shall not we pay the same Respect to the KING of KINGS, and LORD of
LORDS, and lend an attentive Ear to his Ambassadors, when they are declaring in
his Name on what Terms our Pardon, Peace, and Happiness may be secured?

When GOD descended on Mount Sinai in terrible Majesty, to give unto his People
the Law, how attentive were they to his Servant Moses? And if they were so
earnest to hear the Thundrings or Threatenings of the Law, shall not we be as
sollicitous to hear from the Ministers of CHRIST, the glad Tidings of the
Gospel?

Whilst CHRIST was himself on Earth, it is said, that the People hung upon him
to hear the gracious Words that proceeded out of his Mouth. And if we looked on
Ministers as we ought, as the Representatives of JESUS CHRIST, we should hang
upon them to hear their Word^ also.

Besides, the sacred Truths that Gospel Ministers deliver, are not dry insipid
Lectures o^ Moral Philosophy, intended only to amuse u^ for a while; but the
great Mysteries of Godliness, which therefore we are bound studiously to listen
to, lest through our Negligence we should either not understand them, or by any
other Means let them slip.

But how regardless are those of this Direction, who instead of hanging on the
Preacher to hear him, doze or sleep whilst he is speaking to them from GOD?
Unhappy Men! Can they not watch with our blessed LORD one Hour? What; Have they
never read how Eutichus fell down as he was sleeping, when St. Paul continued
his Discourse till Midnight, and was taken up dead?

But to return. Though you may prepare your Hearts, as you may think, by a
teachable Disposition, and be attentive whilst Discourses are delivering, yet
this will profit you little, unless you observe a

Third Direction, -- not to entertain any the least Prejudice against the
Minister.

For could a Preacher speak with the Tongu^ of Men and Angels, if his Audience
was prejudiced against him, he would be but as a sounding Brass, or a tinkling
Cymbal.

That was the Reason why JESUS CHRIST himself, the eternal Word, could not do
many mighty Works, nor preach to any great Effect among those of his own
Country; for they were offended at him. And was this same JESUS, this GOD
incarnate again to bow the Heavens, and to come down speaking as never Man
spoke; yet if we were prejudiced against him, as the Jews were, we should
harden our Hearts as the Jews did theirs.

Take Heed therefore, my Brethren, and beware of entertaining any Dislike
against those whom the Holy Ghost has made Overseers over you. Consider that
the Clergy are Men of like Passions with yourselves. And though we should even
hear a Person teaching others to do, what he has not taught himself; yet that
is no sufficient Reason for rejecting his Doctrine. For Ministers speak not in
their own, but CHRIST'S Name. And we know who commanded the People to do
whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees should say unto them, though they said but
did not.

But, Fourthly, as you ought not be prejudiced against, so you should be
careful not to depend too much on a Preacher, or think more highly of him than
you ought to think. For though this be an Extreme that People seldom run into;
yet preferring one Teacher, in Opposition to another, has often been of ill
Consequence to the Church of GOD.

That, we read, was a Fault which the great Apostle of the Gentiles condemned
in the Corinthians: For whereas one said, I am of Paul; another, I am of
Apollos: Are ye not Carnal, says he? For who is Paul, and who is Apollos, but
Instruments in GOD's Hand by whom you believed? And are not all Ministers sent
forth to be ministering Ambassadors to those who shall be Heirs of Salvation?
And are they not all therefore greatly to be esteemed for their Work's Sake?

The Apostle, it is true, commands us to pay double Honor to those who labor
in the Word and Doctrine. But then to prefer one Minister at the Expense of
another (perhaps to such a Degree, as when you have actually entered a Church,
to come out again, because he does not preach) is earthly, sensual, devilish.

Not to mention that Popularity and Applause cannot but be exceeding dangerous
even to a rightly informed Mind; and must necessarily fill any thinking Man
with a holy Jealousy, left he should take that Honor to himself, which is due
only to GOD; who alone qualifies him for his Ministerial Labors, and from whom
alone every good and perfect Gift comes.

A Fifth Direction I would recommend is, to make a particular Application of
every Thing that is delivered, to your own Hearts.

When our Savior was discoursing at his last Supper with his beloved
Disciples, and foretold that one of th^^ should betray him, each of them
immediately applied it to his own Heart, and said, LORD, Is it I? And would
Persons in lik Manner, when Preachers are dissuading from any Vice, or
persuading to any Virtue, instead of crying, this was designed against such and
such a one, turn their Thoughts inwardly, and say, LORD, Is it I? How far more
beneficial should we find Discourses to be, than they generally are now?

But we are apt to wander too much abroad: Always looking at the Mote which is
in our Neighbor's Eye, rather than the Beam which is in our own.

Haste we now to the Sixth and last Direction: If you would receive a Blessing
from the LORD, when you hear his Word preached, pray to him, both before, in,
and after every Sermon, to endue the Minister with Power to speak, and to grant
you a Will and Ability to put in Practice what he shall show from the Book of
GOD to be your Duty.

This would be an excellent Means to render the Word preached effectual to the
Enlightening and Enflaming your Hearts, and without this all the other Means
before prescribed will be in vain.

No doubt it was this Consideration that made St. Paul so earnestly entreat his
beloved Ephesians to intercede with GOD for him, -- Praying always, says he,
with all Manner of Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit; and for me also, that
I may open my Mouth with Boldness, to make known the Mysteries of the Gospel.
And if so great an Apostle as St. Paul, needed the Prayers of his People, much
more do those Ministers, who have only the ordinary Gifts of the Holy Spirit.

Besides, this would be a good Proof that you sincerely desired to do as well
as know the Will of GOD: And it must highly profit both Ministers and People;
because GOD through your Prayers will give them a double Portion of his Holy
Spirit, whereby they will be enabled to instruct you more fully in the Things
which pertain to the Kingdom of GOD.

And oh! that all that hear me this Day would seriously apply their Hearts to
practice what has now been told them! -- How would Ministers see Satan like
Lightning fall from Heaven, and People find the Word preached sharper than a
two-edged Sword, and mighty through GOD to the pulling down of the Devil's
strong Holds!

The Holy Ghost would then fall on all them that heard the Word; as when St.
Peter preached. The Gospel of CHRIST would have free Course, run very swiftly,
and Thousands again be converted by a Sermon.

For JESUS CHRIST, is the same Yesterday, to Day, and for ever. He has promised
to be with his Ministers always, even unto the End of the World. And the Reason
why we do not receive larger Effusions of the blessed Spirit of GOD, is not,
because our All-powerful Redeemer's Hand is shortened, but because we are not
prepared to receive them, and because we do not expect them, but confine them
to the Primitive Times.

It does indeed sometimes happen that GOD to magnify his Free Grace in CHRIST
JESUS, is found of them that sought him not; a notorious Sinner is forcibly
worked upon by a public Sermon, and plucked as a Firebrand out of the Fire.
But this is not GOD's ordinary Way of acting. No; for the Generality, he only
visits those with the Power of his Word, who humbly wait to know what he would
have them to do. And sends unqualified Hearers not only empty, but hardened,
away.

Take heed, therefore, ye careless, curious Professors, if any such be here
present, how you hear* Remember that, whether we think of it or not, we must
all appear before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, where Ministers must give a
strict Account of the Doctrine they have delivered, and you as strict a one,
how you have improved under it. And good GOD! how will you be able to stand at
the Bar of an angry, Sin-avenging Judge, and see so many Discourses you have
despised, so many Ministers who once longed and labored for the Salvation of
your precious and immortal Souls, brought out as so many swift Witnesses
against you? Will it be sufficient then, think you, to allege that you went to
hear them only out of Curiosity, to pass away an idle Hour, to admire the
Oratory, or ridicule the Simplicity of the Preacher? No, GOD will then let you
know, that you ought to have come out of better Principles, that every Sermon
has been put down to your Account, and that you must then be justly punished
for not improving by them.

But fear not, you little Flock, who with Meekness receive the ingra^ted Word,
and bring forth the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness; for it shall not be so
with you. No; you will be your Minister's Joy, and their Crown of Rejoicing in
the Day of our Lord JESUS, And they will present you in a holy Triumph
faultless and unblameable to our common Redeemer, saying, Behold us, O LORD,
and the Children which Thou have given us.

But still take you heed how you hear. For upon your improving the Grace you
have, more shall be given, and you shall have abundance. For He is faithful
that has promised, Who also will do it. Nay, GOD from out of Sion shall so
bless you, that every Sermon you hear shall communicate to you a fresh Supply
of Spiritual Knowledge. The Word of GOD shall dwell in you richly; you shall go
on from Strength to Strength, from one Degree of Grace unto another, till being
grown up to be perfect Men in CHRIST JESUS, and filled with all the Fullness of
GOD, you shall be translated by Death to see Him as He is, and to sing Praise
before his Throne with Angels and Archangels, Cherubim^ and Seraphims, and the
general Assembly of the Firstborn, whose Names are written in Heaven, for ever
and ever.

Which GOD of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

The End of the First Volume.
SERMONS ON VARIOUS SUBJECTS.

VOL. II.

CONTAINING,

I. Worldly Business no Plea for the Neglect of RELIGION. II. The Marks of the
NEW BIRTH. III. The Power of CHRIST'S Resurrection. IV. The Duty of Searching
the Scriptures. V. SATAN'S DEVICES. VI. The Knowledge of JESUS CHRIST the best
Knowledge. VII. The heinous SIN of Drunkenness. VIII. The Indwelling of the
Spirit, the common Privilege of all Believers. IX. The wise and foolish
Virgins. X. What think ye of CHRIST?
To which are added, Several PRAYERS.

By GEORGE WHITEFIELD, A. B. of Pembroke College, Oxford.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLI^ (...), Market-street, 1740.

THE CONTENTS
SERMON I. MATTHEW. Viii. 22. LET the Dead bury their Dead. 1. SERMON II. ACTS
xix. 2. Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? 15 SERMON III.
PHILIP. iii. 10. That I may know Him, and the Power of his Resurrection. 34
SERMON IV. JOHN V. 39. Search the Scriptures. 50 SERMON V. 2 CORINTHIANS. ii. 11.
Left Satan should get an Advantage over us; for we are not ignorant of his
Devices. 65 SERMON VI. 1 COR. ii. (...). I determined not to know any Thing
among you, ^^ve JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified. 86 SERMON VII. EPHESIANS V. 6.
Be not drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess; but be filled with the Spirit. 101
SERMON VIII. JOHN vii. 37, 38, 39. In the last Day, that great Day of the
Feast, JESUS stood and cried, saying, If any Man thirst, let him come unto me
and drink. He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his
Belly shall flow River^ of living Water. But this spoke he of the Spirit, which
they that believe on him should receive. Page 120
SERMON IX. MATTHEW. xxv. 14. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the Day nor
the Hour in which the Son of Man comes. 143 SERMON X. MATTHEW. xxii. 42. What
think ye of CHRIST? 172
PRAYERS.
A PRAYER for one entrusted with the Education of Children. 202 A PRAYER for a
Servant. 206 A PRAYER for one under spiritual Desertion. 210 A PRAYER for one
under the Displeasure of Relations for being religious. 214 A PRAYER for one
desiring to be awakened to an Experience of the New Birth. 218 A PRAYER for one
newly a^ ^ened (...) a Sense of the Divine Life. 221
SERMON I.
Worldly Business no Plea for the Neglect of RELIGION.
MATTHEW. viii. 22. Let the Dead bury the Dead.
ST. Paul preaching at Athens, tells them, that as he passed by and beheld
their Devotions, he perceived they were in all Things too superstitious. But
was this Apostle to rise, and come publishing the Glad Tidings of Salvation in
any of our populous Cities, he would see no Reason why he should charge the
Inhabitants with this; but rather, as he passed by and observed the Tenor of
their Life, say, I perceive in all Things ye are too Worldly minded; ye are too
eagerly bent on ^^^suing your lawful Business; so eagerly, as (...) ^holly to
neglect, or at least too heedle^ly (...) on the one Thing needful.

There cannot then be a greater Charity shown to the Christian World, than to
found an Alarm in the^^ (...), and to warn them of the inexpressible Danger of
continually grasping after the Things of this Life, without being equally, nay
a Thousand times more concerned for their Well-being in a future State.

And there is still the more Occasion for such an Alarm, because
Worldly-mindedness so easily and craftily besets the Hearts of Men. For out of
a specious Pretense of serving GOD in laboring for the Meat which perishes,
they are insensibly lulled into such a spiritual Slumber, as scarce to perceive
their Neglect to secure that which endures to everlasting Life.

The Words of the Text, if not at first View, yet when examined and explained,
will be found applicable to this Case, as containing an admirable Caution not
to pursue the Affairs of this World at the Expense of our Happiness in the next.

They are Words of JESUS CHRIST himself: The Occasion of their being spoken was
this, -- As he was conversing with those that were gathered round about him, he
gave one of them an immediate Summons to follow him: But he, either afraid to
go after such a persecuted Master, or rather loving this present World, says,
Suffer me first to go home and bury my Father, or, as most explain it, Let me
first go and dispatch some important Business I have (...) in Hand. But JESUS
said unto him, Let (...) Dead b^^^ their Dead; Leave Worldly Business to Wordly
Men, let thy secular Business be left undone, rather than thou should neglect
to follow me.

Whether this Person did as he was commanded, I know not; but this I know, --
That what CHRIST said here in Person, he has often whispered with the small
still Voice of his Holy Spirit, and said to many here present, that rise up
early and late, take Rest and eat the Bread of Carefulness, Come draw off your
Affections from the Things of this Life, take up your Cross and follow me. But
they, willing to justify themselves, make Answer, LORD suffer us first to bury
our Fathers, to dispatch our secular Affairs. I say unto all such, Let the Dead
bury their Dead, let your Worldly Business be left undone rather than you
should neglect to follow him.

From the Words thus explained naturally arises this Proposition, -- That no
Business, tho ever so important, can justify a Neglect of true Religion:

The Truth of which I shall first show, and then make an Application of it.

I. First then, I am to prove that no temporal Business, though ever so
important, can justify a Neglect of true Religion.

By the Word Religion I do not mean any Set of moral Virtues, and partial
Amendment of ourselves, or formal Attendance on any outward Duties whatsoever:
but a thorough real Change of Nature wrought in us by the invisible, yet
powerful Operation of the Holy Ghost, preserved and nourished in our Souls by a
constant Use of all the Means of Grace, evidenced by a good Life, and bringing
forth the Fruits of the Spirit.

This is the true and undefiled Religion, and for the perfecting this good Work
in our Hearts, the eternal Son of GOD came down and shed his precious Blood;
for this End were we made, and sent into the World, and by this alone can we
become the Sons of GOD. Were we indeed to judge by the common Practice of the
World, we might think we were sent into it for no other Purpose than to care
and toil for the uncertain Riches of this Life: But if we consult the lively
Oracles, they will inform us, that we were born for nobler Ends, -- to be born
again from above, -- to be restored to the Divine Likeness by JESUS CHRIST our
Second Adam, and thereby be made meet (...) inherit the Kingdom of Heaven; and
consequently, there is an Obligation laid upon all, even the most busy People,
to secure this End; it being an undeniable Truth, that all Creatures ought to
answer the End for which they were created.

Some indeed are for confining Religion to the Clergy, and think it only
belongs to those who serve at the Altar: But what a fatal Mistake is this,
seeing all Persons are indifferently called by GOD to the same State of inward
Holiness? As we are all corrupt in our Nature, so must we all be renewed and
sanctified. And though it must be granted, that the Clergy lie under double
Obligations to be Examples to Believers in Faith, Zeal, Charity, and whatever
else is commendable and of good Report, as being more immediately dedicated to
the Service of GOD; yet as we have been all baptized with one Baptism into the
Death of CHRIST, we are all under the Necessity of performing our Baptismal
Covenant, and perfecting Holiness i^ the Fear of GOD: For the Holy Scripture
point out to us but one Way of Admission into the Kingdom of CHRIST, -- through
the narrow Gate of a sound Conversion: And he that does not enter into the
Sheepfold, whether Clergy or Layman, by this Door, will find to his everlasting
Confusion, there is no climbing up another Way.

Besides, what a gross Ignorance of the Nature of true Religiou^, as well as of
our own Happiness* does such a Distinction discover? For wh^^ does our Savior
by willing us to be religious require of us, but to subdue our corrupt
Passions, to root out ill Habits, to engraft the Heavenly Graces of GOD's most
Holy Spirit in their room; and, in one Word, to fill us with all the Fullness of
GOD?

And will Men be so much their own Enemies, as to affirm this belongs only to
those who minister in holy Things? Does it not equally concern the most active
Man living? Is it the End of Religion to mak^ Me^ happy, and is it not every
one^^ Privilege to be as happy as he can? Do Persons in Business find the
Corruptions of their Nature, and Disorder of their Passions, so pleasing, that
they care not whether they ever regulate or root them out? Or will they consent
that Ministers shall be alone Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in
Light? -- If not, as they desire the same End, why will they not make Use of
the same Means? Do they think that GOD will create a new Thing upon the Earth,
and contrary to the Purity of his Nature, and Immutability of his Counsel,
admit them into Heaven in their natural State, because they have been encumbred
about many worldly Things? Search the Scriptures, and see if they give any Room
for such a groundless Hope.

But farther, one would imagine there was something of the highest Concern and
utmost Importance in our temporal Affairs, that they should divert so many from
purifying their Hearts by Faith which is in CHRIST JESUS.

A covetous Miser, who neglects Religion by being continually intent on seeking
great Things for himself and those of his own Household, flatters himself he
herein acts most wisely, and at the same Time will censure and condemn a young
Prodigal, who has no Time to be devout, because he is so perpetually engaged in
wasting his Substance by riotous Living and following of Harlots. But yet a
little while, and Men will be convinced, that they are as much without Excuse
who lose their Souls by hunting after Riches, as those who lose them by hunting
after sensual Pleasures. For though Business may ass^^ne an Air of Importance,
when compared with other trifling Amusements, yet when put in the Balance w^^^
the Loss of our precious and immortal Souls, it is equally frivolous, --
According to that of our Savior, What shall it profit a Man, if he shall gain
the whole World and lose his own Soul; or what shall a Man give in Exchange for
his Soul?

And now what need we any farther Proof? We have heard the Decision out of
CHRIST'S own Mouth. But because it is difficult to convince them of this
important Truth, whose Hearts are blinded by the Deceitfulness of Riches, so
that we had need cry out to them in the Language of the Prophet, O Earth,
Earth, Earth, hear the Word of the LORD. I shall lay before you one Passage of
Scripture more, which I could wish were written on the Tables of all our
Hearts. In the xivth of St. Luke, the 18th and following Verses, our blessed
LORD puts forth this Parable, -- A certain Man made a great Supper, and bad
many, and sent his Servant at Supper, Time, to call them that were bidden: But
they all, with one Consent, began to make Excuse. The one said, I have bought a
Piece of Ground, and I must needs go see it, I pray thee have me excused. And
another said, I have bought a Yoke of Oxen, and I must needs go and prove them,
I pray thee therefore have me ^^sed. So the Servant returned, and shewe^^^.
Master all these Things. -- And what follows (...) Did ^he Master accept of
their Excuses? No, the Text tells us the Good Man was angry, and said, that
(...) of those which were bidden, should taste of his Supper. And what does
this Parable teach more or less, than that the most lawful Callings cannot
justify our Neglect, nay, that they are no longer lawful when they in any wise
interfere with the great Concerns of Religion? For the Marriage Supper here
spoken of, means the Gospel; the Master of the House is CHRIST; the Servants
sent out, are his Ministers, whose Duty it is from time to time, to call the
People to this Marriage Feast, or, in other Words, to be religious. Now we find
those that were bidden, were very well and honestly employed. There was no Harm
in buying or seeing a Piece of Ground, or in going to prove a Yoke of Oxen; but
here lay their Fault, -- They were doing these Things when they were invited to
come to the Marriage Feast.

Without doubt, Persons may very honestly and commendably be employed in
following their respective Callings; but yet, if they are engaged so deeply in
these, as to hinder their working out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling,
they must expect the same Sentence with their Predecessors in the Parable, that
none of them shall taste of CHRIST'S Supper; for our particular Calling, as of
this or that Profession, must never interfere with our general and precious
Calling as we are Christians. Not that Christianity calls us entirely out of
the World, the Holy Scriptures warrant no such Doctrine.

It is very remarkable, that in the Book of Life, we find some al^^ost of all
kinds of Occupations, who notwithstanding served GOD in their respective
Generations, and shone as so many Lights in the World. Thus we hear of a good
Centurion in the Evangelists, and a Devout Cornelius in the Acts; a Pious
Lawyer; and some that walked with GOD, even of Nero's Household, in the
Epistles; and our Divine Master himself in his Check to Martha, does not
condemn her for minding, but for being cumbered or perplexed about many Things.

No, you may, nay, you must labor, out of Obedience to GOD, even for the Meat
which perishes. But then, that I may in the Second Place apply what has been
said,

I beseech you, by the Mercies of GOD, in CHRIST JESUS, let it not be at the
Expense of that which endures to everlasting Life; for to repeat our Blessed
Savior's Words, What shall it profit a Man, if he shall gain the whole World
and lose his own Soul; or, What shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul?

Were we always to live in the World, then worldly Wisdom would be our highest
Wisdom: But forasmuch as we have here no continuing City, and were only sent
into this World to have our Natures changed, and to fit ourselves for that
which is to come; then to neglect this important Work for a little worldly
Gain, w^^^ is it but with profane Esau, to sell our Birthright for a Mess of
Pottage.

Alas! how unlike are Christians to Christianity, they are commanded to seek
first the Kingdom of GOD and his Righteousness, and all other real Necessaries
shall be added unto them; but they are fearful (O Men of little Faith) if they
should do so, all other Necessaries would be taken from them: They are strictly
forbidden to be careful for the Morrow, and yet they rest not Night or Day, but
are continually heaping up Riches for many Years, though they know not who shall
gather them. Is this acting like Persons that are Strangers and Pilgrims upon
Earth? Is this keeping their Baptismal Vow? Or rather, Is it not directly
apostatizing from it, and deserting the Service of JESUS CHRIST, to list
themselves under the Banner of Mammon?

But what will be the Hope of such Worldlings, when GOD shall take away their
Souls? What if the Almighty should say to each of them, as he did to the rich
Fool in the Gospel, This Night shall thy Soul be required of thee; Oh then,
what would all those Things profit them, which they are now so busy in
providing?

Was Eternal Life, that free Gift of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, to be purchased with
Money; or could Men carry their Stocks beyond the Grave to buy Oil for their
Lamps, i. e. Grace for their Hearts, when they should be called to meet the
Bridegroom, there might be some Reason why GOD might well bear with them: But
since their Money is to perish with them: since it is certain, as they brought
nothing into the World, so they can carry nothing out; or supposing they could,
since there is no Oil to be bought, i. e. no Grace to be purchased when once
the Lamp of their natural Life is gone out; Would it not be much more prudent
to spend the short Time they have here allotted them in buying Oil while it may
be had, and not for Fear of having a little less of that which will quickly be
another Man's, eternally lose the true Riches?

What think you? Is it to be supposed that it grieved that covetous Worldling
before mentioned, when his Soul sprung into the Worl^ of Spirits, that he could
not stay here till he had pulled down his Barns and built greater? Or think you
not that all Things here below seemed equally little to him then, and he only
repented that he had not employed more Time in pulling down every high Thought
that exalted itself against (...) and building up his Soul in (...) and Fear of
GOD?

And thus it will (...) all unhappy Men, who like him are disquieting
themselves in a vain Pursuit after worldly Riches, and at the same Time are not
rich toward GOD.

They may, for a Season, seem excellently well employed in being sollicitously
careful about the important Concerns of this Life; but when once their Eyes are
opened by Death, (...) their Souls launched into Eternity, they (...) then see
the Littleness of all sublunary (...) and wonder they should be so besotted to
the ^^^ings of another Life, while they were, it (...), applauded for their
great Wisdom and (...) S^^^city in the Affairs of this World.

Alas! how will they bemoan themselves for acting like the unjust Steward, so
very wisely in their temporal Concerns, in calling their respective Creditors
so carefully, and asking how much every one owes to them, and yet never
remembering to call themselves to an Account, or enquire how much they owed
their own Great LORD and Master?

And now what should I say more? The God of this World, and the inordinate
Desire of other Things, must have wholly stifled the Conscience of that Man,
who does not see the Force of these plain reasonings.

Permit me only to add a Word or two to the Rich, and Persons that are freed
from the Business of this Life.

But here I must pause a while, for I am sensible that it is but an ungrateful,
and, as some may imagine, an assuming Thing, for such a Novice in Religion to
take upon him to instruct Men in high Stations, and who perhaps would disdain
to set me with the Dogs of their Flock.

But however, since St. Paul, who knew what best became a young Preacher,
commanded Timothy, young as he was, to exhort and charge the Rich with all
Authority. I hope none here that are so will be offended, if with Humility I
beg leave to remind them, though they once knew, that if Persons in the most busy
Employs are indispensably obliged to work out their Salvation with Fear and
Trembling, much more ought they to do so, who are free from the Toils and
Encumbrance of a lower Way of Life, and consequently have greater Opportunities
and Leisure to prepare themselves for a future State.

But is this really the Case, or do we not find by fatal Experience that too
many (...) ^^ose whom GOD has exalted above their Breth^^^ who are clothed in
Purple and fine Linen and fare sumptuously every Day, by a sad Abuse of GOD's
great Bounty toward them, think that their Stations set them above Religion,
and so let the Poor who live by the Sweat of their Brows, attend more
constantly on the Means of Grace than they.

But woe unto such rich Men! for they have received their Consolation. Happy
had it been if they had never been born: For if the careless irreligious
Tradesman cannot be saved, where will the luxurious and wicked Gentlemen appear?

Let me therefore, by way of Conclusion, exhort all Persons, High and Low, Rich
and Poor, one with another, to make the Renewal of their fallen Nature, the one
Business of their Lives, and to let no worldly Profit, no worldly Pleasure
divert them from the Thoughts if it. Let this Cry, Behold the Bridegroom
comes, be ever sounding in our Ears; and let us live as Creatures that are
every Moment liable to be hurried away by Death to Judgment: Let us remember
that this Life is a State of infinite Importance, a Point between two
Eternities, and that after these few Days are ended, there will remain no more
Sacrifice for Sin; let us be often asking ourselves, How we shall wish we had
lived when we leave the World? And then we shall always live in such a State as
we shall never fear to die in. So that whether we live, we shall live unto the
LORD; or whether we die, we shall die unto the LORD; so that living or dying we
may be the LORD's.

To which End, Let us beseech GOD, the Protector of all them that put their
Trust in him, without whom nothing is strong, nothing is holy, to increase and
multiply upon us his Mercy, that he being our Ruler and Guide, we may so pass
through Things Temporal, that we finally lose not the Things Eternal; through
JESUS CHRIST, our LORD.

SERMON II.
The MARKS of the NEW BIRTH.
ACTS xix. 2. Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye* believed?
TWO Constructions have been given us of these Words; some have supposed, that
the Question here put, is, Whether these Disciples, whom St. Paul found at
Ephesus, after he had passed through the upper ^^^sts, had received the Holy
Ghost, by Impo^^tion of Hands at Confirmation. -- Others think, that these
Disciples had been already baptized into John's Baptism; but that not being
attended with an immediate Effusion of the Holy Spirit, the Apostle here asks
them, Whether they had received the Holy Ghost by being baptized into JESUS
CHRIST? And upon their answering in the Negative, he first baptized, and then
confirmed them in the Name of the Lord JESUS CHRIST.

Which of these Interpretations is most true, is ^^^^her easy nor very
necessary to determine. Ho^^^^er, as the Words contain a most important
Enquiry, without any Reference to the Context, I shall from them draw these two
general Heads of Discourse.

I. First, I shall show who the Holy Ghost, here spoken of, is; and how we must
all receive him before we can be styled True Believers. II. Secondly, I shall
lay down some Scripture Marks, whereby we may know, Whether we have thus
received the Holy Ghost, or not. III. Thirdly, By Way of Conclusion, I shall
address myself to several distinct Classes of Professors, concerning the
Doctrine that shall have been delivered.
I. And First, I am to show who the Holy Ghost, spoken of in the Text is; and
how we must all receive him ere we can be styled True Believers.

By the Holy Ghost here spoken of, is signified the Holy Spirit, -- the third
Person in the ever blessed Trinity, -- consubstantial and coeternal with the
Father and the Son, -- proceeding from, yet equal to them both. -- He is
emphatically called Holy, because infinitely Holy in himself, and the Author
and Finisher of all Holiness in us.

This blessed Spirit, who once moved on the Face of the great Deep, who
overshadowed the Blessed Virgin before that Holy Thing was born of her, who
descended in a bodily Shape like a Dove on our Blessed LORD, when he came up
out of the Water at his Baptism; and lighted afterward in fiery Tongues on the
Heads of all his Apostles at the Day of Pentecost; this is the Holy Ghost, who
must move on the Faces of our Souls; this Power of the Most High must come upon
us, and we must be baptized with his Baptism and refining Fire, before we can
be styled True Members of its mystical Body.

Thus says the Apostle, Know ye not that Christ is in you? that is, by his
Spirit, unless you are Reprobates? Now if any Man has not the Spirit of
CHRIST, he is none of his. -- And again, says St. John, We know that we are his
by the Spirit that he has given us.

It is not indeed necessary that we should have it now given in that miraculous
Manner in which it was at first given to our LORD's Apostles, by Signs and
Wonders. -- But it is absolutely necessary that we should receive the Holy
Ghost in his sanctifying Graces as really as they did, and so will it continue
to be till the End of the World.

For thus stands the Case between GOD and Man. -- GOD at first made Man
upright, or as the sacred Penman expresses it, In the Image of GOD made he Man,
that is, his Soul was the very Copy, the Transcript of the Divine Nature. -- He
that before had by his Almighty F^at spoke the World into Being, breathed into
Man the Breath of spiritual Life, and his Soul became adorned with all the
Perfections of the Deity. -- This was the finishing Stroke of the Creation: The
Perfection both of the moral and material World, -- and so near resembled its
Divine Original, that GOD could not but rejoice, and take Pleasure in his own
Likeness -- And therefore we read, that when GOD had finished the inaanimate
and brutish Part of the Creation, he looked upon it, and behold it was Good;
but when that lovely Godlike Creature, Man, was made, behold it was very Good.

Happy then, unspeakably happy must Man needs be, who was thus Partaker of the
Divine Nature; and thus might. we have still continued, had he still continued
Holy. -- But GOD had placed him in a State of Probation, with a free Grant to
eat of every Tree in the Garden of Eden, except the Tree of Knowledge of Good
and Evil. -- The Day he did eat thereof he was surely to die; that is, not only
to be subject to temporal, but spiritual Death, and consequently to lose that
Divine Image, that spiritual Life GOD had not long since breathed into him, and
which was as much his Happiness as his Glory.

These, one would imagine, were easy Conditions for a finite Creature's
Happiness to depend on. But Man, unhappy Man, being seduced by the Devil, and
desiring like him, to be equal with his Maker, eat of the forbidden Fruit, and
thereby became liable to that Curse which the Eternal GOD, who cannot lie, had
denounced against his Disobedience.

Accordingly we read, that soon after Adam had fallen, he complained that he
was naked. -- Naked not only as to his Body, but Naked and left destitute of
those Divne Graces, which before decked and beautified his Soul. -- The unhappy
Mutiny and Disorder which the visible Creation fell into, those Briars and
Thorns which now sprung up and overspread the Earth, were but poor Emblems, but
lifeless Representations of that Confusion and Rebellion, those diverse Lusts
and Passions which sprung up in, and quite overwhelmed the Soul of Man
immediately after the Fall. -- Alas! he was now no longer the Image of the
invisible GOD; but as he had imitated the Devil's Sin, he became Partaker of
the Devil's Nature, and from an Union with, sunk into a State of direct Enmity
against GOD.

Now in this dreadful disordered Condition are all of us brought into the
World. -- For as the Root is, such must the Branches be. -- Accordingly we are
told, that Adam begat a Son in his own Likeness, that is with the same corrupt
Nature which he himself had sunk into after he had eaten the forbidden Fruit.
And Experience, as well as Scripture proves, that we also are ^ltogether born
in Sin and Corruption, and therefore incapable, whilst in such a State, to hold
Communion with GOD. -- For as Light cannot have Communion with Darkness, so GOD
can have no Communion with such polluted Sons of Belial.

Here then appears the End and Design why CHRIST was made manifest in the
Flesh. -- viz. to put an End to these Disorders, and to restore us to that
primitive Dignity in which we were at first created. -- Accordingly he shed his
precious Blood to satisfy his Father's Justice for our Sins, and thereby also
he purchased again for us the HOLY GHOST, who should once more re-instamp the
Divine Image upon our Hearts, and make us capable of living with and enjoying
GOD.

This, I say, was the only End of our LORD's coming into the World -- Nay, this
is the only End why the World itself is now kept in Being. For as soon as a
sufficient Number are sanctified out of it, the Heavens shall be wrapped up
like a Scrowl, the Elements shall melt with fervent Heat, the Earth and all
that therein is shall be burnt up.

This is that New Birth mentioned by our blessed LORD to Nicodemus, without
which we cannot see the Kingdom of GOD. This is what St. Paul calls being
renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, and herein consists that Holiness without
which no Man shall see the LORD.

In this manner then it is undeniably certain we must receive the HOLY GHOST
ever we can be st^^ed true Members of CHRIST'S mystical Body.

II. I come now, in the Second Place, to lay down some scriptural Marks,
whereby we may easily judge whether we have received the HOLY GHOST or not.

And the First Mark I shall mention is, -- our having received a Spirit of
Prayer and Supplication: -- For that always accompanies the Spirit of Grace. --
No sooner was Paul converted, but behold he prays, says JESUS CHRIST. And
this was urged as an Argument to convince Ananias that he was converted. And
GOD's Elect are said to cry to him Day and Night.

For since one great Work of the Holy Spirit is to convince us of Sin, and to
set us upon seeking Pardon and renewing Grace through the all-sufficient Merits
of a crucified Redeemer, whosoever has felt the Powers of the World to come
awakening him from his spiritual Lethargy, cannot but be always crying out,
LORD what would thou have me do? Or in the Language of the importunate blind
Bartimeus, JESUS, thou Son of David, have Mercy upon me.

The blessed JESUS, as he received the Holy Ghost without Measure, so he
evidenced it by nothing more than his frequent Addresses at the Throne of
Grace. Accordingly we read, that he was often alone on the Mountain praying --
That he rose a great while before Day to pray. -- Nay that he spent whole
Nights in Prayer. -- And whosoever is made Partaker of the same Spirit with the
HOLY JESUS, will be of the same Mind, and delight in nothing so much as to draw
night unto GOD, and lift up holy Hands and Hearts in fervent and devout Prayer.

It must be confessed indeed that this Spirit of Supplication is often as it
were sensibly lost, and decays for some Time even in those who have actually
received the Holy Ghost. And they, through spiritual Dryness and Barrenness of
Soul, find in themselves a Listlessness and Backwardness to this Duty of
Prayer; -- but then they take it as their Cross, and still presevere in seeking
JESUS though it be sorrowing. And their Hearts notwithstanding are fixed upon
GOD, though they cannot exert their Affections so strongly as usual, on Account
of that spiritual Deadness which GOD for wise Reasons has suffered to benumb
their Souls.

But as for the formal Believer, it is not so with him. No, he either prays not
at all, or if he does enter into his Closet, it is with Reluctance -- out of
Custom -- or to satisfy the Checks of his Conscience -- Whereas the true
Believer can no more live without Prayer, than without Food Day by Day. And he
finds his Soul as really and perceptibly fed by the one, as his Body is
nourished and supported by the other.

A Second Scripture Mark of our having received the HOLY GHOST, is -- not
committing Sin. --

Whosoever is born of GOD, says St. John, sins not, neither can be sin
because his Seed remains in him -- Neither can he sin -- This Expression does
not imply the Impossibility of a spiritual Man's sinning. For we are told, that
in many Things we offend all. It means only thus much; that a Man that is
really born again of GOD, does not wilfully commit Sin, much less live in the
habitual Practice of it. For how shall he that is dead to Sin, as every
converted Person is, live any longer therein?

It Is true a Man that is born again of GOD may, through Surprise or Violence of a
Temptation, fall into an Act of Sin: Witness the Adultery of David, and Peter's
De^ial of his Master. But then, like them, he quickly rises again, goes out
from the World, and weeps bitterly; washes the Guilt of Sin away by the Tears
of a sincere Repentance, joined with Faith in the Blood of JESUS CHRIST; takes
double Heed to his Ways for the future, and perfects Holiness in the Fear of
GOD.

The Meaning of this Expression of the Apostle, that a Man that is born again
of GOD, cannot commit Sin, has been Law's Christian Perfection.
fitly illustrated in the Example of a covetous Worldling, to the general Bent
of whose Inclinations, Liberality and Profuseness are directly opposite. But
if, upon some unexpected sudden Occasion, he does play the Prodigal, he
immediately repents him of his Fault, and returns with double Care to his
Savingness again. -- And so is every one that is born again. To commit Sin is
as contrary to the habitual Frame and Tendency of his Mind, as Generosity is to
the Inclinations of a Miser. But if at any Time he is drawn into Sin, he
immediately with double Zeal returns to his Duty, and brings forth Fruits meet
for Repentance.

Whereas the unconverted Sinner is quite dead in Trespasses and Sins, -- or if
he does abstain from the gross Acts of it, from worldly selfish Motives, yet
there is some Right Eye he will not pluck out; some Right Hand which he will
not cut off; some specious Agag that he will not sacrifice for GOD; and thereby
he is convinced, that he is but a mere Saul; and consequently, whatever
Pretensions he may make to the contrary, he has not yet received the HOLY GHOST.

A Third Mark whereby we may know whether or not we have received the Holy
Ghost is, -- our Conquest over the World. -- For whoever is born of GOD, says
the Apostle, overcomes the World. -- By the World we are to understand, as St.
John expresses it, all that is in the World, the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of
the Flesh, and Pride of Life, -- And by overcoming of it is meant our
renouncing these, so as not to follow or be led by them. -- For whosoever is
born from above, has his Affections set on Things above: He feels a Divine
Attraction in his Soul, which forcibly draws his Mind Heavenwards; and as the
Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so does it make his Soul to long after the
Enjoyment of his GOD.

Not that he is so taken up with the Affairs of another Life, as to neglect the
Business of this. No, a truly spiritual Man dares not stand any Day idle: But
then he takes Care, though he labors for the Meat which perishes, first to
secure that which endures to everlasting Life. Or if GOD has exalted him above
his Brethren, yet, like Moses, Joseph and Daniel, he notwithstanding looks upon
himself as a Stranger and Pilgrim upon Earth. -- Having received a Principle of
new Life, he walks by Faith and not by Sight. -- And his Hopes being full of
Immortality, he can look on all Things here below as Vanity and Vexation of
Spirit. -- In short, though he is in, yet is not of the World: And as he was made
for the Enjoyment of GOD, so nothing but GOD can satisfy his Soul.

The ever blessed JESUS was a perfect Instance of overcoming the World. For
though he went continually about doing Good, and always lived in a Press, yet
wherever he was, his Conversation tended Heavenwards. In like Manner he that is
joined to the LORD in one Spirit, will so order his Thoughts, Words, and
Actions aright, that he will evidence to all, that his Conversation is in
Heaven.

On the contrary, an unconverted Man being of the Earth, is earthly: And having
no spiritual Eye to discern spiritual Things, is always seeking for Happiness
in this Life, where it never was, will, or can be found. Being not born again
from above, he is bowed down by a Spirit of natural Infirmity; the Serpent's
Curse becomes his Choice, and he eats of the Dust of the Earth all the Days of
his Life.

A Fourth Scripture Mark of our New Birth, or of our having received the Holy
Ghost, is, -- our loving one another.

We know, says St. John, we are passed from Death unto Life, because we love
the Brethren. -- And by this, says JESUS CHRIST, shall all Men know, that you
are my Disciples, if ye have Love one toward another. -- Love is the
fulfilling of the Gospel, as well as the Law; for GOD is Love, and whosoever
dwells in GOD, dwells in Love.

But by this Love we are not to understand, a Softness and Tenderness of mere
Nature, or a a Love founded on worldly Motives (for this a natural Man may
have) but a Love of our Brethren proceeding from a Love toward GOD. Loving all
Men in general, because GOD loves all Men, and loving good Men in particular,
for the Grace we see in them, and because they love our Lord JESUS in Sincerity.

This is Christian Charity, and that new Commandment which CHRIST gave his
Disciples. New not in its Object, but in the Motive and Example whereon it is
founded, even JESUS CHRIST. This is that Love which the primitive Christians
were so renowned for, that it became a Proverb. -- See, how these Christians
love one another. -- And without this Love, though we should give all our Goods
to feed the Poor, and our Bodies to be burnt, it would profit us nothing.

Farther, this Love is not confined to any particular Set of Men, but is
impartial and catholic. A Love that embraces GOD's Image wherever it beholds
it, and that delights in nothing so much as to see CHRIST's Kingdom come.

This is the Love wherewith JESUS CHRIST loved Mankind. -- He loved all, even
the worst of Men, as appears by his weeping over the obstinately perverse; but
wherever he saw the least Appearance of the Divine Likeness, that Soul he loved
in particular. -- Thus we read, that when he heard the young Man say, All these
Things have I kept from my Youth, that so far he loved him. And when he saw any
noble Instance of Faith, though in a Centurion, a Syro-phoenician, Aliens to
the Commonwealth of Israel, how is he said to marvel at it, as Man, to rejoice
in it, speak of, and commend it? -- So also every spiritual Disciple of JESUS
CHRIST will cordially embrace all that worship GOD in Spirit and in Truth,
howsoever they may differ as to the Appendages of Religion, and Things not
essentially necessary to Salvation.

I confess indeed that the Heart of a natural Man is not thus enlarged all at
once; and a Person may really have received the Holy Ghost (as Peter no doubt
had when he was unwilling to go to Cornelius) though he be not arrived to this.
-- But then we affirm, where a Person is truly in CHRIST, all Narrowness of
Spirit decreases in him daily; the Partition Wall of Bigotry and Party Zeal is
broken down more and more; and the nearer he comes to Heaven the more his Heart
is enlarged with that Love which there will make no Difference between any
People, Nation or Language, but we shall all with one Heart, and one Voice,
sing Praises to him that sits upon the Throne for ever.

But I hasten to show a Fifth, and (...) last Scripture Mark of our New Birth,
(...) shall at present mention, -- Loving our Enemies.

I say unto you, says JESUS CHRIST, Love your Enemies, bless them that curse
you, do good to those that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use
you and persecute you. -- And this Duty of loving our Enemies is so necessary,
that without it, our blessed LORD tells us, our Righteousness does not exceed
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, nay, or of Publicans and
Sinners: For if you do Good to them only which do Good to you, what do you more
than others? What do you extraordinary? Do not even the Publicans the same? --
And these Precepts our LORD confirmed by his own Example, when he wept over the
bloody City; when he suffered himself to be led as a Sheep to the Slaughter;
when he made that mild Reply to the Traitor Judas, Judas betrayest thou the Son
of Man with a Kiss; -- And more especially when in the Agonies and Pangs of
Death, he prayed for his very Murderers, Father forgive them, for they know not
what they do.

This is the most difficult Duty to the natural Man, but whosoever is made
Partaker of that Promise of the Father, will find it practicable and easy. For
if we are born again of GOD, we must be like him; and consequently delight to
be perfect in this Duty of doing good to our worst Enemies in the same Manner,
though not in the same Degree as he is perfect. -- And he sends his Rain on the
Evil and the Good, causes his Sun to shine on the Just and Unjust: And herein
more especially commends his Love toward us, that whilst we were his
Enemies, he sent forth his Son, born of a Woman, made under the Law, that he
might become a Curse for us.

Many other Marks there are scattered up and down the Scriptures, whereby we
may know whether or not we have received the Holy Ghost. Such as to be carnally
minded is Death, but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace. -- Now the
Fruits of the Spirit are Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Meekness, with a Multitude
of Texts to the same Purpose. -- But as most, if not all of them, are
comprehended in the Duties already laid down, I dare affirm, whosoever, upon an
impartial Examination, can find the aforesaid Marks upon his Soul, may be as
certain, as though an Angel was to tell him, that his Pardon is sealed in
Heaven.

And as for my own Part, I had rather see these Divine Graces, these Heavenly
Tempers stamped upon my Soul, than to hear an Angel from Heaven saying unto me,
Son, be of good cheer, thy Sins be forgiven thee.

For these are infallible Witnesses; these are Emanuel, GOD with and in us;
these make up that white Stone, which none knows, saving he who receives it;
these are the Earnests of the Heavenly Inheritance in our Hearts. In short,
these are Glory begun, and are that good Thing, that better Part, which, if you
continue to stir up this Gift of GOD, neither Men or Devils shall ever be able
to take from us.

III. I proceed now, as was proposed, in the Third Place, to make an
Application of the Doctrine delivered, to several distinct Classes of
Professors.

And First, I shall address myself to those who are dead in Trespasses and
Sins. -- And here how could I weep over you, as our LORD wept over Jerusalem!
For alas! how distant must you be from GOD, what a prodigious Work have you got
to finish, who instead of praying Day and Night, seldom or never pray at all!
And instead of being born again in GOD, so as not to commit Sin, are so deeply
sunk into the Nature of Devils as to make a Mock at it. Or instead of
overcoming the World, so as not to follow or be led by it, are continually
making Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof. And lastly,
instead of being endued with the Godlike Dispositions of loving all Men, even
your Enemies, have your Hearts full of Hatred, Malice and Revenge, and deride
those who are sincere Followers of the lowly JESUS. -- But think you, O
Sinners, that GOD will admit such polluted Wretches into his Sight? Or should
he admit you, do you imagine you could take any Pleasure in him? No, Heaven
itself would be no Heaven to you: The Devilish Dispositions which are in your
Hearts would render all the spiritual Enjoyments of those blessed Mansions
ineffectual to make you happy. -- To qualify you to be blissful Partakers of
that Heavenly Inheritance with the Saints in Light, there is a Meetness
required, to attain which ought to be the one Business of your Lives.

It is true, you, as well as the Righteous, in one Sense shall see GOD (for we
must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ) but you must see him once.
never to see him more. For as you carry about in you the Devil's Image, with
Devils you must dwell. Being of the same Nature, you must share the same Doom.
Repent therefore and be converted, that your Sins may be blotted out. See that
you receive the Holy Ghost before you go hence: For otherwise how can you
escape the Damnation of Hell?

Secondly, I shall apply myself to those who deceive themselves with false
Hopes of Salvation. And because, through the Influence of a good Education, or
other providential Restraints, they have not run into the same Excess of Riot
with other Men, think they have no Need to receive the Holy Ghost, and flatter
themselves that they are really born again.

But do you show it by bringing forth the Fruits of the Spirit? Do you pray
without ceasing? Do you not commit Sin? Have you overcome the World? And do you
love your Enemies, and all Mankind, in the same Manner as JESUS CHRIST loved
them?

If these Things, Brethren, be i^ (...) abound, then may you have Confidence
toward GOD: But if not, although you may be civilized, yet you are not
converted. No, you are yet in your Sins. The Nature of the old Adam still
reigns in your Souls. And unless the Nature of the second Adam be engrafted
in its Room, you can never see GOD.

Think not therefore to dress yourselves up in the Ornaments of a good Nature,
and civil Education, and say with Agag, surely the Bitterness of Death is past.
For GOD'S Justice notwithstanding that, like Samuel, shall hew you to Pieces.
-- However you may be highly esteemed in the Sight of Men, yet in the Sight of
GOD you are but like the Apples of Sodom, Dunghills covered over with Snow,
mere whited Sepulchers, appearing a little beautiful without, but inwardly full
of Corruption and of all Uncleanliness. -- And consequently will be dismissed
at the last Day, with a Verily I know you not.

But the Word is profitable for Comfort, as well as Correction.

Thirdly, therefore do I address myself to those who are under the Drawings of
the Father, and are going through the Spirit of Bondage, but not finding the
Marks beforementioned, are ever crying out, Who shall deliver us from the Body
of this Death?

But fear not, little Flock; for notwithstanding your present Infant State of
Grace, it shall be your Father's good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom.

The Grace of GOD, through JESUS CHRIST, that shall deliver you, that shall give
you what you thirst after. -- He has promised he will also do it. -- Ye shall
receive the Spirit of Adoption, that Promise of the Father, if you faint not.
-- Only persevere in seeking it, -- and determine to find no Rest in your
Spirit, till you know and feel that you are thus born again from above, and
GOD's Spirit witnesses with your Spirits that you are the Children of GOD.

Fourthly and lastly, I address myself to those who have received the Holy
Ghost in all its sanctifying Graces, and almost ripe for Glory.

Hail happy Saints! For your Heaven is begun on Earth. -- You have already
received the first Fruits of the Spirit, and are patiently waiting till that
blessed Change come, when your Harvest shall be complete. -- I see and admire
you; though alas! at so great a Distance from you. -- Your Life, I know, is hid
with CHRIST in GOD. -- You have Comforts, you have Meat to eat, which a sinful,
carnal, ridiculing World knows nothing of. -- CHRIST'S Yoke is now become easy
to you, and his Burden light: You have passed through the Pangs of the New
Birth, and now rejoice that the Man CHRIST JESUS is spiritually formed in your
Hearts. You know what it is to dwell in CHRIST, and CHRIST in you. Like Jacob's
Ladder, although your Bodies are (...) Earth, yet your Souls and Hearts are in
Hea^^^^ And by your Faith and constant Recollection, like the Blessed Angels,
you do always (...) the Face of your Father which is in H^^^^^.

I need not then exhort you to pr^^^^ (...) For you know that in walking by the
^pir^^ there is great Reward. Rather will I exhort you in Patience to possess
your Souls yet a little while, and JESUS CHRIST will deliver you from the
Burden of the Flesh, and an abundant Entrance shall be administered unto you
into the eternal Joy and uninterrupted Felicity of his Heavenly Kingdom.

Which GOD of his infini^^ M^^^y grant, through JESUS CHRIST our LORD; to whom
with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, Three (...) and One GOD, be ascri^^d all
(...), Power, and Glory, for ever and ev^^.
SERMON III.
The Power of CHRIST's RESURRECTION.
PHILIP. iii. 10. That I may know Him, and the Power of His Resurrection.
THE Apostle, in the Verses going before the Text, had been cautioning the
Philippians to beware of the Concission, i. e. of some Judaizing Teachers, who
endeavored to subvert the Simplicity of the Gospel, by telling them, they
still ought to be subject to Circumcision, and all the other Ordinances of
Moses. -- And that they might not think he spoke out of Prejudice, and
condemned their Tenets, because he himself was a Stranger to the Jewish
Dispensation, he acquaints them, that if any other Man thought that he had
whereof he might trust in the Flesh, i. e. seek to be justified by the outward
Privileges of the Jews, he had more. For he was circumcised the eighth Day, of
the Stock of Israel, i. e. not a Proselyte, but a native Israelite, of the
Tribe of Benjamin; the Tribe which adhered to Judah when the others revolted;
an Hebrew of the Hebrews; a Jew both on the Father's and Mother's Side; as
touching the Law, a Pharisee, the strictest Sect amongst all Israel. -- And to
show that he was no Gallio in Religion, on account of his great, though
misguided Zeal, he had persecuted the Church of CHRIST; and as touching the
Righteousness of the Law, as far as the Pharisees Exposition of it went, he was
blameless, and had kept it from his Youth. -- But, says he, when it pleased
GOD, who separated me from my Mother's Womb, to reveal his Son in me, what
Things were Gain to me, those Privileges I boasted myself in, and sought to be
justified by, I counted Loss for CHRIST. And that they might not think that it
repented him that he had done so, he tells them, he was ^ow more confirmed than
ever in his Judgment. For, says he, yea doubtless (the (...) the Original rises
with a holy Triumph) and even now I count all Things but Loss for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of CHRIST JESUS my LORD. -- And that they might not
object that he said and did not, he acquaints them, he had given Proofs of the
Sincerity of these Professions, because for the Sake of them, he had suffered
the Loss of all his worldly Things, and still was willing (...) more; for, says
he, I count them but Du^^^^ ^^o more than Off^^^ thrown out to (...)) (...)
that I may win, (...) have a saving Interest (...) CHRIST, and be found in him
(as the Manslayer in the City of Refuge) not having my own Righteousness which
is of the Law, not depending on having Abraham for my Father, or any Works of
Righteousness which I have done, either to atone or serve as a Balance for my
Evil Deeds, but that which is through the Faith of CHRIST, the Righteousness
which is of GOD by Faith, i. e. A Righteousness of GOD's appointing, and which
will be imputed to me, if I believe in CHRIST, -- that I may know him, i. e.
CHRIST, and the Power of his Resurrection; that I may have an experimental
Knowledge of the Efficacy of his Resurrection, by feeling the Influences of his
Blessed Spirit on my Soul. -- In which Words two Things are implied.

First, That JESUS CHRIST did rise from the Dead. Secondly, That it highly
concerns us to know the Power of his Rising again.
Accordingly in the following Discourse I shall endeavor to show, First, That
CHRIST is risen indeed from the Dead; and that it was necessary for him so to
do; and, Secondly, That it highly concerns us to know and experience the Power
of his Resurrection.


That JESUS should rise from the Dead was absolutely necessary, first on his
own Account -- For he had often appealed to this as the last and most
convincing Proof he would give them that he was the true Messiah, -- There
shall no other Sign be given you, says he, than the Sign of the Prophet Jonas.
-- And again, Destroy this Temple of my Body, and in three Days I will build it
up. -- Which Words his Enemies remembered, and urged it as an Argument, to
induce Pilate to grant them a Watch, to prevent his being stolen out of the
Grave. -- We know that that Deceiver said, whilst He was yet alive, After three
days I will rise again. -- So that had he not risen again, they might have
justly said, We know that this Man was an Impostor.

Secondly, It was necessary on our Account, -- He rose again, says the Apostle,
for our Justification; i. e. that the Debt we owed to GOD for our Sins might be
fully satisfied and discharged.

It had pleased the Father (for ever adored be his infinite Love and free
Grace) to wound his only Son for our Transgressions, and to ar^^^ and confine
him in the Prison of the Grave, as our Surety for the Guilt we had contracted
by setting at naught his Commandments. -- Now had CHRIST continued always in
the Grave, we could have had no more Assurance that our Sins were satisfied
for, than any common Debtor can have of his Creditor's being satisfied whilst
his Surety is kept confined. -- But he being released from the Power of Death,
we are thereby assured that in his Sacrifice GOD was well pleased, -- that our
Attone^^nt was finished on the Cross -- and that he had made a full, perfect,
and sufficient Sacrifice, C^^^ation, and Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole
World.

Thirdly, It was necessary that our Lord JESUS should rise again from the Dead,
(...) assure us of the Certainty of the Resurrection of our own Bodies.

The Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Body was entirely exploded and set at
naught among the Gentiles, as appears from the Athenians mocking at and calling
St. Paul a Babbler and a Setter forth of strange Doctrines, when he preached to
them JESUS, and the Resurrection. -- And though it was believed by most of the
Jews, as is evident from many Passages of Scripture; yet not by all; the whole
Sect of the Sadducees denied it. But the Resurrection of JESUS CHRIST put it
out of Dispute. -- For a^ he acted as our Representative, if he our Head be
risen, then must we also, who are his Members, rise with him. -- And as in the
first Adam we all died, even so in him our second Adam we must all in this
Sense be made alive.

As it was necessary, upon all these Accounts, that our Blessed LORD should
rise from the Dead; so it is plain beyond Contradiction, that he did. Never was
any Matter of Fact better attested. Never were more Precautions made use of to
prevent a Cheat. -- He was buried in a Sepulcher, hewn out of a Rock, so that
it could not be said that any dug under, and conveyed him away. It was a
Sepulcher also wherein never Man before was laid; so that if any Body did rise
from thence, it must be the Body of JESUS of of Nazareth. -- Besides, the
Sepulcher was sealed; a great Stone rolled to the Mouth of it, and a Band of
Soldiers (consisting not of his Friends, but of his professed Enemies) was set
to guard it. -- And as for his Disciples coming by Night and stealing him away,
it was altogether impossible. For it was not long since that they had all
forsaken him, and they were the most backward in believing his Resurrection. --
And supposing it was true that they came whilst the Soldiers slept; yet the
Soldiers must be cast into a Deep Sleep indeed, that the rolling away so great
a Stone did not awake some of them.

And our Blessed LORD's afterward appearing at sundry Times, and in diverse
Manners, to his Disciples, when they were assembled together, when they were
walking to Emmaus, when they were fishing; nay, and condescending to show them
his Hands and Feet, and his at length appearing to above five hundred Brethren
at once, put the Truth of his Resurrection out of all Dispute.

Indeed there is one Objection that may be made against what has been said, --
That the Books wherein these Facts are recorded were written by his Disciples.

And who more proper Persons than those who were Eyewitnesses of what they
related, and eat and drank with him after his Resurrection. "But they were
illiterate and ignorant Men." Yet as good Witnesses of a plain Matter of Fact,
as the most learned Masters in Israel. -- Nay, this rendered them more proper
Witnesses. -- For being plain Men, they were therefore less to be suspected of
telling or making a Lie, -- particularly, since they laid down their Lives for
a Testimony of the Truth of it. We read indeed of Jacob's telling a Lie, though
he was a plain Man, in order to get his Father's Blessing. But it was never
heard since the World began, that any Man, much less a whole Set of Men, died
Martyrs for the Sake of an Untruth, when they themselves were to reap no
Advantage from it.

No, this single Circumstance proves them to be Israelites indeed, in whom was
no Guile. -- And the wonderful Success GOD gave to their Ministry afterward,
when three thousand were converted by one Sermon, and twelve poor Fishermen, in
a very short Time were enabled to be more than Conquerors over all the
Opposition Men or Devils could make, was as plain a Demonstration, that CHRIST
was risen; according to their Gospel, as that a Divine Power, at the Sound of a
few Ram's Horns, caused the Walls of Jericho to fall down.

But what need we any farther Witnesses? Believe you the Resurrection of our
Blessed LORD? I know that you believe it, as your gathering together on this
first Day of the Week in the Courts of the LORD's House abundantly testifies.

What concerns us most to be assured of, and which is the

Second Thing I was to speak to is, -- Whether we have experimentally known the
Power of his Resurrection; that is, Whether or not we have received the Holy
Ghost, and by his powerful Operations on our Hearts been raised from the Death
of Sin, to a Life of Righteousness and true Holiness.

It was this the great Apostle was chiefly desirous to know. -- The
Resurrection of CHRIST'S Body he was satisfied would avail him nothing, unless
he experienced the Power of it in raising his dead Soul.

For another, and that a chief End of our Blessed LORD's rising from the Dead,
was to enter Heaven as our Representative, and to send down the Holy Ghost to
apply that Redemption he had finished on the Cross to our Hearts, by working an
entire Change in them.

Without this, CHRIST would have died in vain. For it would have done us no
Service to have his outward Righteousness imputed to us, unless we had an
inward inherent Righteousness wrought in us. -- Because being altogether
conceived and born in Sin, and consequently unfit* to hold Communion with an
infinitely pure and holy GOD, we cannot possibly be made meet to see or enjoy
him, till a thorough Renovation has passed upon our Hearts.

Without this, we leave out the Holy Ghost in the great Work of our Redemption.
-- But as we were made by the Joint Concurrence and Consultation of the blessed
Trinity. And as we were baptized in their Name -- So must a^ of them concur in
rendering that Baptism effectual to our Salvation: As the Father made, and the
Son Redeemed, so must the Holy Ghost sanctify and seal us, or otherwise we have
believed in vain.

This then is what the Apostle means by the Power of CHRIST'S Resurrection, and
this is what we are as much concerned experimentally to know, as that He rose
at all.

Without this, though we may be Moralists, though we may be civilized, good
natur^^ People, yet we are no Christians -- For he is not a true Christian, who
is only one outwardly; nor have we therefore a right Faith, because we daily
profess to believe that CHRIST rose again the third Day from the Dead. But he
is a true Christian who is one inwardly; and then only can we be styled true
Believers, when we not only profess to believe, but have felt the Power of our
blessed LORD's rising from the Dead, by being quickened and raised by his Spirit
when dead in Trespasses and Sins, to a thorough Newness both of Heart and Life.

The Devils themselves cannot but believe the Doctrine of the Resurrection and
tremble -- But yet they continue Devils, because the Benefits of this
Resurrection have not been applied to them, nor have they received a renovating
Power from it to change and put off their Diabolical Nature -- And so likewise,
unless we not only profess to know, but also feel that CHRIST is risen indeed,
by being born again from above, we shall be as far from the Kingdom of GOD as
they, our Fai^^ will be as ineffectual as the Faith of Devils.

Nothing has done more harm to the Christian World; nothing has rendered the
Cross of CHRIST of less Effect, than a vain Supposition that Religion is
something without us -- Whereas we should consider that every thing that CHRIST
did outwardly, must be done over again in our Souls; or otherwise believing
there was such a divine Person once on Earth, who triumphed over Hell and the
Grave, will profit us no more, than believing there was once such a Person as
Alexander, who conquered the World.

As CHRIST was born of the Virgin's Womb, so must he be spiritually formed in
our Hearts -- As He died for Sin, so must we die to Sin -- And as he rose again
from the Dead, so must we also rise to a Divine Life.

None but those who have followed him in this Regeneration, or new Birth, shall
sit on Thrones as Approvers of his Sentence, when he shall come in terrible
Majesty to judge the twelve Tribes of Israel.

It Is true, as for the outward Work of our Redemption it was a transient Act,
and was certainly finished on the Cross -- But the Application of that
Redemption to our Hearts is a Work that will continue always, even unto the End
of the World.

So long as there is a Man breathing on the Earth, who is naturally engendered
of the Offspring of the first Adam, so long must the quickening Spirit which
was purchased by the Resurrection of the second Adam, that LORD from Heaven, be
Breathing upon his Soul.

For though we may exist by CHRIST, yet we cannot be said to exist in Him, till
we are united to him by one Spirit, and enter into a new State of Things, as
certainly as He entered into a new State of Things, after that he rose from the
Dead.

We may throng and crowd around about CHRIST, and call him LORD, LORD, when we
come to worship before his Footstool; but we have not effectually touched Him,
till by a lively Faith in His Resurrection, we perceive a Divine Virtue coming
out of Him, to renew and purify our Souls.

How greatly then do they err who rest in a bare Historical Faith of our
Savior's Resurrection, and look only for external Proofs to evidence it?
Whereas were we the most learned Disputers of this World, and could speak of
the Certainty of this Fact with the Tongue of Men and Angels, yet without this
inward Testimony of it in our Hearts, though we might convince others, yet we
should never be saved by it ourselves.

For we are but dead Men, we are but like so many Carcasses wrapped up in Grave
Clothes, till that same JESUS who called Lazarus from his Tomb, and at whose
Resurrection many that slept arose, -- raise us also by his quickening Spirit
from our natural Death, in which we have so long lain, to a holy and heavenly
Life.

We might think ourselves happy, if we had seen the HOLY JESUS after He was
risen from the Dead, and our Hands handled that LORD of Life. But more happy
are they who have not seen him, and yet having felt the Power of his
Resurrection, therefore believe in Him. -- For many saw our Divine Master, who
were not saved by him; but whosoever has thus felt the Power of his
Resurrection, he has the Earnest of his Inheritance in his Heart, he has passed
from Death to Life, and shall never, if he still stir up the Gift of GOD that
is in him, fall into Condemnation.

I am very sensible that this is Foolishness to the Natural Man, as were many
such like Truths to our LORD's own Disciples before he rose again. But when
these natural Men, like them, have felt the Power of his Resurrection, they
will then own that this Doctrine is from GOD, and say with the Samaritans, Now
we believe not because of thy Saying, for we ourselves have experienced it in
our Hearts.

And Oh that all Unbelievers, all Letter-learned Masters of Israel, who now
look upon the Doctrine of the Power of CHRIST'S Resurrection, or our New Birth,
as an idle Tale, and condemn the Preachers of it as Enthusiasts and Madmen, did
but thus feel the Power of it in their Souls, -- They would no longer ask,
(...) this Thing could be? -- But they would be convinced of it as much as
Thomas was when he saw the LORD's CHRIST; and like him, when JESUS bid him
reach out his Hands and thrust into his Side, in a holy Confusion they would
cry out My LORD and my GOD!

But how shall an Unbeliever, how shall (...) formal Christian come thus to
know CHRIST, and the Power of his Resurrection? -- That GOD who cannot lie has
told us, I am the Resurrection and the Life, says JESUS CHRIST, whosoever
lives and believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live. -- Again,
says the Apostle, By Faith we are saved, and that not of ourselves, it is the
Gift of GOD.

This, this is the Way, walk in it. -- This do, and ye shall live. You shall
live in CHRIST, and CHRIST in you; you shall be one with CHRIST, and CHRIST
with you. -- But without this, your outward Goodness (...) Profession will
avail you nothing.

But then by this Faith we are to understand not a dead speculative Faith, a
Faith in the Head; but a living Principle wrought in the Heart by the powerful
Operations of the Holy Ghost, -- A Faith that will enable us to overcome the
World, and forsake all in Affection for JESUS CHRIST. For thus speaks our
Blessed Master, Unless a Man forsake all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple.

And so the Apostle, in the Words immediately following the Text, says, being
made conformable (...) Death; thereby implying, that the knowing the Power of
CHRIST'S Resurrection cannot be without the being made conformable to him in
his Death.

This we have shadowed out by the Custom of Baptizing by Immersion in the
Primitive Church, and (which is also recommended by our own) their putting the
Infants under the Water, signified their Obligation to die unto Sin; as their
taking them out of the Water, signified their rising again to Newness of Life.
To which the Apostle plainly alludes, when he says, We are buri^^ with him in
Baptism.

If we can reconcile Light and Darkness, Heaven and Hell, then we may hope to
know the Power of CHRIST'S Resurrection without dying to ourselves and the
World. -- But till we can do this, we might as well expect that CHRIST will
have Concord with Belial.

For there is such a Contrariety between the Spi^^^ of this World, and the
Spirit of JESUS CHRIST, that he who will be at Friendship with the one, must be
at Enmity with the other. -- We cannot serve GOD and Mammon.

This may indeed seem a hard Saying, and many, with the young Man in the
Gospel, may be tempted to go away sorrowful? But wherefore should this offend
them? For what is all that is in the World, the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of
the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, but Vanity and Vexation of Spirit?

GOD is LOVE; and therefore could our own Wills, or the World have made us
happy, he never would have sent his own dear Son JESUS CHRIST to die and rise
again, to deliver us from the Power of them. -- But because they only torment,
but cannot satisfy, therefore GOD bids renounce them.

Had any one persuaded profane Esau not to lose so glorious a Privilege merely
for the Sake of gratifying a present corrupt Inclination, when he saw him about
to sell his Birthright for a little red Pottage, would not one think that Man
was Esau's Friend? -- And just thus stands the Case between GOD and us. -- By
the Death and Resurrection of JESUS CHRIST we are newborn to an Heavenly
Inheritance amongst all them which are sanctified, but our own corrupt Wills
would tempt us to sell this glorious Birthright for the Vanities of the World,
which like Esau's red Pottage, may please us for a while, but will soon be
taken away from us. -- GOD knows this and therefore bids us rather renounce
them for a Season, than for the short Enjoyment of the^^ lose the Privilege of
that glorious Birthright, to which by the Resurrection of JESUS CHRIST we are
entitled.

Oh the Depth of the Riches and Excellency of Christianity! Well might the
great St. Paul count all Things but Dung and Dross for the Excellency of the
Knowledge of it. -- Well might he desire so ardently to know JESUS, and the
Power of his Resurrection. -- For even on this side Eternity it raises us above
the World, and makes us from Heavenly Places in CHRIST JESUS.

Well might that glorious Company of Worthies, recorded in the Holy Scriptures,
supported with a deep Sense of their Heavenly Calling, despise the Pleasures
and Profits of this Life, and wander about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, in
Dens and Caves of the Earth, being destitute, afflicted, tormented.

And oh that we were all like minded! that we felt the Power of CHRIST'S
Resurrection as they did! How should we then count all Things as Dung and Dross
for the Excellency of the Knowledge of CHRIST JESUS, our LORD! How should we
then recover our primitive Dignity, trample Earth under our Feet, and with our
Souls be continually gasping after GOD.

And what hinders but we may be thus minded? IS JESUS CHRIST, our great High
Priest, altered from what he was? No, he is the same Yesterday, to Day, and
forever. -- And though he is exalted to the Right Hand of GOD, is not ashamed
to call us Brethren. -- The Power of his Resurrection is as great now as
formerly, and the Holy Spirit, which was assured to us by his Resurrection, as
ready and able to quicken us who are dead in Trespasses and Sins, as any Saint
that ever lived. Let us but cry, and that instantly, to him that is mighty and
able to save. -- Let us, in Sincerity and Truth, without secretly keeping back
the least Part, renounce ourselves and the World -- And then we shall be
Christians indeed. -- And though the World may cast us out, and separate from
our Company, yet JESUS CHRIST will walk with and abide in us. -- And at the
general Resurrection of the last Day, when the Voice of the Archangel and Trump
of GOD shall bid the Sea and the Graves give up their Dead, and all Nations
shall appear before him, then will he confess us before his Father and the Holy
Angels, and we shall receive that Sentence which he shall (...) pronounce to
all that love and fear him, saying, Come ye blessed Children of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Beginning of the World.

Grant this, O FATHER, for the same thy dear Son's Sake JESUS CHRIST our LORD,
to whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost, etc.

SERMON IV.
The DUTY of Searching the SCRIPTURES.
JOHN v. 39. Search the SCRIPTURES.
WHEN the Sadducees came to our Blessed LORD, and put to him the Question,
whose Wife a Woman should be in the next Life, who had seven Husbands in this?
He told them, they erred, not knowing the Scriptures. -- And if we would know
whence all the Errors that have overspread the Church of CHRIST, first arose,
we should find they in a great Measure flowed from the same Fountain, viz. An
Ignorance of the Word of GOD.

Our Blessed LORD, though he was the Eternal GOD, yet as Man, made it his
constant Rule and Guide. -- And therefore, when he was asked by the Lawyer,
Which was the great Commandment of the Law? He referred him to his Bible for an
Answer, What read thou? -- And thus, when led by the Spirit, to be tempted
by the Devil, he repelled all his Assaults, with It is written.

A sufficient Confutation this of their Opinion, who say, The Spirit only, and
not the Spirit by the Word, is to be our Rule of Action. -- If so, our Savior,
who had the Spirit without Measure, needed not always have referred to the
written Word.

But how few copy after the Example of CHRIST? How many are there, who do not
regard the Word of GOD at all, but throw the Sacred Oracles aside, as an
antiquated Book, fit only for unlearned and illiterate Men?

Such Men do greatly err, not knowing what the Scriptures are, and for what
they are designed.

I shall therefore in the following Discourse, I. First show that it is every
one's Duty to search them. And, II. Secondly, lay down some Directions how to
search them with Advantage.


By the Scriptures I understand the Law and the Prophets, and all those Books
which have in all Ages been accounted Canonical, and which make up that Book
commonly called, The Bible.

These are emphatically styled The Scriptures, and in one Place, The Scriptures
of Truth, as though no other Books deserved the Name of true Writings or
Scriptures in Comparison of them.

They are not of any private Interpretation, Authority, or Invention, but Holy
Men of old wrote them, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost.

The Foundation of GOD's revealing himself thus to Mankind, was our Fall in
Adam, and the Necessity of our New Birth in CHRIST JESUS. And if we search the
Scriptures as we ought, we shall find the Sum and Substance, the Alpha and
Omega, the Beginning and End of them, has no other Tendency but to lead us to a
Knowledge of these two great Truths.

All the Threats, Promises, and Precepts, all the Exhortations and Doctrines
contained therein, all the Rites, and Ceremonies, and Sacrifices appointed
under the Jewish Law; nay, almost all the Historical Parts of Holy Scripture,
suppose our being fallen in Adam, and either point out to us a Mediator to
come, or speak of him as already come in the Flesh.

Had Man continued in a State of Innocence, he would not have needed an outward
Revelation, because the Law of GOD was so deeply written in the Tables of his
Heart. But having eaten of the forbidden Fruit, he incurred the Divine
Displeasure, and lost the Divine Image, and therefore without an outward
Revelation could never tell how GOD would be reconciled unto him, or how he
should be saved from the Misery and Darkness of his fallen Nature.

That these Truths are so, I need not refer you to any other Book than that of
your own Hearts.

For unless we are fallen Creatures, whence come those abominable Corruptions
which daily arise in our Hearts? We could not come thus corrupt out of the
Hands of our Maker, because he being Goodness itself, could make nothing but
what is like himself* Holy, Just and Good. And that we want to be delivered
from these Disorders of our Nature is evident, because we find an Unwillingness
within ourselves to own we are thus depraved, and are always striving to appear
to others of a quite different Frame and Temper of Mind, than what we are.

I appeal to the Experience of the most learned Disputer against Divine
Revelation, whether he does not find in himself that he is naturally Proud,
Angry, Revengeful, and full of other Tempers contrary to the Purity, Holiness,
and Long-Suffering of GOD. -- And is not this a demonstrable Proof that some
Way or other he is fallen from GOD? -- And I appeal also whether at the same
Time he finds these Hellish Tempers in his Heart, he does not strive to seem
Amiable, Courteous, Kind, and Affable; and is not this as manifest a Proof that
he is sensible that he is Miserable, and wants he knows not how, to be redeemed
or delivered from it?

Here then GOD by his Word steps in, and opens to his View such a Scene of
Divine Love, and infinite Goodness, in the Holy Scriptures, that none but Men
of such corrupt and reprobate Minds as our modern Deists, would shut their Eyes
against it.

For what does GOD in his written Word do more or less, than show thee, O Man,
how thou art fallen into that Blindness, Darkness, and Misery thou feel and
complainest of? And at the same Time points out the Way to what thou desire,
viz. How thou may be redeemed out of it, -- by believing in, and copying
after the Son of his Love.

For, as I told you before, so I tell you again, upon these two Truths hangs
all Divine Revelation. It being given us for no other End but to show us our
Misery, and our Happiness; our Fall and Recovery; or, in one Word, after what
Manner we died in Adam, and how in CHRIST, we may again be made alive.

Hence then arises the Necessity of searching the Scriptures. For since they
are nothing else but the grand Character of our Salvation, a Revelation of a
Covenant made by GOD with Man in CHRIST, a Light to guide them into the Way of
Peace: It follows, that all are obliged to read and search them, because all
are equally fallen from GOD, all equally stand in need of being informed what
they must do to be restored to, and again united with him.

How foolishly then do the disputing Infidels of this Generation act, who are
continually either calling for Signs from Heaven, or seeking for outward
Evidence to prove the Truth of Divine Revelation? Whereas what they so
earnestly seek for is nigh unto, nay, within them. For let them but consult
their own Hearts, they cannot but feel what they want. -- Let them but consult
the lively Oracles of GOD, and they cannot but see a Remedy revealed for all
their Wants, and that the written Word does as exactly answer the Wants and
Desire of their Hearts, as Face answers to Face in the Water. -- Where then is
the Scribe, where then is the Wi^^, where is the Solidity of the Reasoning of
the Disputers of this W^^^^ Has not GOD revealed himself unto t^^^^ (...) plain
as their own Hearts could wish! (...) they require a Sign. But there shall no
(...) be given them. For if they believe (...) Revelation every way so suited
to their Wants, neither will they be persuaded though one should rise from the
Dead.

But this Discourse is not designed so much for^ them that believe not, as for
them who both know and believe that the Scriptures contain a Revelation that
came from GOD, and that it is their Duty, as being chief Parties concerned, not
only to read, but search them also.

I pass on therefore, as was proposed, in the second Place, to lay down some
Directions how to search them with Advantage.

And First, Have also in View, the End for which the Scriptures were written,
-- to show (...) the Way of Salvation by JESUS CHRIST.

Search the Scriptures, says our Blessed LORD, for they are they that testify
of me. -- Look therefore always for CHRIST in the Scripture. For he is the
Treasure hid in the Field, both of the Old and New Testament, -- In the Old
you will find (...) under Prophesies, Types, Sacrifices and Shadows; in the New,
manifested in the Flesh, to become a Propitiation for our Sin, as a Priest; and
as a Prophet, to reveal the whole Will of his Heavenly Father.

Have CHRIST, and to become a Principle then of a new Life to our Souls, thus
always in view when you are reading the Word of GOD, and this, like the Star in
the East, will guide you to the Messiah, will serve as a Key to every Thing
that is obscure, and (...) to you the Wisdom and Riches of all the ^^^^teries
of the Kingdom of GOD.

Secondly, Search the Scriptures with an humble Child-like Disposition.

For whosoever does not read them with this Temper shall in no wise enter into
the Knowledge of the Things contained therein. For GOD hides the Sense of them
from those that are wise and prudent in their own Eyes, and reveals them only
to Babes in CHRIST, who think they know nothing yet as they ought to know, who
hunger and thirst after Righteousness and humbly desire to be fed with the
sincere Milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby.

Fancy yourselves therefore when you are searching the Scriptures, especially
when you are reading the New Testament, to be with Mary sitting at the Feet of
the HOLY JESUS, and be as willing to learn what GOD shall teach You, as Samuel
was, when he said, Speak, LORD, for thy Servant hears.

And Oh that the Unbelievers would pull down every high Thought and Imagination
that exalts itself against the Revealed Will of GOD! Oh that they would, like
newborn Babes, desire to be fed with the pure Milk of the Word! then we should
have them no longer scoffing at Divine Revelation, nor would they read the
Bible any more (with the same Intent the Philistines brought out Sampson) to
make Sport at it, but they would see the Divine Image and Superscription
written upon every Line of it. They would hear GOD speaking unto their Souls by
it, and consequently be built up in the Knowledge and Fear of him who is the
Author of it.

Thirdly, Search the Scriptures with a sincere Intention to put in Practice
what you read.

For a Desire to do the Will of GOD is the only Way to know it, If any Man will
do my Will, says JESUS CHRIST, He shall know of my Doctrine whether it he of
GOD, or whether I speak of myself. As he also speaks in another Place to his
Disciples, To you, who are willing to practice your Duty, it is given to know
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of GOD; but to those that are without, who only
want to raise Cavils against my Doctrine, all these Things are spoken in
Parables, that seeing they may see and not understand, and hearing they may
hear and not perceive.

For it is but just in GOD to send those strong Delusions, that they may
believe a Lie, and to conceal the Knowledge of himself from all such as do not
seek him with a single Intention.

JESUS CHRIST is the same now as formerly. To those who desire to know from his
Word, who he is that they may believe on and live by and to him, he will reveal
himself as clearly as he did to the Woman of Samaria, when he said, I that
speak to thee am he; or as he did to the Man that was born blind, whom the Jews
had cast out for his Name's sake, He that talks with thee is he. But to those
who consult his Word with a Desire neither to know him or keep his
Commandments, but either merely for their Entertainment, or to scoff at the
Simplicity of the Manner in which he is revealed, to those, I say, he never
will reveal himself, though he should search the Scriptures to all Eternity. --
As he never would tell those whether he was the Messiah or not, who put that
Question to him either out of Curiosity, or that they might have whereof to
accuse him.

Fourthly, In order to search the Scriptures still more effectually, make an
Application of every Thing you read to your own Hearts.

For whatever was written in the Book of GOD, was written for our Learning. And
what CHRIST said unto those aforetime, we must look upon as spoken to us also:
For since the Holy Scriptures are nothing but a Revelation from GOD, how fallen
Man is to be restored by JESUS CHRIST, all the Precepts, Threats and Promises,
belong to us and to our Children, as well as to those to whom they were
immediately made known.

Thus the Apostle, when he tells us that he lived by the Faith of the Son of
GOD, adds who died and gave himself for me, For it is this Application of JESUS
CHRIST to our Hearts that makes his Redemption effectual to each of us.

And it is this Application of all the Doctrinal and Historical Parts of
Scripture, when we are reading them over, that must render them profitable to
us, as they were designed for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness, and make every Child of GOD perfect, thoroughly furnished to
every good Work.

And I dare appeal to the Experience of every Spiritual Reader of Holy Writ,
whether or no if he consulted the Word of GOD in this Manner, he was not at all
Times and at all Seasons as plainly directed how to act, as though he had
consulted the Urim and Thummim which was upon the High Priest's Breast.

For this is the Way GOD now reveals himself to Man: Not by making new
Revelations, but by applying general Things that are revealed already, to every
particular sincere Reader's Heart.

And this, by the Way, answers an Objection made by those that say, the Word of
GOD is not a perfect Rule of Action, because it cannot direct us how to act, or
how to determine in particular Cases, or what Place to go to when we are in
Doubt, and therefore the Spirit, and not the Word, is to be our Rule of Action.

But this I deny, and affirm on the Contrary, that GOD at all Times,
Circumstances and Places, though never so minute, never so particular, will, if
we diligently seek the Assistance of his Holy Spirit, apply general Things to
our Hearts, and thereby, to use the Words of the Holy JESUS, will lead us into
all Truth, and give us the particular Assistance we want: But this leads me to a

Fifth Direction how to search the Scriptures with Profit. Labor to attain
that Spirit by which they were wrote.

For the natural Man discerns not the Words of the Spirit of GOD, because
they are spiritually discerned, the Words that CHRIST has spoken they are
Spirit, and they are Life, and can be no more understood, as to the true hidden
Sense and Meaning of them, by the mere natural Man, than a Person who had never
learnt a Language can understand another speaking in it. The Scriptures
therefore have not unfitly been compared by some to the Cloud which went before
the Israelites, they are dark and hard to be understood by the natural Man, as
the Cloud appeared dark to the Egyptians, but they are Light, they are Life to
Christians indeed, as that same Cloud which seemed dark to Pharaoh and hi^
Host, appeared bright and altogether glorious to the Israel of GOD.

It was the Want of the Assistance of this Spirit that made Nicodemus, a
Teacher of Israel, Ruler of the Jews, so utterly ignorant in the Doctrine of
Regeneration: For being only a natural Man. he could not tell how that Thing
could be. It was the Want of this Spirit that made our Savior's Disciples,
though he so frequently conversed with them, daily mistake the Nature of the
Doctrines he delivered; and it is because the natural Veil is not taken off
from their Hearts, that so many who pretend to search the Scriptures, yet see
no farther than into the bare Letter of them and continue entire Strangers to
the hidden Sense, the Spiritual Meaning, couched under every Parable, and
contained in almost all the Precepts of the Book of GOD.

And indeed how should it be otherwise; for GOD being a Spirit, he cannot
communicate himself any otherwise than in a spiritual Manner to the Hearts of
Men; and consequently i^ we are Strangers to his Spirit, we must continue
Strangers to his Word, because it is altogether like himself Spiritual. Labor
therefore earnestly to attain this blessed Spirit, for otherwise your
Understandings will never be opened to understand the Scriptures aright; and
because Prayer is one of the most immediate Means to get his Holy Spirit,

Sixthly, Let me advise you before you read the Scripture, to pray that CHRIST,
according to his Promise, would send his Spirit to guide you into all Truth;
intersperse short Ejaculations whilst you are engaged in Reading, pray over
every Word and Verse if possible, and when you close up the Book most earnestly
beseech GOD, that the Words which you then have read (...) be inwardly
engrafted into your Hearts, and bring forth in you the Fruits of Good Living.

Do this, and you will with an holy Violence draw down GOD's Holy Spirit into
your Hearts, and you will experience his gracious Influences, and feel him
enlightening, quickening and inflaming your Souls by the Word of GOD; you will
then not only read, but mark, learn, and inwardly digest what you read, and the
Word of GOD will be Meat indeed and Drink indeed unto your Souls; you then will
be as Apollos was, powerful in the Scriptures, be Scribes ready instructed to
the Kingdom of GOD, and bring out of the good Treasures of your Heart, Things
both from the Old and New Testament, to entertain all you converse with.

One Direction more; which shall be the last, Seventhly, Read the Scripture
constantly, or to use our Savior's Expression in the Text, Search the
Scriptures, dig in them as for hid Treasure, for here is a manifest Allusion to
those who dig in Mines, and our Savior would thereby teach us that we must
take as much Pains in constantly reading his Word, if we would grow thereby, as
those who dig for Gold and Silver. The Scriptures contain the Deep Things of
GOD, and therefore can never be sufficiently searched into by a careless,
superficial, cursory Way of Reading them, but by an industrious, close and
humble Application.

The Psalmist therefore makes it the Property of a good Man that he meditates
on GOD's Law Day and Night: And this Book of the Law, says GOD to Joshua, shall
not go out of thy Mouth, but thou shall meditate therein Day and Night, for
then thou shall make thy Way prosperous, and then thou shall have good Success.
Search therefore the Scriptures not only devoutly but daily, for in them are
the Words of eternal Life; wait constantly at Wisdom's Gate, and she will then,
and not till then, display and lay open to you her Heavenly Treasures; (...)
that are rich are without Excuse if you do not* and you that poor ought to take
heed that little Time you have; for by the Scriptures you are to be acquitted,
and by the Scriptures you are to be condemned as the Last Day.

But perhaps you have no Taste for this despised Book; perhaps Plays and
Romances, Books of polite Entertainment, suit your Taste better; but if this be
your Case, give me leave to tell you, your Taste is vitiated, and unless
corrected by the Spirit and Word of GOD, you shall never enter into his
heavenly Kingdom; for unless you delight in GOD here, how will you be made meet
to dwell with him hereafter. -- Is it a Sin then, you will say, to read useless
impertinent Books, I answer, yes: And that for the same Reason, as it is a Sin
to indulge useless Conversation, because both immediately tend to grieve and
quench that Spirit by which alone we can be sealed to the Day of Redemption;
but you may reply, How shall we know this? Why, put in Practice the Precept in
the Text, (...) the Scriptures, in the Manner that has (...) ^^^^mmended, and
then you will be convinced of the Danger, Sinfulness, and Unsatisfactoriness of
reading any other than the Book of GOD, or such as are wrote in the same
Spirit; you will then say, When I was a Child, and ignorant of the Excellency
of the Word of GOD, I read other, what the World calls harmless Books, as other
Children in Knowledge, though old in Years, have done, and still do; but now I
have tasted the good Word of Life, and come to (...) more perfect Knowledge of
CHRIST JESUS my LORD; I put away these childish trifling Things, and am
determined to read no other Books but what lead me to a Knowledge of myself and
CHRIST JESUS. Search therefore the Scriptures, my dear Brethren; taste and see
how good the Word of GOD is, and then you will never leave that Heavenly Manna,
that Angel's Food, to feed on those dry Husks, that light Bread, those
trifling, sinful Compositions, which Men of false Taste delight themselves in;
no, you will then disdain such poor Entertainment, and blush that yourselves
once were fond of it. The Word of GOD will then be sweeter than Honey and the
Honeycomb, and dearer than Gold and Silver; your Souls by reading it will be
filled, as it were, with Marrow and Fatness, and your Hearts insensibly molded
into the Spirit of its blessed Author; in short, You will then be guided by
GOD's Wisdom here, and conducted by the Light of his Divine Word into Glory
hereafter.

SERMON V.
SATAN'S DEVICES.
2 CORINTHIANS. ii. 11. Lest Satan should get an Advantage over us; for we are not
ignorant of his Devices.
THE Occasion of these Words was as follows: In the Church of Corinth there was
an unhappy Person, who had committed such Incest, as was not so much as named
among the Gentiles, in taking his Father's Wife; but either on account of his
Wealth, Power, or some such Reasons, like many notorious Offender^ nowadays,
had not been exposed to the Censures of the Church. St. Paul therefore, in his
first Epistle, severely chides them for this Neglect of Discipline, and
commands them in the Name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, When they were gathered
together, to deliver such a one, whoever he was, to Satan, for the Destruction
of the Flesh, that his Spirit might be saved in the Day of the LORD; that is,
in one Word, that they should solemnly excommunicate him; which was com^^^^
attended with some bodily Disease inflicted by the Devil, under whose Power the
excommunicated Person was for some Time delivered. The Corinthians, being
obedient to the Apostle, as dear Children, no sooner received this Reproof, but
they submitted to it, and cast the offending Party out of the Church. But
whilst they were endeavoring to amend one Fault, they unhapply run into
another; and as they formerly had been too mild and remiss, so now they behaved
toward him with too much Severity and Resentment. The Apostle therefore, in
this Chapter, reproves this, and tells them, that sufficient to the Offender's
Shame, was The Punishment which had been inflicted of many; that he had now
suffered enough; and that therefore, lest he should be tempted to say with Cain
My Punishment is greater than I can bear; or to use the Apostle's own Words,
Lest he should be swallowed up with over much Sorrow; they ought, now he had
given Proof of his Repentance, to forgive him, to confirm their Love toward
him, and so restore him in the Spirit of Meekness; Lest Satan, says he, to
whose Buffetings he was now given, should, by tempting him to Despair, get an
Advantage over us; and so, by representing you as Merciless and Cruel, cause
that Holy Name to be blasphemed by which you are called; for we are not
ignorant of his Devices: we know very well how many subtle Ways he has to draw
aside and beguile unguarded unthinking Men.

Thus then stand the Words in Relation to the Context; but as Satan has many
Devices, as his Quiver is full of other poisonous Darts, besides those which he
shoots at us to drive us to Despair, I shall consider them by themselves, and
in the following Discourse shall, I. First, Briefly observe who we are to
understand by Satan. And, II. Secondly, point out to you, what are the chief
Devices he generally makes use of, to draw off Converts from CHRIST, and
prescribe some Remedies against them.


The Word Satan, in its original Signification, means an Adversary; and in its
general Acceptance, is made use of to point out to us the Chief of the Devils,
who, for striving to be as GOD, was cast down from Heaven, and is now
permitted, with the Rest of his spiritual Wickednesses in high Places, to walk
up and down, seeking whom he may devour. We hear of him immediately after the
Creation, when in the Shape of a Serpent he lay in wait to deceive our first
Parents. -- He is called Satan in the Book of Job; wherein we are told, that
when the Sons of GOD came to present themselves before the LORD, Satan also
came amongst them. -- As the Scripture also speaks in the Book of Chronicles,
and Satan moved David to number the People. -- In the New Testament he goes
under different Denominations; sometimes he is called the Evil One, because he
is evil in himself, and tempts us to Evil. -- Sometimes, the Prince of the
Power of the Air, and the Spirit that now rules in the Children of
Disobedience, because he resides chiefly in the Air; and the whole World, i. e.
All that are not born of GOD, are said to lie in him.

He is an Enemy to GOD and Goodness -- He is a Hater of all Truth; why else did
he slander GOD in Paradise? Why did he tell Eve, You shall not surely die? And
why did he promise to give all the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glories of
them, to JESUS CHRIST, if he would fall down and worship him?

He is full of Malice, Envy and Revenge; for what other Motives could induce
him to molest innocent Man in Paradise? And why is he still so Restless in his
Attempts to destroy us, who have done him no Wrong?

He is a Being of great Power, as appears in his being able to act on the
Imagination of our Blessed LORD, so as to represent to him all the Kingdoms of
the World, and the Glories of them, in a Moment of Time. As also in carrying
his sacred Body through the Air up to a Pinnacle of the Temple; and his driving
a Herd of Swine so furiously into the Deep -- Nay, so great is his Might, that,
I doubt not, was GOD to let him use his full Strength, he could turn the Earth
upside down, or pull the Sun from its Orb.

But what he is most remarkable for is, his Subtlety; for not having Power
given from above to take us by Force, he is obliged to wait for Opportunities
to betray us, and to catch us by Guile. He therefore made use of the Serpent,
which was subtle above all the Beasts of the Field, in order to tempt our first
Parents; and accordingly he is said, in the New Testament, To lie in wait to
deceive; and here in the Words of the Text, the Apostle says, We are not
ignorant of his Devices; thereby implying, that we are more in Danger of being
seduced by his Policy, than over-borne by his Power.

From this short Description of Satan, we may easily judge whose Children they
are, who love to make a Lie, who speak Evil and slander their Neighbor, and
whose Hearts are full of Pride, Subtlety, Malice, Envy, Revenge and all
Uncharitableness. -- Surely they have Satan for their Father -- For the Tempers
of Satan they know; and the Works of Satan they do. But were they to see either
themselves, or Satan, as he is, they could not but be terrified at their own
Likeness, and abhor themselves in Dust and Ashes.

But to return. The Justice of GOD in suffering us to be tempted is vindicated
from these Considerations -- That we are here in a State of Probation -- That
he has promised not to suffer us to be tempted above what we are able to bear
-- And not only so, but to him that overcomes, he will give a Crown of Life.

The Holy Angels themselves, it should seem, were once put to a Trial whether
they would be faithful or not. The first Adam, was tempted even in Paradise.
And JESUS CHRIST, that second Adam, though he was a Son, yet was carried, as
our Representative, by the Holy Spirit into the Wilderness to be tempted of the
(...). And there is not one single Spirit in Paradise amongst the Goodly
Fellowship of the Prophets, the glorious Company of the Apostles, the noble
Army of Martyrs, and the Spirits of just Men made perfect, who, when on Earth,
was not assaulted by the fiery Darts of that wicked one, the Devil.

What then has been the common Lot of all GOD's children, of the Angels, nay,
of the Eternal Son of GOD himself, we must not think to be exempted from. No,
it is sufficient if we are made perfect through Temptations, as they were. --
And therefore since we cannot but be tempted, unless we could unmake Human
Nature, instead of repining at our Condition, we should rather be enquiring, at
what Time of our Lives Satan most violently assaults us? And what those Devices
are, which he commonly makes use of, in order to get an Advantage over us?

As the first Question, I answer, we must expect to be tempted by him, in some
Degree or other, all our Lives long. -- For this Life being a continual
Warfare, we must never expect to have Rest from our Spiritual Adversary, the
Devil; or to say, our Combat with him is finished, till, with our blessed
Master, we bow down our Heads, and give up the Ghost.

But since the Time of our Conversion, or first entering upon the Spiritual
Life, is the most critical Time at which he most violently besets us, as well
knowing, if he can prevent our setting out, he can lead us Captive at his Will;
and since the wise Son of Sirach particularly warns us, when we are going to
serve the LORD, to prepare our Souls for Temptation, I shall, in answer to the
other Question, pass on to the

Second general Thing proposed; and point out, and withal give some Directions
how to overcome those Devices, which Satan generally makes use of at our first
Conversion, in order to get an Advantage over us.

But before I proceed to do this, let me observe to you, that whatsoever shall
be delivered in the following Discourse is only designed for such as have
actually entered upon the Divine Life; and not for carnal almost Christians, who
have the Form of Godliness, but never yet felt the Power of it in their Hearts.
This being premised;

The first Device I shall mention which Satan makes use of, is, to drive us to
Despair.

When GOD the Father awakens a Sinner by the Terrors of the Law, and by his
Holy Spirit convinces him of Sin, in order to lead him to CHRIST, and show him
the Necessity of a Redeemer; then Satan generally strikes in, and aggravates
those Convictions to such a Degree, as to make the Sinner doubt of finding
Mercy through the Mediator.

Thus, in all his Temptations of the Holy JESUS, he chiefly aimed to make him
question, whether he was the Son of GOD? If thou be the Son of GOD, says he, do
so and so. With many such desponding Thoughts, no doubt, he filled the Heart of
the great St. Paul, when he continued three Days neither eating Bread or
drinking Water; and therefore he speaks by Experience, when he says, in the
Words of the Text, We are not ignorant of his Devices, how he will endeavor to
drive the incestuous Person to Despair.

But let not any of you be influenced by him to despair of sinding Mercy. For
it is not the Greatness or Number of our Crimes, but Impenitence and Unbelief,
that will prove our Ruin: No, were our Sins more in Number than the Hairs of
our Head, or of a deeper Die than the brightest Scarlet; yet the Merits of the
Death of JESUS CHRIST are infinitely greater, and Faith in his Blood shall make
them white as Snow.

Answer always therefore his despairing Suggestions, as your Blessed LORD did,
with an It is written. Tell him, you know that your Redeemer lives, ever to
make Intercession for you; that the LORD has received from him double for all
your Crimes: And though you have sinned much, that is no Reason why you should
despair, but only why you should love much, having so much forgiven.

Another Device that Satan generally makes use of, to get an Advantage over
young Converts, is, to tempt them to presume, and to think more highly of
themselves than they ought to think.

When a Person has for some little Time ^asted the good Word of Life, and felt
the Powers of the World to come, he is commonly (as indeed well he may) most
highly transported with that sudden Change he finds in himself. But then, Satan
will not be wanting at such a Time, to puff him up with a high Conceit of his
own Seize, as if he was some great Person; and will tempt him to set at
naught his Brethren, as though he was holier than they.

Take heed therefore, and let us beware of this Device of our spiritual
Adversary; for as before Honor is Humility, so a haughty Spirit generally goes
before a Fall; and GOD is obliged, when under such Circumstances, to send us
some humbling Visitation, or permit us to fall, as he did Peter, into some
grievous Sin, that we may learn not to be too high minded.

To check therefore all Suggestions to Spiritual Pride, let us consider, that
we did not apprehend CHRIST, but were apprehended of him. -- That we have
nothing but what we have received. -- That the free Grace of GOD has alone made
the Difference between us and others; and, was GOD to leave us to the
Deceitfulness of our own Hearts but one Moment, we should become weak and
wicked, like other Men. -- We should farther consider, that being proud of
Grace, is the most ready Way to lose it. -- For GOD resists the Proud, and
gives more Grace only to the Humble. And were we endowed with the Perfections
of Seraphims; yet if we were proud of those Perfections, they would but render
us more accomplished Devils. -- Above all, we should pray earnestly to Almighty
GOD, that we may learn of JESUS CHRIST, to be lowly in Heart. That his Grace,
through the Subtlety and Deceivableness of Satan, may not be our Poison. But
that we may always think soberly of ourselves, as we ought to think.

A third Device I shall mention, which Satan generally makes use of to get an
Advantage over ^s, is to tempt us to Uneasiness, and to have hard Thoughts of
GOD, when we are under Deadness and Dryness in Prayer.

Though this is a Term not understood by the Natural Man; yet, whosoever there
are amongst you, who have passed through the Pangs of the New Birth, they know
full well what I mean, when I talk of Deadness and Dryness in Prayer. And, I
doubt not, but many of you, amongst whom I am now preaching the Kingdom of GOD,
are at this very Time laboring under it.

For when Persons are first awakened to the Divine Life, because Grace is weak
and Nature strong, GOD is often pleased to vouchs^^e them some extraordinary
Illuminations of his Holy Spirit; but when they are grown to be more perfect
Men in CHRIST, then he frequently seems to leave them to themselves; and not
only so, but permits a horrible Deadness and Dread to overwhelm them; at which
Times Satan will not be wanting to vex and tempt them to Impatience, to the
great Discomfort of their Souls.

But be not afraid; for this in no more than your Blessed Redeemer, that (...)
Lamb of GOD, has underwent before you: Witness his bitter Agony in the Garden,
when his Soul was exceeding Sorrowful, even unto Death. -- When he sweat great
Drops of Blood, falling on the Ground; when the Sense of the Divinity was
withdrawn from him; and Satan, in all Probability, was permitted, to set all
his (...) in Array before him.

Rejoice therefore, my Brethren, when you fall into the like Circumstances; as
knowing, that you are therein Partakers of the Sufferings of JESUS CHRIST. --
Consider, that it is necessary such inward Trials should come, to wean us off
the Love of sensible Devotion, and to teach us to follow CHRIST, not merely for
his Loaves, but out of a Principle of Love and Obedience. -- In Patience
therefore possess your Souls, and be not terrified by Satan's Suggestions. --
Still persevere in seeking JESUS in the Use of Means, though it be Sorrowing,
and though through Benumness and Bar^enness of Soul you may go mourning all the
Day long. -- (...) that the Spouse is with you, though behind (...) Curtain; as
he was with Mary, at the Sepul^^^^ though she knew it not. -- That he has
wi^^drawn but for a little while, to make his (...) more welcome. -- That
though he may (...) seem to frown and look back on you, as he did on the
Syrophoenician Woman; yet if you like her, cry out so much the more earnestly,
JESUS, thou Son of David, have Mercy on us (...) it will be made known unto you
again, either in the Temple, by breaking of Bread, or some other Way.

But amongst all the Devices, that Satan makes use of to get an Advantage over
us, there is none in which he is more successful, or by which he grieves the
Children of GOD worse, than that

Fourth Device I am going to mention, viz. His troubling you with blasphemous,
profane, impious, unbelieving Thoughts; and sometimes to such a Degree, that
they are as tormenting as the Rack.

Some indeed are apt to impute all such evil Thoughts to a Disorder of Body. --
But those, who know any Thing of the Spiritual Life, can inform you with
greater Certainty, that for the Generality, they proceed from that wicked One,
the Devil* who, no doubt, has Power given him from above, as well now as
formerly, to disorder the Body, as he did Job's; that he may, with the more
Secrecy and Success work upon, ruffle and torment the Soul.

You that have felt his fiery Darts, can subscribe to the Truth of this, and by
fatal Experience can tell, how often he has bid you, Curse GOD and die, and
darted into your Thoughts a Thousand blasphemous Suggestions, even in your most
secret and solemn Retirements; the bare looking back on which makes your very
Hearts to tremble.

I appeal to your own Consciences; have not some of you, when you have been
lifting up Holy Hands in Prayer, been pestered with such a Crowd of the most
horrid Insinuations, that you have been often tempted to rise off from your
Knees, and been made believe your Prayers were an Abomination to the LORD? Nay,
when, with the Rest of your Christian Brethren, you have crowded round the Holy
Table, and taken the sacred Symbols of CHRIST'S most blessed Body and Blood
into your Hands, instead of remembering the Death of your Savior, have you not
been employed in driving out evil Thoughts, as Abraham was in driving away the
Birds, that came to devour his Sacrifice; and thereby been terrified, lest you
have eat and drank your own Damnation?

But marvel not, as though some strange Thing happened unto you; for this has
been the common Lot of all GOD's Children. -- We read even in Job's Time, That
when the Sons of GOD came to appear before their Maker, i. e. at public
Worship, Satan also came amongst them, to disturb their Devotions.

And think not that GOD is angry with you for these distracting, though ever so
blasphemous Thoughts: No, he knows it is not you, but Satan working in you, and
therefore, notwithstanding he may be displeased with, and certainly will punish
him; yet he will both pity and reward you. And though it be difficult to make
Persons in your Circumstances to believe so* yet, I doubt not, but you are more
acceptable to GOD, when performing your holy Duties in the midst of such
involuntary Distractions, than when you are wrapped up by sensible Devotion, as
it were, into the third Heavens. -- For you are then suffering, as well as
doing the Will of GOD at the same Time; and, like Nehemiah's Servants at the
Building of the Temple, are holding a Trowel in the one Hand, and a Sword in
the other. -- But be not you driven from the Use of any Ordinance whatever, on
account of those abominable Suggestions; for then you let Satan get his desired
Advantage over you; it being his chief Design, by these Thoughts, to make you
fall out with the Means of Grace; and to tempt you to believe, you do not
please GOD, for no other Reason, than because you do not please yourselves. --
Rather persevere in the Use of the Holy Communion especially, and all other
Means whatever; and when these Temptations have wrought that Resignation in
you, for which they were permitted, GOD will visit you with fresh Tokens of his
Love, as he met Abraham, when he returned from the Slaughter of the five Kings;
and will send an Angel from Heaven, as he did to his Son, on Purpose to
strengthen you.

Hitherto we have only observed such Devices as Satan makes use of immediately
by himself; but there is a

Fifth I shall mention, that is not the least, viz. Tempting us by our carnal
Friends and Relations.

This is one of the most common, as well as most artful Devices he makes use of
to draw young Converts from GOD; for when he cannot prevail over them by
himself, he will try what he can do by the Influence and Mediation of others.

Thus he tempted Eve, that she might tempt Adam. -- Thus he stirred up Job's
Wife, to bid him Curse GOD and die. -- And thus he made use of Peter's Tongue,
to persuade our Blessed LORD To spare himself, and thereby decline those
Sufferings, by which alone we could be preserved from suffering the Vengeance
of Eternal Fire. And thus, in these last Days, he often stirs up our most
powerful Friends and dearest Intimates, to dissuade us from going in that
narrow Way, which alone leads unto Life eternal,

But our Blessed LORD has furnished us with a sufficient Answer to all such
Suggestions. -- Get you behind me, my Adversaries; for otherwise they will be
an Offense unto you; and the only Reason why they give such Advice is, because
they savor not the Things that be of GOD, but the Things that be of Men.

Whoever therefore among you are resolved to serve the LORD, prep^^^, your
Souls for many such Temptations as those; for it is necessary that such
Offenses should come, to try your Sincerity, to teach us to cease from Man, and
to see if we will forsake all to follow CHRIST.

Indeed our Modernisers o^ Christianity would persuade us, that the Gospel was
calculated only for about two hundred Years; and that now there is no need of
hating Father and Mother, or being persecuted for the Sake of CHRIST and his
Gospel.

But such Persons err, not knowing the Scriptures, and the Power of Godliness
in their Hearts; for whosoever receives the Love of GOD in the Truth of it,
will find, that CHRIST came to send not Peace, but a Sword upon Earth, as much
now as ever. -- That the Father-in-law shall be against the Daughter-in-law, in
these latter, as well as in the primitive Times; and that if we will live godly
in CHRIST JESUS, we must, as then, so now, from carnal Friends and Relations,
suffer Persecution.

But the Devil has another Device, as dangerous as any of the former, -- i. e.
by not tempting us at all, or rather by withdrawing himself for a while, in
order to come upon us at an Hour when we think not of it.

Thus it is said, that he left JESUS CHRIST only for a Season; and our Blessed
LORD has bid us to watch and pray always, that we enter not into Temptation;
thereby implying, that Satan, whether we think of it or not, is always seeking
how he may devour us.

If we would therefore behave like good Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST, we must be
always upon our guard, and never pretend to lay down our spiritual Weapons of
Prayer and Watching* till our Warfare is accomplished by Death; for if we do,
our spiritual Amaleck will quickly prevail against us. What if he has left us?
It is only for a Season; yet, a little while, and, like a roaring Lion, with
double Fury, he will break out upon us again. -- So great a Coward as the Devil
is, he seldom leaves us at the first Onset. -- As he followed our Blessed LORD
with one Temptation after another, so will he treat (...) Servants. -- And the
Reason why he does (...) ^new his Attacks, is sometimes, because GOD knows we
are yet weak and unable to bear them, -- sometimes, because our grand Adversary
thinks to beset us at a more convenient Season.

Watch carefully therefore over thy Heart, O Christian, and whenever thou
perceivest thyself to be falling into a spiritual Slumber, say to it, as CHRIST
to his Disciples, Arise my Soul, why sleep thou? Awake, awake* put on
Strength, watch and pray, or otherwise the Philistines will be upon thee, and
lead thee whither thou would not. Alas! Is this Life a Time to lay down and
slumber in? Arise, and call upon thy GOD* thy spiritual Enemy is not dead, but
lurketh in some secret Place, seeking a convenient Opportunity how he may
betray thee. If thou ceasest to strive with him, thou ceasest to be a Friend of
GOD; thou ceasest to go in that narrow Way which leads unto Life.

Thus have I endeavored to point out to you (...) of those Devices, that Satan
generally makes use of to get an Advantage over us; many others there are, no
doubt, which he often makes use of.

But these, on account of my Youth and Want of Experience, I cannot yet apprise
you of; they, who have been listed for Years in their Master's Service, and
fought under his Banner against our spiritual Amaleck, are able to discover
more of his Artifices; and, being tempted in all Things, like unto their
Brethren, can in all Things advise and succor those that are tempted.

In the mean while, let me exhort my young Fellow Soldiers, who, like myself,
are but just entering the Field, and for whose Sake this was written, not to be
discouraged at the fiery Trial wherewith they must be tried, if they would be
found faithful Servants of JESUS CHRIST. You see, my dearly beloved Brethren,
by what has been delivered, that our Way through the Wilderness of this World
to the Heavenly Canaan is beset with Thorns, and that there are the Sons of
Anak to be grappled with, ever you can possess the promised Land. But let not
these, like so many false Spies, discourage you from going up to fight the
LORD's Battles, but say with Caleb and Joshua, Nay, but we will go up, for we
are able to conquer them. JESUS CHRIST, that Captain of our Salvation, has in
our stead, and as our Representative, baffled the grand Enemy of Mankind, and
we have nothing to do, but manfully to fight under his Banner, and to go on
from conquering to conquer. Our Glory does not consist in being exempted from,
but in enduring Temptations. Blessed is the Man, says the Apostle, that
endures Temptation; and again, Brethren, count it all Joy, when you fall into
diverse Temptations: And in that perfect Form our blessed LORD has prescribed to
us, we are taught to pray, not so much to be delivered from all Temptation, as
from the Evil of it. No, whilst we are on this Side Eternity, it must needs be
that Temptations come; and, no doubt, Satan has desired to have all of us, to
(...) us as Wheat. But wherefore should we fear? For he that is for us, is by
far more powerful, than all that are against us. JESUS CHRIST, our great High
Priest, is exalted to the Right Hand of GOD, and there sits to make
Intercession for us, that our Faith fail not.

Since then CHRIST is praying, whom should we fear? And since he has promised
to make us more than Conquerors, of whom should we be afraid? No, though an
Host of Devils are set in Array against us, let us not be afraid; and though
there should rise up the hottest Persecution against us, yet let us put our
Trust in GOD. -- What though Satan, and the Rest of his apostate Spirits, are
power^^^ when compared with us; yet, if put in Competition with the Almighty,
they are (...) weak as the meanest Worms. GOD has th^^ all reserved in Chains
of Darkness unto the Judgment of the great Day. -- So far as he permits them,
they shall go, but no farther; and where he pleases, there shall their proud
malicious Designs be stayed. We read in the Gospel, that though a Legion of
them possessed one Man, yet they could not destroy him; nor could they so much
as enter into a Swine, without first having Leave given them from above. It is
true, we often find they foil us, when we are assaulted by them; but let us be
strong, and very courageous; for, though they bruise our Heels, we shall at
length bruise their Heads. -- Yet a little while, and he that shall come, will
come; and then we shall see all our spiritual Enemies put under our Feet. --
What if they do come out against us, like so many great Goliahs; yet, if we can
go forth, as the Stripling David, in the Name and Strength of the LORD of
Hosts, we may say, Oh Satan, where is thy Power? Oh fallen Spirits, where is
your Victory?

Once more therefore, and to conclude, let us be strong, and very courageous,
and let us put on the whole Armor of GOD, that we may be able to stand against
the fiery Darts of the wicked One. Let us renounce ourselves, and the World,
and then we shall take away the Armor in which he trusts, and he will find
nothing in us for his Temptations to work upon. We shall then prevent his
malicious Designs, and being willing to suffer ourselves, shall need less
Sufferings to be sent us from above. Let us have our Loins girl about with
Truth; and for an Helmet, the Hope of Salvation, praying always with all Manner
of Supplication. Above all Things, Let us take the Sword of the Spirit, which
is the Word of GOD, and the Shield of Faith, looking always to JESUS, the
Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy that was set before him,
endured the Pain, despising the Shame, and is now sat down at the Right Hand of
GOD.

To which happy Place may GOD of his infinite Mercy translate us all, through
our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

To whom with the FATHER, and the HOLY GHOST, Three Persons and One Eternal
GOD, be all Honor, and Glory, now and for evermore. Amen.

SERMON VI.
The KNOWLEDGE of JESUS CHRIST the best KNOWLEDGE.
1 COR. ii. 2. I determined not to know any Thing among you, save JESUS CHRIST,
and him crucified.
THE Persons to whom these Words were written, were the Members of the Church
of Corinth; who, as appears by the foregoing Chapter, were not only divided
into different Sects, by one saying, I am of Paul, and another, I am of
Apollos; but also had many amongst them, who were so full of the Wisdom of this
World, and so wise in their own Eyes, that they set at naught the Simplicity of
the Gospel, and accounted the Apostle's Preaching Foolishness.

Never had the Apostle more Need of the Wisdom of the Serpent, mingled with the
Innocence of the Dove, than now. What is the Sum of all his Wisdom? he tells
them, in the Words of the Text, I determined not to know any Thing amongst you,
save JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified.

A Resolution this, worthy the great St. Paul, and no less worthy, no less
necessary for every Minister, and every Disciple of CHRIST, to make always,
even unto the End of the World.

In the following Discourse, I shall First explain what is meant by not knowing
any Thing, save JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified. Secondly, Give some Reasons
why every Christian should determine not to know any Thing else. And Thirdly,
Conclude with a general Exhortation to put this Determination into Practice.


And First, I am to explain what is meant by not knowing any Thing, save JESUS
CHRIST, and him crucified.

By JESUS CHRIST, we are to understand the Eternal Son of GOD. He is called
JESUS, i. e. A Savior, because he was to save us from the Guilt and Power of
our Sins; and, like Joshua, by whom he was remarkably typified, to lead GOD's
Spiritual Israel (...) the Wilderness of this World, to (...) heavenly Canaan,
the promised Inheritance of the Children of GOD.

He is called CHRIST, which signifies Anointed, because he was anointed by the
Holy Ghost at (...), to be a Prophet to instruct, a Priest to make an Atonement
for, and a King to go^^^ and protect his Church. -- And he was crucified, or
hung (O stupendous Love!) till he was dead upon the Cross, that he might become
a Curse for us: For it is written, Cursed is every Man that hanget^ upon a Tree

The Foundation or first Cause of his Suffering, was our Fall in Adam, in whom,
as the living Oracles of GOD declare, We all died, i. e. His Sin was imputed to
us all. It pleased GOD, after he had spoken the World into Being, to create Man
after his own Divine Image, to breathe into him the Breath of Life, and to
place him as our Representative in the Garden of Eden.

But he being left to his own free Will, eat of the forbidden Fruit,
notwithstanding GOD had told him, the Day in which he eat thereof, he should
surely die; and thereby he, with his whole Posterity, in whose Name he acted,
became liable to the Wrath of GOD, and sunk into a spiritual Death.

But behold the Goodness, as well as the Severity of GOD! For no sooner had Man
been convicted as a Sinner, but lo! a Savior is revealed to him, under the
Character of the Seed of the Woman, the Merits of whose Sacrifice was then
immediately to take Place, and who should, in the Fullness of Time, by suffering
Death, satisfy for the Guilt we had contracted; and by becoming a Principle of
new Life in us, should bruise the Serpent's Head, destroy the Power of the
Devil within us, and thereby restore us to a better State than that in which we
were at first created.

This is the plain Scriptural Account of that Mystery of Godliness GOD
manifested in the Flesh; and to this our own Hearts unless blinded by the God
of this World, cannot but yield an immediate Assent.

For, let us but search our own Hearts, and ask ourselves if we could create
our own Children, whether or not we would not create them with a less Mixture
of Good and Evil than we find in ourselves? Supposing GOD then only to have our
Goodness, he could not, at first, make us so sinful, so polluted as we are. But
supposing him to be as he is, infinitely good, or Goodness itself, then it is
absolutely impossible that he should create any thing but what i^ like himself,
perfect, entire, lacking nothing. -- Man then could not come out of the Hands
of his Maker, so miserably blind and ^^ked, with such a Mixture of the Beast
and D^^l, as he finds now in himself, but must have fallen from what he was;
and as it does not suit with the Goodness and Justness of GOD, to punish the
whole Race of Mankind with these Disorders merely for nothing; and since Men
bring these Disorders into the World with them; it follows, that as they could
not sin themselves, being y^^ unborn, some other Man's Sin must have been
imputed to them; from whence, as from a Fountain, all these Evils flow.

I know this Doctrine of our original Sin, or Fall in Adam, is esteemed
Foolishness by the wise Disputer of this World, who will reply, How does it
suit with the Goodness of GOD to impute one Man's Sin to an innocent Posterity?
But has it not been proved to a Demonstration, that it is so? And therefore,
supposing we cannot reconcile it to our shallow Comprehensions, that is no
Argument at all: For if it appears that GOD has done a Thing, we may be sure it
is right, whether we can see the Reasons for it or not.

But this is entirely cleared up by what was said before, that no sooner was
the Sin imputed, but a Mediator was revealed; so that as in Adam all died, even
so in CHRIST all might be made alive.

That CHRIST then, this GOD incarnate, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost,
that he might be freed from the Guilt of our original Sin; who was born of the
Virgin Mary, that he might be the Seed of the Woman only, who suffered under
Pontius Pilate, a Gentile Governor, to fulfill those Prophesies, which signified
what Death he should die -- This same JESUS, who was crucified in Weakness, but
raised in Power, is that Divine Person, that Immanuel, that GOD with us, whom
we preach, in whom you believe, and whom alone the Apostle, in the Text, was
determined to know.

By which Word Know, we are not to understand a bare historical Knowledge (for
to know that CHRIST was crucified by his Enemies at Jerusalem in this Manner
only, will do us no more Service than to know that Caesar was inhumanly
butchered by his Friends at Rome) but the Word Know, means to know, so as to
^pprove of him, as when CHRIST says, Verily, I know you not; i. e. I know you
not, so as to approve of you -- It signifies to know him, so as to embrace him
in all his Offices; -- to take him to be our Prophet, Priest, and King; so as
to give up ourselves wholly to be instructed, saved, and governed by him -- It
implies an experimental Knowledge of his Crucifixion, so as to feel the Power
of it, and be crucified unto the World, as the Apostle explains himself in the
Epistle to the Philippians, where he says, He counts all Things but Dung and
Dross that he might know him, and the Power of his Resurrection.

This Knowledge the Apostle was so swallowed up in, that he was determined not
to know any Thing else; that is, He was resolved to make that his only Study --
the governing Principle of his Life, the Point and End in which all his
Thoughts, Words, and Actions, should center.

Secondly, I pass on to give some Reasons why every Christian should, with the
Apostle, determine not to know any Thing, save JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified.

And, First, Without this, our Persons will not be accepted in the Sight of
GOD. This, and consequently this only, is Life Eternal, says our Blessed LORD
himself, to know thee, the only true GOD, and JESUS CHRIST, whom thou have
sent. As also St. Peter says, There is now no other Name given under Heaven
whereby we can be saved, but that of JESUS CHRIST.

Some indeed, may please themselves in knowing the World, others boast
themselves in the Knowledge of a Multitude of Languages; but could we speak
with the Tongue of Men and Angels, or did we know the Number of the Stars, and
could call them all by their Names, yet, without this experimental Knowledge of
JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified, it would profit us nothing.

The former, indeed, may procure us a little Honor, which comes of Man; but
the latter only can render us acceptable in the Sight of GOD: For, if we are
ignorant of CHRIST, GOD will be to us a consuming Fire.

CHRIST is Way, the Truth, and the Life; no one comes to the Father but
through him -- He is the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World, and none
ever were, or ever will be received up into Glory, but by an experimental
Application of his Merits to their Hearts.

We might as well think to rebuild the Tower of Babel, or reach Heaven with our
Hands, as to imagine to enter therein by any other Door than that of the
Knowledge of JESUS CHRIST.

Other Knowledge may make you wise in your own Eyes, and puff you up; but this
alone edifieth, and makes wise unto Salvation.

As the meanest Christian, if he knows but this, though he know nothing else,
will be accepted; so the greatest Master in Israel, the most Letter-learned
Teacher, without this, will be rejected. His Philosophy is mere Nonsense, his
Wisdom mere Foolishness in the Sight of GOD.

The Author of the Words now before us, was a remarkable Instance of this;
never, perhaps, was a greater Scholar, in all what the World calls fine
Learning, than he: For he was bred up at the Feet of Gamaliel, and profited in
the Knowledge of Books, as well as in the Jewish Religion, above many of his
Equals, as appears by the Language, Rhetoric, and Spirit of his Writings; and
yet, when he came to know what it was to be a Christian, He accounted all
Things but Loss, so he might win CHRIST. And, though he was now at Corin^^,
that Seat of polite Learning, yet he was absolutely determined not to know any
Thing, to make nothing his Study, but what taught him to know JESUS CHRIST, and
him crucified.

Hence then, appears the Folly of those who spend their whole Lives in heaping
up other Knowledge; and instead of searching the Scriptures, which testify of
JESUS CHRIST, and are alone able to make them wise unto Salvation, disquiet
themselves in a Pursuit after the Knowledge of such Things, as when known,
concern them no more, than to know that a Bird dropped a Feather upon one of
the Pyrenean Mountains.

Hence it is, that so many, who profess themselves wise, because they can
dispute of the Causes and Effects, the moral Fitness and Unfitness of Things,
appear mere Fools in the Things of GOD; so that when you come to converse with
them about the great Work of Redemption wrought out for us by JESUS CHRIST, of
his being a Propitiation for our Sins, and a Principle of new Life to our
Souls, they are quite ignorant of the whole Matter, and prove, to a
Demonstration, that, with all their Learning, they know nothing yet as they
ought to know.

But, good GOD! how must it surprise a Man, when the Most High is about to take
away his Soul, to think that he has passed for a wise Man, and a learned
Disputer in this World, and yet is left destitute of that Knowledge which alone
can make him appear with Boldness before the Judgment Seat of JESUS CHRIST? How
must it grieve him, in a future State, to see others, whom he despised as
unlearned and illiterate Men, because they experimentally knew CHRIST, and him
crucified, exalted to the Right Hand of GOD, and himself, with all his sine
Accomplishments, because he knew every Thing, perhaps, but CHRIST, thrust down
into Hell?

Well might the Apostle, in a holy Triumph cry out, Where is the Wise? Where is
the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this World? For, GOD will then make
foolish the Wisdom of this World, and bring to naught the Wisdom of those who
were so knowing in their own Eyes.

I made this Digression from the main Point before us, not to condemn or deny
human Literature, but to show, that it ought to be used only in Subordination
to divine* and that a Christian, if the holy Spirit guided the Pen of the
Apostle when he wrote this Epistle, ought to study no Books, but such as lead
him into a farther Knowledge of JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified.

And there is the more Reason for this, because of the great Mischief the
contrary Practice has done to the Church of GOD: For, what was it but this
Learning, or rather this Ignorance, that kept so many of the Scribes and
Pharisees from the saving Knowledge of JESUS CHRIST? And what is it, but this
human Wisdom, this Science, falsely so called, that blinds the Understanding,
and corrupts the Hearts of so many modern Unbelievers, and makes them unwilling
to submit to the Righteousness which is of GOD by Faith in CHRIST JESUS!

But, Secondly, Without this Knowledge our Performances, as well as Persons,
will not be acceptable in the Sight of GOD.

Through Faith, says the Apostle, that is, Through a (...) Faith in a Mediator
hereafter to come, Abel offered a more acceptable Sacrifice than Cain. And it
is through a like Faith, or an experimental Knowledge of the same divine
Mediator, that our Sacrifices of Prayer, Praise, and Thanksgivings, come up as
an Incense before the Throne of Grace.

Two Persons may go up to the Temple to pray; but he only will return home
justified, who, in the Language of our Collects, sincerely offers up his
Prayers through JESUS CHRIST our LORD.

For it is this great Atonement, this all-sufficient Sacrifice, which alone can
give us Boldness to approach with our Prayers to the Holy of Holies; and he
that presumes to go without this, acts Korah's Crime over again -- offers GOD
strange Fire, and, consequently, will be rejected by him.

Farther, as our Devotions to GOD will not, so neither, without this Knowledge
of JESUS CHRIST, will our Acts of Charity to Men be accepted by him.

For did we give all our Goods to feed the Poor, and yet were destitute of this
Knowledge, it would profit us nothing.

This our Blessed LORD himself intimates in the 25th of St. Matthew, where he
tells those that had been rich in good Works, That in as much as they did it
unto one of the least of his Brethren, they did it unto him. From whence we may
plainly infer, that it is seeing CHRIST in his Members, and doing good to them
out of an experimental Knowledge of his Love to us, that alone will render our
Alms-Deeds rewardable at the last Day.

Lastly, As neither our Acts of Piety nor Charity, so neither will our civil
nor moral Actions be acceptable to GOD without this experimental Knowledge of
JESUS CHRIST.

Our modern Pretenders to Reason, indeed, set up another Principle to act from;
they talk, I Know not what, Of doing moral and civil Duties of Life, from the
moral Fitness and Unfitness of Things. But such Men are blind, however they may
pretend to see; and going thus about to establish their own Righteousness, are
utterly ignorant of the Righteousness which is of GOD by Faith in CHRIST JESUS.

For though we grant, that Morality is a substantial Part of Christianity, and
that CHRIST came not to destroy, i. e. not to take off the Force of the moral
Law, as a Rule of Action, but to explain, and so fulfill it; yet we affirm, that
our moral and civil Actions are now no farther acceptable in the Sight of GOD
the Father, than as they proceed from a Principle of a new Nature, and an
experimental Knowledge of, or vital Faith in his dear Son.

For the Death of JESUS CHRIST has turned our whole Lives into one continued
Sacrifice; and whether we eat or drink, whether we pray to GOD, or do any Thing
to Man, it must all be done out of a Love for, and Knowledge of him who died
and rose again, to render all, even our most ordinary Deeds, acceptable in the
Sight of GOD.

If we live by this Principle, if CHRIST be the Alpha and Omega of all our
Actions, then our most indifferent ones are acceptable Sacrifices; but if this
Principle be wanting, our most pompous Services avail nothing. We are but
spiritual Idolaters -- we sacrifice to our own Net -- we make an Idol of
ourselves, by making ourselves, and not CHRIST, the End of our Actions; and
therefore such Actions are so far from being accepted by GOD, that, according
to the Language of one of the Articles of our Church, We doubt not but they
have the Nature of Sin, because they spring not from an experimental Faith in,
and Knowledge of JESUS CHRIST.

Were we not fallen Creatures, we mig^^ then act, perhaps, from other
Principles; but since we are fallen out of GOD in Adam, and are restored again
only by the Death of JESUS CHRIST, the Face of Things is entirely changed, and
all we think, speak, or do, is only accepted in, and through him.

Justly, therefore, may I, in the

Third and last Place, exhort you, to put the Apostle's Resolution in Practice,
and beseech you with him to determine, Not to know any Thing, save JESUS
CHRIST, and him crucified.

I say, determine; for unless you sit down first, and count the Cost, and from
a well-grounded Conviction of the Excellency of this above all other Knowledge
whatsoever, resolve to make this your chief Study, your only End, your one
thing needful, every frivolous Temptation will draw you aside from the Pursuit
after it.

Your Friends and carnal Acquaintance, and, above all, your grand Adversary the
Devil, will be persuading you to determine not to know any Thing, but how to
lay up Goods for many Years, -- to get a Knowledge and Taste of the Pomps and
Vanities of this wicked World; -- But do you determine not to follow; or be led
by them -- and the more they persuade you to know other Things, the more do you
determine not to know any Thing, save JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified -- For,
this Knowledge never fails; But whether they be Riches, they shall fail --
Whether they be Pomps, they shall cease -- Whether they be Vanities, they shall
fade away -- But the Knowledge of JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified, abides for
ever.

Whatever, therefore, you are ignorant of, be not ignorant of this -- if you
know CHRIST, and him crucified, you know enough to make you happy, supposing
you know nothing else; and, without this, all your other Knowledge cannot keep
you from being everlastingly miserable.

Value not then the Contempt of Friends, which you must necessarily meet with
upon your open Profession to act according to this Determination. For your
Master, whose you are, was despised before you; and all that will know nothing
else but JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified, must, in some Degree or other, suffer
Persecution.

It is necessary that Offenses should come, to try what is in our Hearts, and
whether we will be faithful Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST, or not.

Dare we then to confess our Blessed Master before Men, and to shine as Lights
in the World amidst a crooked and perverse Generation? Let us not to be content
with following him afar off; for then we shall, as Peter did, soon deny him;
but let us be altogether Christians, and let our Speech, and all our Actions,
betray to the World whose Disciples we are, and that we have indeed determined
not to know any Thing, save JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified. O then! well will
it be with us, and happy, unspeakably happy shall we be, even here, -- and what
is infinitely better, when others that despised us, shall be calling for the
Mountains to fall on them, and the Hills to cover them, we shall be exalted to
sit down on the Right Hand of GOD, and shine as the Sun in the Firmament in the
Kingdom of our most adorable Redeemer, for ever and ever.

Which GOD of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

SERMON VII.
The heinous SIN of Drunkenness.
EPHESIANS V. 6. Be not drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess; but be filled with
the Spirit.
THE Persons to whom these Words were written, were the People of Ephesus, who
being, as we are told in the Acts, Worshippers of the great Goddess Diana, in
all Probability worshipped the God Bacchus also; at the Celebration of whose
Festivals, it was always customary, nay, part of their Religion, to get drunk;
as though there was no other Way to please their God, but by turning themselves
into Brutes.

The Apostle therefore, in this Chapter, amongst many other Precepts more
especially applicable to them, lays down that in the Text; and exhorts them, as
they had now, by the free Grace of GOD, been turned from heathenish Darkness to
the Light of the Gospel, to walk (...) Children of Light, and no longer make it
^^rt of their Religion or Practice to be drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess;
but, on the Contrary, strive to be filled with the Spirit of that Savior,
after whose Name they were now called, and whose Religion taught them to
abstain from such a filthy Sin, and to live soberly as they ought to live.

By the World being now Christian, and the Doctrines of the Gospel every where
received, one would imagine, there should be no Reason for repeating the
Precepts now before us. But alas, Christians! I mean Christians falsely so
called, are so led captive by all Sin in general, and by this of Drunkenness in
particular, that was St. Paul to rise again from the Dead, he might be tempted
to think most of us were turned back to the Worship of dumb Idols; that we had
set up Temples in Honor of Bacchus, and made it Part of our Religion, as the
Ephesians did of theirs, to be drunk with Wine wherein is Excess.

Our civil Magistrates have not been wanting to use the Power given them from
above, for the Punishment and Restraint of such evil Doings; and I wish it
could be said this Plague of Drinking, by what they have done, had been stayed
amongst us. But alas! though their Labor, we trust, has not been altogether in
vain in the LORD, yet Thousands, and I could almost say, ten Thousands fall
daily at our Right Hand, by this Sin of Drunkenness, in our Streets; nay, Men
seem to have made a Covenant with Hell, and though the Power of the civil
Magistrate is exerted against them; nay, and though they cannot but daily see
the Companions of their Riot hourly by this, brought to the Grave, yet they
will rise up early to follow strong Drink, and cry, To Morrow shall be as to
Day, and so much the more abundantly; when we awake, we will seek it yet again.

It is high Time therefore, for thy Ministers to lift up their Voices like a
Trumpet, and since human Threats cannot prevail, to set before them the Terrors
of the LORD, and try if these will not persuade them to cease from the Evil of
their Doings.

But alas! how shall I address myself to them? I fear Excess of Drinking has
made them such mere Nabals, that there is no speaking to them. And many of
GOD's Servants have toiled all their Lifetimes in dissuading them from this Sin
of Drunkenness, yet they will not forbear. However, at his Command, I will
speak also, though they be a rebellious House Magnify thy Strength, O LORD, in
my Weakness, and grant that I may speak with such Demonstration of the Spirit,
and with Power, that from henceforward they may cease to act ^o unwisely, and
this Sin of Drunkenness may not be their Ruin.

Believe me, ye unhappy Men of Belial (for such, alas! this Sin has made you)
it is not without the strongest Reasons, as well as utmost Concern for your
precious and immortal Souls, that I now conjure you in the Apostles (...) (...)
to be (...) with Wine, or any (...) wherein is Excess.

For, First, Drunkenness is a Sin which must be highly displeasing to GOD;
because it is an Abuse of his good Creatures.

When GOD first made Man, and had breathed into him the Breath of Life, he gave
him Dominion over the Works of his Hands, and every Herb bearing Seed, and
every Tree, in which was the Fruit of a Tree yielding Seed, to him it was given
for Meat; but when Adam had tasted the forbidden Fruit, which was the only
Restraint laid upon him, he forfeited this Privilege, and had no Right, since
he had disobeyed his Creator, to the Use of any one of the Creatures.

But, blessed be GOD, this Charter, as well as all other Privileges, is
restored to us by the Death of the second Adam, our LORD and Master JESUS
CHRIST. Of every Beast of the Field, every Fish of the Sea, and whatsoever
f^^eth in the Air, or moves on the Face of the Earth, that is fit for Food, we
may freely eat, i. e. without Scruple take, and eat; but then, with this
Limitation, that we use them moderately. For GOD, by the Death of JESUS, has
given no Man License to be intemperate; but, on the contrary, has laid us under
the strongest Obligations to live soberly, as well as godly in this present
World.

But the Drunkard, despising the Goodness and Bounty of GOD, in restoring to us
what we had so justly forfeited, turns his Grace into Wantonness; and as though
the Creature was not of itself enough subject to Vanity, by being Cursed for
our Sake, he abuses it still more, by making it administer to his Lusts; and
turns that Wine which was intended to make glad his Heart, into a deadly Poison.

But think thou, O Drunkard, whosoever thou art, thou shall escape the
righteous Judgment of GOD? No, the Time will shortly come that thou must be no
longer Steward, and then the Sovereign Lord of all the Earth will reckon with
thee for thus wasting his Goods. Alas! will thou then wrest Scripture any
longer to thy own Damnation? And because JESUS CHRIST turned Water into Wine at
the Marriage Feast, to supply the Wants of his indigent Host, say, that it is
therefore meet to make merry, and be drunken. No, thou shall be silent before
him; and know, that though thou have encouraged thyself in Drunkenness by such
like Arguments, yet for all these Things GOD will bring thee into Judgment.

But, Secondly, What makes Drunkenness more exceeding sinful, is, that a Man,
by falling into it, sins against his own Body.

When the Apostle would ^^^ade the Corinthians from Fornication, he (...) this
as an Argument, Flee Fornication, says he, Brethren; for he that commits
Fornication, sins against his own Body. And may not I as justly cry out,
Flee Drunkenness, my Brethren, since he that commits that Crime, sins
against his own Body? For, from whence come so many Disen^^^ and Distemp^^^ in
your Bodies; Come they not from hence, even from your Intemperance in Drinking?
Who has Pains in the Head? Who has Rottenness in the Bones? Who has Redness
of Eyes? He that tarries long at the Wine, he that rises early to seek new
Wine. How many walking Skeletons have you seen, whose Bodies were once
exceeding fair to look upon, fat and well favored; but, by this Sin of
drinking, how has their Beauty departed from them, and how have they been
permitted to walk to and from upon the Earth, as though GOD intended to set
them up, as he did Lot's Wife, for Monuments of his Justice, that others might
learn not to get drunk? Nay, I appeal to yourselves. Are not many, for this
Cause, even now sickly among you? And have not many of your Companions whom you
once saw flourishing, like green Bay Trees, been brought by it, with Sorrow, to
their Graves?

We might perhaps, think ourselves hardly dealt with by GOD, was he to send to
us, as he did to the Royal Psalmist, to choose one Plague out of three, whereby
we should be destroyed. But had the Almighty decreed to cut off Man from the
Face of the Earth, and to shorten his Days, he could not well send a more
effectual Plague, than to permit Men, as they pleased, to overcharge themselves
with Drunkenness; for though it be a slow, yet it is a certain Poison. And if the
Sword has slain its Thousands, Drunkenness has slain its ten Thousands.

And will not this alarm you, O ye Transgressors? Will not this persuade you to
spare yourselves, and to do your Bodies no Harm? What, have you lost the first
Principles of human Nature, the fundamental Law of Self-preservation? You seem
to have a great Fondness for your Bodies, why otherwise to gratify their
inordinate Appetites, do you drink to Excess? But surely, if you truly loved
them, you would not thus destroy them; and was there no other Argument to be
urged against Drunkenness, the Consideration that it will destroy those Lives
you are so fond of, one would imagine, should be sufficient.

I know, indeed, that it is a common Answer that Drunkards make to those, who,
out of Love, would pull them as Firebrands out of the Fire, We are no Body's
Enemy but our own. But this, instead of being an Excuse for, is but an
Aggravation of their Guilt: For (not to mention that the Drunkenness of one Man
has clothed many a Family with Rags, and that it is scarce possible for a
Person to be drunk, without tempting his Neighbor also) I say, not to mention
these, and many other ill Consequences, which would ^^ve such an Excuse to be
entirely false; (...) what is dearer to a Man than himself? (...) he himself be
lost, what would all the whole World avail him? But how will thou stand, O Man,
before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, and make such an Excuse, when thou (...) ^e
arraigned before him as a Self-Mur^^^er* Will it then be sufficient, think
thou, (...) I was no Man's Enemy but my own? (...) GOD will then tell thee,
that thou wast not thy own; that thou wast bought with the Price of his dear
Son's Blood, and thou oug^test therefore to have glorified him with thy Spirit,
and with thy Body, which were his. And since thou have, by Intemperance,
destroyed thy Body, he will destroy both thy Body and Soul in Hell.

But, Thirdly, What renders Drunkenness more inexcuseable, is, that it robs a
Man of his Reason.

Reason is the Glory of a Man; the chief Thing whereby GOD has made us to
differ from the Brute Creation. And our modern Unbelievers have exalted it to
such a high Degree, as even to set it in Opposition to Revelation, and deny the
LORD that bought them. But though in doing this, they greatly err, and whilst
they profess themselves wise, become real Fools; yet we must acknowledge, that
Reason is the Candle of the LORD, and whosoever puts it out, shall bear his
Punishment, whosoever he be.

But yet, (...) the Drunkard does. Nebuchadnezzar's Curse he makes his Choice,
his Reason departs from him, and then what is he better than a Brute?

The very Heathen Kings were so sensible of this, that, in order to deter their
young Princes from drinking, they used to make their Slaves get drunk, and be
exposed before them. And did thou but see thine own Picture, O Drunkard,
when, after having drowned thy Reason, thou staggerest to and fro, like one of
the Fools in Israel, and see thy very Companions making Songs upon thee,
surely thou would not return to thy Vomit again, but abhor thyself in Dust
and Ashes!

When David, in a Holy Ecstasy, was dancing before the Ark, Michal, Readiness
Daughter, despised him in her Heart; and when he came home, she said, How
glorious was the King of Israel to Day, who uncovered himself to Day in the
Eyes of the Handmaids of his Servants, as one of the vain Fellows shamelesly
uncovereth himself. And may not every one that meets a Drunkard, more justly
say, How glorious does he, that was made a little lower than the Angels, look
to Day, when unmindful of his Dignity, he has, by drinking, robbed himself of
his Reason, and reduced himself to a Level with the Beasts that perish.

But what if GOD, in the Midst of one of these drunken Fits, should arrest thee
by Death, and say unto thee, Thou Fool, this Moment shall thy Soul be required
of thee. Oh! How would thou appear in those filthy Garments before that GOD,
in who^^ Sight the Heavens are not clean. And (...) know thou, O Man, but
this may be thy Lot? Have thou not known many, in thy Lifetime, summoned at
such an unguarded Hour; and what Assurance have thou given thee, that thou
shall not be the next? Because GOD has forborne thee so long, think thou he
will forbear always? No, this is rather a Sign that he will come at an Hour
thou look not for him; and since his Goodness and Long-Suffering has not led
thee to Repentance, he will cut thee down, and not permit thee to cumber the
Ground any longer. Consider this then, all ye that count it a Pleasure to turn
yourselves into Brutes, lest GOD pluck you away by a sudden Death, and there be
none to deliver you.

But, Fourthly, There is a farther Aggravation of this Crime, that it is an
Inlet to, and Forerunner of many other Sins; for it seldom comes alone.

We may say of Drunkenness, as Solomon does of Strife, that it is like the
letting out of Water; for we know not what will be the End thereof. Its Name is
Legion: For behold a Troop of Sins comes after it. And for my own Part, when I
see a Drunkard, I can scarce, with the holy Prophet, when he looked in Hazael's
Face, forbear weeping, to consider how many Vices he may fall into, ever he
comes to himself again.

What ho^^^d Incest did righteous Lot commit with his own Daughters when they
had made him drunk? And, I doubt not, but there are many amongst you, who have
committed such Crimes when you have deprived yourselves of your Reason by
drinking, that were you to hear of them, your Heart, like Nabal's, after he was
told how he had abused David when he was drunk, would die within you. And had
any one told you, when you were sober, that you would have been guilty of such
Crimes, you would have cried out, with Hazael before mentioned, Are thy
Servants so many Dogs, that they should do thus?

But no marvel that Drunkards commit such Crimes: For Drunkenness drives the
Holy Spirit from them: they become mere Machines for the Devil to work up to
what he pleases; he enters into them, as he entered into the Herd of Swine; and
no Wonder if they then commit all Uncleanness, and any other Crime, with
Greediness. But this leads me to a

Fifth Consideration, which highly aggravates the Sin of Drunkenness, viz. That
it separates the holy Spirit from us.

It is to be hoped, that no one here present need be informed, that before we
can (...) Christians indeed, we must receive the Holy Ghost, must be born again
from above, and have the Spirit of GOD witnessing with our Spirits, that we are
the Sons of GOD. This, this alone is true Christianity; and without the
Cohabita^^^^ of (...) Blessed Spirit in our Hear^^, our Righteousness does not
exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, and we shall in no wise
enter into the Kingdom of GOD.

But now Drunkards, do, in Effect, bid this Blessed Spirit depart from them:
For what has he to do with such filthy Swine? No, they have no Lot or Share in
the Spirit of the Son of David. They have chased him out of their Hearts, by
defiling his Temple; I mean their Bodies. And he can no more hold Communion
with them, than Light can have Communion with Darkness, or CHRIST have Concord
with Belial.

The Apostle therefore, in the Words of the Text, exhorts the Ephesians, not to
be drunk with Wine, wherein is Excess, but to be filled with the Spirit;
thereby implying, that Drunkenness and the Spirit of GOD could never dwell in
the same Heart. And in another Epistle, he bids them avoid unprofitable
Conversation, as a Thing which grieved the Holy Spirit; whereby alone they
could be sealed to the Day of Redemption. And if unprofitable Conversation
grieves the Holy Spirit, at what an infinite Distance must Drunkenness drive
him from the Hearts of Men?

But oh that you were wise! That you would consider what a dreadful Thing it is
to have the Spirit of the Living GOD depart from you: For, assure yourselves,
if you live without him, you live without GOD in the World. You are in the same
miserable forlorn Condition as Saul was, when an evil Spirit of the LORD came
upon him; and you are only so many Vessels of Wrath fitted for Destruction. But
this brings me to the

Sixth and last Reason I shall urge against the Sin of Drunkenness, that it
absolutely unfits a Man for the Enjoyment of GOD in Heaven, and exposes him to
his Eternal Wrath.

To see and enjoy GOD, and to be like the blessed Angels, always beholding the
Face of our Heavenly Father, in the Glories of his Kingdom, is such an
unspeakable Happiness, that even wicked Men, though they will not live the Life
of the Righteous, cannot but wish their future State to be like his.

But think you, O ye Drunkards, that you shall ever be Partakers of this
Inheritance with the Saints in Light? Do you flatter yourselves, that you, who
have made them often the Subject of your drunken Songs, shall now be exalted to
sing with them the Heavenly Songs of Sion? No, as by Druukenness you have made
your Hearts Cages of unclean Birds, with impure and unclean Spirits must you
dwell.

A burning Tophet, kindled by GOD's Wrath, is prepared for your Reception,
where you must suffer the Vengeance of an Eternal Fire, and in vain cry out for
a Drop of Water to cool your Tongues. Indeed you shall drink, but it shall be a
Cup of GOD's (...) the Hand of the LORD there (...) be a Cup of Fury, it will
be full mi^^d; (...) as for the Dregs thereof, all the Drunkards of the Land
shall suck them out.

But perhaps you may not believe this Report. These Words may be looked upon by
you as idle Tales, and I may seem to you as Let did to his Sons-in-law, when he
came to warn them to get up out of Sodom, as one that mocketh. But if you
believe not me, believe eternal Truth itself, and he has positively declared,
that no Drunkard shall ever enter into his Kingdom.

And I call Heaven and Earth to Witness against you this Day, that as surely as
the LORD rained Fire and Brimstone, as soon as Lot went out of Sodom, so surely
will GOD cast you into a Lake of Fire and Brimstone, when he shall come to take
Vengeance on them that know not GOD, and have not obeyed the Gospel of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST.

Behold then I have told you before; remember you this Day were informed what
the End of Drunkenness would be. And I summon you, in the Name of that GOD whom
I serve, to meet me at the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, that you may acquit both my
Master and me; and con^ess, with your own Mouths, that your Damnation was of
yourselves, and that we were freed from the Blood of you all.

But, LORD, has no one believed our Report? Will thou suffer so many Words to
be spoken in vain, i^ it be yet in vain? No, methinks I see some pricked to the
Heart, and ready to cry out in the Language of David to Abigail, Blessed be the
LORD GOD of Israel, which sent thee this Day to speak unto us. For surely,
unless he had sent thee, this Sin of Drunkenness had been our Rain. But now,
since we find whither it will lead us, we are resolved to drink no Liquor to
Excess while the World stands, lest we should be tormented in the Flames of
Hell.

But alas! how shall we be delivered from the Power of this Sin? Can the
Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots? So hard, almost, will it
be for us who have been accustomed to be intemperate, to learn to live sober.

But do not despair; for what is impossible with Man, is possible with GOD. Of
whom then should you seek for Succor, but of him your LORD? Who, though for
this Sin of Drunkenness, he might justly turn away his Face from you; yet if
you pour out your Hearts before him in daily Prayer, and ask Assistance from
above, he will endue you with Power from on high, and make you more than
Conquerors through JESUS CHRIST that loved you. Had you (...) up Communion with
him in Pr^^er, you would not so long, by Drunkenness, have had Communion with
Devils. And had you besought him instantly, that you might not be le^ into
Temptation, you would always have (...) delivered (...) the Evil of it. But,
like (...), you have desired (...) be your (...); you have lived without
Prayer, depended on your own Strength; and see, alas! on what a broken Reed you
have leaned. How soon have you made yourselves like the Beasts that have no
Understanding? But turn ye, turn ye from your evil Ways. Come to him, with the
repenting Prodigal, saying, Father we have sinned, we beseech thee, let not
this Sin of Drunkenness have any longer Dominion over us. And lo! it shall
happen to you even as you will.

But think not that GOD must do all* and you nothing. No; as we can do nothing
without him, so he will do nothing without us. And if we pray that we may not
be led into Temptation, we must take heed not to throw ourselves into it.

A second Means therefore I would recommend to you, in order to get the better
of Drunkenness, is to avoid evil Company. For it is the evil Communications of
wicked Men, that has drawn so many thousands into this Sin, and so corrupted
their good Manners.

But you may say, If I leave my Companions, I must expect Contempt. For they
will certainly despise me for being s^^gular. And think thou, O Man, ever to
enter in (...) the strait Gate by a true Conversion, without being had in
Derision of them that are round about thee? No* though thou may be despised,
and no^ to go to Heaven, yet thou can not go to Heaven, without being
despised: For the Friendship of the World is En^^ity with GOD. And they that
are born after the Flesh, will persecute those that are born after the Spirit.
Let not, therefore, a servile Fear of being despised by a Man that shall die,
hinder thy turning unto the living GOD. For what is a little Contempt? It is
but a Vapor which vanishes away, and comes not again. Better be derided by a
few Companions here, than be made ashamed before Men and Angels hereafter.
Better be the Song of a few Drunkards on Earth, than dwell with them where they
will be eternally reproaching and cursing each other in Hell. Yet a little
while, and they themselves shall praise thy Doings, and shall say, We, Fools,
counted his leaving us to be Folly, and his End to (...) without Honor: But
how is he numbered among the Sons of GOD, and his Lot among the Saints!.

But I hasten to lay (...) a Third Means for ^^ose who would over (...) this
Sin of Drunkenness, -- to enter (...) of strict Self-denial and (...). For this
Kind of Sin goes not (...) but by Prayer and Fasting. It is true, this may
seem a difficult Task; (...) then, we ^ust thank ourselves for it; For had we
begun ^^oner, our Work would have been the easier. and even now, if you will
but strive, the Yoke of Mortification will grow lighter and ligh^^^ every Day.

And here, by way of Conclusion to this Discourse, I cannot but (...), high and
low, rich and (...), to practice a strict Self-denia^^^ eating and drinking.
For though the Kingdom of GOD consists not in Meats and Drinks, yet an
abstemious Use of, and a frequent total Abstinence from GOD's good Creatures,
are great Promoters of the spiritual Life. And perhaps there are more destroyed
by living in a regular Sensuality, than even by that very Sin I have now been
warning you of* -- I know, indeed, that many, who are only almost Christians,
and who seek, but do not strive to enter into the Kingdom of GOD, urge a Text
of Scripture to justify their Indulgence, saying, That it is not what enters
into the Man d^^ileth the Man. And so we grant, when taken moderately; but then
they should consider, that it is possible, nay, it is proved by daily
Experience, that a Person may eat and drink so much as not to hurt his Body,
and yet do infinite Prejudice to his Soul. For Self- indulgence lulls the Soul
into a spiritual Slumber, as well as direct Intemperance; and though the latter
may expose us to more Contempt among Men, yet the former, if continued in, will
as certainly shut us out from the Presence of GOD. St. Paul knew this full
well; and therefore, though he was the spiritual Father of Thousands, and was
near upon finishing his Course, yet he says, it was his daily Practice to keep
his Body under, and bring it into Subjection, no doubt, by a strict Abstinence
and Fasting; not that he might arrive at higher Degrees of Perfection, but le^t
after he had preached to others, he himself should be a Castaway. But why urge
I the Apostle's Example to excite you to a strict Temperance in eating and
drinking? Rather let me exhort you only to put in Practice the latter Part of
the Text, to labor to be filled with the Spirit of GOD, and then you will no
longer search the Scriptures to find Arguments for Self-indulgence; but you
will deal sincerely with yourselves, and fast as often as the Church enjoins,
if your Healths will permit; and eat and drink no more at any Time, than what
is consistent with the strictest Precepts of the Gospel. O do but beg of GOD,
that you may see how you are fallen in Adam, and must be renewed ever you can
be happy, by the Spirit of JESUS CHRIST! Let us be^eech him to enlighten us, to
see the Treachery of our corrupt Hearts, and how pure and holy these Bodies
ought to be, which are living Temples of the Holy Ghost, and then we shall show
ourselves Men. Abstain from all Appearance of any Thing that will quench this
Holy Spirit, and do any Thing that will invite him into, or cause him to abide
in our Hearts. And thus being made Temples of the Holy Ghost, by his dwelling
in our Bodies here, though after Death, Worms may destroy them; yet shall they be
raise^ by the same Spirit at the general Resurrection of the last Day, to be
fashioned like unto CHRIST'S glorio^^ (...).

Which GOD of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

SERMON VIII.
The Indwelling of the Spirit, the common Privilege of all Believers.
JOHN vii. 37, 38, 39. In the last Day, that great Day of the Feast, JESUS
stood and cried, saying, If any Man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink.
He that believes on me, as the Scripture has said, out of his Belly shall
slow Rivers of living Water.
But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive.

NOTHING has rendered the Cross of CHRIST of less Effect, nothing has been a
greater stumbling Block and Rock of Offense to weak Minds, than a Supposition,
now current among us, that most of what is contained in the Gospel of JESUS
CHRIST, was designed only for our LORD's first and immediate Followers, and
consequently calculated for one or two hundred Years. -- Accordingly many now
read the Life, Sufferings, Death and Resurrection of JESUS CHRIST, in the same
Manner as learned Men read Caesar's Commentaries, or the Conquests of
Alexander; as Things rather intended to afford Matter for Speculation, than to
be acted over again in and by us.

As this is true of the Doctrines of the Gospel in general, so it is in
particular of the Operations of GOD's Spirit upon the Hearts of Believers for
we no sooner mention the Necessity of our receiving the Holy Ghost in these
last Days, as well as formerly; but we are looked upon by some, as Enthusiasts
and Madmen; and, by others, represented as wilfully deceiving the People, and
undermining the established Constitution of the Church.

Judge ye then, my Brethren, whether it is not high Time for the true Ministers
of JESUS CHRIST, who have been themselves made Partakers of this heavenly Gift,
to lift up their Voices like a Trumpet; and if they would not have those Souls
perish for which the LORD JESUS has shed his precious Blood, to declare with
all Boldness, that the Holy Spirit is the common Privilege and Portion (...) in
all Ages; and that we also, as well as the first Christians, must receive the
Holy Ghost ever we can be truly called the Children of GOD.

For this Reason (and also that I (...) Answer the Design of our Church in
(...) the present Festival) I have chosen the (...) of the Text.

They were spoken by JESUS CHRIST, when, as the Evangelist tells us, he was at
the Feast of Tabernacles. Our LORD (herein leading all an Example) attended on
the Temple-service in general, and the Festivals of the Jewish Church in
particular. -- The Festival at which he was now present, was that of the Feast
of Tabernacles which the Jews observed according to GOD's Appointment in
Commemoration of their living in Tents. -- At the last Day of this Feast it was
customary for many pious People to fetch Water from a certain Place, and bring
it on their Heads, singing this Anthem out of Isaiah, And with Joy shall they
draw Water out of the Wells of Salvation. -- Our dear Lord JESUS observing
this, and it being his constant Practice to spiritualize every Thing he met
with, cries out, If any Man thirsts, let him come unto me, rather than unto
that Well, and drink. -- He that believes on me, as the Scripture has spoken,
(where it is said, GOD will make Water spring out of a dry Rock, and such like)
out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of living Water. -- And that we might know
what our Savior meant by this living Water, the Evangelist immediately adds,
But this (...) of the Spirit, which they that believe on him (...) receive.

These last Words I shall chiefly insist on in the ensuing Discourse, and shall
treat on them in the following Manner.

First, I shall briefly show what is meant by the Word Spirit. Secondly, I
shall show that this Spirit is the common Privilege of all Believers. Thirdly,
I shall show the Reason on which this Doctrine is founded. Lastly, I shall
conclude with a general Exhortation, to believe on JESUS CHRIST, whereby alone
we can be qualified to receive this Spirit. And, First, I am briefly to show
what is meant by the Spirit.
By the Spirit, or the Holy Ghost, is to be understood the third Person in the
ever blessed Trinity, consubstantial and coeternal with the Father and the
Son, proceeding from, yet equal to them both -- For to use the Words of our
Church in this Day's Office, that which we believe of the Glory of the Father,
the same we believe of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, without any Difference
or Inequality.

Thus says St. John, in his first Epistle, Chap. v. Ver. 7. There are Three
that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these
Three are one. And our LORD when he gave his Apostles Commission to go and
teach all Nations, commands them to baptize in the Name of the Holy Ghost, as
well as of the Father and the Son. -- And St. Peter, Acts v. Ver.3. said to
Ananias, Why has Satan filled thine Heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? And,
Ver.4. he says, Thou have not lied unto Men, but unto GOD. -- From all which
Passages, it is plain* that the Holy Ghost, is truly and properly GOD, as well
as the Father and the Son. This is an unspeakable Mystery, but a Mystery of
GOD's revealing, and therefore to be assented to with our whole Hearts. --
Seeing GOD is not a Man that he should lie, nor the Son of Man that he should
deceive.

I proceed, Secondly, to prove that the Holy Ghost is the common Privilege of
all Believers.

But, here I would not be understood of so receiving the Holy Ghost, as to
enable us to work Miracles, or show outward Signs and Wonders. For I allow our
Adversaries, that to pretend to be inspired, in this Sense, is being wise above
what is written. Perhaps it cannot be proved, that GOD ever interposed in this
extraordinary Manner, but when some new Revelation was to be established, as at
the first settling of the Mosaic and Gospel Dispensation. -- And as for my own
Part, I cannot but suspect the Spirit of those who insist upon a Repetition of
such Miracles at this Time. -- For the World being now become nominally
Christian, at least, (though GOD knows, little of the Power is left among us)
there need not outward Miracles, but only an inward Cooperation of the Holy
Spirit with the Word, to prove that JESUS is that Messiah which was to come
into the World.

Besides, it is possible for thee, O Man, to have Faith, so as to be able to
remove Mountains, or cast out Devils; nay, thou might speak with the Tongue
of Men and Angels, yea, and bid the Sun stand still in the midst of Heaven;
yet, what would all these Gifts of the Spirit avail thee, without being made
Partaker of his sanctifying Graces? Saul had the Spirit of Government for a
while, so as to become another Man, and yet was a Castaway. -- And many, who
cast out Devils in CHRIST's Name, at the last will be disowned by him. If
therefore thou had only the Gifts, but was destitute of the Graces of the
Holy Ghost, they would only serve to lead thee with so much the more Solemnity
to Hell.

Here then, I say, we join issue with our Adversaries, and will readily grant,
that we are not in this Sense to be inspired, as were our LORD's first
Apostles. But unless Men have Eyes which see not, and Ears which hear not, how
can they read the latter Part of the Text, and not confess that the Holy
Spirit, in another Sense, is the common Privilege of all Believers, even to the
End of the World? -- This spoke be of the Spirit, which they that believe on
him (...) receive. -- Observe, he does not say, they that believe on him for
one or two Ages, but they that believe on him in general, i. e. at all Times,
and in all Places. -- So that unless we can prove that St. John was under a
Delusion when he wrote these Words, we must believe (...) we even we also,
shall receive the Holy Ghost, (...) we believe on the Lord JESUS with our whole
Hearts.

Again, our LORD, just before his bitter Passion, when he was about to offer up
(...) Soul an Offering for the Sins of the Wor^^ when his Heart was most
enlarged, and he would undoubtedly demand the most excellent Gift for his
Disciples, prays, that they all may be one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I
in thee, that they also may be one in us. -- I in them, and thou in me, that
they be made perfect in one; that is, that all his true Followers might be
united to him by his Holy Spirit, by as real, vital, and mystical an Union, as
there is between JESUS CHRIST and the Father. I say all his true Followers* --
For it is evident from our LORD's own Words, that he had us and all Believers
in View, when he put up this Prayer. -- Neither pray I for these alone, but for
them also which shall believe on me through their Word; so that, unless we
treat our LORD as the High Priests did, and count him a Blasphemer; we must
confess, that all who believe in JESUS CHRIST, through the Word or Ministration
of the Apostles, are to be joined to JESUS CHRIST, by being made Partakers of
the Holy Spirit.

There Is a great Noise made of late, about the Word Enthusiast, and it has been
cast upon the Preachers of the Gospel, as a Term of Reproach. -- But every
Christian, in the proper Sens^ of the Word, must be an Enthusiast. -- That is,
must be inspired of GOD, or have GOD in him. For who dares say, he is a
Christian, till he can say, GOD is in me? St. Peter tells us, we have many
great and precious Promises, that we may be made Partakers of the Divine
Nature. -- Our LORD prays, that we may be one, as the Father and He are One;
and our own Church, in Conformity to these Texts of Scripture, in her excellent
Communion-Office, tells us, that those who receive the Sacrament worthily,
dwell in CHRIST, and CHRIST in them; that they are one with CHRIST, and CHRIST
with them. -- And yet Christians in general, must have their Names cast out as
Evil, and Ministers in particular must be looked upon as Deceivers of the
People, for affirming, that we must be really united to GOD, (...) receiving
the Holy Ghost. Be astonished, O Heavens, at this!

Indeed, I will not say, our Letter-learned Preachers deny this Doctrine in
express Words. -- But however, they do it in Effect. -- For they talk
professedly against inward Feelings, and say, we may have GOD's Spirit without
feeling it, which is in Reality to deny the Thing itself -- And had I a Mind to
hinder the Progress of the Gospel, and to establish the Kingdom of Darkness, I
would go about, telling People, they might have the Spirit of GOD, and yet not
feel it.

But to return, -- When our LORD was about to ascend to his Father, and our
Father; to his GOD, and our GOD; (...) Apostles this Commission, Go and ^ea^h
all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. -- By the Term, All Nations, it is allowed, are (...) that
should profess to believe on JESUS (...) even to the End of the World. And
accordingly by Authority of this Commission, we do baptize them in this and
every Age of the Church. -- And (...) this be true, then the Proposition to be
proved will be undeniable. For though we translate these Words, baptizing them
in the Name; yet as the Name of GOD, in the LORD's Prayer, and several other
Places, signifies his Nature, they might as well be translated thus, baptizing
them into the Nature of the Father, into the Nature of the Son, and into the
Nature of the Holy Ghost. And consequently, if we are all to be baptized into
the Nature of the Holy Ghost, ever our Baptism be effectual to Salvation, it is
evident, that we all must actually receive the Holy Ghost, ever we can say, we
truly believe in JESUS CHRIST. For no one can say, that JESUS is my LORD, but
he that has thus received the Holy Ghost.

Numbers of other Texts might be quoted, to make this Doctrine, if possible,
still more plain. -- But I am astonished, that any, who call themselves
Members; much more, that many, who are Preachers of the Church of England,
should dare so much as open their Lips against it. And yet with Grief, GOD is
my Judge, I speak it, Persons of the establis^^^ (...) seem, more generally to
be ignorant of it, than any Dissenters whatsoever.

But, good GOD! My dear Brethren, what have you been doing? How often have your
Hearts given your Lips the Lie? How often have you offered GOD the Sacrifice of
Fools, and had your Prayers turned into Sin, if you approve of, and use our
excellent Church-Liturgy, and yet deny the Holy Spirit to be the Portion of all
Believers? In the daily Absolution, the Minister exhorts the People to pray,
that GOD would grant them Repentance, and his Holy Spirit. -- In the Collect
for Christmas Day, we beseech GOD, that he would daily renew us by his Holy
Spirit. -- In the last Week's Collect we prayed that we may evermore rejoice in
the Comforts of the Holy Ghost. -- And in the concluding Prayer, which we put
up every Day, we pray not only, that the Grace of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and
the Love of GOD, but that the Fellowship of the Holy Ghost may be with us all
evermore.

But farther, -- A solemn Season is now approaching, I mean the Ember-Days, at
the End of which, all that are to be ordained to the Office of a Deacon, are in
the Sight of GOD, and in the Presence of the Congregation, to declare that they
trust they are inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost, to take upon them that
Administration. -- And to those who are to be ordained Priests, the Bishop is
to repeat these solemn Words, Receive thou the Holy Ghost, now committed unto
thee ^y the Imposition of our Hands. -- And yet, Oh that I had no Reason to
speak it, many that use our Forms, and many that have witnessed this good
Confession, yet dare talk and preach against the Necessity of receiving the
Holy Ghost now, as well as formerly; and not only so, but cry out against
those, who do insist upon it, as Madmen, Enthusiasts, Schismatics, and
Underminers of the Established Constitution.

But you are the Schismatics, you are the Bane of the Church of England, who
are always crying out, the Temple of the LORD, the Temple of the LORD; and yet
starve the People out of our Communion, by feeding them only with the dry Husks
of dead Morality, and not bringing out to them the fatted Calf, I mean the
Doctrines of the Operations of the blessed Spirit of GOD -- But here is the
Misfortune, many of us are not led by, and therefore no Wonder, that we cannot
talk feolingly of the HOLY GHOST -- We subscribe to our Articles, and make them
serve for a Key to get into Church-Preferment, and then preach contrary to
those very Articles to which we have subscribed -- Far be it from me, to charge
all the Clergy with this hateful Hypocrisy -- No, blessed be GOD, there are
some left among us, who dare maintain the Doctrines of the Reformation, and
preach the Truth, as it is in JESUS -- But I speak the Truth in CHRIST, I lie
not -- The Generality of the Clergy are fallen from our Articles, and do not
speak agreeable to them, or to the Form of sound Words, delivered in the
Scriptures -- Woe be unto such blind Leaders of the Blind! How can you escape
the Damnation of Hell? It is ^ot all your Learning (falsely so called) it is
not all your Preferments can keep you from the just Judgment of GOD -- Yet a
little while and we shall all appear before the Tribunal of CHRIST -- There,
there will I meet you -- There JESUS CHRIST, that great Shepherd and Bishop of
Souls shall determine, who are the false Prophets, who are the Wolves in
Sheep's Clothing. -- Those who say, that we must now receive and feel the Holy
Ghost, or those who exclaim against it, as the Doctrine of Devils.

But I can no more. It is an unpleasing Task to censure any Order of Men,
especially those who are in the Ministry -- Nor would any thing excuse it but
Necessity: That Necessity which extorted from our LORD himself so many Woes
against the Scribes and Pharisees, the Letter-learned Rulers and Teachers of
the Jewish Church -- And surely, if I could bear to see People perish for lack
of Knowledge, and yet be silent toward those who keep from them the Key of
true knowledge, the very Stones would cry out.

Would we restore the Church to its primitive Dignity* the only Way is to live
and preach the Doctrine of CHRIST, and the Articles to which we have
subscribed. Then we shall find the Number of Dissenters will daily decrease,
and the Church of England become the Joy of the whole Earth.

I am now, in the Third Place, to show the Reasonableness of this Doctrine.

I say, the Reasonableness of this Doctrine -- For however it may seem
Foolishness to the natural Man, yet to those, who have tasted of the good Word
of Life, and have felt the Power of the World to come, it will appear to be
founded on the highest Reason, and is capable, to those who have Eyes to see,
even of a Demonstration -- I say of a Demonstration: For it stands on this
Self-evident Supposition, that we are fallen Creatures, or, to use the
Scripture-Expression, Have all died in Adam.

I know indeed it is now no uncommon thing amongst us, to deny the Doctrine of
original Sin, as well as the Divinity of JESUS CHRIST, who is GOD over all,
blessed forever -- But it is incumbent on those who deny it, first to disprove
the Authority of the Holy Scriptures -- If thou can prove, thou Unbeliever,
that the Book, which we call The Bible, does not contain the lively Oracles of
GOD; if thou can show, that holy Men of Old, did not write this Book, as they
were inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost, then will we give up the Doctrine of
original Sin -- But unless thou can do this, we must insist upon it, that we
are all conceived and born in Sin; if for no other, yet for this one Reason,
because that GOD, who cannot lie, has told us so.

But what has Light to do with Darkness, or polite Infidels with the Bible?
Alas! as they are Strangers to the Power, so they are generally as great
Strangers to the Word of GOD. And therefore, if we will preach to them, we must
preach from their Hearts: For talking in the Language of the Scripture, is but
like talking in an unknown Tongue. Tell me then, O Man, whosoever thou art,
that deniest the Doctrine of original (...) if thy Conscience be not seared as
with a ^ot Iron! Tell me, if thou do not find thyself by Nature to be a Motly
Mixture of Brute and Devil? I know these Terms will stir up the whole Pharisee
in thy Heart; but let not Satan hurry thee hence. Stop a little, and let us
reason together. Do thou not find, that by Nature thou art prone to Pride?
Otherwise, wherefore art thou now offended? Again, do not thou find in
thyself the Seeds of Malice, Revenge, and all Uncharitableness? And what are
these but the very Tempers of the Devil? Again, do we not all by Nature follow,
and suffer ourselves to be led by our natural Appetites, always looking
downwards, never looking upwards to that GOD, in whom we live, move, and have
our Being? And what is this but the very Nature of the Beasts that perish? Out
of thy own Heart therefore will I oblige thee to confess, what an inspired
Apostle (...) long since told us, that the whole (...) Nature lies in the
Wicked One, i. (...) (...) Devil* that we are no better than those whom St.
Jude calls Brute Beasts. For we have Tempers in us all by Nature, that prove to
a Demo^stration, that we are altogether Earthly, Sensual, Devilish.

And this by the Way will serve as another Argument, to prove the Reality of
the Operations of the blessed Spirit on the Hearts of Believers, against those
false Profe^^ors, who deny there is any such Thing as Influences of the Holy
Spirit that may be felt. For if they will grant that the Devil works, and
that so as to be felt in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience (which they
must grant, unless they will give an Apostle the Lie) where is the Wonder that
the good Spirit should have the same Power over those that are truly obedient
to the Faith of JESUS CHRIST?

But to return. If it be true then, that we are all by Nature a Motly Mixture
of Brute and Devil, it is evident, that we all must receive the Holy Ghost,
ever we can dwell with and enjoy GOD.

When you read how the Prodigal in the Gospel was reduced to so low a
Condition, as to eat Husks with Swine, and how Nebuchadnezzar was turned out,
to graze with Oxen, I am confident, you pity their unhappy State. And when you
hear, how JESUS CHRIST will say, at the last Day, to all that are not born
again of GOD, Depart from me ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, do not your Hearts shrink within you, with a secret
Horror? And if Creatures with only our Degree of Goodness cannot bear, even the
Thoughts of dwelling with Beasts or Devils, to whose Nature we are so nearly
allied, how do we imagine, GOD, who is infinite Goodness and Purity itself, can
dwell with us, while we are Partakers of both their Natures? We might as well
think to reconcile Heaven and Hell.

When Adam had eaten the forbidden Fruit, he fled and hid himself from GOD.
Why? because he was naked; that is, he was alienated from the Life of GOD, the
due Punishment of his Disobedience. Now we are all by Nature naked and void of
GOD, as he was at that Time, and consequently, till we are changed, and
clothed upon by a Divine Nature again, we must fly from GOD also.

Hence then appears the Reasonableness of our being obliged to receive the
Spirit of GOD. It is founded on the Doctrine of Original Sin. And therefore you
will always find that those who talk against feeling the Operations of the Holy
Ghost, very rarely, or very slightly at least, mention our Fall in Adam. No,
they refer St. Paul's Account of the Depravity of Unbelievers, only to those of
old Time. Whereas it is obvious, on the contrary, that we are all equally
included under the Guilt and Consequences of our first Parent's Sin, even as
others; and to use the Language of our own Church-Article, bring into the World
with us a Corruption, which renders us liable to GOD's Wrath, and Eternal
Damnation.

Should I preach to you any other Doctrine, I should wrong my own Soul; I
should be found a false Witness toward GOD (...) And he that preaches any
(...) Doctrine, howsoever dignified and distinguished shall bear his Punishment
whosoever he be.

From this plain Reason then appears the Necessity why we, as well as the first
Apostle, in this Sense, must receive the Spirit of GOD.

For the great Work of Sanctification, or making us holy, is particularly
referred to the Holy Ghost. And therefore our LORD says, Unless a Man be born
of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of GOD.

For JESUS CHRIST came down to save us not only from the Guilt, but also from
the Power of Sin. And however often we have repeated our Creed, and told GOD we
believe in the Holy Chost, yet if we have not believed in him, so as to be
really united to JESUS CHRIST by him, we have no more Concord with JESUS CHRIST
than Belial himself.

And now, my Brethren, what shall I say more? Tell me, are not many of you
offended at what has been said already? Do not some of you think, though I mean
well, yet I have carried the Point a little too far? Are not others ready to
cry out, If this be true, who then can be saved? Is not this driving People
into Despair?

Yes, I ingenuously confess it is. But into what Despair? A Despair of Mercy
through CHRIST? No, GOD forbid; but a Despair of living with GOD without
receiving the Holy Ghost. And I would to GOD, that not only all you that hear
me this Day, but that the whole World was filled with this Despair. Believe me,
my Brethren, I have been doing no more than you allow your bodily Physicians to
do every Day. If you have a Wound in your Bodies, and are in earnest about a
Cure, you bid the Surgeon probe it to the very Bottom. And shall not the
Physician of your Souls be allowed the same Freedom? And what have I been doing
but searching your natural Wounds, that I might convince you of your Danger,
and put you upon applying to JESUS CHRIST for a Remedy? Indeed I have dealt
with you as gently as I could; and now I have wounded, I come to heal you.

For I was, in the Last Place, to exhort you all to come to JESUS CHRIST by
Faith, whereby you, even you also, shall receive the Holy Ghost. For this spoke
he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive.

This, this is what I long to come to, Hitherto I have been preaching only the
Law. but behold I bring you glad Tidings of great Joy. If I have wounded you
before, be not afraid; behold, I now bring a Remedy for all your Wounds. For
notwithstanding you are (...) now sunk into the Nature of the Beast. (...)
Devil, yet if you truly believe on JESUS CHRIST you shall receive the
quickening Spirit promised in the Text, and be restored to the glorious
Liberties of the Sons of GOD. I say, if you believe on JESUS CHRIST. For by
Faith we are saved; it is not of Works, left any one should boast. And however
some Men may say, there is a Fitness required in the Creature, and that we must
have a Righteousness of our own, before we can lay hold on the Righteousness of
CHRIST; yet, if we believe the Scripture, Salvation is the free Gift of GOD in
CHRIST JESUS our LORD; and whosoever believes on him with his whole Heart,
though his Soul be as black as Hell itself, shall receive the Gift of the Holy
Ghost. -- Behold then, I stand up, and cry out in this great Day of the Feast,
Let every one that thirsts come unto JESUS CHRIST and drink. He that
believes on him, out of his Belly shall flow not only Streams or Rivulets, but
whole Rivers of living Water. This I speak, my Brethren, of the Spirit which
they that believe on JESUS shall certainly receive. -- For JESUS CHRIST is the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever. He is the Way, the Truth, the
Resurrection, and the Life. -- Whosoever believes on him, though he were dead,
yet shall he live. -- There is no Respect of Persons with JESUS CHRIST. -- High
and low, rich and poor, one with another, may come to him with an humble
Confidence, if they draw near by Faith. -- From him we may all receive Grace
upon Grace. -- For JESUS CHRIST is full of Grace and Truth, and ready to save
to the u^termost all that by a true Faith turn unto him. -- Indeed the Poor
generally receive the Gospel, and GOD has chosen the Poor in this World rich in
Faith. But though not many mighty, not many noble are called; and though it be
casier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a rich Man to
enter into the Kingdom of GOD, yet even to you that are rich do I now freely
offer Salvation by JESUS CHRIST, if you will renounce yourselves, and come to
JESUS CHRIST as poor Sinners. I say, as poor Sinners; for the Poor in Spirit
are only so blessed as to have a Right to the Kingdom of GOD. -- JESUS CHRIST
calls none to him but those that thirst after his Righteousness, and feel
themselves weary and heavy laden with the Burden of their Sins. -- JESUS CHRIST
justifies the Ungodly. He came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentance.

Do not then say you are unworthy; for this is a faithful and true Saying, and
worthy of all Men to be received, That JESUS CHRIST came into the World to save
Sinners; and if you are the chief of Sinners; if you feel yourselves such,
verily JESUS CHRIST came into the World chiefly to save you. -- When Joseph was
called out of the Prisonhouse to Pharaoh's Court, we are told, that he staid
some Time to prepare himself; but do you come with all your Prison Clothes
about you; come poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked as you are, and GOD
the Father shall receive you with open Arms, as he did the returning Prodigal.
He shall cover your Nakedness with the best Robe of his dear Son's
Righteousness, shall seal you with the Signet of his Spirit, and feed you with
the fatted Calf, even with the Comforts of the Holy Ghost. -- Oh let there then
be Joy in Heaven over some of you believing. -- Let me not go back to my
Master, and say, LORD, they will not believe my Report. -- Harden no longer
your Hearts, but open them wide, and let the King of Glory in. -- Believe me, I
am willing to go to Prison or Death for you; but I am not willing to go to
Heaven without you -- The Love of JESUS CHRIST constrains me to lift up my
Voice like a Trumpet. -- My Heart is now full -- Out of the Abundance of the
Love which I have for your precious and immortal Souls my Mouth now speaks.
-- And I could now not only continue my Discourse till Midnight, but I could
speak till I could speak no more. -- And why should I despair of any? No, I can
despair of no one, when I consider JESUS CHRIST has had Mercy on such a Wretch
as I am. -- However you may think of yourselves, I know that by Nature I am but
half a Devil, and half a Beast. -- The free Grace of CHRIST prevented me. -- He
saw me in my Blood, He passed by me, and said unto me, Live. -- And the same
Crace which was sufficient for me, is sufficient for you also. -- Behold, the
same blessed Spirit is ready to breathe on all your dry Bones, if you will
believe on JESUS CHRIST whom GOD has sent. -- Indeed you can never believe on,
or serve a better Master, one that is more mighty, or more willing to save. --
Indeed I can say the LORD CHRIST is gracious, his Yoke is easy, his Burden
exceeding light. -- After you have served him many Years, like the Servants
under the Law, was he willing to discharge you, you would say, We love our
Master, and will not go from him. -- Come then, my guilty Brethren, come and
believe on the LORD that bought you with his precious Blood. -- Look up by
Faith, and see him whom you have pierced. -- Behold him bleeding, panting,
dying! -- Behold him with Arms stretched out ready to receive you all. -- Cry
unto him as the penitent Thief did, LORD, remember us now thou art in thy
Kingdom, and he shall say to your Souls, Shortly shall you be with me in
Paradise. -- For those whom CHRIST justifies, them he also glorifies, even with
that Glory which he enjoyed with the Father before the World began. -- Do not
say, I have bought a Piece of Ground, and must needs go and see it; I have
bought a Yoke of Oxen, and must needs go prove them; I have married a Wife, I
am engaged in an eager Pursuit after the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of
Life, and therefore cannot come. -- Do not fear having your Name cast out as
Evil, or being accounted a Fool for CHRIST's Sake. -- Yet a while, and you
shall shine like the Stars in the Firmament for ever. -- Only believe, and
JESUS CHRIST shall be to you Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and eternal
Redemption. -- Your Bodies shall be fashioned like unto his glorious Body, and
your Souls fall into all the Fullness of GOD.

Which may GOD of his infinite Mercy grant, etc.

SERMON IX.
The wise and foolish Virgins.
MATTHEW. XXV. 14. Watch therefore, for ye know neither the Day nor the Hour in
which the Son of Man comes.
THE Apostle St. Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews, informs us, That it is
appointed for all Men once to die; after that, says he, comes Judgment. -- And
I think if any Consideration be sufficient to awaken a sleeping drowsy World,
it must be this. -- That there will be a Day wherein these Heavens shall be
wrapped up like a Scrowl, this Element melt with fervent Heat, the Earth and all
the Things therein be burnt up, and every Soul, and every Nation and Language
summoned to appear before the dreadful Tribunal of the righteous Judge of Quick
and Dead, to receive Rewards and Punishments according to the Deeds done in
their Bodies. -- The great Apostle just mentioned, when brought before Felix,
could think of (...) better Means to convert that sinful Man, than ^o reason of
Temperance, Righteousness, and more especially of a Judgment to come. -- The
first might in some Measure affect, but I am persuaded it was the last
Consideration, I mean of a Judgment to come, that made him tremble; and so bad
as the World is grown, yet there are few have their Consciences so far seared,
as with a red hot Iron, as to deny that there will be a Reckoning hereafter.
The promiscuous Dispensations of Providence in this Life, wherein we see good
Men afflicted, destitute, tormented, and the Wicked permitted triumphantly to
ride over their Heads, has been always looked upon as an indisputable Argument,
by the Generality of Men, that there will be a Day in which GOD will judge the
World in Righteousness, and administer true Equity unto his People. -- Some
indeed are so bold as to deny it, while they are engaged in the Pursuit of the
Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life. -- But follow them to their Deathbeds,
ask them, when their Souls are ready to launch into Eternity, what they then
think of a Judgment to come? and (...) will tell you they dare not give their
Conscien^^ the Lie any longer. -- They feel a fearful Looking for of Judgment
and fiery Indignation in their Hearts. -- Since then these Things are so, does
it not highly concern each of us, my Brethren, before we come on a Bed of
Sickness, seriously to examine how the Account stands between GOD and our
Souls, and how it will fare with us (...) Day? As for the openly Profane, the
Drunkard, the Whoremonger, the Adulterer, and such like, there is no Doubt of
what will become of them, -- without Repentance they shall never enter into the
Kingdom of GOD, and his CHRIST: No; their Damnation slumbereth not; a burning
fiery Tophet, kindled by the Fury of GOD's eternal Wrath, is prepared for their
Reception, wherein they must suffer the Vengeance of an eternal Fire. -- Nor is
there the least Doubt of the State of true Believers. -- For though they be
despised and rejected of natural Men, yet being born again of GOD, they are
Heirs of GOD, and joint Heirs with CHRIST. -- They have the Earnest of the
promised Inheritance in their Hearts, and are assured, that a new and living
Way is made open for them, into the Holy of Holies, by the Blood of JESUS
CHRIST, through which an abundant Entrance shall be administered to them at the
great Day of Accounts. The only Question is, What will become of the almost
Christian, one that is content to go, as he thinks, in a middle Way to Heaven,
without being profane on the one Hand, or, as he falsely imagined, righteous
overmuch on the other? -- Multitudes there are in every Congregation, and
consequently here present, of this stamp. -- And what is worst of all, it is
more easy to convince the most notorious Publicans and Sinners of their being
out of a State of Salvation, than any of these. -- Notwithstanding, if JESUS
CHRIST may be our Judge, they shall as certainly be rejected and disowned by
him at the last Day, as though they lived in open Defiance of all his Laws. --
For what says our LORD in the Parable of which the Words of the Text are a
Reddition or Conclusion, and which I intend to make the Subject of my present
Discourse. -- Then, that is, at the Day of the Judgment, which he had been
discoursing of in the foregoing, and prosecutes in this Chapter, shall the
Kingdom of Heaven, i. e. the State of Professors in the Gospel Church, be
likened unto Ten Virgins, which took their Lamps and went forth to meet the
Bridegroom. In which Words is a manifest Allusion to a Custom prevailing in our
LORD's Time among the Jews, at Marriage Solemnities, which were generally at
Night, and at which it was customary for the Persons of the Bride-chamber to go
out in Procession, with many Lights to meet the Bridegroom. -- By the
Bridegroom then here spoken of, you are to understand JESUS CHRIST. -- The
Church, i. e. True Believers, are his Spouse, -- he is united to them by one
Spirit even in this Life; but the Solemnizing of these sacred Nuptials is
reserved till the Day of Judgment, when he shall come to take them home to
himself, and present them before Men and Angels, as his Purchase, to his
Father, without Spot or Wrinkle, or any such Thing. -- By the Ten Virgins we
are to understand the Professors of Christianity in general. -- All are called
Virgins, because all are called to be Saints. Whosoever names the Name of
CHRIST, is obliged by that very Profession to depart from all Iniquity. The
pure and chaste in Heart are the only Persons that will be so blessed as to see
GOD. -- As CHRIST was born of a Virgin's Womb, so he can dwell in none but
Virgin Souls, made pure and holy by the Cohabitation of his Holy Spirit. But
what says the Apostle? All are not Israelites that are of Israel, -- All are
not Christians that are called after the Name of CHRIST: -- No, says our LORD,
in the 2d v. Five of those Virgins were wise, i. e. True Believers, and five
were foolish, i. e. Formal Hypocrites. But why are five said to be wise, and
the other five scolish? -- Hear what our LORD says in the following Verses,
They that were foolish took their Lamps and took no Oil with them: But the wise
took Oil in their Vessels with their Lamps. They that were foolish took ^^eir
Lamps, i. e. the Lamp of an outward Profession. They would go to Church, say
over several Manuals of Prayers, come perhaps into a Field to hear a Sermon,
give at a Collection, and receive the Sacrament constantly, nay, of^ner than
once a Month. -- But then here lay the Mis^^^e, they had (...) in their Lamps,
-- no true Principle or (...), no living Faith in their Hearts, without which
though we should give all our Goods to feed the Poor, and our Bodies to be burnt,
it would pr^^^t us nothing. In short, they were exact, nay perhaps
superstitious Bigots as to the Form, bat all the while they were Strangers to,
and, in effect, denied the Power of Godliness in their Hearts. They would go to
Church, but at the same Time, think it no harm to go to a Bail or an Assembly,
notwithstanding they promised at their Paptism, to renounce the Pomps and
Vanities of this wicked World. -- They were so exceeding fearful of being
righte^^^ overmuch, that they would even persecute those that were truly
devout, if they attempted to go a Step farther than themselves. In one Word,
they never effectually felt the Power of the World to come. They thought they
might be Christians without so much inward Feeling (...) therefore,
notwithstanding their high (...) had only a Name to live.

And now, Sirs, let me pause a while, and in the Name of GOD, whom I endeavor
to serve in the Gospel of his dear Son, give me (...) ask one Question. Whilst
I have been draw^^^ though in Miniature, the Character of th^^^ foolish Virgins,
have not many of your Consciences made the Application, and with a small,
still, though articulate Voice, said, Thou Man, thou Woman, art one of those
foolish Virgins, f^r thy Practice and Sentiments agrees thereto? Do not
stifle, but encourage these Convictions; and who knows but that LORD, who is
rich (...) Mercy to all that call upon him faithfully, may so work upon you
even by this Foolishness of Preaching, as to make you wise Virgins before you
return home?

What they were you shall know immediately; But the wise, says our LORD, ver.
4. ^ook Oil in their Vessels with their Lamps. -- Observe, the wise, that is,
the true Believers, had their Lamps as well as the foolish Virgins; for
Christianity does (...) require us to cast off all outward Forms. We may use
Forms and yet not be formal: For Instance, it is possible to worship GOD in a
set Form of Prayer, and yet worship him in Spirit and in Truth. And therefore,
Brethren, let us not judge one another. The wise Virgins had their Lamps;
herein did not lie the Difference between them and the foolish, that one
worshipped GOD with a Form and the other did not: No; as the Pharisee and
Publican went up to the Temple to pray, so these wise and foolish Virgins might
go to the same Place of Worship, and sit under the same Ministry; but then the
wise took Oil in their Vessels with their Lamps; they kept up the Form, but did
not rest in it; their Words in Prayer were the Language of their Hearts, and
they were no Strangers to inward Feelings; they were not a^^a^d of searching
Doctrine, nor affronted when Ministers told them they deserve to be damned;
they were not self-righteous, but were willing that JESUS CHRIST should have
all the Glory of their Salvation; they were convinced that the Merits of JESUS
CHRIST were to be apprehended only by Faith, but yet were they as careful to
maintain good Works, as though they were to be justified by them: In short, their
Obedience flowed from Love and Gratitude, and wa^ cheerful, constant, uniform,
universal, like that Obedience which the Holy Angels pay our Father in Heaven.

Here then let me exhort you to pause again; and if any of you can faithfully
apply these Characters to your Hearts, give GOD the Glory, and take the Comfort
to your own Souls; you are not false but true Believers. JESUS CHRIST has been
made of GOD to you Wisdom, even that Wisdom, whereby you shall be made wise
unto Salvation. GOD sees a Difference between you and foolish Virgins, if
natural Men will not. You need not be uneasy if one Chance and Fate in this
Life may happen to you both. I say, one Chance and Fate; for ver. (...). while
the Bridegroom tarried, i. e. in the intermediate Space of Time which passed
between our LORD's Ascension and his coming again to Judgment, they all
slumbered and slept. The wise as well as foolish died, for Dust we are, and to
Dust we must return. It Is no Reflection at all upon the Divine Goodnes^, that
Believers, as well as Hypocrites, must pass through the Valley of the Shadow of
Death; for CHRIST has taken the Sting out of it, so that we need fear no Evil.
It is to them a Passage to everlasting Life. Death is only terrible to those
that have no Hope, because they live without Faith in the World. Whosoever
there are amongst you, that have received the First-(...) of the Spirit, I am
persuaded you are ready to cry out with holy Job, We would not live here
always, (...) long to be dissolved, that we may be with JESUS CHRIST; and though
Worms must destroy our Bodies as well as others, yet we are content, being
assured that our Redeemer lives, that he will stand at the latter Days upon
the Earth, and that in our Flesh we shall see GOD.

But it is not so with Hypocrites and Unbelievers beyond the Grave; for what
says our LORD? And at Midnight; observe, at Midnight, night, when all was
hushed and quiet, and no one dreaming any such Thing, a Cry was made; The Voice
of the Archangel and the Trump of GOD was heard sounding this general Alarm,
To Things in Heaven, to Things in Earth, and to Things in the Waters under the
Earth, BEHOLD -- mark how this awful Summons is ushered in with the Word BEHOLD
-- to engage our Attention; Behold the Bridegroom comes! even JESUS CHRIST,
the Desire of Nations, the Bridegroom of his Spouse the Church! Because he
tarried for a while to exercise the Faith of Saints, and give Sinners Space to
repent, Scoffers were apt to cry out, Where is the Promise of his coming? But
the LORD is not slack concerning his Promise, as these Men (...) slackness --
For Behold he that was to come now comes, and will not tarry any longer: He
comes to be glorified in his Saints, and to take Vengeance on them that know
not GOD, and have not obeyed his Gospel: He comes not as a poor despised
Galilean; not to be stabled in a stinking Manger; not to be despised and
rejected of Men; not to be blindfolded, spit upon, and buffeted; not to be
nailed to an accursed Tree; not as the Son of Man, but as he really was the
eternal Son of an eternal GOD: He comes riding on the Wings of the Wind in the
Glory of the Father and his Holy Angels, and to be had in everlasting Reverence
of all that shall be round about him. -- Go ye forth to meet him -- arise, ye
Dead, ye foolish as well as wise Virgins, arise and come to Judgment.
Multitudes no doubt, that heard the awakening Cry, would have rejoiced if the
Rocks might fall on, and the Hills cover them from the Presence of the LAMB:
What would they give, if as they lived as Beasts, they might now die like
Beasts that perish? How would they rejoice if those same Excuses which they had
made on this side Eternity for not attending on Holy Ordinances, would now
serve to keep them from appearing before the heavenly Bridegroom! But as Adam
notwithstanding his Fig Leaves, and the Trees of the Garden, could not hide
himself from GOD, when arrested with an -- Adam, where art thou? So now, the
Decree is gone forth, and the Trump of GOD has given its last Sound, all
Tongues, People, Nations and Languages, both wise and foolish Virgins must come
into his Presence, and bow beneath his Footstool; even Pontius Pilate, Annas
and Caiaphas; even the proud persecuting Highpriests and Pharisees of this
Generation, must now appear before him: For says our LORD, then, i. e. when the
Cry was made, Behold, the Bridegroom (...) in a Moment, in the twinkling of an
Eye, the Graves were opened, the Sea gave up its (...) all those Virgins, both
wise and foolish, ar^^^ and trimmed their Lamps, i. e. endeavored to put
themselves in a proper Posture to meet the Bridegroom.

But how may we imagine the foolish Virgins were surprised, when
notwithstanding their high Thoughts and proud Imaginations of their Security,
they now find themselves wholly naked and void of that Inward Holiness and
Purity of Heart, without which no Man living at that Day shall comfortably meet
the LORD! I doubt not, but many these foolish Virgins whilst in this World,
were clothed in Purple and fine Linen, fared sumptuously every Day, and would
disdain to set the wise Virgins, some of which might be as poor as Lazarus,
even with the Dogs of their Flock. These were looked upon by them as
Enthusiasts and Madmen, as Persons that were Righteous overmuch, and who
intended to turn the World upside down: But now Death has opened their Eyes,
and convinced them to their Eternal Sorrow, that he is not a true Christian who
is only one outwardly. Now they find (though alas! too late) they, and not the
wise Virgins, had been beside themselves. Now their proud Hearts are made to
stoop, their lofty Looks are brought low; and as Dives entreated that Lazarus
might dip the Tip of his Finger in Water, and be sent to cool his Tongue, so
these foolish Virgins, these formal Hypocrites, are obliged to turn Beggars to
those whom they once despised -- Give us of your Oil -- Oh! impart to us a
little of that Grace and Holy Spirit, for the insisting on which we Fools
accounted your Lives Madness; for alas! our Lamps are gone out -- we had only
the Form of Godliness -- we were whited Sepulchers -- we were Heart-Hypocrites
-- we contented ourselves with desiring to be good, and though confident of
Salvation whilst we lived, yet our Hope is entirely gone now GOD has taken away
our Souls; give us therefore, Oh! give us, though we once despised you, give us
of your Oil, for our Lamps of an outward Prosession, transient Convictions, are
quite gone out.

Comfort ye, comfort ye, my People, says the LORD, with this. -- My Brethren
in CHRIST, hear what the foolish say to the wise Virgins, and learn in Patience
to possess your Souls. If you are true Followers of the lowly JESUS, I am
persuaded you have your Names cast out, and all manner of Evil spoken against
you, for his Namesake; for (...) one ever did or will live godly in CHRIST
JESUS, without suffering Persecution; nay, I doubt not, but your chief Foes are
those of your own Household: Tell me, do not your carnal Relations and Friends
vex your tender Souls Day by Day, in bidding you spare yourselves, and take
heed lest you go too far: And as you passed along to come and hear the Word of
GOD, have you not heard many a Pharisee cry out, Here comes another Troop of
his Followers! Brethren, be not surprised, CHRIST'S Servants were always the
World's Fools; you know it hated him before it hated you. Rejoice and be
exceeding glad. Yet a little while and Behold the Bridegroom comes, and then
shall you hear these formal scoffing Pharisees saying unto you, Give us of your
Oil, for our Lamps are gone out. When you are reviled, revile not again: When
you suffer, threaten not; commit your Souls into the Hands of him that judges
righteously^ For behold the Day comes when the Children of GOD shall speak for
themselves.

The wise Virgins, in the Parable, no doubt endured the same cruel Mockings as
you may do; but as the Lamb before the Shearers is Dumb, so in this Life opened
they not they their Mouths; but now we find they can give their Enemies an
Answer: Not so, lest there be not enough for us and you; but go ye rather to
them that sell, and buy for yourselves. These Words are not to be understood as
though they were spoken in an insulting Manner; for true Charity teaches us to
use the worst of Sinners, and our most bitter Enemies, with the Meekness and
Gentleness of CHRIST: Though Dives was in Hell, yet Abraham does not say, Thou
Villain, but only Son remember: And I am persuaded, had it been in the Power of
these wise Virgins, they would have dealt with the foolish Virgins, as, GOD
knows, I would willingly deal with my most inveterate Enemies, not only give
them of their Oil, but also exalt them to the Right Hand of GOD. -- It was not
then for want of Love, but for fear of wanting a sufficiency for themselves,
that made them return this answer, Not so, lest there be not enough for us and
you: For they that have most Grace have none to spare; none but self-righteous,
foolish Virgins think they are good enough, or have already attained. -- Those
who are truly wise are always most distrustful of themselves, pressing forwards
to the Things that are before, and think it well if after they have done all,
they can make their Calling and Election sure -- Not so, lest there be not
enough for us and you; But go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your
selves: These Words indeed seem to be spoken in a triumphant, but certainly
they were uttered in the most compassionate Manner, go ye to them that sell and
buy for yourselves: -- Unhappy Virgins! you accounted our Lives Folly. Whilst
with you in the Body, how often have you condemned us for our Zeal in running
to hear the Word, and looked upon us as Enthusiasts, for talking about and
affirming, that we must be led by the Spirit, and walk by the Spirit, and feel
the Spirit of GOD witnessing with our Spirits, that we are (...) Children? But
now you would be glad to be Partakers of this Privilege, but it is not ours to
give. You contented yourselves with seeking when you should have been striving
to enter in at the strait Gate. -- And now go to them that sell, if you can,
and buy for yourselves.

And what say you to this, ye foolish formal Professors? For I doubt not but
Curiosity and Novelty has brought many such, even to this despised Place, to
hear a Sermon. Can you hear this Reply to the foolish Virgins, and yet not
tremble? Why, yet a little while, and thus it shall be done to you. Rejoice and
bolster yourselves up in your Duties and Forms; endeavor to cover your
Nakedness with the Fig Leaves of an outward Profession and a legal
Righteousness, and despise the true Servants of CHRIST as much as you please
yet know, that all your Hopes will fail you when GOD brings you into Judgment.
For not him who commends himself is justified, but he whom the LORD
commends.

But to return; we do not hear any Reply the foolish Virgins make: No, their
Consciences condemned them; like the Person in the Parable without a
Wedding Garment, they are struck dumb, and are now filled with anxious Thoughts
how they shall buy Oil, that they may lift up their Heads before the
Bridegroom. But whilst they went to buy, v. 10. i. e. whilst they were thinking
what they should do, the Bridegroom, the Lord Jesus, the Head, the King, the
Husband of his Spouse the Church, comes attended with Thousands and Twenty
times Ten Thousands of Saints and Angels, publicly to count up his Jewels; and
they that were ready, -- the wise Virgins who had Oil in their Lamps, and were
sealed by his Spirit to the Day of Redemption, these having on a Wedding
Garment of an imputed Righteousness, and a new Nature, went in with him to the
Marriage.

But who can express the Transports that these wise Virgins felt, when they
were thus admitted, in a holy Triumph, into the Presence and full Enjoyment of
him whom their Souls hungered and thirsted after! No doubt they had tasted of
his Love, and by Faith had often fed on him in ^^eir Hearts, when sitting down
to commemorate his last Supper here on Earth; but how full may we think their
Hearts and Tongues were of his Praises, when they see themselves sit down
together to eat Bread in his Heavenly Kingdom! And what was best of all, the
Door was shut, and shut them in, to enjoy the ever blessed GOD and the Company
of Angels and the Spirits of just Men made perfect, without Interruption for
evermore. I say, without Interruption; for in this Life, their Eyes often
gushed out with Water because Men kept not GOD's Law; and they could never come
to appear before the LORD, or to hear his Word, but Satan and his Emissaries
would come also to disturb them; but now the Door is shut, now there is a
perfect Communion of Saints, which they in vain longed for in this lower World;
now Tares no longer grow up with the Wheat; not one single Hypocrite or
Unbeliever can skreen himhimself amongst them. -- Now the wicked cease from
troubling, and now their weary Souls enjoy an everlasting Rest.

Once more, O Believers let me exhort you in Patience to possess your Souls.
GOD if he has freely justified you by Faith in his Son, and given you his
Spirit, has sealed you to be his; and has secured you as surely as he secured
Noah when he locked him in the Ark. But though Heirs of GOD, and joint Heirs
with CHRIST, and neither Men or Devils can pluck you out of your heavenly
Father's Hands, yet you must be tossed about with manifold Temptations; but
lift up your Heads, the Day of your perfect complete Redemption draws nigh.
-- Behold the Bridegroom comes to take you to himself, the Door shall be shut,
and you shall be forever with the LORD.

But I even tremble to tell you, O nominal Christians, that the Door will be
shut, I mean the Door of Mercy, never, never to be opened to give you
Admission, though you should continue knocking to all Eternity. For thus speaks
our LORD, v. 11. Afterward, i. e. after those that were ready had went in, and
the Door was shut; after they had to their Sorrow found that no Oil was to be
bought, no Grace to be procured, came also the other Virgins; and, as Es^u
after Jacob had got the Blessing, cried with an exceeding bitter Cry, bles^ me,
even me also, Oh my Father; so they came saying, LORD, LORD, open to us. --
Observe the Importunity of these foolish Virgins, implied in these Words, LORD,
LORD. -- Whilst in the Body, I suppose they only read, but did not pray over
their Prayers: If you would tell them, they should Pray without ceasing, they
should pray from their Hearts, and feel the Want of what they prayed for; they
would answer, They could not tell what you mean by inward Feelings; that GOD
did not require us to be always on our Knees, but if a Man did justly, and
loved Mercy, and did as the Church Forms required him, it was as much as the
LORD required at his Hands.

I fear, Sirs, too many amongst us, are of this Mind. Nay, I fear there are
many so polite, so void of the Love of GOD, as to think it too great a Piece of
Self-Denial, to rise early to offer up a Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving
acceptable to GOD through JESUS CHRIST. If any such by the good Providence of
GOD, are brought hither this Morning, I beseech you consider your Ways, and
remember, if you are not awakened out of your Spiritual Lethargy, and live a
Life of Prayer here, you shall in vain cry out with the foolish Virgins, LORD,
LORD, open unto us, hereafter. -- Observe, further, the Impudence, as well as
Importunity of these other Virgins; LORD, LORD, say they, -- as though they were
intimately acquainted with the Holy JESUS. Like Numbers amongst us, who because
they go to Church, repeat their Creeds, and receive the blessed Sacrame^^ (...)
they have a Right to call JESUS the^ (...), and dare call GOD their Father
(...) they put up the Lord's Prayer. But JESUS is not your Savior. The Devil,
not GOD, is your Father, unless your Hearts are purified by Faith, and you are
born again from above. It Is not merely being baptized by Water, but being born
again of the Holy Ghost that must qualify you for Salvation; and it will do you
no Service at the great Day, to say unto CHRIST, LORD, my Name is in the
Register of such and such a Parish. -- I am persuaded the foolish Virgins could
say this and more; but what Answer did JESUS make? He answered and said, v. 12.
Verily, I say unto you: He puts the Word VERILY, to assure them he was in
earnest. -- I say unto you, -- I who am Truth itself, -- I whom you have owned
in Words, but in Works denied, VERILY, I say unto you, I know you (...). These
Words must not be understood literally; for whatever Arians and Socinians may
say to the contrary, yet we affirm that JESUS CHRIST is GOD, GOD blessed
forever, and therefore knows all Things. He saw Nathaniel when under the
Fig Tree: He sees and is now looking down from Heaven his Dewlling Place, upon
us, to see how we behave in these Fields. -- Brethren, I know nothing of the
Thoughts and Intents of your Hearts, in coming hither; but JESUS CHRIST he
knows who come like newborn Babes, desirous to be fed with the sincere Milk of
the Word. And he knows who came to hear what the Babbler says, and to run away
with part of a broken Sentence, that they may have whereof to accuse him. --
This Expression then, I know you not, must not be understood literally; No, it
implies a Knowledge of Approbation, as though CHRIST had said, you call me LORD,
LORD, but you have not done the Things that I have said; you desire me to open
the Door, but how can you come in hither not having on a Wedding Garment? Alas,
you are naked as you came into the World! where is my outward Righteousness
imputed to you? Where is my inherent Righteousness wrought in you? Where is my
Divine Image stamped upon your Souls? How dare you call me LORD, LORD, when you
have not received the Holy Ghost, whereby I seal all that are truly mine?
Verily, I know you not, depart from me, ye Cursed, into everlasting Fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

And now he that has Ears to hear, let him hear what Manner of Persons these
were, whom JESUS CHRIST dismissed with this Answer. -- Remember, I entreat you,
remember they are not sent away for being Fornicators, Swea^ers,
Sabbath Breakers, or Prodigals. No, in all Probability, as I observed before,
they were, touching the outward Observances of the Mo^^l Law, blameless; --
they were constant as to the Form of Religion; and if they did no good, yet no
one could say, they did any one any harm. The only Thing for which they were
condemned and eternally banished from the Presence of the LORD (for so much is
implied in that Sentence I know you not) was this, they had no Oil in their
Lamps; no Principle of a true living Faith, and Holiness in their Hearts. --
And If Persons may go to Church, receive the Sacrament, lead honest moral
Lives, and yet be sent to Hell at the last Day, as they certainly will be if
they advance no further, Where will thou, O Drunkard? Where will thou, O
Swearer? Where will thou, O Sabbath-Breaker? Where will thou that deniest
Divine Revelation, and even the Form of Godliness? Where will thou and such
like Sinners appear? I know very well where. -- You must appear before the
dreadful Tribunal of JESUS CHRIST: For however you may, like Felix, put off the
Prosecution of your Convictions, yet you as well as others, must arise after
Death, and appear in Judgment: You will then find to your eternal Sorrow, what
I just hinted at in the Beginning of this Discourse, viz. that your Damnation
slumbereth not: Sin has blinded your Hearts, and hardened your Foreheads now,
but yet a little while and our LORD will ease him of his Adversaries. --
Methinks already, by Faith, I see the Heavens opened, and the Holy JESUS
coming, with his Face brighter than Ten Thousand Suns, darting Fury upon you
from his Eyes! -- Methinks I see you rising from your Graves trembling and
astonished, and crying out, Who can abide this Day of his coming!

And now what Inference shall I draw from what has been delivered? Our LORD, in
the Words of the Text, has drawn one for me, Watch therefore, for ye know
neither the Day nor the Hour whe^e^n the Son of Man comes.

Watch; that is, be upon your Guard, and keep your Graces in continual
Exercise: For as when we are commanded to watch unto Prayer, it signifies that
we should continue instant in that Duty; so when we are required to watch in
general, it means that we should put on the whole Armor of GOD, and live every
Day as though it was our last. And Oh! that the LORD, may now enable me to lift
up my Voice like a Trumpet! For had I a thousand Tongues, or could I speak so
loud that the whole World might hear me, I could not sound a more useful Alarm
than that which is contained in the Words of the Text. (...) therefore, my
Brethren, I beseech you by (...) Mercies of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, Watch (...)
upon your Guard; Awake, ye that sleep in (...) For ye know neither the Day nor
the Hour (...) the Son of Man comes. Perhaps to Day, perhaps this Midnight,
the CRY may be made: For in a Moment, in the twinkling of an Eye, the Trump is
to sound. -- However, supposing the final Day of Judgment may yet be a great
way off, yet the Day of Death is certainly near at Hand: For what is our Life?
It is but a Vapor* it is but a Span long, so soon passes it away and we are
gone. Blessed be GOD we are all here well; but who out of this great Multitude
dares say, I shall go home to my House in Safety? Who knows but whilst I am
speaking, GOD may commission his ministering Spirits immediately to call some of
you away by a sudden Stroke, to give an Account with what Attention you have
heard this Sermon. You know my Brethren, some such Instances we have lately had
given us -- And what Angel or Spirit has assured us that some of you shall not
be the next? Watch therefore, for ye know neither the Day nor the Hour wherein
the Son of Man will come -- And it is chiefly for this Reason, that GOD has hid
the Day of our Deaths from us -- For since I know not but I may die to me (...)
why, O my Soul, may each of us (...) thou not watch to Day? Since I (...) not
but I may die the next Moment, w^y will thou not prepare for dying this? --
Many such Reflections as these, my Brethren, crowd in upon my Mind. At present,
blessed be the LORD, who delights to magnify his Strength in a poor Worm's
Weakness, I am at a stand, not so much about what I shall say, as what I shall
leave unsaid -- My Belly, like Elihu's, is as it were full of new Wines -- out
of the abundance of my Heart my Mouth speaks. The seeing so great a Multitude
standing before me, a Sense of the infinite Majesty of that GOD in whose Name I
preach, and before whom I as well as you must appear to give an Account; and
the uncertainty there is whether I shall live another Day to speak to you any
more -- These Considerations, I say, especially the Presence of GOD, which I
now feel upon my Soul, furnishes me with so much Matter, that I scarce know
where to begin or where to end my Application -- however, for Method sake by
the Divine Assistance, I will branch it into three several particulars.

And first, I would remind you that are notoriously ungodly, of what our LORD
says in the Text: For though I have said that your Damnation slumbereth not,
whilst you continue in an impenitent State; yet that was only to set you upon
your Watch, to convince you of your Danger, and excite you to cry out, What
shall we do to be saved? I appeal to all that hear me, whether I have said the
Door of Mercy should be shut against you if you believe on JESUS CHRIST: No, if
you are the chief of Sinners; if you are Murderers of Fathers, Murderers of
Mothers; if you are emphatically the Dung and Offscouring of all Things; yet if
you believe on JESUS CHRIST and cry unto him with the same Faith as the
expiring Thief, LORD remember me now thou art in thy Kingdom; I will pawn my
eternal Salvation upon it, if he does not shortly translate you to this
heavenly Paradise. Wonder not at my speaking with so much Assurance: For I know
this is a faithful and true Saying, and worthy all Acceptance, that JESUS
CHRIST came into the World to save all truly convicted and believing Sinners:
Nay so great is his Love, that I am persuaded, was it necessary, he would come
again into the World and die a second Time for them on the Cross. But blessed
be GOD, when our LORD bowed down his Head and gave up the Ghost, our Redemption
was finished. It Is not our Sins, but our want of a lively Faith in his Blood,
that will prove our Condemnation: If you draw near to him by Faith, though ye are
the worst of Sinners, yet he will ^^t say unto you, Verily I know you not --
No, a Door of Mercy shall be opened to you. Look then, look then, by an Eye of
Faith to that GOD-MAN whom ye have pierced -- Behold him bleeding, panting,
dying upon the Cross, with Arms stretched out ready to embrace you all -- Hark!
how he groans! See how all Nature is in an Agony! The Rocks rend, the Graves
open; the Sun withdraws its Light, ashamed as it were to see the GOD OF NATURE
suffer; and all this to usher in Man's great Redemption. -- Nay, the HOLY
JESUS, in the very Agonies and Pangs of Death, prays for his very Murderers;
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. What then, if you have
(...) the Son of GOD afresh, and put him to an open Shame, yet do not despair,
only believe and even this shall be forgiven: You have read, at least you have
heard, no doubt, how three thousand were converted at St. Peter's preaching one
single Sermon, after our LORD's Ascension into Heaven; and many of the
Crucifiers of the LORD OF GLORY undoubtedly were amongst them, and why should
you despair? For JESUS CHRIST is the same, yesterday, to Day, and forever. The
Holy Ghost shall be sent down on you, as well as on them, if you do but
believe; for CHRIST ascended up on High to receive this Gift, even for the
vilest of Men. -- Come then, All ye that are weary and heavy laden, with the
sense of your Sins, lay hold on CHRIST by Faith, and he will give you Rest; for
Salvation is the free Gift o^ GOD to all them that believe. And though you may
think this too good News to to be true, yet I speak the Truth in CHRIST, I lie
not, this is the Gospel, th^^ is the glad Tidings which we are commissioned to
preach to every Creature. Be not faithless then, but believing. Let not the
Devil lead you captive at his Will any longer; for all the Wages he gives his
Servants is Death, Death often in this Life, Death everlasting in the next: But
now the free Gift of GOD is eternal Life to all that believe in JESUS CHRIST --
Pharisees are and will be offended at my coming here and offering you Salvation
on such cheap Terms -- but the more they bid me hold my Peace, the more will I
cry out and proclaim to convicted Sinners JESUS, David's Son according to the
Flesh, but David's Lord as he was GOD, will have Mercy upon all that by a
living Faith truly turn to him -- If this is to ^^^vile, I pray GOD I may be
more vile. -- If they will not let me preach CHRIST crucified, and offer
Salvation to poor Sinners in a Church, I will preach him in the Lanes, Streets,
Highways and Hedges; and nothing pleases me better than to think I am now in
one of the Devils strongest Holds -- Surely the LORD has not sent me and all
you hither for nothing; no, blessed be GOD, the Fields are white ready unto
Harvest, and many Souls I (...) will be gathered into his heavenly Garner --
It Is true, it is the Midnight of the Church, especially the poor Church of
England; but GOD has lately sent forth his Servants (...) cry, Behold the
Bridegroom comes: I beseech you, Oh Sinners, hearken unto the Voice! Let me
espouse you by Faith to my dear Master; and henceforward WATCH AND PRAY, that
you may be ready to go forth to meet him.

Secondly, I would apply myself to those amongst you that are not openly (...)
by depending on a formal Round of (...) deceive your own Souls, and are only
(...) Virgins. -- But I must speak to your Conviction rather than your Comfort.
My dear Brethren, do not deceive your own Souls, -- You have heard how far the
foolish Virgins went, and yet were answered with a verily I know you not: The
Reason is, because none but such that have a living Faith in JESUS CHRIST, and
are truly born again, can possibly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: You may
perhaps live honest and outwardly moral Lives, but if you depend on that
Morality, or join your Works with your Faith, in order to justify you before
GOD, you have no Lot or Share in CHRIST'S Redemption: For what is this but to
deny the LORD that has bought you? What is this but making yourselves your own
Saviors? -- taking the Crown from JESUS CHRIST, and putting it on your own
Heads? The Crime of the Devil some have supposed consisted in this, that he
would not bow to JESUS CHRIST, when he came into the World as Mediator, and the
Father commanded all the Angels to worship him; and what do you less? You will
not own and submit to his Righteousness, and though you pretend to worship him
with your Lips, yet your Hearts are far from him; besides you in Effect deny
the Operations of his blessed Spirit, you mistake common for effectual Grace,
you hope to be saved because you have good Desires, and a few short
Convictions; and what is this, but to give GOD, his Word, and all his Saints
the Lie? A Jew, a Turk, has equally as good Grounds whereon to build his Hopes
of Salvation. Need I not then need to cry out to you, Ye foolish Virgins,
Watch, beg of GOD to convince you of your Self-Righteousness, and the secret
Unbelief of your Hearts; or otherwise whenever the CRY shall be made, Behold
the Bridegroom comes, you will find yourselves utterly unprepared to go forth
to meet him: -- You may cry LORD, LORD, but the Answer will be, Verily, I know
you not.

Thirdly, I would speak a Word or two by Way of Exhortation to those who are
wise Virgins, and are assured that they have on a Wedding Garment. That there
are many such amongst you, who by Grace have renounced your own Righteousness,
and know that the Righteousness of the Lord JESUS is imputed to you, I make no
doubt. GOD has his secret Ones in the worst of Times; and I am persuaded he has
not lot so loud a Gospel Cry to be made amongst his People, as of late has been
heard, for nothing: No, I am confident the Holy Ghost has been given to many at
the Preaching of Faith, and has powerfully fallen upon many whilst they have
been hearing the Word: You are now then no longer foolish but wise Virgins;
notwithstanding, I beseech you also to suffer the Word of Exhortation; for wise
Virgins are too apt, whilst the Bridegroom tarries, to slumber and sleep. Watch
therefore, my dear Brethren, watch and pray, at this Time especially; for
perhaps a Time of Suffering is at hand -- The Ark of the LORD begins already to
be driven into the Wilderness. -- Be ye therefore upon your watch, and still
persevere in following your LORD, even without the Camp, bearing his Reproach:
The Cry that has been lately made, has awakened the Devil and his Servants:
they begin to rage horribly; and well they may; for I hope his Kingdom is in
Danger. Watch therefore, my dear Brethren, for if we are not always upon our
Guard, a Time of Trial may overtake us unawares; and, instead of owning, like
Peter we may be tempted to to deny our Master. Set Death and Eternity often
before you. Look unto JESUS, the Author and Finisher of your Faith, and
consider how little a While it will be, ever he comes to Judgment; and then our
Reproach shall be wiped away; the Accusers of us and our Brethren shall be cast
down, and we all shall be shut in Heaven for ever, with our dear LORD JESUS.

Lastly; what I say unto you, I say unto all, WATCH: High and Low, Rich and
Poor, Young and Old, one with another, I beseech you, by the Mercies of JESUS,
whom I am now preaching, be upon your Guard: Fly, fly to JESUS CHRIST, that
Heavenly Bridegroom: Behold he desires to take you to himself, miserable, poor,
blind and naked as you are; he is willing to cloth you with his everlasting
Righteousness, and make you Partakers of that Glory, which he enjoyed with the
Father before the World began. Oh! do not turn a deaf Ear to me; do not reject
the Message on Account of the Meanness of the Messenger. I am a Child; a Youth
of uncircumcised Lips; but the LORD has chosen me, that the Glory might be all
his own. -- Had he sent to invite you by a learned Rabbi, you might have been
tempted to think the Man had done something; but now GOD has sent a Child that
cannot speak, that the Excellency of the Power may be seen not to be of Man,
but of GOD. Let the learned Pharisees then despise my Youth. I care not how
vile I appear in the Sight of such Men: I glory in it. And I am persuaded, if
any of you should be married to CHRIST by this Preaching, you will have no
Reason to repent, when you come to Heaven, that GOD sent a Child to cry, Behold
the Bridegroom comes! Oh! my Brethren, the Thought of being instrumental in
bringing one of you to Glory, fills me with fresh Zeal. My Brethren, once more
I entreat you, WATCH, WATCH AND PRAY: For the LORD JESUS will receive all that
call upon him faithfully. Let that CRY, Behold the Bridegroom comes, be
continually sounding in your Ears; and begin now to live, as though you were
assured, this Night you were to go forth to meet him. I could say more, but the
other Business and Duties of the Day oblige me to stop. May the LORD give you
all an hearing Ear, and obedient Heart, and so closely unite you to himself by
one Spirit, that when he shall come in terrible Majesty, to judge Mankind, you
may be found having on a Wedding Garment, and ready to go in with him to the
Marriage.

Grant this, O LORD, for (...) dear SON's Sake.

SERMON X.
What think ye of CHRIST?
MATTHEW. xxii. 42. What think ye of CHRIST?
WHEN it pleased the eternal Son of GOD to tabernacle among us, and come
preaching the glad Tidings of Salvation to a fallen World, different Opinions
were entertained by different Parties concerning him. -- As to his Person, some
said he was Moses; others that he was Elias, Jeremias, or one of the ancient
Prophets; few acknowledged him to be what he really was, GOD Blessed for
evermore. -- And as to his Doctrine, though the common People, being free from
Prejudice, were persuaded of the heavenly Tendency of his going about to do
Good, for the Generality, heard him gladly, and said he was a good Man; yet the
envious, worldly-minded, self-righteous Governors and Teachers of the Jewish
Church, being grieved at his Success, on the one Hand, and unable (having never
been taught of GOD) to understand the Purity of his Doctrine, on the other;
notwithstanding our LORD spoke as never Man spoke, and did such Miracles which
no Man could possibly do, unless GOD was with him; yet they not only were so
infatuated, as to say, that he deceived the People. but also were so
blasphemous as to affirm, that he was in league with the Devil himself, and
cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. -- Nay, our LORD's own
Brethren and Kinsmen, according to the Flesh, were so blinded by Prejudice and
Unbelief, that on a certain Day, when he went out to teach the Multitudes in
the Fields, they sent to take hold on him, urging this as a Reason for their
Conduct, viz. That he was besides himself.

Thus was the King and Lord of Glory judged by Man's Judgment, when made
manifest in the Flesh: Far be it from any of his Ministers to expect any better
Treatment. -- No, if we come in the Spirit and Power of our Master, in this, as
in every other Part of his Sufferings, we must follow his Steps. -- The like
Reproaches which were cast on him, will be thrown on us also. -- Those that
received our Lord and his Doctrine, will receive and hear us for his Namesake.
-- The Poor, blessed be GOD, as our present Meeting abundantly testifies,
receive the Gospel, and (...) common People hear us gladly; whilst those th^^
are sitting in Moses his Chair, and love to wear long ^^^^es, being ignorant of
the Righteousness which is of GOD by Faith in CHRIST JESUS, and having never
felt the Power of GOD upon their Hearts, will be continually crying out against
us, as Madmen, Deceivers of the People, and as acting under the Influences of
evil Spirits.

But he is unworthy the Name of a Minister of the Gospel of Peace, who is
unwilling, not only to have his Name cast out as evil, but also to die for the
Truths of the Lord JESUS. -- It is the Character of Hirelings and False
Prophets, who care not for the Sheep, to have all Men speak well of them. --
Blessed are you, says our LORD to his first Apostles, and in them to all
succeeding Ministers, when Men speak all Manner of Evil against you falsely for
my Name sake. -- And indeed it is impossible but such Offenses must come: For
Men will always judge of others according to the Principles from which they act
themselves. -- And if they care not to yield Obedience to the Doctrines which
we deliver, they must necessarily, in Self-defence, speak against the
Preachers, lest they should be ask^d that Question, which the Pharisees of old
feared to have retorted on them, if they confessed that John was a Prophet,
viz. Why then did you not believe on him? In all such Cases, we have nothing to
do but to search our own Hearts, and if we can assure our Consciences, before
GOD, that we act with a single Eye to his Glory, we are cheerfully to go on in
our Work, and not in the least to regard what Men or Devils can say against, or
do unto us.

But to return. You have heard what various Thoughts were handed about
concerning JESUS CHRIST whilst here on Earth: Nor is he otherwise treated, even
now he is exalted to sit down at the Right Hand of his Father in Heaven. -- A
Stranger to Christianity, was he to hear we all profess to hold one LORD, would
naturally infer, that we all thought and spoke one and the same Thing about
him. But alas! to out Shame be it mentioned, though CHRIST be not divided in
himself, yet Professors are sadly divided in their Thoughts about him; and that
not only as to the Circumstances of his Religion, but also of those essential
Truths which must necessarily be believed and received by us, if ever we hope
to be Heirs of eternal Salvation.

Some, and that I fear a Multitude which no Man can easily number, there are
amongst us, who call themselves Christians, and yet seldom or never seriously
think of JESUS CHRIST at all. They can think of their Shops, and their Farms,
their Plays, their Balls, their Assemblies, and Horse-races (Entertainments
which directly tend to exclude Religion out of the World) but as for CHRIST,
the Author and Finisher of their Faith, the LORD who has bought them with his
precious Blood, and who is the only Thing worth their thinking of, alas! he is
not in all, at most in very few, of their Thoughts. But believe me, O ye
earthly, sensual, carnally minded Professors, however little you may think of
CHRIST now, or however industriously you may strive to keep him out of your
Thoughts, by pursuing the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride
of Life, yet there is a Time coming, when you will wish you had thought of
CHRIST more, and of your Profits and Pleasures less. -- For the Gay; the
Polite, the Rich also must die as well as others, and leave their Pomps, their
Vanities, and all their Wealth behind them. -- And oh! what Thoughts will you
entertain concerning JESUS CHRIST, in that Hour.

But I must not pursue these Reflections: They would carry me too far from the
main Design of this Discourse, which is to show what those that are truly
desirous to know how to worship GOD in Spirit and in Truth, ought to think
concerning JESUS CHRIST, whom GOD has sent to be the End of the Law for
Righteousness to all them that shall believe.

I trust, my Brethren, you are more noble than to think me too strict or
scrupulous, in thus attempting to regulate even your Thoughts about JESUS
CHRIST: For by our Thoughts as well as our Words and Actions, are we to be
judged at the Great Day. And in vain do we hope to believe in, or worship
CHRIST aright, unless our Principles, on which our Faith and Practice is
founded, are agreeable to the Form of sound Words delivered to us in the
Scriptures of Truth.

Besides, many Deceivers are gone abroad into the World. Mere Heathen Morality,
and not JESUS CHRIST, is preached in most of our Churches. And how should
People think rightly of CHRIST, of whom they have scarcely heard? Do bear with
me a little then, whilst, to inform your Consciences, I ask you a few Questions
concerning JESUS CHRIST: For there is no other Name given under Heaven, whereby
we can be saved, but his.

And First, What think you about the Person of CHRIST? Whose Son is he? This is
the Qu^^^ our LORD puts to the Pharisees in the Words following the Text; and
never was it more necessary to repeat this Question than in these last Days.
For Numbers that are called after the Name of CHRIST, and I fear, many that
pretend to preach him, are so far advanced in the blasphemous Chair, as openly
to deny his being really, truly and properly GOD. But no one that ever was
Partaker of his Spirit, will speak thus lightly of him. No; if they are asked,
as Peter and his Brethren were, but whom say ye that I am? they will reply
without Hesitation. Thou art CHRIST the Son of the ever-living GOD. For the
Confession of our Lord's Divinity, is the Rock upon which be builds his Church.
Was it possible to take this away, the Gates of Hell would quickly prevail
against it. -- My Brethren, if JESUS CHRIST be not very GOD of very GOD, I
would never preach the Gospel of CHRIST again. For it would not be Gospel; it
would be only a System of moral Ethics: Seneca, Cicero, or any of the Gentile
Philosophers would be as good a Savior as JESUS of Nazareth. It is the
Divinity of our LORD that gives a Sanction to his Death, and makes him such a
High Priest as became us, viz. One who by the infinite Merits of his Suffering
could make a full, perfect, sufficient Sacrifice, Satisfaction and Oblation to
an infinitely offended Justice. And whatsoever Minister of the Church of
England, makes use of her Forms, and (...) of her Bread, and yet holds not this
Doctrine (as I fear too many such are crept in amongst us) such a one belongs
only to the Synagogue of Satan. -- He is not a Child or Minister of GOD: No; he
is a Wolf in Sheep's Clothing, he is a Child and Minister of that Wicked One
the Devil.

Many will think these hard Sayings: But I think it no Breach of Charity to
affirm, that an Arian or Socinian cannot be a Christian. -- The one would make
us believe JESUS CHRIST is only a Created God, which is a Self-Contradiction.
And the other would have us look on him only as a Good Man, and instead of
owning his Death to be an Atonement for the Sins of the World, would persuade
us, that CHRIST died only to seal the Truth of his Doctrine with his Blood. But
if JESUS CHRIST be no more than a mere Man, if he be not truly GOD, he was the
vilest Sinner that ever appeared in the World. -- For he accepted of Divine
Adoration from the Man who had been born blind, as we read John ix. 38. And he
said, LORD I believe, and worshipped him. Besides, if CHRIST be not properly
GOD, our Faith is vain, we are yet in our Sins: -- For no created Being, though
of the highest Order, could possibly merit any thing at GOD's Hands.: No, it
was our LORD's Divinity, that alone qualified him to take away the Sins of the
World; and and therefore we hear St. John pronouncing so positively, that the
Word, i. e. JESUS CHRIST, was not only with GOD, but was GOD. -- For the like
Reason, St. Paul says, that he was in the Form of GOD. -- That in him dwelt all
the Fullness of the Godhead bodily. -- Nay, JESUS CHRIST himself assumes the
Title which GOD gave to himself, when he sent Moses to deliver his People
Israel. Before Abraham was, says he, I am. -- And again, I and my Father are
one. Which last Words, though our modern Infidels would evade and wrest, as they
do the other Scriptures, to their own Damnation; yet it is evident, that the
Jews understood our LORD, when he spoke thus, as though he made himself equal
with GOD; otherwise why did they stone him as a Blasphemer? -- And now, why
should it be thought a Breach of Charity, to affirm, that those that deny ^^e
Divinity of JESUS CHRIST, in the strictest Sense of the Word, cannot be
Christians? For they are greater Infidels than the Devils themselves. -- They
confessed that they knew who he was, he was even the holy One of GOD. -- They
not only believe, but which is more than all the Unbelievers of this Generation
do, they tremble. -- And was it possible for Arius or Socinus, those
Arch-Hereticks, to be released from their Chains of Darkness, under which they
are now reserved to the Judgment of the great Day. I am persuaded they would
inform us, how Hell had convinced them of the Divinity of JESUS CHRIST, and
that they would advise their Followers to abhor their Principles, left they
should come into the same Place, and thereby increase each others Torments.

But, Secondly, What think you of the Manhood or Incarnation of JESUS CHRIST?
For CHRIST was not only GOD, but he was GOD and Man in one Person. -- Thus runs
the Text and Context. -- When the Pharisees were gathered together. JESUS asked
them, saying, What think ye of CHRIST? Whose Son is he? They say unto him, the
Son of David. -- How then, says our Divine Master, does David in Spirit call
him LORD? From which Passage it is evident, that we do not think rightly of the
Person of JESUS CHRIST, unless we believe him to be perfect GOD and perfect
Man, of a reasonable Soul and human Flesh subsisting.

For it is on this Account that he is called CHRIST, or the anointed, i. e. one
who through his own voluntary Offer was set apart by the Father, and strengthened
and qualified by the Anointing or Communication of the Holy Ghost, to be a
Mediator between Him and offending Man.

The Reason or first Cause why the Son of GOD took upon him our Nature, was,
the Fall of our first Parents. -- I hope there is no one present so
atheistical, as to think that Man made himself: No, it was GOD that made us,
and not we ourselves. -- And I would willingly think, that no one would be so
blasphemous as to suppose, that if GOD did make us, he made us such Creatures
as we now find ourselves to be. For this would be giving GOD's Word the lie,
which tells us, that in the Image of GOD, not in the Image which we now bear on
our Souls, made be Man. -- Far be it from us to think thus: For as GOD made
Man, so GOD made him perfect. He placed him in the Garden of Eden, and
condescended to enter into a Covenant with him, promising him eternal Life,
upon Condition of an unsinning Obedience; and threatening eternal Death, if he
broke his Law, and eat the forbidden Fruit.

Man did eat; and herein acting as our Representative, thereby involved both
himself and us in that Curse, which GOD, the righteous Judge, had said should
be the Consequence of his Disobedience. -- But here begins that Mystery of
Godliness, GOD manifested in the Flesh. For (sing, O Heavens, and rejoice, O
Earth!) the eternal Father, foreseeing how Satan would bruise the Heel of Man,
had in his eternal Counsel, provided a Means whereby he might bruise that
accursed Serpent's Head. Man is permitted to fall, and become subject to Death;
but JESUS the only begotten Son of GOD, begotten of the Father before all
Worlds, God of God, Light of Light, very God, of very God, offers to die to
make an Atonement for his Transgression, and to fulfill all Righteousness in
his stead. And because it was impossible for him to do this as he was GOD, and
yet since Man had offended, it was necessary it should be done in the Person of
Man, rather than we should perish; this Everlasting GOD, this Prince of Peace,
this Ancient of Days, in the Fullness of Time, had a Body prepared for him by
the Holy Ghost, and became an Infant of a Span long. -- In this Body he
performed a complete Obedience to the Law of GOD, whereby he, in our stead,
fulfilled the Covenant of Works, and at last became subject to Death, even the
Death upon the Cross; that as GOD he might satisfy, as Man he might obey and
suffer; and being GOD and Man in one Person, might once more procure a Union
between GOD and our Souls.

And now, What think you of this Love of CHRIST? Do not you think it was
wondrous great? Especially when you consider that we were CHRIST'S bitter
Enemies, and that he would have been infinitely happy in himself,
notwithstanding we had perished for ever. -- Whatever you may think of it, I
know the blessed Angels, who are not so much concerned in this Mystery of
Godliness as we, think most highly of it. -- They do, they will desire to look
into and admire it, through all Eternity. -- Why, Oh why, ye Sinners, will you
not think of this Love of CHRIST! -- Surely it must melt down the most hardened
Heart. -- Whilst I am speaking, the Thoughts of this infinite and condescending
Love, fires and warms my Soul. -- I could dwell on it forever. -- But it is
expedient for you, that I should ask you another Question concerning JESUS
CHRIST.

Thirdly, What think you about being justified by CHRIST? -- I believe I can
answer for some of you. -- For many, I fear, think to be justified or looked
upon as righteous in GOD's Sight, without JESUS CHRIST. -- But such will find
themselves dreadfully mistaken: For out of CHRIST GOD is a consuming Fire. --
Others satisfy themselves with believing that CHRIST was GOD and Man, and that
he came into the World to save Sinners in general. Whereas their chief Thoughts
ought to be, how they may be assured that JESUS CHRIST came into the World to
save them in particular. -- The Life that I now live in the Flesh, says the
Apostle, is by Faith of the Son of GOD, who died and gave himself for me. --
Observe, for me. For it is this immediate Application of JESUS CHRIST to our
own Hearts, that renders his Merits effectual to our eternal Salvation. -- An
unapplied CHRIST will do us no Service at all. -- Others there are that go
still further: For they think that JESUS CHRIST is GOD-MAN, that he is to be
applied to their Hearts, and that they can be justified in GOD's Sight in or
through him; but then they make him only in Part a Savior. -- They are for doing
what they can themselves, and then JESUS CHRIST is to make up the Deficiencies
of their Righteousness. This is the Sum and Substance of our modern Divinity.
And was it possible for me to know the Thoughts of most that hear me this Day,
I believe they would tell me, this was the Scheme they had laid, and perhaps
depended on for some Years, for their eternal Salvation. Is it not then high
Time, my Brethren, for you to entert^^ quite different Thoughts concerning
Justification by JESUS CHRIST? For if you think thus, you are in the Case of
those unhappy Jews, who went about establishing their own Righteousness, and
would not submit to, and consequently were deprived of that Righteousness which
is of GOD by Faith in CHRIST JESUS our LORD. What think you then, my Brethren,
if I tell you, that you are to be justified freely through Faith in JESUS CHRIST,
without any Regard to any Work, or Fitness, foreseen in us, at all? For
Salvation is the free Gift of GOD. I know no Fitness in Man, but a Fitness to
be cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone forever. Our Righteousness in GOD's
Sight is but as filthy Rags. He cannot away with it. -- Our Holiness, if we
have any, is not the Cause, but the Effect of our Justification in GOD's Sight.
-- We love GOD, because he first loved us. We must not come to GOD as the proud
Pharisee did, bringing in as it were a Reckoning of our Services. We must come
in the Temper and Language of the poor Publican, smiting upon our Breasts and
saying, GOD be merciful to me a Sinner. For JESUS CHRIST justifies us whilst we
are ungodly. -- He came not to call the Righteous, but the Sinners to
Repentance. The poor in Spirit, they who are willing to go out of themselves,
and rely wholly on the Righteousness of another, are only so blessed as to be
Members of his Kingdom. The Righteousness, the whole Righteousness of JESUS
CHRIST, is to be imputed to us, instead of our own. For we are not under the
Law, but under Grace: And as many as walk after this Rule, Peace be on them;
for they, and they only are the true Israel of GOD. In the great Work of Man's
Redemption, Boasting is entirely excluded; which could not be if only one of
our Works was to be joined with the Merits of CHRIST. Our Salvation is all of
GOD from the Beginning to the End. It is not of Works, lest any Man should
boast. Man has no hand in it: It is CHRIST who is to be made to us of GOD the
Father, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and eternal Redemption. -- His
active as well as his passive Obedience, is to be applied to poor Sinners. He
has fulfilled all Righteousness in our stead, that we might become the
Righteousness of GOD in him. -- All we have to do, is to lay hold on this
Righteousness by Faith: And that very Moment we do apprehend him by a lively
Faith, that very Moment we may be assured that the Blood of JESUS CHRIST has
cleansed us from all Sin. -- For the Promise is to us and to our Children, and
to as many as the LORD our GOD shall call. If we and our whole Houses believe,
we shall be saved as well as the Jailer and his House: For the Righteousness of
JESUS CHRIST is an everlasting as well as a perfect Righteousness. -- It is as
effectual to all them that believe in him now, as formerly; and so it will be,
till Time shall be no more. Search the Scriptures as the Bereans did, and see
whether these Things are not so. Search St. Paul's Epistles to the Romans and
Galatians, and there you will find this Doctrine so plainly taught you, that
unless you have Eyes and see not, he that runs may read. Search the Eleventh
Article of our Church, We are accounted righteous before GOD, only for the
Merits of our LORD and Savior JESUS CHRIST by Faith, and not for our own Works
or Deservings.

This Doctrine of our free Justification by Faith in CHRIST JESUS, however
censured and evil spoken of by our present Masters of Israel; was highly
esteemed by our wise Forefathers: For in the subsequent Words of the
forementioned Article, it is called a most wholesome Doctrine, and very full of
Comfort; and so it is to all that are weary and heavy laden, and are truly
willing to find Rest in JESUS CHRIST.

This is Gospel, this is glad Tidings, of great Joy to all that feel themselves
poor, lost and undone damned Sinners. Ho every one that thirsts, come unto
the Waters of Life and drink freely; come and buy without Money and without
Price. -- Behold a Fountain opened in your Savior's Side, for Sin and for all
Uncleanness. Look unto him whom you have pierced. Look unto him by Faith, and
verily you shall be saved, though you came here only to ridicule and blaspheme,
and never thought of GOD or of CHRIST before.

Not that you must think GOD will save you because, or on Account of your
Faith: For Faith is a Work, and then you would be justified for your Works. But
when I tell you, we are to be justified by Faith, I mean that Faith is the
Instrument whereby the Sinner applies or brings home the Redemption of JESUS
CHRIST to his Heart. And to whomsoever GOD gives such a Faith (for it is the
free Gift of GOD) he may lift up his Head with Boldness, he need not fear, he
is a spiritual Son of our spiritual David, he has passed from Death to Life, he
shall never come into Condemnation. -- This is the Gospel which we preach. If
any Man or Angel preach any other Gospel, than this of our being freely
justified through Faith in CHRIST JESUS, we have the Authority of the greatest
Apostle to pronounce him accursed.

And (...), my Brethren, What think you of this Foolishness of Preaching? To
you that have tasted the good Word of Life, and been enlightened to see the
Riches of GOD's free Grace in CHRIST JESUS, I am persuaded it is precious, and
has distilled like the Dew into your Souls. -- And Oh! that all were like
minded! -- But I am afraid Numbers are ready to go away contradicting and
blaspheming. Tell me, are there not many of you saying within yourselves, This
is a licentious Doctrine; this Preacher is opening a Door for Encouragement in
Sin. But this does not surprise me at all, it is a stale antiquated Objection,
as old as the Doctrine of Justification itself; and (which by the Way is not
much to the Credit of those who urge it now) it was made by an Infidel. St.
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, after he had in the first five Chapters
demonstrably proved the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone; in the sixth,
brings in an Unbeliever saying, shall we continue in Sin then that Grace may
abound? But as he rejected such an Inference with a God forbid, so do I: For
the Faith which we preach is not a dead speculative Faith, an assenting to
Things credible as credible, as it is commonly defined. It is not a Faith of
the Head only; but a Faith of the Heart. It is a living Principle wrought in
the Soul, by the Spirit of the Ever-living GOD, convincing the Sinner of his
lost, undone Condition by Nature, enabling him to apply and lay hold on the
perfect Righteousness of Jesus Christ freely offered him in the Gospel, and
continually exciting him out of a Principle of Love and Gratitude, to show
forth that Faith by abounding in every good Word and Work. -- This is the Sum
and Substance of the Doctrine that has been delivered. -- And if this be a
licentious Doctrine, judge ye. -- No, my Brethren, this is not destroying, but
teaching you how to do good Works, from a proper Principle. -- For to use the
Words of our Church in another of her Articles, Works done before the Grace of
Christ, and the Inspiration of the Spirit, are not pleasant to God, forasmuch
as they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ -- rather for that they are not
done as God has willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they
have the Nature of Sin. So that they who bid you do, and then live, are just as
wise as those who would persuade you to build a beautiful magnificent House,
without laying a Foundation.

It Is true, the Doctrine of our free Justification by Faith in CHRIST JESUS,
like other Gospel Truths, may and will be abused by Men of corrupt Minds,
Reprobates concerning the Faith: But they who receive the Truth of GOD in the
Love of it, will always be showing their Faith by their Works. For this Reason,
St. Paul, after he had been telling the Ephesians, That by Grace they were
saved through Faith, not of Works, lest any Man should b^ast, immediately adds,
For we are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works. And in his
Epistle to Titus, having given him Directions, Chapter 3. v. 7. to tell People they
were justified by Grace, directly subjoins, v. 8. I will that you affirm
constantly, that they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain
good Works. Agreeable to this we are told in our 12th Article, That albeit good
Works, which are the Fruits of Faith, and follow after Justification, cannot
put away our Sins, and endure the Severity of God's Judgment; yet are they
pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ; and do spring necessarily out of a
true and lively Faith, insomuch that a lively Faith may be as evidently known
by them as a Tree discerned by the Fruit.

Oh what would I give, that this Article was duly understood and preached by
all that have subscribed to it! The Ark of the Lord would not then be driven
into the Wilderness, nor so many dissent from the Church of England. -- For I
am fully persuaded, that it is not so much on account of Rites and Ceremonies,
as our not Preaching the Truth as it is in JESUS, that so many have been
obliged to go and seek for Food elsewhere. Did not we fall from our established
Doctrines, few, comparatively speaking, would fall from the established Church.
Where Christ is preached, though it be in a Church or Common, Dissenters of all
Denominations have and do most freely come. But if our Clergy will preach only
the Law, and not show the Way of Salvation by Faith in Christ Jesus, the Charge
of Schism at the Day of Judgment, I fear, will chiefly lie at their Door. The
true Sheep of Christ know the Voice of Christ's true Shepherds, Strangers they
will not hear.

Observe, my dear Brethren, the Words of the Article, good Works are the Fruits
of Faith, and follow after Justification. How then can they ^recede or be any
ways the Cause of it? No; our Persons must be justified before our Performances
can be accepted. God had respect to Abel before he had respect to his Offering:
And therefore the Righteousness of Jesus Christ must be freely (...) ^o, and
apprehended by us through Faith, before we can offer an acceptable Sacrifice to
God: For out of Christ, as I hinted before, God is a consuming Fire; and
whatsoever is not of Faith in Christ, is Sin.

People's mistaking the Doctrine of free Justification, I believe, is partly
owing to their not rightly considering the different Persons St. Paul and St.
James wrote to in their Epistles, as also the different Kind of Justification
each of them writes about: The former asserts in Line upon Line, Argument upon
Argument, that we are justified by Faith alone. -- The latter put^ this
Question, Was not Abraham justified by Works? From whence many, not considering
the different Views of these Holy Men, and the different Persons they wrote to,
have blended and joined Faith and Works in order to justify us in the Sight of
God. But this is a Mistake all over: For St. Paul was writing to the Jewish
Proselites, who sought Righteousness by the Works, not of the Ceremonial only,
but of the Moral Law. -- In Contradistinction to that, he tells them they were
to look for Justification in God's Sight, only by the perfect Righteousness of
Jesus Christ apprehended by Faith. -- St. James had a different-Set of People
to deal with, viz. such who abused the Doctrines of free Justification, and
thought they should be saved (as Numbers among us do now) upon their barely
professing to believe on Jesus Christ. -- These the holy Apostle endeavors
wisely to convince, that such a Faith was only a dead and false Faith, and
therefore it behoved (...) would be blessed with faithful Abraham, (...) forth
their Faith by their Works as he (...) was not Abraham justified by Works, says
he? i. e. Did he not prove that his Faith was a true justifying Faith by its
being productive of good Works? From whence it is plain that St. James is
talking of a declarative Justification before Men; show me, demonstrate,
evidence to me, that thou have a true Faith, by thy Works. Whereas St. Paul is
talking only of our being justified in the Sight of God; and thus he proves
that Abraham, as we also are to be, was justified before ever the Moral or
Ceremonial Law was given to the Jews: For it is written, Abraham believed in
the Lord, and it was accounted to him for Righteousness.

Take the Substance of what has been said on this Head, in the few following
Words. -- Every Man that is saved, is justified ^hree Ways. First,
meritoriously, i. e. by the Death of Jesus Christ: It is the Blood of Jesus
Christ alone that cleanses us from all Sin. Secondly, instrumentally, viz. By
Faith; Faith is the Means or Instrument whereby the Merits of Jesus Christ are
applied to the Sinner's Heart: Ye are all the Children of God by Faith in
Christ Jesus. Thirdly, we are justified declaratively; namely, by good Works,
i. e. good Works declare and prove to the World, that our Faith is a true
saving Faith. -- Was not Abraham justified by Works? And again, Show me thy
Faith by thy Works? --

It may not be improper to illustrate this Doctrine by an Example or two. I
suppose no one will pretend to say, that there was any Fitness for ^^lvation in
Zacheus the Publican, when he came to see Jesus out of no better Principle,
than that whereby perhaps Thousands are led to hear me preach, I mean
Curiosity; but Jesus Christ prevented and called him by his free Grace, and
sweetly, but irresistibly inclined him to obey that Call, as I pray God he may
influence all you that come only to see who the Preacher is. Zacheus received
our Lord joyfully into his House, and at the same Time by Faith received him
into his Heart. Zacheus was then freely justified in the Sight of God. -- But
behold the immediate Fruits of that Justification! He stands forth in the
Midst, and as before he had believed in his Heart, he now makes Confession with
his Mouth to Salvation. -- Behold, Lord, the Half of my Goods I give unto the
Poor, and if I have taken any Thing from any Man by false Accusation, I restore
him Fourfold. -- And thus it will be with thee, O Believer, as soon as ever
God's dear Son is revealed in thee by a living Faith, thou will have no Rest in
thy Spirit, till out of Love and Gratitude for what God has done for thy Soul,
thou show forth thy Faith by thy Works.

Again, I suppose every Body will grant there was no Fitness for Salvation in
the Persecutor Saul, no more than there is in those persecuting Zealots of
these last Days, who are already breathing out Threatenings, and, if in their
Power, would breath out Slaughter also, against the Disciples of the LORD.

Now our Lord, we know, freely prevented him by his Grace (and, O that he (...)
effectually call the Persecutors of this Go(...) and by a Light from Heaven
struck (...) Ground. -- At the same Time, by his (...) pricked him to the
Heart, convinced him of Sin, and caused him to cry out, Who art thou, Lord?
Christ replies, I am JESUS whom thou persecutest. Faith then was
instantaneously given him, and behold, immediately Saul cries out, Lord what
would thou have me to do? And so will every poor Soul that believes on the
Lord Jesus with his whole Heart. He will be always asking, Lord what shall I do
for thee? Lord what would thou have me to do? Not to justify himself, but
only to evidence the Sincerity of his Love and Thankfulness to his all-merciful
High Priest, for plucking him as a Firebrand out of the Fire.

Perhaps, many Self-righteous Persons amongst you, may flatter yourselves, that
you are not so wicked as either Zacheus or Saul was, and consequently there is
a greater Fitness for Salvation in you than in them. But if you think thus,
indeed you th^^^ more highly of yourselves than you ought to ^^^nk: -- For by
Nature we are all alike, all equally fallen short of the Glory of God, all
equally dead in Trespasses and Sins, and there needs the same Almighty Power to
be exerted in converting any one of the most sober, good natured Moral Persons
(...) present, (...) there was in converting the Publican Zacheus, o^ that
notorious Persecutor Saul. -- And was it po^^^^e for you to ascend into the
highest Heavens, and to enquire of the Spirits of just Men made perfect, I am
persuaded they would tell you this Doctrine is (...) God. But we have a more
sure Word of Pr^^^^cy, to which we would do well to give heed, as unto a Light
shining in a dark Place. My Brethren, the Word is nigh you; search the
Scriptures; beg of God to make you willing to be saved in this the Day of his
Power, and you shall all be taught of God. -- For it is not Fresh and Blood,
but the Spirit of Jesus Christ, that alone can reveal these Things unto you.

Fourthly and lastly, What think you of JESUS CHRIST being formed within you?
For whom Christ justifies, them he also sanctifies. Although, he finds, yet he
does not leave us unholy. -- A true Christian may not so properly be said to
live as JESUS CHRIST to live in him. For they only that are led by the Spirit
of CHRIST, who is GOD, are the true Sons of GOD.

As I observed before, so I tell you again, the Faith which we preach is not a
dead, but a lively active Faith wrought in the Soul and working a thorough
Change, by the Power of the Holy Ghost, in the whole Man -- And unless it be
thus in you, notwithstanding you may be orthodox as to the foregoing
Principles, notwithstanding you may have good Desires, and attend constantly on
the Means of Grace; yet, in St. Paul's Opinion, you are out of a State of
Salvation. Know you not, says that Apostle to the Corinthians, a Church famous
for its Gifts above any Church under Heaven, that CHRIST is in you, viz. by his
Spirit, unless you are Reprobates?

For Christ came not only to save us from the Guilt, but the Power of our Sins:
Till he has done this, however he may be a Savior to others we can have no
Assurance, or well-^^^^ded Hope, that he has saved us: For it is by receiving
his blessed Spirit into our Hearts, and feeling him witnessing with our
Spirits, that we are the Sons of God, that we can be certified of our being
sealed to the Day of Redemption.

This is a great Mystery, but I speak of Christ and the New Birth. -- Marvel
not at my asking you, what you think about Christ being formed within you? For
either GOD must change his Nature, or we ours. For as in Adam we all have
spiritually died, so all that are effectually saved by Christ, must in Christ
be spiritually made alive. His only End in dying and rising again, and
interceding for us now in Heaven, is to redeem us from the Misery of our fallen
Nature, and, by the Operation of his blessed Spirit, to make us meet to be
Partakers of the Heavenly Inheritance with the Saints in Light. None but those
that thus are changed by his Grace here, shall appear with him in Glory
hereafter.

Examine yo^^selves therefore, my Brethren, whether you are in the Faith; prove
yourselves; and think it not sufficient to say in your Creed, I believe in
Jesus Christ: For you do not believe, you are Liars, you are Reprobates, you
are yet in a State of Death. You take God's Name in vain when you call him
Father. Your Prayers are turned into Sin, unless you believe into Christ, so as
to have your Life hid with him in God, and to receive Life and Nourishment from
Him, as the Branches do from the Vine.

I know, indeed, the Men of this Generation deny there is any such Thing as
Feeling CHRIST within them; but alas! to what a dreadful Condition would such
reduce us, even to the State of the abandoned Heathens, who St Paul tells us
were past Feeling. -- The Apostle prays that the Ephesians may abound in all
Knowledge and Spiritual Understanding, or as it might be rendered, Spiritual
Sensation. -- And in the Office for the Visitation of the Sick, the Minister
prays, that the Lord may make the sick Person know and feel, that there is no
other Name under Heaven given unto Men, in whom and through whom they may receive
Health and Salvation, but only the Name of our Lord JESUS. -- For there is a
spiritual, as well as a corporeal Feeling, and though this is not communicated to
us in a sensible Manner, so as to be subject to our Senses, yet it is as real,
as any sensible or visible Sensation, and may be as truly felt and discerned by
the Soul, as any Impression from without can be felt by the Body. -- All that
are born again of God, know that I lie not.

What think you, Sirs, did Naaman feel when he was cured of his Leprosy? Did
the Woman feel Virtue coming out of Jesus Christ, when she touched the Hem of
his Garment, and was cured of her bloody Issue? Did Elizabeth feel when the
Babe leaped in her Womb? So surely may thou feel, O Believer, when Jesus
Christ dwells in thy Heart. I pray God make you all know and feel this, ever
you depart hence.

Oh, my Brethren, my Heart is enlarged toward you. I trust I feel something of
that hidden, but powerful Presence of CHRIST, whilst I am preaching to you.
Indeed it is sweet, indeed it is exceeding comfortable. All the Harm I wish
you, that without Cause are my Enemies, is, that you felt the like. Believe me,
though it would be Hell to my Soul, to return to a natural State again, yet I
would willingly change States with you for a little while, that you might know
what it is to have Christ dwelling in your Hearts by Faith. Oh! Do not turn
your Backs. Do not let the Devil hurry you away. Be not afraid of Convictions.
Do not think worse of (...) Doctrine, because preached without the Church
Walls. -- Our Lord in the Days of his Flesh, preached on a Mount, a Ship, a
Field; and I am persuaded many have felt his gracious Presence here. -- Indeed
we speak what we know. -- Oh do not reject the Kingdom of God against
yourselves. Be so wise as to receive our Witness. -- I cannot, I will not let
you go. Stay a little, let us reason together. -- However lightly you may
esteem your Souls, I know our Lord has set an unspeakable Value on them. He
thought them worthy of his most precious Blood. -- I beseech you therefore, O
Sinners, be ye reconciled to God. I hope you do not fear being accepted in the
Beloved. -- Behold he calls you. Behold he prevents and follows you with his
Mercy, and has sent forth his Servants into the Highways and Hedges, to
compel you to come in. Remember then, that at such an Hour, of such a Day, in
such a Year, in this Place, you were all told what you ought to think
concerning Jesus Christ. -- If you now perish, it will not be for lack of
Knowledge. -- I am free from the Blood of you all. -- You cannot say I have
been preaching Damnation to you. -- You cannot say I have, like legal
Preachers, been requiring you to make Brick without Straw. I have not bid you
make yourselves Saints, and then come to God. -- But I have offered you
Salvation on as cheap Terms as you can desire. -- I have offered you Christ's
whole Wisdom, Christ's whole Righteousness, Christ's whole Sanctification and
Eternal Redemption, if you will but believe on him. -- If you say you cannot
believe, you say right; for Faith as well as every other Blessing is the Gift
of God: But then it is free to all that confess themselves Sinners, and
sincerely ask it in his dear Son's Name. Ask then, and it shall be given you;
seek and you shall find; knock and a Door of Mercy shall be opened unto you.
For if CHRIST has given himself, will he not give you Faith, whereby alone his
Merits can be applied to your Hearts? Why do we not entert^in more loving
Thoughts of CHRIST? Or do you think he will have Mercy on others, and not on
you? But are you not Sinners? And did not JESUS CHRIST come into the World to
save Sinners? -- If you say you are the chief of Sinners; I answer, that will
be no Hindrance to your Salvation, indeed it will not, if you lay hold on him
by Faith. Read the Evangelists, and see how kindly he behaved to his Disciples
who fled from and denied him. Go tell my Brethren, says he. He does not say, Go
tell those Traitors; but, Go tell my Brethren; And Peter; as though he had said,
go tell my Brethren in general, and poor Peter in particular, that I am risen.
Oh, comfort his poor drooping Heart, tell him I am reconciled to him. Bid him
w^ep no more so bitterly. For though with Oaths (...) Curses he has thrice denied
me, yet I have died for his Sins, I am risen again for his Justification, I
freely forgive him all. -- Thus slow to Anger, and of great Kindness, was our
all-merciful High Priest. And do you think he has changed his Nature, and
forgets poor Sinners, now he is exalted to the Right Hand of God? No, he is the
same Yesterday, to Day and forever, and sits there only to make Intercession
for us. -- Come then, ye Harlots, come ye Publicans, come ye most abandoned
Sinners, come and believe on Jesus Christ. Though the whole World despise you and
cast you out, yet he will not disdain to take you up. Oh! amazing, Oh!
infinitely condescending Love, even you he will not be ashamed to call his
Brethren. And Oh! how will you escape if you neglect such a glorious Offer of
Salvation? What would the damned Spirits now in the Prison of Hell give, if
Christ was so freely offered to their Souls? And why are not we lifting up our
Eyes in Torment? Does any one out of this great Multitude dare say, he does not
deserve Damnation? If not, why are we left and others taken away by Death. What
is this but an Instance of God's free Grace, and a Sign of his good Will
toward us? Oh then, let God's Goodness lead us to Repentance! Oh let there be
Joy in Heaven over some of you repenting! Though we are in a Field, I am
persuaded the blessed Angels are hovering now around us, and long, as the Heart
pants after the Water Brooks, to sing an Anthem at your Conversion. Blessed
be God I hope their Joy will be fulfilled. An awful Silence appears amongst us.
I have good Hope that the Words that the Lord has enabled me to speak in your
Ears this Day, have not altogether fallen to the Ground. Your Tears and deep
Attention are an Evidence, that the Lord God is amongst us of a Truth. Come ye
Pharisees, come and see, in spite of your Satanical ^age and Fury, the Lord
JESUS is getting himself the Victory. And Brethren, I speak the Truth in
CHRIST, I lie not, if one Soul of you, by the Blessing of God, be brought to
think savingly of Jesus Christ this Day, I care not if my Enemies were
permitted to carry me to Prison and put my Feet fast in the Stocks, as soon as
I have delivered this Sermon. Brethren, my Heart's Desire and Prayer to God is,
that you may be saved. For this Cause I follow my Master without the Camp. I
care not how much of his sacred Reproach I bear, so that some of you be
converted from the Errors of your Ways. I rejoice, yea and I will rejoice. Ye
Men, ye Devils do your worst. The LORD who sent will support me. And when
CHRIST, who is our Life, and whom (...) I have now been preaching, shall
appear, I also, together with his despised little Ones, shall appear with him
in Glory. -- And then, what will you think of CHRIST? -- I know what you will
think of him. You will then think him to be the Fairest among ten Thousand. You
will then think and feel him to be a just and Sin-avenging Judge. Oh then be ye
persuaded to kiss him lest he be angry, and so you be banished forever from the
Presence of the Lord. Behold I come to you, as the Angel did to Lot. My dear
Brethren, flee, flee for Lives, haste, linger no longer in your spiritual
Sodom; for otherwise you will be eternally destroyed. Numbers, no Doubt, there
are amongst you, that may regard me no more than Lot's Sons-in-law regarded
him. I am persuaded I seem to some of you as one that mocks. -- But I speak the
Truth in CHRIST, I lie not, as sure as Fire and Brimstone rained from the Lord
out of Heaven, to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah, so surely at the great Day shall
the Vials of God's Wrath be poured on you, if you do not think seriously of and
act agreeable to the Gospel of the Lord's CHRIST. Behold I have told you
before, -- I pray GOD, all you that forget him may seriously think of what has
been said, before he pluck you away and there be none to deliver you.

Now to GOD the Father, etc.

PRAYERS.
A PRAYER for one entrusted with the Education of Children.
O Dearest JESU, who gatherest thy Lambs into thy Bosom, and did solemnly
command thy Servant Peter, to feed thy Lambs; grant I may show that I love thee
more than all Things, by doing as thou have commanded him.

LORD, who am I, or what is in me, that thou should thus put Honor upon me, in
making me any way instrumental to the preparing Souls for thee? O Savior, I
have sinned against Heaven, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, much
less to be employed in the Service of thy Children.

But since thou have been pleased in me to show forth all thy Mercy, and have
called me by thy good Providence to this blessed Work, grant that I may always
remember, that the little Flock committed to my Charge, are bought with the
Price of thy own most precious Blood. And let it therefore be my Meat and
Drink, to feed them with the sincere Milk of thy Word, that they may grow
thereby.

To this End, I beseech thee of thy free Grace, first to convert my own Soul,
and cause me to become like a little Child myself, that from an experimental
Knowledge of my own Corruptions, I may have my spiritual Senses exercised, to
discern the first Emotions of Evil that may at any Time arise in their Hearts.

O give me, I beseech thee, a discerning Spirit, that I may search, and try,
and examine the different Tempers of their Sin-sick Souls; and, like a skilful
Physician, apply healing or corrosive Medicines, as their respective Maladies
shall require.

Gracious JESU, let punishing be always my strange Work; and, if it be
possible, grant that they may be all drawn to their Duty, as I would be drawn
myself, by the Cords of Love. And when I am obliged to correct them, grant it
may not be to show my Authority, or gratify a corrupt Passion, but purely out
of the same Motive from which thou do correct us, to make them Partakers of
thy Holiness.

Oh! keep me, I beseech thee, from being angry without a Cause: Permit me not
rashly to be provoked by the infirmities and Perverseness of their Infant
Years; but grant I may show all Longsuffering toward them: And by exercising
such frequent Acts of Patience and Forbearance, grant, I myself may learn the
Meekness and Gentleness of CHRIST.

O thou, who taughtest thy Disciples how to pray, pour down, I beseech thee,
the Spirit of Grace and Supplication into their Hearts, that at all Times, and
in all Places they may both desire and know how to call upon thee by diligent
Prayer.

Father, into thy Hands I commend my own and their Spirits: Look down from
Heaven, the Habitation of thy Holiness, and bless them from thy holy Hill.

Keep them, oh keep them unspotted from the World; grant they may fly youthful
Lusts, and remember thee, their Creator, in the Days of their Youth. Train
them, I beseech thee, in the Way wherein they should go; and when they are old,
let them not depart from it.

O thou, who did sanctify Jeremiah from the Womb, and calledst young Samuel
betimes, to wear a linen Ephod before thee, Sanctify their whole Spirits,
Souls and Bodies, and preserve them blameless, till the second Coming of our
LORD JESUS CHRIST.

O thou, who did endue Solomon with Grace, to choose Wisdom before Riches and
Honor; incline their Hearts to make the same Choice of thee, their only Good;
and may they always renounce and triumph over the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust
of the Eye, and the Pride of Life.

Finally, do thou, O blessed JESU, who at twelve Years old wast found in the
Temple, sitting among the Doctors, both hearing and asking them Questions,
grant that these Children may love to tread the Courts of thy House, and have
their Ears opened betimes, to receive the Discipline of Wisdom, that so, if it
be thy good Pleasure, to prolong the Time of their Pilgrimage here on Earth,
they may shine as Lights in the World; or, if thou see it best, to bring down
their Strength in their Journey, and to shorten their Days, they may be early
fitted by Purity of Heart, to sing eternal Hallelujahs to thee, the Father, and
the Holy Ghost, in the Kingdom of Heaven for ever.

Grant this, O Father, for thy Dear Son's Sake, CHRIST JESUS, our LORD, Amen,
Amen.

A PRAYER for a Servant.
O Thou HIGH and LOFTY ONE, who inh^bitest Eternity, yet art pleased to dwell
with the humble Heart: O blessed JESU, who have made of one Blood all Nations
under Heaven, with whom there is no Respect of Persons, and who in the Days of
thy I lesh did go down to heal a Centurion's sick Servant; have Mercy, I
beseech thee, on me, even me also a poor Servant. Stretch forth the Right Hand
of thy Power, to heal all the Diseases of my Sin-sick Soul, and enable me by
thy Holy Spirit, faithfully to discharge the several Duties of that Vocation,
whereto I am called by thee my GOD. Give me Grace, I most humbly beseech thee,
to obey my Master, according to the Flesh, in all Things; not with Eye-service,
as a Man-pleaser, but with Singleness of Heart, as unto CHRIST; knowing, that
whatsoever any Man does, the same he shall receive of the LORD, whether he be
bond or free.

Make my Obedience to my Master on Earth, like to that which the holy Angels
pay thee in Heaven. When I am commanded to go, may I go; when I am required to
come, may I come; whatsoever I am bid to do agreeable to thy Will, may I do it
heartily, as unto the LORD, and not unto Men. But if at any Time, O LORD, thou
should, to try what is in my Heart, permit me to be tempted to do any
Wickedness, O do thou give me Grace, as thou did Joseph, patiently to submit
to a Prison and to Death itself, rather than sin against thee, my GOD. Knowing
that it is Thank worthy, if a Man for Conscience toward GOD, endure Grief,
suffering wrongfully. Enable me, O LORD, to show good Fidelity in all Things
committed to my Charge. Do thou, who blessedst Abraham's Servant, when he went
to take a Wife for his Master's Son, Isaac; so bless me in all my Master's
Business, that he may see, as Potiphar did, that the LORD makes all that I do
to prosper in my Hands.

Keep, O LORD, also the Door of my Lips, that I offend at no Time with my
Tongue; let a false Tongue be far from me, and let me never lie unto my Master,
as Gehazi did. O let no such Unfaithfulness cleave unto me; left by being a
Partaker with him in his Crime, (...) ^^rtake also in his Punishment. Bridle
also my Tongue from ever answering again: May all Sullenness and Peevishness of
Temper be put away from me, with all Passion: May I learn of thee, O Holy JESU,
to be meek and lowly in Heart; O make me patient of Reproof, willing to be
taught, and subject with all Fear and Godly Reverence, not only to the Good and
Gentle, but also to the Froward. Or if ever, through the Weakness of the Flesh,
I should offend in this Point, as Hagar did against Sarah, enable me, I beseech
thee, immediately to repent and to return again to my Obedience. Grant also, O
LORD, I may behave holily and unblameably to my Fellow Servants: Let no corrupt
Communication, nor foolish Talking, or Jesting, which is not convenient, at any
Time come out of my Mouth, but rather giving of Thanks; May our Conversation be
always seasoned with the Salt of thy Holy Word, and such as may tend to the
Edifying one another.

Endue us all with that Charity, which hides a Multitude of Sins; and if ever,
O LORD, thy Glory should call me to bring up an ^ll Report to my Master against
any of my Fellow Servants, which I beseech thee, of thine Mercies, I may never
have Occasion to do; grant it may be done with Gentleness and Compassion, not
to insinuate myself into my Master's Favor, but to prevent them sinning
against thee, and thereby ruining their own Souls. Keep us, we beseech thee,
from striving among ourselves, as Abraham's and Lot's Herdsmen did, about any
of the Concerns of this Life; but grant we may be always provoking each other
to Love and to good Works. Preserve us, we beseech thee, from envying one
another, either the Favor of ^ur Master, or any Blessing whatsoever. Let us
not seek our own, but each our Brother's Welfare, as Members of the same Body,
as Disciples of the same LORD; when one of us suffers, let all of us suffer;
when one of us rejoices, let all of us rejoice with him: Make us Pitiful and
Tenderhearted to each other, and if at any Time we should have a Quarrel,
enable us. O LORD, immediately to forgive one another, even as thou GOD for
CHRIST's Sake, have forgiven us.

Finally, O LORD, endue us with a deep Humility, that we may in Brotherly Love
prefer one another, and in Lowliness of Mind each of us esteem his Brother
better than himself. O hear all our Prayers for our Master, and grant that he
and his Household may faithfully serve thee our LORD. O make him as devout as
Cornelius, and us, like the Soldiers that waited upon him, devout also. That
thus adorning thy Holy Gospel in all Things, we may at thy second Coming to
judge the World, be rewarded according as we have improved the different
Talents which we have received from thee, O glorious Redeemer, who live and
reignest with the Father and the Holy Ghost, ever one GOD, World without End.
Amen, Amen.

A PRAYER for one under Spiritual Desertion.
O Ever blessed and most compassionate Redeemer, who wast in all Things tempted
like as we are, Sin only excepted -- O thou Lover of Souls, who in the Days of
thy Flesh did offer up strong Cries and Tears, and wast heard in that thou
fearedst -- O thou Restorer of Mankind, who wast in such an Agony in the
Garden, that thou sweatest great Drops of Blood, falling to the Ground. -- O
thou Almighty High Priest, who, when through the eternal Spirit thou wast about
to make thy Soul an Offering for Sin, had thy own Divinity withdrawn from
thee, and did cry ou^ in the Bitterness of thy Soul, My GOD, my GOD, why have
thou forsaken me. -- O thou, who now fittest at the Right Hand of the Father,
continually to make Intercession for us. Look down, I beseech thee, upon me,
thy unworthy Servant. -- For thou have turned away thy Face and lo! I am
troubled. -- Thou have taken off my Chariot-Wheels, and I drive heavily. --
Thou have permitted a Cloud to overshadow me, and an horrible Darkness,
Fearfulness and Dread, to overwhelm me, so that my Soul would be exceeding
sorrowful, even unto Death, did I not believe thou would yet turn again, and
visit me.

Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; but if my Soul cannot be
made perfect, unless I drink it, thy Holy, thy Blessed Will be done.

Lo here I am! Deal with me as it seems good in thy Sight. -- Only let thy
Grace be sufficient for me; and in the midst of my Agony send down, I beseech
thee, an Angel from Heaven to strengthen me.

LORD, thou know that Satan has desired to have me, that he may sift me as
Wheat; O grant that my Faith fail not.

Suffer, O suffer him not to get an Advantage over me, for thou art not
ignorant of his Devices. -- O let him not so prevail against me, as to make me
entertain hard Thoughts of thee my most loving Master, and compassionate
Redeemer: For I know thou of very Faithfulness have caused me thus to be
troubled; -- And do afflict me for no other Reason, but to make me Partaker
of thy Holiness.

Give me, O give me, the Shield of Faith, and enable me to repel all the fiery
blasphemous Thoughts, that the wicked one shall at any Time dart into my Mind.
-- Let me drive them off as carefully as Abraham did the Birds that came to
devour his Sacrifice. -- And oh! Let him never tempt me to think, thou will
impute them to me for Sin.

LORD, thou only know the present Dryness and Barrenness of my Soul, and how
liable I am to be tempted to fret against thee, O LORD, and to seek Pleasure in
the Creature, when I can find no sensible Satisfaction in thee, my great
Redeemer, who art GOD, blessed forever.

But, I beseech thee, keep my Soul quiet and composed, and for thy Mercy's Sake
enable me only to take Pleasure in thee, and to sit down solitary in the
Bitterness of my Soul, and patiently wait till I can draw Comfort from thee,
the Fountain of living Waters, rather than hew out to myself broken Cisterns,
that will hold no Water.

Never, never let me fall out with any of thy Ordinances, or think, I do not
please thee in my holy Duties, because I have no inward sensible Pleasure in
them myself.

Enable me to walk by Faith and not by Sight, and to seek thee in the Use of
all appointed Means, though it be sorrowing; being assured that after three
Days I shall find thee in the Temple; of that thou will make thyself known unto
me, by breaking of Bread, or in some other Way.

LORD, I believe, help thou my Unbelief, that I am now talking with thee as
certainly, as Mary was, when thou did converse with her at the Sepulcher;
though she knew it not. -- In thy due Time reveal thyself again to me, as thou
did to her; and let me hear the Voice of my Beloved.

Thou have promised, thou will not suffer us to be tempted above what we are
able to bear, but wilt with the Temptation make a Way for us to escape, that we
may be able to bear it. -- Fulfill, O Lord, this thy Promise -- And after I have
suffered a while, strengthen, stablish, settle, and visit me, as thou did thy
Servant Abraham when he returned from the Slaughter of the five Kings.

LORD, lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance upon me; restore to me the Joy
of thy Salvation; and when my Heart is duly prepared, and humbled by these
inward Trials, grant me a feelin^ Possession of thee, my GOD, for the Sake of
thy dear Son, JESUS CHRIST, our LORD, Amen. Amen.

A PRAYER for one under the Displeasure of Relations, for being Religious.
BLessed LORD, who have commanded us to call upon thee in Time of Trouble, and
thou will deliver us; and have always shown thyself to be a GOD, hearing
Prayer, mighty and willing to save; hear me now, I pray thee, when I call upon
thee; for Trouble is at Hand.

Thou see, O LORD, how many of my Brethren, according to the Flesh, persecute
me for thy Name's Sake; so that I must renounce them, or decline openly
professing thee before Men.

But GOD forbid I should love Father or Mother, Brethren or Sisters, more than
thee, and thereby prove myself not worthy of thee. No! I have long since given
thee my Soul and my Body; so lo! I now freely give thee my Friends also.

For I now find by Experience, that as it was formerly, so it is now. -- They
that are born after the Flesh, do persecute those that are born after the
Spirit. -- That thou came not to send Peace on Earth, but a Sword. -- And
that, unless a Man forsake all that he has, he cannot be thy Disciple.

Lo! I come to perform this Part of thy Will, O my GOD; being assured that
whosoever forsakes Father or Mother, Brethren or Sisters, Houses o^ Lands for
thy Sake, or the Gospel, shall receive a hundredfold in this present Life, with
Persecution, and in the World to come Life everlasting.

I trust, O LORD, it is for thy Sake alone that I now make an Offering of the
Favor of my Friends to thee; for thou know, O LORD, how continually they
cry out, Spare thyself; though I am doing no more than thy holy Word strictly
requires me to do.

But do thou, O Blessed Savior, who said unto Peter, Get thee behind me
Satan, enable me to stop my Ears to their false Insinuations, charm they never
so sweetly; for they savor not the Things that be of God, but the Things that
be of Men; and unless, O LORD, thou do help, they will be an Offense unto me,
and cause me to deny the LORD that bought me.

Far be it from me, O LORD, to be surprised, because of those Offenses; for
thou have long since denounced Woe against the World because of Offenses; and I
find, it is needful for my Soul, that such Offenses should come, to try what is
in my Heart; and to try whether I love thee in Deed and in Truth.

Blessed therefore, forever blessed be thy holy Name, that I am accounted
worthy to suffer for thy Name's Sake. O let me rejoice, and be exceeding glad,
that my Reward shall be great in Heaven.

O let me never regard any of their Threatenings; for when my Father and Mother
forsakes me, thou, O LORD, I am assured, wilt take me up.

Take me, O take me into the Arms of thy Mercy; for henceforward know I no Man
after the Flesh. And whosoever does the Will of my Father, the same shall be my
Brother, and Sister, and Mother.

I know, O LORD, I know, that this will expose me to the Derision and
Persecution of those that are round about me.

But do thou, who did seek for the poor Beggar, after he was cast out by the
Jewish Council, and did reveal thyself unto him, reveal thyself to me also,
when my Name is cast out as Evil by my Friends and the World. -- Though they
curse, yet bless thou me, O LORD; and enable me, I most humbly beseech thee, to
pray for them, even when they most despitefully use me, and persecute me;
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

It is owing, O LORD, to thy free Mercy alone, that I have in any Measure been
enlightened to know thee and the Power of thy Resurrection. O let the same Grace
be sufficient for them also, and make thy Almighty Power to be known in their
Conversion.

Thou did once, O blessed Savior, magnify thy Goodness in turning thy
Servant Paul, from being a bitter Persecutor, to be a zealous Preacher of thy
Gospel; and made the trembling Jailor cry out, even to those whose Feet he
had hurt in the Stocks, Sirs, what shall I do to be saved?

Look down therefore, I beseech thee, in Pity and Compassion, on those of my
own Household; and after I am converted myself, make me, or some other,
instrumental, to strengthen these my weak Brethren; that though we are now
divided amongst ourselves, two against three, and three against two, yet we may
at last, all with one Heart and one Mouth, glorify thee, O LORD; that thou
may come and abide with us, and love us as thou did Lazarus, Mary, and her
Sister Martha. Grant this, O Savior, for thy infinite Merits Sake. Amen and
Amen.

A PRAYER for one desiring to be awakened to on Experience of the New Birth.
BLessed JESUS, thou have told us in thy Gospel, that unless a Man be born
again of the Spirit, and his Righteousness exceed the outward Righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, he cannot in any wise enter into the Kingdom of GOD.
Grant me therefore, I beseech thee, this true Circumcision of the Heart; and
send down thy blessed Spirit to work in me that inward Holiness which alone can
make me meet to partake of the Heavenly Inheritance with the Saints in Light.

Create in me, I beseech thee, a new Heart, and renew a right Spirit within me.
For of whom shall I seek for Succor but of thee, O LORD, with whom alone this
is possible? LORD if thou will thou can make me whole. O say unto my Soul, as
thou did once unto the poor Leper* I will, be thou renewed. Have Compassion
on me, O LORD, as thou once had unto blind Bartimeus, who sat by the Way-side
begging.

LORD, thou know all Things, thou know what I would have thee to do. --
Grant, LORD, that I may receive my Sight. -- For I am conceived and born in
Sin, my whole Head is sick, my whole Heart is faint, from the Crown of my Head
to the Sole of my Feet I am full of Wounds and Bruises, and putrefying Sores.
And yet I see not. O awaken me, though it be with Thunder, to a sensible Feeling
of the Corruptions of my fallen Nature? and for the Mercies Sake suffer me no
longer to sit in Darkness, and the Shadow of Death.

O prick me, prick me to the Hear^^ (...) down a Ray of that all-quickening
Light (...) struck thy Servant Saul to the Ground (...) make me cry out with
the trembling (...) What shall I do to be saved?

LORD, behold I pray; and blush, and a^^ confounded that I never prayed on this
wise before.

But I have looked upon myself as rich, not considering that I was poor and
blind, and naked. I have trusted to my own Righteousness. -- I flattered myself
I was whole, and therefore blindly thought I had no Need of thee, O great
Physician of Souls, to heal my Sickness.

But being now convinced by thy free Mercy that my own Righteousness is as
filthy Rags, and that he is only a true Christian who is one inwardly; behold,
with strong Cryings and Tears, and Groanings that cannot be uttered, I beseech
thee visit me with thy free Spirit, and say unto these dry Bones, Live.

I confess, O LORD, that thy Grace is thy own, and that thy Spirit blows
where he liste^^. And wast thou to deal with me after my Dese^^^ and reward me
according to my Wickedness, (...) had long since been given over to a reprobate
Mind, and had my Conscience seared as with a red hot Iron.

But, O LORD, since by sparing me so long thou have shown that thou would not
the Death of a Sinner. -- And since thou have promised that thou will give thy
holy Spirit to those that ask it, I hope thy Goodness and Long-suffering is
intended to lead me to Repentance, and that thou will not turn away thy Face
from me.

Thou see, O LORD, thou see, that with the utmost Earnestness and Humility
of Soul, I ask thy holy Spirit of thee; and am resolved in Confidence of thy
Promise, who can not lie, to seek and knock till I find a Door of Mercy
opened unto me.

LORD save me, or I perish; visit, O visit me with thy Salvation. -- Lighten my
Eyes, that I sleep not in Death. -- O let me no longer continue a Stranger to
myself, -- But quicken me, quicken me with thy free Spirit, that I may know
myself even as I am known.

Behold here I am. Let me do and suffer what seems Good in thy Sight, only
renew me by thy Spirit in my Mind, and make me a Partaker of thy Divine Nature.
-- So shall I praise thee all the Days of my Life, and give thee Thanks forever
in the Glories of thy Kingdom, O most adorable Redeemer; to whom with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor and Praise, both now and
forevermore. Amen.

A PRAYER for one newly awakened to a Sense of the Divine Life.
O Almighty and everlasting Father, who in the beginning spoke and it was done,
saying, Let there be Light and there was Light. -- O most adorable Redeemer,
who when Adam had eaten the forbidden Fruit wast revealed as the Seed of the
Woman, and did in the Fullness of Time, die an accursed Death to save us from
the Guilt and Power of our Sins, and thereby break the Serpent's Head. -- O
blessed and ^ternal Spirit, who did once move upon the Face of the great
Deep, who did overshadow the blessed Virgin, who did descend on the Son of
GOD at his Baptism, and did come down after his Ascension in fiery Tongues
upon the Heads of each of his Apostles. -- O holy blessed and glorious Trinity,
three Persons and one GOD, by whose Consultation we were first made, and into
whose Name we have been again baptized -- Accept my humble and hearty Sacrifice
of Praise and Thanksgiving for calling me out of Darkness into thy mavelous
Light; for quickening me when dead in Trespasses and (...), and moving upon the
Face of my polluted and disordered Soul.

Thou have promised, O LORD, that th^n wilt not quench the smoking Flax, or
break the bruised Reed. And thou have told us, that thy holy Spirit should be
in us, as a Well of Water springing up unto eternal Life. Finish therefore, I
beseech thee, the good Work begun in my Soul, and now thou have called me,
never let me lie down again.

Thou see, O LORD, the good Seed sown in my Heart is yet but as a very small
Grain of Mustard Seed. -- O continue to water with the Dew of thy heavenly
Blessing what thy own Right Hand has planted, and it shall become a great Tree.

Thou have touched the Eye of my Mind by thy Divine Power, and I see Men as
Trees walking. Let thy holy Spirit by his blessed Influences more and more
remove the remaining Scales, till I at length see all Things clearly.

With Shame and Confusion of Face, O LORD, I confess I am unworthy of this and
all other thy Mercies. For I have long since done Despite to the Spirit of
Grace, crucified the Son of God afresh, and put him to open Shame. But do thou,
who art rich in Mercy to all that call upon thee, in Faithfulness, forgive me
what is past, and grant I may from henceforward work out my Salvation with Fear
and Trembling, since thou have so graciously wrought in me both to will and to
do after thy good Pleasure.

I know, O LORD, that now thou have begun to deliver me out of my natural and
wo^se t^an Egyptian Bondage. I must expect to pass through a barren and dry
Wilderness, that there are Lions in the Way, that the Sons of Anak are to be
grappled with before I attain to the true Sabbath of the Soul.

But thou, Angel of the everlasting (...), who sentest thy ministering Spirits
to rescue righteous Lot, who leddest thy Sheep by the Hands of Moses and Aaron;
and did appear in a Vision to Ananias, commanding him to go and lay his Hands
upon thy Servant Soul. Send me always a faithful and experienced (...), who may
lead me by the Hand, and keep (...) from lingering in my spiritual Sodom, by his
prudent Directions under thee, and preserve me from the Snares and Fury of my
spiritual Adversaries, which otherwise may overtake and destroy my Soul.

O make me teachable like a little Child. -- Convert my Soul and bring it low.
-- Grant I may be willing to learn what Things I ought to do, and also may have
Power faithfully to fulfill the same.

Strengthen me, I beseech thee, by the holy Spirit, to cut off a Right Hand, to
pluck out a Right Eye, lay aside every Weight, especially the Sin that does
most easily beset me; -- to forsake Father and Mother, Brethren and Sisters,
yea, and my own Life also, rather than not be thy Disciple.

O suffer me not to deceive my own Soul by a partial Reformation. -- Search me
and try me, and examine my Heart, and let no secret unmortified Lust or Passion
ever keep me from Life everlasting.

LORD, I am not my own. Thou have bough me with the Price of thy Son's most
precious Blood.

Thou have often required, and lo! I now give thee my Heart, to the best of my
Knowledge, without secretly keeping back the least Part. For whom have I in
Heaven but thee, and what is there on Earth that I can desire in Comparison of
thee!

O mould me into thy own most blessed Image, my LORD and my GOD. Fill me with
thy Grace here, fit me for thy Glory hereafter. Even so, LORD JESUS. Amen and
Amen.

The End of the Second Volume.

