An Evening-Lecture.

Mr. Byles's SERMON From JOH. III. 2. The same came to JESUS by Night.

THE Visit to JESUS by Night. AN Evening-Lecture.

By Mr. BYLES.

Joh. xx. 19. The same Day at Evening -- where the Disciples were assembled --
came JESUS and stood in the midst, and says unto them, Peace be unto you.

BOSTON, Printed and Sold by ROGERS and FOUL, at the Head of Queen Street,
near the Townhouse. 1741.

AN Evening-Lecture.
JOHN III. 2. The same came to JESUS by Night --


THESE Words are spoken of Nicodemus, a Man of Honor and Authority among the
Jews, and secretly a Disciple of our Lord JESUS. The same came to JESUS by
Night, to hear about his Soul, and the Mysteries of the Kingdom. 'Twas
Nicodemus's Fault that he feared to profess CHRIST openly; that he chose the
Darkness to approach him undiscovered: But it was his Happiness that he came at
all; and it was infinite Compassion in our Lord that he accepted the cowardly
Visit, and instructed the weak, but sincere Disciple. I should be glad if the
Arguments brought by some to vindicate Nicodemus from the Imputation of
Cowardice in this Visit, were of more Significance. The Words are big with
Entertainment and Instruction: And from the various Hints which they afford us,
I propose to give you an useful and brief Discourse.

The same came to JESUS. The DOCTRINE is, That for us to come to JESUS CHRIST
is our Interest and our Duty.

It is our Duty. So Nicodemus was convinced, when he made his serious Approach.
He was convinced that he was the great Teacher come from GOD. And therefore he
knew that he ought to wait upon him for Instruction and Wisdom.

And as this was the Duty of Nicodemus in his Day, so it is no less ours at
this Distance. We are under the same Obligations, and our Lord JESUS is still
the same Prophet and Teacher that he was then. Indeed we cannot go to CHRIST as
Nicodemus did, and have the Pleasure and the sacred Curosity to hear from his
Lips the divine Language. He is now gone to his Father, and is no more visible
on Earth. But yet have we his Spirit to lead us into all Truth: and they are
His Instructions, which the Spirit gives us. And we are equally obliged to
repair to him now for this spiritual Instruction as Nicodemus of old. Joh. xvi.
7, -- 14. It is expedient for you that I go awny: For if I go not away the
Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart I will send him unto you. --
He shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. CHRIST then speaks as
much to us by his Spirit, as if we saw his Face, and heard his Voice, as they
did when he was upon Earth. And we are as much obliged to attend the gentle
Whispers and obey them. In every divine Institution we are to seek that we may
find him.

And as this is our Duty, so it is our Interest too. Nicodemus found it so when
he came desirous to learn, and went home instructed, wise unto Salvation. Our
Duty and our Interest are inseperably linked together, by the Law of Nature,
and the GOD of Heaven. Heaven and eternal Happiness will be the future Reward
of our Obedience to the divine Commands: Nor is this all, nor shall we wait so
long for a Recompense; for they carry their own Wages in them, and IN keeping
of them there is great Reward. The believing, humble Soul, that comes to JESUS
CHRIST, shall find a blessed Peace and Satisfaction attending, and succeeding
the sacred Labor. A divine Ease, and Relief of Mind, will be the sweet
Consequence of a Visit to JESUS. Matthew. xi. 28, 29. Come unto me all ye that
Labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest -- and ye shall find Rest
unto your Souls. This then is the First Doctrine observable in the Words: and
happy if we obey it.

The Exhortation here is, Let us come to JESUS CHRIST, as Nicodemus in the
Text; and be encouraged by the Reception he found. Let us pray for the Holy
Spirit to instruct us in the Mysteries of Godliness; and be afraid to grieve
and sin away his Influences. Whenever we find the blessed Spirit at work upon
us, let us cherish the holy Thoughts, and labor to keep them alive in us. We
must find a Time every Day for Retirement to pray for this, and the better to
attend to it. If we seek him he will be found of us, but if we forsake him, he
will cast us off forever. He has said, My Spirit shall not always strive with
Man. And woe to us if he depart from us. Nay, he has limited it to a certain
Day; wherefore, To Day if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your Heart, lest
he swear in his Wrath ye shall not enter into his Rest. Behold now is the
accepted Time, behold now is the Day of Salvation. Escape for thy Life this
Night, for to morrow thou shall be slain. And now does the Savior encourage
our Labors, I love them that love me, and they that seek me early shall find
me. Nicodemus went to CHRIST in Body; but we cannot. He is gone away above our
aspectable Skies: And where he is gone, thither we cannot come, till Death
shall give us Wings to fly as the Eagles toward Heaven. But though we cannot
approach in Person to his bodily Presence, yet we can come to him as truly and
as effectually as Nicodemus. Let us then do so, by Repentance, Faith, Prayer,
and Meditation.

But to proceed to another main Branch of the Text: The same came to JESUS by
Night. The DOCTRINE is, No Season is improper or unsuitable for our solemn
Approach to JESUS CHRIST. Our Lord accepted and rewarded the Visit of
Nicodemus, though he chose the Night to befriend his Cowardice, and came in the
unseasonable Hours of Darkness. Tired and spent as our LORD was will not to be
with the Affairs of the Day, he sent not the feeble Disciple from him, but
redeemed Time from his natural Rest, to discourse with, enlighten and instruct
him. That we may reap the Benefit of this Passage in sacred Record, I have
formed this Doctrine for you, That at every Season we are welcome to our LORD
JESUS.

1. There is no Season improper for us in which to believe on JESUS CHRIST:
that is, to come to him by Faith. Faith in JESUS CHRIST is the great Doctrine
of the Gospel. And as it is to be preached to all Nations; to all Men, in every
Place, so at every Season too: In Season, and out of Season And the Practice is
like the preaching: it should be universal in Time, Place and Person. The
youngest is not too young for this, nor the eldest too old. The first Essay at
Understanding and Will should be employed in believing on CHRIST, and the Acts
should be continued and repeated to the latest Gasp of Breath. Those who have
never yet savingly complied with the Offers of the Gospel, are obliged to do it
now: So long as you have an Inclination to do it, you may safely conclude the
Season for it is not over. In every various Circumstance of Life: In the
Sunshine of Prosperity, or in the Gloom of Affliction, like Nicodemus in the
Night, Faith in JESUS CHRIST is your Duty, and should be your Practice.

2. There is no Season improper for us in which to come to CHRIST by
Repentance. The Discourse between Nicodemus and our blessed Savior in the
Night, turned upon Repentance and Conversion. They were the mysterious
Doctrines of Regeneration which were the Subject of Debate between our LORD and
the young Disciple. It naturally, methinks, leads our Thoughts to this, that
the most improper Season is still proper for our Concern about Repentance and
the New Birth. This besure was the Sentiment of the Psalmist, when he thought
that the Night was better improved in devoting himself to GOD, than in the soft
Refreshment of Slumber and Sleep. Psalm. cxxxii. 4. I will not give Sleep to my
Eyes, nor Slumber to my Eyelids, till I find out a Place for the LORD, an
Habitation for the mighty GOD of Jacob. It Is dangerous delaying one Night.

3. There is no Season improper in which to come to CHRIST by Prayer. Prayer is
a coming to GOD, and to CHRIST who is GOD. It Is called a drawing near to him;
and a seaking him; and coming before him. They that be far from thee shall
perish: But it is good for me to DRAW NEAR to GOD. O that I knew where I might
FIND HIM, that I could COME NEAR even to his Seat, I would order my Cause
before him, and fill my Mouth with Arguments. Let my Prayer COME BEFORE thee as
Incense, and the lifting up of my Hands as the Evening Sacrifice And as Prayer
is a coming to CHRIST, and to GOD the Father by him, so this Way of sacred
Access is never impertinent or unseasonable. We are commanded to pray without
ceasing: To pray always with all Prayer. We are encouraged that the Ears of the
LORD are always open to our Prayer; and that the Prayer of the upright is his
Delight. Even in the darkest Times we are allowed to pray. Nay the darker the
Season, the more necessary the Prayer. Is any afflicted? Let him pray.
Nicodemus in the Darkness of the Night; and Jonah in the Darkness of his
Affliction, and in the Belly of Hell, may both alike approach to GOD. -- WATCH
and pray.

4. There is no Season improper for us in which to come to CHRIST by
Meditation. In our Thoughts we may travel from Earth to Heaven in a Moment. Our
Souls may approach to CHRIST, in the Twinkling of an Eye. We have no need, like
Nicodemus, to wait for the Night for this: But a thousand Times every Day we
may lift our Thoughts to Heaven. So was the Law of GOD sweet, to the devout
Psalmist; and his Meditation all the Day. Night as well as Day, this was his
dear and happy Employment. In it does he meditate Day and Night. So Isaac went
out to meditate in the Field at Even Tide. Through the dark and solitary Hours of
the Night, holy Contemplation may find us sweet Employment. Psalm. lxiii. 5, 6.
My Soul shall be satisfied -- when I remember thee on my Bed, and meditate on
the in the Night Watches. Not Nicodemus himself sitting at the Feet of JESUS,
might conceive diviner Satisfaction! The Believer conversing with his LORD in
holy Contemplations, amidst the Shades and Darkness, has Light arising in his
Darkness. He may triumph in the Glooms and the Solitude, and raise his Songs in
the Night.

And to assist our Meditations in the Night, see how full of Subjects the holy
Scriptures appear, to cultivate and adorn the Work. How many wonderful
Transactions have happened in this Season, to distinguish the Shades and render
the Night glorious. Should we, like Abasuerus, linger through the Night without
the Comfort of a Slumber, we have nobler Records than of Media and Persia to
entertain and delight our Thoughts. Let us reflect back upon the sacred Pages
on such Scenes as these, as the Night slowly slides away, and the Morning
forgets to dawn. So let us, like Nicodemus, pay a Visit to our LORD by Night.
This is the best Way not to possess Nights of Vanity, when it may be wearisome
Nights are appointed unto us. Why need we say, Would GOD it were Morning! In
Evening Time it shall be Light. The Night shall be Light round about me, and
the Darkness shall shine as the Day.

What a glorious Night was it when our Father Israel seized the struggling
Angel, and wrested the Blessing from his Grasp?

How solemn and memorable was the Night, in the Mixture of Salvation and Ruin,
which instituted the ancient Passover? GOD marched through the Darkness; and
the Pestilence stalked before him: Round about all the Firstborn gave a Gasp,
and stretched out Breathless: While the Destroyer saw the Blood upon the
sprinkled Door-Posts, and smiled and passed over: A Night much to be remembered
throughout all Generations.

How illustrious was the fatal Night, which poured the Red Sea upon the Armies
of Egypt, and landed Israel on the opposite Shore. With what a terrible
Magnificence might you then have seen the Shekinah blaze through the Ranks of
Israel, and confound Pharaoh with its tremendious Gloom? Before, the Waves
broke, divided, and fled away in haste, to open a Path for the favorite
People: Behind, they tossed, and foamed, and roared; they watched the Signal from
the Rod of Moses, and rushed thundering down.

'Twas in the Night that the Angel was commissioned against the Host of
Assyria. He flashed out swift as a Ray of Light, silent as a lambent Flame, but
refistless and distructive as the feathered Lightning. An hundred and fourscore
and five Thousand Souls were licked up in a Moment; and the Field looked pale
with Corpses. What a dismal Night did the whole World lie in, till the Gospel
spread its Light, and the Day Star arose. They sat in Darkness and saw no
Light. O the wondrous Night that gave the Savior to the perishing Earth! O the
Glories of that illustrious Hour! 'Twas to you, ye admiring Shepherds, that the
heavenly Messenger brought the joyful Tidings! They were watching their Flocks
in the Night, when, all on a sudden, a Light broke from Heaven round the
Mountains, and the Voice of Gabriel proclaimed the Savior born. Then was heard
the Music of Paradise tuneful round the Sky; and Glory to GOD in the Highest,
trembled on a Million of Strings.

'Twas on the fatal Night ( -- that same Night in which he was betrayed --)
that he sat retired in the upper Chamber with the Twelve, and instituted for us
the sacred Supper, the dear Memorials of his dying Love.

A few dark Hours after you might have seen him lie in his bitter Agony,
bleeding on the Ground, praying and weeping, with the Cup of trembling in his
Hand: The dear JESUS, who had spent so many Nights in Prayer to GOD!

'Twas the same execrable Night (but blessed Hours for us) that they came to
seize him with Lanthorns and Torches; and poured upon him Indignities and
Torments.

The next Day there was a miraculous Night while there was Darkness over the
whole Land, and the mourning Skies were hung in black at the Anguish of his
Crucifixion.

The Night after, he lay, a pale, bloody Corpse, among the awful Mansions of the
dead. And what a proper Meditation does this naturally lead us to, on our own
Death and Grave?

In the Night, how easy may be the Transition of Thoughts, to that long
Darkness between us and the Resurrection: That refreshing Sleep in the Dust,
which CHRIST has consecrated for us, and will raise us from. A Land of
Darkness, as Darkness it self, whose Light is as Darkness. But O blessed Dawn
after the long Darkness! The Meditation may transport us; and like Paul and
Silas, we may raise our Voice of Harmony and Praise in all the Terrors of the
hideous Night. Are there not twelve Hours in a Day, let us work while the Day
lasts, for the Night comes wherein no Man can work.

But to draw toward a Close. Let us often redeem our Hours in the Night, to
meditate upon that dismal, glorious Hour, when our LORD shall come again.
Behold he comes as a Thief in the Night. At Midnight will the Cry be heard;
and a general Horror run through every human Breast. Now shall the Shades
scatter away, and the Heavens glitter with an unknown Glory. O tremendious
Night! O awful Shades and Darkness, dispelled by devouring Fire, and pursued by
dazzling Destruction! And who can say when this solemn Scene of Things must come
on? Perhaps this Night; perhaps all on a sudden the Judge may break in upon the
secure World. Watch therefore, for ye know not the Day, nor the Hour; whether
at Even, or at Midnight, or at the Cock-crowing, or in the Morning.

But, to add no more: In the Night, how naturally may we transfer our Thot's to
the Place of Darkness: The Hell prepared for wicked Men and devils. Here is a
Night without any Hope of a Morning to end it; or a single Ray of Light to
refresh it. A Night consisting of Darkness and Fire: But as the Fire affords
them no Light, the Darkness allows them no Rest. And as the Volume of
Revelation affords us Matter for Contemplation in the Night, so also does the
Volume of Nature.

See the dark Earth and the dusky Skies, brightened by Starlight, or silvered
over by Moonshine: And when ye see the blue Either; the Stars twinkle at a
Distance; and the Moon, the fair Empress of the silent Shades, serenely
gleeming, reflect inward and say, LORD, when I behold the Heavens, the Work of
thy Fingers, the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained; what is Man, that
thou art mindful of him? and the Son of Man that thou visitst him?

Think too on the kind Providence that preserves you every Night. The
Pestilence may walk in Darkness innocently by me, and I am not afraid of the
Terror by Night. I lie down in Peace and sleep: I awake, for the LORD sustained
me. His holy Ministers attend my Curtains and guard my Slumbers. There stood by
me this Night, the Angel of GOD whose I am, and whom I serve.

It were easy, you see, to enlarge; and to add many other pertinent Topics for
Meditation in the dark Hours, by which, like Nicodemus, we might come to JESUS
by Night: But here I shall stop.

I might add a third Doctrine. That Fear in a good Cause is a dishononourable
Thing. 'Twas Nicodemus's Weakness that he came to our LORD by Night. He was
afraid of the Jews, and ashamed of Reproach and Persecution: and it is recorded
to all Generations, as a Blemish upon the good Man's Character. We learn by it
not to be like him in this: Never to be ashamed in a good Cause, or afraid to
profess it openly. Though we are not to be ostentatious in Religion, yet we are
never to be ashamed of it. We must let our Light shine before others. There is
a happy Medium betwixt Impudence and Bashfulness: and as they are both
ill-breeding in civil Life, so they are both detestible in Religion. But I
shall not enlarge here. I could not have done Justice to my Text without
hinting at this; I have done it the rather, because this is a Crime too common,
especially among young People, to be ashamed in Matters of Religion. Things
that are most worthy and honorable they perform with a most awkward Air, and
are willing to put the amiable Name of Modesty upon this ungraceful Blush.
Modesty, it is true, is very charming: but a Shame in Matters of Religion, is
dastardly and clownish, and far from this fine and delicate Temper. There is as
much Difference between Modesty and Bashfulness as between Courage and Frenzy.
Fortitude the Virtue of an Angel; Rashness the Rage of a Brute. How mean is it
for a Person, educated in a Christian Land, to be ashamed to pray in a Family,
or ask a Blessing at a Table; ashamed of what my Brother! -- to acknowledge thy
Maker! So that while a hypocrital Showyness is to be avoided, yet on the other
Hand we are to remember, that our LORD has said, He that is ashamed of me and
of my Words before Men, of him will I be ashamed before my Father who is in
Heaven. Nicodemus was changed from this coward Temper, uponhis understanding
what the New Birth meant: And went afterward and boldly honored the dead Body
of JESUS. Joh. xix. 39.

Thus I have finished the Doctrinal handling of the Words. I shall now conclude
with a brief Improvement of the Second Doctrine.

Is it as we have heard? Did Nicodemus come to JESUS by Night? And does it
preach to us our Duty to approach to our LORD at every Season? Let us then
receive the Word of Exhortation, and practice the Duty. Let us wait upon the
blessed Savior Day and Night, and his Praise be continually in our Mouth. In
our darkest Hours let this refresh us, and brighten all the Shades: In every
Affliction, and every Temptation, and every Darkness; in every Day, and the
Gloom of every Night. Let us use ourselves to the noble Comfort; and so learn
Expertness in it. Let us furnish our Minds with innumerable Subjects pertinent
for Contemplation in every Kind of Darkness. And let us repair to CHRIST as the
Sun of Righteousness: A Light unto the Gentiles, and the Glory of his People
Israel.

This, I hope, has been your intent at this Season. CHRIST has met you in this
Discourse: and like Nicodemus, you have come to him by Night: O may you go away
enlightened and renewed as he did. Happy will this Night then be, memorable and
blessed; and with Joy will you look back upon it through the Ages of eternal
Day.

But, my Brethren, if you refuse and rebel, at your own Peril be it. Better had
you not come hither this Night, than going away, continue Strangers to CHRIST.
The golden Opportunities will become a Curse: and the higher your present
Privileges are the deeper will be your future Fall: Even from this Sermon
you will sink but the lower into Ruin. So while Paul continued his Speech till
Midnight, the sleepy Eutychus fell headlong from the third Lost, and was taken
up dead, Act. xx. 8, 9. From succeeding Days and Nights here upon Earth, you
must quickly be banished to perpetual Night; to Blackness of Darkness for ever:
The outer Darkness, where is weeping and wailing and gnashiug of Teeth. And in
Chains under Darkness, you will be reserved to the Judgment of the great Day.
This must be your Condition quickly: How quickly you cannot say. The Day goes
away, the Shadows of the Evening are stretched out. Thon Fool, this Night may
thy Soul be required of thee.

On the other Hand: If you will indeed be persuaded truly to come to CHRIST,
you will find the most blessed Success and Joy. At present you will come to him
in the Night: The Darkness of this World: But in a little Time the dark Minutes
will all be over and endless Light will dawn. Weeping may endure for a Night,
but Joy comes in the Morning. You Will leave the Darkness of Earth for the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light. For truly, Light is sown for the Righteous,
and Joy for the upright in Heart. The Night is far spent, the Day is at Hand.
There you will set in eternal Sunshine, without a Night, and without a Cloud.
It Is true, you must walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death to arrive at
this: But all on a sudden the Day will break and the Shadows flee away, the
Shadow of Death will be turned into the Light of the Morning. Angels shall
convey your Souls to Paradise, the fair Regions of Everlasting Day.

And anon your Body shall ascend glittering from the Grave: and though it is sown
in Dishonor, it shall be raised in Glory. You Will sing over your sleeping, but
quickening Dust, Arise and shine, for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the
LORD is risen upon thee. Then shall you shine as the Brightness of the
Firnament, and as the Stars for ever and ever. O how different this magnificent
Glory, from the Gloom of the present World! Here we need the Moon and Stars to
brighten the Shades; and the Sun itself shines at a Distance, and with
Intermissions, and through Clouds. And to supply his absent Beams we have
Recourse to the little Arts of Lamps and Candles. But of that World we read,
Rev. xxii. 5. xxi. 23, 24, 25. There shall be no Night there, and they need no
Candle, neither the Moon to shine in it; neither the Light of the Sun: For the
LORD GOD gives them Light, and the Glory of GOD did lighten it, and the LAMB
is the Light thereof. And the Nations of them which are saved, shall walk in
the Light of it.

FINIS.

