Mr. Cooke's SERMON Preached before the Association of Ministers in Danbury,
July 29th. 1741.

Divine Sovereignty in the Salvation of Sinners, considered and improved. IN A
SERMON Preached before the Eastern Association of Fairfield County, on a
public Lecture in DANBURY, July 29th. 1741. Published at the Desire of the
MINISTERS associated, and others present.

By SAMUEL COOK, M. A. Pastor of the Church in Stratfield.

MATTHEW. xx. 15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is
thine Eye evil because I am good?

BOSTON, Printed by G. ROGERS, for J. EDWARDS in Cornhill, 1741.

Divine SOVEREIGNTY In The Salvation of Sinners Considered and Improved.
Exodus xxxiii. 19. -- And will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and
will show Mercy to whom I will show Mercy.


IN the foregoing Verse, Moses addresseth the Lord with this Request, I beseech
thee show me thy Glory. Never mere Man since the Fall in this Life had been
honored with so frequent, intimate and long continued Converse and Communion
with God as Moses, like a Man with his Friend, and very lately, for forty Days
together without Intermission: And yet, at the farthest Remove from a
surfeiting Satiety, he still earnestly desires Acquaintance with God in a
higher Measure. Whereupon we may Observe,

That those who are blessed with a saving Acquaintance with God and some
Measure of spiritual Communion with him, are coveting still more and more of
the Knowledge of God in Christ Jesus. Indeed their Desires after other Objects
are hereby in a great Degree superseded, as appears by the Profession of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon
Earth, that I desire besides thee And of Paul, Philip. 3.8. Yea doubtless, and
I count all Things but Loss, for the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ
Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the Loss of all Things, and do count
them but Dung that I may win Christ.

But their Appetite after more is raised by the Taste they have had of the
Sweetness of Communion with God in Christ. It Is a sad Symptom, that he is
wholly a Stranger to any saving Acquaintance and Communion with God, who has
enough of it and desires no more.

But to return to Moses's Prayer, I beseech thee show me thy Glory, that is,
make me to see thy Glory, make it some Way or other visible to me.

We know Moses was not so ignorant as to think that God's proper Essence could
be seen by bodily Eves; but having hitherto only heard a Voice out of a Pillar
of Cloud and Fire, he now desired to see some Representation of the divine
Glory, such as God might see fit to gratify him with. Thus much of Moses's
Request.

In the Sequel we have God's gracious Reply to his Suit.

1. God in Mercy denies Moses that which was not fit to be granted him, and
which even Moses himself could not have born, ver. 20. And he said thou can
not see my Face, for there shall no Man see me and live.

Many Times it is best, we have not in Specie what we ask for. It was best for
Moses that he was so far denied. A clear Sight of the Glory of God would quite
overpower the Faculties of any mortal Man in the present State. It is in
Compassion to our Frame, that God holds back the Face of his Throne and
spreads a Cloud upon it. But

2. God grants unto Moses what shall be abundantly satisfying. He shall hear
what would please him, ver. 19. I will make all my Goodness pass before thee,
and I will proclaim the Name of the Lord before thee, and will be gracious etc.
as in the Text. This was the best Answer to Moses his Request. Show me thy
Glory, says he, and God graciously answers by telling him, I will show thee my
Goodness etc. God's Goodness is his Glory, and he would have us know him by the
Glory of his Mercy, rather than by the Glory of his Majesty. Now the Height of
God's Goodness even the special Glory of it, is the Sovereignty thereof, held
forth most clearly in our Text.

It Is the Glory of the Goodness of God, that he, as an absolute Proprietor,
makes what Difference he pleases in the Bestowment of his Gifts; as not being
Debtor nor accountable to any. May not he do what he will with his own?

It Is the Glory of Divine Goodness, that all his Reasons of Mercy are fetched
from within himself, not from any Thing in the Creature which is the designed
Subject of it. As he has Mercy on whom he will, so it is because he will, as
our blessed Jesus takes Notice, Mat. 11.26. Even so Father, for so it seemed
good in thy Sight.

As for the Displays of divine Wrath, these are not merely sovereign and
arbitrary: There is always a Reason for it found in the Creature. God never
says, I will be angry at whom I will be angry; for his Wrath is always just and
holy. But he says, I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious etc; for his
Grace is always free and arbitrary. God never damns by Prerogative, but he
always saves by Prerogative.

What I shall further offer on this Subject will be in clearing up and applying
this

DOCTRINE.
The Mercy of God to any of his sinful Creatures has it is Foundation in and
takes it is Rise from his mere sovereign, arbitrary good Pleasure.

This great and fundamental Doctrine of the Gospel, because it is wholly
subversive of all carnal Dependence, we have naturally, through the wretched
Pride of our Hearts, a very great and fatal Aversion to. But it is truly most
useful and encouraging to poor Sinners enquiring the Way to Zion with their
Facesthitherward; as well as most refreshingly sweet and delightful to those,
who are bro't savingly home to God in Christ, and have found him, whom their
Souls love, and after whom they have been sorrowing; as may be herein after
more particularly considered.

This Doctrine I shall endeavor to illustrate, by considering sundry Instances
of the Grace and Mercy of God toward some of his sinful Creatures, respecting
their everlasting Welfare; and observe as I pass along, that these all have
their Foundation in, and take their Rise from God's mere sovereign good
Pleasure.

1. A notable Instance of the adorable Goodness and Mercy of God is his
gracious Design of the Recovery and Salvation of any of his fallen, sinful and
miserable Creatures.

That the glorious God has entertained and formed such a gracious Design, is
not the Thing which I now intend to prove, nor do we need to have it proven to
us, who enjoy the Light of the glorious Gospel, and do universally assent to
it, as a Point out of all Dispute.

What I am to show is, that this gracious Design of God flows from his own mere
sovereign good Pleasure. This will appear, if we consider

1. That no Wrong had been done the sinful sallen Creature, if it had been
eternally abandoned unto remediless Ruin.

What is strictly a Point of Justice is not arbitrary but necessary; and the
Subject is really wronged that is denied any Good, to which it has a Claim:
But there is no Wrong done to the Subject from whom is withheld only that
which he has no just Claim to: Therefore the sinful fallen Creature had not
been wronged, if there never had been any Design laid for his Recovery and
Salvation: Here, every Mouth must be stopped and all the sinful World become
guilty before God. It Is therefore apparent, that it is owing only to the
sovereign good Pleasure of God, that a Design is laid for the Recovery and
Salvation of any sinful fallen Creatures. Moreover,

2. God could have recovered his own Glory effectually to all Intents and
Purposes, of his sinful fallen Creatures, without designing their Recovery. God
has indeed made all Things for his own Glory. And he must not, nor can he be
frustrated of this his End. But he may freely choose the Way, wherein he will
have his Glory of any of his Creatures. It is certain, that God is glorified in
the eternal Destruction of some as well as in the eternal Salvation of others.
The Lord is known by the Judgment, which he executes; the Wicked shall be
turned into Hell and all the Nations that forget God, Psalm 9 16, 17.

The Apostle Paul plainly tells, that God may and will have his Glory as well
in the Destruction, as in the Salvation of Sinners, Romans 9.22, 23. which read
at Leisure. Yea, the very Goodness of God had been sufficiently emblazon'd,
without supposing a Design of the Recovery and Salvation of any fallen
Creatures; I mean his Goodness in Creation, and his infinite Condescension in
binding himself in Covenant, to reward with an happy Immortality that perfect
Obedience, which the intelligent Creature was made capable of yielding, and
which God might (if he pleased) have exacted of him in Right of his own
absolute Sovereignty. Again consider,

3. God's great End in designing the Recovery and Salvation of any of his
fallen Creatures, is the Manifestation of the Riches of his Grace, as you may
see in Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6, 7. Now the Glory of Divine Grace consists not only in
it is being conferred on the unworthy and ill-deserving, nor merely in the
Readiness and Willingness of God in bestowing the same; but also supposes in
God a perfect and absolute Liberty on both Sides equally: That is either to
grant or withold as seems good to him. Take away this absolute Liberty, as
they do who deny the mere Sovereignty of Divine Grace, and you wretchedly
eclipse the Glory of it. Once more here consider,

4. The Design of the Recovery of any fallen Creatures is by a Surety of God's
own providing; which further proves divine Sovereignty to be the Foundation and
Source of it.

It might perhaps be accounted too bold for us to say or think, that God could
not, in any other Way than by Way of Suretiship, have provided for the Sinner's
Salvation. But this we may venture to say, viz. not only, that this is the only
Way, which God has been pleased to reveal to us, but also that we are not
capable of conceiving of any other Way consistent with the Glory and Honor of
all the divine Attributes. Now it is against all Reason to suppose, that when
the sinful Creature had rejected God and thereby ruined himself, God should be
under any Necessity of accepting a Ransom offered by another instead of the
Sinner; his Crime being capital: Much less can God be supposed holden, to
provide for a Sinner such a Ransom. The Matter must be resolved into the
sovereign and arbitrary good Pleasure of God.

II. Another Instance of the Mercy of God toward fallen Creatures, wherein his
Sovereignty is exemplified is this, viz. that this merciful Design of God
terminates on Man, exclusive of the fallen Angels.

That this is the Case we all own and must do so, if we give Credit to the
divine Oracles, wherein this is most clearly revealed; therefore I shall not
stay to prove it: But pass on to show, that we have here in this Instance a
clear Proof of the absolute Sovereignty of Divine Grace. Here consider,

1. There is Nothing in Man conceivable, which is not to be found in the
sinning Angels, which might make Man rather chosen for a Subject of Mercy than
Devils. Are the Devils deserving God's Wrath and Curse forever for Rebellion
and Enmity against God? So is Man.

And if any suppose, that mere Misery itself does in some Respects, recommend
the Subject to Mercy; it must be allowed, that Devils, in this Regard, stand as
fair Candidates for Mercy as Men, if not fairer; for they are doubtless as
miserable and as sensibly so as Men are, excepting only that they have not this
to reflect upon, as Gospel Sinners have, that they have rejected tendered
Salvation.

The Misery of the Creature may be be considered as the Object, but not as the
first Motive of divine Mercy.

2. The Glory of divine Grace would have as much appeared in the Salvation of
Devils as of Men. It Is so clear that there needs not a Word to be said in it is
Confirmation.

3. Carnal Men have the very same Pride, Enmity and Antipathy against the Way
of Salvation which God has provided, until it be slain by the mighty Power of
God, as Devils themselves can be supposed to have. The Apostle tells us, Romans
8.7. The carnal Mind is Enmity against God, etc. And God could have designed
and effected a Conquest over the Enmity of Devils, as well as of Men. Yea,

4. What Odds their appears betwixt sinful Angels and sinful Men would have led
us, rather to have thought them the more likely Objects of designed Mercy, than
Men; by Reason of the Superiority of their natural Capacity for the Service and
Glory of God; had they been recovered to Holiness and Happiness.

III. The Sovereignty of God is discovered in this, viz. that some, not all of
the sinful human Race are the designed Subjects of Recovery and Salvation by
Jesus Christ. It Is certain, that some only, and not all of the Individuals of
Mankind are the designed Subjects of this Recovery. We all readily yield that
this Recovery does not in Fact take Place in the Case of all, but of some only;
upon which it will follow, that it was not designed for all, but for some only:
Unless we supopse (what is most absurd) that God may be frustrated of his own
Design and Purpose. Now, what Reason for this can we give, saving the mere
Sovereignty of divine Grace? Sure none at all. For,

I. The Remedy provided is of Value enough for the Recovery and Salvation of
all, were the Number a Million Times as great as it is. What is sufficient for
any One must be of an infinite Value: And what is infinite is sufficient for
all. The Apostle, speaking of Christ, says, Col. 1.16. It pleases the Father,
that in him should all Fullness dwell.

2. It was not necessary for the Honor of God's vindictive Justice, that some
should be secluded from, when others are admitted to partake in the designed
Recovery by Jesus Christ: for Divine Justice and Vengeance never sat in such
Triumph as on the Cross of Christ.

3. If all as well as any had been the designed Subjects of this Recovery by
Jesus Christ, the Mercy of God would have had so many more everlasting
Monuments.

4. All are alike involved in Guilt, exposed to the Wrath of God and tremendous
Curses of the Law; and alike naturally indisposed to accept of the Remedy
provided. This Case therefore must be resolved into divine Sovereignty.

IV. That only some of the Children of Men enjoy the external Means of Grace
and Salvation is owing to God's mere sovereign good Pleasure. You know this is
Fact, some only, exclusive of others, enjoy the outward Means of Grace and
Salvation. This was for many Ages the peculiar Privilege of the Israelites,
exclusive of all other Nations, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. And now its the
distinguishing Privilege of the Christian Nations, not common to all Mankind.
This flows from the mere arbitrary good Pleasure of God: As Moses in the Name
of God assures the Israelites, that they might not vaunt themselves, Deuteronomy. 7.6,
7, 8. And as our Savior assures us, Mat. 11.25, 26. I thank thee, O Father
Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these Things from the Wise and
Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes: even so, Father, for so it seemed
good in thy Sight.

V. That only some are awakened, convinced and converted by the Ministry of the
Word; when others enjoying the same or the like outward Advantages and Helps
are never the better therefore, arises from God's arbitrary and sovereign good
Pleasure. At the same Time when Lydia's Heart was opened, that she attended to
the Things spoken by Paul, in a sound Conversion; there were many others
present, who probably were not at all wrought upon for their good, Acts 16.13,
14. Of Peter's Hearers there were Three Thousand converted by one rowzing
Sermon, Acts 2.14 -- 41. But of Stephen's Hearers we don't know that there was
so much as one converted by his Sermon, very much of the same Kind and Tendency
with the former: These, instead of kindly Convictions, were filled with a
blood-thirsty Rage against their faithful Reprover, Acts 7.54 etc. Felix met
with a Shock of Conviction that set him a trembling, Acts 24.25. as well as the
Jailer, Acts 16.29. of which one only issued in Conversion. Thus it has been
in all Ages and Places of Christianity, to the present: And perhaps there has
scarcely ever been a Period, since the Apostolic Age, wherein has been more
conspicuous than in the present Day, what the Apostle Paul observed in his
Time, 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. We are unto God a sweet Savor of Christ, in them that
are saved, and in them that perish: To the one we are a Savor of Death unto
Death, and to the other a Savor of Life unto Life. Now whence comes this
Difference? Is it because of something distinguishingly found in some to
recommend them to God above other? No, no. Those distinguishingly favored with
saving Grace, under the same Means which evidently prove hardening to others,
must and will assign it to mere fovereign Grace. It is not of him that wills,
nor of him that runs, but of God that shows Mercy, Romans 9.16. Although we
are to work out our own Salvation with Fear and Trembling; Yet we are to know,
that it is God that works in us to will and to do of his own good Pleasure,
Philip. 2.12, 13.

Having thus illustrated and confirmed the Doctrine, I proceed to the

APPLICATION.
USE I. Hence infer, that its a great Mistake and of very dangerous
Consequence, which many carnal Persons under the Gospel fall into, who will
persuade themselves, that they are able (with the common Concurrence of divine
Providence in upholding their Beings and Faculties) to do that which has a
certain Connection with, or which shall assuredly issue in their Conversion and
eternal Salvation. By Conversation with sundry Persons considerably concerned
for their Souls, I find this Mistake is inbibed and deeply rooted; and it may
be so in many more than I am aware of. I believe, that upon Inquiry most of you
if not all, will at once readily own, and think you do it sincerely too; that
you have never done nor can do any Thing, which is properly meritorious of
Grace and Glory, as Labors are of Wages. No, your Hope is in Christ and in him
alone. But yet you secretly think, that you either have done, or can and will
do that which has a sure Connection with your spiritual and eternal Welfare.
You will own, you cannot repent of your Sins savingly in your own Strength,
cannot turn your Heart of Stone into an Heart of Flesh, cannot believe in Christ
to the saving of your Souls, cannot convert your selves from Darkness to Light,
from the Power of Satan unto God. But yet you may imagine your selves able to
do that, which shall certainly issue in this happy Change. This is a great
Mistake arising principally from a Misunderstanding of the Promises of the
Gospel, as to the Subjects thereof: such as we have in Ezck. 36.25, 26 etc.
compared with ver. 37. and in Mat. 7.7. and in Luke 11.13.

Now Persons in a carnal State, many of them, are ready to entertain a Thought,
that by their own Doings (though they cannot properly merit, yet) they are insured
of spiritual and saving Mercies, by Virtue of these and such like Promises,
which God has made them in his Word. But this is all a Mistake; for no
graceless Person has any Claim to one Promise of saving Mercies in the whole
Book of God. It Is too hard a saying for many to patiently bear, but it is true.
The gracious Promises are Children's Bread, they are the peculiar Inheritance
of those who, by a saving Faith, are in Christ Jesus, and Christless Souls have
no Interest in them; For the Apostle tells us, that all the Promises of God in
Christ are yea, and in him Amen to the Glory of God by us, 2 Cor. 1.20. And if
so, What claim have christless Sinners to the Promises? If God be a Sovereign
Despenser of his saving Graces and Favors and may grant or withhold them
according to his mere good Pleasure, as I have endeavored before to show; then
Sinners in their natural State have no Claim to the Promises: For if God had
once bound himself by his Promise to any of his Creatures; he is no more at
perfect Liberty either to grant or withold the promised Blessings, as may
please him; but inviolably holden by his Promise, and it were not just in God
to withhold the same.

Let me here show Sinners in sundry Particulars (at least something of the)
Greatness and Danger of this Mistake, which I am speaking of.

1. It must be very dangerous for Sinners still to stick fast on the first
Covenant, the Covenant of Works; because that being once broken, there is no
Claim to be made by Virtue of it, to any Thing else but the Curses of it. By
Virtue of that Covenant whilst yet unbroken, Man by his own Doings might have
certainly entitled himself to God's Favor and everlasting Happiness. But, how?
Why, merely by Virtue of God's Covenant Promise. No Man can ever imagine, that
the Obedience required of Man at first, and particularly in that determining
Point, viz. his refraining to eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil,
could have any Thing at all of absolute or proper Merit in the Nature of it;
much less in any Measure equivalent to the Blessings, he would have reaped
thereby, had he been obedient; as painful Labors for another are of a Merit
equivalent to the stipulated Wages. Now for a poor Sinner to persuade himself,
upon what he has done or can do, that he has a good Claim to converting and
saving Mercies by Virtue of the Promises, is nothing more or less, than to
stand to this Moment on the Foot of a Covenant of Works, as really in the
Essentials of it as ever Man in the Beginning did: And the unhappy Creature is
all this while going about to establish a Righteousness of his own, of the same
Kind with the Righteousness required under the first Covenant, which consisted
in a Compliance with the Condition, on which an happy Immortality was then
promised.

2. To suppose that a Sinner in his natural State does or can do that which
will entitle him to the Promises of Grace and Salvation, is quite inconsistent
with and contrary to the whole Tenor and main Design of the Gospel, which is
perfectly to exclude all Boasting in and of our selves, and to lay the Crown of
our Salvation on the Head of rich, free and sovereign Grace through Christ Jesus.
Romans 3.27.

3. To suppose that a Sinner by any Thing he can do, may claim the Promises,
has a direct Tendency to render. Grace and Glory cheap and contemptible, and
to harden Sinners in their Neglect thereof. It Is very apparent that many under
the Gospel think, that the attaining of a saving Faith in Christ and Repentance
unto Life, is nothing so difficult and hazardous as some represent it to be;
and that they need not be so very speedy and earnest in the Quest thereof as
some would have them to be. Now one great cause is this sad Mistake we are
speaking of. They think that these Blessings, with all others depending
thereupon, are secured to them in the Promises: It is but seeking for them in
Sincerity, which, they suppose they can do at any Time and they shall certainly
find, for God has promised them; this makes them careless and dilatory to
their Ruin.

On the contrary, it is apparent, that a due Sense of divine Sovereignty in the
Dispensations of Grace, has a happy Tendency to invigorate our Pursuits
thereof: if there be any Pertinence in the Apostle's Talk, Philip. 2.12, 23.
Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling; for it is God which
works in you to Will and to do of his good Pleasure.

4. If it were possible for Persons continuing under this Mistake which I am
speaking of, yet to become Subjects of special Grace here, and Glory hereafter;
I cannot conceive how it is possible for them to taste a tenth (I was going to
say a thousandth) Part of the Sweetness thereof. O, it is the Sovereignty and
absolute Freeness of Divine Grace to us (who might have been justly aband oned
to eternal Ruin as well as others after our utmost Efforts) which makes it so
ravishingly delightful unto our Souls. To this you can all in some good Measure
witness, who have (as the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 2.3.) tasted that the Lord is
gracious.

That which shows the exceeding Riches of his Grace in his Kindness toward us,
through Jesus Christ, is this, viz, that by Grace we are saved through Faith,
and that not of our selves, it is the Gift of God, not of Works least any Man
should boast. Ephesians. 3.7, 8, 9.

5. To what has been offered, I shall only add this one Consideration farther
under this Head viz. that Converts, who have at first sought regenerating and
saving Grace under this Notion, that the Promises of God secure the same to
them, on Condition of their own faithful Endeavors in Quest thereof, have been
obliged after all their vain Struggles on this Foot, at last to lie down at the
Foot of divine Sovereignty and acknowledge that if they perish at last,
notwithstanding what they have done, God would remain perfectly just, holy and
true, and they justly miserable to Eternity: And that if ever they are saved,
it must be from the mere and unpromised Mercy of God through Jesus Christ.

That you may all more clearly see this Truth; suppose the Matter were laid
down in Form of a categorick Syllogism thus,

Every adult Person of common Understanding under the Light of the Gospel, who
duly improves himself in seeking Regeneration and Salvation by Jesus Christ, is
assured by the Promises of God, that he shall obtain the same: But I do so
improve myself: Therefore I may rest assured of this, that I shall certainly
obtain.

The first Proposition is, that every adult Person of common Understanding
under the Light of the Gospel, who duly improves himself in seeking
Regeneration and Salvation by Jesus Christ, is assured by the Promises of God,
that he small obtain the same. This Men are naturally very fond of, and
accordingly the Sinner under his first Concern for his Soul and Eternity, goes
to Work to do something, that may (on this Foot) give him a Claim to converting
Grace, and will be disturbed, if a Minister tells him plainly that these his
Labors are vain on this Supposition which he goes upon. Let what will be said
on the other Side of the Question, the Sinner under his first Awakenings,
through the reigning Pride of his Heart scorning to come quite empty handed,
will endeavor and think to obtain something, by his own Industry with the
common Concurrence of divine Providence in upholding his Being and Faculties,
that shall entile him at least to a Promise of converting Grace. Sundry of you
who now hear me and who are hopefully converted, can (I believe) by your own
Experience attest to the Truth of this. But now I appeal to you: Say in the
Presence and in the Fear of God, who searches the Hearts and tries the Reins
of the Children of Men as well as their Ways; can any one single Person among
you with a good Conscience assume and say, as in the second Proposition? I have
duly improved my self in seeking regenerating Grace and Salvation by Jesus
Christ: I have gone as far as possibly I could, without renewing Grace in the
Reformation of what I know has been amiss in Point of Omissions and
Commissions, in the closest and most strict Meditation, in the most earnest,
vehement and steadily persevering Importunity in Prayerfulness etc. If any of
you my Hearers, upon such a Challenge, will venture to assume positively for
your selves; I may venture, without the Breach of Charity to say of you; that
you are bold as blind Bayard, and therefore bold because stark blind. Every
sensible and experienced Christian will (upon his longest Trials this Way) be
constrained to own; Alas for me! I have been sadly deficient in my Improvements
of common Gifts and Advantages; I might have done very much more and better
than I have done, without special renewing Grace. You my Friends who have
experienced a saving Change (I am morally assured) will, upon a serious
Reflection, find your selves obliged to own this, that after all your vain
Struggles against it, you have been compelled to make your dernier Resort to,
and fall down at the Foot of divine Sovereignty, and subscribe to that in Romans
9. 18. Therefore has he Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and whom he will he
hardneth.

USE II. Of Caution. I would in the Name and Fear of God solemnly warn and
caution my self and all that hear me, against the dreadful Abuse of the
Doctrine of the Sovereignty of Divine Grace, to the ascertaining our eternal
Ruin. Our Text and Doctrine present us with one of the most beautiful sweet and
refreshing Flowers of Paradise. But as a Spider or Serpent may extract the most
deadly Poison from the same Flower out of which the Be sucks the richest and
sweetest Honey; so it is with any precious Truth of the Gospel, and this in
particular: While it is improved by some to their everlasting Benefit, it is
abused by others to their consummate Ruin. Let us then be cautioned against the
Abuse of this Doctrine, either in justifying or in any Measure excusing and
apologizing for our own Negligence or Indolence, in the Business of our
spiritual and eternal Salvation. Some will say, if I was verily persuaded, that
God's Mercy flows only from his mere Sovereignty, and that I have no Promise of
converting and saving Grace on my own sincere Endeavors; I would never incline
an Ear, nor move an Hand or Foot or Tongue or Thought in the Business of my
Salvation, but lazily wait the Event of God's sovereign Pleasure concerning me.
Many Sinners there are who talk at this Rate; some, with a Design to ridicule
the Doctrine of the Sovereignty of Divine Grace, as an absurd Doctrine: To
these I shall say Nothing more now, than advise them setiously and prayerfully
to ead the ninth Chapter of Romans and when they have thus read it, let them
immediately give up their Cause, or find Brass enough to brand the divinely
inspired Apostle Paul as the Athenian Philosophers did) for a vain and
ridiculous Babbler. Other Sinners there are who allow the Doctrine of the
Sovereignty of Divine Grace to be true and certain; who yet wretchedly pervert
the same to their Ruin, or are in great Danger of; by excusing themselves in
the Neglect of utmost Painfulness, Prayerfulness and Perseverance in the Use of
all the Means of Grace and Salvation. Now for the Caution of such I recommend
these following Considerations.

Consider,

1. If you neglect or become remiss or superficial in your Prayers and the Use
of all or any other Means of Grace and Salvation which you are favored with;
you run directly counter to the divine Commands, and thereby take the ready
Course to ensure Damnation to your selves. Nothing in the Scriptures is
plainer, than that Sinners are enjoined by God's preceptive Will, to do that
which also the innate Principle of Self-Love well regulated will excite them
to, viz. that they exert themselves to the utmost in all Religious Duties, in
pursuing and endeavoring to secure their spiritual and eternal Well-Being. The
Lord Jesus Christ has commanded Sinners to exert themselves to the utmost in
Quest of Grace here and Glory hereafter. Thus he has done with his own Mouth
while bodily present here on Earth, Luke 13.24. Strive to enter in at the
strait Gate. John 6.27, Labor for that Meat which endures to everlasting
Life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you. And thus did he afterward by
his Spirit in the Mouths and Pens of his Apostles, Philip. 2.12. Work out your
own Salvation with Fear and Trembling. 2 Pet. 1.10. Give Diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure. Then consider,

2. God loses not his Authority to command, though Sinners have forfeited any
Claim to the Promises. It must indeed be conceded, that if there were no other
Relation betwixt two Parties, than that which is properly foederal, or a
Covenant Relation, wherein the Parties are no otherwise obliged to each other
than by Compact: In this Case, if either of the Parties once in Covenant with
the other (though it be by his own Default) forfeits any Claim of the other, he
is not any longer holden to the other, any farther than to suffer the Penalty
or Breach of Covenant. But if a Superior, as a King, Parent or Master should
see Cause to covenant with his inferior Correlate, and the inferior should, by
his own Default, cut himself off from claiming any Benefit by that Covenant;
this can do Nothing toward dissolving the native or original Authority of the
Superior. So in the present Case, if Sinners have forfeited any Claim to a
Promise, this cannot dissolve their native Obligation to Obedience.

3. It is an Argumont of a sordid mercenary Spirit, that we will not do our
Duty, without being first assured of Wages for it. What? Will we not take any
Pains in the Prosecution of a Business of such vast Importance as that of Grace
here and Glory hereafter, on any other Condition than that of God's assuring us
beforehand by his Promise, that we shall certainly succeed? How sordid and base
were this? See how it looks in the Instance of a poor starved perishing Beggar.
He is directed to apply for Relief to some noble wealthy, generous Personage,
who is able to help, and who has of his mere Generosity relieved Multitudes
under such Circumstances: But now the sturdy Beggar replies, not I, I will not
stir a Foot toward him, unless I have first such a Promise of him, that it
shall not remain at his mere Pleasure to give or withold needed Supplies: I
will not go except I may upon his Word first given, boldly challenge at his
Hands what I want. In this Case your Indignation against the sordid Wretch
would rise to such a Degree, as that you would be provoked to say of him; even
set him then die and rot on the Dunghill, if he be so proud and stout. Now in
Application of this Simile, I may say to thee, Sinner! whosoever thou art, that
thus abusest the Doctrine of the Sovereignty of divine Grace in Manner a
beforesaid, as Nathan to David in the Application of his Parable, thou art the
Man or Woman; and would to God, it might have as good Effect.

Again consider,

4. God has many a Time heard the Prayers even of carnal Persons, of his mere
Sovereignty, though he has never before assured them Audience by any express
Promise, especially on their Perseverance and increasing Importunity; that is
to say, he has graciously granted the Blessings thus asked in Praver for the
Matter of it agreeable with his Will, although the Sins attending the same,
arising from a wrong Principle and End, were more than enough to justify God in
the Rejection of the Suppliant with Abhorrence. We have a very remarkable
Exemplification of this in the Case of the Woman of Canaan, recorded in Mat.
15.22. etc. What the Apostle said of the Ephesians before their Conversion to
the Christian Faith, Chap. 2. v. 12. At that Time ye were without Christ, being
Aliens from the Commonwealth of Isael and Strangers from the Covenants of
Promise, having no Hope, and without God in the World; was true of this Woman:
She was neither a native nor proselyted Israelite, as appears by what Christ
said to his Disciples, ver. 24. I am not sent but to the last Sheep of the
House of Israel: and to the Woman her self, ver. 26. It is not meet to take the
Children's Bread and to cast it to Dogs: And the Woman her self never pretends
a Claim to any Promise; but persuaded of the Power and Goodness of Christ, she
is importunate and persevering in her Cries for Mercy, and is graciously heard
and answered. And this is the Case with almost all who have been converted in
adult Age; their Prayers whilst unconverted have been heard and graciously
answered, in the Bestowment of converting Grace, when once they have beeh fully
brought to disclaim any Challenge hereof at the Hands of God, and freely
acknowledge that he may either grant or withold the same as seems good to
him. I believe, the Sinner must be made sensible that God is not a Debtor to
him by his Promise or any other Way, before he is prepared to receive special
Grace.

And I cannot but think, that a principal Reason why Sinners pray in vain for a
long Time and with considerable Earnestness for regenerating Grace, and find
themselves as far off as ever, is because they do all under a Notion that God
is at least by his Promse a Debtor to them.

Poor Sinner yet in vain seeking converting Grace! be prevailed upon to drop
any such Pretensions, if you would ever obtain the Mercy you need, and freely
acknowledge that God may justly grant or withold the Mercy, you need, as
seems good to him. I know what a Sinner will say for himself here. He will say
I am fully convinced that God owes me not converting Grace in Point of strict
Justice. I can and do freely own, that if I were everlastingly rejected after
all I have done, God would be just and righteous; but my Dependence is on his
Veracity in the Promises. Now my dear Friends, stop a Minute here, and consider
how inconsistent such Talk or Thoughts are. Can you suppose it consistent with
Justice and Righteousness for any one to break his Promise to another? Indeed
of the Condition of a Promise bears no Proportion in Value to the Good promised
on that Condition; as if a Man should seriously and bona Fide promise me an
Estate of an hundred a Year, on the Condition of a ^^pe of Tobacco every
New Year's Day; In such a Case the Person cannot be supposed under any previous
Obligation in Point of Justice ever to make such a Promise: And the making of
the Promise is an Act of mere Grace: Yet when he has once solemnly promised
and engaged, he is as really holden in Point of Justice to perform his Promise,
as if the Condition was of an equavalent Value. But to proceed, consider,

5. Though a graceless Sinner has no Claim to a Promise of converting Grace,
yet the Promises of this Nature in the Gospel afford unto Sinners great Ground
of Encouragement in seeking Conversion, and for this Purpose may be and are
justly improved by wise and godly Divines, for the Quickening of Sinners in the
Quest hereof. Such gracious Passages of Scripture so far as they reser to the
unconverted; I look upon as so many Predictions or Prophesies of what the Lord
designs, and will in his own Time and Way graciously accomplish, though none
can beforehand ordinarily know in partieular the designed Subjects. And these
Expressions taken in this Sense afford a sufficient Ground of Encouragement to
awakened Sinners. It seems to me that Sinners, viewing such Scriptures in this
Light, have not less but more Encouragement ministered to them, than if they are
considered as formal Promises made them on certain Conditions therein expressed
to be performed by them. Let us for Example take a View of what we have in
Ezekiel. 36.25. etc. Then will I sprinkle clean Water upon you, and ye shall be
clean -- a new Heart also will I give you etc. compared with v. 37. I will yet
for this be inquired of by the House of Israel to do it for them. Now if we
consider these Passages as containing a Promise of regenerating Grace made to
Sinners on a Condition to be performed by them; here the awakened Sinner will
be for ever restless, conscious of his own Failure as to his Compliance with
the Condition, But if we consider these Things as a Prediction or prophetical
Declaration of God's gracious Purposes toward Sinners, including therein, not
only the main End and Design, but also the Means leading thereunto: Here the
Sinner finding in himself this gracious Purpose of God operating though in the
smallest Deginnings, of what is only preliminary or preparatory to Conversion,
does entertain withal a beginning Hope: And as it progressively operates from
one Step to another, so the Grounds of Encouragement are still rising; because
(...) this Light he views the whole Work, from the smallest Beginnings to it is
Consummation, in Christ's Hands, who having begun a good Work will hopefully
perform it until the Day of Christ, Philip. 1.6. In these Passages of Scripture
the Sinner may for his Encouragement, see the Exhibitation of the gracious
Purpose of God, his almighty Power and infinite Goodness in the Conversion and
Salvation of the worst of Sinners; and so be assured of the Possibility of his
own Conversion: Which then rises into some Probability, when he finds (in
Pursuance of such a gracious Design) an Heart given to seek regenerating Grace;
and the more earnest and persevering he is helped to be, the higher the
probability still rises, because the whole is in the Hand of an infinitely wife
gracious and mighty Efficient: And what more can be expected or desired? Once
more consider.

6. By your Neglect of Prayerfulness, Painfulness and Perseverance in Quest of
Grace and Salvation by Jesus Christ, you take the ready Course to cut your
selves off from all Hopes of obtaining. It Is agreed on all Hands, not only by
those who suppose, that the Sinner is secured of saving Mercies, by the
Promises of God, on Condition of his honestly exerting himself in proper
Endeavors therefore; but also by those who know that saving Mercies take their
Rise from God's mere good Pleasure, as before held forth in this Discourse: I
say it is universally agreed, that the careless negligent Sinner, continuing so,
has no Ground at all to hope that he shall ever be saved.

What then do thou mean poor Sinner, who art striving (not to enter in at the
strait Gate, but) to justify or at least excuse thy Neglect of seeking the
great Salvation exhibited in the Gospel, by such a wretched perverting of the
precious Doctrine of the Sovereignty of Divine Grace? What a Madness is it for
thee to take that Pains and Study in arguing and ascertaining thine own
Damnation, as some others do in working out their own Salvation with Fear and
Trembling; and for the same general Reason, viz. because it is God that works
in us to Will and to do of his own good Pleasure? Unhappy Creature! Art thou
then desperately resolved in thine own mind that thou will e'n bear Damnation
as well as thou can? Oh amazing! Can thine Heart endure or thine Hands be
strong in the Day that God shall deal with thee? Ezekiel. 22.14. Who among us
shall dwell with the devouring Fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting
Burnings? If. 33.14. But I must proceed to improve the Subject in

USE III. Hence learn, that the very worst of Sinners in this World, under
Gospel Advantages are not excluded Hopes of obtaining saving Mercies at the
Hands of God, on the Account of either the Greatness or Number, or aggravating
Circumstances of their Sins, or their long Continuance hitherto in a State and
Course of Sin. Satan that grand Enemy of Souls, always seeking whom he may
devour, rocks the Cradle and keeps the Sinner fast asleep in carnal Security
and Indolence, as long as possibly he can; and would be glad to have him sleep
on and take his Rest, till he be awakned with the Flames of Hell about his
Ears. If the Sinner meet with something in the Ministry of Divine Ordinances or
Providence, that gives him a little Disrest for a short Time; Satan is
watchful to quiet him again as soon as possible before he is thoroughly awakened;
by Suggesting to him, either that his Sins that trouble him are small, mere
Peccadilloes, what the best of Men are liable to, and yet in a safe Estate,
being no more than common Frailties which are overlookt of Course; or if they
are great in themselves, yet in a considerable Measure excusable on the Account
of some extraordinary Provocation or Tempration, that might have mastered the
best Man on Earth: If these Devices fail him, he has another at Hand; he will
if possible persuade the Sinner at least to suspend his anxious Concern about
his Sins and his Soul for the present, and promises him a more convenient
Season afterward. But sometimes these Artifices of Satan for keeping the
Sinner asleep, or getting him to sleep again, when he begins to make a Stir,
prove not effectual for this Purpose: Now the Devil changes shape and acts the
Part of a roaring Lion, when his serpentine Wiles fail him. He now tells the
rowzed Sinner, your Case is desperate; your Sins are so many, so great in
themselves, so highly aggravated and so long continued in, that it is in vain
for you to hope for Mercy; and its best for you to take what sensual Pleasures
you can in this World. It is from such Suggestions of the Devil that Sinners
say practically as in Isai. 22.13, Let us cat and drink for tomorrow we shall
die; and as in Jer. 18.12, There is no Hope, but we will walk after our own
Devices, and we will every one do the Imagination of his evil Heart. God of his
Infinite Mercy grant, that none of us may be so ignorant of Satan's Devices,
that he may get this Advantage at last of us to consummate our Ruin! Poor
distressed and disconsolate Sinner! art thou just ready to conclude desperately
against thy self, that there is no hope or Help for thee in God, but that thou
must inevitably perish everlastingly; because thy Sins are for Size like the
Mountains of the Earth, and for Number like the Sands on the Shore, attended
with the most aggravating Circumstances, and long persisted in? Know thou, that
it is the Devil the Father of Lies, who prompts thee to draw this false
Conclusion, though from true Premises. Think of the greatness, the Number and
aggravating Circumstances of thy Sins as much as thou will, the more the
better: But withal think of the Sovereignty of Divine Grace through Jesus Christ.
Never was one Sinner since the Fall of Adam therefore converted, pardoned and
saved, because he was (antecedent to the Impressions of Divine Grace on his
Soul) better than another, or less Criminal than another, but because God will
be gracious to whom he will be gracious, and will show Mercy to whom he will
show Mercy

The Consideration of the Sovereignty of Divine Grace is infinitely more
encouraging than discouraging to all who should be encouraged. It is indeed
mortifying to the haughty and proud Sinner, and may it give a fatal Stab to the
letting out of the very Hearts-Blood of damning Pride and Self-Righteousness:
But it is very encouraging to the awakened and deeply convinced Sinner. Such an
One may think and justly too, though I have been the chief of Sinners, as vile a
Miscreant as Manasseh, as foul a Debauchee as Mary Magdalene, once possessed
with seven Devils, as virulent an Opposer and Persecutor of those zealously
engaged to build up the Kingdom of Christ in it is Power and Purity as ever Saul
(afterward called Paul) was while a Pharisee; and even worse than any or all
these: Yet if the Grace of God to Sinners be merely sovereign and arbitrary, it
may be I may obtain Mercy through Christ: For it is a faithful Saying and worthy
of all Acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners, of
whom (says the Apostle) I am chief. 1. Tim. 1.15.

Moreover, this Doctrine is applicable also in

USE IV. For Instruction to those who are reflecting on the State of their own
Souls, with a Desire to know what it is. -- We are all of us apace going off
the Stage of this Life: It is but a little while before the Places that now
know us will know us no more: And it is very probable that many of us, now in
Company before the Lord in his House, will be in Eternity before the Revolution
of another Year. We likewise know that we all have immortal Souls capable of
existing seperately in a State of Happiness or Misery during their Separation
from the Body; and that even our Bodies themselves shall be raised at the last
Day out of their Dust, and be again animated with the same Souls; and that
there is prepared for the everlasting Entertainment of every one of us, either
an Heaven of Happiness, or an Hell of Misery inexpressible, according as we are
found in a State of Grace or of Sin, at the Time of our Nature's Dissolution. I
hope therefore that many of you are disposed to enquire seriously into your
Sat with a sincere Desire to know what it is; that you may have the greater
Comfort and Joy if it be safe; or if otherwise, that you may fly for your Lives
to the alone Hope and Refuge set before you, whilst the Golden Scepter of Grace
is extended, and the Door of Mercy stands open. Now for this Purpose I shall
agreeable to this Subject recommend it to you, to enquire closely and
impartially in sundry Particulars, in which, I beseech, be faithful to your own
Souls.

1. Enquire; Have you ever had a clear Sense of Divine Sovereignty in the
Business of your spiritual and eternal Salvation? Can you with Understanding
and in Sincerity subscribe your Assent to the Truth of our Doctrine? Think
closely what Answer you would return if God himself should demand of you and
say; Sinner! What think thou? May I do what I will with mine own? Is it
certain, true and just, that I may distribute special and saving Grace and
Mercy through Jesus Christ to whom I will, and merely because I will? I would
with all Humility say to thee, Sinner, as God in another Case to David, 2 Samuel
24.13. Advise now and see what Answer I shall return to him that sent me. If
thou can answer clearly and fully in the affirmative; it is well as far as it
goes. But this alone will not discriminate a godly Person, for many in this
Point as well others, may seem to have sound Heads, who yet have rotten Hearts.
But if thou hesitatest on this Point, but more especially if thou answerest
boldly in the Negative; the Examination needs go no farther; there appears upon
thee a very black Mark, such as is not the Spot of God's Children. But such an
One as answers this first Enquiry in the Affirmative, I beseech farther to
enquire.

2. Have you ever been brought to a full Submission to Divine Sovereignty in
the Distribution of saving Mercies through Jesus Christ? This is a Step far
beyond the former: That has it is Seat in the Head, this in the Heart; that in
the Understanding only, this in the Will also; that may be alone without this,
but this latter always pre-supposeth the former. Have you, being fully
convinced of the Truth of the Doctrine, and notwithstanding a just Sense of the
Wrath and Indignation of an holy Sin-hating God against such a fallen guilty
Creature as you are, have you humbly cast your self down at the Footstool of
the Throne of Grace, resolvedly waiting there, until it shall please him to
extend saving Mercy to you through Jesus Christ, with an Heart disposed to
justify God, if after all he should finally reject you? If a well informed
Conscience can clearly answer this Enquiry in the Affirmative; the Case looks
very hopeful. But I fear some are dangerously deceived in this critical Point:
therefore for farther Proof, enquire in the next Place,

3. Have you ever found any considerable Struggling and Opposition in your
Hearts against this Submission on to Divine Sovereignty? -- Answer honestly. If
you have had such Struggles in your Heart; it is strange that you should not be
sensible of it: And if your Heart has never opposed this Submission I am
speaking of, I am at least very suspicious that you are Strangers to the Thing
it self. Oh! the proud and stout hearted Sinner cannot bear to buckle thus.
What? To submit to God's sovereign Disposal, without a previous Assurance of a
good Issue? No, it is more than Flesh and Blood can bear. Here the Sinner starts
back, this is the special critical Point, the distressing Pinch attending the
New Birth: Hitherto come many Sinners who never at last get through this Spot:
Here is their ne plus ultra; and so the poor Creatures finally perish after
very hopeful Beginnings. And those who have at length happily got through these
Straits, have ordinarily found a great deal of Difficulty here, through the
Reluctance of their own proud Hearts, who cannot easily bear to part with their
own Righteousness, of which they must be stripped stark naked, or else they can
never shoot this Gulf. Are you sensible that you have met with Difficulty in
this Spot, and found your Proud Hearts dispose to wrangle against God, thinking
it hard that thou must submit at his Foot without Assurance beforehand of a
good Issue.

4. Enquire; Have you been ashamed and even confounded on the Account of this
your Opposition, and found it at length effectually born down? If so there is
great Grounds of Hope in your Case, that the Match betwixt Christ and your Soul
will be soon made up, if it be not already consummated; the main Impediment
being now removed: Especially if

5. You have hereupon found the Burden, lying on you before, in a great Measure
taken off. I believe that the Promise of Rest, which Christ makes to weary and
heavyladen Souls coming to him, always takes Place in some sensible Degree, on
the Soul's first closing with Christ. And I believe, that if the Rest, that a
Soul finds, be consequential to the Submission before spoken of, it is an
hopeful Symptom of it is Union with Christ. But if present Quietness in a Soul
lately distressed be not introduced by this Submission it is a cursed Peace
arising either from the Returns of former Stupidity, or rather the governing
Prevalence of a self-righteous Spirit. But enquire further,

6. Has the Ease and Comfort you find in the hopeful Method aforesaid been
attended with a deep Sense of your own Vileness on the one Hand, and of the
astonishing Riches of divine Grace through Jesus Christ on the other? If not,
your Peace is not genuine but spurious and worse than Nothing. But if you now
think more meanly of yourselves, and more highly and adoringly of the infinite
Riches of Divine Grace in and through Jesus Christ, to such vile, contemptible,
ill-deserving Creatures as you are; there is Ground to hope, your Peace is such
as Christ has given; and that your State is safe. Especially,

7. If you find hereupon evidently a new Turn of Soul, in all the Powers
thereof. That will doubtless always hold thus which the Apostle tells us, 2
Cor. 5.17. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, old Things are past
away, behold all Things are become new. How is it with you? Do you find this?
The Soul of Man is capable of reflex Acts upon it self. Look within and see, if
there be any evident Turn there, in your Understanding, Will and Affections.
Have you put off the old Man with his Deeds, and put on the new Man which is
renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of him who has created you anew, Col. 3.
9, 10. He that passes out of a State of Nature into that of Grace, is withal
translated out of Darkness into mavelous Light; for God, who commanded the
Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give the Light of
the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6.
Every true Convert is in the best Sense a new light Man: He sees now as he
never saw before: He is quite a new Scene opening before him. Again, there is a
notable Change now in the Will: The Objects of it is Choice on the one Hand, and
of it is Rejection on the other, are now the Reverse of what they were before.
Those who sincerely take hold on the Covenant, choose the Things that please
God, Isa. 56.4. They now with Moses, choose rather to suffer Affliction with the
People of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a Season, esteeming the
Reproach of Christ greater Riches, than the Treasures in Egypt, Heb. 11.25, 26.
Once more the Affections now run in new Channels, both the closing Affections,
as, Desire, Hope, Love, Joy etc. and the seperating Affections, as, Contempt,
Fear, Hatred, Grief etc. These Affections are indeed physically considered, the
same as they were; but they are objectively vastly differing, yea and contrary.
Now spiritual and heavenly Things are the Objects of the Souls principal
Desire, Hope, Love and Joy; instead of sinful, or at best merely carnal
Enjoyments. Now the Believer treads the Moon under his Feet, looks with
Contempt on all the sublunary World, with its Pleasures, Profits and Honors,
that before appeared gay and charming. Now he fears not them which kill the
Body, but are not able to kill the Soul; but he fears him who is able to
destroy both Soul and Body in Hell; not with a slavish, but a filial Fear. Now
he is no more as formerly a Hater of God and Holiness, but of Sin; this is the
Object of his implacable Detestation. Now he grieves bitterly not for the
Disappoinment of his worldly Schemes and Hopes as before, but for his Sins that
have separated betwixt God and him, and occasioned the hiding of God's Face
from his Soul, and whereby he has rendered himself guilty of the greatest Folly
and basest Ingratitude; and he can never enjoy an Hour's Comfort more in any
Thing until he can again sensibly find Christ, whom his Soul loves, and after
whom his Soul pants, as the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks. Moreover
this Change of the Soul it is several Powers will always influence the (...)
Conversation unto Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord. Now Sin
will not reign in the mortal Body of a Believer, that he should obey it in the
Lusts thereof, neither will he yield his Members as Instruments of
Unrighteousness unto Sin; but yield himself unto God, as one that is alive from
the Dead, and his Members as Instruments of Righteousness unto God.

But its more then Time, I had concluded. Dearly beloved Friends! who are now
reflecting on your State for the Disscovery of it, be persuaded honestly,
closely and prayerfully to improve the Rules of Trial, which I have laid before
you with as much Plainness as I can; together with what other Helps for this
Purpose you have had and may yet farther have; and this with a sincere Desire
to know the Truth. Hereupon it is highly probable, some of you may find Reason
to conclude, that you are yet in a State of Nature, adn perhaps others, that
you are hopefully in a State of Grace. -- To those of the former Sort,

I have not Time to offer any Thing farther in particular, and must therefore
only refer you to, and earnestly beseech, yea and solemnly charge you in the
Contempt at your utmost Peril another Day; that you heedfully observe the
Caution given in Use second, and the encouraging Instruction in Use third, both
designedly calculated for your Benefit: The Lord of his Infinite Mercy add his
Blessing thereunto.

To those of the latter Sort I shall offer a few Words of Advice.

1. Be humble and thankful. Entertain the meanest Thoughts of your selves, and
most thankful and adoring Thoughts of the Infinite Riches of Divine Grace in
Christ toward you. Don't sacrifice to your own Net, nor burn Incense to your
own Drag. Say feelingly, Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy Name, O Lord,
be all the Glory.

2. Be exemplary in Holiness, that the good Ways of the Lord may be well and
not ill spoken of on your Account. Let your Lights so shine before others, that
they seeing your good Works may glorisy your Father which is in Heaven.
Remember, that unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required.

3. Boast not your selves over others. Learn that no one of you be puffed up
against another: For who makes thee to differ from another, and what have
thou, that thou did not receive, why do thou glory as if thou had not
received it?

4. Be encouraged to trust and hope in God through Christ for all present and
future needed Supplies of Grace from Time to Time. If God of his mere
Sovereignty has brought you into a State of Grace, out of a State of Nature,
when you could lay no Claim to any Promise of it; how much more may you now,
for all needed Supplies trust in Christ, to whom you are united, in whom the
Promises are yea, and in him Amen, unto the Glory of God by us?

5. Be not diffident concerning others, your Relations and Friends at present
in a Graceless and Christless State. But take Pains with them, as far as there
appears any the least Probability of it is being serviceable to them: And besure
bear them much on your Hearts in Prayer before God, who can do all Things, and
from whom no Thought can be withheld. Don't let your Hearts sink down under
the last Discouragements in the Case of any of them. Remember here two Things.

1. The Sovereignty of Divine Grace. If the Mercy of God takes it is Rise merely
from his own sovereign good Pleasure, and not from any Thing first found in the
Creature, as you experimentally know in your own Case; you have no Reason to
despair of One, who seems at the greatest Remove from any Thing that is Good.
2. Although the poor Christless Sinner has no Claim to the Promises, yet you
(being in Christ Jesus) have a Claim, and may humbly and believingly plead the
Promises on behalf of such an One. If what we find in Ezekiel. 36.25. etc. where
God speaks of regenerating as well as justifying Grace, be looked upon, not only
as a prophetical Declaration of what a gracious God would in his own Time and
Way do, as I have herein before considered it, but also as properly a Promise
for any to lay hold upon and believingly plead the Accomplishment of; I must
suppose that the few truly Godly found among this People, were they to whom
this Promise was firstly made, and by whom it was accordingly pleadable, though
on the Behalf of their graceless Relatives and Friends. And we know, that no
Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private Interpretation, 2 Pet. 1.20. And
that the Things formerly written by Divine Inspiration, are written for our
Admonition, on whom the Ends of the World are come, 1. Cor. 10.11. On the
whole, I think, dearly, beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ, that you have
sufficient Warrant and Encouragement ministered to you, to be painful with and
prayerful for your Graceless, Christless Relatives, especially in such a Day as
this, wherein, notwithstanding a vigorous Opposition, Sinners are daily in
Companies flocking to the Lord Jesus Christ as Doves to their Windows. The good
Lord of his Infinite Mercy grant Success to the faithful Endeavors and fervent
Prayers of you and all others, the Children of God, on Behalf of those poor
Creatures among us, who are yet without Christ, Aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, Strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having no well grounded Hope,
and without God in the World; that they who are yet afar off may be made nigh
by the Blood of Christ; to whom be Glory for ever and ever Amen.
FINIS.

