Dr. Colman's SERMON BEFORE THE GENERAL COURT, August 27. 1741.

The LORD shall rejoice in his Works.

A SERMON Preached at the LECTURE in BOSTON, August 27. 1741. BEFORE His
EXCELLENCY William Shirley, Esquire Captain General and Commander in Chief, And in
the Audience OF THE General Court.

By Benjamin Colman, D.D

PSALM. cxi. 3. His Work is honorable and glorious, and his Righteousness
endures for ever. BOSTON: Printed by J. DRAPER, Printer to His Excellency the
GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. MDCCXLI.

At a Council held at the Council Chamber in Boston, upon Thursday the 27th of
August 1741.
Voted,
THAT Jacob Wendell, Richard Bill and John Read, Esqrs be desired to give the
Reverend Dr. Benjamin Colman the Thanks of this Board for his Sermon preached
this Day at the public Lecture in Boston, and to request of him a Copy thereof
for the Press.

J. Willard, Secr.

THE LORD shall rejoice IN HIS WORKS
PSALM CIV. 31. THE Glory of the LORD shall endure forever, the LORD shall
rejoice in his Works.


THE Glory of the LORD in his Works of Creation and Providence, but more
especially the latter, is the Subject of this high and lofty Psalm. The Style
and Strain of it perfectly agrees to the stately Subject. "It is a noble Poem,
esteemed by very competent Judges, far to excel all that the Wit and Devotion
of Man has ever wrote upon the Dominion of GOD manifest in the Works of Nature;
if we only consider it in the Brightness of Ideas and Ornaments of Diction."
HENRY's Expos.
It begins with giving Glory in the highest; O LORD my GOD, thou art very
Great, thou art clothed with Honor and Majesty; who coverest thy self with
Light as with a Garment! And it draws to a close with my Text, " The Glory of
the LORD shall endure forever, the LORD shall rejoice in his Works.

Or it may be read as a Prayer, the Hebrew being in the Imperative Mood, Let
the Glory of the LORD endure forever; Let the Lord rejoice in his Works. q. d.
" Amen, O LORD most great and gracious! It is so, it will be so, and ever may
it be! Let the whole Earth ever give thee Glory.

Every way the Words breathe a most fervent Doxology, upon the Contemplation
and Recitation of the glorious Work of GOD through the Universe, and express a
raptrous Thanksgiving to Him thereon; "O may the LORD have Glory from us, and
Joy in all his Creatures; and never more be grieved, as He once was, that he
had made Man upon the Earth.

But the Words are more than a Prayer: They are an Affirmation of what ever
was, is and shall be: "Thy Glory shall endure to Eternity, and thy Joy in all
thy Works, in thy own unchangeable Complacency in them, which is infinitely
more than all the Adorations of Angels and Saints on the Account of 'em, for
ever and ever.

It is only the latter Part of the Text I shall discourse of, and to be sure in
a poor and low manner, on so high a Subject, The LORD shall rejoice in his
Works.

The Blessedness and Glory here ascribed to GOD, is Joy. Glory and Blessedness,
cannot be without Joy. They are essential to and inseparable from each other:
And GOD is the blessed and only Potentate in this, because his Joy is perfect
in all his Works. Never did King or Saint come near to this, no not Solomon in
all his Glory. He wrote Vanity of Vanities on his great Works, for he erred and
sinned in his doing and using them. GOD's Works are all perfect; "They are
Verity and Judgment, and are done in Truth and Uprightness"; and the King of
Glory has a perfect Joy in the Perfection of them all; his Works of Creation,
Providence and Grace. A perfect Wisdom, Holiness, Goodness, Munificence,
Benediction shines forth in them; so that ineffable, perfect, infinite Joy must
be the constant Result. It can be no otherwise for ever and ever. It must be
without Variableness or Shadow of Change. The invariable Cause and Reason must
have an invariable Effect. Perfectness is the Cause, Blessedness and Fullness of
Joy is the Result. There can be neither Addition or Diminution.

Although my Text leads me more particularly to the Consideration of GOD's Works
of Providence, yet I will say something also of the Work of Creation and
Redemption.

I. GOD ever had, has and will have a Divine ineffable Joy in his Work of
Creation; in all and every Part of it.

How manifold these are, we may see through the Psalm, which instances in GOD's
making the Angels, stretching forth the Heavens, laying the Foundation of the
Earth, covering it with the Deep, filling it with Springs of Water, clothing it
with Grass and Trees, the Food of the Cattle, and the Dwelling of the Fowl.

At the Creation of all these, Moses tells us how GOD expressed his divine
Joys; He saw 'em all to be very good, perfect in their Kind, and he blessed
them, rested and instituted the weekly Sabbath; a holy perpetual Rest to Man:
-- How could Complacency and Joy be more expressed? No wonder that all his
Angels sang together, and all the Sons of GOD in one World and other shouted
for Joy. Job. xxxviii. 7. They saw the Joy of GOD in every Thing that was made,
and far into the Reasons of it. But GOD only comprehends his own Work, and his
Joy transcends theirs infinitely, as does his Knowledge and Goodness.

Man was the Joy of his GOD, in the Day of his Creation: Let us make Man in our
Image, after our Likeness, and let him have Dominion. GOD made an Eden for him,
put him into the Garden of Pleasure, and filled him with Joys in his holy and
happy State. To give such a Being, must be an unknown Joy to to him that gave
it.

When we see but a little into the Works of GOD, O what a Joy does it give us?
When we consider his Heavens, the Work of his Fingers, the Moon and Stars which
He has created! When we look down on the springing Wegetables in our Fields and
Gardens, -- " If GOD so clothe the Grass! When we soar after the Fowl of
Heaven, as on the strong Wings of Eagles, or view the goodly Wings of the
Peacock at our Door! When we go down to the Sea in Ships, and the Dolphin or
the Whale play about us; -- There is that Leviathan! Or be it the more terrible
Crocodile near the Shore, with the Things creeping innumerable both small and
great Beasts, whereof our Context sings: How do the Silver Shoals glitter on
the Hook or in the Net as we draw them up!

When we survey the Animals upon the dry Land, both tame and wild, meek and
fierce, from the Horse and Elephant, to the Mouse and Worm; what surprising
Pleasures do the Varieties of wondrous Use and Beauty give to our Contemplative
and devout Minds! -- But yet when we raise our Eye upon our selves, and look in
one another's Faces, and see each others Souls in our Eyes and Speech; how GOD
has made the Dust into Organs of Sight and Hearing, our Hands to work, and
Tongues our Glory! How he has made our Minds and Souls to think and know, to
admire, love and joy! to pray and praise and serve and be happy! to give Glory
and Honor and Thanks to the Fountain of (...), Perfection and Blessedness! --
Above all, when we find our Selves capable of a Spiritual and Divine Joy, in
casting our selves before the Throne, and uttering the Songs of Heaven, from
which the Celestial Spirits never rest; Revel. iv. 8, 9. Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God Almighty, which was and is and is to come! -- Thou art worthy, to
receive Glory and Honor and Power; for Thou have created all Things, and for
thy Pleasure they are and were created.

I say, when we may at any time feel within our selves, any part of their
Pleasure and Delight, in our Meditations on, and searching into the Things that
GOD has made; what must we then conceive of the Joy of GOD in his creating them?

II. I proceed to contemplate, in a like, low and brief manner, the infinite
and incessant Joy of GOD in his upholding, preserving, supplying and governing
all his Creatures. The Joy must be the same in GOD's Work of Providence, as of
Creation; for the same Wisdom, Power and Goodness is glorious for ever in the
one and other; and therefore the like Blessedness and Joy results from both.

Has a Father Joy (O low Comparison) in feeding, instructing, clothing and
ruling his Family, with Prudence and Tenderness? Or to rise higher, Has a a
good King Joy in blessing, and protecting his Kingdom? in being as the Light
and Rain to them, and as the Breath of their Nostrils: which are the high and
most elegant Representation of the Oracles of GOD to us! Yea, has every earthly
Benefactor, even in the lowest Rank of Life, a superior Joy, akin to that of
benevolent Angels, in showing the Kindnesses of GOD to their Fellow Worms; in
distributing to their Wants and Needs, and making their Hearts to sing? -- Then
think of the Immense Joys of GOD in his vast Benefits to all his Creatures
through every Moment of their Existance! To fill them with Good and Happiness,
according to their various Capacities of receiving from Him! As the Psalmist
sings of the Blessedness of GOD a few Verses before my Text; 'These all wait
upon Thee, that thou may give them their Meat in due Season; that thou
give them they gather; thou openest thy Hand, they are filled with Good.

I might go into particulars, if there were any End of them, and speak of the
perpetual Joys which the LORD most High must necessarily have in the daily and
annual Course of the Sun, or of the Planets in their Revolutions and Circles
about it; whereby Heat and Life, Light, Food and Joy, is preserved in them all;
and all our precious Things are put forth, Grass for the Cattle, and Herbs for
the service of Man, and Corn and Wine and Oil to make glad his Heart and his
Face to shine. Nor does the LORD of all overlook the Life that is most below
ours: "He knows all the Beasts of the Mountains, and the Cattle upon a thousand
Hills, are His! and almost all for Us, O we of little Observation and
Gratitude! -- But how vast must His Satisfaction be, in his vast Provisions for
us Daily? " His Thoughts are very deep, while the brutish Man knows not, nor
the Fool understands any of them. It Is very well there is here and there found
a Soul of high Devotion, " made glad through His Work, and triumphing in them; as
in Psalm xcii; "Upon an Instrument of ten Strings, upon the Harp with a solemn
Sound; to show forth his Loving Kindness in the Morning, and his Faithfulness
every Night. -- But whether we will call on our Souls or no, or awake up our
Glory to sing and give Praise; yet GOD has his Joys every Moment of Time, as
our Context teaches us, while He makes the Clouds his Chariot and walks upon
the Wings of the Wind! while He appoints the Moon for Seasons, and the Sun
knows its going down; while He sets a Bound to the Deep, and sends his Springs
into the Valleys, to give Drink to every Beast; -- He sees 'em quench their
Thirst with the Pleasure of a common Owner of 'em all! He feeds alike the mute
Fish of the Sea, and the Birds that sing among the Branches, as joyful as
Creatures of the Air can be. -- If we have no religious Joy in contemplating
these common Works of Providence; yet GOD has a Fullness of Joys for ever in
them. Earth and Sea are full of his Riches Neque enim hic vulgaris est Honor,
quod DEUS Mundum tam splendido Ornatu in Gratiam nostram instruxit; ut non
solum pulchri hujus Theatri simus Spectatores, sed multiplici Bonorum Copia et
Varietate, quae in co nobis sunt exposita, fruamur. Call. in loc.
.

But what then in the Joy of GOD in the Nations of Men! ver. 23. " Man goes
forth to his Work, and to his Labor until the Evening.

Man is his great Family, whom the LORD daily feeds; and the Nations and their
Food is but as the Drop of a Bucket, and the small Dust of the Balance.

His Delights were from everlasting in the Sons of Men; and he makes his Sun to
shine and his Rain to fall upon the Just and Unjust; and under such Feet he yet
puts "all Sheep and Oxen, the Beasts of the "Field, the Fowl of the Air, and
the Fish of the Sea. For out of the Inhabitants of this our Globe He has an
Election of his Grace, foreknown and predestined to be His Joy to eternal
Ages. These HE has given to his only-begotten and eternal SON, before all
Worlds, to be by Him brought out of a State of Sin and Misery, the woeful Fruit
of their wicked Fall from Him, to heavenly Holiness and everlasting
Blessedness. -- These therefore He seeds and keeps on Earth, with a peculiar
Love and Delight, as he did his Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Job and
others, preserving them to his heavenly Kingdom.

These are his chosen and called, adopted and sanctified, his Children Personam
optimi patris induit, qui filiis blande fovendis, et liberaliter alendis se
oblectat.
, his Jewels and Treasure; and all this of his own Heart only and freest Grace;
for before he formed them in the Belly, he knew them, and had writ their Names
in the Book of Life, having loved them with an Everlasting Love: They are even
as the Espoused of his Soul, and as the Bridegroom rejoiceth over his Bride, so
the LORD their GOD over them! -- This is his own Word Jer. i. 5. Rev. xiii. 8.
xvii. 8. Jer. xxxi. 3. ii. 2. Isai. lxii. 5. Rev. xxi. 2.
, and what can be more expressive of his Joy in them?

He feeds them with a Fathers Heart and Hand, with a Covenant Love and Care:
"He gives Meat to them that fear him, ever mindful of his Covenant. They are
his Portion and Inheritance, and the LORD is theirs. They have Bread to eat,
which others know not of, they taste and see that the LORD is good; and the Joy
of the LORD is their strength: His secret is with them, and he shows them his
Covenant. He takes them into a blessed and high Fellowship and Communion, and
manifests himself so to them as not to the World: He makes a Hedge about them,
and neither Satan nor Sabean can break in upon them: He speaks of 'em with Joy,
as he did of Job to his Adversary the Devil; "Have thou considered my Servant?
And if he break the Hedge, and suffer Men or Devils to break in with Rage and
Fury, yet in the End the LORD and his Servant have Joy; and indeed he enters
into the Joy of his LORD; he does so here in this Life by Faith and Love, he
shall do so in Vision and Fruition to all Eternity. -- The Psalm ends with this
Distinction between the Godly and the Wicked; the Pleasure of GOD in the one,
and their Triumph in Him; while the others perish by the Fire of his Wrath: Let
the Sinners be consumed out of the Earth, and let the Wicked be no more; but
bless thou the LORD O my Soul, praise ye the LORD.

But this special Joy of the LORD in some of His Works above others, and in
some of the Children of Men above others, naturally leads me into the
Contemplation of the LORDs rejoicing in his Work of Redemption. I come therefore

III. To speak of GOD's Joy in our Redemption, his wondrous Work of Grace and
Mercy, relating to our precious and immortal Souls, their present
Sanctification and eternal Glorification. The most distinguishing Blessings of
Providence do only minister unto (...) of Grace, and hereby become spiritual
and saving to us.

The Joy of GOD is in recovering sinful Man to his original Holiness and
Blessedness: " Have I any Pleasure at all that the Sinner should die? says the
Lord GOD: And not that be turn and live. GOD and his Angels rejoice in this;
for there is Joy among the Angels over one Sinner that repents: But the Joy
of the immense Father of Spirits must of necessity excel infinitely the Joys of
all his holy Angels on this Account: Even to them also it might be said, although
these elder Brethren know no Displicency and Envy, as we read in the Parable,
Luke xv. Son thou art ever with me, and all I have is thine; but this thy
Brother was dead and is alive again, he was lost and is found: It is meet that
we make merry and be glad.

Known unto GOD are all his Works from Eternity, before the Being of any Angel
or Spirit! Conscious to his own everlasting Love to some who should never Sin,
and to others whom He would bring to Repentance, he had the Joy of it before
all Worlds. This his ineffable incomprehensible Joy in his eternal Purpose of
Mercy to an elect Number of the Race of sallen Adam, is represented to us through
the lively Oracles; from the first Promise of a SAVIOR, Genesis iii. to the
Transports of Heaven on the Consummation of the Marriage of the Lamb, Rev. xix.
7. Let us be glad and rejoice and give Honor to Him.

All Things (...) existed in the Eternal Mind, and were seen and enjoyed by Him
in his perfect Idea. The Eternal FATHER possessed all Things in his Eternal
SON; the Heir of all, by whom He made the Worlds: was, says he (Prove. viii. 1.)
set up from everlasting, from the Beginning, or ever the Earth was; I was daily
his Delight, rejoicing always before Him; rejoicing in the habitable Parts of
the Earth, and my Delights were with the Sons of Men. Whom the FATHER then
foresaw, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his SON, that
he might be the Firstborn among many Brethren, Rom viii. 29. And surely as He
had though it so it has and shall come to pass, and as he purposed so it shall
stand. Read the whole Joy of the FATHER and CHRIST, and of all the Elect and
saved, through the first and third Chapters of the Epistle of St. Paul to the
Ephesians.

The Joy of GOD is first in the Person of the REDEEMER, and for his sake in his
redeemed saved Ones,

1. In the Person of the Redeemer, the Divine Joy is from everlasting,
ineffable, infinite, Heb. i. 3. Who being the brightness of his Glory, and the
express Image of his Person, and upholding all Things by the Word of his Power;
when he had by Himself purged our Sins, sat down on the right Hand of the
Majesty on High.

It is in his Office of a Redeemer to us, that the Father teaches us to behold
the Glory of the Son, and speaks his Joy in Him, Psalm. ii. 6. I have set my
King upon my holy Hill of Sion; I will declare the Decree, the LORD said unto
Me, thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten thee: Ask of me and I will give
the Heathen for thy Inheritance; and the uttermost Parts of the Earth for thy
Possession. Isa. xlii. 1, Behold my Servant whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom
my Heart delights; I have put my Spirit upon Him, he shall bring forth
Judgment to the Gentiles. Matthew. iii. 17. And lo a Voice from Heaven, saying,
This is my beloved SON in whom I am well-pleased.

Look through the whole Revelation of JESUS to us, from the Beginning of the
Bible to the End of it, and see if the Joy of GOD in the REDEEMER be not the
Harmony of Scripture. So the Revelation begins to Adam after his Sin and
Condemnation: A blessed Seed of the Woman to break the Serpent's Head. A SEED
the Joy of GOD and of Souls, the Terror and Judge of Devils. Enoch prophesied
of Him with Joy and Terror; Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his
Saints to execute Judgment upon all; first in a Flood of Water and then of
Fire. Abraham heard of his Day with Joy, and great Reason had he for it in the
Promise made to him, " In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed. In the Blessing of Judah, CHRIST is declared to be the Joy of GOD and
of his Israel; "Judah, Thou art he whom thy Brethren shall praise. So the GOD
of Israel spoke of his CHRIST to Moses as his highest Joy, "A Prophet will I
raise up like unto thee, unto HIM they shall hearken. And so to David at large,
in the lxxxix Psalm, "I have laid Help upon One that is Mighty, with my holy
Oil have I anointed Him.

In his Incarnation he was the Joy of Heaven and Earth: Isai. ix. 6. Unto us a
Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his
Shoulder; and his Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God,
the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. Luke ii. 10. I bring you good
Tidings of great Joy, which shall be to all People; for unto you is born this
Day a SAVIOR which is CHRIST the Lord.

The REDEEMER in all his Offices is the Joy of GOD and Man; "Thou art a PRIEST
forever, after the Order of Melchisedec: In his Ministry, "He shall bring forth
Judgment to the Gentiles: In his Miracles, "The Lame shall leap as a Heart, and
the Tongue of the Dumb shall sing: In his Sufferings, "I have glorified thee;
and will glorify: In his Resurrection, "O Death I will be thy Plague, O Grave I
will be thy Destruction! In his Ascension, "GOD is gone up with a Shout, the
LORD with the Voice of a Trumpet; sing Praises to our King, sing Praises: In
his Exaltation, "Sit thou at my right Hand until I make thy Enemies thy
Footstool: In his Intercession, "I know that thou hear me always: And
finally, GOD's Joy in CHRIST is at his Second Coming in Glory; "For the Father
loves the Son, and has committed all Judgment to Him; that all Men should
honor the Son even as they honor the Father. -- Such is the Joy of GOD in the
Person of the REDEEMER, through his Accomplishment of the whole and every Part of
our Redemption and Salvation.

2. I have only to add, the Joy of GOD in his Redeemed and saved, for CHRIST's
sake.

They are his Elect and therefore his Joy: He chose 'em before the Foundation
of the World, to be made holy, having loved them with an everlasting Love, and
he draws them with Loving Kindness. He has espoused them, and joys over them
as a Bridegroom. GOD has adopted them in CHRIST, put his Spirit into them, his
Image on 'em. -- He joys in his Grace in them; in all the Exercise and Fruit
of it to his own Glory. His Gifts and Calling are without Repentance. -- He
joys in their Prayers and Praises, their spiritual Sacrifices, they are a
sweet Savor of Rest to him. He joys in their Pardon and Justification; "I --,
even I am He, that blotteth out thy Sins for my own sake. He joys in their
Access to Him, Communion with him, and Joy in him, "Let me hear thy Voice, for
sweet is thy Voice and thy Countenance is comely. He joys in their Obedience
to Him, of every kind, active and passive, as in Abel and Job, the First-Fruit
and the nonesuch from the Earth. He joys in all his Dispensations to his
sanctified, in all their Comforts and Crosses, when they receive Good, and when
Evil; his Love and Joy is the same in all, and theirs ought to be so; "I will
chasten him, with the Rod of Men, but my Loving Kindness will I not take away,
nor suffer my Faithfulness to fail --. He sends out his black Horses, his dark
Dispensations, and they quiet his Spirit, Zech, vi. 8. He purifies his People
in the Furnace, and sees 'em with Joy come forth as Gold: He burns up the
Wicked as Dross, "Ah! I will ease me of my Enemies! Pharaoh and Antichrist are
alike raised up for his own and his Churches Triumph. The Song of Moses and the
Lamb are one: " Great and mavelous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty! just and
true thy Ways, O King of Saints! who shall not glorify Thee! -- And to
conclude, The Consummation of all Things, when the Mystery of GOD is finished,
will be consummate Joy. both on the part of the FATHER and of CHRIST and of the
Church: Revel. xvi. 2. And I saw the New Jerusalem coming down from GOD out of
Heaven, as a Bride adorned for her Husband.

So I have meditated in the easiest, plainest, most Scriptural and Evangelical
manner, and in the most general and comprehensive I could, " The LORD's
rejoicing in his Works.

The Use remains, and first, See the Blessedness, Perfection, and Glory of the
LORD OUR GOD, and how He is to be admired, blessed and magnified by us, for
what He is in Himself. He is the Blessed GOD! how Grand and glorious is this
Ascription! His JOY in all his Works is infinite. This is worthy of the CREATOR
and Governor of all Worlds, and the Redeemer and Sanctifier of the Saved out
of ours. How happy must HE be, who is the Fountain of Being and Felicity in all
Worlds! Psalm. lxxii. 19. And blessed be his glorious Name for ever, and let the
whole Earth be filled with his Glory! Amen and Amen.

2. The Perfection of all the Works of GOD is a necessary Inference from his
rejoicing in them. If his whole Work were not perfect, how should HE that is
perfect rejoice in it? They must be all done in perfect Truth, Wisdom,
Goodness, Holiness. They must be as He Himself is. If He were not absolutely
perfect, he could have no Joy in Himself; if his Works were not all so, he
could have none in them. " He covers himself with Light as with a Garment, and
lays the Beams of his mighty Building, -- and a Universe appears. " His Work
is honorable and glorious, and his Righteousness endures for ever. They are
Verity and Judgment and stand fast for ever and ever. He has made 'em to be
remembered, he has ordained everlasting Memorials of them to us, in his Sabbath
and the Holy Supper. He sent Redemption to his People, he has commanded his
Covenant for ever; holy and reverend is his Name.

3. Let us learn our Duty, in Conformity to the Blessed GOD, and for his Glory
from us, and for our own Joy and Blessedness here and for ever; to rejoice in
GOD and in the Knowledge we have of his Works of Nature, Providence and Grace.

We have Minds and Eyes to observe 'em, and Memories to retain 'em. " Sought
out they are by all that have Pleasure in them; and he that has it not, is
worse than blind and brutish " Understand ye brutish among the People, and ye
Fools when will ye be wise? To whom shall I send them for Instruction and
Correction! let it be to a holy Woman, an inspired Mother in Israel, to Hannah
the Mother of Samuel, 1. Sam. ii, r. And Hannah prayed and said, "My Heart
rejoiceth in the LORD, my Horn is exalted in the LORD. I rejoice in his
Salvation; there is none holy as the LORD, there is none beside him.

A religious Joy in GOD is a most high and important Thing in his holy Law to
us, but how hard is it to attain this Divine Life. Phil. iv. 4. Rejoice in the
LORD always, and again I say rejoice. Man was made for this Joy and in it, and
had he preserved his Innocence and Holiness, this had been the Light and Life
of his Spirit: As it is the Image of GOD on the Spirits in Glory, that they are
holy and joyful like him. It is the most natural Resolve in the World, that the
Psalmist comes into, upon uttering the Words of my Text; " The LORD shall
rejoice in his Works; and I will sing unto the LORD as long as I live; I will
sing Praise unto my GOD while I have my Being; my Meditation of him shall be
sweet; I will be glad in the LORD Haec Gratitudo unicae Compensationis loco est
apud Deum, ubi debita cum laud persequimur: Cupit enim Ordinem, quem ab initio
Deus instituit, fluere in legitimo Donorum ^^us usu.
.

But as the Joy of GOD is more especially in the great Work of our Redemption
and in his Redeemed; so let our Joy be in CHRIST JESUS, the Joy of his
Redeemed; and in them that are so, the excellent Ones of the Earth, in whom
should be all our Delight. Let us rejoice in his holy Law and holy Worship and
Worshippers; in holy Devotedness and Obedience to Him who has died for us and
rose again; in the Exercise of Faith and Love, Repentance, Prayer and Praise.
Let CHRIST be our Glory and Joy; He and his Righteousness, He and his People,
He and his Cross, He and his Salvation.

4. Let the Use be of Shame and Confusion to us, of Humiliation, Repentance and
holy Mourning, that we know no more of this sacred Pleasure, a holy Joy in GOD
and his Works; that we have no more contemplated and seen GOD in 'em! that GOD
and his Works are not in all our Thoughts! that we are so lost in Sense, and
tho'tless of GOD in every Thing we see and feel and hear and taste! that our
Philosophy and Theology are so poor and low! that we are sunk so much below Men
as well as Christians! stupid and mindless of these Works of Providence and
Grace, which should exceedingly affect us and excite our Gratitude and Praise!
and again at times (it may be) grieved at his Works, discontented, offended and
fretful at them, like Jonah! or envious as Asaph, "I was as a Beast before
Thee! and worse, for the Beasts envy not.

Let us remember our Faults this Day; -- that under some of GOD's holy and
righteous Works Usward we have been dejected, cast down and ready to despond!
that we have been unresigned and impatient, or no more submissive to the Will
of our Heavenly Father! or that we have been no more obedient and fruitful
under Divine Corrections and Rebukes! that we have despised the LORD's
Chastning, or fainted! that we have been no more humbled, purged, purified and
refined by them! -- So GOD has not the Joy of his Work, but has been grieved
and justly provoked by us! as he was by the Sinners of the old World, and it
repented him that he had made Man upon the Earth, and it grieved him at the
Heart, and he destroyed the Work of his Hand. Genesis vi. 6.

But to close with a more pleasurable Direction and Exhortation, which yet may
seem somewhat strange too; that we should need to be so exhorted.

5. Let GOD have Joy in Us among his other Works. He will have none in us
without our own Consent and Will, he will joy in the Triumphs of his Justice on
us, if we will not be to the Triumph of his Grace and Mercy. If thou be
righteous what give thou to Him? And if thou sinnest what do thou against
him? -- We are a Part of the Work of his Hands, and he expects Joy from us, and
has made us for a voluntary yielding it to him. This is the Prerogative of Man
above the inseriour Creatures; He must joy in GOD, that GOD may joy in Him. --
With Joy also has GOD redeemed us, that he might rejoice in us, as renewed,
sanctified, justified and glorified. O let him have this Joy in our
Regeneration, Adoption, Justification and eternal Salvation. Let Him have Joy
in our Love, Adoration, Service and Obedience; in our Submissions, Prayers and
Thanksgivings for ever and ever. -- Let us devote our selves to Him as living
Sacrifices, holy and acceptable through JESUS CHRIST our LORD. Let us walk before
Him in all holy Obedience, that He may dwell with us and in us, and be our GOD.
Let his Name be hallowed by us, and his Kingdom come in us, and his Will be
done by us, as it is done in Heaven. Why should not GOD have Joy in Us, as he
has in his holy Ones above, through the Ages of Eternity! Let us yield Him the
Obedience of Faith here, and of Love and Joy for ever. The Kingdom of GOD here
in us, and that to come hereafter, is Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the HOLY
GHOST. This is approved of GOD and accepted by him; this is the Joy of the LORD
-- But then we must deprecate Sinners and their Ways, and imprecate against
them, for GOD can have no Joy in them, nor in his Earth because of them. So
therefore the Psalm concludes; " Let the Sinners be consumed out of the Earth,
and let the Wicked be no more; bless thou the LORD O my Soul, praise ye the
LORD. The Meaning is, The holy GOD can never rejoice in Us, nor in his Works on
Earth, while we and they are involved in Sin; but were Sin once consumed out of
the Earth which is the very End and Effect of our Redemption by CHRIST; then
GOD has Pleasure in beholding this his Earth and dwelling in it, and then we
with holy Joys and Exultation can laud and praise and bless him. Else " He
looks on the Earth, and it trembles, he touches the Hills and they smoke: His
fiery Presence sets it in a Flame; which are the very Words following my Text
Ostendit statum Mundi in illu DEI Laetitia fundatum esse, quia nisi Terram
vegetet sereno paterno que affectu, simul ac eam severo oculo adspexerit,
tremefaciet, Montesque ipsos ex uret.


Let this therefore be our holy Ambition, our humble Prayer and sollicitous
Care, that GOD and his Earth may have Joy in us and from us in our respective
Places.

Let MAGISTRATES therefore rule for GOD, as they do by Him and under Him; and
say unto the Fools, deal not so foolishly, and unto the Wicked, lift not up the
Horn on high, speak not with a stiff Neck. Let 'em resolve by the Grace of GOD
and say with David, I will behave my self wisely in a perfect Way, I will walk
in my House with a perfect Heart; I will set no evil Thing before my Eyes, a
froward Heart shall depart from me, I will not know a wicked Person; my Eyes
shall be upon the Faithful in the Land, that they may serve me.

Then if the Vine be advanced to rule over the Trees, it shall be so far from
losing it is Sweetness, that it will but the more abundantly diffuse it is
generous Spirit, and cheer the Heart both of GOD and Man: As Jotham spoke in
his Parable by the Wisdom of GOD. But wise was the Vine to refuse the Rule, if
it must thereby lose it is Sweetness, turn sour and grieve both GOD and Man; as
Saul did, and the LORD said to Samuel, "It repents me that I made him King.

But as this Matter pertains to Rulers, that the LORD may rejoice in his
Work; so also does it to the whole Body of a People, Ministers and private
Christians, in a reverend and delightful Concurrence with Them; as Aaron and
Hur held up the Hands of Moses in the Mount; and as Shechaniah answered and
said unto Ezra; -- "We also will be with Thee; be of good Courage and do it.

How beauteous, healthy and Athletic then is the Body? the Head and all the
Members together having the same Regard to GOD and Care one for another; that
the LORD (whose we are, and whom we serve together) may take Pleasure in us all
and beautify the Meek with Salvation, his Israel rejoicing in Him that made
him, and the Children of Zion being joyful in their King.

I will give you here an Instance, the most general and comprehensive, singular
and proper, in the religious Observation of the Lord's Day among a People; it
being the One primitive and perpetual Memorial of the LORD's rejoicing in his
whole Work of Creation, Providence and Redemption; and the weekly sacred Season
of our joyful remembering GOD in his Works, to give Him the enduring Glory of
them.

Let Rulers and People only unite in the Sanctification of the SABBATH,
Ministers leading in the holy public Solemnities of Worship, and People
assembling with Reverence and godly Fear; Parents and Heads of Families
commanding their Children and Households to call it the Holy of the LORD and
honorable, and to honor Him thereon, not finding their own Pleasure, nor
taking their own Way and Walk, nor speaking their own Words on GOD's holy Day;
(Isai. lviii. 13, 14.) -- How would the Glory of the LORD endure forever among
us by this Means, and our GOD rejoice over us to bless us, as He has promised;
Then shall thou delight thy self in the LORD, and I will cause thee to ride
upon the high Places of the Earth, and feed thee with the Heritage of Jacob thy
Father; for the Mouth of the LORD has spoken it.

Men, Brethren and Fathers hearken! If we in our respective Places religiously
consult the Glory of GOD and it is enduring among us, there is no doubt at all
to be made of GOD's rejoicing over us to do us good: And they that be of Thee
shall build the old waste Places; Thou shall raise up the Foundations of past
Generations; and be called the Repairer of the Breach, the Restorer of Paths to
dwell in.

But while we are zealous for the Ordinances of our GOD, relating to his
Worship, shall we forget or neglect the Duties that respect our civil Life and
moral Conduct one toward another; a sober, a righteous and peaceable Life, in
all Godliness and Honesty? GOD forbid! -- Shall we not willingly and gladly
submit to every Ordinance of Man for the LORD's sake? whether it be to the KING
in supreme, or unto GOVERNORS as sent by Him, for the Punishment of
Evildoers, and for the Praise of them that do well? -- For so it is the Will
of GOD that with well-doing you put to silence the Ignorance of foolish Men; as
free and not using your Liberty as a Cloak of Maliciousness, but as the
Servants of GOD: Honor all Men, love the Brotherhood, fear GOD, honor the
KING,

So we are taught of GOD, and commanded by Him to teach you, To be subject to
Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates and to be ready unto every good
Work. -- Let every Soul therefore be to the HIGHER POWERS; for there is no
Power but of GOD: the POWERS that be are ordained of Him; whosoever therefore
resists the Power (in it is lawful Commands) resists the Ordinance of GOD,
and they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation: But be not
terrified by this Word, as if on Pain of Damnation you were obliged to obey
evil and unlawful Commands; No; the righteous and holy GOD can never require
this of us, nor may his VICEGERENTS on Earth demand it: For Rulers are not a
Terror to good Works, but to the evil: Will thou then be afraid of the Power?
Do that which is good and thou shall have Praise of the same; (you may most
justly expect and demand it.) For He is the Minister of GOD to thee for Good:
But if thou do that which is evil be afraid; for He bears not the Sword in
vain; He is the Minister of GOD, a Revenger, to execute Wrath upon him that
does Evil; (and upon no other) wherefore you must needs be subject, not only
for Wrath but for Conscience Sake. For, for this Cause pay you Tribute also;
for They are GOD's Ministers, attending continually upon this very Thing:
Render therefore unto all their Dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due; Custom to
whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear, Honor to whom Honor: Owe no Man any Thing but
to love one another; for he that loves another has fulfilled the Law; scil.
of the second Table, in all that it prescribes to us in our various Relations,
in Family, School, Church and State.

So let the Beauty of the LORD our GOD be upon us! So may He establish the Work
of our Hands! So may He satisfy us early with his Mercy, that we may rejoice
all our Days! So may He make us glad, according to the Days wherein He has
afflicted us, and the Years wherein we have seen evil.

So may Your EXCELLENCY, and We together, have Reason to rejoice for ever in
the particular Work of GOD, which has bro't you to worship with us at this
Time; Your Accession to the GOVERNMENT over us.

May there be much Glory to GOD, and Joy to YOUR SELF and Us, in the Wisdom,
Righteousness and Goodness of your Administration.

May your EXCELLENCY ever have Peace and Satisfaction in your Reflections
thereon from Day to Day, and Joy in the Day of CHRIST.

May you daily prove your own Work (as the Apostle speaks) and have Rejoicing
in your self alone! in the Conscience of your own Uprightness; for (as it
follows) Every Man shall bear his own Burden.

GOVERNMENT is in it self Burden eno' for any Shoulder, and only a good
Conscience before GOD can make it lightsome and easy to a good Christian. Some
are filled with their own Ways, which are bitter enough; but as the wise King
has taught us, " The good Man shall be satisfied from himself: In the Sincerity
of his Heart, and Integrity of his Life, the Recompense of his Hands shall be
rendered him.

May David's humble Resolution be this Day taken up by your EXCELLENCY, and
strictly kept to; " When I receive the Congregation, I will judge uprightly. So
" Wisdom and Knowledge shall be the Stability of your Times, and Strength of
Salvation.

And so the Glory of the LORD shall endure with us, in the flourishing of pure
Religion, and of a righteous Commerce, and of holy Sabbaths, under your wise
Counsels and Influence.

Happy the RULER and People together in such a Case, for the LORD will be their
GOD. And though the Ruler must die like other Men, accountable to his GOD and
ours; yet will be living and dying be justly owned an earthly kind of God in
this, "That like the GREAT LORD his Righteous SOVEREIGN, he shall rejoice in
hill own Works of Righteousness and Goodness, for ever and ever.

Which GOD of his infinite Mercy grant to YOUR EXCELLENCY, and to all our
Honorable RULERS, both in the Legislative and Executive Trust; through JESUS
CHRIST, to whom be Glory, for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.
APPENDIX. FROM THE New England Weekly-Journal. BOSTON, August 17.
THIS Morning the associated Pasters of the Churches in this Town waited on His
Excellency the Governor, and the Rev. Dr. COLMAN presented to Him the
following Address.

To His EXCELLENCY William Shirley, Esquire Captain General and Governor in Chief
in and over His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England.
SIR,
WE the associated Pastors in the Town of Boston, wait on your Excellency to
congratulate You upon your Advancement to the Chair over us, to acknowledge the
sovereign governing Providence of GOD herein, and to assure your Excellency of
our humble and earnest Prayers to GOD that the SPIRIT of Wisdom and Grace may
rest upon You, for your discharging the Duties of so great a Trust, and the
Improvement of your excellent Talents to the Glory of GOD, the Honor of the
KING, the Weal of your People, and your own good Account in the Day of CHRIST.

Your Excellency well knows the Loyalty and zealous Affection of our Churches
to the Protestant Succession in the Royal House of King GEORGE the Second, our
rightful Sovereign; and you have also seen the dutiful Regards of our Ministers
through the Province to His Majesty's Governor: Which give us an humble
Confidence in recommending our Churches, and the College in Cambridge, with all
their Rights and Privileges, to your Excellency's Favor and Protection.

And, whereas these Churches have been happily distinguished from the
Beginning, for their strict Observation of the Lord's Day, on which the
Religion and good Order of a People so greatly depend; We humbly beseech your
Excellency's tender Regard to us in this important Matter.

And we trust, Sir, by the Help of GOD, that neither we nor any of the Brethren
of our Denomination, will ever be wanting in that Reverence and Duty to your
Excellency which a righteous Administration must always command from us.

To which Address His Excellency was pleased to give the following Answer,

GENTLEMEN,
I AM well persuaded of your Loyalty and zealous Affection to the Protestant
Succession in His Majesty's Royal House, and am obliged to you for this Mark of
your Respect and Esteem for Me; and you may depend upon my best Endeavors for
the Maintenance of all the Rights and Privileges of the Churches of
New England within this Province, and of the Ministers of them, and to promote
the Interest of the College in Cambridge, during my Administration of His
Majesty's Government among you; and you may depend upon my peculiar Care for
the Preservation and Advancement of Religion among the People in every
Instance, and especially by encouraging and enjoining a strict Observation of
the Lord's Day.

The Ministers then waited on Governor BELCHER, to thank Him for all his
Goodness and Favor to the Churches through the Province, and to the Pastors of
them, during the Course of his Administration, and to express their good Wishes
of the gracious Presence of GOD with Him in his Recess.


