An ANSWER To the Rev. Mr. Garden's Three First Letters To the Rev. Mr.
Whitefield.

AN ANSWER TO The Rev. Mr. Garden's Three First Letters TO The Rev. Mr.
Whitefield. With An APPENDIX Concerning Mr. Garden's Treatment of Mr.
Whitefield, etc.

Romans 3.27, 28. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what Law? of Works?
Nay: but by the Law of Faith. Therefore we conclude, that a Man is justified by
Faith without the Deeds of the Law.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, over against the Prison
in Queenstreet. 1741.

AN ANSWER, etc.
SIR,
ACCORDING to your Desire I now send you some Remarks upon Mr. Commissary
GARDEN'S LETTERS to the Reverend Mr. WHITEFIELD, which you may either publish
or suppress, as you think they deserve.

Remarks on Mr. GARDEN'S First LETTER.
THE First consists chiefly of an endeavor to prove Mr. Whitefield guilty of a
Self-Contradiction, founded upon what he says in his Sermon Entitled, What
think ye of Christ. page 18. viz. Observe my Dear Brethren the Words of the
Article, Good Works are the Fruits of Faith, and follow after Justification.
How then can they precede, or be any ways the cause of it? No; our Persons must
be Justified before our Performances are Accepted Upon which Mr. Garden
observes, that Mr. Whitefield (has explained) this Article into a
Contradiction to his own Doctrine, since he has taught, that a true Faith
necessarily preceeds Justification; and the latter part of the Article says,
that Good Works do necessarily spring out of a true and lively Faith. From both
which Mr. Garden thinks it will follow, that Good Works do in fact go before
Justification. The Argument is all contained in these Words, viz. "Now if Good
Works do necessarily spring out of a true and lively Faith; and a true and
lively Faith necessarily preceeds Justification, the consequence will be, that
Good Works do not only follow after Justification, but preceed it also.

This he assures us is a plain Consequence. But I am apt to think it is a plain
Consequence to none, who have not that Scotch Second-Sight he speaks of; i. e.
an Ability of seeing that which is not. Indeed if Mr. Whitefield had said, that
Faith necessarily preceeds Justification any space of Time, though ever so small,
he would have owned in Effect that Good Works go before Justification as well
as follow it; and Mr. Commissary might have sang T^ D^um with a much better
Grace than he does at present. The whole turns upon this single Point: If Mr.
Whitefield has said, that Faith preceeds Justification, any real space of
Time; Actum est; he must fall before his Adversary. But if he does not hold
this Thing, the Commissary triumphs without any Victory.

Now what Mr. Whitefield holds, as to Faith's preceding Justification, this
Reverend Gentleman tells us himself. In page 19. he says, That some sew, who
disturb, insult and abuse their Neighbors for differing from them (meaning Mr.
Whitefield and others) suppose that Faith and Justification are coexistent, and
that there is no space between the first Act of a justifying Faith and
Justification for Good Works to be exerted in. That is in other Words, that
Faith preceeds Justification, not in Time, but only in the order of Conception.
Well then, this being Mr. Whitefield's Idea of Faith's preceding
Justification, (his Enemy himself being Judge) wherein does it appear that he
has explained the Article into a Contradiction to himself? Does it follow that
because he holds Faith and Justification to be coexistent that therefore they
are not coexistent; that because he supposes there is no room for Good Works to
be exerted in between them, that therefore he supposes there is some room for
them? If these are no Consequences, then Mr. Garden is no Conqueror. How
naturally might his own Words be returned to him again! Away with such confused
and contradictory Gibberish!

Surely this Man of Logic, when he comes to see there was no Knot at all, will
wish he had been Asleep when he challenged Mr. Whitefield to untie it if he
could; and be heartily ashamed of this same confident boasting.

Remarks on Mr. GARDEN'S Second LETTER.
MR. Whitefield having given this Gentleman to understand that be was too warm
for a Dispute; and desit'd him to peruse the Sermon again, and confute it in
Print if he could. He Answers in his Second Letter, That he is free from
Warmth, and not willing to be put off in a Matter which was of so much
Importance to his own Soul, and the Souls of his People: and therefore tells
him what he has firmly believed, and taught his People, beseeching him in the
most solemn Manner to restore him, if therein he has departed from the Gospel,
and the Articles of his own Church.

What he firmly believes and has always taught his People, he faith is this,
That Good Works do as necessarily spring from a true and lively Faith, whither
before or after Justification as Light and Heat do the Sun It is well worth the
while to Inquire here what he means by a true and lively Faith. And this he
tells us very honestly in Page 9. Line 1. That it is a Faith actually producing
Good Works. This then being the settled meaning of a true and lively Faith, if
we consider aright, we shall find that the amount of what he ushers in with so
much Solemnity, is only this; viz. That he has always firmly believed, and
taught his Hearers, that Good Works always spring from the Faith that produces
Good Works; or to be plainer still; that the Faith which produces Good Works,
produces Good Works; than which it is impossible any thing should be more
Orthodox, or less Instructive. It Is needless for him to desire to be set more
right in this Matter: Nay as he has always taught his Hearers this Doctrine,
so let him teach it to them still, for though it will do them no manner of Good,
it may do them less Harm than other Doctrines they might hear in lieu of it.
Mr. Garden, to do him Justice, did not attain to this unlucky Expression
Proprio Mart. It seems rather to be a Form of Words, venerable for Antiquity;
their very Giants in Divinity speak the same Things, and feed their People with
the same wholesome but not very nourishing Food.

The good Commissary goes on in continuation of the Sentence; Or that as the
Body without the Soul is dead, so Faith without Works, whither before or after
Justification, is dead also.

In which Words he makes no Declaration of his Idea of Faith in Man's
Justification, since he only sets down a Scripture Passage, without explaining
it; which he knows his Adversaries maintain to be their Belief as well as he
that it is his.

This is just as if an Arian or Socinian should say, that he firmly believed
and had always taught his Hearers, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; and
without explaining himself further, desire to be set Right, if in this he has
assered any Thing contrary to the Scriptures. Would not Mr. Garden himself
think such an Arian or Socinian, had said nothing in all this, and therefore
deserved no Notice. And yet this is exactly his own Case, in saying that he
believes with St. James, that Faith without Works is dead, and desiring to be
restored, if he has said amiss. Upon the whole, I have often heard of some who
have a Talent of saying a great deal in a little: of others, whose Talent is to
say a little in a great deal; and with these I incline to rank Mr. Garden, though
some critical Readers, may be apt to thrust him down to a third Class,
alleging that through this whole Epistle he has said just nothing at all: Quid
tulit hic Tanto Dignum promissor Hiatu!
Parturiunt Montes etc.


Remarks upon Mr. GARDEN's Third LETTER.
MR. Garden's third Letter, is as he says, a Supplement to his former, and
containing a few Queries to the Reverend Mr. Whitefield, concerning his
Behavior as a Presbyter of the Church of England. And he immediately attacks
him with a Charge of wilful and malicious Slander against his Brethren
Conformists, in the before mentioned Sermon page 18. You have accused them in
that Sermon, says Mr. GARDEN, of not Preaching the Truth as it is in Jesus, of
falling from our Established Articles. and of Preaching only the Law, and not
the Way of Salvation by Jesus Christ; i. e. of Preaching Justification by
Works, and not by Faith only. And then instead of saying in Words, (whatever he
said in his Heart) Pudet ^aec opprobria nobis, et dici potuisse et non potuisse
refelli; he very courageously asks Mr. Whitefield, where are his Evidences,
what Proof he has to support his Charge; and challenges him to make out the
Assertion; which alas! is a thing Deplorably easy to be done. Accordingly I
shall set my self to show that the Clergy in general have run away from their
own Articles, leaving them to the Dissenters to keep for them: And more
particularly that of Justification by Faith only, crying up dead Works in Lieu
of it. That they have Deserted the Articles Solemnly Subscribed by them, will
appear from the Proof of these two Assertions, viz (1) That their Articles were
Industriously compiled in opposition to what are now called Arminian Errors;
and (2) that their Clergy generally speaking are Infected with this deadly
Poison; and spread the Infection with all their Might.

FIRST then I will attempt to make it evident that the Articles were
Industriously composed, to confront what are called Arminian Errors. And this
is so plain, at first sight, that he that Runs may Read it in them. I doubt not
but if a Million of unprejudiced Men, were to peruse them, they would to a Man
construe them in this Sense. Mr. Whiston therefore, a Man of chief Note among
them, being both afraid and ashamed of twisting them into the Sense of
Arminius, acknowledges that they directly and expressly assert the Calvinian
Doctrines, and therefore he advises the Convocation to alter them, or to lay
them quite aside. (See Mr. Whiston's Preface to Dr. Mather.)

I know the Men of this Way have this Subterfuge, viz. that the Compilers of
the Articles intended a double Meaning that so honest Men on both Sides the
Question might see their own Principles in them, and subscribe them with a good
Conscience. But this is a broken Reed to lean upon. For in the first Place, it
does not seem consistent with Simplicity and godly Sincerity, that a Number of
Ministers of the Gospel, should avoid Plainness of Speech with their utmost
Endeavors, and study Words of an uncertain Sound, while they were declaring
what they thought to be the Truth as it was in Jesus. And the very Gentlemen
who use this Evasion, reflect greatly upon themselves, as well as upon the
Authors of the Articles: For they do in Effect ^a^ that if they had been of the
Number of the ancient Compilers, or were they now to compile Articles which
contained the true Belief of the Church of England, they would easily be
carried away with such Dissimulation, and slily hunt after Words that have a
double, and a treble Meaning too, if they could find them. Charity therefore
for those worthy Compilers of the Articles, and a Regard to their own
Reputation, should keep these Men from ^in^imating that they were so full of
Sub^l^ty, and acted not uprightly, according to the Truth of the Gospel.

Besides, (in the next Place) the Preamble to the Articles says, that they
were composed with this View, that there might be Uniformity touching the
Doctrine of true Religion: and if Uniformity and Diversity be not the same
Thing, then it follows, that the Compilers had no double Meanings in the
Articles. In a Word, the Compilers say, that they designed Men should be of one
Mind; these Gentlemen say, they designed Men should be of two Minds; and who
could tell their Intent best, they themselves, or these Men, let the World
judge. And as the Articles were compes'd upon the Calvin^stick Scheme, so have
they been publicly understood ever since.

I am now, (which was the SECOND Thing) to show that the Clergy, generally
speaking, have r^rn'd their Backs upon their own Articles, and have embraced,
and propagated the Errors of Arminius. I say, generally speaking; because, as
Mr. Whitefield observes, there are some sew who dare to adhere to the Doctrines
of the Reformation, and are not ashamed to preach what they have subscribed,
but Apparent Rari: and those that do appear, have Trials of cruel Mockings, are
treated as the filth and off-scourging of all Things; and as bi^er Enemies to
what is now called the Church. This is so evident and a Thing they so much
G^ory in, that I shall not Summon any Arguments to prove Arminianism upon them,
lest I come under that Censure of CICERO; Utitur in re non Dubia Tessibus non
Necessar^is. Though it is probable that Mr. Johnson may rise up, and disapprove
of my taking this Point for granted. For in his second Letter to his dissenting
Parishioners (i.e. to those Parishioners of his, that are not his Parishioners)
he asserts it is very abusive to call him and his Brethren Arminians, since
they don't hold every Thing just as Arminius did. But at this Rate, he might
deny that there is an Arian, or Socinian upon the Face of the Earth, since
those that are called Arians and Socinians differ in some Things (full as much
as they from Arminius) from their respective Founders, Arius and Socinus.
However, if the Name of Arminians does not exactly suit them; they must have
some other Name invented for them, which signifies f^ll as bad. Nay, as
Multitudes of them are less Orthodox than Arminius, they had better be
contented with the Name they have at present, for fear of a worse.

I now proceed to the particular Charge Mr. Whitefield brings against his
Brethren of the Established Clergy, viz. Their preaching up Justification by
Works, and not by Faith only, as they are enjoined by their own Article. And
has Mr. Garden the Forehead to deny this? Yes, surely; and calls it a
malicious Slander, without the least Foundation of Truth to support it; and yet
poor Man, while he would clear the Clergy from this Charge, he owns the very
Thing charged against them; and is a swift Witness against himself.

The Doctrine (says he) which you are so angry at, and censure as preaching
Justification by Works, and not by F^^th only, is this; That we are justified
by Faith only, and not by Works; thus explained, viz. that we are justified by
such a Faith as is true and lively, that is actually producing good Fruits or
Works, and consequently implying them, as a necessary Condition, (but no
meritorious Ca^se) of our Justification. page 8, 9. That is, we are justified
by such a Faith as implies Works. Works are part of this Man's Definition of
justifying Faith; nay an essential Part according to Bishop Williams, whom our
Author cires, as giving his own Sentiments. For "the Faith which justifies,
(says the Bishop) 'is a practical Faith, and to which Repentance ^ and
Obedience (i.e. Works) do belong as the essential Parts of it." Which is
exactly the same that others mean when they tell us, that Faith in Christ,
signifies Faith in him, and Faithfulness to him; an assent to the Gospel, and
compliance with it. However, though Works are an essential Part of justifying
Faith, yet if we will believe Mr. Garden, they don't at all justify.
Egregiously absurd! As if that which is the essential Part of a Thing, should
have no Hand in what is done by that Thing. Common Sense will tell any one,
that if Faith does justify, whatever is Faith does justify; and since Works are
Part of Faith, an essential Part of it, Works must also justify in Part: And
then what becomes of their Justification by Faith only, which Mr. Garden is not
ashamed to say, he and his Brethren maintain. His way to creep out is no
better, nor bigger than this: by Faith he means Faith and Works too; and then
very cunningly holds, that we are justified by Faith only. Which is just about
as Good, as if a Man should say that the Duke of Marlborough only commanded in
such a Battle, and that Prince Eugene was not with him: and being urged, that
he asserted what was contrary to known Fact; should insist upon it, that it was
a certain Truth that the Duke only commanded, and that the Prince was not with
him; making out his Assertion thus; that by the Duke of Marlborough he always
means, the Duke of Marlborough, and Prince Eugene too.

But then if this is what Mr. Garden means, what need is there of fa^ing, that
we are justified by Faith only. For if his Definition of Faith be so large as
to take in Faith and Works too, what is there left to justify: By saying that
we are justified by Faith only, he seems to exclude something else which
erroneous Men are apt to think does justify; and in reality, he takes in every
thing, and excludes nothing at all. And the Amount of this saying in his Mouth,
and the Mouths of his Brethren, is only this; that Men are justified only by
every thing, and by nothing else. It were to be wished therefore that they
would be a little more Logical for the future, and only say, that men are
justified by Faith; leaving the needless Word only out of all their Writings
and Discourses for ever.

The Truth is, Mr. Garden and Friends see so much of Justification by Faith
only in the Scriptures of Truth, especially the Epistles of St. Paul; that they
are ashamed of holding any Thing else but Justification by Faith only
themselves. But in as much as they don't believe it with the Heart; whenever
they take it upon them to explain themselves, they are always found out. They
try to say Shibboleth, as well as others; but they cannot frame their Mouths for
such an hard Word; after all their Endeavors an unavoidable Sibboleth comes
and discovers who they are. Even the good Bishop of London himself is an
Instance, showing how impossible it is that any one whose Heart is not Right in
the Article of Justification by Faith, should express himself upon that
Subject, to the Satisfaction of those who have a true Idea of it. For, when in
his pastoral Letter, he exhorts his Clergy, to preach Justification by Faith
only, so as to leave no Doubt upon the Minds of their Hearers but that Good
Works are a necessary Condition of Justification: It Is no better than if he had
accosted them thus; My very good Presbyters, whenever you teach your People
that they are justified by Faith only, never leave them till you have made them
believe that they are not justified by Faith only: which Injunction of his
Lordship they are too careful to observe.

If it be said, that whatever Stress the Bishop, Mr. Garden, and all the Men of
this Device lay upon Good Works, they don't look upon them as meritorious
Causes of Man's Justification, but that they allow that the Death and
Sufferings of Christ, are what alone merit Justification for the rebellious
Sons of Men. I answer, whoever charges them with this? The Papists themselves
own Christ's Passion to be the meritorious Cause that Justification may be had
for us with God. But then does it follow that because they don't hold Merit in
this high Sense, that therefore they don't hold it in any Sense? That because
they are not worse than the Papists in this Point, that therefore they are
nothing like them?

But to come directly to our Charge against them; and it is this; That since
Christ has merited Justification for Mankind, they together with the Papists
hold that the way for them to merit, or to be entitled to this merited
Justification, are Works of Righteousness which they do The Reverend Commissary
surely will not deny this Charge; for he has expr^sly told the World, that,
GOOD WORKS ARE MEANS OF OUR JUSTIFICATION. Page 30. Which is so contrary to St.
Paul, and so agreab'e to his pretended Holiness at Rome, that were there a
proper Opportunity, he would bid fair for an Euge from that Man of Sin. For
upon this single D ctrine it is, that the Papists build their Pilgrimages,
superstitious Austerities, and almost every thing else abhorrent from Reason
and Scriptures. Could the Papists, but once disbelieve, what Mr. Garden firmly
believes, Popery would no longer cumber the Earth.

What is it that sets poor deluded Souls upon offering up Gists to my Lady of
Loretto; upon trave^^^^ after the Bones of Thomas a Becket, and other Saints
b^^h good and bad; and practicing uncommanded Austerities upon their own
Bodies; but a firm belief of Mr. Garden's Doctrine, instilled into them by
their o^^n blind Guides the Friars and Jesuits; viz. That GOOD WORKS ARE MEANS
OF JUSTIFICATION! When they are in bitterness at any Time, through a Sense of
their Guilt, and sollicitous to escape the Wrath to come, they immediately
betake themselves to the doing of good Works, which they have been told are
Means of Justification; and never leave doing them till they have done enough
to be justified; to the neglect of that Faith in Christ, which whosoever has
is justified, and whosoever has not is condemned even though he had all the good
Works of the Church of Rome, or of the whole World of Mankind, placed to his
Account, to screen him from the Wrath of an angry God.

And as Mr. Garden and Friends harmonize with the Papists in their belief of
this Principle, that GOOD WORKS ARE MEANS OF JUSTIFICATION; so do they, in
their Practice upon it. Instead of finding convinced Sinners to God for the
obtainment of precious Faith, and exhorting them to give God and themselves no
rest till they have a Principle of justifying and sanctifying Faith infused
into them, by his almighty Spirit; they only tell them to forsake their Sins,
and to do their D^ty, and especially to abound in Works of Charity, which
covers a Multitude of Sins: which indeed is no more likely to convert them,
than sending them to Loretto ordering them to tell their Beads, to whi^ their
Bodies for the Sins of their Souls; or to do an h^^dted other foolish Things,
usually prescribed by the Romish Priests on such Occasions. I say not, that the
forsaking of Sin, and doing our Duty comma^^ed in God's Word, are not to be
preferred to the abovementioned and such like Fooleries of the Roman Catholic
Church. God forbid that I should say any thing like it! But this I say, that
for Ministers of the Gospel to order convinced Sinners to reform their Lives,
by departing from Evil and doing Good, without showing them the necessity of a
Principle of Faith infused into them by the Spirit of the ever living God, in
order to their Acceptance: I say for the reformed Clergy to do so (and all do
so, that follow Arminius whosoever they be) is not taking a more likely way to
convert them, and bring them into a justified State, than it they had bid them
to endow Hospitals, to go Pilgrimages after sacred Relics etc. For in the
first Place, these Sinners cannot forsake their Sins as to the love and
practice of them, not comply with the D^^ies enjoined by God's Word, they being
yet Strangers to the Faith of God's Elect, which alone can purify the Heart,
and amend the Life. And then, in the next Place, could they cease to do Evil,
and learn to do well better than any unregenerate Persons ever did; yet their
Obedience not springing from Faith, and being depended upon by them, would be
but a vain Oblation and no more incline their Maker to justify them, than if
they had only visited and kissed Bones, told their Beads, and practiced other
sanctified Fopperies of the Church of Rome. The Truth is, these Teachers
suppose that all Men have Faith (who live under the Gospel and are not
Infidels) and therefore when they are applied to by their Hearers, inquiring
what they shall do to be saved; they only tell them to live obedient Lives, and
through the Merits of Christ, their imperfect Obedience shall be accepted of
them: Which though it may appear plausible at first view, is in reality only to
cause them to seek to be justified by the Works of the Law: A fundamental
Principle taught by that Mother of Abominations the Church of Rome.

It was not therefore without Reason, that our pious Forefathers accused
Archbishop Laud with another mitred Brother in Iniquity of a Design to
introduce Popery paving ^he Way to it b^ Arminianism, and pa^ic^latly the
Denial of Justification by Faith only. This being as Luther well observes Arti
culus stantis vel cadentis E^chsioe

I do not pretend to say that these Men have any Design of a total
Reconciliation with that Church; or that they are as bad as Papists: For Mr.
Bradbury's saying, is what I agree to; viz. That those Protestants who hold
Justification by Works have only the Heart of Popery without the Head: And it is
certainly better to have only the Heart, than to have Head and Heart too.

Thus we see that Mr. Garden who charges Mr. Whitefield with Faishood and
Slander, for saying he and others held Justification by Works, has in Fact
owned the very Thing by saying Good Works are Means of Justification.

Mr. Garden, I know, will be ready to say, as he has said, that though Good
Works are Means of Justification, yet they don't justify. Which is no better
than it he should say, that Blows given with an Ax, were Means of cutting down
a certain Tree; but yet the Tree was not cut down by those Blows. For my Part I
should think that Means which do nothing are very poor Means; or rather no
Means at all.

But however, if Good Works must be Means of Justification, as I am persuaded
Mr. Garden thinks they are thorough Means, let what will become of his other
Assertion, viz that Men are justified by Faith only; I shall mention several
Things which follow from it. And

1. Will it not follow from hence that Good Works are the Only Means of
Justification? I am apt to think that if they do any Thing in Man's
Justification, they do every Thing; as may appear from the following Instance.
Suppose two Men to have only that Faith without Works which is dead; they are
at present undoubtedly in an unjustified State. Suppose further, that one of
them does Good Works, and does them long enough to be justified; while the
other's Faith is yet alone. The former will be justified, the latter not. And
yet what is the Cause that the former is justified while the latter is not? why
nothing, but Works of Righteousness which he did. So that the whole of this
Man's Justification curtis upon his Good Works. If i^ be said, that this Man is
not justified by his Works, but because his Faith was lively and operative (as
I expect it will be said) I answer, this is saying nothing; and I shall take
Notice of it But if it be said that this happy Man, besides his Works, had an
increasing Faith, more than he had when he first set out; and more than the
other ever had; I Answer, The good Man's Faith was of the same Kind with the
wicked Man's, and only superior in Degree (both being only Faith of Assent.)
And if the bad Man's Faith did not justify him at all; so neither can a greater
Degree of the same Faith be of a justifying Nature; And consequently he that
was justified, was justified by Works, and not by Faith. Or, if any Man will
say, that he was justified by Faith, it can be only in this poor Sense, viz. he
was justified by Faith, only as Faith helped him to do justifying Works.

2. If good Works are Means of Justification, then a certain Number of Good
Works is necessary to justify every Person that comes into the World. I say not
that the same Number of good Works will do for all. For, to keep to their
Principle, they must suppose that a greater or lesser Number shall be required,
according as Persons have been greater or lesser Sinners; and according as the
good Works they do are more or less virtuous, not to say meritorious.

3. Consequently no Man can tell exactly when he o^ others are justified;
contrary to the Scripture, which exhorts Men to be sure of their Justification,
and to rejoice in a Sense of it; because it is impossible to know just how many
Works will do. There are some that hold that no Man is justified in this Life:
and that we must needs go out of the World before it can be said of us, that
God is at Peace with us. And I shall show, that Mr. Garden's Works have led him
into this Error by and by: If he stands by one of his Bishops whom he has
cited as giving his own Sentiments.

4. If Good Works are Means of Justification, this is an undeniable
Consequence, that a Man may attain to one half, two thirds, three quarters,
ninety nine hundredths of Justification; may arrive so near to it that one
Prayer, or good Wish more would certainly justify him; which Divinity St. Paul
would never have owned. The most unseeing of Mr. Garden's Friends may be
sensible of no Consequence here: And others may call it Cavilling and
Sophistry, that don't deserve an Answer; and thereby keep up their Credit with
their Hearers. But let them attempt fairly to prove that this frightful
Divinity is good Divinity; Or if they are ashamed to own it to be good
Divinity, then let them prove that it is not their Divinity, and get rid of it
they can: And they will find that Hic Labor hoc opus erit.

I say again; that if Good Works are the Means of Justification, there will be
a necessity l^id upon these Men to acknowledge what I have now objected; and
particularly that a Man may be so near a justified Estate, that one little good
Work more, would certainly bring him into it. This will hold good in all manner
of Works which require a Continuance of Time for their performance. Thus in the
finishing an House, or writing a Book, there is a certain Time, wherein one
Blow more with the Hand, or one Letter more with the Pen, would complete the
House or Book And so in Justification which is though it by them a Work of long
Continuance, and effected by good Works as the Means; there must of necessity
be a critical Instant, in which a Man may be so near being justified, that the
doing the least good Work that can be though it of would justify him entirely. Well
then; this being inseparable from Mr. Garden's dear Doctrine of Good Works
being the Means of Justification, I would ask, (if it be lawful to ask a civil
Question) what would become of a poor Sinner, that should be taken out of the
World in that unhappy Juncture, wherein his Justification was so near being
effected, that there wanted but one good Wish, one, Lord have Mercy upon me,
more, to have completed it? Shall the Man be miserable for ever for this
Defect? Or, shall he be looked upon as justified, though he had not quite worked
out his own Justification? Or, lastly, shall he be doomed to Purgatory for a
while, to satisfy for what was wanting, and thereby to be made meet for the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light? As the Papists positively hold, being
induced by Mr Garden's Principle of Good Works being the Means of
Justification. Lastly, I would ask, what will become of those Good Works, which
are the Overplus after a Man is justified? And whether it be not from this
Doctrine that the Popish Priests teach that some Men may have more good Deeds
than they need themselves, and a little to spate for those that want,

Mr. Garden having to'd the "strange Way, in which he and some others, hold
Justification; he applies himself to Mr. Whitefield thus, This is the Doctrine
which you censure, and are so angry at; but which notwithstanding is the true
Doctrine of the Gospel; and agreably taught by the ancient Fathers; by the
Church of England; by her Clergy at all Times; and (be not surprised) by your
Reverence, and Brethren Methodists, though not without apparent Shuffle etc. page
9.

To each of which Assertions I shall endeavor a proper Answer: And,

1. I utterly deny his Justification to be the Doctrine of the Gospel: Nay I
affirm it to be another Gospel, brought from Rome; which St. Paul knew nothing
of St. Paul every where concludes that Men are justified by Faith without the
Works of the Law, Rom 3.28. If he had thought that Works did any thing in Man's
Justification, though never so little, he would certainly have acknowledged it,
notwithstanding all his Zeal for Faith; and not have determined peremptorily
that they did nothing at all. How careful is he to distinguish between Faith
and Works in Man's Justification, left any one should seek Justification, as it
were by the Works of the Law. i.e. b. Faith and Works mixed together, Gal 2.16.
But do Mr. Garden and Brethren make this Distinction? No, verily; they choose to
jumble them together for a Reason well known to themselves, and to almost every
Body else. Nay, St. Paul not only inculcates the Doctrine of Justification by
Faith without any impure Mixture of Works; but shows it to be of the last
Importance to be believed. He testifies to the Galatians over and over, and to
all Christians to the End of the World, that whoever sought to be justified by
the Works of the Law, (as well moral as ceremonial Works) they had fallen from
Grace, and Christ would profit them nothing, Gal. 5.4.

This was what St. Paul testified seventeen Hundred Years ago And would to God
that all his Successors, would testify the same Thing, and not directly the
contrary! Then should we have the Doctrine of Grace restored to us, as it was
at the first, and pure Christianity, as it was in the beginning. Then would
perishing Souls no longer be starved with the dry Husks of Morality, but be fed
with Food convenient for them, and grow fat and flourishing in the Courts of
our God.

And blessed be the Name of God, that he has in this Day of Darkness and Error
raised up several Men full of Faith and of the Holy Ghost; Men whose great
Business it is to preach this Truth as it is in Jesus; and who have some of
them spread the Savor of this Knowledge into distant Parts, undaunted with all
the Persecutions they meet with from wicked and unreasonable Men Sing O
Heavens, and Rejoice O Earth! May they still be strong in the Lord, and in the
Power of his Might; and may the Word of the Lord spoken by them, have free
Course, run, and be glorified. May the Lord of the Harvest send forth other
Laborers into the Vineyard of the same Spirit and Power. And may the Knowledge
of Justification by Faith ONLY, cover the Earth, as the Waters do the Sea.

But to return; Mr. Garden having conceded that St. PAUL held Justification by
Faith, would have him expounded by St. JAMES, who says that Faith without
Works is dead being alone And it is very true that St PAUL should be so
understood. But though St. PAUL held undoubtedly that Works were the effect of a
Justifying Faith, yet it never entered into his Heart, that Works had any Hand
in justifying; as Mr. Garden and Brethren Dream it has. I cannot but observe
that as the Apostle PAUL and Mr. Garden differ, so there is no great Harmony
between him and St. JAMES, even in this Passage, which he has cited from him,
as co respondent to his own Thoughts For certainly St. JAMES by saving that
Faith without Works is Dead; says that Faith with Works is not Dead Whereas
our Divine thinks, that Faith with Works may be Dead as well as Faith without
Works. Here Mr. Garden and Friends may Cry out Slander and Abuse; but let them
have a little Patience. For, in speaking to the Twelfth Article of the Church,
page 18. He says that the Article don't mean to exclude good Works going before
Justification provided that they are the fruits of Faith; so that there may be
good Works according to him, which are the fruits of Faith, and the Man that
has this Faith and Works, not justified and consequently Faith with Works,
which is Dead. For if Faith with Works don't Justify, then it is Dead.
Astonishing Divinity this! This can only be avoided by saying what I wonder any
Man is not ashamed to say, viz. that the Faith with Works which goes before
Justification is not Dead but Alive, as far as it goes: and that it there were
more of it, or rather more Works tacked to it, it would Justify completely.

II. This is so far from being the Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers, that the
Fathers he has selected as most for his purpose, don't say one Word in its
Favor, but quite the contrary. For all that is here cited, is perfectly
agreeable to what is held by those who suppose Faith and Justification are
coexistent; and that there can be no good Works preceding Justification.

But to show the Doctrine of the Ancient Fathers, I need only now confront him
with his own Authentic Book of HOMILIES, compiled for every Minister to Read
to his Congregation, in the Reign of King Edward VI, by the excellent Reformers
of the Church of England, who Sealed their Doctrine with their Blood, in the
Reign of his next Successor Queen Mary I. In the 2d Part of the Sermon of
Salvation, They say as follows, Faith ONLY Justifies, is the Doctrine of old
Doctors. And after this wite, To be justified ONLY by this true and lively
FAITH in CHRIST, speak ALL the Old and Ancient Authors, both Greeks and Latins,
of whom I So the Minister was to Read in Public.
will especially rehearse Three; Hilary, Basil and Ambrose. St Hilary says
these Words plainly in the Ninth Canon upon Matthew; Faith ONLY justifies. And
St. Basil a Greek Author writes thus. This is a perfect and whole Rejoicing in
GOD, when a Man advances NOT himself for his own Righteousness, but
acknowledges himself to LACK true Justice and Righteousness, and to be
justified by the ONLY FAITH in CHRIST: and Paul (says he) does glory in the
Contempt of his own Righteousness, and that he looks for the Righteousness of
GOD by FAITH. These be the very Words of St. Basil. And St. Ambrose a Latin
Author says these Words, This is the Ordinance of GOD, that they which believe
in CHRIST should be saved, WITHOUT WORKS, by FAITH ONLY, freely receiving
Remission of their Sins. Consider diligently these Words; WITHOUT WORKS, by
FAITH ONLY, freely we receive the Remission of our Sins. What can be spo^^n
more plainly than to say, that freely WITHOUT WORKS, by FAITH ONLY we obtain
Remission of our Sins? These and other like Sentences, that we be justified by
FAITH ONLY, freely, and WITHOUT WORKS, we do read oftimes in the best and most
ancient Writers, as beside Hilary, Basil and St. Ambrose, before rehearsed; we
read the same in Or^g^n, St Chrysostom St Cyprian, St. Augustine, Prosper,
Occumentus, Proclus, Bernardus, Anseim, and many other Authors Greek and Latin.
All these are the connected Passages in the said 2d Part of the sermon of
Salvation, contained in your own Book of Homilies appointed to be Read in
Churches, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth a so, and Directed to be Read in
Churches, in your Book of Common Prayer, which you have Solemnly declared your
Approbation of; which Book of Homilies is also approved in the 39. Articles,
which you have solemnly Declared your unfeigned Assent to and subscribed the
same: and yet now directly contrary to this Book of Homilies. and directly
contrary to your own Declaration and Subscription, you in your Letter III
assert that Good Works are implied as a NECESSARY CONDITION of our
JUSTIFICATION; and that this is the true Doctrine of the Gospel, and agreably
taught by the Ancient Fathers, by the Church of England by her Clergy at all
Times. By which Means you publicly in Print be^ie your own Book of Homilies,
which you have solemnly Declared your unfeigned Assent unto and subscribed the
same. And for your maintaining what is contrary thereto by the 12th Chapter of
Laws in the 13th Year of Queen Elizabeth, you ought to be Deprived

III. Is it not Astonishing that he should bring in the good old Orthodox
Eleventh Article of the Church of England, as favoring his wild Notion of
Justification; and that the HOMILY which he pressed to stand by him, should
fight most powerfully against him? The Homily (which, it is agreed on both
Sides, gives the true Sense of the Article) tells us that St Chrysestom, says,
that Faith of it self is full of Good Works; and that as scon as a Man does
believe (...) shall be garnish^d with them. Which is very true if we understand
Faith of that special Faith of which Mr Colvin and Followers speak, which is
in^used into the Soul by the Spirit of the ever li^ing God, and which is
simultaneous with Justification: Bar absolutely false, if we understand it of
any other: For these Men themselves suppose the Faith of Assent does not
necessarily produce Good Works; and that in some that have is, it is
accompanied with Good Works, in others not Wherefore when the Homily cites St.
Chrysosteme as saying that Faith it self is full of Good Works; and that as
soon as a Man does believe be shall be garnished with them; it explains the
Article into a Cal^mistick Faith (which will not suffer Good Works to go before
it) or else it asserts what all Sides hold to be false.

But Mr. Garden will say, that the Homily means, that the Faith which is true
and lively is full of Good Works etc. and that therefore there is no need of
supposing that i^ speaks of an infused Calvinistick Faith, simultaneous with
Justification, and inconsistent with Good Works going before it. And I grant
him that if the Homily does mean his true and lively Faith, there is no more to
be said. But I have one very strong Reason to the contrary, and that is this;
that I can hardly believe they were shallow enough to have no better a Meaning
We have already seen what his true and lively Faith is, viz. A Faith actually
producing good Works. And therefore, if the Authors of the HOMILY intended Mr.
Garden's true and lively Faith; the Amount of what they said in the forecited
Words would be only this, viz. that the Faith which actually produces Good
Works, produces Good Works; and when he has a Faith that garnisheth him with
Good Works, then he is garnished with Good Works. In a Word, the Authors of the
Homily understood the Eleventh Article to speak of such a Faith which is
coexistent with Justification; and between which and Justification there can be
no Good Works.

But for your full Conviction, I shall show from your Book of Homilies and
Articles (1) What is that Faith which they hold does justify; and (2) That this
Faith only is That which justifies. (1) In the 3d Part of the Sermon of
Salvation their Note in the Margin is in these Words -- What is the true and
justifying Faith, and answering to it in the Page is the Description following
-- For the right and true Christian Faith is not only to believe that holy
Scripture and all the foresaid Articles of our Faith are true; but also to have
a sure Trust and Confidence in God's merciful Promises, to be saved from
everlasting Damnation by CHRIST: whereof does follow a loving Heart to obey his
Commandments. (2) That THIS FAITH is That which ONLY justifies appears also
further both from the 35th and 11th Articles of the Church of England, in
Conjunction with the Book of Homilies For Article 35 is in these Words, The
second Book of Homilies, the several Titles whereof we have joined under this
Article, does contain a Godly and wholesome Doctrine, and necessary for these
Times, as does the former Book of Homilies, which were set forth in the Time of
Edward the VI. and therefore we judge them to be Read in Churches by the
Ministers DILIGENTLY and distinctly, that they may be understanded of the
People. And Article 11th is This -- We are accounted Righteous before God, only
for the Merit of our Lord and Savioar JESUS CHRIST, by Faith, and not for our
own Works, or Deservings. Wherefore that we are justified by FAITH only, is a
most wholesome Doctrine, and very full of Comfort, as more largely is expressed
in the HOMILY of Justification.

Now these Articles and Homilies thus included in them, you and all the Clergy
of the Church of England, have solemnly Declared your UNFEIGNED ASSENT unto,
and have SUESCRIBED to the same And now we'll see what the Homily further says
in this Point of Justification, which the said 11th Article expressly refers to,
and which you have Declared and Subscribed your unfeigned Assent to.

For besides what I recited before from the said Homily, affirming that WITHOUT
WORKS by FAITH ONLY we are JUSTIFIED, and that THIS is the Doctrine of ALL the
ANCIENT AUTHORS; since this authentic Book enlarges on this GreatPoint, I
shall add the following Passages from it, to your utter Contusion: In Part I of
the said Sermon of Salvation, are the following Passages, viz. St. Paul
declares here nothing upon the Behalf of Man concerning his Justification, but
ONLY a true and lively Faith, which nevertheless is the Gift of GOD, and not
Man's only Work without GOD: and vet that FAITH does not shut out Repentance,
Hope, Love, Dread and the Fear of GOD, to be joined with FAITH in every Man
that is justified; but it shuts THEM out from the Office of JUSTIFYING. So
that although they be all present together in him that is justified, yet they
justify NOT all together: neither does Faith shut out the Justice of our GOOD
WORKS, necessarily to be done after wards of Duty toward GOD (for we are most
bounden to serve GOD in doing good Deeds commanded by him, in his holy
Scripture all the Days of our Life) But it exclud^th THEM so that we may not do
them to this Intent, to be made Just by Doing of them.

And after the above recited Passages of the Doctrine of the Fathers in the
said 2d Part of the Sermon of Salvation, wherein the Homily teaches
Justification without Works by Faith only; the Homily condemns you and all your
Clergy who ^ou say preach Good Works as a necessary Condition of Justification;
I say, the said Homily fearfully condemns you in the following Words -- in the
Margin, "WHAT THEY BE that impugn the Doctrine that FAITH ONLY JUSTIFIES." And
against the said Margin in the Body of the Page, the Clauses following, viz.
This Faith the holy Scripture teaches us is the strong Rock and Foundation of
Christian Religion: THIS DOCTRINE all old and ancient Authors of Christ's
Church do approve: This Doctrine advances and sets forth the true Glory of
CHRIST and beats down the vain Glory of Man: THIS whosoever denies, is not
to be accounted for a Christian Man, nor for a setter forth of CHRIST's Glory,
but for an Adversary to CHRIST and his Gospel, and for a setter forth of Men's
vain Glory.

This Doctrine then, viz. of Justification by Faith ONLY without Works so fully
declared in the said Article and Homily, whosoever Denies, though he be Mr.
Commissary or the Author of the Whole Duty of Man, or Bishop Williams or
ArchBishop Tilletson, or any of the Present Clergy of the Church of England;
the said Homily says, He is not to be accounted for a Christian Man, but for an
Adversary to CHRIST and his Gospel: and this both Mr Commissary, and the Bishop
of London, and all the Clergy of said Church, have solemnly Declared and
Subscribed their unfeigned Assent to. And yet the Commissary both denies this
Doctrine, and even reproaches and derides it as an Antinomian Doctrine at the
End of his Letter IV. to Mr Whitefield, in the following Words. -- Then what
becomes of your remarkable ANTINOMIAN Challenge, -- Who dares ass^rt that we
are not justified in the Sight of God m^erly by an Act of Faith in Jesus
Christ, without any Regard to Works, past, present, or to come.

Yes what a horrid Scandal does Mr. Commissary Charge on his own Clergy? For
contrary to their own Book of Homilies, and to their own Articles asserting the
Book of Homilies to contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine and necessary for
these Times, and THEREFORE to be read in Churches by the Minister DILIGENTLY
and distinctly, that they may be understanded of the People: And especially
contrary to the 11th Article, which asserts that we are justified by FAITH ONLY
is a MOST WHOLESOME Doctrine, as more largely expressed in the Homily of
Justification; yea lastly contrary to their own solemn Declaration of their
UNFEIGNED ASSENT and their Subscription to the same -- Mr. Commissary affirms
in Print that THEIR CLELGY teach GOOD WORKS as a NECESSARY CONDITION of
JUSTIFICATION.

IV. As to his saying that he explains Justification by Faith, in Harmony with
the Clergy at all Times, I have already proved the contrary, by showing that
this Justification of his is altogether Popish, and has had public Testimony
born against it from the Reformation. He has indeed picked up several great
Names between whom and himself, he would have us think there is a perfect
Agreement in this Matter; concerning each of whom I would make a few Remarks.
And

1. We have a Passage from Bishop DOWNAM brought in thus -- And as of the
CHURCH, so agreably is this the Doctrine at all Times preached by her CLERGY --
We are justified by Faith only and not by Works: and, yet (says Bp DOWNAM,
Treatise of Justific. Page 15) That Faith which is alone severed from all other
Inward Graces and Outward Obedience, does not justify either alone, or at all:
because it is not a true and lively, but a counterfeit and dead Faith.

Now in this the Commissary seems greatly to impose on the ignorant Part of the
World; whether consciously to himself or not I don't determine. For Bp DOWNAM
did in 1639, publish a Folio upon Justification, containing about 660 Pages.
The whole Design of which large Work, is against the Papists, to show, that the
RIGHTEOUSNESS of CHRIST, imputed to us, is the only meritorious Cause of our
Justification, and that FAITH in CHRIST is the ONLY Instrument of our Receiving
Justification from his Righteousness; or that FAITH in CHRIST is the ONLY Thing
on our Part whereby we are Justified, and this not as a Work, but ONLY as an
Instrument and the ONLY Instrument of our apprehending CHRIST'S Righteousness;
upon which That Righteousness becomes imputed to us for our Justification.

This is the main Purport of that old and excellent Divine in that large
Performance: and that the Reader may more surely see it, I shall here recite
that whole Paragraph out of which Mr. Garden selected the Scrap abovesaid. It
is exactly in the following Words, SIXTHLY, When we say that FAITH does justify
ALONE. Two Things are implied: FIRST, that we are justified by the
Righteousness of CHRIST ALONE apprehended by FAITH, and not by any
Righteousness inherent in us. SECONDLY, That this Righteousness of CHRIST by
which ALONE we are justified, is apprehended by FAITH ONLY. Not that justifying
Faith is or can be alone; but because there being MANY GRACES in the Faithful,
which all have their several Commendations; yet NONE OF THEM serves to
apprehend CHRIST's Righteousness, but FAITH ONLY; and yet that Faith which is
alone, severed from all other inward Graces and outward Obedience does not
justify either alone or at all; because it is not a true and a lively, but a
counterfeit and dead Faith. For even as the EYE among all the Parts of the
Body, which all have their several Uses, has ONLY the FACULTY of SEEING; and
yet that Eye which is separated from the rest of the Parts, does see neither
alone nor at all, because it is but the Carcass of an Eye: so among ^all the
Groces of the Soul, it is the OFFICE of FAITH ALONE, as the EYE of the SOUL, to
LOOK upon HIM that was figured by the BRAZEN SERPENT: yet if it should be
severed from the Rest, it evere Dead For as St James says [Jam. 2. 1^.] That
Faith which is alone and by it self is dead And as the EYE in respect of PEING
is not alone yet in respect of SEEING it is ALONE; so FAITH which is not alone,
does justify ALONE.

This is Bp DOWNAM'S whole Paragragh in page 15. and the same Things he repeats
in other Places, ^and with more Enlargement in Chap. IV III, which he who^^y
spends in pro^ing Justification by Faith ALONE without any Regard to Works or
other Graces. For thus he begin the Chapter, Sect. I. Now I come to the 3d
QUESTION, which is the Principal concerning FAITH, wh^th (...) be justified by
FAITH ALONE, as WE with ALL ANTIQUITY do hold: or not by Faith alone, but also
by OTHER HABITS of GRACE, as Charity and the rest, and by the WORKS of GRACE
which the PAPISTS hold (...) concur in us to the Act of Justification, as the
Causes thereof? In Sect III. he says -- But the Word ALONE ^oth most ^^please
the PAPISTS, who ^ill needs part S^akes with CHRIST in their Justification In
Sect VI He proceeds to prove our Justification by FAITH ALONE and brings this
Argument, For if we be justifi^^ by he IMPUTED RIGHTEOUSNESS of CHRIST ALONE,
and if in us there be NOTHING which (...) or m^^^th us Partakers of CHRIST'S
RIGHTEOUSNESS, but FAITH ONLY; then there is nothing in us by which we are
justified, b^ ONLY FAITH. In Sect. VII. He pro^^nces several Scriptures to
prove the same. In Sect. VIII He brings this Argument -- All those Places which
exclude Works from Justification, do by necessary Consequence teach
Justification by FAITH ALONE. In Sect. IX He argues thus -- THAT by which ALONE
the Promise (...) Justification, by which ALONE Justification, by which ALONE
CHRIST Himself who is our Righteousness is received THAT a one justifies: By
FAITH ALONE the Promise, by it ALONE Justification, by it ALONE CHRIST himself
is received. In Sect X. He argues thus -- THAT which is the ONLY CONDITION of
the COVENANT OF GRACE by THAT ALONE we are justified, because to THAT ALONE
Justification is promised: FAITH is the ONLY CONDITION of the COVENANT OF
GRACE. [ Job 3.16 Act 10 43. Gal. 3 9.] which is therefore called THE LAW OF
FAITH [ Romans 3 27] Therefore by FAITH ALONE we are justified. If against the
ASSUMPTION it be OBJECTED, that CHARITY and OBEDIENCE and OTHER VIRTUES are
also required: I ANSWER. That THE ^ are NOT the CONDITIONS of the COVENANT, but
the Things by Covenant Promised to them that Believe. If we Believe. GOD has
promised to justify us; and b^ing Justified. or Redeemed, to (...) and to save
us. See Luk^^ 73.74, 75. Jer. 31.33, 34. Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. Gal 3 9. and 14 22.
CHARITY, OBEDIENCE etc are the Conditions of the Covenant of Works, D^^th^s and
thou shall Live: but the Condition of the COVENANT of GRACE is, BELIEVE; and
thou shall be ENABLED to walk in the OBEDIENCE of the Law, thou shall Receive
the Gift of the SPIRIT, and finally thou shall be SAVED For being by FAITH
freed from Sin, and become Servants to GOD, you have your Fruit unto Holiness
and the End everlasting Life, P^om. 6. 22. In Sect XI. H^ argues thus. -- The
Holy Scriptures wheresoever they speak of THAT by which we are justified,
mention Nothing in us but FAITH; not WORKS, not OTHER GRACES. unless it be to
EXCLUDE THEM from the Act of Justification: which is a plain Evidence that
FAITH does justify ALONE In Chap. IX. the Title is -- Testimonies of the
ancient Fathers, and of Others in all Ages for Justification by FAITH ALONE.
Then he begins the Chapter thus -- Now that this Doctrine is no Novelty, but
that which in ALL AGES has been the received Doctrine of the CHRISTIAN
CHURCHES. I will prove by the Testimony of the CHRISTIAN WRITERS in ALL AGES,
but chi^fl^ of the ancient FATHERS. And then he fills he Chapter with
Quotations from between thirty and forty of them to the same Purpose. All these
comma'd Passages are the very Words of the excellent Bp DOWNAM.

But all this Doctrine is directly contrary to Mr. Commissary's Scheme, and to
the present Scheme of most of his Brethren Clergymen of the Church of England,
as Mr. Commissary lays it down in Page 8, 9. in the following Words -- Well then
the Doctrine the CLERGY preach is this, viz. That we are justified by such a
Faith only as is trus and lively, that is actually producing GOOD FRUITS or
WORKS, and consequently implying THEM as a NECESSARY CONDITION (but no
meritorious Cause) of our JUSTIFICATION. This is indeed the true Doctrine of
the Gospel; and agreably taught by the ancient FATHERS -- by the CHURCH of
ENGLAND -- by her CLERGY at ALL TIMES etc.

And now which shall we believe -- Mr. Commissary, or the learned Bp DOWNAM, as
to Matter of Fact? For as the Bishop asserts and proves that Good Works are no
Condition at all of our Justification, but that Faith in CHRIST is the ONLY
Condition, and this only as an Instrument apprehending the Righteousness of
CHRIST, and that this is the Doctrine of the Church of England and of the
ancient Fathers and Christian Writers in all Ages, whose Testimonies he
expressly produces. Mr. Commissary plumply contradicts him, and says with the
Papists whom the Bishop opposes, that Good Works are implied as a NECESSARY
CONDITION of our Justication; and (without any Proof) that this is the true
Doctrine of the Gospel and agreably taught by the ancient Fathers, by the
Church of England, and by her Clergy, at all Times.

Indeed the Commissary happened here to own one most sorrowful and evident
Truth, viz that the Present Clergy preach GOOD WORKS implied as a NECESSARY
CONDITION of our Justification. But every Man of Learring knows that this is a
Doctrine which the excellent Bp DOWNAM calls a Popish Doctrine and which he
strenuously opposes; and is indeed a modern Doctrine in the Protestant Church
of England, and was never owned, but opposed in the Church till the Return of
those two Popish Princes into England, viz Charles the II and his Brother
James, in 1660 And now Mr Commissary boldly asserts that This which Bp Downam
opposes as a Popish Doctrine, is the true Doctrine of the Gospel, and that this
is the Doctrine which the Church of England Clergy Preach etc.

In short, it appears a most astonishing and horrible Thing, that when the
Commissary had both Bp DOWNAM and the BOOK of HOMILIZS in his Hand, where the
ancient Fathers are produced as utterly excluding WORKS from being any
Condition of Justification and strongly asser^ing Justification by FAITH ONLY;
that yet in direct Opposition to those known and authentic Treatises, he
should roundly affirm that Good Works are implied as a NECESSARY CONDITION of
Justification, and that the ancient Fathers and the Church of England and her
Clergy at all Times have taught the same^ It is also strange, that in
Opposition to Mr. Whitefield, who charges the modern Divines for departing from
the Doctrine of the old Divines of the Church in the Point of Justification;
yet Mr. Commissary should bring Bp DOWNAM in, as if He were a modern Divine;
when he printed his Folio in 1639 and was one of those old Orthodox Divines,
from whom Mr. Whitefield justly complains, that the present Clergy have sadly
departed in the Point of Justification! And that Mr. Commissary should yet
quote this worthy BISHOP, and thereby make the ignorant Part of the World who
have not his Book, believe, as if Mr. Commissary with his present Clergy and
that old Orthodox BISHOP were of the same Mind!

In the

2. Place, we have the Suffrage of Bishop Beveridge; whose Words, (besides many
other Things spoken by him just as Mr. Garden's Opposers speak upon the same
Point) are these; That it is not from our WORKS that accompany our FAITH, but
from our FAITH which is accompanied by our WORKS, that we are justified By
which Words it appears that his next Bishop will do him more Harm than Good,
and therefore he had better have said nothing about him. For, does Mr Garden
hold to what I have just quoted from him concerning the Bishop? No, by no
Means. Mr. Garden holds that Faith implies Works; and as has been shown, with
Bishop Williams asserts. that WORKS are an essential Part of justifying FAITH.
And if they are an essential Part of justifying Faith, it is from them that we
are justified So that Bishop Beveridge whom he summoned to Witness for him,
bears full Testimony against him

To this I add what Bishop Beveridge says in his Private Thoughts under Article
VIII. in the following Words -- How is it possible that I should be justified
by Good Works, when I can do no Good Works at all before I be first justified?
my Works cannot be accepted as Good till my Person be so: not can my Person be
accepted by GOD, till first engrafted into CHRIST; before which engrafting into
the true Vine, it is impossible I should bring forth Good Fruit: For the Plowing
of the Wicked is Sin says Solomon, Prove. xxi. 4. Yea the Sacrifices of the
Wicked are an Abomination to the Lord, Chap. xv. 8. And if both the civil and
spiritual Actions of the Wicked be Sin; which of all their Actions shall have
the Honor to justify them in the Sight of GOD?

And now Mr. Garden! would you have the World believe that you are of the same
Sentiment with the pious Bp Beveridge in the Point of Justification? when you
assert Good Works are a NECESSARY CONDITION of Justification; and the said
Bishop asserts that, before we are justified. we can do NO Good Works AT ALL,
and that this is impossible.

In the

3d Place, Comes the Bishop of Sarum, whom I readily grant to be on our A
^hor's Side; for it appears from what he has quoted from him, especially the
last Sentence, that together with Mr. Garden, by justifying Faith, he means
Faith, Love Repentance, and Obedience; that is every Thing. But yet there is
this Difference between them; that whereas Mr. Garden faith. we are justified
by this Faith only; the Bishop rememb^ing that his Faith stood for Faith and
Works too, very Logically left out the Word only.

But both Bishop Barnet and Mr. Garden's next cited Author Bishop Williams, are
some of those modern Writers whom all Men of Learning know have, in the Point
of Justification, openly departed from the Doctrine of the first Reformers in
the Church of England. And to convince every one of this, he needs only read
the Passages Mr. Garden cites from Bishop Barnet and Bishop Williams and then
compare them with the Passages I have recited from the Articks, the Book of
Homilies, and Bp Downam.

4. The Rear of this Episcopal Army is brought up by Bishop Williams: who also
is a Man after Mr. Garden's own H^art^ for his Justifying Faith comprehends in
(...) all that Duty and those Graces, which he says, are made the Condition of
the Gospel Covenant; and which gives a Title to all the benefits of it. i. e.
Justifying Faith, signifies Faith and all manner of Good Works in Conjunction.
And in the last Sen^ence, he tells us that not only Repentance and Obedience.
but Perseverance also belongs to this justifying Faith, and is an essential
Part of it. See Page 11. lin. ult From which Words of the Bishop. and Mr
Garden's citing them with Approbation, may we not discover a very odd Opinion
held by them both. viz. That no Man is, justified in this Life; and that we
must needs go out of the World before it can be said that we are reconciled to
our Maker? contrary to the Tenor of the Bible. For if Perseverance is an
essential Part of justifying Faith, there can be no such Thing as
Justification, while an essential Part of that which justifies is wanting; and
this essential Part must be wanting all the Days of a Man's Life: for
Perseverance intends the whole of our Course.

But however horrid this Opinion appears, considered in it is Repugnancy to
Scripture, and Reason, it must be confessed it looks much better if we take a
View of it as grafted upon Mr. Garden's Bosom Tenet, that Good Works are Means
of Justification. Nay, if I could once swallow down the latter, I should make
no difficulty with the former If I really though it Good Words to be Means of
Justification. I should think it more likely that a Man should be justified by
the Good Works he performed through his whole Life; than by the Obedience of
(perhaps) a few Days Nay it looks much more modest, and ascribes a less degree
of Merit to Good Works, to maintain that all the Good Works a Man ever did are
required to justify him, than to maintain, that half or one quarter of them
(perhaps) will do very well.

And besides, by this Means I should get rid of what I should be glad to get
^^d of by any Means, viz. the Doctrine of a Man's being in a State of Grace to
Day, and out of it Tomorrow; his being a Child of GOD, and a Child of the Devil
by turns, no one knows how often. And as to the Doctrine of a Man's attaining
to one half two thirds, nine tenthts, etc of Justification; I should be no more
perplexed with it upon the new Hypothesis, than upon the old Thus I have fairly
shown the Doctrine of no forgiveness in this Life, may be charged upon the
Bishop, and Mr Garden, since the Passage which the former wrote, and which the
latter vouches as his own Sentiments, undeniably contains it. However if Mr.
Garden will do Penance, and own that the good Bishop and he wrote both besides
themselves; the one in blundering so eg^egriously, the other in publishing his
Blunder with Approbation and Veneration; the Public will doubtless exercite
suitable Charity toward them.

V. As to his saying that Mr. Whitefield and Brethren Methodists, hold
Justification by Faith as he himself does: I Answer, that Mr. Garden does not
really think this Charge against them to be just; because in page 19 he tells
how differently from him they explain Justification by Faith, and blames them
for it. All therefore that he can found his Charge upon, must be some Passages
of theirs wherein they have contradicted themselves, and before they were aware
of it, come over to him. And I allow Mr Garden to treat them as I have treated
him, and as I design to treat him again; that is to set them a Fighting with
their own selves, if he can do it fairly. But the Passages he has adduced are
not really in any measure inconsistent with their avowed Principles. They have
asserted, That true Faith continually excites Men to show forth that Faith by
abounding in every good Word and Work. And that the Faith which justifies, is
not a Faith exclusive of Good Works, but inclusive, or (productive) of them.
Mr. Whitefield's Sermon, What think ye of Christ? And Mr. W^esley Sermon on,
Salvation by Faith, page 14.

And does it follow that because these Gen^lemen hold that Faith always
produces Good Works, that therefore he and they must have he same idea of
Faith and Works in Man's Justification? No in no wise. Is it not strange, that
Mr. Garden and Friends can see no Medium between Antinomianism and A^mmianism;
and that they should assert that all those who (...) themselves of the former
Error, join with them in espou^ng the latter?

This Gentleman having shown or rather attempted to show how agreeable his Idea
of Justification by Faith, is to the Gospel, to the ancient Fathers, to the
Church of England, to her Clergy at all Times, and lastly to Mr. Whitefield and
Friends; he accuses Mr. Whitefield of arrogant and ^icked Stander in accusing
him and Brethren of holding Justification by Works, since he could not do it
upon an, Grounds but what would equally support the Charge against himself, and
Friends the Methodists. In which Accusation, after what has been said, I
believe there is no Man will think his Fault was want of Courage! He seems
indeed in the very next Breath to be sensible of his misrepresenting these two
excellent Gentlemen; and he addresses himself to Mr. Whitefield thus

But you will say this is not a fair Representation o^ State of the Matter in
Question. For the Ground on which you accuse the Clergy of preaching only the
Law, or Justification by Works, is not their preaching that Good Works such as
are pleasing to God, are the necessary Fruits and Effects of a justifying
Faith; no, but their preaching that such Good Works are the necessary
Conditions of Justification, and consequently not only follow after, but go
before it also, contrary to sound Doctrine, and the 12th Article of the Church,
Page 13. To which he Answers, That this is a miserable Distinction, serving
only to entangle and amuse, and not to instruct the Minds of the weak and
unwary Populace. And his strong Reasons are these that follow.

1. That Mr. Edwards a Wrangler in Mr. Whitefield's own Way, (so he calls an
eminently pious and peaceable Man) owns that Goods Works may be a Condition of
Justification, in another Sense than that of meritorious Causes. Ergo quid^
Why, that Mr. Whitefield wrongs him and Fraternity in saying that they hold
Works to be meritorious Causes of Justification. Does it follow that because
they might have another Sense, that therefore they had? A Posse ad esse an
unquam valuit consequentia?

But it will be said, that since it is possible, according to Mr. Edwards, that
Men may hold Good Works to be Conditions of Justification in another Sense than
that of their being meritorious Causes, Mr. Whitefield ought in Charity to
think they did.

I Answer, Mr. Whitefield's Charity must have been extravagantly large, to have
supposed that they don't look upon Good Works as meritorious, when by
Preaching, Writing, and Conversation, they declare they do. I don't say that
they look upon Good Works to be meritorious of Condignity, but of Congruity
only, with the more moderate Papists. Indeed the Word Merit, is a Name of such
evil Report, that they are perfectly ashamed of it; but then they hold fast the
Thing, which is worse than the Name; and will never be persuaded to let it go.
Nay, they have some of them the Courage, to tax the Roman Catholics, as if
this Doctrine was p^culiar to them; and yet they cannot bring one Argument to
support the Charge against the more moderate Papists, which will not equally
conclude against themselves.

This I have proved already, and need not do it again.

To return therefore; Must Mr. Whitefield be deemed a malicious Slanderer of
these Men in what he has said of them? No verily. Unless, they may be thought
Slanderers of their own Selves. For when they speak or w^ite, they make out
full as much against themselves, as he ever charged them with. Their very
Charges of Falsehood against him, unluckily for them, prove that he is a Man of
Truth, and that in his Spirit there is no Guile. And the grand Reason why they
count him their Enemy is because he tells them the Truth; having found our, and
born Testimony against that base smugling Trade of Importing prohibited Goods
from Rome, in which they are so deeply engaged.

His 2d Argument (for it is very probable, he though it it an Argument) is taken
from what he says no one will deny, viz. That Faith and Good Works are both
Conditions of Salvation; and if of Salvation, then he inters they must be
Conditions of Justification too; and consequently that Good Works go before
Justification. Q. E D.

But then, I would tell him, that when he builds an Argument upon the Consent
of all, he must be sore that all do Consent; otherwise he will have no
Foundation, and the Superstructure, will be just good for nothing. And
accordingly I now take away this Foundation, and set all a tumbling, by denying
that Good Works, are so necessary to Salvation, that there can in no Case be
Salvation without them. In which Denial I shall be born out by all that hate
the Oracles of Arminius; by the Church of England; and particularly by Mr
Garden himself: for this Gentleman seems (by his Conduct) so set upon being
consuted, that least his Adversary should not do it effectually without him, he
scarcely ever falls to confute himself.

The Followers of Mr. Calvin, it is well known hold that as soon as a Man
believes he is justified, and that if God should please to take him out of the
World in that Instant, he would not perish, but have everlasting Live: though not
one Good Work had been done by him. The Di^ines of this Way do indeed more than
any Men, press the Necessity of an universal Obedience to the Laws of God,
testi^ying unweariedly, that Faith without Works is dead; that is, that
whatever Pretenses Men may have to Faith, yet if they dare to rebel against the
most high God, their Faith will not stop them from the Damnation of Hell
whither they are hastening. But yet in as much as they believe Men are justified
by Faith only; they suppose that where there is the reality of Faith there is
the reality of Justification, and would be of Salvation, were the Subject of it
immediately to depart this Life. The Church of England also, being
Calvinistical, as I have shown; might from hence be argued to be of this
Opinion: but they expressly show themselves to be like minded, in their ordering
the Minister, in his Visitation of the Sick, after saying to, and hearing a few
Words from ^he dying Person to forgive his Sins upon the Spot. Many Things
might be excepted against this Form; but yet it sully implies their Belief of
this Truth, viz that a Man may be forgiven and in a State of Salvation without
doing any Works of Righteousness at all. Nay, Mr Garden (for I am now come to
him) has undoubtedly affirmed in the most solemn manner, to departing
Profligates that by Virtue of the Power derived to him from his Savior, be
forgave their Sins. Which (at the least) implie^, that if they were sincere in
what they said to Mr. Garden, their Sins were forgiven by God. And if so, then
there is no doubt, but that if they had been snatched away the very Moment of
their Absolution, Heaven and Happiness would have been their Portion. The Truth
is, Mr. Garden is either in Jest, or in Earnest, when he forgives the Sins of
poor dying People. If he is in Jest, (which I cannot think of him) there is no
more to be said. But if he is in Earnest, why then he confutes himself: holding
in effect, with the Church of England and all Calvinists, what he said every
Body denied, and upon the denial of which he builds all his Reasoning: which
indeed is very good Reasoning, and would never fall to the Ground, were there
any Thing under it, to keep it up.

Perhaps, some Friend of Mr. Garden, will be ready to say, that when he
forgives the Sins of dying wicked Men, upon their saying what is prescribed for
them to say in the Common Prayer Book, he has Regard to some Good Works he
supposes they have sormerly done; or rather to all the Good Works which the
poor sick wicked Men ever did in the Co^rse of their Lives. So that though they
are really forgiven upon Mr. Garden's absolving them, yet they are not forgiven
without Good Works, that is Good Works formerly done by them. Without stopping
to put several Questions which naturally arise here; I will evade this
Solution, by supposing the dying Penitent to be one, who had formerly been
justified, but had at the Time the Minister comes to absolve him, fallen from
Grace; nor done one Good Work toward reinstating himself into the divine
Favor: I would now ask, whither, upon his saying in sincerity what is
prescribed, and Mr. Garden's forgiving him, he would really be forgiven by Gad.
and taken to Happiness, if he died that Instant? If it be said Yes (and I think
no one will say No) then it is most plain, that the dying Penitent is forgiven
(and would be saved if he then died) without any Regard to Good Works.

But perhaps it may be said, that though in such a Case, there is no Regard to
Good Works past, yet there is to Good Works which the Person would have done,
had he had a longer space: That such a Sinner, so dying is forgiven and
received up to Glory, because God saw the Validity of his Repentance, and that
if there had been Opportunity, he would have brought forth Fruits meet for
Repentance This is that vertual Obedience which Dr. TILLDTSON, speaks of, in
his Sermon, from these Words, If ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die etc. And
which he thinks will save a Man. where there is no room for that which is
actual. Such miserable Inventions do Men seek out to themselves, who will not
believe that we are justified by Faith only, according to the Scriptures! I
say, miserable Inventions: For if God has Regard to the Good which he foreseer
wicked Men would have done had they lived longer; then by a Parity of Reason be
will have Regard to the Evil which he foresees Good Men would have done, had
they lived longer: And then the Rule of his Proceedings at the Great Day, will
not be according to the Good and Evil Men have done in the Body, but according
to the Good and Evil they would have done, had they lived longer: which is
horrible Divinity, and therefore shows the absutdity of the Supposition from
whence it flows.

What has been said, might be applied to what he cites from Dr Jackson
However, lest it should he though it a neglect to say nothing to him in particular,
I shall consider the Case which he supposes, viz. of a Man's Departing in the
very Instant in which be is Justified. He says, no Man will doubt either of
his Absolution or Salvation. He then asks, is he saved with Works, or without?
If without, then our Savioue's Rule fails, Math. 5.20 Except your Righteousness
exceed the Righteousness, etc. As if it was not a great deal more natural, to
suppose, that Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth are joined
together in the Soul of a Believer, as they are in the Scripture; and that a
Man may be Righteous, and so his Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, though there be no Opportunity to Work Righteousness;
even as a Tree may be good, and yet cat down before it bring forth good Fruit.
The Man who Repents and Believes to the Salvation of his Soul, is certainly at
the very instant, and before he has done one Good Work, a more Righteous
Person than any of the Scribes and Pharisees were. Nay was all the
Righteousness of all the Scribes and Pharisees from the beginning to this very
Day (and perhaps there never were so many Pharisees in the World at a time, as
there are at this Day) I say, was all this Righteousness transferred to one
Man, he would not be so Holy and Righteous, as the Believer is the very moment
of his receiving Jesus Christ by Faith. But if we should grant Dr. Jackson what
there is no need of granting him, viz. that by Righteousness our Savior means
outward Acts of Righteousness, as if it had been said, Except your good Deeds,
and Acts of Righteousness are more and better than those of the Scribes and
Pharisees, etc; there is no Difficulty in explaining the Words: The meaning
will be this, that whatever Confidence Professors may put in their Faith and
Seize, yet if in their Lives and Conversation, they don't exceed the
Scribes and Pharisees, they may conclude that their Faith is not the right
sort, and that they shall never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

But then how those of Doctor Jackson's Mind, who explain the Words according
to the severity of them, as denying Heaven absolutely to all whose outward Good
Works are not more and better than those of the Scribes and Pharisers; I say,
how they will get over their own Explanation, I am not able to understand. For,
not to mention the Case of Infants, which seems to be desperate: How will they
make out their giving Thanks to God that he has in great Mercy taken to
himself, the Souls ^f all that die Churchmen, provided they have been
Baptized, were not excommunicated and did not lay violent Hands upon
themselves; even though they be the vilest of Men, Liars, Fornicators, Profane
Swearers, Drunkards, that die Drunk, and the like Do these all exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees?

Let any Man consider the many good Things these vile Men were remarkable for;
or at least their treedom from scandalous Sins, and he will judge that they
were not comparable for Vileness, to thousands of the Sons of the Church, who
as soon as Dead, are as it were Canonnised for Saints, and have solemn
Thanksgivings put up to God for their Reception into Heaven.

For my Part, though I doubt not but that there have been and still are many good
Christians of the Prelatical Church; yet at the same time I believe it to be
matter of common and sorrowful Observation, that the very highest part of High
Church are generally speaking, much worse than Scribes and Pharisees: and vet
the Men who officiate at their Funerals, and testify to their good Estate;
insist upon it, that unless a Man's Righteousness, his outward Acts of
Righteousness and Obedience exceed those of the Scribes and Pharisees, he can
in no Case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

And as they contradict their own Exposition of Math 5 20, by officiating at
Funerals, so do they by gi^ing Absolution to dying Sinners; as is evident from
what has been said upon that Head.

There is not one of them I believe that dares to deny, but that in Case a
Person whom he knew to have been as bad as a Scribe or Pharisee, should be sick
nigh unto Death, and desire Absolution, saying over what is appointed him to
say; he would absolve him: And yet how he could do it, consistently with their
Exposition, is what he nor I shall ever be able to comprehend.

Mr. Garden has also a great deal about Dr Edwards, laboring to prove him
guilty of a Self Contradiction. (that is to bring him into the same
Comdemnation with himself) and withal representing him as one of the worst of
Men. Whether the Doctor is really inconsistent with himself in any thing, he
has cited from him, is a Matter of great uncertainty with me; not having the
Original, and not clearly understanding the Passages, and Remarks upon them, as
they stand in Mr. Garden's Letters. However, if either Dr. Edwards, or Mr.
Whitefield, or any other Gentleman, has in fair Construction, done once, what
Mr. Garden has a great many times; contradicted his own self; I shall so far
readily give up his Cause, It being my Motto;

Nullius Addictus Jurare in Verba Magistri. And as for the Cry which Mr Garden
and Company make against this excellent Divine of their own Communion: it is
well known that they hate him for the same Reason which made Cain hate Abel,
viz. because he was more Righteous than themselves, Adhearing Steadfastly to
the Articles of the Church of England, and Reproving them for turning their
Backs upon them.

Our Reverend Commissary having proved (as he thought) that he and those that
are with him, don't hold any Merit in Good Works; and that Good Works must go
before Justification, because they go before Salvation: He comes in the

3d Place to speak to the Twelfth Article of the Church of England, which Mr.
Whitefield had said, was full against Good Works preceding Justification; and
which he labors to prove is not inconsistent with that Doctrine. Page 18. And
to this purpose he observes, that the Article don't mean to exclude Good Works
from going before Justification, because it has no Negative Words to exclude
them For my Part, I should think, that the Article saving that Good Works are
the Fruits of Faith, and follow after Justification, does sufficiently exclude
any Good Works from going before: and am persuaded he would think so too, were
it not that he has such a Kindness for them, as to bring them into the
Condition of our Justification, and is not willing they should be excluded.
Supposing the Article of the Church which speaks of Original Sin, had contained
a Clause similar to this; and asserted that Men were chargeable with Guilt in
the Sight of God, after they arrived to Years of Discretion; would not the
Commissary have seen clearly that the Article intended to exclude any Sin from
going before; and rejoice that it was so full in their Favor; crying out,
Exceptis firm at Regulam in non Exceptis. I believe that he dares not say that
he would not. How unreasonable therefore is it, that he should love Darkness
rather than Light? And though he has Eyes given him on purpose to see with; that
he should hoodwink himself least he should see what is displeasing to him?

He goes on and says that the next following Article, entitled of Works before
Justification, confirms his Assertion, viz. That the other did not mean to
exclude Good Works from going before Justification. The Words are Works before
the Grace of Christ, and the Inspiration of his Spirit are not pleasing to God:
He asks why? And then answers in the following Clause of the Article, Because
they spring not of Faith in Jesus Christ. Upon which his Remark is, that here
it is plain, that by Works before Justification the Article means Works that
are so before it, as to be before the Grace of Christ, and consequently Faith
in him; that is in a State of mere Heathenism, and Infidelity: And therefore he
inters that Works that are not so before the Grace of Christ, that is, Works
performed by all that live under the Gospel, and are not Infidels, by this
Article, are supposed to be good and acceptable to God.

This Gentleman speaks of several trembling Fits which came upon him while he
was writing his Letters; and in my Opinion this was a Place for him to have
trembled in, and to have been horribly afraid. For it seems utterly impossible,
that it should enter into any Man's Heart, that the Compilers of the Article
designed to be understood in this Sense. He knows that the whole Article was
levelled at the Papists, who held that Good Works, which were meritorious of
Condignity or Congruity, went before Justification, and were Means of it. The
meridian Sun is not plainer, to any one that reads it. And yet he would give
the World to understand, that the Design of the Article was only to show that
the Good Works of Heathens and Infidels, were of but little Value. However, if
Mr. Garden will declare that he expounded this Article in the simplicity of his
Heart; that he verily believes this wild romantic Sense was intended by the
Authors; and that he does not feel something within him at the same time,
punishing him for saying so; the Public may have a better Opinion of his
Honesty, though not of his Judgment. It is for a Lamentation, and shall be for a
Lamentation, that Necessity the Mother of Invention, too often puts Men upon
wresting the Articles of the Church of England, as they do the SCRIPTURES also.
They know that if they will but give them a fair Construction, some beloved
Error must fall to the Ground. And therefore they hunt after, and pick up such
Meanings, as no Man would ever think of, to be sure would never embrace, were
it not for some present Distress. And in this Difficulty and Pursuit, it often
befalls them, that they hit upon Meanings so uncunningly devised, that they do
them full as much harm as good. So it fares with them respecting this new Sense
put upon the old Article. For though it helps them to avoid the unwelcome Truth
contained in it; yet it exposes them to have no Charity for Infidels under the
Gospel; (with whom some of them, though I hope not Mr. Garden are in great
Charity) and also to declare that the Heathen World are out of a State of
Salvation: For by saying that Works that are so before the Grace of Christ, as
to be in a State of Heathenism, are not pleasing to God; they do in effect say,
that Heathens cannot please God in any Thing they do; nor consequently can be
accepted of him: when yet the World knows they look upon moral Heathens to be
in God's Favor; though they are heartily cursed for it by their own Church in
the 18th Article; which says; They also, are to be had ACCURSED who presume to
say, that every Man shall be saved by the Law or Sect which he professes, so
that he be diligent to frame his Life, according to that Law, and the Light of
Nature. I know they have a Trick to explain away this Article also, which I
shall not stop to consure, but only make this Remark upon it; viz that the Man
that can use it, and keep his Countenance, whatever he is addicted to, is not
much addicted to Blushing. Upon the whole of the Argument, let the 12th Article
be fairly, grammatically construed (and Authority commands us to construe it
so) and it is impossible but any considerate and unprejudiced Man, should see
that Mr. Garden's Exposition was calculated to serve a Design; and that Mr
Whitefield and the Article speak the same Things; viz. that truly Good Works
follow after Justification, but can never go before it.

Mr. Garden having derided the Supposition of the Coexistence of Faith and
Justification, and of there being no room ^o^ Good Works between them, as
dishonouring the Articles; and as of no manner of Consequence, whether true or
false, so long as this Foundation is held sure, that we are justified by such a
Faith as is true and lively etc; he challenges any one to prove that the first
mere Act of Faith and Justification are coexistent; and also to show the
Importance of the Doctrine if it should be true: Of which courageous, but no
judicious Challenge I readily accept. And

1. I shall prove, what he, either erring, or else not knowing the Scriptures,
thinks it is impossible for any Man to prove, viz. that Faith and Justification
are simultaneous; or that as soon as a Man believes in JESUS CHRIST, he is
justified from all his Sins. And here I shall detach but one single Passage of
the whole Army of them, which are ready to make out this Truth And that is what
we read in Joh. 3.18. He that believes is not condemned. Which shows, (it
Words of the Holy Ghost can show it) that as soon as it may be said of a Man
that he Believes in JESUS CHRIST, with such a Kind of Faith as is there
intended; so soon it may be said of him, that he is not condemned, but
justified. I don't suppose this Text will signify any Thing with Mr. Garden and
Friends; for they have such a knack of explaining away the Scriptures, that
they care not how many of them stand in their way?

But what will they say here? Why, that by BELIEVING the Apostle means
BELIEVING and WORKING too. But why will they say so? For no other Reason in the
World, but because they would have it so: their Wills and not their
Understandings helping them to explain or rather to darken the Apostle's Words:
for the Apostle seems to have guarded with all his Might, against Good Works
going before Justification, to the Conviction of all Legalists in his Days, and
to the End of Time: but almost to none Effect. If what he has said will not
convince these Men, I am sore nothing would. Nay, if St. Paul had said, that
the first mere Act of Faith and Justification are coexistent, in so many Words;
which Mr. Garden faith now is absolutely false: I say, if these had been Words
of Scripture, would not he and Friends confure them as perfectly consistent
with their beloved Nation of Good Works going before Justification? I doubt not
but they would. Nay, I could tell the Way they would go to work in such a
difficult Case.

Mr. Garden assures us, that no one can be under any Temptation of disbelieving
that Men are justified immediately upon their believing: and gives this very
odd Reason for it, viz. Because the less we are required to do, so much the
happier is it for us, who are able to do so little, and who are so unwilling to
do any thing at all. Page 20

That is in other Words, Since Salvation is easier upon the Supposition that
Men are justified by Faith, before the doing of Good Works, than upon Mr.
Garden's Supposition, that Works are necessary before Justification; therefore
any one would be rather tempted to believe the former to be right, than the
latter, provided there were Grounds for it in Scripture. And I grant that were
justifying Faith a Thing so scandalously cheap as the Faith of Assent is, he
would be right; it would be an easier way to Heaven than his, and Men would
NATURALLY hold Justification by Faith. But since justifying Faith is supposed
to be a Principle infused into the Soul by the SPIRIT OF GOD, which Man cannot
attain to of himself, and which therefore is infinitely harder than doing dead
Works, before Justification; it is the Difficulty of Salvation this way which
makes Men naturally reject it, though a Man declare it unto them, and choose Mr.
Garden's way before it.

For they say thus within themselves; if this infused Faith is necessary, as we
know nothing of it at present, to it being out of our Power, it may be we never
shall: And hence they will hold to that Way which seems most in their Power,
and in spite of Scripture seek to be justified by the Works of the Law; though
God himself by Inspiration assures us that by the Deeds of the Law no Flesh
living shall be justified, Rom, 3.20.

Nay, I would appeal to the Consciences of Mr Garden and Abettors, whether or
no the grand Cause of their Malignity against Justification by an infused
Faith, be not a Fear that they are unacquainted with the Thing; and
consequently an Apprehension that if the Doctrine be true, they themselves are
in a State of Damnation as yet, and without so much Power to work out their own
Salvation, as they choose to think themselves possessed of Had they comfortable
Hopes that let this Doctrine be ever so true, they should run no Risque of
Eternal Salvation; would they oppose the Doctrine with so much Vigor and Rage?
I am sure they would not. Vast Allowances ought therefore to be made by their
Hearers and Readers, when they find them set for the Defense of the contrary
way of Justification: For it is for their Interest; by this Craft they have
their Comfort: If the other Way be right, they are undone for ever: And
therefore it stands them in Hand, to be zealous against it.

But with the Opposers of their Doctrine it is not so. Let it be never so Right
they are not hurt by it. If this Faith should be a Whimsey (as they think and
call it) yet they hold and practice Good Works, at least as much as their
Brethren; and therefore if the Arminian Justification be the right one, they
shall be justified with an Arminian Justification.

It would therefore be highly proper for Laymen, when they hear Ministers on
both Sides zealously cry down each others Method of Justification, to inquire
with the wise Romans, Cui bono? i. e. What Advantage they propose to themselves
by their Zeal? And if they find those who preach against Justification by an
infused Faith, are afraid that the Doctrine should be true; as most certainly
they are, lest they should lose their Peace: And on the contrary that those
Ministers, who preach down their Justification, have no Interest to promote by
it, but only the common Salvation; these Considerations ought in Reason to go a
great way with them.

I am afraid Mr. Garden and Confederates, will make themselves merry rather
than serious with these Things; alleging that this Faith is a mere Nonentity,
and that all the Arguments in the World, cannot give a real Existence to it.
But why should they speak Evil of the Things which they know not; and sport
themselves with their own Deceivings? They are sensible that the Scripture
speaks almost every where of a certain Faith which does justify. They
themselves are ashamed to say that the Faith of Assent does justify. And as to
what they call justifying Faith, they know it is not properly Faith, but a
compound of Faith and Works together. Would it not be their Wisdom therefore to
conclude that there is some other thing which is truly JUSTIFYING FAITH, and to
seek after it? They have the Testimony of thousands, and thousands, whom they
must own to be as wise and as good Men as themselves, who have obtained this
Mercy of the Lord: and who will tell them that they build all their Hopes upon
it, counting Faith of Assent, and unregenerate Morality in all its Glory, to be
but Loss and Dung in comparison of it.

Nay, there are many who can assure them that they themselves in the Times of
their Ignorance, were Scoffers and Mockers at the Faith of God's Elect, being
elated with unsanctified Reason, and the Pride of Philosophy falsely so called:
And that they have had their towering Thoughts and lofty Imaginations brought
down to the Foolishness of an infused Faith; and that they would not be
deprived of it for Millions of Worlds. Why therefore, should these Men reject
it upon the Foundation of their own Want of Experience: for other Foundation
can no Man have against it? Would not they themselves call that Debauchee a
Madman, who should affirm there was no Pleasure in a religious Life, because he
never found any in it? And yet this is exactly their own Case, who deny that
the exceeding Greatness of God's Power is exerted upon the Souls of Believers,
merely because they are not conscious of any such blessed Operations upon their
own.

Surely if they would be prevailed upon to act as Men, and as Christians; they
would be jealous over themselves with a godly Jealousy, and cry mightily to
GOD, that what they know not be would teach them: giving themselves no rest
till the same Spirit which works in others, work effectually in them also,
making them Partakers of like precious Faith: Which GOD of his infinite Mercy
grant unto all that are destitute of it; through JESUS CHRIST our Lord.

Which brings me to the

2d Thing, which was to show that the Doctrine of a Man's being justified
immediately upon his believing, is not only true, but a Doctrine of Importance
Mr. Garden faith, that as long as this Foundation is held sure, that Men are
justified by a true and lively Faith, that is, a Faith actually producing Good
Works; it is of no manner of Consequence whether Good Works go before
Justification, or not. And I grant that there is an Appearance of Truth in what
he faith: And it is this Deceivableness of Error, which causes many
inconsiderate Persons, to conclude that it is not worth the while to set up one
way of Justification, and to pull down the other; since both hold, that it Men
don't Maintain Good Works, as well as Believe, there will be no Heaven for
them. But yet there is really a vast and amazing Difference between these two
Opinions; that Men ARE justified as soon as they believe; and that other of Mr
Garden's, viz. that Men are NOT justified so soon as they believe, nor till
they have done a Number of Good Works. The Belief of the former causes Sinners
to go the right Way to work in Religion, viz. to seek to God in the first
Place, and with their whole Hearts, that he would reveal his Son in them, and
give them that Faith in him, which intitles to his Merits, and which alone can
purity their Hearts, and amend their Lives: The Belief of the latter causes
Persons to treasure up an heap of Good Works in hopes, that together with the
Faith of Assent (which Reprobates are capable of) they shall be rendered so
acceptable to their Maker that he will be merciful to their Unrighteousness,
and remember their Iniquities no more. They do indeed make mention of the
Righteousness (passive) of Christ, and own that it is through the Merit of his
Sufferings, that there is Forgiveness and Justification for them with God: But
then, as was said before, they think the Way to entitle themselves to this
merited Justification, is by doing Works of Righteousness To give my Sentiments
freely upon this Doctrine: It leads Men from CHRIST, and (...) him. It does not
tend to make Men true Christians, but only true Pharisees. Every Preacher of
it, whoever he be, is a Pharisee; and every Man begotten by him into the Belief
of it, is himself a Pharisee, and the Son of a Pharisee. Away, away with it
then (...) Rome, from whence it came: And there let it abide as long as the Sun
and Moon endure; if it may not perish from under the whole Heavens through the
tender Mercies of our God. Let the Friends of it but carry it back to the Land
of its Nativity; and if they make no Returns or worse than none, bringing home
Salt, Cream, Spittle, and other superstitious Fooleries in Li^^ of it; they
will make a saving Voyage. For there is really more deadly Poison in this one
Tenet of Good Works going before Justification, than there is in one half of
the Popish Ceremonies put together. It is not without Reason therefore that Mr.
Whitefield, and other eminent Servants of the most high GOD, sent into the
World on purpose to teach the way of Truth more perfectly, than these Men do;
Cry aloud, and spare not but lift up their Voices like Trumpets against it:
witnessing both to small and great, in Season, and out of Season, the
Everlasting Misery and Destruction that are in its Ways.

These pious Gentlemen know, that the Proud have them greatly in Derision; that
all manner of Evil is spoken of them falsely; and that their Names are cast out
as Evil. But none of these Things move them. Nay I am persuaded, that they
^ount not their Lives dear to themselves, so that they can but fulfill their
Ministry, and testify the Gospel of the GRACE of GOD.

The great Outcry of the Clergy against them, and what makes them set the
profaner Populace a roaring as them, is a Pretense that they are so full of
Zeal, that they have no Charity: and yet whoever is present at their Devotions,
and observes the vehement and flaming Love to GOD, and the Souls of Men, which
runs through them all; will be ready to think, that of all Men living these Men
have Charity; or else that what their Enemies call Charity is a poo^ sorry
Thing, and not worth the having. And indeed there is sorrowful Occasion to
observe, that Charity (as well as Faith) is quite another Thing from what it
was in the Days of the Apostles. It now mostly stands for a woeful Neutrality,
with regard to those Truths we are bid to contend earnestly for; and
consequential Belief that the Way to Heaven is very broad and easy. And
accordingly those Ministers who are most formal and sleepy in the House of the
living God; who are most regardless of working out their own Salvation with
fear and trembling; and of taking others by the Hand, and leading them in the
way in which they should go; are the most charitable Men, according to the
common, and perverse Acceptance of the Word. And indeed, this Thing must needs
be so: For he that hardly believes there is an Heaven, will ordinarily hare any
Disputes about the Way to it; and will rather charitably believe that almost
all Mankind are traveling to Heaven, as well as himself, if there be an
Heaven. Of this Charity, I readily grant Mr. Whitefield, and those other
Gentlemen, know but little; saving that they frequently observe and lament it
in their Enemies. But then, as for St. Paul's Charity which consists in an
ardent Love to GOD and CHRIST, and an unquenchable Desire after the Salvation
of perishing Souls, to say the least of them, they come not a whit behind the
chiefest of their Adversaries.

And inasmuch as the Pleasure of the Lord apparently prospers in their Hands;
inasmuch as Ministers of all Denominations know, whether they own it, or not,
that their People come away much more seriously disposed, than from hearing
themselves: they ought to Rejoice in their Labors, to grow warm from their
Fire, to esteem them worthy of double Honor, and to wish them God Speed. At
least they ought to be afraid of prating against them with malicious Words; of
devising evil Devices; and indeed of doing any thing against these Men, lest if
their Work be of God, they cannot overthrow it, but only kick against the
Pricks, and at last be found fighters against God.

Mr Garden coming near the close of his Letter, rattles off Mr. Whitefield upon
the old Score, of his accusing him and the Clergy of his Mind, of holding Good
Works to be meritorious; or that Men are justified by them: telling him that he
has not proved this poisonous Insinuation; and that he dares not pretend to do
it for these two Reasons; because he has no Talent at proving any Thing; and
because he is conscious to himself that the same Arguments which he must bring
to prove Merit upon them, will help the Solifidian to prove Merit upon himself.

As to the first of them; viz his having no Talent at proving any Thing, as Mr.
Garden says of him in his haste; were this true, he might nevertheless, make
out his Assertion. For there requires no Genius for Disputing, to prove so
plain a Matter, as that of the indicted Clergy, holding Good Works to be
meritorious; or that Men are justified by them. He needed only to have
collected what they themselves have said, and then the unprejudiced Part of
Mankind would have seen that they were condemned out of their own Mouths.

And then, as to Mr. Whitefield's being scared from such an Attempt, by an
Apprehension of the Solifidians being upon his back, and mauling him with the
same Weapons, which he must use in mauling his Clerical Brethren: I answer,
this would have been fearing where no fear was.

For it will by no Means 'follow that if Mr. Garden is a Meritmonger for
saving. Good Works necessarily go before Justification; that Mr. Whitefield
must be one too, for ass^^ting that (...) Works are necessary to Salvation: For
Mr. Whitefield does not suppose them to be so necessary to Salvation, as Mr.
Garden would have them to be to Justification. The former justly thinks, that
those who don't maintain Good Works, shall never see the Lord. But then he is
fully of the Min that whoever truly believes, is in that Instant an Heir of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and if he should die before he did one Good Work, would
undoubtedly depart into the Possession of it Whereas the latter thinks that
Good Works are of the Essence of Justification, and that without them no Man
can be justified.

Mr. Garden looks upon Good Works as what do (at least in Part) justify: But
Mr. Whitefield don't imagine that Good Works save Men in any Measure; but are
only the genuine Effects of that which does instrumentally save them, i. Faith.
So that since Good Works are not so necessary to Salvation according to Mr.
Whitefield, as they are to Justification, according to Mr. Garden; nor
necessary in the same Manner; it is abundantly evident, that Mr. Whitefield's
Arguments against the Clergy upon the Point of Merit, could not have been
improved against himself by the Solifidians. And yet Mr. Garden is so persuaded
to the contrary, that he gives his Word and Honor, that in Case it can be
shown, that he can defend himself against a Charge of Merit, from Solifidians,
better than himself and Friends can from the same Charge brought by him against
them; he will turn Methodist, the next Moment. Which Promise he is Here by
these Presents, desired to remember, and to make good.

I purposely omit making any Answer to what follows in this Letter about Fire,
Faggot, Jesuits, Deists, Persecution etc. because there is nothing material
contained in these Paragraphs, that needs answering; and also because I have
been so long already in discussing other Matters.

In his Postscript; he desires Mr. Whitefield to help out Mr. Wesley against a
Self Contradiction which he endeavors to prove upon him from two Expressions
cited from him. Concerning which I would remark, that the Contradiction, is
only a seeming. and not a real one. Describing the Faith which justifies he
asserts that it is not dead; but inclusive of all Good Works, and all Holiness.
Sermon. By Grace ye are saved through Faith. Page 14. And in his Preface to his
Hymns, Page 5. Showing how we are justified, he declares that it is by Faith
which produces Good Works or Holiness, but vet not by Faith as it includes Good
Works or Holiness. The short of what Mr. Wesley faith, and means is this; That
JUSTIFYING FAITH includes (or produces) Good Works; but then when we consi^^t
it as strictly justifying, we must not consider it, as including Good Works:
o^, lumping FAITH and WORKS together, as Mr. Garden and his Brethren for eve^
do.

Thus Sir, I have complied with the one half of your Desire, and must be
excused as to the rest; since I am much cumber'd with Business, and have wrote
more upon the first three Letters, than I thought I should upon the whole six

I know nothing of the Gentleman who is the Author, as to his Person; but will
venture to affirm, that however powerful his bodily Presence may be, his
Letters are certainly weak.

I am SIR, Your Friend and Humble Servant, A. Croswell.
Groton, in Connecticut, December. 16. 1740.
AN APPENDIX, Concerning the Rev. Mr. GARDEN'S Treatment of his Christian
Brother the Rev. Mr. WHITEFIELD.
THE Occasion of this Appendix is that vain glorious Paragraph in Mr.
Commissary's Third Letter, dated at Charlestown April 8. 1740, in the following
Words -- But still PERSECUTION -- you cry out; -- for WANT of it you mean: For
OURS is NO Persecuting Country for Religion; EVERY MAN may enjoy HIS OWN WAY in
PEACE and SAFETY. But as you may regard the being Persecuted as something
essential to a true Christian, and necessary to keep up the Spirit of
Christianity, you seem to be in Quest and Pursuit of it; Please only to step
into a Neighboring Country, SPAIN or PORTUGAL, and you will hid fair, I dare say,
to find it.

And now we will see how long the Rev. Mr. Garden will keep his Rev. and Christian
Brother Whitefield in WANT of Persecution; and how long the Bishop's Commissary
will maintain the King's Province of South Carolina, to be no Persecuting
Country for Religion; how long every Man may enjoy his own way there in Peace
and Safety; and how long his pious and excellent Brother Clergyman Mr.
Whitefield had need of stepping into Spain or Portugal, to find out
Persecution. For

I. As Ishmael's MOCKING Isaac, Genesis 21.9 is by the inspired Apostle thus
described, Gal. iv. 29. As then be that was born after the Flesh PERSECUTED him
that was born after the Spirit; even so it is NOW. I may for the same Reason
assert the same Thing both of the present Age and of the present Case -- Even
so it is NOW. Or it Mockings, Scoffs and Jeers of the Pious and Rev. Mr.
Whitefield for his strict Adherence to the Holy Scriptures, as well as the
Articles and Homi^ies of the Church of England, in the great Point of
Justification by Faith in Christ, and by this Faith alone; be Persecution: Then
Mr. Garden has Persecuted Mr. Whitefield; as Ishmael Persecuted Isaac.

To make this evident, I shall here set down some of Mr. Commissary's bitter
Words and Scoffings in his Third and Fifth Letters, as follow -- LETTER III.
Dated April 8.

In Page 8. Mr. Commissary charges Mr. Whitefield with 'wilful and malicious
Slander'. Page 9. 'Your Reverence'. -- Apparent Shuffle'. Page 12. 'Your
Reverence'. -- Not without Shuffle -- Thus your Reverence'. Page 13. 'Arrogant
and wicked Slander in you -- Miserable Distinction, a poor Jingle of Words -- A
Wrangler in your own Way'. Page 14 'Your Mob Harangues -- Guilty of wilful
Slander'. -- Nonsense'.

In Page 16, 17, 18 are Mr. Garden's following Flouts on the late Rev. Learned,
Pious and highly esteemed Dr Edwards, one of the principal Ornaments of the
Church of England in his Day, and doubtless now in Glory. -- Page 16.
'Senseless Distinction'. -- 'Silly Subterfuges'. -- 'Rare Champion of Grace!'
-- 'Wonderful Fears!' Page 17. 'A very sorry Decision'. -- 'His Apprehension of
the Matter is absurd'. Page 18. 'Sanctified Logic out of all Question!' --
'Arrant Piece of Nonsense'.

Then Mr. Comm^ssary returns to Mr. Whitefield, with the following reviling and
jeering Passages, Page 20. 'You reach and deceive the People'. -- 'Your
poisoned Insinuation; false and insidious!' -- You have no Talent at proving
any Thing. -- Up starts a hair-brained Solifidian, andruns about a Mouthing --.
Page 21, 22 Lay your Hand on your Mouth! Nay rather open it wide, and recall
the Slander you have scattered far and wide around you -- The Fire you have
kind^ed is that of Slander and Defamation^ a Fire which no Devil in Hell, no
nor Jesuit nor Deist on Earth will ever go about to extinguish, but faggot and
foment it with all their Might -- Is it not you that falsely accuse the
Brethren? ' -- Pursue the first Plan you amused the World with'. -- But why
poor Gentleman are you thus to be Bantered? Are you not really Persecuted? Are
you not cast out of the Synagogues; excluded the Church of England Pulpits; and
treated as a Disciple of Fox or MUGGLETON? And is not all this PERSECUTION? But
for what Cause ARE YOU THUS TREATED? Why only for the trifling Cause of
accusing the Clergy etc. -- 'Will your Reverence be pleased etc.'

Mr. Commissary's IVth LETTER, dated April 15. is about an Anonymous Pamphlet,
which he says He presumes not to know whether Mr. Whitefield approves of all
and every Thing it contains. But in his Vth Letter, dated April 21. Mr.
Commissary readily returns to the same kind of abusive Language, in the
following Passages:

Page 32. Had you observed common Decency or good Manners -- But your contrary
Behavior, exposes you to the utmost Scorn and Contempt. -- You know how,
pretending the Cause of God, to bring railing Accusations, to support some
Crotchets you have got in your own Brains. Page 33. You know how to dispense it
to the Populace in a Vehicle of cant Terms, without Sense or Meaning. Page 35.
'Arrant Gibberish!' Page 36. 'Your monstrous Inference'. -- 'You love dearly to
shuffl^e among Terms'. -- Alas my old Friend, whether is your poor Head now a
wandering? -- In your Mountebank Way, you have young David like, as you fancy,
slain your Geliah. -- In the Pride and Naughtiness of your Heart, you have made
so absurd an Attempt and so foolishly managed it. -- 'Your dirty Pamphlets'.
Page 36, 37. But might not one such Conquest have sufficed you, as it did young
David, at a Time? No, your noble Spirit scorns only to imitate, but must excel.
No sooner have you dispatched this Champion of the uncircumcised in Heart and
Ears; but advancing from a David into a Knight of Lamanca, you go straight in
Pursuit of new Adventures! And who unhappily falls in your Way, but another Son
of Anak, the Author of the Whole Duty of Man? Down he must come; -- and thus
you gird your self for the Battle. Page 37. Choice Armor indeed! who shall be
able to stand before you? None sure but the Pope and the Mufti -- a mo^ly
Triumvirate of Infallibles! Your Reverence, the Pope and the Mufti -- most
consummate Assurance, wherewith you jointly and severally disturb and confound
the World -- 'Who dares dispute your Infallibility'. Page 38. Thus an elder
Brother of yours, the ever memorable GEORGE Fox, an Infallible also in his Day,
to whom God had given the true Knowledge of the Doctrines of Grace. -- Your
Reverence. -- 'Another noble Champion of Grace'. -- 'Your 'Reverence'. -- 'This
Brother Champion of yours'. Page 39. 'Your Infallibility'. -- 'Enlighren'd with
your Reverence'. Page 40. Have you not been dabling with the Marrow of modern
Divinity, or some such precious Book, which puzzles your Head, and lies crude
on your Understanding? Or are you deputed by some other Head or Hand behind the
Curtain, to put off such Stuff upon the World? Or finally, do you really mean
to burlesque the Bible etc.

I might recite other Passages; but am weary of them, and so I believe is the
Christian Reader. But on the whole, I would ask, whether this is the Language
of a grave, meek and humble Minister and Disciple of JESUS; or of a Bishop's
Commissary? Exalted with a secular Dignity over, and looking down with Scorn
upon his pious and labourious Brother; and a Brother flaming with a wondrous
Zeal, and spending his Strength more than all other Men in these Parts of the
World, for the Conversion of Souls, and Recovery of the Church of England to
those Pure Doctrines of Grace and Justification; for which her first Reformers
gloriously suffered Martyrdom; but which Mr. Commissary now Derides, and says
the present Clergy of the Church of England are of the same Opinion with him:
though both He and They have all solemnly declared their unfeigned Assent to the
contrary.

And as when there was a Strife among the First Ministers of CHRIST, which of
them should be accounted the Greatest -- JESUS called them to him and said, ye
know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise DOMINION over them; and they
that are Great exercise AUTHORITY upon them; but IT SHALL NOT BE SO AMONG YOU,
Luke xxii. and Math. xx. So Ministers of a worldly Spirit, have in all Ages
affected worldly Dominion and Authority; like even those first Ministers of
CHRIST, for which he justly blamed them; and like the Princes and other great
Ones among the Gentiles, which he forbids them in the least to imitate lin the
Exercise of Dominion and Authority. A most wise and gracious Prohibition! As
all Ages restisy; who have always found that the raising the Ministers of
Christ to worldly Dominion and Authority, has raised their Pride, and made them
Worldly, nourished their spiteful Passions, ruined their humble Character; and
given them a dreadful Scope to wreak their Malice and Revenge on those beneath
them. And none in the World have so cruelly used their Power as Clergymen
invested with a worldly Dominion and Authority.

The BRITISH COLONIES have indeed till now been happily free from their
terrible Dominion. But whoever considers the Spirit which Mr Garden shows in
the above Expressions, will be apt to think that he only wanted a Power and
Opportunity to vex his Rev and Pious Brother in a more grievous Manner. And it
is not long ere the Commissary finds an Opportunity, and readily lays hold on
it, to make Mr. Whitefield know and feel his Power. As we in the

II. Place proceed to show. For in the latter End of June following Mr.
Whitefield goes from the Province of Georgia into the Province of South
Carolina. On Thursday July 3. enters Charlestown. The next Day being Friday
July 4, receives a Letter from the Commissary, which Mr. Whitefield immediately
answers. On Saturday July 5, Preaches twice: and Lord's Day July 6 twice more.
On the same Day he goes to Church both Forenoon and Afternoon: and as Mr.
Whitefield writes in the following Words -- I heard the Commissary Preach as
virulent and unorthodox, inconsistent Discourse, as ever I heard in my Life.
His Heart seemed full of Choler and Resentment: Out of the Abundance thereof,
he poured forth so many bitter Words against the Methodists (as he called them)
in general, and Me in particular, that several who intended to receive the
Sacrament at his Hands, withdrew. Never I believe was such a Preparation Sermon
preached before. I could not help thinking the Preacher was of the same Spirit
with Bishop Gardner in Queen Mary's Days. After Sermon he sent his Clerk to
desire me not to come to the Sacrament, till he had spoke with me -- I
immediately retired to my Lodging, rejoicing that I was accounted worthy to
suffer this further Degree of Contempt for my dear Lord's Sake. Blessed Jesus
lay it not to the Commissary's Charge. Amen and Amen.

Upon this I appeal to every impartial Reader, whether Mr. Commissary had not
by this preceding Management utterly disqualified Himself from being looked
upon as an impartial Judge over a Brother Clergyman, whom he had so openly and
opprobriously Reviled?

But the more the Commissary rails, the more his People grow offended, and the
more they leave him, and grow more cager of hearing another sort of Preaching
and another sort of Language in the meek and humble Person reviled. And Mr.
Whitefield being denied the Privilege of Preaching in the Church of England,
though desired by great Numbers of that Society: where, when ever he officiates,
he always uses the Common Prayer Book and conforms thereto; as he accounts
himself obliged, when in the Episcopal Churches: At the Desire of the People,
he Prayed and Preached in the Presbyterian Meeting House: and accounting
himself not obliged by Law to use the Common Prayer Book in them, be Prayed
without it. Upon which the very next Day, viz Monday July 7. Mr. Commissary
could bear no longer, but begins the Exercise of his COMMISSARIAL Dominion and
Authority in the following Writ or Order.

ALexander Garden lawfully constituted Commissary of the Right Reverend Father
in CHRIST, Edmund, by divine Permission, Lord Bishop of London, supported by
the Royal Authority, underwritten.
Alexander Garden,
TO all and singular Clerks, and literate Persons whomsoever, in and throughout
the whole Province of South Carolina, wheresoever appointed Greeting;
To you conjunctly and severally, we commit, and strictly injoining, command
that you do cite, or cause to be cited, peremptorily George Whitefield, Clerk;
and Presbyter of the Church of England, that he lawfully appear before us, in
the Parish Church of St. Phillip's Charlestown, and in the judicial Place of
the same, on Tuesday, the 15 Day of this Instant July, 'twixt the Hours of 9
and 10 in the Forenoon, then and there in Justice to answer to certain
Articles, Heads, or Interrogatories which will be objected, and ministered unto
him concerning THE MERE HEALTH OF HIS SOUL, and the REFORMATION, and CORRECTION
OF HIS MANNERS, and EXCESSES, and CHIEFLY for OMITTING TO USE THE FORM of
PRAYERS PRESCRIBED IN THE COMMUNION BOOK. -- And further to do and receive what
shall be just in that Behalf on Pain of Law and Contempt. -- And what you shall
do in the Premises, you shall duly certify us, together with these Presents.

Given under our Hands and Seals of our Office, at Charlestown, this seventh
Day of July, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand seven Hundred and Forty.
Vera Copia.
But early this Monday Morning July 7, Mr. Whitefield had set out to Ashley
Ferry, about 14 Miles from Charlestown; where he preached at the Baptist
Meeting House. Tuesday July 8. to Dorchester; where he Preached twice in the
Independent Meeting House. Wednesday July 9, in the Forenoon, he preached near
the Meeting House there again; and returning to Charlestown, preached in the
Evening there also, Thursday July 10 went over the Water; read Prayers, and
preached at the Request of the Church Wardens, Vestry, at Christ's Church; in
the Evening returned to Charlestown. And Friday July 11. he there preached
twice again: In all these Places at the Desire of great Numbers, and with great
Labor, Fatigue, Acceptance and Success. But while this extraordinary Person is
taking all these Pains for the good of Souls; the Commissary is laying his
Schemes to molest and vex him: And on the Dav last mentioned, Mr. Whitefield
received from the Commissary by the Hands of his Apparitor the following
CITATION.

YOU are hereby cited to appear at the Church of St. Philip's Charlestown, on
Tuesday the 15 day of this instant July betwixt the Hours of 9 and 10 in the
Forenoon, before the Rev. Alexander Garden Commissary, to answer to such
Articles, as shall there be objected to you.

Wm. Smith, Apparitor.

In the mean while -- Mr. Whitefield goes on in his laborious Work. On Saturday
July 12. he goes upon Invitation to John's Island about 20 Miles up the River,
Reads Prayers in the Church, preaches twice, and returns to Charlestown. Lord's
Day July 13. in the Morning and Evening he preaches there again; and in the
Forenoon went to Church, and heard the Commissary preac^^e; where, as Mr
Whitefield well observes -- Had some infernal Spirit been sent to draw my
Picture, I think it scarcely possible he could paint me in more horrid Colors.
I think if ever, then was the Time that all manner of E^il was spoke against me
falsely for Christ's sake; The Commissary seemed to ransack Church History for
Instances of Enthusiasm and abused Grace; he drew a Parallel between me, and
all the Oliverians, Ranters, Quakers, French Prophess, till he came down to a
Family of the Du^arts, who lived (not many Years ago) in South Carolina, and
were guilty of the most notorious Incests, and Murders. To the Honor of God's
free Grace be it spoken, whilst he was representing me thus, I felt the blessed
Spirit strengthening and refreshing my Soul: God at the same Time gave me to see
what I was by Nature, how I had deserved his eternal Wrath, and therefore I did
not feel the least Resentment against the Preacher; no, I pitied, I prayed for
him, and wished from my Soul, that the Lord would convert him, as he did once
the Persecutor Saul, and let him know, that it is JESUS whom he persecutes.

Monday July 14. Mr Whitefield preaches twice again. Tuesday July 15 He
appeared according to the Citation in the Parish Church of St. Philip's and in
the Judicial Place in the Forenoon: where were many Spectators; and the Rev.
Mr. COMMISSARY, and the Rev Mr. Guy, Millichamp, Roe and Orr, sat as Judges.
The Commissary tendering a Paper, desires Mr Whitefield's Answer to those
Articles: But Mr. Whitefield refused taking (...) fied of the Authority of the
Court in Question. The Commissary then said, They would proceed to Censure.
Upon which Mr Whitefield reminded them of the Example of the Heathen
Magistrates, who exceeded their Authority in Condemning and Scourging St. Paul
being a Roman, unheard. After a short Debate the Commissary sent his Apparitor
to his House for (...) Commission to act as Commissary from the Lish^p of
London Upon Mr. Whitefield's Reading it, he desires to be satisfied of the
^^shop of London's Authority in that Province, not finding the Royal Authority
underwritten, as mentioned in his Citation Upon this a Latin Commission without
a S^^l was Read. And Mr. Whitefield objected, That though there ^^ght be a
GENERAL POWER given the Bishop to ex^^^^^^ E^^^^siastical Jurisdiction in that
Province; yet the EXTENT of that Power was to be determined by PARTICULAR ACTS
of ASSEMBLY. Mr. Whitefield further urged, that a Court of this (...) was
entirely unprecedented in AMERICA; that be belonged to GEORGIA, a different
Province, not under the Commissary's Power, and was at SOUTH CAROLINA only as
an (...). He also added that though he had preached in the Fields near London
some Months, yet the Bishop never attempted to exercise such Authority over him
-- that the Commissarys in Maryland and Penfilvania were mere Ciphers -- that
the Trustees, to his Knowledge. Questioned the Bishop of London's having any
Jurisdiction in those Parts -- and that he desired he might have till Tomorrow
9 o'Clock, the Time to which the Court was adjourned, to inform himself of the
Extent of their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in that Province: And though at first
the Commissary said, He had indulged Mr. Whitefield too far already; yet after
some Consideration granted his Request, and adjourned. And Mr. Whitefield
preached twice more that Day in Charistown.

Wednesday July 16. At 10 in the Morning, Mr. Whitefield appeared; and by the
Advice of his Friends, exhibited a Recusatio Judicis, that is, his Exception
against the COMMISSARY'S being his Judge in this Cause; having too great Reason
to believe the Commissary prejudiced against him. At first the Commissary
refused to Read it. At length he took Mr. Whitefield's Paper, read it to
himself, and said, He would not except it Mr. Whitefield then stood up
according to Law and said he would go and Protest against all further
Proceedings as null and void, and lest the Court: But being called back by the
Appariter and Register, he returned, and gave in his Exception, to be Read and
Filed. By this time the Commissary had gotten Mr. Graham an Attorney to appear
in behalf of the Court, who insisted on having the Exceptions tried in Court:
But as according to La^ Mr Whitefield had referred them to the Examininaion of
six Arbitrators, 3 nominated by him, and 3 by the Commissary; Mr. Whitefield's
Attorney Mr. Rutledge in his Behalf, Protested against all further Proceedings,
and against his appearing at the next Court, till the Reference to Arbitrators
was complied with: it being quite improbable to imagine that the Commissary,
who must be judged if the Exceptions should be tried by that Court, should
allow himself prejudiced. -- Mr. Whitefield being desire: then went to James
Island and read Prayers and Preached, and stayed all Night.

Next Day, viz. Thursday July 17, He returned, and by his Attorney's Advice
appeared in Court again, to see if his Exceptions were admitted to Arbitration,
according to Law, (...) Repelled. And finding his Exceptions REPELLED, and his
Attorney stopped, as he was rising up to invalidate what the other Attorney
said; Mr. Whitefield APPEALED to HIS MAJESTY in the High Court of Chancery, and
declared all other Proceedings in that Court against him to be null and void.
Which caused many to rejoice and give Thanks to God on his Behalf.

Friday July 18, and Saturday July 19, He Preached twice each Day again at
Charlestown. And Saturday after the Afternoon Exercise, being desired by the
Apparitor to go to the Commissary; Mr. Whitefield went: and at his Desire to
swear he would lodge his Appeal within a Twelve Month, and to Deposite Ten
Pounds Sterling, and finding the Commissary's Orders gave him Authority to
require it; Mr. Whitefield took the Oath, and promised to leave Ten Pounds in
the Hands of a Friend etc.

And thus Ends this famous and FIRST Ecclesiastical or rather Clergical Court
in the BRITISH COLONIES. But what a Thousand Pities, that it was not the first
Time erected, to punish some notorious Immorality or other either in the
Episcopal Clergy or People, to whom alone it belongs, and among whom, as well
as others, there are notorious Immoralities enough abounding in all the
Colonies? Or if an Episcopal Clergyman must be the primary Object of this
Commissarial Power and Severity; what a thousand Pities, that their First Court
was not erected to punish some or other for Playing at Cards and Dice, or
haunting Taverns, or too much constant Drinking, or some other Misdemeanour,
which they need not take much Pains to find or prove.

But instead of this -- To begin with a young Clergyman of such extraordinary
Sanctity of Manners, and of such slaming Zeal to promote the highest Degrees of
Piety, as we find none superior since the Apostles Days -- It cannot possibly
recommend these Courts to the Esteem of the British Colonies; but rather to
their universal and great Displeasure. For though the common People in EUROPE are
generally so ignorant and weak as to hug the Chains of the Clergy, and keep
them on as fast and long as possible -- the AMERICANS live in a freer Air, more
generally taste the Sweets of Liberty; and being nearer an Equality of Birth
and Wealth, there being Land enough for every industrious Person; there are
fewer among them in Dependence on others, they are generally more knowing than
the common People in EUROPE; and are not like for several Ages, or as long as
this near Equality remains, to desire the Dominion of the Clergy over them

Upon viewing the Terms of the WRIT, I believe there is scarce a Man of common
Sense in all the Colonies that can forbear smiling to read of the mighty
heinous Articles objected to the Pious and Rev. Mr WHITEFIELD -- concerning the
mere HEALTH of HIS SOUL and the REFORMATION and CORRECTION OF HIS MANNERS and
Excrsses; and CHIEFLY [CHIEFLY] ^or OMITTING to use the Form of Prayers
prescribed in the Communion Book Though every Man of common Knowledge among us
knows that the Form of Prayers prescribed in the Communion Book, was Prescribed
to be used only in Episcopal Churches or Chapels: and not Prescribed to be used
in other Congregations, either in England or America. And how hugely does this
Affair concern the mee^ HEALTH of Mr Whitefield's SOUL and the Reformation and
Correction of his Manners? Though this Omission, even in a Presbyterian
Congregation, is the chief Thing to be objected to this most labourious Brother
Minister; and for such an Omission chiefly or only, the Commissary has put Mr.
Whitefield to near Two Hundred Pounds Sterling Charge, which I suppose is near
Two Thousand Pounds Carolina Currency, to carry his Appeal to England, and
maintain it There.

And is not such a prodigious Expense as this a grievous Persecution? or is Mr.
Commissary so full of Humanity as to account it no Persecution at all? -- the
Crime so great, and the Fine so little! -- I said the Fine; For though strictly
speaking, it may not be called a Fine; it is in Reality Equally heavy on the
helpless Sufferer. And I do not see but it is in the Power of the Commissary
and the rest of his Brethren, to put Mr. Whitefield or any other Episcopalian,
offensive to them, to the like Expense even every Year, by forcing him to
Appeal to England till they utterly ruin him: and then he must lie down under
their Power. But as, alas, it is not One in a Hundred in the British Colonies
that can bear the Expense of Appealing to England; the Power of this
Commissarial Court in America, seems to be in effect, to the most, Supreme and
Sovereign. Or if the Commissaries should say -- You that are able, or have able
Friends to help you, need never put your selves or them to the ruinous Expense
of Appealing to England; This seems no more than to say, You had better lie
down and submit to us, as your Sovereign or Dernier Power And I see no Way for
the Episcopalians in the British Colonies to get rid of this Power, but either
by joining with the Presbyterians; or by lowly Submissions making Friends with
their COMMISSARIES; or by obtaining the Grace of the KING and PARLIAMENT to
allow of Appeals from the COMMISSARIAL Courts in America, to the CIVIL
JUDICATORIES in the several Colonies; where the People will not be afraid to be
severely Punished for Trifles; and where they will be apt to expect Humanity
and common Justice.

In the mean while, we congratulate Mr. Garden for taking such effectual Care
so soon to Prove -- That Mr Whitefield cries out for WANT of PERSECUTION; and
that South Carolina is no Persecuting Country for Religion; but that every Man
[even Mr. WHITEFIELD] may enjoy his own Way [even of Praying in a Presbyterian
Congregation without the Communion Book] in Peace and Safety; and if Mr.
Whitefield wants PERSECUTION, He must [alter all this,] even st^p into SPAIN or
PORTUGAL, to find it. For Mr. Garden's Commissarial Prosecution does not near
arise to his dear Doctor Sach^^^^^^s WHOLESOME SEVERITIES; i e. but wholesome
Medicines for the me^r HEALTH of the SOUL.

To be Corrected.
Page. Line. Read. 4 15 assected 9 6 Si^^eleth comes out, 20 13 DILIGENTLY 29
13 Good Works 36 10 Canorized

FINIS.

