THE Distinguishing Marks Of a Work of the SPIRIT of GOD.

Applied to that uncommon Operation that has lately appeared on the Minds of
many of the People of this Land:

With a particular Consideration of the extraordinary Circumstances with which
this Work is attended.

A DISCOURSE Delivered at New Haven, September 10th 1741. Being the Day after
the Commencement; And now Published at the earnest Desire of many Ministers and
other Gentlemen that heard it; with great Enlargements.

By Jonathan Edwards, A. M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST at Northampton.

With a Preface by the Rev. Mr. COOPER of Boston.

Joh 10. 4. 5 And the Sheep follow him, for they know his Voice; and a Stranger
will they not follow, but will flee from him, for they know not the Voice of
Strangers.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queen street, over
against the Prison. 1741.

TO THE READER.
THERE are several Dispensations, or Days of Grace, which the Church of God has
been under from the beginning of Time. There is that under the ancient
Patriarchs; that under the Law of Moses; and there is that of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ, under which we now are. This is the brightest Day that ever
shone, and exceeds the other for peculiar Advantages. To us who are so happy as
to live under the Evangelical Dispensation, may those Words of our Savior be
directed, which he spoke to his Disciples, when he was first setting up the
Messiah's Kingdom in the World, and Gospel Light and Power began to spread
abroad; Blessed are the Eyes which see the Things that ye see. For I tell you,
that many Prophets and Kings, have desired to see those Things which ye see,
and have not seen them; and to hear those Things which ye hear, and have not
heard them. Luke 10. 23, 24.


The Mosaic Dispensation, though darkened with Types and Figures, yet far exceeded
the former: But the Gospel Dispensation so much exceeds in Glory, that it does
eclipse the Glory of the Legal, as the Stars disappear when the Sun arises,
and goes forth in his Strength -- And the chief Thing that renders the Gospel
so glorious is, that it is the Ministration of the SPIRIT. Under the preaching
of it the Holy Spirit was to be poured out in more plentiful Measures; not only
in miraculous Gifts, as in the first Times of the Gospel; but in his internal
saving Operations, accompanying the outward Ministry, to produce numerous
Conversions to Christ, and give spiritual Life to Souls that were before dead
in Trespasses and Sins, and so prepare them for Life eternal. Thus the Apostle
speaks, when he runs a Comparison between the old Testament and the new, the
Law of Moses, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ; For the Letter kills, but the
Spirit gives Life. But if the Ministration of Death, written and engraven in
Stones was glorious, so that the Children of Israel could not steadfastly behold
the Face of Moses, for the Glory of his Countenance, which Glory was to be done
away; how shall not the Ministration of the Spirit be rather glorious? 2 Cor.
3. 6, 7, 8.


This blessed Time of the Gospel, has several other Denominations, which may
raise our Esteem and Value for it. It is called by the evangelical Prophet,
Isai. 61 2.
The acceptable Year of the Lord. Or, as it may be read, the Year of Liking, or
of Benevolence, or of the good Will of the Lord; because it would be the
special Period in which he would display his Grace and Favor in an
extraordinary Manner, and deal out spiritual Blessings with a full and liberal
Hand. -- It is also styled by our Savior, The Regeneration; Math. 19. 28.
which may refer not only to that glorious Restitution of all Things, which is
looked for at the Close of the Christian Dispensation, but to the renewing Work
of Grace in particular Souls, carried on from the Beginning to the End of it.

But few were renewed and sanctified under the former Dispensations, compared
with the Instances of the Grace of God in Gospel Times. Such Numbers were bro't
into the Gospel Church when it was first set up, as to give Occasion for that
pleasing admiring Question, which was indeed a Prophecy of it, Isai. 60. 8.
Who are these that fly as a Cloud? And as the Doves to their Windows? Then the
Power of the divine Spirit so accompanied the Ministry of the Word, as that
Thousands were converted under one Sermon. -- But notwithstanding this large
Effusion of the Spirit, when Gospel Light first dawned upon the World, and that
pleasant Spring of Religion which then appeared on the Face of the Earth, there
was a gradual Withdraw of his saving Light and Influences, and so the Gospel
came to be less sucessful, and the State of Christianity withered in one Place
and another.

Indeed at the Time of the Reformatiom from Popery, when Gospel Light broke in
upon the Church, and dispelled the Clouds of Antichristian Darkness that
covered it, the Power of divine Grace so accompanied the Preaching of the Word,
as that it had admirable Success in the Conversion and Edification of Souls,
and the blessed Fruits thereof appeared in the Hearts and Lives of it is
Professors. That was one of the Days of the Son of Man, on which the exalted
Redeemer, rode forth in his Glory and Majesty, on the white Horse of the pure
Gospel, conquering and to conquer; and the Bow in his Hand, like that of
Jonathan's, returned not empty. --

But what a dead and barren Time has it now been, for a great while, with all
the Churches of the Reformation? The golden Showers have been restrained; the
Influences of the Spirit suspended; and the Consequence has been, that the
Gospel has not had any eminent Success: Conversions have been rare and dubious;
few Sons and Daughters have been born to God; and the Hearts of Christians not
so quickened, warmed and refreshed under the Ordinances, as they have been.

That this has been the sad State of Religion among us in this Land for many
Years, (except one or two distinguished Places, who have at Times been visited
with a Shower of Mercy, while other Towns and Churches have not been rained
upon) will be acknowleg'd by all who have spiritual Senses exercised, as it has
been lamented by faithful Ministers, and serious Christians. Accordingly it has
been a constant Petition in our public Prayers from Sabbath to Sabbath, "That
God would pour out his Spirit upon us, and revive his Work in the midst of the
Years." And besides our annual Fast-Days appointed by the Government, most of
our Churches have set apart Days, wherein to seek the Lord by Prayer and
Fasting, that he would come and rain down Righteousness upon us.

And now, -- Behold! The Lord whom we have sought, has suddenly come to his
Temple. The Dispensation of Grace we are now under, is certainly such as
neither we nor our Fathers have seen; and in some Circumstances so wonderful,
that I believe there has not been the like since the extraordinary pouring out
of the Spirit immediately after our Lord's Ascension. The Apostolical Times
seem to have returned upon us: Such a Display has there been of the Power and
Grace of the divine Spirit in the Assemblies of his People, and such
Testimonies has he given to the Word of the Gospel. --

I remember a remarkable Passage of the late Reverend and Learned Mr. How,
which I think it may be worth while to transcribe here. It is in his Discourse
concerning the prosperous State of the Christian Church before the End of Time,
by a plentiful Effusion of the Holy Spirit, P. 80. In such a Time, says he,
when the Spirit shall be poured forth plentifully, sure Ministers shall have
their proportionable Share. And when such a Time as that shall come, I believe
you will hear much other Kind of Sermons, (or they will who shall live to such
a Time) than you are will not to do now a Days: Souls will surely be dealt withal
at another Kind of Rate. It is plain, says He, too sadly plain, There is a
great Retraction of the Spirit of God even from Us: We know not how to speak
living Sense into Souls; how to get within you: Our Words die in our Mouths, or
drop and die between you and us. We even faint when we speak; long experienced
Unsuccessfulness makes us despond: We speak not as Persons that hope to
prevail, that expect to make you serious, heavenly, mindful of God, and to walk
more like Christians. The Methods of alluring and convincing Souls, even that
some of us have known, are lost from amongst us in a great Part. There have
been other Ways taken, than we can tell now how to fall upon, for the
mollifying of the Obdurate, and the awakening of the Secure, and the convincing
and persuading of the Obstinate, and the winning of the Disaffected. Sure there
will be a large Share, that will come even to the Part of Ministers, when such
an Effusion of the Spirit shall be, as is expected: That they shall know how to
speak to better Purpose, with more Compassion, with more Seriousness, with more
Authority and Allurement, than we now find we can. Thus He.

Agreeable to the just Expectation of this great and excellent Man, we have
found it in this remarkable Day. A Number of Preachers have appeared among us,
to whom God has given such a large Measure of his Spirit, that we are ready
sometimes to apply to them the Character given of Barnabas, Acts. 11. 24.
That he was a good Man, and full of the Holy Ghost, and of Faith. They preach
the Gospel of the Grace of God from Place to Place, with uncommon Zeal and
Assiduity. -- The Doctrines they insist on, are the Doctrines of the
Reformation, under the Influence whereof the Power of Godliness so flourished
in the last Century. The Points on which their Preaching mainly turns, are
those important ones, of Man's Guilt, Corruption, and Impotence; Supernatural
Regeneration by the Spirit of God, and free Justification by Faith in the
Righteousness of Christ; and the Marks of the new Birth. -- The Manner of their
preaching is not with the enticing Words of Man's Wisdom: Howbeit, they speak
Wisdom among them that are perfect. An ardent Love to Christ and Souls, warms
their Breasts, and animates their Labors. God has made these his Ministers
active Spirits, a Flame of Fire in his Service: And his Word in their Mouths
has been as a Fire; and as a Hammer that breaks the Rock in Pieces. In most
Places where they have labored, God has evidently wrought with them, and
confirmed the Word by Signs following. Such a Power and Presence of God in
religious Assemblies, has not been known since God set up his Sanctuary amongst
us: He has indeed glorified the House of his Glory.

This Work is truly extraordinary in Respect of the Extent of it. It is more or
less in the several Provinces that measure many hundred Miles on this
Continent. He sends forth his Commandment upon Earth; his Word runs very
swiftly. It has entered and spread in some of the most populous Towns, the chief
Places of Concourse and Business. And, -- Blessed be God! -- It has visited the
Seats of Learning, both here, and in a neighboring Colony. O may the Holy
Spirit constantly reside in them both, seize our devoted Youth, and form them
as polished Shafts successfully to fight the Lord's Battles against the Powers
of Darkness, when they shall be called out to Service!

It is extraordinary also with Respect to the Numbers that have been the
Subjects of this Operation. Stupid Sinners have been awak'ned by Hundreds; And
the Inquiry has been general in some Places, What must I do to be saved? I
verily believe in this our Metropolis, there were the last Winter some
Thousands under such religious Impressions as they never felt before.

The Work has been remarkable also for the various Sorts of Persons that have
been under the Influence of it. -- These have been of all Ages. Some elderly
Persons have been snatched as Brands out of the burning, made Monuments of
divine Mercy, and born to God, though out of due Time; as the Apostle speaks in
his own Case. 1 Cor. 15. 8.
But here with us it has lain mostly amongst the Young. Sprightly Youth have
been made to bow like Willows to the Redeemer's Scepter, and willingly to
subscribe with their own Hands to the Lord. And out of the Mouths of Babes,
some little Children, has God ordained to himself Praise, to still the Enemy
and the Avenger. -- Of all Ranks and Degrees. Some of the great and rich; but
more of the low and poor -- Of other Countries and Nations. Ethiopia has
stretched out her Hand: Some poor Negroes have, I trust, been vindicated into
the glorious Liberty of the Children of God. -- Of all Qualities and
Conditions. The most ignorant; the foolish Things of the World, Babes in
Knowledge have been made wise unto Salvation, and taught those heavenly Truths,
which have been hid from the wise and prudent. Some of the learned and knowing
among Men, have had those Things revealed to them of the Father in Heaven,
which Flesh and Blood do not teach: And of these, some who had gone into the
modern Notions, and had no other than the polite Religion of the present Times,
have had their Prejudices conquered, their carnal Reasonings overcome, and
their Understandings made to bow to Gospel Mysteries; they now receive the
Truth as it is in Jesus, and their Faith no longer stands in the Wisdom of Man,
but in the Power of God. Some of the most rude and disorderly, are become
regular in their Behavior, and sober in all Things. The Gay and Airy, are
become grave and serious. Some of the greatest Sinners have appeared to be
turned into real Saints. Drunkards have become temperate: Fornicators and
Adulterers of a chaste Conversation; Swearers, and profane Persons, have learned
to fear that glorious and fearful Name, the Lord their God; and carnal
Worldlings have been made to seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness. Yea, Deriders and Scoffers at this Work and the Instruments of
it, have come under its conquering Power. Some of this Stamp, who have gone to
hear the Preacher, as some did Paul; What will this Babbler say? Have not been
able to resist the Power and the Spirit with which he spoke; have sat trembling
under the Word, and gone away from it weeping; and afterward did cleave unto
the Preacher, as Dionysius the Aropagite did unto Paul. Acts. 17. 18. 34.
compared.
Diverse Instances of this Kind, have fallen under my Knowledge. -- The virtuous
and civil have been convinced that Morality is not to be relied on for Life;
and so excited to seek after the new Birth, and a vital Union to Jesus Christ
by Faith. The formal Professor likewise has been awakened out of his dead
Formalities, and brought under the Power of Godliness; taken off from his false
Rests, and bro't to build his Hopes only on the Mediator's Righteousness. At
the same Time many of the Children of God have been greatly quickened and
refreshed; have been awakened out of the sleepy Frames they were fallen into,
and excited to give Diligence to make their Calling and Election sure; and have
had precious reviving and sealing Times. -- Thus extensive and general the
divine Influence has been, at this glorious Season.

One Thing more is worthy Remark; and this is the Uniformity of the Work. By
the Accounts I have received in Letters, and Conversation with Ministers and
Others who live in different Parts of the Land where this Work is going on, It
is the same Work that is carried on in one Place and another: The Method of the
Spirit's Operation on the Minds of People is the same; though with some Variety
of Circumstances as is usual at other Times: And the particular Appearances
with which this Work is attended, that have not been so common at other Times,
are also much the same. These are indeed objected by many against the Work: But
though Conversion is the same Work, in the main Strokes of it, wherever it is
wrought; yet it seems reasonable to suppose that at an extraordinary Season
wherein God is pleased to carry on a Work of his Grace in a more observable and
glorious Manner, in a Way which he would have to be taken Notice of by the
World; at such a Time, I say, It seems reasonable to suppose, There may be some
particular Appearances in the Work of Conversion, which are not common at other
Times, when yet there are true Conversions wrought; or some Circumstances
attending the Work may be carried to an unusual Degree and Height. If it were
not thus, the Work of the Lord would not be so much regarded and spoken of; and
so God would not have so much, of the Glory of it: nor would the Work it self
he like to spread so fast; for God has evidently made Use of Example and
Discourse in the carrying of it on.

And as to the Fruits of this Work, (which we have been bid so often to wait
for) Blessed be God! so far as there has been Time for Observation they appear
to be abiding. I don't mean, That none have lost their Impressions, or that
there are no Instances of Hypocrisy and Apostasy. Scripture and Experience lead
us to expect these at such a Season. It is to me Matter of Surprise and
Thankfulness that as yet there have been no more. But I mean, That a great
Number of those who have been awakened are still seeking and striving to enter
in at the strait Gate. The most of those who have been thought to be converted,
continue to give Evidences of their being new Creatures, and seem to cleave to
the Lord with full Purpose of Heart. To be sure a new Face of Things continues
in this Town; though many Circumstances concur to render such a Work not so
observable here, as in smaller and distant Places. Many Things not becoming the
Profession of the Gospel are in a Measure reformed. Taverns, Dancing-Schools,
and such Meetings as have been called Assemblies, which have always proved
unfriendly to serious Godliness, are much less frequented. Many have reduced
their Dress and Apparel, so as to make them look more like the Followers of the
humble Jesus. And it has been both surprising and pleasant to see how some
Younger People, and of that Sex too which is most fond of such Vanities, have
put off the Bravery of their Ornaments, as the Effect and Indication of their
seeking the inward Glories of the King's Daughter. Religion is now much more
the Subject of Conversation at Friends Houses, than ever I knew it. The
Doctrines of Grace are espoused and relished. Private religious Meetings are
greatly multiplied. -- The public Assemblies (especially Lectures) are much
better attended: And our Auditories were never so attentive and serious. There
is indeed an extraordinary Appetite after the sincere Milk of the Word.

It is more than a Twelve Month since an Evening-Lecture was set up in this
Town; there are now several; two constantly on Tuesday and Friday-Evenings;
when some of our most capacious Houses are well filled, with Hearers who by
their Looks and Deportment seem to come to hear that their Souls might live. An
Evening in God's Courts is now esteemed better than many elsewhere. There is
also great Resort to Ministers in private. Our Hands continue full of Work: And
many Times we have more than we can discourse with distinctly and seperately --.

I have been thus large and particular, that Persons at a Distance, who are
desirous to know the present State of Religion here, into whose Hands these
Papers will come, may receive some Satisfaction. --

And now, Can any be at a Loss to what Spirit to ascribe this Work? To
attribute it, as some do, to the Devil, is to make the old Serpent, like the
foolish Woman, who plucketh down her House with her Hands. Prove. ^4. 1.
Our Savior has taught us to argue otherwise in such a Case as this: Every
Kingdom divided against it self, is bro't to Desolation; and every City or
House divided against it self, shall not stand. And if Satan cast out Satan, he
is divided against himself: How then shall his Kingdom stand? Math. 12 25, 26.


That some entertain Prejudices against this Work, and others revile and
reproach it, does not make it look less like a Work of God: It would else want
one Mark of it is being so; for the Spirit of this World, and the Spirit which
is of God, are contrary the one to the other. I don't wonder that Satan rages,
and shows his Rage in some that are under his Influence, when his Kingdom is so
shaken, and his Subjects desert him by Hundreds, I hope by Thousands.

The Prejudices of some, I make no doubt, are owing to the Want of Opportunity
to be rightly informed, and their having received Misrepresentations from
abroad. Others may be offended because they have not experienced any Thing like
such a Work in themselves; and if these Things be so, they must begin again,
and get another Foundation laid than that on which they have built: And this is
what Men are hardly bro't to. And others, perhaps, may dislike the present
Work, because it supports and confirms some Principles which they have not yet
embraced, and against which such Prejudices hang about their Minds, as they
cannot easily shake off: For it is certain these Fruits do not grow on Arminian
Ground. I hope none dislike the Work because they have not been used as
Instruments in it: For if we love our Lord Jesus Christ in Sincerity, we shall
rejoice to see Him increase, though we should decrease.

If any are resolutely set to disbelieve this Work, to reproach and oppose it,
they must be left to the free sovereign Power and Mercy of God to enlighten and
rescue them. These, if they have had Opportunity to be rightly informed, I am
ready to think, would have been Disbelievers, and Opposers of the Miracles and
Mission of our Savior, had they lived in his Days. The Malignity which some of
them have discovered, to me approaches near to the unpardonable Sin; and they
had need beware lest they indeed sin the Sin which is unto Death: For as I
believe it can be committed in these Days as well as in the Days of the
Apostles, so I think Persons are now in more Danger of committing it than at
other Times. [I hope these Words have dropped from my Pen not in an untemperate
Zeal, but with due Caution, and some suitable Solemnity of Spirit] At least let
them come under the Awe of that Word, Psalm. 28. 5. Because they regard not the
Works of the Lord, nor the Operation of his Hands, he shall destroy them, and
not build them up.

But if any are disposed to receive Conviction, have a Mind open to Light, and
are really willing to know of the present Work whether it be of God, it is with
great Satisfaction and Pleasure I can recommend to them the following Sheets;
in which they will find the distinguishing Marks of such a Work, as they are to
be found in the Holy Scriptures, applied to the uncommon Operation that has
been on the Minds of many in this Land. Here the Matter is tried by the
infallible Touchstone of the holy Scriptures, and is weighed in the Balances
of the Sanctuary, with great Judgment and Impartiality.

A Performance of this Kind is seasonable and necessary; and I desire heartily
to bless God who inclined this his Servant to undertake it, and has graciously
assisted him in it. The Reverend Author is known to be a Scribe instructed unto
the Kingdom of Heaven; the Place where he has been called to exercise his
Ministry has been famous for experimental Religion; and he has had
Opportunities to observe this Work in many Places where it has powerfully
appeared, and to converse with Numbers that have been the Subjects of it: These
Things qualify him for this Undertaking above most. His Arguments in favor of
the Work, are strongly drawn from Scripture, Reason, and Experience: And I
believe every candid judicious Reader will say, he writes very free from an
Enthusiastic or a Party Spirit. The Use of human Learning is asserted; a
methodical Way of Preaching, the Fruit of Study as well as Prayer, is
recommended; and the Exercise of Charity in judging Others pressed and urged:
And those Things which are esteemed the Blemishes, and are like to be the
Hindrances of the Work, are with great Faithfulness cautioned and warned
against. -- Many I believe will be thankful for this Publication. Those who
have already entertained favorable Thoughts of this Work, will be confirmed by
it; and the Doubting may be convinced and satisfied. But if there are any who
cannot after all see the Signatures of a Divine Hand on the Work, it is to be
hoped they will be prevailed on to spare their Censures, and stop their
Oppositions, lest happily they should be found even to fight against God --

I had yet several Things to say, which I see I must suppress, or I shall go
much beyond the Limits of a Preface: And I fear I need to ask Pardon, both of
the Reader and the Publishers, for the Length I have run already. Only I cannot
help expressing my Wish, that those who have been conversant in this Work, in
one Place and another, would transmit Accounts of it to such a Hand as the
Reverend Author of this Discourse, to be compiled into a Narrative, like that
of the Conversions at Northhampton which was published a few Years ago: that so
the World may know this surprising Dispensation, in the Beginning, Progress,
and various Circumstances of it. This, I apprehend, would be for the Honor of
the HOLY SPIRIT, whose Work and Office has been treated so reproachfully in the
Christian World: It would be an open Attestation to the Divinity of a despised
Gospel: And it might have a happy Effect on other Places, where the Sound of
this mavelous Work would by this Means be heard. I cannot but think it would
be one of the most useful Pieces of Church History the People of God are
blessed with. Perhaps it would come the nearest to the Acts of the Apostles of
any Thing extant; and all the Histories in the World do not come up to that:
There we have something as surprising, as in the Book of Genesis; and a new
Creation, of another Kind, seems to open to our View. -- But I must forbear. --

I will only add my Prayer, That the worthy Author of this Discourse, may long
be continued a burning and shining Light in the Golden Candlestick where CHRIST
has placed him; and from thence diffuse his Light through these Provinces! That
the divine SPIRIT, whose Cause is here espoused, would accompany this, and the
other valuable Publications of his Servant, with his powerful Influences; that
they may promote the REDEEMER'S Interest, serve the Ends of vital Religion, and
so add to the Author's present Joy, and future Crown!

Boston, Nov. 20. 1741. W. Cooper.

The Marks of a Work of the true SPIRIT.
1 JOHN iv. 1. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether
they are of GOD; because many false Prophets are gone out into the World.
THE apostolical Age, or the Age in which the Apostles lived and preached the
Gospel, was an Age of the greatest out-pouring of the Spirit of God that ever
was; and that both as to the extraordinary Influences and Gifts of the Spirit,
in Inspiration and Miracles, and also as to his ordinary Operations, in
convincing, converting, enlightening and sanctifying the Souls of Men. But as
the Influences of the true Spirit abounded, so Counterfeits did also then
abound: The Devil was abundant in mimicking, both the ordinary and
extraordinary Influences of the Spirit of God, as is manifest by innumerable
Passages of the Apostles Writings. This made it very necessary that the Church
of Christ should be furnished with some certain Rules, and distinguishing and
clear Marks by which she might proceed safely in judging of Spirits, and
distinguish the true from the false, without Danger of being imposed upon. The
giving such Rules is the plain Design of this Chapter, where we have this
Matter more expressly and fully treated of than any where else in the Bible. The
Apostle here, of set Purpose, undertakes to supply the Church of God with such
Marks of the true Spirit as may be plain, and safe, and surely distinguishing,
and well accommodated to Use and Practice; and that the Subject might be
clearly and sufficiently handled, he insists upon it throughout the Chapter:
Which makes it wonderful that what is said in this Chapter, is no more taken
notice of in this extraordinary Day, when that which is so remarkable appears;
such an uncommon Operation on the Minds of People, that is so extensive; and
there is such a Variety of Opinions concerning it, and so much Talk about the
Work of the Spirit.

The Apostle is led to discourse on this Subject by an occasional Mention of
the indwelling of the Spirit, as the sure Evidence of an Interest in Christ, in
the last Verse of the foregoing Chapter. And he that keeps his Commandments
dwells in him, and he in him; and hereby we know that he abides in us, by
the Spirit which he has given us. Whence we may infer, That the Design of the
Apostle in this Chapter is not only to give Marks whereby to distinguish the
true Spirit from false in his extraordinary Gifts of Prophecy and Miracles, but
also in his ordinary Influences on the Minds of his People, in order to their
Union to Christ, and being built up in him; which is also manifest from the
Marks themselves that are given, which we shall hereafter take Notice of.

The Words of the Text are an Introduction to this Discourse, of the
distinguishing Signs of the true and false Spirit. Before the Apostle proceeds
to lay down these Signs, he exhorts the Christians he writes to, to Care in
this Matter. And, 1. Here is the Duty of trying the Spirits urged, with a
Caution annexed, against an over Credulouslness, and a Forwardness to admit
every Thing as the Mark of a true Spirit that has that Show or Pretext;
Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of
God. 2. The Necessity of this Duty is shown from this, That there were many
Counterfeits: because many false Prophets are gone out into the World. The
false Apostles, and false Prophets, that were in those Days, did not only
pretend to have the Spirit of God in his extraordinary Gifts of Inspiration,
but also to be the great Friends and Servents of Heaven, and to be eminently
holy Persons, and so to have much of the ordinary, saving, sanctifying
Influences of the Spirit of God on their Hearts; and we are to look upon these
Words as a Direction to examine and try their Pretenses to the Spirit of God,
in both these Respects.

After the Apostle had thus counseled and warned the Christians he wrote to,
with Respect to the Trial of Spirits, he immediately proceeds to give them
Rules, by which they may safely proceed in judging of every Thing that had the
Pretext of being either the ordinary or extraordinary Work of the Spirit of God.

My Design therefore at this Time is to show what are the true, certain, and
distinguishing Evidences of a Work of the Spirit of God, by which we may
proceed safely in judging of any Operation we find in our selves, or see in
others.

And here I would observe that we are to take the Scriptures as our Guide in
such Cases: This is the great and standing Rule which God has given to his
Church, to guide them in all Things relating to the great Concerns of their
Souls; and it is an infallible and sufficient Rule. There are undoubtedly
sufficient Marks given to guide the Church of God in this great Affair of
judging of Spirits, without which it would lie open to woeful Delusion, and
would be remedilesly exposed to be imposed on and devoured by its Enemies: And
what Rules soever we may find in the holy Scriptures to this end, we need not
be afraid to trust to. Doubtless that Spirit that indicted the Scriptures knew
how to give us good Rules, by which to distinguish his Operations from all that
is falsely pretended to be from him.

This, as I observed before, the Spirit of God has done of set purpose, in the
Chapter wherein is the Text; and done it more particularly and fully than any
where else: so that in my present Discourse, I shall go no where else for Rules
or Marks for the Trial of Spirits, but shall confine my self to those that I
find here.

But before I proceed particularly to speak to these, I would prepare my Way by
first observing negatively, in some Instances, What are not Signs that we are
to judge of a Work by, whether it be the Work of the Spirit of God or no; and
especially, what are no Evidences that a Work that is wrought amongst a People,
is not the Work of the Spirit of God.

1. Nothing can certainly be concluded from this, That the Work that appears is
carried on in a Way very unusual and extraordinary. It Is no Sign that a Work is
not the Work of the Spirit of God, that it is carried on in such a Way as the
same Spirit of God heretofore has not been wont to carry on his Work, provided
the Variety or Difference be such, as may still be comprehended within the
Limits of those Rules which the Scriptures have given to distinguish a Work of
the Spirit of God by. What we have been used to, or what the Church of God has
been used to, is not a Rule by which we are to judge whether a Work be the Work
of God, because there may be new and extraordinary Works of God. God has
heretofore wrought in an extraordinary Manner; he has brought those Things to
pass that have been new Things, strange Works; and has wrought in such a Manner
as to surprise both Men and Angels: And as God has done thus in Times past, so
we have no Reason to think but that he will do so still. The Prophecies of
Scripture give us Reason to think that God has still new Things to accomplish,
and Things to bring to pass that have never yet been seen. No Deviation from
what has hitherto been usual, let it be never so great, is an Argument that a
Work is not the Work of the Spirit of God, if it be no Deviation from the Rule
that God has given, to judge of a Work of his Spirit by. The Spirit of God is
sovereign in his Operations; and we know that he uses a great Variety; and we
cannot tell how great a Variety he may use, within the Compass of the Rules he
himself has fixed. We ought not to limit God where he has not limited himself.
If a Work be never so different from the Work of God's Spirit that has formerly
been, yet if it only agrees in those Things that the Word of God has given us
as the distinguishing Signs of a Work of his Spirit, that is sufficient to
determine us entirely in its Favor.

Therefore it is not reasonable to determine that a Work is not the Work of
God's Spirit, because of the extraordinary Degree in which the Minds of Persons
are influenced and wrought upon. If they seem to have an extraordinary
Conviction of the dreadful nature of Sin, and a very uncommon Sense of the
Misery of a Christless Condition, or seem to have extraordinary Views of the
certainty and glory of divine Things; and consequent on these Apprehensions,
are proportionably moved with very extraordinary Affections of Fear and Sorrow,
Desire, Love or Joy: Or if the Change that seems to be made in Persons, the
Alteration in their Affections and Frames, be very sudden, and the Work that is
wrought on People's Minds seems to be carried on with very unusual Swiftness,
and the Persons that are thus strangely affected are very many, and many of
them are very young; and also be very unusual in many other Circumstances, not
infringing upon Scripture Marks of a Work of the Spirit; these Things are no
Argument that the Work is not a Work of the Spirit of God.

The extraordinary and unusual Degree of Influence, and Power of Operation, if
in its Nature it be agreeable to the Rules and Marks given in the Scripture, is
rather an Argument in it is Favor; for by how much the higher Degree that is
in, which is in its Nature agreeable to the Rule, so much the more is there of
Conformity to the Rule, and so much the more evident and manifest is that
Conformity. When Things are in small Degrees, though they be really agreeable to
the Rule, yet the Nature of them is more difficultly discerned, and it is not so
easily seen whether it agrees with the Rule or no.

There is a great Aptness in Persons to doubt of Things that are Strange;
especially it is difficult for elderly Persons, those that have lived a great
while in the World, to think that to be right which they have been never used
to in their Day, and have not heard of in the Days of their Fathers. But if it
be a good Argument that a Work is not from the Spirit of God, that it is very
unusual, then it always was so, and was so in the Apostles Days. The Work of
the Spirit of God that was wrought then, was carried on in a Manner that, in
very many Respects, was altogether new: There were such Things then that the
Jews, then living, nor their Fathers, had never seen nor heard, yea such as
never had been since the World stood: The Work was then carried on with more
visible and remarkable Power than ever had been before; never were there seen
before such mighty and wonderful Effects of the Spirit of God, in such sudden
Changes, and such great Engagedness and Zeal in such Multitudes; such a great
and sudden Alteration in Towns, Cities and Countries; such a swift Progress,
and vast Extent of the Work; and many other extraordinary Circumstances might
be mentioned. The great Unusualness of the Work surprised the Jews; they knew
not what to make of it, but could not believe it to be the Work of God; many
looked upon the Persons that were the Subjects of it as bereft of Reason; as
you may see in Acts 2. 13. and 26. 24. and 1 Cor. 4. 10.

And we have Reason from Scripture Prophecy to suppose, That at the
Commencement of that last and greatest Out-pouring of the Spirit of God, that
is to be in the latter Ages of the World, the Manner of the Work will be very
extraordinary, and such as never has yet been seen; so that there shall be
Occasion then to say, as in Isai. 66. 8. Who has heard such a Thing? Who has
seen such Things? Shall the Earth be made to bring forth in one Day? Shall a
Nation be born at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her
Children. It may be reasonably expected that the extraordinary Manner of the
Work then, will bear some Proportion to the very extraordinary Events, and that
glorious Change in the State of the World, God will be about to bring to pass
by it.

2. A Work is not to be judged of by any Effects on the Bodies of Men; such as
Tears, Trembling, Groans, loud Outcries, Agonies of Body, or the failing of
bodily Strength. The Influence the Minds of Persons are under, is not to be
judged of one Way or the other, whether it be from the Spirit of God or no, by
such Effects on the Body; and the Reason is, Because the Scripture no where
gives us any such Rule. We cannot conclude that Persons are under the Influence
of the true Spirit, because we see such Effects upon their Bodies, because this
is not given as a Mark of the true Spirit: nor on the other Hand, (...) any
Reason to conclude, from any (...) Appearances, that Persons (...) that does,
either expre^^y or (...) Body; nor does Reason exclude them. It Is easily
accounted for from the Consideration of the Nature of divine and eternal
Things, and the Nature of Man, and the Laws of the Union between Soul and Body,
how a right Influence, a true and proper Sense of Things, should have such
Effects on the Body, even those that are of the most extraordinary Kind; such
as taking away the bodily Strength, or throwing the Body into great Agonies,
and extorting loud Outcries. There are none of us but what suppose, and would
have been ready at any Time to say it, That the Misery of Hell is doubtless so
dreadful, and Eternity so vast, that if a Person should have a clear
Apprehension of that Misery as it is, it would be more than his feeble Frame
could bear; and especially, if at the same Time he saw himself in great Danger
of it, and to be utterly uncertain whether he should be delivered from it, yea,
and to have no Security from it one Day or Hour. If we consider human Nature,
(...) need not wonder that when Persons have a very great Sense of that which
is so amazingly dreadful, and also have a great View of their own Wickedness
and God's Anger, that Things seem to them to fore-bode speedy and immediate
Destruction. We see the Nature of Man to be such, that when he is in Danger of
some Calamity that is very terrible to him, and that he looks upon himself
greatly exposed to, he is ready upon every Occasion to think that now it is
coming: As when Persons Hearts are full of Fear, in Time of War, looking upon
themselves eminently exposed; they are ready to tremble at the shaking of a
Leaf, and to expect the Enemy every Minute, and to say within themselves, now I
shall be slain. If we should suppose that a Person saw himself hanging over a
great Pit, full of fierce and glowing Flames, by a Thread that he knew to be
very weak, and not sufficient long to bear his Weight, and knew that Multitudes
had been in such Circumstances before, and that most of them had fallen and
perished; and saw nothing within Reach, that he could take hold of to save him;
What Distress would he be in? How ready to think that now the Thread was
breaking* now this Minute he should be swallowed up in these dreadful Flames?
And would not he be ready to cry out in such Circumstances? How much more those
that see themselves in this Manner hanging over an infinitely more dreadful
Pit, or held over it in the Hand of God, who at the same Time they see to be
exceedingly provoked? No wonder they are ready to expect every Moment when this
angry God will let them drop; and no Wonder they cry out of their Misery; and
no Wonder that the Wrath of God when manifested but a little to the Soul,
over-bears human Strength.

So it may be easily accounted for, that a true Sense of the glorious
Excellency of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of his wonderful dying Love, and the
Exercise of a truly spiritual Love and Joy, should be such as very much to over
come the bodily Strength. We are all ready to own that no Man can see God and
live; and that it is but a very small Part of that Apprehension of the Glory and
Love of Christ, and Exercise of Love to him and Joy in him, which the Saints in
Heaven are the Subjects of, that our present Frame can bear: Therefore it is not
at all strange that God should sometimes give his Saints such Fore-tastes of
Heaven, as to diminish their bodily Strength. If it was not unaccountable that
the Queen of Sheba fainted, and had her bodily Strength taken away, when she
came to see the Glory of Solomon, much less is it unaccountable that she who is
the Antitype of the Queen of Sheba, viz. the Church, that is brought as it
were from the utmost Ends of the Earth, from being an Alien and Stranger, far
off, in a State of Sin and Misery, should faint when she comes to see the Glory
of Christ, who is the Antitype of Solomon; and especially will be so in that
prosperous, peaceful, glorious Kingdom, which he will set up in the World in
it is latter Age.

Some object against such extraordinary Appearances, that we have no Instances
of 'em recorded in the New Testament, in the Time of the extraordinary
Effusions of the Spirit that were then. If this should be allowed, I can see no
Force in the Objection, if neither Reason, nor any Rule of Scripture excludes
such Things; especially considering what was observed under the foregoing
Particular. I don't know that we have any express mention in the New Testament
of any Person's weeping, or groaning, or sighing, through Fear of Hell, or a
Sense of God's Anger; but is there any Body so foolish as from hence to argue,
that in whomsoever these Things appear, their Convictions are not from the
Spirit of God? And the Reason why we don't argue thus is, Because these are
easily accounted for, from what we know of the Nature of Man, and from what the
Scriptures do inform us in general concerning the Nature of eternal Things, and
the Nature of the Convictions of God's Spirit; so that there is no need that
any Thing should be said in particular concerning these external,
circumstantial Effects. No Body supposes that there is any need of express
Scripture for every external, accidental Manifestation of the inward Motion of
the Mind: And though such Circumstances are not particularly recorded in sacred
History, yet there is a great deal of Reason to think, from the general
Accounts we have, that it could not be otherwise than that such Things must be
in those Days. And there is also Reason to think that that great Out-pouring of
the Spirit that then was, was not wholly without those more extraordinary
Effects on Persons Bodies. The Jailer in particular, seems to have been an
Instance of that Nature, when he, in the utmost Distress and Amazement, came
trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas: His falling down at that Time,
don't seem to be a designed putting himself into a Posture of Supplication, or
humble Address to Paul and Silas, for he seems not to have said any Thing to
'em then; but he first brought them out, and then he says to them, Sirs, what
must I do to be saved? Act. 16. 29, 30. But his falling down, seems to be from
the same Cause as his Trembling. The Psalmist gives an Account of his crying
out aloud, and a great weakening of his Body under Convictions of Conscience,
and a Sense of the Guilt of Sin, Psalm. 32. 3, 4. When I kept Silence my Bones
waxed old, through my roaring all the Day long; for Day and Night thy Hand was
heavy upon me, my Moisture is turned into the Drought of Summer. We may at
least argue so much from it, That such an Effect of Conviction of Sin, may well
in some Cases be supposed: for if we should suppose any Thing of an Auxesis in
the Expressions made use of, yet the Psalmist would not represent what was, by
that which would be absurd, and which no Degree of that Exercise of Mind he
spoke of, would have any Tendency to.

We read of the Disciples, Math. 14. 26, that when they saw Christ coming to
them in the Storm, and took him for some terrible Enemy, threatening their
Destruction in that Storm, they cried out for Fear: Why therefore should it be
thought strange, that Persons should cry out for Fear, when God appears to them
as their terrible Enemy, and they see themselves in great Danger of being
swallowed up in the bottomless Gulf of eternal Misery?

The Spouse once and again speaks of her self as overpowered with the Love of
Christ, so as to weaken her Body, and make her ready to faint. Cant. 2. 5. Stay
me with Flaggons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of Love. And Chap. 5.
8. I charge you, O ye Daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my Beloved, that ye
tell him that I am sick of Love. From whence we may at least argue, that such
an Effect may well be supposed to arise from such a Cause in the Saints in some
Cases, and that such an Effect will sometimes be seen in the Church of Christ.

It Is a weak Objection, That the Impressions that Enthusiasts are under, have
been will not to have a great Effect on their Bodies. That the Quakers used to
tremble, is no Argument that Saul, afterward Paul, and the Jailer, did not
tremble from real Convictions of Conscience. Indeed all such Objections from
Effects on the Body, let them be greater or less, seem to be exceeding
frivilous: they that argue from hence, are going in the Dark; they know not
what Ground they go upon, nor what Rule they go by. The Root and Cause of
Things is to be looked at, and the Nature of the Operations and Affections that
Persons Minds are under, are what are to be inquired into, and examined by the
Rule of God's Word, and not the Motions of the Blood and animal Spirits.

3. It Is no Argument that an Operation that appears on the Minds of a People,
is not the Work of the Spirit of God, That it occasions a great Ado, and a
great deal of Noise about Religion. For though true Religion be of a contrary
Nature to that of the Pharisees, that was ostentatious, and delighted to set it
self forth to the View of Men, for their Applause; yet such is human Nature,
that it is morally impossible that there should be a great Concern, and strong
Affection, and Engagedness of Mind amongst a People, that should be general,
and what most of them agree in, and yet there be but little said or done that
should be publicly observable; or that it should not cause a notable, visible,
and open Commotion and Alteration amongst that People.

Surely it is no Argument that the Minds of Persons are not under the Influence
of God's Spirit, that they are very much moved: for indeed spiritual and
eternal Things are so great, and of such vast and infinite Concern, that there
is a great Absurdity in Men's being but moderately moved and affected by them;
and it is no Argument that they are not moved by the Spirit of God, that they
are affected with these Things properly, and in some Measure, as they deserve,
or in some Proportion to their Importance. And when was there ever any such
Thing, (...) the World stood, as a People in general being greatly affected, in
any Affair whatsoever, without Noise or Stir? The Nature of Man will not allow
it.

Indeed Christ says, Luke 17. 20. The Kingdom of God comes not with
Observation. That is, it will not consist in what is outward and visible; it shall
not be like the Kingdoms of earthly Kings, set up with outward Pomp, in some
particular Place, which shall be especially the Royal City, and Seat of the
Kingdom; as Christ explains himself in the Words next following, Neither shall
they say, lo here, or lo there; for behold the Kingdom of God is within you.
Not that the Kingdom of God shall be set up in the World, on the Ruins of
Satan's Kingdom, without a very notable, observable, great Effect; a mighty
Change in the State of Things; to the Observation and Astonishment of the whole
World: For such an Effect as this is even held forth in the Prophecies of
Scripture, and is so by Christ himself, in this very Place, and even in his own
Explanation of those forementioned Words, ver. 24. For as the Lightning, that
lightneth out of one Part under Heaven, shines unto the other Part under
Heaven, so shall also the Son of Man be in his Day. This is to distinguish
Christ's coming to set up his Kingdom, from the coming of false Christ's, which
Christ tells us will be in a private Manner, in the Deserts, and in the secret
Chambers; whereas this Event of sitting up the Kingdom of God, should be open
and public, in the Sight of the whole World, with clear Manifestation, like
Lightning that cannot be hid, but glares in every ones Eyes, and shines from one
Side of Heaven to the other.

And we find that when Christ's Kingdom came, by that remarkable pouring out of
the Spirit in the Apostles Days, it occasioned a great Stir and Ado every
where. What a mighty Opposition was there in Jerusalem, on Occasion of that
great Effusion of the Spirit that was there? And so what a great Ado in
Samaria, Antioch, Ephesus, and Corinth, and other Places? The Affair filled the
World with Noise, and gave Occasion to some to say of the Apostles, that they
had turned the World upside down, Act. 17. 6.

4. It Is no Argument that an Operation that appears on the Minds of a People,
is not the Work of the Spirit of God, That many that are the Subjects of it,
have great Impressions on their Imaginations. That Persons have many
Impressions on their Imaginations, don't prove that they have nothing else. It
is easy to be accounted for, that there should be much of this Nature amongst a
People, where a great Multitude, of all Kinds of Constitutions, have their
Minds engaged with intense Thought and strong Affection about those Things that
are invisible; yea, it would be Strange if there should not. Such is our Nature
that we cannot think of Things invisible, without a Degree of Imagination. I
dare appeal to any Man, of the greatest Powers of Mind, Whether or no he is
able to fix his Thoughts on God or Christ, or the Things of another World,
without imaginary Ideas, attending his Meditations? And the more engaged the
Mind is, and the more intense the Contemplation and Affection, still the more
lively and strong will the imaginary Idea ordinarily be; especially when the
Contemplation and Affection of the Mind is attended with any Thing of Surprise;
as when the View a Person has is very new, and takes strong hold of the
Passions, either Fear or Joy; and when the Change of the State and Views of the
Mind is sudden, from a contrary Extreme, as from that which was extremely
dreadful, to that which is extremely ravishing and delightful: And it is no
Wonder that many Persons don't (...) distinguish between that which is
imaginary, and that which is intellectual and spiritual; and that they are apt
to lay too much Weight on the imaginary Part, and are most ready to speak of
that in the Account they give of their Experiences, especially Persons of less
Understanding and Capacity of Distinction.

As God has given us such a Faculty as the Imagination, and has so made us that
we cannot think of Things spiritual and invisible, without some Exercise of this
Faculty, so it appears to me that such is our State and Nature, that this
Faculty is really subservient and helpful to the other Faculties of the Mind,
when a proper Use is made of it; though oftentimes when the Imagination is too
strong, and the other Faculties weak, it over-bears 'em, and much disturbs them
in their Exercise. It appears to me manifest in many Instances I have been
acquainted with, that God has really made Use of this Faculty to truly divine
Purposes; especially in some that are more ignorant: God seems to condescend to
their Circumstances, and deal with them as Babes; as of old he instructed his
Church while in a State of Ignorance and Minority by Types and outward
Representations. I can see nothing unreasonable in such a Supposition. Let
others that have much Occasion to deal with Souls in spiritual Concerns, judge
whether Experience don't confirm it.

It is no Argument that a Work is not the Work of the Spirit of God, that some
that are the Subjects of it, have in some extraordinary Frames, been in a kind
of Ecstasy, wherein they have been carried beyond themselves, and have had their
Minds transported into a Train of strong and pleasing Imaginations, and kind of
Visions, as though they were wrapped up even to Heaven, and there saw glorious
Sights. I have been acquainted with some such Instances; and I see no Manner of
Need of bringing in the Help of the Devil into the Account that we give of
these Things; nor yet of supposing them to be of the same Nature with the
Visions of the Prophets, or St. Paul's Rapture into Paradise. Human Nature,
under these vehement and intense Exercises and Affections of Mind, which some
Persons are the Subjects of, is all that need be brought into the Account. If
it may well be accounted for, that Persons under a true Sense of the glorious
and wonderful Greatness and Excellency of divine Things, and Soul-ravishing
Views of the Beauty and Love of Christ, should have the Strength of Nature
overpowered, as I have already shown that it may; then I think it is not at
all strange, that amongst great Numbers that are thus affected and overborn,
there should be some Persons of particular Constitutions that should have their
Imaginations thus affected: When it is thus, the Effect is no other than what
bears a Proportion and Analogy to other Effects of the strong Exercise of their
Minds. It Is no Wonder that when the Thoughts are so fixed, and the Affections
so strong, and the whole Soul so engaged and ravished and swallowed up, that
all other Parts of the Body are so affected as to be deprived of their
Strength, and the whole Frame ready to dissolve; I say, it is no Wonder that in
such a Case, the Brain in particular, (especially in some Constitutions) which
is a Part of the Body which we know is nextly and most especially affected by
intense Contemplations and Exercises of Mind, should be overborn and affected,
so that it is Strength and Spirits should for a Season be diverted, and so taken
off from Impressions made on the Organs of external Sense, and wholly employed
in a Train of pleasing delightful Imaginations, such as the Frame the Mind is
then in disposes it to.

Some Persons are ready to interpret such Things wrong, and to lay too much
Weight on them, as though they were prophetical Visions, and to look upon what
they imagine they see or hear in them as divine Revelations, and sometimes
Significations from Heaven of what shall come to pass; which the Issue, in some
Instances I have known, has shown to be otherwise: But yet it appears to me
that such Things are evidently sometimes, from the Spirit of God, though
indirectly; that is, as that extraordinary Frame of Mind they are in, and that
strong and lively Sense of divine Things that is the Occasion of them, is from
his Spirit; and also as the Mind continues in it is holy Frame, and retains a
divine Sense of the Excellency of spiritual Things, even in it is Rapture: which
holy Frame and Sense is from the Spirit of God, though the Imaginations that
attend it are but accidental, and therefore there is commonly something or
other in them that is confused, improper and false.

5. It Is no Sign that a Work that appears, and is wrought on the Minds of
People, is not from the Spirit of God, That Example is made use of as a great
Means of it. It Is surely no Argument that an Effect is not from God, that Means
are made use of in producing it; for we know that it is God's Manner to make use
of Means in carrying on his Work in the World: and it is no more an Argument
against the Divinity of an Effect, that this Means is made use of, than if it
was by any other Means. It Is agreeable to Scripture that Persons should be
influenced by one another good Example: The Scripture directs us to set good
Examples to that End, Math. 5. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 1. 1 Timothy 4. 12. Tit. 2. 7. and
also directs us to be influenced by the good Examples that others set, and to
follow them, 2 Cor. 8. 1, -- 7. Heb. 6. 12. Phil. 3. 17. 1 Cor. 4. 16. and
Chap. 11. 1. 2 These. 3. 9. 1 These. 1. 7. By which it appears that Example is
one of God's Means; and certainly it is no Argument that a Work is not the Work
of God, that God's own Means are made Use of to effect it.

And as it is a scriptural Way of carrying on God's Work, to carry it on by
Example, so it is a reasonable Way. It Is no Argument that Men are not influenced
by Reason, that they are influenced by Example. This Way of Persons holding
forth Truth to one another, has a Tendency to enlighten the Mind, and to
convince Reason. None will deny but that for Persons to signify Things one to
another by Words, may rationally be supposed to tend to inlighten each others
Minds; but the same Things may be signified by Actions, and signified much more
fully and effectually. Words are of no Use any otherwise than as they convey
our own Ideas to others; but Actions, in some Cases, may do it much more fully.
There is a Language in Actions; and in some Cases, much more clear and
convincing than in Words.

It Is therefore no Argument against the Goodness of the Effect, that one
affects and stirs up another; or that Persons are greatly affected by seeing
others so; yea, though the Impression that is made upon them should be only by
seeing the Tokens of great and extraordinary Affection in others in their
Behavior, taking for granted what they are affected with, without hearing them
say one Word. There may be Language sufficient in such a Case in their
Behavior only, to convey their Minds to others, and to signify to them the
Sense of Things they have, more than can possibly be done by Words only. If a
Person should see another under some extreme bodily Torment, he might receive
much clearer Ideas, and more convincing Evidence what he suffered by his
Actions in his Misery, than he could do only by the Words of an unaffected
indifferent Relator. In like Manner he might receive a greater Idea of any
Thing that is excellent and very delightful, from the Behavior of one that is
in actual Enjoyment, or one that is sensible through Sight and Taste, than by the
dull Narration of one that is unexperienced and insensible himself. I desire
that this Matter may be examined by the strictest Reason.

And there is this Argument, that Effects that are produced in Persons Minds by
Example are rational, that it is manifest that not only weak and ignorant People
are much influenced by it, but nothing can be more evident to any one that
observes the World of Mankind, than that all sorts of Persons, wise and unwise,
and even those that make the greatest Boasts of Strength of Reason, are more
influenced by Reason held forth in this Way than almost any other Way.

Indeed when religious Affections are raised by this Means, it is as when
Persons affected in hearing the Word preached, or any other Means, the
Affections of many prove flashy, and soon vanish, as Christ represents of the
stony Ground Hearers; but the Affections of some that are thus moved by Example
are abiding, and prove to be of saving Issue.

There never yet was a Time of remarkable pouring out of the Spirit, and great
Revival of Religion, but that Example had a main Hand; so it was in the Time of
the Reformation, and so it evidently was in that great Out-pouring of the
Spirit that was in the Apostles Days, in Jerusalem, and Samaria, and Ephesus,
and other Parts of the World, as will be most manifest to any one that attends
to the Accounts we have in the Acts of the Apostles: As in those Days one
Person was moved by another, so one City or Town was influenced by the Example
of another, 1 These. 1. 7, 8. So that ye were Ensamples to all that believe in
Macedonia, and Achaia; for from you founded out the Word of the Lord, not only
in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every Place your Faith to Godward is
spread abroad.

It Is no valid Objection against Examples being made so much use of, that the
Scripture speaks of the Word of God as the principal Means of carrying on God's
Work; for the Word of God is the principal Means nevertheless, as that is the
Means by which other Means operate, and are made effectual: The Sacraments have
no Effect but by the Word. And so it is that Example becomes effectual; for all
that is visible to the Eye is unintelligible and vain, without the Word of God
to instruct and guide the Mind: It Is the Word of God that is indeed held forth
and applied by Example, as the Word of the Lord founded forth to other Towns in
Macedonia and Achaia, by the Example of those that believed in Thessalonica.

That Example should be a great Means of propagating the Church of God seems to
be several Ways signified in Scripture: It is signified by Ruth's following
Naomi out of the Land of Moab, into the Land of Israel, when she resolved that
she would not leave her; but would go whether she went, and would lodge where
she lodged; and that Naomi' s People should be her People, and Naomi' s God her
God. Ruth who was the Mother of David and of Christ, was undoubtedly a great
Type of the Church; upon which Account her History is inserted in the Canon of
the Scripture: In her leaving the Land of Moab and it is Gods, to come and put
her Trust under the Shadow of the Wings of the God of Israel, we have a Type,
not only of the Conversion of the Gentile Church, but the Conversion of every
Sinner, that is naturally an Alien and Stranger, but in his Conversion forgets
his own People, and Father's House, and is made nigh, and becomes a
Fellow-Citizen with the Saints, and a true Israelite. The same seems to be
signified in the Effect the Example of the Spouse, when she was sick of Love,
has on the Daughters of Jerusalem, i. e. visible Christians, who are
represented as being first awakened by seeing the Spouse in such extraordinary
Circumstances, and then converted. See Cant. 5. 8, 9. and 6. 1. And this is
undoubtedly one Way that the Spirit and the Bride says, come, Rev. 22. 17. i.e.
the Spirit in the Bride. It Is foretold, that the Work of God should be carried
on very much by this Means, in the last great Out-pouring of the Spirit, that
should introduce the glorious Day of the Church, so often spoken of in
Scripture. Zech. 8. 21, 22, 23. And the Inhabitants of one City, shall go to
another, saying, let us go speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the
Lord of Hosts; I will go also. Yea many People, and strong Nations shall come
to seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord. Thus says
the Lord of Hosts, in those Days it shall come to pass, that ten Men shall take
hold, out of all Languages of the Nations, even shall take hold of the Skirt of
him that is a Jew, saying, we will go with you, for we have heard that God is
with you.

6. It Is no Sign that a Work that is wrought amongst a People is not from the
Spirit of God, That many that seem to be the Subjects of it, are guilty of
great Imprudences and Irregularities in their Conduct. We are to consider that
the End for which God pours out his Spirit, is to make Men holy, and not to
make them Politicians. It Is no Wonder at all, that in a mixed Multitude of all
sorts, wise and unwise, young and old, of weak and strong natural Abilities,
that are under strong Impressions of Mind, there are many that behave
themselves imprudently. There are but few that know how to conduct them under
vehement Affections of any Kind, whether they be of a temporal or spiritual
Nature: to do so requires a great deal of Discretion, and strength and
steadiness of Mind. A thousand Imprudences will not prove a Work not to be the
Work of the Spirit of God; yea if there be not only Imprudences, but many
Things prevailing that are irregular, and really contrary to the Rules of God's
holy Word. That it should be thus may be well accounted for from the exceeding
Weakness of human Nature, together with the remaining Darkness and Corruption
of those that are yet the Subjects of the saving Influences of God's Spirit,
and have a real Zeal for God.

We have a remarkable Instance in the New Testament, of a People that partook
largely of that great Effusion of the Spirit there was in the Apostles Days,
among whom, there nevertheless abounded Imprudences and great Irregularities;
and that is the Church of the Corinthians. There is scarce any Church more
celebrated in the New Testament for being blessed with large Measures of the
Spirit of God, both in his ordinary Influences, in convincing and converting
Sinners, and also in his extraordinary and miraculous Gifts; yet what manifold
Imprudences, and great and sinful Irregularities, and strange Confusion did
they run into, at the Lord's Supper, and in the Exercise of Church Discipline,
and their indecent Manner of attending other Parts of public Worship, and in
Jarring and Contention about their Teachers, and even in the Exercise of their
extraordinary Gifts of Prophecy, speaking with Tongues, and the like, wherein
they spoke and acted by the immediate Inspiration of the Spirit of God?

And if we see great Imprudences, and even sinful Irregularities in some that
are improved as great Instruments to carry on the Work, it will not prove it not
to be the Work of God. The Apostle Peter himself, that was a great and
eminently holy and inspired Apostle, and one of the chief Instruments of
setting up the Christian Church in the World, and one of the Chief of the
Apostles, when he was actually engaged in this Work, was guilty of a great and
sinful Error in his Conduct; of which the Apostle Paul speaks, Gal. 2. 11, 12,
13. But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the Face, because he
was to be blamed; for before that certain came from James, he did eat with the
Gentiles, but when they were come, he withdrew, and separated himself, fearing
them that were of the Circumcision; and the other Jews dissembled likewise with
him; insomuch that Barnabas also was carried away with their Dissimulation. If
the great Pillar of the Christian Church, and he who was one of the Chief of
those that are the very Foundations on which, next to Christ, the whole Church
is said to be built, was guilty of such an Irregularity; is it any Wonder if
other lesser Instruments, that have not that extraordinary Conduct of the
divine Spirit that he had, should be guilty of many Irregularities?

And here in particular, it is no Evidence that a Work is not the Work of God,
if many that are the Subjects of it, or are improved as Instruments to carry it
on, are guilty of too great a forwardness to censure others as Unconverted,
through Mistakes they have embraced concerning the Marks by which they are to
judge of others Hypocrisy and Carnality; either not duly apprehending the
Latitude the Spirit of God uses in the Methods of his Operations, or for want
of making due Allowance for that Infirmity and Corruption that may be left in
the Hearts of the Saints; as well as through want of a due Sense of their own
Blindness and Weakness, and remaining Corruption, whereby spiritual Pride may
have a secret Vent, this Way, under some Disguise, and not be discovered.

If we allow that truly pious Men may have a great deal of remaining Blindness
and Corruption, and may be liable to Mistakes about the Marks of Hypocrisy, as
undoubtedly all will allow; then it is not unaccountable that they should
sometimes run into such Errors as these: It Is as easy, and upon some Accounts,
more easy to be accounted for, why the remaining Corruption of good Men should
sometimes have an unobserved Vent this Way, then most other Ways, (though it be
exceeding unhappy,) and without Doubt many holy Men have erred this Way.

Luke warmness in Religion is abominable, and Zeal an excellent Grace; yet
above all other Christian Virtues, it need to be strictly watched and searched;
for it is that with which Corruption, and particularly Pride and human Passion,
is exceeding apt to mix unobserved. And it is observable that there never was a
Time of great Reformation, to cause a Revival of much of a Spirit of Zeal in
the Church of God, but that it has been attended in some notable Instances,
with Irregularity, running out some Way or other into an undue Severity. Thus
in the Apostles Days, a great deal of Zeal was spent about unclean Meats, with
heat of Spirit in Christians one against another, both Parties condemning and
censuring one another, as not true Christians; when the Apostle had Charity for
both, as influenced by a Spirit of real Piety: He that eats, says he, to the
Lord he eats, and gives God Thanks; and he that eats not, to the Lord he
eats not, and given God Thanks. So in the Church of Corinth, they had got
into a Way of extolling some Ministers, and censuring others, and were puffed
up for one against another: but yet these Things were no Sign that the Work
that was then so wonderfully carried on, was not the Work of God. And after
this, when Religion was still greatly flourishing in the World, and a Spirit of
eminent Holiness and Zeal prevailed in the Christian Church, the Zeal of
Christians run out into a very improper and undue Severity, in the Exercise of
Church Discipline toward Delinquents; in some Cases they would by no Means
admit them into their Charity and Communion, though they appeared never so humble
and penitent. And in the Days of Constantine the Great, the Zeal of Christians
against Heathenism, run out into a Degree of Persecution. So in that glorious
Revival of Religion, in the Time of the Reformation, Zeal in many Instances
appeared in a very improper Severity, and even a Degree of Persecution; (...)
in some of the most eminent Reformers; as in the great Calvin in particular:
and many in those Days of the flourishing of vital Religion, were guilty of
severely censuring others that differed from them in Opinion in some Points of
Divinity.

7. Nor are many Errors in Judgment, and some Delusions of Satan intermixed
with the Work, any Argument that the Work in general is not the Work of the
Spirit of God. However great a pouring out of the Spirit there may be, it is not
to be expected that the Spirit of God should be given now in the same Manner
that it was to the Apostles, infallibly to guide them in Points of Christian
Doctrine, so that what they taught might be relied on as a Rule to the
Christian Church. And if many Delusions of Satan appear at the same Time that a
great religious Concern prevails, it is not an Argument that the Work in
general is not the Work of God, any more than it was an Argument in Egypt that
there were no true Miracles wro't there, by the Hand of God, because Jannes and
Jambres wrought false Miracles at the same Time by the Hand of the Devil. Yea
the same Persons may be the Subjects of much of the Influences of the Spirit of
God, and yet in some Things be led away by the Delusions of the Devil; and this
be no more of a Paradox than many other Things that are true of real Saints, in
the present State, where Grace dwells with so much Corruption, and the new Man
and the old Man subsist together in the same Person; and the Kingdom of God and
the Kingdom of the Devil remain for a while together in the same Heart. Many
godly Persons have undoubtedly in this and other Ages, exposed themselves to
woeful Delusions, by an Aptness to lay too much Weight on Impulses and
Impressions, as if they were immediate Revelations from God, to signify
something future, or to direct them where to go and what to do.

8. If some such as were thought to be wrought upon, fall away into gross
Errors or scandalous Practices, it is no Argument that the Work in general is
not the Work of the Spirit of God. That there are some Counterfeits, is no
Argument that nothing is true: such Things are always expected in a Time of
Reformation. If we look into Church History, we shall find no Instance of great
Revival of Religion, but what has been attended with many such Things:
Instances of this Nature in the Apostles Days were innumerable, both of those
that fell away into gross Heresies, and also vile Practices; that yet seemed to
be the Subjects of that Work of the Spirit of God that was then, and were
accepted for a while amongst those that were truly so, as their Brethren, and
some of their Company, and were not suspected not to be of them, till they went
out from them: And they were not only private Christians, but Teachers and
Officers, and eminent Persons in the Christian Church; and some that God had
endowed with miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost; as appears by the Beginning of
the 6 Chapter of Hebrews. An Instance of these was Judas, who was one of the
twelve Apostles, and had long been constantly united to, and intimately
conversant with a Company of truly experienced Disciples, without being
discovered or suspected, 'till he discovered himself by his scandalous
Practice; and had been treated by Jesus himself, in all external Things, as if
he had truly been a Disciple, even to the investing him with the Character of
Apostle, and sending him forth to preach the Gospel, and induing him with
miraculous Gifts of the Spirit: for though Christ knew him, yet he did not then
cloth himself with the Character of Omniscient Judge, and Searcher of Hearts,
but acted the Part of a Minister of the visible Church of God, (for he was his
Father's Minister;) and therefore rejected him not, 'till he had discovered
himself by his scandalous Practice; thereby giving an Example to other Guides
and Rulers of the visible Church, not to take it upon them to act the Part of
Searcher of Hearts, but to be influenced in their Administrations by what is
visible and open.

There were some Instances then of such Apostates, not only in some that for a
while were thought true Christians, but some that were esteemed eminently full
of the Grace of God's Spirit: An Instance of this Nature was Nicolas, one of
the seven Deacons; who was looked upon by the Christians in Jerusalem, in the
Time of that extraordinary pouring out of the Spirit, as a Man full of the Holy
Ghost, and was chosen out of the Multitude of Christians to that Office, for
that Reason; as you may see in Acts 6. 3, 5. yet he afterward fell away, and
became the Head of a Set of vile Heretics, of gross Practices, called from his
Name the Sect of the Nicolaitans, Rev. 2. 6, and 15.

So in the Time of the Reformation from Popery* how great was the Number of
those that for a while seemed to join with the Reformers, that fell away into
the grossest and most absurd Errors, and abominable Practices.

And it is particularly observable that in Times of great pouring out of the
Spirit to revive Religion in the World, a Number of those that for a while
seemed to partake in it, have fallen off into whimsical and extravagant Errors,
and gross Enthusiasm, boasting of high Degrees of Spirituality and Perfection,
censuring and condemning others as Carnal. Thus it was with the Gnostics in
the Apostles Times; and thus it was with the several Sects of Anabaptists in
the Time of the Reformation, as Anthony Burgess observes, in his Book called
Spiritual Refining, Part I. Sermon. 23. P. 132. The first worthy Reformers, and
glorious Instruments of God found a bitter Conflict herein, so that they were
exercised not only with Formalists, and traditionary Papists on the one Side,
but Men that pretended themselves to be more enlightened than the Reformers
were, on the other Side: Hence they called those that did adhere to the
Scripture, and would try Revelations by it, Literists, and Vowelists, as Men
acquainted with the Words and Vowels of the Scripture, having nothing of the
Spirit of God: And wheresoever, in any Town, the true Doctrine of the Gospel
brake forth to the displacing of Popery, presently such Opinions arose, like
Tares that came up among the good Wheat; whereby great Divisions were raised,
and the Reformation made abominable and odious to the World; as if that had
been the Sun to give Heat and Warmth to those Worms and Serpents to crawl out
of the Ground. Hence they inveighed against Luther, and said he had only
promulged a carnal Gospel. Some of the Leaders of those wild Enthusiasts, had
been for a while, highly esteemed by the first Reformers, and peculiarly dear
to them.

So in England at the Time when vital Religion did much prevail in the Days of
King Charles 1. the Interregnum, and Oliver Cromwell, such Things as these
abounded. And so in the beginning of New England, in her purest Days, when
vital Piety flourished, such Kind of Things as these broke out. Therefore the
Devil's sowing such Tares is no Proof that a true Work of the Spirit of God is
not gloriously carried on.

9. It Is no Argument that a Work is not from the Spirit of God, That it seems
to be promoted by Ministers insisting very much on the Terrors of God's holy
Law, and that with a great deal of Pathos and Earnestness. If there be really a
Hell of such dreadful, and never ending Torments, as is generally supposed,
that Multitudes are in great Danger of, and that the bigger Part of Men in
Christian Countries do actually from Generation to Generation fall into, for
want of a Sense of the Terribleness of it, and their Danger of it, and so for
want of taking due Care to avoid it; then why is it not proper for those that
have the Care of Souls, to take great Pains to make Men sensible of it? Why
should not they be told as much of the Truth as can be? If I am in Danger of
going to Hell, I should be glad to know as much as possibly I can of the
Dreadfulness of it: If I am very prone to neglect due Care to avoid it, he does
me the best Kindness, that does most to represent to me the Truth of the Case,
that sets forth my Misery and Danger in the liveliest Manner.

I appeal to every one in this Congregation, whether this is not the very
Course they would take in Case of Exposedness to any great temporal Calamity?
If any of you that are Heads of Families, saw one of your Children in an House
that was all on Fire over it is Head, and in eminent Danger of being soon
consumed in the Flames, that seemed to be very insensible of it is Danger, and
neglected to escape, after you had often spoke to it, and called to it, would
you go on to speak to it only in a cold and indifferent Manner? Would not you
cry aloud, and call earnestly to it, and represent the Danger it was in, and
it is own Folly in delaying, in the most lively Manner you was capable of? Would
not Nature itself teach this, and oblige you to it? If you should continue to
speak to it only in a cold Manner, as you are will not to do in ordinary
Conversation about indifferent Matters, would not those about you begin to
think you were bereft of Reason your self? This is not the Way of Mankind, nor
the Way of any one Person in this Congregation, in temporal Affairs of great
Moment, that require earnest Heed and great Haste, and about which they are
greatly concerned, to speak to others of their Danger, and warn them but a
little; and when they do it at all, do it in a cold indifferent Manner: Nature
teaches Men otherwise. If we that have the Care of Souls, knew what Hell was,
had seen the State of the Damned, or by any other Means, become sensible how
dreadful their Case was; and at the same Time knew that the bigger Part of Men
went thither; and saw our Hearers in eminent Danger, and that they were not
sensible of their Danger, and so after being often warned neglected to escape,
it would be morally impossible for us to avoid abundantly and most earnestly
setting before them the Dreadfulness of that Misery they were in Danger of, and
their great Exposedness to it, and Warning them to fly from it, and even to cry
aloud to them.

When Ministers preach of Hell, and warn Sinners to avoid it, in a cold Manner,
though they may say in Words that it is infinitely terrible; yet (if we look on
Language as a Communication of our Minds to others) they contradict themselves;
for Actions, as I observed before, have a Language to convey our Minds, as well
as Words; and at the same Time that such a Preacher's Words represent the
Sinner's State as infinitely dreadful, his Behavior and Manner of speaking
contradict it, and show that the Preacher don't think so; so that he defeats
his own Purpose; for the Language of his Actions, in such a Case, is much more
effectual than the bare Signification of his Words.

Not that I think that the Law only should be preached: Ministers may preach
other Things too little. The Gospel is to be preached as well as the Law, and
the Law is to be preached only to make Way for the Gospel, and in order to an
effectual preaching of that; for the main Work of Ministers of the Gospel is to
preach the Gospel: it is the End of the Law; Christ is the End of the Law for
Righteousness: So that a Minister would miss it very much if he should insist
so much on the Terrors of the Law, as to forget his End, and neglect to preach
the Gospel; but yet the Law is very much to be insisted on, and the preaching
of the Gospel is like to be in vain without it.

And certainly such Earnestness and Affection in speaking is beautiful, as
becomes the Nature and Importance of the Subject. Not but that there may be
such a Thing as an indecent Boisterousness in a Preacher, that is something
besides what naturally arises from the Nature of his Subject, and in which the
Matter and Manner don't well agree together.

Some talk of it as an unreasonable Thing to think to fright Persons to Heaven;
but I think it is a reasonable Thing to endeavor to fright Persons away from
Hell, that stand upon the Brink of it, and are just ready to fall into it, and
are senseless of their Danger: it is a reasonable Thing to fright a Person out
of an House on Fire. The Word Fright is commonly used for sudden causless Fear,
or groundless Surprise; but surely a just Fear, that there is good Reason for,
though it be very great, is not to be spoken against under any such Name.

Having thus shown, in some Instances, what are not Evidences that a Work that
is wrought among a People, is not a Work of the Spirit of God,

I now proceed in the Second Place, as was proposed, to show positively, What
are the sure, distinguishing, Scripture Evidences and Marks of a Work of the
Spirit of God, by which we may proceed in judging of any Operation we find in
our selves, or see among a People, without Danger of being misled.

And in this, as I said before, I shall confine my self wholly to those Marks
which are given us by the Apostle in the Chapter wherein is my Text, where this
Matter is particularly handled, and more plainly and fully than any where else
in the Bible. And in speaking to these Marks, I shall take them in the Order in
which I find them in the Chapter.

1. When that Spirit that is at work amongst a People is observed to operate
after such a Manner, as to raise their Esteem of that Jesus that was born of
the Virgin, and was crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem; and seems more to
confirm and establish their Minds in the Truth of what the Gospel declares to
us of his being the Son of God, and the Savior of Men; it is a sure Sign that
that Spirit is the Spirit of God. This Sign the Apostle gives us in the 2d and
3d Verses thereby know ye the Spirit of God; every Spirit that confesses that
Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is of God; and every Spirit that confesses
not that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is not of God. This implies a
confessing, not only that there was such a Person that appeared in Palestine,
and did and suffered those Things that are recorded of him, but that that
Person was CHRIST, i. e. the Son of God, the Anointed of God to be Lord and
Savior, as the Name Jesus Christ implies. That thus much is implied in the
Apostle's Meaning, is confirmed by the 15th Verse, where the Apostle is still
on the same Subject of Signs of the true Spirit, Whosoever shall confess that
Jesus is the Son of God, God dwells in him, and he in God.

And it is to be observed that the Word confess, as it is often used in the New
Testament, signifies more than merely allowing: It implies an establishing and
confirming a Thing by Testimony, and declaring it with manifestation of Esteem
and Affection: so Math. 10. 32. Whosoever therefore shall confess me before
Men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in Heaven. Romans 15. 9. I
will confess to (...) among the Gentiles, and sing unto thy N^^e. And Phil. 2.
11. That every Tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of
God the Father. And that this is the Force of the Expression, as the Apostle
John uses it in this Place, is confirmed by that other Place in the same
Epistle, in the next Chapter, at the first Verse, Whosoever believes that
Jesus is the Christ, is born of God; and every one that loves him that begat,
loves him also that is begotten of him. And by that parallel Place of the
Apostle Paul, where we have the same Rule given to distinguish the true Spirit
from all Counterfeits, 1 Cor. 12. 3. Wherefore I give you to understand, that
no Man speaking by the Spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed, (or will show an
ill or mean Esteem of him) and that no Man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but
by the Holy Ghost.

So that if the Spirit that is at work among a People, is plainly observed to
work after that Manner, as to convince them of Christ, and lead them to Christ;
more to confirm their Minds in the Belief of the Story of Christ, as he
appeared in the Flesh, and that he is the Son of God, and was sent of God to
save Sinners, and that he is the only Savior, and that they stand in great
need of him; and seems to beget in them higher and more honorable Thoughts of
him than they used to have, and to incline their Affections more to him; it is
a sure Sign that it is the true and right Spirit; and that whether we can
determine whether that Conviction and Affection be in that Manner, or to that
Degree, as to be saving or no.

But the Words of the Apostle are remarkable; The Person that the Spirit gives
Testimony to and to whom he raises their Esteem and Respect, must be that Jesus
that appeared in the Flesh, and not another Christ in his Stead; not any
mystical, fantastical Christ; such as the Light within, which the Spirit of the
Quakers extols, while it diminishes their Esteem of, and Dependence upon an
outward Christ, or Jesus as he came in the Flesh, and leads them off from him;
but the Spirit that gives Testimony for that Jesus, and leads to Him, can be no
other than the Spirit of God.

The Devil has the most bitter and implacable Enmity against that Person,
especially in his Character of the Savior of Men; he mortally hates the Story
and Doctrine of his Redemption; he never would go about to beget in Men more
honorable Thoughts of him, and so to incline them more to fear him, and lay
greater Weight on his Instructions and Commands. The Spirit that inclines Men's
Hearts to the Seed of the Woman, is not the Spirit of the Serpent, that has
such an irreconcilable Enmity against him. He that heightens Men's Esteem of
the glorious Michael, that Prince of the Angels, is not the Spirit of the
Dragon that is at War with him.

2. When the Spirit that is at work operates against the Interest of Satan's
Kingdom, which lies in encouraging and establishing Sin, and cherishing Men's
worldly Lusts; this is a sure Sign that it is a true, and not a false Spirit.
This Sign we have given us in the 4th and 5th Verses. Ye are of God, little
Children, and have overcome them; because greater is he that is in you, than he
that is in the World. They are of the World, therefore speak they of the World,
and the World hears them. Here is a plain Antithesis: It Is evident that the
Apostle is still comparing those that are influenced by the two opposite Kinds
of Spirits, the true and the false, and showing the Difference; the one are of
God, and overcome the Spirit of the World; the other are of the World, and
speak and savor the Things of the World. The Spirit of the Devil is here
called, He that is in the World. Christ says, My Kingdom is not of this World.
But it is otherwise with Satan's Kingdom; he is the God of this World.

What the Apostle means by the World, or the Things that are of the World, we
learn by his own Words, in the 2d Chapter of this Epistle 15th and 16th Verses.
Love not the World, neither the Things that are in the World: If any Man love
the World, the Love of the Father is not in him: For all that is in the World,
the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, is not
of the Father, but is of the World. So that by the World, the Apostle evidently
means every Thing that appertains to the Interest of Sin, and comprehends all
the Corruptions and Lusts of Men, and all those Acts and Objects by which they
are gratified. In these Things lies the Interest of his Kingdom, who is the
Spirit that is in the World, and is the God of the World.

So that we may safely determine, from what the Apostle says, that the Spirit
that is at work amongst a People, that is observed to work after such a Manner,
as to lessen Men's Esteem of the Pleasures, Profits and Honors of the World,
and to take off their Hearts from an eager Pursuit after these Things; and to
engage them in a deep Concern about a future and eternal Happiness in that
invisible World, that the Gospel reveals; and puts them upon earnest seeking
the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness; and convinces them of the
Dreadfulness of Sin, the Guilt that it brings, and the Misery that it exposes
to: I say, the Spirit that operates after such a Manner, must needs be the
Spirit of God.

It is not to be supposed that Satan would go about to convince Men of Sin, and
awaken the Conscience; it can no Way serve his End, to make that Candle of the
Lord shine the brighter, and to open the Mouth of that Vicegerent of God in the
Soul: It is for his Interest, whatever he does, to lull Conscience asleep, and
keep that quiet; to have that, with it is Eyes and Mouth open in the Soul, will
tend to clog and hinder all his Designs of Darkness, and ever more to be
disturbing his Affairs, and crossing his Interest in the Soul, and disquieting
him, so that he can manage nothing to his Mind without Molestation. Would the
Devil when he is about to establish Men in a Way and State of Sin, take such a
Course, in the first Place to enlighten and awaken the Conscience to see the
Dreadfulness of Sin, and make them exceedingly afraid of Sin, and sensible of
their Misery by Reason of their past Sins, and their great Need of Deliverance
from the Guilt of them, and more careful, inquisitive and watchful to discern
what is sinful; and to avoid future Sins; and so more afraid of the Devil's
Temptations, and careful to guard against them? What do those Men do with their
Reason, that suppose that the Spirit that operates thus, is the Spirit of the
Devil?

Possibly some may say, That the Devil may even awaken Men's Consciences to
deceive them, and make them think they have been the Subjects of a saving Work
of the Spirit of God, while they are indeed still in the Gall of Bitterness.
But to this it may be replied, That the Man that has an awakened Conscience is
the least likely to be deceived of any Man in the World: It Is the drowsy,
insensible, stupid Conscience, that is most easily blinded. The more sensible
Conscience is in a diseased Soul, the less easily is it quieted without a real
Healing. The more sensible Conscience is made of the Dreadfulness of Sin, and
of the Greatness of a Man's own Guilt of it, the less likely is he to rest in
his own Righteousness, or to be pacified with nothing but Shadows. A Man that
has been thoroughly terrified with a Sense of his Danger and Misery, is not
easily flattered and made to believe himself safe, without any good Grounds.

To awaken Conscience, and convince of the Evil of Sin, cannot tend to establish
Sin, but certainly tends to make Way for Sin and Satan's being cast out.
Therefore this is a good Argument that the Spirit that operates thus, cannot be
the Spirit of the Devil; if Christ knew how to argue, who told the Pharisees,
that supposed that the Spirit that he wro't by, was the Spirit of the Devil,
that Satan would not cast out Satan, Math. 12. 25, 26.

And therefore if we see Persons made sensible of the dreadful Nature of Sin,
and of the Displeasure of God against it, and of their own miserable Condition
as they are in themselves, by Reason of Sin, and earnestly concerned for their
eternal Salvation, and sensible of their Need of God's Pity and Help, and
engaged to seek it in the Use of the Means that God has appointed, we may
certainly conclude that it is from the Spirit of God, whatever Effects this
Concern has on their Bodies; though it causes them to cry out aloud, or to
shriek, or to faint, or though it throws them into Convulsions, or whatever other
Way the Blood and Spirits are moved.

The Influence of the Spirit of God is yet more abundantly manifest, if Persons
have their Hearts drawn off from the World, and weaned from the Objects of
their worldly Lusts, and taken off from worldly Pursuits, by the Sense they
have of the Excellency of divine Things, and the Affection they have to those
spiritual Enjoyments of another World, that are promised in the Gospel.

3. That Spirit that operates in such a Manner, as to cause in Men a greater
Regard to the holy Scriptures, and establishes them more in their Truth and
Divinity, is certainly the Spirit of God. This Rule the Apostle gives us in the
6th Verse: We are of God; he that knows God hears us: He that is not of
God, hears not us: Hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of
Error. We are of God; that is, We the Apostles, are sent forth of God, and
appointed of him, to teach the World, and to deliver that Doctrine, those
Instructions that are to be their Rule; therefore he that knows God, hears
us etc. -- The Apostle's Argument in the Verse equally reaches all that in the
same Sense are of God, that is, all those that God has appointed and inspired
to deliver to his Church it is Rule of Faith and Practice; all the Prophets and
Apostles, whose Doctrine God has made the Foundation on which he has built his
Church, as in Ephesians. 2. 20; all the Penmen of the holy Scriptures. The Devil
never would go about to beget in Persons a Regard to that divine Word, which
God has given to be the great and standing Rule for the Direction of his
Church in all religious Matters and Concerns of their Souls, in all Ages. A
Spirit of Delusion will not incline Persons to go to seek Direction at the Mouth
of God. To the Law and to the Testimony, is never the Cry of those evil Spirits
that have no Light in them; for it is God's own Direction to discover their
Delusions, Isai. 8, 19, 20. And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them
that have familiar Spirits, and unto Wizards that peep, and that matter: should
not a People seek unto their God? for the Living to the Dead? To the Law, and
to the Testimony; if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there
is no Light in them. The Devil don't say the same as Abraham did, They have
Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them: Nor the same that the Voice from
Heaven did concerning Christ, Hear ye him. Would the Spirit of Error, in order
to deceive Men, beget in them an high Opinion of the infallible Rule, and
incline them to think much of it, and be very conversant with it? Would the
Prince of Darkness, in order to promote his Kingdom of Darkness, lead Men to
the Sun? The Devil has ever shown a mortal Spite and Hatred toward that holy
Book, the Bible: He has done all that has been in his Power to extinguish that
Light, and to draw Men off from it: He knows that it is that Light by which his
Kingdom of Darkness is to be overthrown. He has had for many Ages Experience of
it is Power to defeat his Purposes, and baffle his Designs: It is his constant
Plague: It Is the main Weapon which Michael uses in his War with him: It Is the
Sword of the Spirit, that pierces him, and conquers him: It Is that great, and
sore, and strong Sword, with which God punishes Leviathan, that crooked
Serpent: It Is that sharp Sword that we read of, Rev. 19. 15. that proceeds out
of the Mouth of him that sat on the Horse, with which he finites his Enemies.
Every Text is a Dart to torment the old Serpent: He has felt the stinging Smart
thousands of Times; therefore he is enraged against the Bible, and hates every
Word in it: And therefore we may be sure that he never will go about to raise
Persons Esteem of it, or Affection to it. And accordingly we see it to be
common in Enthusiasts, that they depreciate this written Rule, and set up the
Light within, or some other Rule above it.

4. Another Rule to judge of Spirits may be drawn from those opposite
Compellations given to the two opposite Spirits, in the last Words of the 6th
Verse, The SPIRIT OF TRUTH, and the SPIRIT OF ERROR. These Words do exhibit the
two opposite Characters of the spirit of God, and other Spirits that
counterfeit his Operations. And therefore, if by observing the Manner of the
Operation of a Spirit that is at work among a People, we see that it operates
as a Sprit of Truth, leading Persons to Truth, convincing them of those Things
that are true, we may safely determine that it is a right and true Spirit. As
for Instance, if we observe that the Spirit that is at work, makes Men more
sensible than they used to be, that there is a God, and that he is a great God,
and a Sin-hating God; and makes them more to realize it, that they must die,
and that Life is short, and very uncertain; and confirms Persons in it that
there is another World, that they have immortal Souls, and that they must give
Account of themselves to God; and convinces them that they are exceeding sinful
by Nature and Practice; and that they are helpless in themselves; and confirms
them in other Things that are agreeable to sound Doctrine: The Spirit that
works thus, operates as a Spirit of Truth: He represents Things as they are
indeed: He brings Men to the Light; for whatever makes Truth manifest, is
Light; as the Apostle Paul observes, Ephesians. 5. 13. But all Things that are
reproved (or discovered, as it is in the Margin) are made manifest by the
Light; for whatsoever does make manifest is Light. And therefore we may
conclude that it is not the Spirit of Darkness, that does thus discover, and
make manifest the Truth. Christ tells us that Satan is a Liar, and the Father
of Lies; and his Kingdom is a Kingdom of Darkness. It Is upheld and promoted
only by Darkness and Error: Satan has all his Power and Dominion by Darkness.
Hence we read of the Power of Darkness, Luke 22. 53. and Col. 1. 13. And Devils
are called the Rulers of the Darkness of this World Whatever Spirit removes our
Darkness, and bring upto the Light; undeceives us, and convinces us of the
Truth; does us a Kindness. If I am brought to a Sight of Truth, and am made
sensible of Things as they be, my Duty is immediately to thank God for it,
without standing first to inquire by what Means I have such a Benefit.

5. If the Spirit that is at work among a People operates as a Spirit of Love
to God and Man, it is a sure Sign that it is the Spirit of God. This Sign the
Apostle insists upon from the 6th Verse to the End of the Chapter: Beloved, let
us love one another; for Love is of God, and every one that loves is born of
God, and knows God: He that loves not, knows not God, for God is Love etc.
Here it is evident, that the Apostle is still comparing those two sorts of
Persons that are influenced by the opposite Kinds of Spirits; and mentions Love
as a Mark by which we may know who has the true Spirit: But this is especially
evident by the 12th and 13th Verses, If we love one another, God dwells in
us, and his Love is perfected in us: Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and
he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit. In these Verses Love is
spoken of as if it were that wherein the very Nature of the Holy Spirit
consisted; or as if divine Love dwelling in us, and the Spirit of God dwelling
in us, were the same Thing; as it is also in the two last Verses of the
foregoing Chapter; as also in the 16th Verse of this Chapter. Therefore this
last Mark which the Apostle gives of the true Spirit, he seems to speak of as
the most eminent; and so insists much more largely upon it, than upon all the
rest; and speaks expressly of both Love to God and Men; of Love to Men, in the
7th, 11th and 12th Verses; and of Love to God, in the 17th, 18th and 19th
Verses; and of both together, in the two last Verses; and of Love to Men, as
arising from Love to God, in these two last Verses.

Therefore when the Spirit that is at work amongst a People, tends this Way,
and brings many of them to high and exalting Thoughts of the divine Being, and
his glorious Perfections; and works in them an admiring, delightful Sense of
the Excellency of Jesus Christ; representing Him as the chief among ten
Thousands, altogether lovely, and makes him precious to the Soul; winning and
drawing the Heart with those Motives and Incitements to Love, which the Apostle
speaks of in that Passage of Scripture we are upon, viz. the wonderful, free
Love of God in giving his only begotten Son to die for us, and the wonderful
dying Love of Christ to us, who had no Love to him, but were his Enemies; as
Ver. 9, 10. In this was manifested the Love of God toward us, because that God
sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we might live through him.
Herein is Love; not that we loved God, but that he loved as, and sent his Son
to be the Prepitiation for our Sins. And Ver. 16. And we have known, and
believed the Love that God has to us. And Ver. 19. We Love him, because he
first loved us. The Spirit excites to Love on these Motives, and makes the
Attributes of God as revealed in the Gospel, and manifested in Christ,
delightful Objects of Contemplation; and makes the Soul to long after God and
Christ, after their Presence and Communion, and Acquaintance with them, and
Conformity to them; and to live so as to Please and Honor them: And also
quells Contentions among Men, and gives a Spirit of Peace and Good Will,
excites to Acts of outward Kindness, and earnest Desires of the Salvation of
others Souls; and causes a Delight in those that appear as the Children of God,
and Followers of Christ: I say when a Spirit operates after this Manner among a
People, there is the highest Kind of Evidence of the Influence of a true and
divine Spirit.

Indeed there is a Counterfeit of Love, that often appears amongst those that
are led by a Spirit of Delusion: There is commonly in the wildest Enthusiasts a
Kind of Union and Affection that appears in them one toward another, arising
from Self-Love, occasioned by their agreeing one with another in those Things
wherein they greatly differ from all others, and for which they are the Objects
of the Ridicule of all the rest of Mankind; which naturally will cause them so
much the more to prize the Esteem they observe in each other, of those
Peculiarities that make them the Objects of others Contempt: So the ancient
Gnostics and the wild Fanatics, that appeared in the Beginning of the
Reformation, boasted of their great Love one to another: One Sect of them in
particular, calling themselves the Family of Love. But this is quite another
Thing than that Christian Love that I have just described; it is only the
working of a natural Self-Love, and no true Benevolence, any more than the
Union and Friendship which may be among a Company of Pirates, that are at War
with all the rest of the World. There is sufficient said in this Passage of St.
John, that we are upon, of the Nature and Motive of a truly Christian Love,
thoroughly to distinguish it from all such Counterfeits. It is Love that arises
from an Apprehension of the wonderful Riches of free Grace, and Sovereignty of
God's Love to us, in Christ Jesus; being attended with a Sense of our own utter
Unworthiness, as in our selves the Enemies and Haters of God and Christ, and
with a Renunciation of all our own Excellency and Righteousness. See Ver. 9,
10, 11, and 19. The surest Character of true divine supernatural Love,
distinguishing it from Counterfeits that do arise from a natural Self-Love, is
that That Christian Virtue shines in it, that does above all others renounce
and abase and annihilate Self, viz. Humility. Christian Love, or true Charity,
is an humble Love, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5. Charity vaunteth not it self; is not puffed
up, does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily
provoked. When therefore we see Love in Persons attended with a Sense of their
own Littleness, Vileness, Weakness, and utter Insufficiency; and so with
Self-Diffidence, Self-Emptiness, Self-Renunciation, and Poverty of Spirit,
there are the manifest Tokens of the Spirit of God: He that thus dwells in
Love, dwells in God, and God in him. The Love the Apostle speaks of as a great
Evidence of the true Spirit, is God's Loove, or Christ's Love; as Ver. 12. --
His Love is perfected in us. What Kind of Love that is, we may see best in what
appeared in Christ, in the Example he set us, when he was here upon Earth. The
Love that appeared in that Lamb of God, was not only a Love to Friends, but to
Enemies, and a Love attended with a meek and humble Spirit. Learn of me, says
he, for I am meek and lowly in Heart.

Love and Humility are two Things the most contrary to the Spirit of the Devil,
of any Thing in the World; for the Character of that Evil Spirit, above all
Things, consists in Pride and Malice.

Thus I have spoken particularly to the several Marks the Apostle gives us of a
Work of the true Spirit. There are some of these Things the Devil would not do
if he could: Thus, he would not awaken the Conscience, and make Men sensible of
their miserable State by Nature, by Reason of Sin, and sensible of their great
Need of a Savior: And he would not confirm Men in a Belief that Jesus is the
Son of God, and the Savior of Sinners, or raise Men's Value and Esteem of Him:
He would not beget in Men's Minds an Opinion of the Necessity, Usefulness and
Truth of the Holy Scriptures, or incline them to hearken to them, or make much
Use of them; nor would he go about to show Men the Truth, in Things that
concern their Souls Interest; to undeceive 'em, and lead 'em out of Darkness
into Light, and give 'em a View of Things as they are indeed. And there are
other Things that the Devil neither can nor will do: He will not give Men a
Spirit of Divine Love, or Christian Humility and Poverty of Spirit; nor could
he if he would: He cannot give those Things which he has not himself: These
Things are as contrary as possible to his Nature. And therefore when there is
an extraordinary Influence or Operation appearing on the Minds of a People, if
these Things are found in it, we are safe in determining that it is the Work of
God, whatever other Circumstances it may be attended with, whatever Instruments
are improved, whatever Methods are taken to promote it; whatever Means a
sovereign God, whose Judgments are a great Deep, makes Use of to carry it on;
and whatever Motions there may be of the animal Spirits, whatever Effects may
be wrought on Men's Bodies. These Marks, that the Apostle has given us, are
sufficient to stand alone, and support themselves; and wherever they be, they
plainly show the Finger of God, and are sufficient to outweigh a Thousand such
little Objections, as many make from Oddities, Irregularities, and Errors in
Conduct, and the Delusions and Scandals of some Professors.

Object. But here some may object against the Sufficiency of the Marks given,
what the Apostle Paul says, in the 2 Cor. 11. 13, 14. For such are false
Apostles, deceitful Workers, transforming themselves into the Apostles of
Christ; and no Marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light.

To which I Answer, That this can be no Objection against the Sufficiency of
these Marks to distinguish the true Spirit from the false Spirit, in those
false Apostles and false Prophets, which the Apostle speaks of, in whom the
Devil was transformed into an Angel of Light, because it is principally with a
View to them that the Apostle gives these Marks; as appears by the Words of the
Text, Believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of God:
And this is the Reason he gives, Because many false Prophets are gone out into
the World: There are many gone out into the World that are the Ministers of the
Devil, that transform themselves into the Prophets of God, in whom the Spirit
of the Devil is transformed into an Angel of Light; therefore try the Spirits
by these Rules that I shall give you, that you may be able to distinguish the
true Spirit from the false Spirit, under such a crafty Disguise. Those false
Prophets the Apostle John speaks of, are doubtless the same Sort of Men with
those false Apostles, and deceitful Workers, that the Apostle Paul speaks of,
in that Place in the 2d of Corinthians, in whom the Devil was transformed into
an Angel of Light: And therefore we may be sure that these Marks the Apostle
gives, are especially adapted to distinguish between the true Spirit, and the
Devil transformed into an Angel of Light, because they are given especially for
that End; that is the Apostle's declared Purpose and Design, to give Marks by
which the true Spirit may be distinguished from that Sort of Counterfeits.

And if we look over what is said about these false Prophets, and false
Apostles, (as there is much said about them in the New Testament) and take
Notice in what Manner the Devil was transformed into an Angel of Light in them,
we shall not find any Thing that in the least injures the Sufficiency of these
Marks to distinguish the true Spirit from such Counterfeits. The Devil
transformed himself into an Angel of Light, as there was in them a Show, and
great Boasts of extraordinary Knowledge in divine Things; Col. 2. 8. 1 Timothy 1.
6, 7. and Chap. 6. 3, 4, 5. 2 Timothy 2. 14, 16, 17, 18. Tit. 1. 10, 16. Hence
their Followers called themselves Gnostics, from their great pretended
Knowledge: And the Devil in them mimicked the miraculous Gifts of the Holy
Spirit, in Visions, Revelations, Prophecies, Miracles, and the immediate
Conduct of the Spirit in what they did: Hence they are called false Apostles,
and false Prophets: See Mat. 24. 24. Again, there was a false Show of, and
lying Pretenses to great Holiness and Devotion in Words: Romans 16. 17, 18. Ephesians.
4. 14. Hence they are called deceitful Workers, and Wells, and Clouds without
Water. 2 Cor. 11. 13. 2 Pet. 2. 17. Jude 12. There was also in them a Show of
extraordinary Piety and Righteousness in their superstitious Worship: Col. 2.
16, 17, 18. 21, 22, 23. So they had a false, proud, and bitter Zeal; Gal. 4.
17. 18. 1 Timothy 1. 6. and Chap.6. 4, 5. And likewise a false Show of Humility,
in affecting an extraordinary outward Meanness and Dejection, when indeed they
were vainly puffed up with their fleshly Mind; and made a Righteousness of
their Humility, and were exceedingly lifted up with their eminent Piety: Col.
2. 18, 23. But how do such Things as these, in the least injure those Things
that have been mentioned as the distinguishing Evidences of the true Spirit?

Besides such vain Shows which may be from the Devil, there are common
Influences of the Spirit, which are often mistaken for saving Grace: But these
are out of the Question, because though they are not saving, yet are the Work of
the true Spirit.

Having thus fulfilled what I at first proposed, in considering what are the
certain, distinguishing Marks, by which we may safely proceed in judging of any
Work that falls under our Observation, whether it be the Work of the Spirit of
God or no. I now proceed to the APPLICATION.

I. From what has been said, I will venture to draw this Inference, viz. That
that extraordinary Influence that has lately appeared on the Minds of the
People abroad in this Land, causing in them an uncommon Concern and Engagedness
of Mind about the Things of Religion, is undoubtedly, in the general, from the
Spirit of God. There are but two Things that need to be known in order to such
a Work's being judged of, viz. Facts and Rules. The Rules of the Word of God we
have had laid before us; and as to Facts, there are but two Ways that we can
come at them, so as to be in a Capacity to compare them with the Rules, either
by our own Observation, or by Information from others that have had Opportunity
to observe.

As to this Work that has lately been carried on in the Land, there are many
Things concerning it that are notorious, and known by every Body, (unless it be
some that have been very much out of the Way of observing and hearing indeed)
that unless the Apostle John was out in his Rules, are sufficient to determine
it to be in general, the Work of God. It Is notorious that the Spirit that is at
work, takes off Persons Minds from the Vanities of the World, and engages them
in a deep Concern about a future and eternal Happiness in another World, and
puts them upon earnestly seeking their Salvation, and convinces them of the
Dreadfulness of Sin, and of their own guilty and miserable State as they are by
Nature. It is notorious that it awakens Men's Consciences, and makes 'em
sensible of the Dreadfulness of God's Anger, and causes in them a great Desire,
and earnest Care and Endeavor to obtain his Favor. It is notorious, that it
puts them upon a more diligent Improvement of the Means of Grace which God has
appointed. It is also notorious, that, in general, it works in Persons a
greater Regard to the Word of God, and desire of hearing and reading of it, and
to be more conversant with the holy Scriptures than they used to be. And it is
notoriously manifest that the Spirit that is at work, in general, operates as a
Spirit of Truth, making Persons more sensible of what is really true, in those
Things that concern their eternal Salvation: As that they must die, and that
Life is very short and uncertain; that there is a Great, Sin-hating God, that
they are accountable to, and will fix them in an eternal State in another
World, and that they stand in great Need of a Savior. It is furthermore
notorious, that the Spirit that is at work makes Persons more sensible of the
Value of that Jesus that was crucified, and their Need of him; and that it puts
them upon earnestly seeking an Interest in him. It cannot be but that these
Things should be apparent to People in general through the Land: for these
Things ben't done in a Corner; the Work that has been wrought has not been
confined to a few Towns, in some remoter Parts of the Land, but has been
carried on in many Places in all Parts of the Land, and in most of the
principal, and most populous, and public Places in it, (Christ in this Respect
has wrought amongst us, in the same Manner that he wrought his Miracles in
Judea) and has now been continued for a considerable Time; so that there has
been a great deal of Opportunity to observe the Manner of the Work. And all
such as have been much in the Way of observing the Work, and have been very
conversant with those that have been the Subjects of it, do see a great deal
more that, by the Rules of the Apostle, does clearly and certainly show it to
be the Work of God.

And here I would observe, That the Nature and Tendency of a Spirit that is at
work, may be determined with much greater certainty, and less Danger of being
imposed upon, when it is observed in a great Multitude of People of all Sorts,
and in various different Places, than when it is only seen in a few, in some
particular Place, that have been much conversant one with another. A few
particular Persons may agree to put a Cheat upon others, by a false Pretense,
and professing Things that they never were conscious to in their own Minds: But
when the Work is spread over great Part of a Country, in Places distant one
from another, among People of all Sorts, and all Ages, and in Multitudes of
Persons, of sound Mind, good Understanding, and known Integrity; there would be
the greatest Absurdity in supposing that, by all the Observation that can be
made by all that is heard from them and seen in them, for many Months together,
by those that are most intimate with them in these Affairs, and have long been
acquainted with them, that yet it cannot be determined what Kind of Influence
the Operation they are under, has upon People's Minds, whether it tends to
awaken their Consciences, or to stupify them; whether it tends to incline them
more to seek their Salvation, or neglect it; whether it seems to confirm them
in a Belief of the Scriptures, or to lead them to Deism; whether it makes them
have more Regard to the great Truths of Religion, or less; and so in other
Things. There is probably no particular Person here present, that thinks
himself to have a Right to be treated as one of a sound Mind, and common Sense,
and Veracity, but would think himself abused, if he should declare to others,
that he had altered his Mind in these and those Particulars; he now found
himself convinced of the Truth of this or that, that formerly he did not
believe; and that he found in himself such and such Fears, that he don't use to
have; or found a greater Aversion than he was will not to have, or a greater
Esteem and Affection to such and such Things; and those that he made such a
Profession to would not believe him, though they had long been conversant with
him, and though he persisted in this Profession for many Months together, and
nothing appeared in him but what agreed thereto. But much more unreasonable it
would be, when such Professions are made, not by a particular Person only, but
a great Part of a People in a Land, to suppose that they all agree in
professing what indeed they do not feel in their Souls.

And here it is to be observed, That for Persons to profess that they are
convinced of these or those divine Truths; or that they esteem and love such
divine Things, in a saving Manner; and for them to profess, that they are more
convinced or confirmed in the Truth of them, than they used to be, and find
that they have a greater Regard to them than before they had, are two very
different Things. Persons of Honesty and common Sense, have much greater Right
to demand Credit to be given to the latter Profession, than to the former;
(though in the former it is vastly less likely that a People in general should be
deceived, than some particular Persons.) But whether Persons Convictions, and
the Alteration in their Dispositions and Affections, be in a Degree and Manner
that is saving, is beside the present Question. If there be such Effects on
Peoples Judgments, Dispositions and Affections, as have been spoken of, whether
they be in a Degree and Manner that is saving or no, it is nevertheless a Sign
of the Influence of the Spirit of God. Scripture Rules serve to distinguish the
common Influences of the Spirit of God, as well as those that are saving, from
the Influence of other Causes.

And as I am One that, by the Providence of God, have for some Months past,
been much amongst those that have been the Subjects of that Work, that has of
late been carried on in the Land; and particularly, have been abundantly in the
Way of seeing and observing those extraordinary Things that many Persons have
been much stumbled at; such as Persons crying out aloud, shrieking, being put
into great Agonies of Body, and deprived of their bodily Strength, and the
like; and that in many different Towns; and have been very particularly
conversant with great Numbers of such, both in the Time of their being the
Subjects of such extraordinary Influences, and afterward, from Time to Time,
and have seen the Manner and Issue of such Operations, and the Fruits of them,
for several Months together; many of them being Persons that I have long known,
and have been intimately acquainted with them in Soul Concerns, before and
since: So I look upon my self called on this Occasion to give my Testimony,
that so far as the Nature and Tendency of such a Work is capable of falling
under the Observation of a By-stander, to whom those that have been the
Subjects of it have endeavored to open their Hearts, or can be come at by
diligent and particular Inquiry, this Work has all those Marks that have been
spoken of; in very many Instances, in every Article; and particularly in many
of those that have been the Subjects of such extraordinary Operations, all
those Marks have appeared in a very great Degree.

Those in whom have been these uncommon Appearances, have been of two Sorts;
either those that have been in great Distress, in an Apprehension of their Sin
and Misery; or those that have been overcome with a sweet Sense of the
Greatness, Wonderfulness and Excellency of divine Things. Of the Multitude of
those of the former sort, that I have had Opportunity to observe, and have been
acquainted with, there have been very few, but that by all that could be
observed in them, in the Time of it, or afterward, their Distress has arisen
from real, proper Conviction, and a being in a Degree sensible of that which
was the Truth. And though I don't suppose, when such Things were observed to be
common, that Persons have laid themselves under those violent Restraints, to
avoid outward Manifestations of their Distress, that perhaps they otherwise
would have done; yet there have been very few in whom there has been any
Appearance of feigning or affecting such Manifestations, and very many for whom
it would have been undoubtedly utterly impossible for 'em to avoid them.
Generally those that have been in these Agonies have appeared to be in the
perfect Exercise of their Reason; and those of them that have been able to
speak, have been well able to give an Account of the Circumstances of their
Minds, and the Cause of their Distress, in the Time of it, and well able to
remember, and give an Account afterward. I have known a very few Instances of
those, that in their great Extremity, have for a short Space been deprived, in
some Measure of the Use of Reason; but among the many Hundreds, and it may be
Thousands, that have lately been brought to such Agonies, I never yet knew one,
lastingly deprived of their Reason. In some that I have known, Melancholy has
evidently been mixed; and when it is so, the Difference is very apparent; their
Distresses are of another Kind, and operate quite after another Manner, than
when their Distress is from mere Conviction: It Is not Truth only that
distresses them, but many vain Shadows and Notions, that will not give Place
either to Scripture or Reason. Some in their great Distress, have not been well
able to give an Account of themselves, or to declare the Sense they have of
Things, or to explain the Manner and Cause of their Trouble to others, that yet
I have had no Reason to think were not under proper Convictions, and in whom
there has been manifested a good Issue. But this will not be at all wondered at,
by those who have had much to do with Souls under spiritual Difficulties. Some
Things that they are sensible of are altogether new to them, their Ideas and
inward Sensations are new, and what they therefore knew not how to accommodate
Language to, or to find Words to express. And some who on first Inquiry, say
they know not what was the Matter with them, on being particularly Examined and
Interrogated, have been able to represent their Case, though of themselves they
could not find Expressions, and Forms of Speech to do it.

Some say they think that the Terrors that such Persons are in, that have such
Effects on their Bodies, is only a Fright. But certainly there ought to be a
Distinction made between a very great Fear, and extreme Distress, arising from
an Apprehension of some dreadful Truth, that is a Cause that is fully
proportionable to such an Effect, and a needless causless Fright: which is of
two Kinds; either when Persons are terrified with that which is not the Truth;
(of this I have seen very few Instances, unless in Case of Melancholy;) Or
secondly, when Persons are under a childish Fright, only from some terrible
outward Appearance and Noise, and a general Notion thence arising, that there
is something or other Terrible, they know not what; without having in their
Minds the Apprehension of any particular terrible Truth whatsoever; of such a
Kind of Fright I have seen very little Appearance, either among Old or Young.

Those that are in such Extremity, commonly express a great Sense of their
exceeding Wickedness, the Multitude and Aggravations of their actual Sins, and
the dreadful Pollution, Enmity and Perverseness of their Hearts, and a dreadful
Obstinacy and hardness of Heart; a Sense of their great Guilt in the Sight of
God; and the Dreadfulness of the Punishment that Sin exposes to: Very often
they have a lively Idea of the horrible Pit of eternal Misery; and at the same
Time it appears to them, that a Great God that has them in his Hands, is
exceeding Angry with them; his Wrath appears amazingly terrible to them: God
appearing to them so much provoked, and his great Wrath so incensed, they are
apprehensive of great Danger, that he will not bear with them any longer; but
will now, forthwith, cut 'em off, and send them down to the dreadful Pit they
have in View; at the same Time seeing no Refuge: They see more and more of the
Vanity of every Thing they used to trust to, and flatter themselves in; 'till
they are brought wholly to despair in all, and to see that they are at the
Disposal of the mere Will of the God that is so angry with them. Very many, in
the midst of their Extremity, have been brought to an extraordinary Sense of
their fully deserving that Wrath and Destruction, which is then before their
Eyes; and at the same Time, that they have feared every Moment, that it would
be executed upon them, they have been greatly convinced that it would be
altogether just that it should, and that God is indeed absolutely Sovereign:
and very often, some Text of Scripture expressing God's Sovereignty, has been
set home upon their Minds, whereby their Minds have been calmed and they have
been brought as it were to lie at God's Foot; and after great Agonies, a little
before Light has arisen, they have been composed and quiet, in a Kind of
Submission to a Just and Sovereign God; but their bodily Strength much spent;
and sometimes their Lives, to Appearance almost gone; and then Light has
appeared, and a glorious Redeemer, with his wonderful, all-sufficient Grace,
has been represented to them, often, in some sweet Invitation of Scripture.
Sometimes the Light comes in suddenly, sometimes more gradually, filling their
Souls with Love, Admiration, Joy and Self-Abasement; drawing forth their Hearts
in Longing after the excellent lovely Redeemer, and Longings to lie in the Dust
before him; and Longings that others might behold him, and embrace him, and be
delivered by him; and Longings to live to his Glory: but sensible that they can
do nothing of themselves* appearing Vile in their own Eyes, and having much of
a Jealousy over their own Hearts. And all the Appearances of a real Change of
Heart have followed; and Grace has acted, from Time to Time, after the same
Manner that it used to act in those that were converted formerly, with the like
Difficulties, Temptations, Buffetings, and like Comforts; excepting that in
many, Light and Comfort has been in higher Degree than ordinary. Many very
young Children have been thus wro't upon. There have been some Instances very
much like those Demoniacks that we read of, Mar. 1. 26. and Chap. 9. 26. of
whom we read, that when the Devil had cried with a loud Voice, and rent them
sore, he came out of them. And probably those Instances were designed for a
Type of such Things as these. Some have several Turns of great Agonies, before
they are delivered: and some have been in such Distresses, and it has passed
off, and no Deliverance at all has followed.

Some object against it, as great Confusion, when there is a Number together,
in such Circumstances, making a Noise; and say, God cannot be the Author of it,
because he is the God of Order, not of Confusion. But let it be considered,
what is the proper Notion of Confusion, but the breaking that Order of Things
whereby they are properly disposed, and duly directed to their End, so that the
Order and due Connection of Means being broken, they fail of their End; but
Conviction and Conversion of Sinners is the obtaining the End of religious
Means. Not but that I think that Persons that are thus extraordinarily moved
should endeavor to refrain from such outward Manifestations, what they well
can, and should refrain to their utmost, in the Time of the solemn Worship. But
if God is pleased to convince the Consciences of Persons, so that they cannot
avoid great outward Manifestations, even to the interrupting, and breaking off
those public Means they were attending, I don't think this is Confusion, or an
unhappy Interruption, any more than if a Company should meet on the Field to
pray for Rain, and should be broken off from their Exercise by a plentiful
Shower. Would to God that all the public Assemblies in the Land were broken
off from their public Exercises with such Confusion as this the next Sabbath
Day! We need not be sorry for the breaking the Order of the Means, by obtaining
the End to which that Order is directed: He that is going a Journey to fetch a
Treasure, need not be sorry that he is stopped by meeting the Treasure in the
midst of his Journey.

Besides those that are overcome with Conviction and Distress, I have seen many
of late, that have had their bodily Strength taken away with a Sense of the
glorious Excellency of the Redeemer, and the Wonders of his dying Love; with a
very uncommon Sense of their own Littleness, and exceeding Vileness attending
it, with all Expressions and Appearances of the greatest Abasement and
Abhorrence of themselves: And not only new Converts, but many that were, as we
hope, formerly converted, whose Love and Joy has been attended with a Flood of
Tears, and a great Appearance of Contrition and Humiliation, especially for
their having lived no more to God's Glory since their Conversion; with a far
greater Sight of their Vileness, and the Evil of their Hearts than ever they
had; with an exceeding Earnestness of Desire to live better for the Time to
come, but attended with greater Self-Diffidence than ever: And many have been
even overcome with Pity to the Souls of others, and longing for their Salvation.

And many other Things I might mention in this extraordinary Work, answering to
every one of those Marks that have been insisted on. So that if the Apostle
John knew how to give Signs of a Work of the true Spirit, this is such a Work.

Providence has cast my Lot in a Place where the Work of God has formerly been
carried on: I had the Happiness to be settled in that Place two Years with the
venerable STODDARD; and was then acquainted with a Number that, during that
Season, were wro't upon, under his Ministry, and have been intimately
acquainted with the Experiences of many others, that were wro't upon before
under his Ministry, in a Manner agreeable to his Doctrine, and the Doctrine of
all orthodox Divines; and of late that Work has been carried on there, with
very much of these uncommon Opperations: but it is apparent to all to be the
same Work, not only that was wro't there six or seven Years ago, but elder
Christians there know it to be the same Work that was carried on there, in
their former Pastor's Days, though there be some new Circumstances. And certainly
we must throw by all the Talk of Conversion and Christian Experience; and not
only so, but we must throw by our Bibles, and give up revealed Religion, if
this be not in general the Work of God, Not that I suppose that the Degree of
the Influence of the Spirit of God, is to be determined by the Degree of Effect
on Men's Bodies, or that those are always the best Experiences, that have the
greatest Influence on the Body.

And as to the Imprudences and Irregularities and Mixture of Delusion that have
been; it is not at all to be wondered at that a Reformation, after a long
continued, and almost universal Deadness, should at first when the Revival is
new, be attended with such Things. In the first Creation God did not make a
complete World at once; but there was a great deal of Imperfection, Darkness,
and Mixture of Chaos and Confusion, after God first said, Let there be Light,
before the whole stood forth in perfect Form. When God at first began his great
Work for the Deliverance of his People, after their long continued Bondage in
Egypt, there were false Wonders mixed with true, for a while; which hardened
the unbelieving Egyptians, and made 'em to doubt of the Divinity of the whole
Work. When the Children of Israel first went about bringing up the Ark of God,
after it had long been neglected, and had been long absent, they sought not the
Lord after the due Order, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. At the Time when the Sons of God
came to present themselves before the Lord, Satan came also among them. And
Solomon's Ships when they brought Gold and Silver and Pearls, also brought Apes
and Peacocks. When Day Light first appears, after a Night of Darkness, we must
expect to have Darkness mixed with Light, for a while, and not to have perfect
Day, and the Sun risen at once. The Fruits of the Earth are first green before
they are ripe, and come to their proper Perfection gradually; and so Christ
tells us, is the Kingdom of God. Mark 4. 26, 27, 28. So is the Kingdom of God;
as if a Man should cast Seed into the Ground, and should Sleep, and rise Night
and Day; and the Seed should spring and grow up, he knows not how: for the
Earth brings forth Fruit of her self; first the Blade; then the Ear; then the
full Corn in the Ear.

The Imprudences and Errors that have attended this Work, are the less to be
wondered at, if it be considered, that it is chiefly young Persons that have
been the Subjects of it, who have less Steadiness and Experience, and are in
the Heat of Youth, and much more ready to run to Extremes. Satan will keep Men
secure as long as he can; but when he can do that no longer, he often
endeavors to drive them to Extremes, and so to dishonor God, and wound
Religion that Way. And doubtless it has been one Occasion of much of the
Misconduct there has been, that in many Places, People that are the Subjects of
this Work of God's Spirit, see plainly that their Ministers have an ill Opinion
of the Work; and therefore with just Reason, durst not apply themselves to 'em
as their Guides in this Work; and so are without Guides: and no Wonder that
when a People are as Sheep without a Shepherd, they wander out of the Way. A
People, in such Circumstances especially, stand in great and continual Need of
Guides, and their Guides stand in continual Need of much more Wisdom than they
have of their own. And if a People have Ministers that favor the Work, and
rejoice in it, yet it is not to be expected that, either People or Ministers
should know so well how to conduct themselves in such an extraordinary State of
Things, while it is new, and what they never had any Experience of before, as
they may, after they have had Experience, and Time to see the Tendency,
Consequences and Issue of Things. The happy Influence of Experience is very
manifest at this Day, in the People among whom God has settled my Abode. The
Work of God that has been carried on there this Year, has been much purer than
that which was wrought there six Years before: It has seemed to be more purely
spiritual; freer from natural and corrupt Mixtures, and any Thing savouring of
enthusiastic Wildness and Extravagance: It has wrought more by deep
Humiliation and Abasement before God and Men; and they have been much freer
from Imprudences and Irregularities. And particularly there has been a
remarkable Difference in this Respect, That whereas many before, in their
Comforts and Rejoycings, did too much forget their Distance from God, and were
ready in their Conversation together of the Things of God, and of their own
Experiences, to talk with too much of an Air of Lightness, and something of
Laughter; now they seem to have no Disposition to it, but rejoice with a more
solemn, reverential, humble Joy; as God directs the Princes of the Earth, Psalm.
2. 11. It Is not because the Joy is not as great, and in many of them much
greater: There are many among us, that were wro't upon in that former Season,
that have now had much greater Communications from Heaven than they had then;
but their Rejoicing operates in another Manner: it only abases and solemnizes
them; breaks their Hearts, and brings them into the Dust: Now when they speak
of their Joys, it is not with Laughter, but a Flood of Tears. Thus those that
laughed before, weep now; and yet, by their united Testimony, their Joy is
vastly purer and sweeter than that which before did more raise their animal
Spirits. They are now more like Jacob, when God appeared to him at Bethel, when
he saw the Ladder that reached to Heaven, and said, How dreadful is this Place;
and like Moses, when God showed him his Glory on the Mount, when he made haste,
and bowed himself unto the Earth.

II. Let us all be hence warned, by no Means to oppose, or do any Thing, in the
least to clog or hinder that Work that has lately been carried on in the Land,
but on the contrary, to do our utmost to promote it. Now Christ is come down
from Heaven into this Land, in a remarkable and wonderful Work of his Spirit,
it becomes all his professed Disciples to acknowledge him, and give him Honor.

The Example of the Jews in Christ's and the Apostles Times, is enough to beget
in those that don't acknowledge this Work, a great Jealousy of themselves, and
to make them exceeding cautious of what they say or do. Christ then was in the
World, and the World knew him not: He came to his own professing People, and
his own received him not. That coming of Christ had been much spoken of in the
Prophecies of Scripture that they had in their Hands, and had been long
expected, and yet because Christ came in a Manner that they did not expect, and
that was not agreeable to their carnal Reason, they would not own him, but
opposed him, counted him a Madman, and the Spirit that he wrought by the Spirit
of the Devil. They stood and wondered at the great Things that were done, and
knew not what to make of 'em; but yet they met with so many stumbling Blocks,
that they finally could not acknowledge him. And when the Spirit of God came to
be so wonderfully poured out in the Apostles Days, they looked upon it to be
Confusion and Distraction. They were astonished by what they saw and heard, but
not convinced. And especially was the Work of God then rejected by those that
were most conceited of their own Understanding and Knowledge, agreeable to Isai.
29. 14. Therefore behold, I will proceed to do a mavelous Work amongst this
People, even a mavelous Work and a Wonder; for the Wisdom of their wise Men
shall perish, and the Understanding of their prudent Men shall be hid. And many
of them that had been in Reputation for Religion and Piety, had a great Spite
against the Work, because they saw it tended to diminish their Honor, and to
reproach their Formality and Luke warmness. Some upon these Accounts
maliciously and openly opposed and repro^^^ed the Work of the Spirit of God,
and called it the Work of the Devil, against inward Conviction; and so were
guilty of the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost.

There is another Coming of Christ, a spiritual Coming, to set up his Kingdom
in the World, that is as much spoken of in Scripture Prophecy, as that first
Coming of Christ was, and that has been long expected by the Church of God;
that we have Reason to think, from what is said of it, will be, in many
Respects, parallel with the other. And certainly, that low State that the
visible Church of God has lately been sunk into, is very parallel with the
State of the Jewish Church, when Christ came: and therefore no Wonder at all,
that when Christ comes, his Work should appear a strange Work to most; yea, it
would be a Wonder if it should be otherwise. Whether the Work that is now
wro't, be the Beginning of that great Coming of Christ to set up his Kingdom,
that is so much spoken of, or no; yet it is evident from what has been said,
that it is a Work of the same Spirit, and of the same Nature. And there is no
Reason to doubt but that, for Persons to continue long to refuse to acknowledge
Christ in the Work, especially those that are set to be Teachers in his Church,
will be in like Manner provoking to God, as it was in the Jews of old to refuse
to acknowledge Christ; and that notwithstanding what they may plead of the great
stumbling Blocks that are in the Way, and the Cause they have to doubt of the
Work. The Teachers of the Jewish Church found innumerable stumbling Blocks,
that were to them insuperable: there were many Things appeared in Christ, and
in the Work of the Spirit after his Ascension, that were exceeding strange to
'em; they were assured that they had just Cause for their Scruples: Christ and
his Work were to the Jews a stumbling Block: But blessed is he, says Christ,
whosoever shall not be offended (or stumbled) in me. As strange and as
unexpected as the Manner of Christ's Appearance was, yet he had not been long
in Judea, working Miracles, before all those that had Opportunity to observe,
and yet refused to acknowledge him, brought fearful Guilt upon themselves in the
Sight of God; and Christ condemned them, that though they could discern the Face
of the Sky, and of the Earth, yet they could not discern the Signs of these
Times: and why, says he, Even of your selves, judge ye not what is right? Luke
12. at the latter End.

It Is not to be supposed that the great JEHOVAH has bowed the Heavens and come
down into this Land, and appeared here now for so long a Time, in such a
glorious Work of his Power and Grace, in so extensive a Manner, in the most
public Places of the Land, and almost all Parts of it, without giving such
Evidences of his Presence, that great Numbers, and even many Teachers in his
Church, can remain guiltless in his Sight, without ever receiving and
acknowledging him, and giving him Honor, and appearing to rejoice in his
gracious Presence; or without so much as once giving him Thanks for so glorious
and blessed a Work of his Grace, wherein his Goodness does more appear, than if
he had bestowed on us all the temporal Blessings that the World affords. A long
continued Silence in such a Case is undoubtedly provoking to God; especially in
Ministers: it is a secret Kind of Opposition, that really tends to hinder the
Work: such silent Ministers stand in the Way of the Work of God; as Christ said
of old, He that is not with us is against us. Those that stand wondering at
this strange Work of God, not knowing what to make of it, and refusing to
receive it, and ready it may be sometimes to speak contemptibly of it, as it
was with the Jews of old, would do well to consider and tremble at St. Paul's
Words to them, Act. 13. 40, 41. Beware therefore least that come upon you,
which is spoken of in the Prophets, Behold ye Despisers, and wonder, and
perish; for I work a Work in your Days, which you shall in no wise bebelieve,
though a Man declare it unto you. And those that cannot believe the Work to be
true, because of the extraordinary Degree and Manner of it, should consider how
it was with the unbelieving Lord in Samaria, who said, Behold, if the Lord
would make Windows in Heaven, might this Thing be? To whom Elisha said, Behold
thou shall see it with thine Eyes, but shall not eat thereof. Let all to whom
this Work is a Cloud and Darkness, as the Pillar of Cloud and Fire was to the
Egyptians, take heed that it ben't their Destruction, as that was theirs, while
it gave Light to God's Israel.

I would pray those that quiet themselves with that, that they proceed on a
Principle of Prudence, and are waiting to see what the Issue of Things will be,
and what Fruits those that are the Subjects of this Work will bring forth in
their Lives and Conversations, would consider, whether this will justify a long
refraining from acknowleging Christ when he appears so wonderfully and
graciously present in the Land. It Is probable that many of those that are thus
waiting, know not what they are waiting for: If they wait to see a Work of God
without Difficulties and stumbling Blocks, that will be like the Fool's waiting
at the River Side to have the Water all run by. A Work of God without stumbling
Blocks is never to be expected: It must needs be that Offenses come. There
never yet was any great Manifestation that God made of himself to the World,
without many Difficulties attending it. It is with the Works of God, as it is
with the Word of God; they are full of those Things that seem strange and
inconsistent and difficult to the carnal unbelieving Hearts of Men. Christ and
his Work always was, and always will be a Stone of Stumbling, and Rock of
Offense; a Gin and a Snare to many. The Prophet Hosea, in the last Chap. of his
Prophecy, speaking of a glorious Revival of Religion in God's Church, when God
would be as the Dew unto Israel, and he should grow as the Lilly, and cast
forth his Roots as Lebanon, his Branches should spread, etc. concludes all
thus, in the last Verse, Who is wise? and he shall understand these Things;
prudent? and he shall know them. For the Ways of the Lord are right, and the
Just shall walk in them, but the Transgressors shall fall therein.

It Is probable that the stumbling Blocks that now attend this Work, will in
some Respects be increased, and not diminished. Particularly, we probably shall
see more Instances of Apostasy and gross Iniquity among Professors. And if one
Kind of stumbling Blocks are removed, it is to be expected that others will
come. It Is with Christ's Works, as it was with his Parables: Things that are
difficult to Men's dark Minds, are ordered of purpose, for the Trial of
Person's Dispositions and spiritual Sense, and that Persons of corrupt Minds,
and of an unbelieving, perverse, cavelling Spirit, seeing might see and not
understand. Those that are now waiting to see the Issue of this Work, think
they shall be better able to determine by and by; but they are probably, many
of them, mistaken. The Jews that saw Christ's Miracles, waited to see better
Evidences of his being the Messiah; they wanted a Sign from Heaven; but they
waited in vain; their stumbling Blocks did not diminish, but increase; they
found no End to 'em; and so were more and more hardened in their Unbelief. Many
have been praying for that glorious Reformation spoken of in Scripture, that
knew not what they have been praying for, (as it was with the Jews when they
prayed for the Coming of Christ) if it should come, they would not acknowledge
or receive it.

This pretended Prudence of Persons, in waiting so long before they acknowledge
this Work, will probably in the End prove the greatest Imprudence, in this
Respect, that hereby they will fail of any Share of so great a Blessing, and
will miss the most precious Opportunity of obtaining divine Light, Grace and
Comfort, and heavenly and eternal Benefits, that ever God gave in New England:
While the glorious Fountain is set open in so wonderful a Manner, and
Multitudes flock to it, and receive a rich Supply of the Wants of their Souls,
they stand at a Distance doubting and wondering, and receive nothing, and are
like to continue thus till the precious Season is past.

It is to be wondered at, that those that have doubted of the Work that has
been attended with such uncommon exten^^^ Appearances, should be easy in their
Doubts, without taking thorough Pains to inform themselves, by going where such
Things have been to be seen, and narrowly observing them, and diligently
inquiring into them; not contenting themselves only with observing two or three
Instances, nor resting till they were fully informed by their own Observation.
I don't doubt but that if this Course had been taken, it would have convinced
all whose Minds are not shut up against Conviction, in a great Degree indeed.
How greatly have they erred, who only from the uncertain Reports of others,
have ventered to speak slightily of these Things? That Caution of an
unbelieving Jew might teach them more Prudence, Act. 5. 38, 39. Refrain from
these Men, and let them alone; for if this Counsel, or this Work be of Men, it
will come to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it: lest happily ye
be found to fight against God. Whether what has been said in this Discourse be
enough to convince all that have heard it, that the Work that is now carried on
in the Land, is the Work of God, or not, yet I hope that for the future, they
will at least hearken to the Caution of Gamaliel that has been now mentioned;
for the future not to oppose it, or say any Thing against it, or any Thing that
has so much as an indirect Tendency to bring it into Discredit, least they
should be found to be Opposers of the Holy Ghost. There is no Kind of Sins so
hurtful and dangerous to the Souls of Men, as those that are committed against
the Holy Ghost. We had better speak against God the Father, or the Son, than to
speak against the Holy Spirit in his gracious Operations on the Hearts of Men:
nothing will so much tend for ever to prevent our having any Benefit of his
Operations in our own Souls.

If there are any that will still resolutely go on to speak contemptibly of
these Things, I would beg of them to take heed that they ben't guilty of the
unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost. A Time when the Holy Spirit is much
poured out, and Men's Lusts, Lukewarmness and Hypocrisy reproached by it is
powerful Operations, is the most likely Time of any whatsoever, for this Sin to
be committed. If the Work goes on, it is well if among the many that show an
Enmity against it, and reproach it, some ben't guilty of this Sin, if none have
been already. Those that maliciously oppose and reproach this Work, and call it
the Work of the Devil, want but one Thing of the unpardonable Sin, and that is
doing it against inward Conviction. And though some are so prudent, as now openly
to oppose and reproach the Work, yet it is to be feared, at this Day when the
Lord is going forth (...) gloriously against his Enemies, that many that are
silent and unactive, especially Ministers, will bring that Curse of the Angel
of the Lord upon themselves, Judge. 5. 23. Curse ye Meroz, said the Angel of the
Lord: curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the
Help of the Lord, to the Help of the Lord against the Mighty.

Since the Great God has come down from Heaven, and manifested himself in so
wonderful a Manner in this Land, it is in vain for any of us to expect any
other, than to be greatly affected by it in our spiritual State and
Circumstances, respecting the Favor of God, one Way or the other. Those that
don't become more happy by it, will become far more guilty and miserable. It is
always so: such a Season that proves an acceptable Year, and a Time of great
Grace and Favor to them that will accept it and improve it, proves a Day of
Vengeance to others. Isai. 61. 2. When God sends forth his Word it shall not
return to him void; much less his Spirit. When Christ was upon Earth in Judea,
many slighted and neglected him; but it proved in the Issue to be no Matter of
Indifference to them: God made all that People to feel that Christ had been
among them; those that did not feel it to their Comfort, felt it to their
Sorrow with a Witness. When God only sent the Prophet Ezekiel to the Children
of Israel, he declared that whether they would hear, or whether they would
forbear, yet they should know that there had been a Prophet among them. How
much more may we suppose that when God has appeared so wonderfully in this
Land, that he will make every one to know that the great JEHOVAH has been in
New England.

I come now in the

III. and last Place, to apply my self to those that are the Friends of this
Work, and have been Partakers of it, and are zealous to promote it. Let me
earnestly exhort such to give diligent heed to themselves to avoid all Errors
and Misconduct, and whatsoever may darken and obscure the Work, and give
Occasion to those that stand ready to reproach it. The Apostle was careful to
cut off Occasion from those that desired Occasion. The same Apostle exhorts
Titus, to maintain that strict Care and Watch over himself, that both his
Preaching and Behavior might be such as could not be condemned; that he that
was of the contrary Part might be ashamed, having no evil Thing to say of them,
Tit. 2. 7, 8. We had need to be wise as Serpents and harmless as Doves. It Is of
no small Consequence that we should at this Day behave our selves innocently
and prudently. We must expect that the great Enemy of this Work will especially
try his utmost with us; and he will especially triumph if he can prevail
against any of us, in any Thing to blind and mislead us: He knows it will do
more to further his Purpose and Interest, than if he prevailed against an
hundred others. We had need to watch and pray, for we are but little Children;
this roaring Lion is too strong for us, and this old Serpent too subtle for us.

Humility and Self-Diffidence, and an entire Dependence on our Lord Jesus
Christ, will be our best Defense. Let us therefore maintain the strictest Watch
against spiritual Pride, or a being lifted up with extraordinary Experiences
and Comforts, and high Favors of Heaven that any of us may have received. We
had need after such Favors, in a special Manner to keep a strict and jealous
Eye upon our own Hearts, least there should arise Self-exalting Reflections
upon what we have received, and high Thoughts of our selves as being now some
of the most eminent of Saints and peculiar Favorites of Heaven, and that the
Secret of the Lord is especially with us, and that we above all are fit to be
improved as the great Instructors and Censors of this evil Generation: And in
an high Conceit of our own Wisdom and Discerning, should as it were naturally
assume to our selves the Airs of Prophets or extraordinary Ambassadors of
Heaven. When we have great Discoveries of God made to our Souls, we should not
shine bright in our own Eyes. Moses when he had been conversing with God in the
Mount, though his Face shone so as to dazzle the Eyes of Aaron and the People,
yet he did not shine in his own Eyes; he wist not that his Face shone. Let none
think themselves out of Danger of this spiritual Pride, even in their best
Frames. God saw that the Apostle Paul, (though probably the most eminent Saint
that ever lived.) was not out of Danger of it, no not when he had just been
conversing with God in the third Heaven: See 2 Cor. 12. 7. Pride is the worst
Viper that is in the Heart; it is the first Sin that ever entered into the
Universe, and it lies lowest of all in the Foundation of the whole Building of
Sin, and is the most secret, deceitful and unsearchable in its Ways of working,
of any Lust whatsoever: it is ready to mix with every Thing; and nothing is so
hateful to God, and contrary to the Spirit of the Gospel, or of so dangerous
Consequence; and there is no one Sin that does so much let in the Devil into
the Hearts of the Saints, and expose them to his Delusions. I have seen it in
many Instances, and that in eminent Saints. The Devil has come in at this Door
presently after some eminent Experience and extraordinary Communion with God,
and has woefully deluded and led 'em astray, 'till God has mercifully opened
their Eyes and delivered them; and they themselves have afterward been made
sensible that it was Pride that betrayed them.

Some of the true Friends of the Work of God's Spirit have erred in giving too
much heed to Impulses and strong Impressions on their Minds, as though they were
immediate Significations from Heaven, to them, of something that should come to
pass, or something that it was the Mind and Will of God that they should do,
which was not signified or revealed any where in the Bible without those
Impulses. These Impressions, if they are truly from the Spirit of God, are of a
quite different Nature from the gracious Influences of the Spirit of God on the
Hearts of the Saints; they are of the Nature of the extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit, and are properly Inspiration, such as the Prophets and Apostles, and
others had of old; which the Apostle distinguishes from the Grace of the
Spirit, in the 13th Chap. of the first of Corinthians.

One Reason why some have been ready to lay Weight on such Impulses, is an
Opinion they have had, That the Glory of the approaching happy Days of the
Church would partly consist in restoring those extraordinary Gifts of the
Spirit: which Opinion I believe arises partly through Want of duly considering
and comparing the Nature and Value of those two Kinds of Influences of the
Spirit viz. his ordinary gracious Influences, and his extraordinary Influences
in Inspiration and miraculous Gifts. The former are by far the most excellent
and glorious; as the Apostle largely shows in the first of Corinthians
beginning, with the 31st Verse of the 12th Chapter; speaking of the
extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, he says, But covet earnestly the best Gifts;
and yet I show you a more excellent Way. i. e. a more excellent Way of the
Influence of the Spirit: And then he goes on in the next Chapter, to show what
that more excellent Way is, even that which is in the Grace of the Spirit,
which summarily consists in Charity, or divine Love. And throughout that Chapter
he shows the great Preference of that above Inspiration. God communicates
himself in his own Nature more to the Soul in saving Grace in the Heart, than
in all maraculous Gifts: The blessed Image of God consists in that, and not in
these: The Excellency, Happiness and Glory of the Soul, does immediately
consist in that, and not in those: That is a Root that bears infinitely more
excellent Fruit: Salvation and the eternal Enjoyment of God is promised to
divine Grace, but not to Inspiration: A Man may have those extraordinary Gifts,
and yet be abominable to God, and go to Hell: The spiritual and eternal Life of
the Soul don't consist in the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, but the Grace
of the Spirit: This, and not those, is that Influence of the Spirit of God
which God bestows only on his Favorites and dear Children: He has sometimes
thrown out the other to Dogs and Swine, as he did to Balaam, Saul, and Judas;
and some that in the primitive Times of the Christian Church committed the
unpardonable Sin, as Heb. 6. Many wicked Men at the Day of Judgment will plead,
Have we not prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast out Devils, and in thy
Name done many wonderful Works. The greatest Privilege of the Prophets and
Apostles, was not their being inspired and working Miracles, but their eminent
Holiness. The Grace that was in their Hearts, was a thousand Times more their
Dignity and Honor, than their miraculous Gifts. The Things that we find David
comforting himself in, in the Book of Psalms, are not his being a King, or a
Prophet, but the holy Influences of the Spirit of God in his Heart,
communicating to him divine Light, Love and Joy. The Apostle Paul abounded in
Visions and Revelations and miraculous Gifts, above all the Apostles; but yet
he esteems all Things but Loss for the Excellency of the spiritual Knowledge of
Christ. It was not the Gifts but the Grace of the Apostles, that was the proper
Evidence of their Names being written in Heaven, which Christ directs them to
rejoice in, much more, than in the Devils being subject to them. To have Grace
in the Heart is an higher Privilege than the blessed Virgin her self had, in
having the Body of the second Person in the Trinity conceived in her Womb, by
the Power of the Highest overshadowing her; Luke 11, 27, 28. And it came to
pass as he spoke these Things, a certain Woman of the Company lift up her
Voice, and said unto them, Blessed is the Womb that bear thee, and the Paps
that thou have sucked! But he said, yea, rather blessed are they that hear the
Word of God, and keep it. See also to the same Purpose, Math. 12. 47, etc.

The Influence of the Holy Spirit, or divine Charity in the Heart, is the very
greatest Privilege and Glory of the highest Archangel in Heaven; yea, this is
the very Thing by which the Creature has Fellowship with God himself, with the
Father and the Son, in their Beauty and Happiness, and are made Partakers of
the divine Nature, and have Christ's Joy fulfilled in themselves.

The ordinary sanctifying Influences of the Spirit of God are the End of all
extraordinary Gifts, as the Apostle shows, Ephesians. 4: 11, 12, 13. They are good
for nothing, any further than as they are subordinate to this End; they will be
so far from profiting any without it, that they will only aggravate their
Misery. This is as the Apostle observes, the most excellent Way of God's
communicating his Spirit to his Church; it is the greatest Glory of the Church
in all Ages. This Glory is what makes the State of the Church on Earth most
like the State of the Church in Heaven, where Prophecy and Tongues, and other
miraculous Gifts cease, and are vanished away, and God communicates his Spirit
only in that more excellent Way that the Apostle speaks of, viz. Charity, or
divine Love, which never fails. Therefore the Glory of the approaching happy
State of the Church don't at all require these extraordinary Gifts. As that
State of the Church will be the nearest of any to its perfect State in Heaven,
so I believe it will be like it in this, that all extraordinary Gifts shall
have ceased and vanished away; and all those Stars and Moon, with the reflected
Light they gave in the Night, or a more dark Season, shall be swallowed up in
the Sun of divine Love. The Apostle speaks of those Gifts of Inspiration as
childish Things, in comparison of the Influence of the Spirit in divine Love,
Things given to the Church only to support it in its Minority, 'till the Church
should have a complete, standing Rule established, and all the ordinary Means
of Grace should be settled; but as Things that should cease; as the Church
advanced above it is childish State, and should entirely vanish when the Church
should come to the State of Manhood; which will be in the approaching glorious
Times, above any other State of the Church on Earth. 1 Cor. 13. 11. When I was
a Child, I spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child, I thought as a Child: but
when I became a Man, I put away childish Things: Compared with the three
preceding Verses.

When the Apostle in this Chapter, speaks of Prophecies, Tongues and
Revelations ceasing and vanishing away in the Church, when the Christian Church
should be advanced from a State of Minority to a State of Manhood, he seems to
have Respect to it is coming to an adult State in this World as well as in
Heaven; for he speaks of such an adult State, or State of Manhood, wherein
those three Things, Faith, Hope, and Charity, should abide or remain after
Miracles and Revelations had ceased; as you may see in the last Verse, And now
abides ((...) remains) Faith, Hope, Charity; these three. The Apostle's
Manner, of speaking here shows an evident Reference to what he had just been
saying before; and here is a manifest Antithesis between that remaining spoken
of here, and that failing, ceasing, and vanishing away, spoken of in the 8th
Verse. The Apostle had been showing how that all those Gifts of Inspiration,
that were the Leading-Strings of the Christian Church in it is Infancy, should
vanish away, when the Church came to a State of Manhood; and when he has done,
then he returns to observe, what Things remain after those had failed and
ceased; and he observes that those three Things shall remain in the Church,
Faith, Hope, and Charity: And therefore the adult State of the Church he speaks
of, is the more perfect State which it shall arrive at in this World, which
will be above all in that glorious State it shall be bro't to in the latter
Ages of the World. And this was the more properly observed to the Church of the
Corinthians, upon two Accounts; Because the Apostle had before observed to that
Church that they were in a State of Infancy, Chap. 3. 1, 2. And because that
Church seems above all others to have abounded with miraculous Gifts. -- When
the expected glorious State of the Church comes, the Increase of Light shall be
so great, that it will in some Respect answer what is said ver. 12. of seeing
Face to Face. See Isai. 24. 23, and 25. 7.

Therefore I don't expect a Restoration of these miraculous Gifts in the
approaching glorious Times of the Church, nor do I desire it: It appears to me
that it would add nothing to the Glory of those Times, but rather diminish from
it. For my Part, I had rather enjoy the sweet Influences of the Spirit, showing
Christ's spiritual divine Beauty, and infinite Grace, and dying Love, drawing
forth the holy Exercises of Faith, and divine Love, and sweet Complacence, and
humble Joy in God, one Quarter of an Hour, than to have prophetical Visions and
Revelations for a whole Year. It appears to me much more probable that God
should give immediate Revelations to his Saints in the dark Times of Popery,
than now in the Approach of the most glorious and perfect State of his Church
on Earth. It don't appear to me that there is any Need of those extraordinary
Gifts, to introduce this happy State, and set up the Kingdom of God through the
World: I have seen so much of the Power of God in a more excellent Way, as to
convince me that God can easily do it without.

I would therefore entreat the People of God to be very cautious how they give
Heed to such Things. I have seen 'em fail in very many Instances; and know by
Experience that Impressions being made with great Power, and upon the Minds of
true Saints, yea eminent Saints; and presently after, yea in the midst of,
extraordinary Exercises of Grace, and sweet Communion with God, and attended
with Texts of Scripture strongly impressed on the Mind, are no sure Signs of
their being Revelations from Heaven: for I have known such Impressions fail,
and prove vain by the Event, in some Instances attended with all these
Circumstances. I know that they that leave the sure Word of Prophecy, that God
has given us to be a Light shining in a dark Place, to follow such Impressions
and Impulses, leave the Guidance of the Pole Star, to follow a Jack with a
Lanthorn. And no wonder therefore that sometimes they are led a dreadful Dance,
and into woeful Extravagancies.

And seeing Inspiration is not to be expected, let us not despise human
Learning. They that say human Learning is of little or no Use in the Work of
the Ministry, don't consider what they say; if they did, they would not say it.
By human Learning I mean, and suppose others mean, that Improvement of that
common Knowledge which Men have, by human and outward Means. And therefore to
say that human Learning is of no Use, is as much as to say that the Education
of a Child, or that the common Knowledge that a grown Man has, more than a
little Child, is of no Use; and so that a Child of four Years old, is as fit
for a Teacher in the Church of God, with the same Degree of Grace, and capable
of doing as much to advance the Kingdom of Christ, by his Instruction, as a
very understanding knowing Man of thirty Years of Age. If adult Persons have
greater Ability and Advantage to do Service, because they have more human
Knowledge than a little Child, then doubtless if they have more human Knowledge
still, with the same Degree of Grace, they would have still greater Ability and
Advantage to do Service. An increase of Knowledge, without doubt, increases a
Man's Advantage either to do Good or Hurt, according as he is disposed. It Is
too manifest to be denied, that God made great Use of human Learning in the
Apostle Paul, as he also did in Moses and Solomon.

And if Knowledge, obtained by human Means, is not to be despised, then it will
follow that the Means of obtaining it are not to be neglected, viz. Study; and
that this is of great Use in order to a Preparation for a public instructing
others. And though undoubtedly, an having the Heart full of the powerful
Influences of the Spirit of God, may at some Times enable Persons to speak
profitably, yea very excellently, without Study; yet this will not warrant us
needlessly to cast our selves down from the Pinnacle of the Temple, depending
upon it that the Angel of the Lord will bear us up, and keep us from dashing
our Foot against a Stone, when there is another Way to go down, though it ben't
so quick. And I would pray that Method in public Discourses, which tends
greatly to help both the Understanding and Memory, may not be wholly neglected.

And another Thing I would beg the dear Children of God more fully to consider
of, is; How far, and upon what Grounds, the Rules of the holy Scriptures will
truly justify their passing Censures upon others that are professing
Christians, as Hypocrites and ignorant of any Thing of real Religion. We all
know that there is a judging and censuring of some Sort or other, that the
Scripture very often, and very strictly forbids. I desire that those Rules of
Scripture may be looked into, and thoroughly weighed (...) that it may be
considered whether or no (...) it upon us to discern the State of the Soul of
others, and to pass Sentence upon them as wicked Men, that are professing
Christians, and of a good visible Conversation, be not really forbidden by
Christ in the New Testament: If it be, then doubtless the Disciples of Christ
ought to avoid it, however sufficient they may think themselves for it; or
however needful, or of good Tendency, they may think it. It Is plain that that
Sort of Judging is forbidden, that God claims as his Prerogative, whatever that
be. We know that there is a certain Judging of the Hearts of the Children of
Men, that is often spoken of as the great Prerogative of God, and which belongs
only to him; as in 1 Kin. 8. 39. Forgive, and do, and give to every Man
according to his Ways, whose Heart thou know: for thou, even thou only,
know the Hearts of all the Children of Men. And if we examine, we shall find
that that Judging of Hearts that is spoken of as God's Prerogative, is not only
the judging of the Aims and Disposition of Men's Hearts in particular Actions,
but chiefly a judging the State of the Hearts of the Professors of Religion,
with Regard to that Profession. This will appear very manifest, by looking over
the following Scriptures; 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Psalm. 7. 9, 10, 11. Psalm. 26.
throughout. Prove. 16. 2. and 17. 3. and 21. 2. Joh. 2. 23, 24, 25. Rev. 2. 22, 2^
That Sort of Judging which is God's prope^ (...), is forbidden, as Romans 14. 4.
Who art thou (...) judge another Man's Servant? to his own (...) stands
(...) falls. Jam. 4. 12. There is one lawgiver that is able to save and to
destroy; who art thou that judge another? 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4. But with me it is a
very small Thing, that I should be judged of you, or of Man's Judgment; yea I
judge not mine own self; but he that judges me is the Lord.

Again; Whatsoever Kind of Judging is the proper Work and Business of the Day
of Judgment, is a Judging that we are forbidden, as in 1 Cor. 4. 5. Therefore
judge nothing before the Time, until the Lord come; who both will bring to
Light the hidden Things of Darkness, and will make manifest the Counsels of the
Hearts; and then shall every Man have Praise of God. But to distinguish
Hypocrites, that have the Form of Godliness, and the visible Conversation of
godly Men, from true Saints; to separate the Sheep from Goats, is the proper
Business of the Day of Judgment; yea, is represented as the main Business and
End of that great Day. They therefore do greatly err that take it upon them
positively to determine who are sincere, and who not, and to draw the dividing
Line between true Saints and Hypocrites, and to separate between Sheep and
Goats, setting the one on the Right and the other on the Left, and to
distinguish and gather out the Tares from amongst the Wheat: Many of the
Servants of the Owner of the Field are very ready to think themselves
sufficient for this, and are forward to offer their Service to this End; but
their Lord says Nay, least while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up the Wheat
also Let both grow together until the Harvest; and in the Time of the Harvest I
will take Care to see a thorough Separation made; as Mat. 13. 28, 29, 30.
Agreably to that forementioned Prohibition of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 5. Judge
nothing before the Time. In this Parable by the Servants that have the Care of
the Fruit of the Field, is doubtless meant the same with the Servants that have
the Care of the Fruit of the Vineyard, Luke 20. and those that are elsewhere
represented as Servants of the Lord of the Harvest, that are appointed as
Laborers in his Harvest, which we know are Ministers of the Gospel. Now that
Parable in the 13th of Math. is fulfilled; While Men slept, (during that long
sleepy, dead Time that has been in the Church,) the Enemy has sowed Tares; and
now is the Time when the Blade is sprung up, and Religion is reviving; now some
of the Servants that have the Care of the Field, say, Let us go and gather up
the Tares. -- I know by Experience that there is a great Aptness in Men, that
think they have had some Experience of the Power of Religion, to think
themselves sufficient to discern and determine the State of others Souls, by a
little Conversation with them; and Experience has taught me that it is an Error.
I once did not imagine that the Heart of Man had been so unsearchable as I find
it is. I am less charitable, and less uncharitable than once I was. I find more
Things in wicked Men that may Counterfeit, and make a fair Show of Piety, and
more Ways that the remaining Corruption of the Godly may make them appear like
carnal Men, Formalists and dead Hypocrites, than once I knew of. The longer I
live, the less I wonder that God challenges it as his Prerogative to try the
Hearts of the Children of Men, and has directed that this Business should be
let alone till the Harvest. I find that God is wiser than Men. I desire to
adore the Wisdom of God, and his Goodness to me and my fellow Creatures, that
he has not committed this great Business into the Hands of such poor, weak,
dim-sighted a Creature as I am; of so much Blindness, Pride, Partiality,
Prejudice, and Deceitfulness of Heart; but has committed it into the Hands of
one infinitely fitter for it, and has made it his Prerogative.

The Talk of some Persons, and the Account they give of their Experiences is
exceeding satisfying, and such as forbids and banishes the least Thought of
their being any other, than the precious Children of God; it obliges and as it
were forces full Charity: But yet we must allow the Scriptures to stand good,
that speak of every Thing in the Saint, that belongs to the spiritual and
divine Life, as hidden. Their Life is said to be hidden, Col. 3. 3, 4. Their
Food is the hidden Manna; they have Meat to eat that others know not of; a
Stranger intermeddles not with their Joys: The Heart in which they possess
their divine distinguishing Ornaments, is the hidden Man, and in the Sight of
God only, 1 Pet. 3. 4. Their new Name, that Christ has given them, No Man knows
but he that receives it, Rev. 2. 17. The Praise of the true Israelites, whose
Circumcision is that of the Heart, is not of Men but of God, Romans 2. 29. that
is; they can be certainly known and discerned to be Israelites, so as to have
the Honor that belongs to such, only of God; as appears by the Use of the like
Expression by the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. ^. speaking there of it is being God's
Prerogative to judge who are upright Christians, and that which he will do at
the Day of Judgment, he adds, and then shall every Man have Praise of God.

The Instance of Judas is remarkable; who though he had been so much amongst the
rest of the Disciples, who were all Persons of true Experience, yet never
seemed to have entertained a Thought of his being any other than a true
Disciple, till he discovered himself by his scandalous Practice.

And the Instance of Achitophel is also very remarkable; whom David did not
discern, though he was so wise and holy a Man, a Person of such great Experience,
and so great a Divine, and had such great Acquaintance with the Scriptures, and
knew more than all his Teachers, and more than the Ancients; and was grown old
in Experience, and was in the greatest Ripeness of his Judgment, and was a
great Prophet; and though he was so intimately acquainted with Achitophel, he
being his familiar Friend, and most intimate Companion in religious and
spiritual Concerns: yet David not only never discovered him to be an Hypocrite,
but relied upon him as a true Saint, thought he relished and felt his religious
Discourse, it was sweet to him, and he counted him an eminent Saint; so that he
made him above any other Man his Guide and Counselor in Soul Matters: but yet
he was not only, no Saint, but a notoriously wicked Man, a murderous, vile
Wretch. Psalm. 55. 11, 12, 13, 14. Wickedness is in the midst thereof; Deceit
and Guile depart not from her Streets: For it was not an Enemy that reproached
me, then I could have born it; neither was it he that hated me that did magnify
himself against me, then I would have hid my self from him: But it was thou, a
Man mine Equal, my Guide and mine Acquaintance: We took sweet Counsel together,
and walked unto the House of God in Company.

To suppose that Men have Ability and Right to determine the State of the Souls
of visible Christians, and so to make an open Separation between Saints and
Hypocrites, that true Saints may be of one visible Company, and Hypocrites of
another, separated by a Partition that Men make, carries in it an
Inconsistency: for it supposes that God has given Men Power to make another
visible Church, within his visible Church; for by visible Christians, or those
that are of God's visible Church, can be understood nothing else, than that
Company that are Christians or Saints, visibly so; i. e. that have a Right to
be received as such, in the Eye of a public Charity. None can have Right to
exclude any one of this visible Church, but in the Way of that regular
ecclesiastical Proceeding, which God has established in his visible Church.

I beg of those that have a true Zeal for promoting this Work of God, that God
has begun in the Land, well to consider these Things. I am persuaded that as
many of them as have much to do with Souls, if they don't hearken to me now,
yet will be of the same Mind when they have had more Experience.

And another Thing that I would entreat the zealous Friends of this glorious
Work of God to avoid, is managing the Controversy with Opposers with too much
Heat, and Appearance of an angry Zeal; and particularly insisting very much in
public Prayer and Preaching, on the Persecution of Opposers. If their
Persecution were ten Times so great as it is, methinks it would not be best to
say so much about it. It becomes Christians to be like Lambs, not to be apt to
complain and cry when they are hurt; to be dumb and not open their Mouth, after
the Example of our dear Redeemer; and not to be like Swine, that are apt to
scream aloud when they are touched. We should not be ready presently to think
and speak of Fire from Heaven, when the Samaritans oppose us, and will not receive
us into their Villages. God's zealous Ministers would do well to think of the
Direction the Apostle Paul gave to a zealous Minister, 2 Timothy 24. 25, 26. And
the Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all Men, apt to
teach, patient; in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God
peradventure will give them Repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth. And
that they may recover themselves out of the Snare of the Devil, who are taken
Captive by him at his Will.

And another Thing that I would humbly recommend to those that Love the Lord
Jesus Christ, and would advance his Kingdom, is a good Attendance to that
excellent Rule of Prudence Christ has left us, Math. 9. 16, 17. No Man puts
a Piece of new Cloth into an old Garment; for that which is put in to fill it
up, takes from the Garment, and the Rent is made worse. Neither do Men put new
Wine into old Bottles; else the Bottles break, and the Wine runs out, and
the Bottles perish. But they put new Wine into new Bottles, and both are
preserved. I am afraid that the Wine is now running out in some Parts of this
Land, for want of attending to this Rule. For though I believe we have confined
our selves too much to a certain stated Method and Form in the Management of
our religious Affairs; which has had a Tendency to cause all our Religion to
degenerate into mere Formality; yet whatsoever has the Appearance of a great
Innovation, that tends much to shock and surprise Peoples Minds, and to set
them a talking and disputing, tends greatly to hinder the Progress of the Power
of Religion, by raising the Opposition of some, and diverting the Minds of
others, and perplexing the Minds of many with Doubts and Scruples, and causing
People to swerve from their great Business, and turn aside to vain Jangling.
Therefore that which is very much beside the common Practice, unless it be a
Thing in it is own Nature of considerable Importance, had better be avoided.
Herein we shall follow the Example of one, who had the greatest Success in
propagating the Power of Religion in the World, of any Man that ever lived,
that he himself gives us an Account of, 1 Cor. 9. 20, 21, 22, 23. Unto the
Jews, I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews: to them that are under the
Law, as under the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law: To them
that are without Law, (being not without Law to God, but under Law to Christ,)
that I might gain them that are without Law: To the weak, became I as weak,
that I might gain the weak: I am made all Things to all Men, that I might by
all Means, save some. And this I do for the Gospel's sake, that I might be
partaker thereof with you.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. l. 22. r. Work of. p. 4. l. 1. r. Favorites of. p. 69. l. 22. r. who
on. p. 91. l. 14. r. Lust. p. 94. l. 24. r. list.


