Christ Triumphing, AND Satan Raging.

A SERMON On MATTHEW. XII. 28. Wherein is proven, that the KINGDOM OF GOD IS COME
UNTO US at this Day. First preached at Nottingham in Pensilvania, Jan. 20.
1740, 1. And now published for the common Benefit.

SAMUEL FINLEY, Preacher of the Gospel.

Aug. de bona persev. in fine. Ego -- cum per eos qui meos labores legunt, non
^^m doctior, verum etiam emendatior fio; propitium ^^i Deum agnoseo: and hoc
per Ecclesiae Doctores ^xime expecto, si and in ipsorum manus veniunt,
dig^aturque nosse qu^^ scribo.

Phil. 1.17. -- Knowing that I am set for the Desence (...) the Gospel.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, 1741.

The PREFACE To the READER.
I Doubt not but a Variety of Censures will be passed upon this Discourse, and
its Author, by those who are disaffected at the Work of GOD. Some may say, It
can be nothing but Pride and Self-Conceit that engages a Youth to appear in
Print: Or perhaps they will say, Raw Novice; or, How knows this Man Letters?
Others may say, I push the Matter a little too far in many Things; that my
Doctrine is too harsh; and may call it a Piece of Railery. But neither so do
their Witnesses agree; for if the Doctrine be too grating and galling to the
Generality of Mankind, how then can I expect to raise my Reputation, and
gratify by Pride, by making it public? And though I do so with (...) Desire of
and Love to those who oppose themselves; yet they will be ready to conclude,
that it proceeds from Passion and Rage. But let the Reader carefully observe
the Chapter Arguments are chiefly founded; and see whether the same Objection
might not have been made to our LORD by the Pharisees, when he reasoned with
them upon the same Subject. And I should in vain look for a better Reception
than he met with, from the same Ranks of Persons, if I deal faithfully with
them. Yet I must not forbear. It may lease GOD to make it useful to some. I
would earnestly recommend a serious Perusal of that Book, entitled, The
fulfilling of the Scriptures, to such as call this a New Scheme. I am
persuaded, that a new Impression of said Book might be very serviceable to the
present Age: It is ^revely and judiciously written.

I need make no other Apology for the Method or Style of this Sermon, but only,
that it is better to be understood by all, than admired by any. However it is
not generally so flat as to be nauseous. I hold it a good Rule, to judge of any
Treatise from the Notions which the Strain thereof seems naturally to convey
and insill; and not from s^^^ defenseless Expressions, or Sentences dropped by
the by. But there is a Club lately formed, who call themselves Querists, that
seem pleased with the contrary. Method: If they c^^ find on unguarded Word or
Sentence, they presently deduct a Doctrine from it, which the Author's general
Strain ca^ prove was never by him intended. When a figurative Expression, in a
Book to them displeasing, will bear a fix Witticism, or satirical Jeer; if it
cannot be called unsound Doctrine, they will make it horrid Nonsense; and
sometimes strive to perplex Things that are plain enough; and seem desirous to
persuade the World, that such forced Meanings are the Author's Principles. Thus
they have dealt by Mr. Whitefield; and thus they may, perhaps, deal by this
Sermon. For many will hate and contradict, what they are unable to confute. But
the Reader may see, what a perverse Way of Reasoning at would be, to affirm
that a Kingdom is weak, because there are some depopulated Villages in it: Yet
after this Manner do the Querists reason. I can truly say, that it is an
unpleasing Task to me, thus to censure any: But the Necessary of it, in the
present Case, is plain, viz. That none may be imposed on to think a Book is
consuted, when some Expressiens are censured in the of resaid Manner. Either
let the (...) is fied Persons raze the Foundation on which I have built: or, if
that cannot be done, let them show, that the ^^persi^^ there is not built upon
the Foundation. In a (...): They (...) regularly to answer the Arguments I have
ad^^^^. Or, if they cannot, is it not reasonable (...) to them; and not vainly
(...) on (...), or c^^suse Passanges when the Meaning is plain and (...).

There is one Thing further I would observe to the Reader, viz. That Religion
has frequently been traduced by its Ene^ies, as the procuring Cause of common
Calamities: And accordingly, some of our Opposers do invidiously speak after
this Manner; That the Misery of an hard Winter has been sent upon the Land as a
just Judgment for such a Devilish Work as has been amongst us. I mention this
the rather, because it is exactly parallel to a Calumny which Heathen Opposers
cast upon Christianity in the primitive Ages. When a sore Famine was in the
Roman Empire, they boldly spoke to this Purpose, viz. That the GODS (for such
was their Dichect) had sent the Famine as a Punishment on account of the
Christians; and hence they thought it Justice to sacrifice them, and appease
their angry Deities by utterly destroying the Christian Race. By such
Suggestions the Devil sirives to imbitter the World against the Power of
Godliness: We are not ignorant of his Devices. Woe to the Inhabitants of the
Earth, for the Devil is come down with great Wrath, because he knows his Time
is short. No doubt he will ere long, upon some such Pretense, persuade his
Servants that it is not fit such Follows as we should live. For thus has he
always done. Oh that GOD may convince Opposers who reason thus! For, if they
persist, they will find to their sad Experience, that GOD will send, not only
temporal Calamities, but eternal Woes, on those who continue to despise his
Work: And will give his Witnesses Power to smite the Earth with all Plagues, as
often as they will. Rev. xi. 6. And that not because of the Progress of vital
Piety, but for the Contempt and Rejection of it: Though the ungodly World, as
they wrest the Scriptures, so also they wrest the Providence of GOD, to their
own Destruction. Thus were the Jews infatuated to interpret all the
Prognostics of their final Desolation, as Tokens of their complete Victory.

Reader, whoever thou art, of whatever Party, I tell thee, (which is all the
Assurance I can at present give) that my Desire and Prayer is, that thy
immortal Soul may reap Advantage from what I have written, by the Blessing of
GOD. And if you will read it with the same Desire, without Prejudice, I presume
you will acknowledge, that it does not seem to have any other Tendency. Take it
then, as a Token of my Love to thy Soul. And if GOD thy Maker does bless it for
the designed End, give him the Glory. And pray for

Thy Soul's Wellwisher, SAMUEL FINLEY.

MATTHEW. XII. 28. But if I cast out Devils by the Spirit of GOD, then the
Kingdom of GOD is come unto you.


MY Brethren, If we look back into the History of the Church, we may see that
CHRIST's Coming to it has not been so clear and evident, as not to be mistaken
and rejected, even by his own professing People; He came to his own, and his
own received him not. Joh. I. 11. And because this is the very Hinge whereon
our Eternal Happiness turns, every one must say, that it concerns us all to
study the surest and clearest Light in this Matter. It deserves the most solemn
and serious Attention; the most calm and deliberate Consideration; the most
impartial and unprejudiced Examination: Because it is an Affair of eternal
Moment. It is no sleeveless Errand I come to you about this Day; what I speak,
will be in Remembrance to all Eternity. I come to speak for GOD, who is here
present as a Witness of my Intentions, and a Judge of the Truth of my Doctrine;
and a Witness of the Reception you give it. In the Fear of this Great GOD let
us both speak and hear. And do not mistake me, as if I were speaking for
myself. No; I ask not your Silver or Gold; I value not your Applause or
Dispraise; nor do I desire from a Party-Zeal, to wed you to an Opinion. I
desire none, no not a Brother, to join with me herein, unl^^^^ be joined to
JESUS CHRIST; or from a Prospect that be may be joined to him. For, my
Principle is. That whoever are hypocritical Pretenders, either Ministers or
People, will, sooner or later, take Offense, and be a Dishonor, and a Wound to
Religion, as Demas and Alexander. If you will mistake me, to your own Loss it
will be, and your Blood will be upon your own Heads; for I have endeavored to
prevent it.

THE Occasion of the Words of my Text you will sind by looking back to the 22.
v. where is recorded a great Miracle wrought by our LORD, viz. Healing a Person
possessed by the Devil, blind and dumb: So evident was it, that he both spoke
and saw; it could be no Delusion. In v. 23. is observed the Effect of this on
the Multitude; they were amazed, and said, Is not this the Son of David? They
seemed well affected, and just ready to acknowledge this to be the Work of GOD,
and to embrace CHRIST as the promised Messiah, until the Pharisees jumbled them
all again. For, no doubt, they concluded, that if it were the Finger of GOD,
surely the pious Pharisees, who knew the Law best, and expounded it to them,
would not oppose it. And therefore they turn their Eyes from the Miracle to
hear the angr^ Pharisees.

What could any think, but that this Miracle would have put 'em for ever to
Silence, and have made even the Devil ashamed to oppose what was so evident? Or
at least have satisfied the People about CHRIST, so as they would not give Heed
to the Pharisees. But, from the following History we find it did neither. For
when the Pharisees perceived the People's Readiness to embrace JESUS as the
Messiah, they were afraid of the Consequence; for they knew their Credit must
then sink, perceiving that as many as were his wa^^^ Adherents, (...), and
their uns^^rching, l^gal, unprofitable, and powerless Doctrines. And when they
could not deny the Matter of Fact, they ascribe it to the Devil. And to
prepossess, and imbitter the People effectually against him, they call him,
This Fellow. A bitter Scoff, a satirical seer, Mocking, Laughing at the Work of
GOD, or its Promoters, calling it Enthusiasm or Fally, will readily turn carnal
Hearts against it; and make 'em shrink from it as a shameful Thing. This
Fellow, say they, though it is true he has cast out a Devil, yet that will not
prove him to be the Son of David; for the Devil himself can cast out Devils; do
not think the more of him for that; for we can prove from the Scriptures that
he is not the Son of David, and consequently he must be an Enthusiastic
Fellow, in League with the Devil, and to obtain the Applause of ignorant
People, he gets the Assistance of the Devil to cast out Devils. Oh how would
this shock the People, and raise their Aversion against CHRIST! to hear their
own beloved Teachers painfully warn them against him as a Devilish Fellow!

And alas! thus it has been with many at this Day, when the Power of GOD has
appeared in the Assemblies. They have been put into some Amazement, and stunned
about their own Case; have entertained a favorable Opinion of the Work of GOD,
until they have heard other Ministers speak against it; and by their Means, and
the Devil's Temptations, joined with the Plague of an unsanctified Heart, have
not only been jumbled, and turned from it, but have turned actually against it.
They who today cry Hosanna, tomorrow, when embittered by the Chief Priests,
cry, Crucify him.

From v. 25. we have our LORD's Reply in Vindication of his Work from the false
and malicious Aspersions of his Opposers. And hence his Ambassadors are taught
to do the same Thing; to justify his Work, though they should thereby cast
Contempt on all the Ministers on Earth. Why then, will any make it an Objection
against the Work of GOD, that we speak against the Ministers who oppose it;
since its being his Work, will not only justify us in so doing, but also make
it a necessry Duty? Therefore, after CHRIST's Example I ought to vindicate his
Work; nay, there is a Woe to me if I do not, though it should cost me my Life;
though it should be to the everlasting Disgrace of all that oppose it, whether
Ministers or People, Friends or Enemies, Relations or Strangers. Do not then,
mistake me, as if I spoke from any personal Prejudice against any, while I
profess the Contray, while I show a better Reason for my so doing. No; the
Persons of many, who are now Opposers, are dear to me, and never did me any
Harm.

Our LORD refutes the Pharisees, 1. From the Inconsisteney of their Argument
with human Policy. For whoever has a Kingdom, and desires to preserve it, would
certainly take the most probable Means for that End: And since the Safety of a
Kingdom consists in the Unity of its Members, consequently the Contrary tends
to its Overthrow. For if it were divided against itself, it would destroy
itself by intestine Broils, and become an easy Prey to a foreign Enemy. Now, as
Satan has a Kingdom, so he has Policy enough to preserve it, and his Malice
against GOD and Mankind is not lessened. But if he would forcibly cast out
Devils in Confirmation of a Doctrine directly sabversive of his Kingdom, surely
we must think he has forgot his Policy, has laid aside his Malice, is divided
against himself, (...) set for the Reformation of Hell, and consequently his
Kingdom cannot long continue.

2. He refutes 'em from their Inconsistency with thems^l^^s. For his Disciples
and Followers, who were some of their Children, to whom they were more
favorable, did cast out Devils in his Name. And this the Pharisees had
acknowledged was the Finger of GOD; for so much is implied in his saying,
Therefore they b^^^ be your Judges. But when he did the sa^^^ by hi^^^^n
Authority, they said it was by the Devil. And therefore be asks them, If I by
Beel^^^ub cast out Devils, by whom do your Children cast them out? They cast
out Devils, and you acknowledge that it is by the Power of GOD; I do the same,
and you say, It is by Beelzebub. Why are you so inconsistent with yourselves?
When the Effects are the same, by what Rule can you assign quite contrary
Causes? Therefore they shall be your Judges. i. e. They shall bear Witness
against your Partiality, so that you shall be condemned: [As we commonly say,
Such an Evidence condemned a Man.] But on the contrary, if what you say will
not bear Examination, then it will follow, That I cast out Devils by the Spirit
of God; and if so, then it also follows, That the Kingdom of God is come unto
you. The Kingdom of GOD, i. e. The Messiah's Kingdom, the Dispensation of the
Gospel, the Day of GOD's Power: The LORD whom ye sought, is come to his Temple,
and instead of Rejoicing thereat, you reject his Kingdom against yourselves;
instead of praising GOD for it, you are grieved that it is come, and wish it
away again: Woe to you that desired the Day of the LORD; to what Purpose is it
for you? You thought it would be clear Day that you could not mistake it,
whereas it is Darkness, and not Light. It come not with Observation: Yet it is
come unto you; but that is all, the Kingdom of GOD is not within you. It is
come into the Hearts of others, but is only come unto your Ears. However, what
you so long looked for, and prayed for, is come; if ye will receive it, receive
it.

Observe. The Argument by which our LORD proves that the Kingdom of GOD is
come, is his Casting out Devils. And having proven, that this could not be the
Work of the Devil, he infers, that it must be the Work of GOD's Spirit. And
hence coucludes, That the Kingdom of GOD is come to them. Hence then clearly
follows this Doctrinal Observation, viz.

That it is a sure Proof of a gracious Work of GOD's Spirit, when the Devil is
cast out, by the Means of (...) Gospel-Doctrine.

What I chiefly intend by this Text, is, To pr^^^ that the Kingdom of GOD is
come unto us at this Da^^ But some may say, How does this Doctrine tend (...)
prove it, seeing none possessed of Devils are no^^ miraculously cured?
Therefore, to obviate this Objection, I have chosen the following Method: I. I
will show, how it will appear that the Devil, in some Measure, possesses every
unregenerate Soul. II. By what Marks it will be discernable when be is cast
out. III. Prove the Doctrine. IV. Show, that the Kingdom of GOD is come unto as
at this Day.


And lastly, apply.

And First I am to show, How it will appear that the Devil, in some Measure,
possesses every unregenerate Soul.

I am sensible this must be a shocking Expression, and no Wonder though it be:
And some may take Offense, and say I speak in an unprecedented Strain, and
rashly abuse Mankind. But do not conclude either too hastily, until you have
weighed my Reasons. But first I will premise, that I do not mean he possesses
them so, as to deprive them of the Use of the Powers or Faculties of Soul or
Body, as he did the Person mentioned in this Passage of Scripture; but only
that he possesses them so, as to pervert the Use of these Faculties to quite
wrong Purposes.

Now, let it be observed, that this Person is said to be possessed by a durub
Spirit, in Mark ix. ^7. by a Metonymy of the Effect, i. e. The Spirit is said
to be dumb from the Dumbness which he caused in the Person possessed by him.
How then, if he is properly said to possess (...), whom he deprives of their
natural Sight, or Speech; (...) same Reason will hold of those, whom he
deprives ^^eir spiritual Sight: And thus he deals by the Wic^^^, 2 Cor. iv. 4.
in whom the God of this World has (...) their Minds. And hence he is justly
said to ^^ess these who do his Drudgery, as a Master possesses a Servant: For,
says the Apostle, his Servants ye are whom ye obey. Romans vi. 16. These then, in
whom he mises lustful, adulterous Motions, are justly said to be possessed by
an unclean Spirit, Matthew. xii. 43. As Aheb's Prophets are said to be acted by a
lying Spirit. King. xxii. 22. The LORD JESUS says as much as I have said, in
Job. viii. 44. where he tells the unconverted Jews, Ye are of your Father the
Devil. This ^^tes the Possession he had of them, as a Father possesses a Son.
In Ephesians. ii. 2. the Prince of the Power of the Air, i. e. the Devil, is said to
work in the Children of Disobedience, as a Man works, and vends his Wares in a
Shop, which he possesses. It Is a proud Fondness (...) affect more Modesty than
CHRIST or his Apostles. I may boldly say, A graceless Heart is the Devil's
Mint^^^se. No Wonder then, that it is a Forgery of Lies, Deceit, and Hypocrisy;
or a Cage of unclean and ^^^eful Thoughts; a very Sink of Hellish Wickedness.
For why; the Devil is the God of this World, i. e. of unconverted, worldly Men,
of whatever Rank or Station they be; and he sets up his Kingdom in their
Hearts, in Opposition to the GOD of Heaven. He is said to have filled the Heart
of Ananias and Saphira, causing them to lie against the Holy Ghost. Acts 5. 3.
And can he fill the Heart, and not possess it? And is not every Liar a Child of
the Devil, who was a Liar from the Beginning, and the Father of it? Joh. viii.
44.

But if these Arguments should be thought insufficient, I will appeal to
Matters of Fact. Take we then a View of a carnal Heart; such as we have in R^m.
i. 29, 30. and 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10. Gal. 5.19, 20. and therein we shall find, All
Unrighteousness, Fornication, Wickedness, Covetousness, Maliciousness, Envy,
Murder, Debate, Deceit, Malignity, Whispering, Backbiting, Hatred of GOD,
Pride, Beasting, Despite, Invention of evil Things, Disobedience to Parents,
Ignorance, Blindness, Treacher, Cruelty, Hard-heartedness, Implacability,
Unmercifulness, Idolatry, Adultery, Effeminacy, Sodomy, Thefts, Drunkenness,
Mockery of what is good, Extortion, Unclean Lusts, Wantonness, Laseiviousness,
Witcheraft, Hatred, Anger, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Damnable
Heresies, Hypocrisy, and many more such like. O Sinner! look at thy Picture,
and see what a deformed Creature thou art; but withal consider, that the half
is not told. Now, to whom shall we attribute these Works? Would not any of you
say, that GOD never implanted such cursed Qualities in you as these? and would
you not rather ascribe them to the Devil, than to yourselves? And if these
Things be in you, what is the Consequence? Surely his Servants ye are, to whom
ye yield Obedience. If you are angry, and hate me for telling you so, do you
not prove what I say? For, he that hates another Man, is a Murderer, 1 John
iii. 15. And is not Murder a Work of the Devil, who was a Murderer from the
Beginning? And hence he is said to be in Danger of Hellfire, who calls
another, Fool, through Rancour and Malice. Matthew. 5.22. Thus is appears, that the
Devil possesses every unregenerate Soul.

But some may say, I have never been guilty of these Actions mentioned, and
consequently the Devil has never had Possession of me.

But though you have not been actually guilty of all these; yet of as many of
them, as will prove all that I say. But if you would make a due Eatimate of
your Heart, you must look on it, as containing the Seeds of all the Wickedness
any Mortal has ever been guilty of: For, though the inborn Corruptions of some me
several Ways restrained from breaking out into Action; yet, until the Heart be
renewed by Grace, it is still under the Power of Sin. Those who have been
greatly reformed in Externals, and afterward turned openly Profane, are a
Proof of this. Besides the Apostle teaches us the same Thing, in Ephesians. ii. 3.
while he puts himself, and others who were then Christians, in the same Rank
with the worst of Sinners, before their Conversion. Notwithstanding his
blameless Life, yet he is in the same Rank with these who were dead in
Trespasses and Sins, in whom the Prince of the Power of the Air did work. Among
whom we all had our Conversotion in Times ^^est, -- and were by Nature the
Children of Wrath, even as others. -- We need no more wonder, why many moral
knowing Men do vehemently oppose the Work of GOD.

Now, since these are the Evidences of a Soul possessed of Satan; the contrary
Characters must be engraven on it by the Spirit of GOD, when Satan is cast out.

And hence we may the more easily know, in The Second Place, By what Marks it
will be discernable when a Soul is freed from the Possession of Satan.

And this will be discernable, 1. To the Persons themselves. 2. To other
Christians. 3. In some Measure to the Graceless World.

And 1. The Persons themselves may know: For, when the Spirit of GOD comes to
cast out Satan, he convinces of Sin, of Righteousness, and Judgment. He first
removes their natural Blindness; and they see themselves to be all that I have
described them to be, and worse. Then they can feelingly say, with Paul, I know
that in me dwells no good Thing! For the Holy Ghost sets home the Law with
Power upon their Consciences, in the spiritual Meaning and Extent of it; and
they see it is exceeding broad, directing, not (...) to the Maker, but also to
the Manner of their Services; and extending, not only to all their Words, and
all their Actions, but also to all their Thoughts. By this Means they perceive
these Things to be Sins, which they little thought of before. They see they
have never given the Law its Due in any one Instance of Life, in Thought, Word,
^or Deed. The Ignorance, Pride, Selfishness, Hypocrisy, Slothfulness, etc. that
were mixed with their best Doings, are opened to their View, and they behold a
whole World of Iniquity. But further, they see the heinous Nature of Sin, how
hateful, how contrary to the Nature of GOD. Also the dreadful Consequences of
it; the infinite Power and Justice of GOD engaged against 'em for it; the
burning Hell they are exposed to on account of it; the glorious Heaven they
lose by it; and with all their own utter Inability to expiate the Guilt of the
smallest Sin. Their natural Stupidity and Carelessness is also removed; they are
exceedingly distressed, and can be no longer easy; nothing will quiet them but
an assured Token of GOD's Favor and pardoning Grace. Thus he convinces of Sin;
and they must needs know what they are convinced of.

Then the Holy Ghost opens up the Scriptures, and reveals to their fainting
Souls the Scripture-Method of Falvation by the Righteousness of CHRIST; and
^^kes them see, that, though they have no heavenly Beauty, Wisdom, or
Rightcousness, yet CHRIST is all they can want, or desire: They are so surely
convinced of this, that they as little doubt of his Righreousness, as of their
own Sins. They can venture their Souls, their ^^rnal Happiness, upon the Truth
of the Gospel; they do not at all doubt of Life in CHRIST, if they could but
win him, and be found in him. They see the Excellency of this Method of
Salvation, and the ab^^^^^ Necessity of this perfect Righteousness. Then they
are convinced, that, as he is a complant, so he is also a willing Savior, and
will refuse none that come to him. Thus they are convinced of Righteousness;
and can they be convinced of any Thing, and not know that they are convinced of
it?

Further, their native Pride is broken down; their hard Hearts are melted, and
their obstinate Wills made pliable, and cheerfully consent to take CHRIST for
Wisdom, Rightrousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. Then he is lovely above
all Things, the Chiefest among ten Thousand in their Esteem. He is their
Choice, their Delight, their Happiness, the Center of all their Affections, the
Ground of their Hopes and Joys. They cannot be satisfied without a Sense of his
Presence; they are troubled when he hides his Face. Instead of a ^avish Terror
and Horror of Conscience, they are, sometimes, filled with inward Peace, and
Consolation, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. Then is the Power of Sin broken, and
the Life is reformed to better Purpose than ever it was before. They love what
they formerly loathed; and hate what they loved. Strict Holiness is lovely,
GOD's Laws are sweet to their Souls; they delight in religious Exercises, in
religious Company, and spiritual Conference, instead of wanton Frolicks and
vain Mirth. Instead of Pride, Covetousness, outrageous Passions, Hatred, and
Wrathfulness; they have Humility, Meekness, and Gentleness, Love to the People
of GOD, Love to their Enemies, a generous Contempt of earthly Things,
Heavenly-Mindedness. Instead of careless Lives, there is a Watch upon their
very Thoughts. They daily mourn under a Sense of their daily Miscarriages, and
grieve at the inborn Corruptions which they feel in their Souls. Thus they
sight under CHRIST'S Banner, against the Devil, the World, and the Flesh. Thus
they are convinced of Judgment; for whoever have felt these Things, may know.
That the Prince of this World is judged: Or, in other Words, That the Devil is
east out. Jeb. xvi. 1^.

2. This will be discernable to other Christians, and that by Analogy, or
Comparison of Experiences: For, though the Work of GOD may differ in some
Circumstances in the Beginning; yet in Substance it is the same; and when it is
wrought, is just the same in all; there is but one Faith, and one Spirit. Real
Christians have all the same Desires, the same Fears, the same passionate
Breathings of Love to GOD and CHRIST; the same Pursuits after Holiness, and
Mortification of Sin; the same Complaints, the same Joys and Comforts; the same
Supports and Encouragements: Cat down and raised up on the very same Accounts;
have the same Savor, Taste, and Relish of divine Things. There is an Oneness
among them, a Fellow-Feeling of one another's Grievances, a Bearing of one
another's Burdens. This endears them to one another above the dearest graceless
Relations. Now, it is from this Sameness of Experiences that their Knowledge of
one another proceeds. When they tell each other what GOD has done for their
Souls, they understand one another sweetly; and the one sees himself in the
other's Heart when it is told him. As a Traveller (making Allowance for
Similitudes) will know that another has traveled the same Road, by his exact
Description of particular Places; and can distinguish between him, and another
that has only read the Geographical Description of it, by the different Remarks
they will unavoidably make. And what though some Hypocrites may be taken for
Christians, and some weak Christians mistaken too; Yet particular Exceptions do
not break general Rules: The Body of Hypocrites and Christians will not be for
easily mistaken by experienced, judicious Christians, as carnal People imagine.
For though many graceless Persons may learn to talk of Christian Experiences, yet
they will generally bewray their Ignorance in some thing or other, that every
real Christian knows, when they come close to the Point. But still they will
want that Power, and Relish, and Savor of divine Things, which are inimitable.
And hence the Apostle, in 1 Cor. iv. 19, 30. says, I will know, not the Words
of such an one, but the Power; for the Kingdom of GOD consists not in Word, but
in Power. So every real Christian can distinguish between Words and Power; or
else the same Apostle would have in vain directed them to turn away from such
as had the FORM, but denied the POWER of Gadliness. 2 Timothy iii. 5. Now, if in
express Words the Power were denied, the Form would be wanting; and therefore
it must be such as have the Form, and in Words confess that Power of Godliness,
from whom Christians must turn away, only because they have not this Power. But
how could this be done, unless they could distinguish between the Form, and the
Power? But this they can do; for, whoever has had the Spirit and Presence of
GOD, cannot but know when he wants it, and when he has it; and knowing what
Emotions of Heart he has in such and such Frames, he will the more readily
discern, when another speaks, prays, or preaches with the same Relish of divine
Things; as he that has felt the Passions of Anger, Love, or Joy, will the more
readily observe the Symptoms of them in another. And a spiritual Object is as
discernable to a spiritual Man, as a natural Object to a natural Man. But the
natural Man, who is spiritually blind, cannot possibly perceive the spiritual
Object, cannot savor the Things of GOD. But a Christian cannot but know, when
another speaks skilfully, feelingly, and distinctly of his own Case; and also
when it is ignorantly, insipidly, indistinctly, and powerlesly spoken of. And
hence the Apostle says, The spiritual Man judges all Things, yet he himself is
judged of no Man. 1 Cor. ii. 15. That is, He can discern spiritual Things, and
is best able to judge of spiritual Persons; yet he is not to be judged, as to
his Experiences, by a natural Man; because the natural Man is not a fit or
proper Judge of spiritual Things, seeing he understands them not. -- Now, these
internal Evidences of a Work of GOD can never be represented to the
Understandings of such who have never felt them, any more than Light or Colors
to one born blind; he wants Proof that there is Light, and asks how we can know
it; we can only tell him that the Light comes attended with its own Evidence,
and by the Light we see Light. Just so it is here: Carnal Persons have a great
many Exceptions against this Doctrine; they wonder how we can pretend to judge
of the State of others; and will tell us, We take GOD's Prerogative upon us to
judge the Hearts of Men; whereas we only judge them from what appears to us, in
so far as we know of their Manner of Life, and Christian Experiences. And hence
it is, that whenever GOD opens the Eyes of any, they soon see what Company to
join with. Hence likewise it is, that Christians cannot but judge these to be
graceless, who oppose, dislike, or show Ignorance of those Things, which they
know to be the Things of the Spirit of GOD. When they tell them so, they call
it Hatred and Rage; but this Doctrine proves that it is not. -- Hence we may
also infer, That these Persons, who have sufficient Opportunity of knowing the
Lives of Professors, and yet see no Difference among such as seem to have an
equal Quantity of Morality, and Head-Knowledge; I say, this Doctrine will prove
these to be blind themselves. No doubt Pharisee-Teachers will ask, Are we blind
also? However from hence we see how the Work of GOD, in casting out Satan, is
discornable to Christians. They can say with Peter, Let others think and speak
as they will, yet we believe, and are sure, that this is the Work of GOD. For
when they perceive that GOD works the same Things in others as in themselves,
it confirms their Belief of it. Indeed graceless Persons cannot be so certain;
as appears by their frequently fal^ng away in all Ages, when Persecution, or
other Offenses come; and the Reason is, because these internal Evidences can
never be represented to them; for, if young Christians would tell to them their
Experiences, they would account them Gibberish, and Foolishness: But,

3. The Work of GOD may be discernable to them also; and that by such Evidences
as carry in them a Probability that the Devil is cast out. Nay, according to
their own Principles they are obliged to believe it: For their professed
Principle is, to judge every Man a Christian who is Moral and Orthodox: And
though they be not competent Judges of Christian Experiences, from whence they
might have a Certainty of the Work of GOD; yet there are other Marks that are
level to their Capacities, from whence they may have a Probability. As, when he
that was formerly a Drunkard, lives a sober Life: When a vain, light, and
wanton Person becomes grave, and sedate: When the Blasphemer becomes a Praiser
of GOD: When Laughter is turned into Mourning; and carnal Joy into Heaviness;
and that professedly on account of their Souls Condition: When the Ignorant are
filled with Knowledge in divine Things, and the Tongue that was dumb in the
Things of GOD, speaks the Language of Canaan: When the Erroneous are become
Orthodox in fundamental Points: When such as never minded any Religion, do make
Religion their only Basiness: When busy Marthas, and covetous Worldlings, do
neglect their worldly Concerns to seek after GOD's Ordinances. Now, these
Things, and such like, are discernable to those who are graceless; and
according to their own Rules they ought to judge that the Devil is cast out.

Thirdly. It will be easy from hence, to prove the Doctrine, viz. That it is a
sure and infallible Proof of a gracious Work of GOD's Spirit, when the Devil is
cast out by Means of true Gospel-Doctrine.

For, if the Devil possesses every carnal Heart, in the Manner as has been
proven; then he must cast be out by One stronger than himself; but Man is not
stronger. And if Satan would cast out Satan, as a Confirmation of a Doctrine
directly subversive of his Kingdom, he would be divided against himself; which
is contrary to his Policy, and Enmity against GOD and Mankind. And
consequently, To cast him out, must be the Work of GOD's Spirit, who alone can
spoil him of his Armoua, viz. Ignorance, vicious Desires, Blindness of Mind,
Hardness of Heart, Unbelief, Errors, Presumption, and carnal Security, by which
he trusted to barricade and fortify himself against the Power of GOD, and live
peaceably in the carnal Heart.

Besides, to attend the Ordinances of GOD, to wait on him at his House of
Praver, instead of a Tavern or Playhouse; to frequent Christian Societies; to
desire Christian Conversation, instead of Balls, Dances, Frolicks, and
Merry-Meetings of Good-Fellows; to study Holiness in Heart and Life; to mourn
bitterly for Sin, and hate it; to seek the Favor and Presence of GOD, and
Tokens of his Love; to be restless about the State of their Souls, so as
nothing will quiet them but Assurance of Pardon; to love GOD, and rejoice in
CHRIST JESUS above all Things, etc. Now, I say, to do these Things, are not the
Works of One that has a Devil. And if it were the Work of Man, if he were the
Moral Cause of Conversion; then, s^rely, the learned and elaborate Discourses,
the moral Reasonings, the harmonious and eloquent Preaching of the Clergy,
would have still persuaded Mankind to it in every Age. But on the Contrary,
since these Characers, and the Properties before described, are contrary ^o the
Nature and Pursuits of Satan, and above the Power of both Men and Devils to
effect; and only within the Power of GOD, agreeable to his Word, his Nature,
and Persections: Then it unavoidably follows, That they are the Work of his
Sprit.

All that remains now of the Doctrinal Part, is, Fourthly. To prove, That the
Kingdom of GOD is come unto us at this Day.

Oh the joyful Sound! Unto us, upon whom the Ends of the World are come! Surely
all that hear me will rejoice, if I can make it appear.

That there has been a great religious Commotion in the World in our present
Day, is so evident,, that it cannot be denied: But there has been a Murmuring
among the People; some saying, That GOD is with us of a Truth; that the
Dayspring from on high has visited us; and the Day Star has risen in many
Hearts: Others saying, Nay, it is all Deceit, or Delusion, or the Work of the
Devil. But that CHRIST is come to his Church, will appear, I presume, in the
Judgment of any considering Person, if I can make these Things appear: 1. That
the Church was in the same Circumstances as when he used to visit it. 2. If the
Manner of his Coming be in Substannce the same. 3. If the Treatment he meets
with, be the same. 4. If the Consequences and Effects be the same. 5. If the
Attempts and Objections made against him, be the same. And, in a Word,


If the Devil be cast out by Means of true Gospel-Doctrine. And

1. As to the Circumstances of the Church; He always came when it needed a
Reformation, even in the Judgment of graceless Professors; when Religion
dwindled into an empty Form, and Professors had lost the Life and Power of
Godliness; in a Word, when there was Midnight-Darkness, and little Faith to be
found on the Earth. Thus it was when he came in the Flesh; when he sent St.
Athanasius, Luther and Calvin, and at the Reformation of Scotland. We find the
graceless Jews prayed for the Day of the LORD, in Amos 5.18. And hence were our
Pulpits filled with seemingly devout Prayers for a Revival of Religion, and
Confessions of its decayed State. And what had we lately but a dry Formality?
Did not all in general seem to be at Ease in Zion, and in much Peace about the
State of their Souls? How few were asking the Watchmen, What of the Night? The
Lives of Professors careless, unholy, unguarded; Ordinances attended, Duties
performed, Sermons preached, without Life or Power, and as little Success. Was
not worldly Discourse our mutual Entertainment at our solemn Assemblies on
Holy Days? Thus in Darkness and Security were we: And like People, like Priest.

2. As to the Manner of his Coming; It never was in such a Manner as carnal
Persons imagined; but still unexpected, and out of the common Way. And this is
a necessary Consequent of the State of the Church: For since he comes in a dark
Time, we may easily conclude, that the Manner thereof is unobserved at first.
He must needs come unawares, when a carnal World have forgotten, and do neglect
him; and do not know him, or the powerful Operations of his Spirit until they
^^^l them. For though they may pray for the Day of the LORD; yet they know it not
when it comes, and so do not know what they ask. Amos 5.18. Now, by this Means
he comes always quire cross to the Inclinations of the Clergy, who are
generally sunk in Carnality as well as the People. And as a Consequence of
this, the Ministers by whom He works, have always at first been few: And thus
the Work appears the more eminently to be his own, the less probable that the
Instruments appear. Thus it was when he came in the Flesh. He came indeed out
of Beth^ehem, but in a mean Condition; and afterward unperceivably changing
his Place, was mistaken. When he entered on his public Ministry, it was (...)
according to the Traditions of the Fathers; for we find they were surprised, in
Luke iv. when he began to expound the Scriptures, being neither a Scribe nor
Pharisee. And the People not being used with such close and particular
Applications, could not bear his new Methods. Passing by the established, but
proud, bigoted, gainsaying Clergy, he chooses Twelve unlearned, unpolished Men,
most of them Fishers; and gave them a Commission to preach the Gospel, without
consulting the Sanhedrim about such unprecedented Proceedings. Thus was his
Coming dark, and cross to them. -- Now, in our Days the Parallel is plain, for
supposing the present Commotion to be the Work of GOD: Every one knows how
cross it is to the Inclinations of the Clergy. Surely, our Opposers will
confess, they neither did, nor do expect Religion to be revived in such a
Manner; while there are so many Things, in their Opinion, wrong. Surely, it is
a dark Day to them, and no Light in it; many of them know not what to make of
it, by their own Confession. We all know how few its Propagators are; and they
say, that most of us are unlearned: But do they not, by the by, bewray
themselves herein? For, if unlearned, they must have the less Rhetoric and
Oratory; and consequently the less able to bring such Things to pass. If it
were the Work of Man, a superior Power of Man would overthrow it. -- In a Word,
the Parallel holds in every Thing, only our Manner of Licensing is not
unprecedented.

3. The Treatment he met with; As a native Consequence of his Coming in so dark
and mean a Condition, and cross to the Minds of the Clergy; he was rejected by
them, and by many of the Noble and Mighty after the Flesh; who embittered
against him as many People as they could influence. And as a Consequence of his
being disowned by these, he was chiefly followed by what we call the Mob, the
Rabble, the common and meaner Sort. And being disowned by the self-righteous
Moralists, was followed by the openly Profane, the Publicans, and Harlots: For
he is still set for the Rise and Fall of many in Israel; and many who thought
themselves firsi, and were esteemed so by others in the Dark, did show
themselves to be last. Thus it was when he came in the Flesh; rejected by the
Clergy so generally, and by the Noble and Wise, that it was said, Have any of
the Rulers or Pharisees believed on him? No: But this People who know not the
Law, are accursed. -- Just so is he treated by the same Ranks of Persons at
this Day. May I not ask, Have any of the Rulers, have any of the Ministers
embraced the present Work? Do they not rather prepossess and imbitter the
carnal People against it? And many who seemed first in Religion, are they not
become the very last, and the last, first? For our Opposers confess of their
own Accord, That it is only the ignorant Rabble that embrace it; many of which
never minded any Religion, and so do not know the Law. Sure they who know the
Law, might know, that it is a good Proof of a Day of GOD's Power when the Poor
have the Gospel preached to them, and do receive it. Mat. xi. 5. Might they not
know that our LORD used this Argument? And also that GOD chooses foolish Things
to confound the Wise? But they must confess, that though there be not many, yet,
Glory to GOD! there are some of the Wise, and Mighty, and Noble, on our Side.

4. The Effects and Consequences of his Coming; As a Consequence of the strong
Opposition of the Clergy, and others of their Adherents, against him. Contrary
to their own Intentions, their Speaking of him was a Means of setting the
People on the Search; and Numbers flocked after him, to hear these n^w
Doctrines, and new Methods; and were then caught in the Gospel-net: As many as
were ordained to eternal Life, believed. Thus in Joh. vii. 11, and seq. the
Pharisees speaking against him, put him in the People's Minds, who began to
talk of him. His Audiences were often deeply affected; and frequently divided
between him and the Clergy: And hence we so often read, that there was a
Division among the People. He never came to send Peace on the Earth, but a
Sword, and Division. Luke xii. 51 -- 58. -- Just so it has been in our Day.
Many can say by Experience, that their Attention and Curiosity was raised by
Means of the Contradictions of their Ministers. And hence we have seen unusual
Numbers going to hear the Word like thirsty Flocks: And heard a great Mourning,
like the Mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddon. Also there has been
a Division among the People; some praising GOD for what their Eyes have seen,
and their Ears heard, and their Souls felt; others going way mocking,
contradicting, blaspheming.

Another Effect was, the Breaking down of Bigotry; partly as a native
Consequence of the Attention of all Parties being raised to come and hear; and
partly by the Example and Directions of CHRIST, and his Followers. Thus he
freely conversed, eat, and drank, with different opposite Parties, Jews and
Samaritans, Publicans and Pharisees; and justified his so doing from the Need
there was of it, that all might come freely, and reap Benefit. And the Apostle,
in Phil. iii. 15, 16. advises real Christians who hold the Foundation, to walk
together in such Things as they are agreed in; for in Things wherein they are
disagreed, they cannot. -- And just so our Opposers confess it to be now, while
they accuse us for holding Communion with different Societies, and would
insinuate, that we do so from some politic Design: Indeed there is this Policy
in it, To gain some by any Means, and make a Party for JESUS CHRIST.

5. The Attempts; As a Consequence of the People's following CHRIST or his
Ambassadors, and disregarding the Clergy, the latter always attempted to
overthrow the new Scheme: Were (1) unwearied in forming mischievous Devices
against him; would tell the People, they had an Imposture, and were deluded,
and deceived; followed him for no other End but to find something to cavil at;
wrested both his Words and Actions to find Matter of Accusation. (2) They were
unsatisfied; for after they had been busy all along, they say, What do we? q.
d. We have been too slack and cowardly; come, let us bestir ourselves, and not
suffer all to be overturned; we have prevailed nothing as yet. (3) Their
Attempts were still unsuccessful, and always tended to promote the Cause they
were set to baffle: Though they are still busy, yet are conscious they prevail
nothing. Thus when the Scribes and Pharisees sought Christ at the Feast, Joh.
vii. 11. they put him in the People's Minds, who straight began to talk of him,
some good, some evil: When the Pharisees perceived this, they sorbid them to
speak of him either good or ill; for so much is implied in these Words, Howbeit
no Man spoke openly of him, for Fear of the Jews. They hoped that the Thoughts
of Christ would wear out of the People's Minds through Time. -- Just thus do the
Opposers now to a tittle It can be made appear, how Companies of Ministers and
People, have met together in a private Manner, to consult how they might
suppress the new Scheme, and what they could say against it: And indeed, their
Cavils, and the Spirit with which they are urged, do plainly show, that they
rather desire Matter of Accusation, than that they really have it. How do they
twist and wrest both the Words and Actions, and magnisy the Blemishes, of those
who stand up for the Work of GOD? If they can find an unguarded Expression,
they draw what horrid Consequences from it they can, and then affirm that this
is the Man's Principles. For Proof of all this, see the Qua^^^.
They want some plausible Pretense to blind the People. And they are yet
saying, What do we? -- And I could show, were it necessary, how every Instance
of Opposition against the present Work, have all been turned to its Advantage.
Oh that they would consider whom they fight against! for GOD is with us of a
Truth. And now some of them beg for Peace, and would have us be silent about
these controverted Things, that they may wear out of Mind. Their asking Peace
and Quietness has an Aspect pleasing to the Flesh, and looks plausible: But GOD
forbid that we should cease to proclaim his wondrous Deeds, to humor the
Enemies of his Work! No; let us tell them abroad more loudly, though it gall the
Consciences, and torment the Minds of all the Opposers on Earth. Rev. xi. 10.
Thus far we are on a straight Parallel, by the Confession of our Opposers.

6. The Objections made against him, are the same as usual. For, (1) The
Pharisees objected Disorder to our LORD, and his Apostles. How often are they
accused of not walking according to the Traditions of the Elders? And our
Opposers say, This cannot be the Work of GOD, because not according to their
Order: But they have not proven, that GOD is obliged to work by their Rules.
(2) When our LORD and his Apostles pleaded for free Grace, they were called
Enemies to Moses and the Law; and he was often called a Blasphemer. So the
present Opposers of GOD's Work, accuse some of us of speaking against the Law,
and call us Antinomians; and tug and strive, by wresting both the Words and
Intentions of some of our Brethren, to prove them Blasphemy. See the Quarists
p. 9.
He has spoken Blasphemy, why hear ye him? (3) It was objected to our LORD and
his Apostles, that they held Communion with Persons of different Societies.
Hence they stumbled, because he kept Company with Publicans, and Samaritans,
and Sinners. And thought, had he been so much as a common Prophet, he would
have known better what Company to keep; and hence concluded he could not
possibly be the CHRIST. -- So our Opposers say, that we bring the Church into
Confusion by a mixed Communion of different Persuasions; who yet hold the
Foundation. And further they ask, Why these who were of no religious Society,
are fond of this new Scheme? Quer. last Page.
Why eats your Master with Publicans and Sinners? He that pretends to be so
good a Man, why does he keep such bad Company? They seem now to think it
unjust, that Persons who never did so much in Religion as they, should enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven before them. (4) It is objected to us, that this
Commotion rends the Church; divides Congregations and Families; sets People at
Variance; makes them harsh and censorious. So we hear Tertullus, Act. xxiv. 5.
accuse Paul as a pestilent Fellow, a Mover of Sedition, a Profaner of the
Temple. The Pharisees, Joh. ix. 44. ask in a sour Manner, Are we blind also?
Do thou judge us to be blind too so rashly? And Elijah, because a Son of
Thunder, though he was the most peaceable, yet he must needs be called a Troubler
of Israel, in 1 Kings xviii. 17. And, in a Word, both they and we are Turners
of the World upside down, Subverters of Peace and Church Government, and the
like. Read Luke xii. 51 -- 57. Suppose ye, says Christ, that I am come to send
Peace on the Earth? I came not to send Peace, but a Sword -- to divide a Family
against itself. -- Why cannot our present Opposers discern the S^ns of THESE
TIMES? (5) The present Opposers say, they do not quarrel with the Work of GOD;
no, far be it from them; but only with these Disorders. So, in Joh. x. 33. the
Jews say, For a good Work we stone thee not: No; far be it from us, do not so
mistake us, we would be ready to encourage every Thing that has the Appearance
of Piety; it is not for thy good Works, but for Blasphemy. But his good Works,
instead of procuring their Favor, did raise their Envy: And though they would
not be so barefaced before the People; yet they could willingly have embrued
their Hands in his Blood, for no other Crime but his good Works; because he so
far out-shined them. But on account of the People, they must first find some
plausible Pretense against him. They took no Notice, or laid no Stress on his
Miracles; were never satisfied with all the Evidences he gave them; their
common Question was, What Sign show thou? Though they seemed resolved not to
be satisfied with any Sign. They still found Exceptions against all his Works;
and when they could not deny the Matter of Fact, they ascribed it to the Devil
sometimes. How often do they ask the Man born blind, how he received his Sight?
and would willingly have denied that he was blind: How earnest were they to
find some Flaw or other? And when they could find none, they put a religious
Face upon their Envy; exhort the Man to give GOD the Glory, but not to mind
JESUS; for they were sure he was a Sinner. -- Just so it is now adays to a
tittle. Our Opposers have no End of asking for Evidences; without taking Notice
of the Power of GOD, that has appeared in the Assemblies, or on the Lives of
Men: They still muster up Objections, and harp only on what they call Disorder.
They gather a great many of their Exceptions together, and then ask, if these
Irregularities be the Work of GOD. Without observing the deep Concern that
Souls seem to be under, they only ask about the Fits and Convulsions that their
Sorrow throws them into; and which they would be ready to allow for, in worldly
Respects, as the sudden News of the Death of Friends, or the like. And if some
unexceptionable Evidence of the Power of GOD be alleged against them; they
strive to evade its Force some Way or other, by saying, That possibly GOD may
bring Good out of Evil; but yet do speak against the Whole, as a Devilish Work.
They seem glad to get any Objection against it; not willing that it should be
the Work of GOD. They fix their Eyes only on the Failures and Blemishes of
those who defend it, and magnify Mole-hills into Mountains: And if they can get
nothing that has the Appearance of a Fault, they are industrious to forge, and
spread slanderous Reports, and false Insinuations; and seem as fond of them, as
if they had got a Victory. In a Word; they appear as if their greatest Desire
was, to blind their own Eyes, and stop their own Ears, that hearing they might
not understand, and seeing they might not perceive, lest they should be
Converts too, as they call us by way of Ridicule.


Thus the Parallel runs clear and undeniable. The same Attempts and Objections,
from the same Ranks of Persons, do prove the same Dispositions to be in
graceless Persons now, as formerly; the same Blindness and Enmity. And why
should it be thought strange that CHRIST'S pretended Ambassadors are his
bitterest Enemies, seeing it has been always so? The LORD always reformed his
Church contrary to their Desires. There is the same kind of Opposition, and
Opposers too, in Scotland and England at present, as here in America. And had I
Time, I could show that all Things, in every Period of the Church, answer and
agree with this, as Face answers Face in a Glass. But the Coming of CHRIST in
the Flesh, will be found to be analogous to his Coming at other Times; and the
Parallel from that, is most level to the Capacity of every one; and traced with
less Difficulty, and more Certainty by common People: And therefore I have
chiesly compared that Period, and our present Day.

But lastly, if Satan be cast out, It will be instead of all Proofs, that the
Kingdom of GOD is come unto us. For, says CHRIST, if I cast out Devils by the
Spirit of GOD, then the Kingdom of GOD is come unto you.

I have shown under the Second Head, how the People of GOD may know this to be
true of themselves; and how they are satisfied of each other, by Analogy of
Experiences; and accordingly they believe, and are sure, that the Kingdom of
GOD is come. They know the Voice of their Beloved. And therefore I shall only
insist on such Evidences now, as can appear to the World.

And here it is evident, that a peaceful World has been roused with a Witness
about the State of their Souls. Luke xi. 21, 22. These who were ignorant, can
speak skilfully about religious Things; and even the Graceless are increased in
Knowledge: Which is a Proof, That Light is come into the World. Some Deists and
Papists are become sound in the Faith; and Drunkards have become sober;
Swearers and Blasphemers drop their Oaths, and speak reverently of GOD: Vain
Persons who minded no Religion, but frequented Taverns, Plays and Frolicks,
passing their Time in Filthiness, foolish Talking and Jesting, or singing
paltry Songs; do now frequent Christian Societies, seek Christian Conversation,
and talk of Soul-Concerns; and choose to express their Mirth in Pflams, and
Hymns, and spiritual Songs. They who were too sprightly to be devout, and
esteemed it an unmanly Thing to shed Tears for their Souls State; have mourned
as for an only Son, and seemed to be in Bitternerness as for a Firstborn.
Zech. xii. 10. Worldlings have quit their Labor, and earnestly followed the
Ordinances of GOD. Pious and Soul-searching Books, that sormerly lay neglected,
are now in great Request. And, which is yet more, Persons who only came to mock
at the Lamentations of others, have been convinced ere they went away, and by
free Grace profelyted to such Ways as they formerly despised. Ministers have
been strengthened, and stirred up, to preach every Day for some Time
considerable. -- And that all this is Consequent upon the Preaching of true
Gospel-Doctrine, the printed Writings of those Ministers, by whom the Work is
carried on, will prove. Their Doctrine is plainly subversive of Satan's
Kingdom; though they be slanderously reported of, by some, who strive to perplex
Things that are plain, and make an unguarded Expression to be unsound Doctrine:
Yet, if their Doctrines be compared with those of our pious Ancestors, it will
be evident, that they harmonize in the same Truths in experimental Things; and
consequently we must think, That the Hearts of the Children are turned to the
Fathers, from whom they had degenerated.

Now, let it be observed, that I do not lay down these outward Evidences as
infallible Marks of true Grace: Let none judge himself Gracious from them
alone, without the internal Evidences formerly described. I only urge these,
because graceless Persons cannot judge from the other Marks; and because
Opposers of God's Work, are obliged, by their own professed Principles, to
acknowledge, That Satan is cast out, when such Things appear. -- And were it
necessary, I could produce many Instances of such Reformations as I have
mentioned.

And how shall any now account for their Opposition to this Work? I desire to
speak to such with Bowels of Love.

My Dear Fellow-Mortals! Let me a while expostulate the Matter with you. Why do
you not act agreeable to your own Principles? A dry Formalist, who shows no
Relish, nor Power of Godliness, seems to live chaste, honest, and sober; and
you charitably judge he does so by the Grace of GOD. Another, who was drunken
and unclean, becomes chaste and sober, lively and zealous withal; and you
insinuate or say, that it is by the Power of the Devil. Why do you not consist
with yourselves? Why do you say the one is of GOD, and the other of the Devil,
who is a zealous Pleader for the Work of GOD? Do you not see, that GOD can
condemn you by your own Rules? One Man diligently attended GOD's Ordinances all
his Days, being instructed out of the Law, and accustomed to approve of the
Things that are more excellent; and you would allow he does so by the Power of
GOD, because he is an orderly Man, and is very orthodox in Mint, and Anise, and
Cumin. Another that was heedless of all Religion, a Publican, Harlot,
Sabbath-breaker, Erroneous, does now take much Pains to wait upon GOD, and
begins to observe the divine Law; and yet you say, it is the Work of Men or
Devils: Therefore, these very Persons, whom you approve of, shall be your
Judges, and witness against your glaring Partiality. These despised Publicans
and Harlots, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven before you, and sit down
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, when you, the professed Children of the
Kingdom, shall be thrust down to utter Darkness, except you repent.

Was not the World very secure a while ago, in Comparison of what it is now?
Did not many appear to be at Ease in Zion, who are now alarmed? Or if you
should deny that moral Professors were in a carnal Security, though contrary to
the express Declaration of many of them; yet, must you not confess, that the
openly Profane, the grossly Ignorant, who minded no Religion, were in a carnal
Security? And if such Persons had Peace about the State of their Souls, must
you not say, that the Devil made the Peace? Now then, let me ask you, How can
one ^^ter into a ^trong Man's House, and spoil his Goods, unless he first bind
the strong Man? If the Devil kept these in Slavery, must they not have been
rescued by a stronger than he? But Man is not stronger; and consequently it
must be the Mighty GOD, who thus divides the Spoil with the Strong. I^^. 53.12.

Do you not perceive a great Change on some of your Neighbors? Do you not
observe some of them to be more devout and serious, more sober and knowing, who
used to be quite otherwise? And how do you account for these Things? Why do you
not either make the Tree good, and its Fruit good; or else, corrupt, and its
Fruit corrupt? Either say, that Sobriety and Devotion, Temperance and Chastity,
diligent Attendance on GOD's Ordinances, Christian Conference, Sorrow for Sin,
Leaving it off, etc. are good, and proceed from a good Cause; or else, say that
they are evil, and proceed from an evil Cause. But if von say they are good;
why do you ascribe them to Satan? Can he give what he has not? Either speak
Things that are consistent, or else be silent. And why do you not even of
yourselves judge what is right? But, O Generation of Vibers, how can ye, being
evil, and unrenewed, speak good Things? For out of the Abundance of the Heart,
the Mouth speaketn. Matthew. xii. 34.

Perhaps you will say, That you see no Change, only that People are more
censorious and uncharitable, judging their Neighbors to be graceless, and seem
harsh and passionate against other Ministers, whom they call carnal; and you
ask, Are these the Fruits of the Spirit of GOD?

In Answer, I would desire yourselves to tell' by what Rule you would have them
judge an Opposer of GOD's Work to be gracious, who persists against all
Evidences of it? Either he does so ignorantly, or knowingly? If ignorantly,
does it not prove that he is spiritually plind, and cannot perceive the Things
of GOD, and so must be Graceless? But if he does so spitefully, contrary to the
Remonstrances of his Conscience, en^^ghtned by the Spirit of GOD; it seems to
be plainly the unpardonable Sin. And why will you accuse me for judging thus,
until you prove what I contend for to be the Work of the Devil? Why do you make
that Practice an Argument that it is not the Work of GOD, since its being his
Work will justisy the Practice? It I should judge Opposers of GOD's Work to be
gracious, as well as those who plead for it; then I would, like you, be
inconsistent with myself; then I would make it, not the Work of GOD, but some
indifferent Thing, where Men might be good, and hold either Side. -- It is no
new Thing to hear Zeal for GOD, and Opposition to the Enemies of his Cause,
mistaken for Passion and Rage, by such as never have felt the Love of GOD in
their Hearts. And if some Christians, when provoked by your blasphemous
Railery, do speak passionately with Indignation, I think something of it is
very justifiable, when I consider Paul's Words to Elymas, Act. xiii. 10. O suil
of all Subtilty, and all Michief, thou Child of the Devil, thou Enemy of all
Righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right Ways of the LORD? But,
no doubt, their Zeal may sometimes be as rash as Peter's, when he cut off
Malchus's Ear: The LORD does not approve of this, neither do we: Young
Christians have often too much Wildfire, mixed with true Zeal. And if ever your
Hearts had been warm with Zeal for GOD and his Cause, if you had ever had a
First Love; (Rev. ii. 4.) then you would know it to be as I say; and would be
ready to make Allowances, especially in some warm Tempers. -- But I suppose you
would have them be perfect, all Spirit, and no Flesh. -- They themselves long
to be so. But if they were, it would not screen them from your Malice, more
than our LORD from the Pharisees. Malchus had as good an Argument, as you, to
prove that Peter had no Grace; that CHRIST and all his Followers were
quarrelsome and seditious: And it is probable he did improve it to the same End
as you do other Things; asking, if that was any Fruit of the Spirit to cut off
his Ear? No doubt he might say, If that be Conversion, may God keep me from it;
these that pretend most of all to it, are the most bitter and outrageous; one
of the Gang cut off my Ear, from a religious Pretense; there is none of them
better; they are all embarked in the same Ship, and have the same sour and
harsh Turn of Mind. Just thus you blind yourselves by poring only on the black
Spots of GOD's People, and strive to make them more so: Where then is your
boasted Charity? Do you not see that all your Cavils and Objections prove you
to be ignorant of the Things of GOD, and Enemies to his Work? Do you not see
that your very Objections prove it to be his Work, and always will? For thus
has GOD always overshot the Devil in his own Bow. Perhaps some of you will say,
We are not against it. But do you not show, that you are not for it? Are you
not more cordial with its Enemies, than its Friends? Are you not still making
Exceptions against it? I look upon all Neuters, as Enemies, in Affairs of
Religion. Away with your carnal Prudence! And either follow GOD or Baal. He
that is not actually with us, is against us; and he that gathers not with us,
seattereth abread. Mat. xii. 30.

I know there will be no End of your Objections, and calling for Evidences,
until GOD open your Eyes, if ever he do it. The Question is likely still to be,
What Sign, what Proof do you give us, seeing so many Things are wrong? I will
answer, as our LORD did on the same Occasion, An evil and adulterous Generation
secketh after a Sign, and there shall no other Sign be given to it, but only
the POWER of GOD's WORD on the Hearts and Lives of Mankind. This is the last,
and greatest Evidence; and if you reject this, you reject the last Means of
your Conviction.

I tell you further, That the Sin against the Holy Chost shall never be
forgiven. And I verily fear, that many, both Ministers and People, in this
Generation, will be guilty of it: For GOD generally leaves a Testimony in the
Consciences of his bitterest Enemies; and when they persist against these
Convictions, and the clearest Evidences of Matters of Fact, spitefully, (...)
reproach the Work of his Spirit; I have small Hopes that they shall ever be
renewed to Repentance. For, was it not in these very Circumstances the
Pharisces were, when our LORD charges them with this unpardonable Sin? Mat.
xii. 31. Indeed I am afraid, lest I hear, to my Sorrow, that some of you die in
a fearful Looking for of Wrath and fury Indignation. But whoever of you do
these Things ignorantly, as Paul, who verily thought he should do many Things
against Jesus of Nazareth; there is yet Hope concerning you. I beseech you
then, sear and tremble to proceed further: Pray to GOD, if, perhaps, the
Thoughts of your Hearts, and Words of your Mouths, may be forgiven you. And do
not resist these Evidences that are as clear as you are capable of, until GOD
give you to know the Things of his Spirit. If you will resist, I tell you in
the Fear of GOD, it will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, for Tire and
Sidon, in the Day of Judgment, than for you: Ninevels together with them, shall
rise up in Judgment against you, and shall condemn you; because you have
Opportunity of greater Light than they. And though you be exalted nearer Heaven,
yet woe to you, for with a more dreadful Vengeance will you be plunged deeper
into Hell. And every Word you speak against the Work of GOD, you shall give
Account thereof in the Day of Judgment. Your false and malicious Slanders
against GOD's Servants, will be set in Order before the assemhled Universe. And
how will you then make good your Party against GOD? Neither will the Ministers,
who excite and encourage you, be able to deliver their miserable Votaries. How
will they ease your afrighted Souls, your disturbed, awakened Consciences, on a
Dying-Bed? Tempters never prove good Comforters. No, you shall fall in the Day,
and the false Prophet shall fall with you in the Night, and GOD will destroy,
you both; you shall go down with them into the Sides of the Pit, and make your
Beds in Hell; both shall fall together into the burning Gulf of eternal Woe,
unless you repent. And then you will curse them to all Eternity, and yourselves
too. Beware then of ravening Wolves, though they come unto you in Sheeps
Clothing: They come for no other End but for to steal, and to kill, and to
destroy the Sheep. Do not believe that the LORD sends Ministers to oppose his
Work. No, they run, but he has not sent them. Let neither Father, nor Mother,
Husband, Wife, or Child, nor Reverend Father, tu^^ you against the Work of GOD.
-- But whether you will hear, or forbear; whether you will receive it, or not:
Yet, as I have proven, of this be certain, That the Kingdom of GOD is come unto
you; I know a graceless Heart will not rejoice at it.

Time would fail me to draw what Inferences the Doctrine affords. -- I have
spoken to Opposers; I now come to speak to such as acknowledge that the Kingdom
of GOD is come, who yet are not the Subjects of it.

Perhaps now you think yourselves pretty safe, because you do not oppose it
openly. But, let not an Acknowledgment satify you, without sceling the Power
thereof upon your Hearts. What will it avail you, that the Kingdom of GOD is
come UNTO you, unless it be WITHIN you? No doubt, some of you have selt some
Power awakening and convincing you of Sin; and you have folded your Hands to
sleep again, as if the Bitterness of Death had been past, and thus have rested
short of JESUS CHRIST. Poor Souls! you are but just where you were; or rather
in a worse Condition. True Grace is an active Principle, and would not suffer
you to be so easy, while you had Flesh to grapple with. Read with Fear Mat.
xii. 43, 44, 45. When a Person is awakened to a Sense of Sin, and Dread of
Wrath; the unclean Spirit goes out, is not cast out; does not much disturb him,
but strives to lull him in Security and Presumption: Then he sweeps himself
clean of grosser Commissions of Sin, or Omissions of Duty; and garnishes
himself with a more strict Formality in Religion, while the Heart is,
nevertheless, empty of renewing Grace; the Devil finding it so, repossesses
him. And all that is remarkable of some such, is, that they have been
remarkably worse than ever before. And even so it is like to be with many in
this wicked Generation. O Sinner, if ever GOD intend Mercy to thy Soul, thou
art likely to be roused up with more Terror than ever. Nothing but the Kingdom
of GOD within you will do. Though you may be amazed today, and cry, Hosanna;
tomorrow you will cry, Crucisy him, if you are graceless. You will never stand
a fiery Trial, but are likely to turn open Enemies, upon some Offense that GOD
will cast in your Way to try you. Blessed only is he, whosoever shall not be
offended in JESUS CHRIST. Mat. xi. 6. It is difficult not to be offended in
him. Woe to the ungodly World, because Offenses will turn them away from him, or
^^^e against ^im. For they are not so confident in him, or his Work, as to
stand all Shocks.

But lastly: I know there are some of you, that believe, and are sure to your
own Expe^^^ce, That GOD is come to (...).

(For, if GOD had not left us a very small Remnant, we should have been as
Sodom, and made miserable like unto Gomorrah. If the Hearts of some Fathers and
Children had not been turned to each other, surely GOD would have come and
smitten the whole Earth with a Curse. Mal. iv. 6.)

You know that GOD has opened the Eyes of your Minds, and you have seen your
own Vileness, and Sin in its Hatefulness; Holiness in its Loveliness; GOD in
his Glory, his Justice, and Mercy; and CHRIST in his beauteous, his dyed
Garments, as your Righteousness, Hope, and Joy. You looked, by Faith, on him
whom you pierced, and did mourn for him, as for and only Son, and were in
Bitterness, as for a Firstborn. Your flinty Hearts were turned into a Spring,
when GOD poured upon you the Spirit of Grace and Supplication: Then was there a
great Mourning, like the Mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddon; and
every Aslembly was Bochim, a Place of Weeping. Did not JESUS there give you his
Loves? And you Hearts have been knit to him ever since. I doubt not but some of
you, from a Sense of much Forgiveness would gladly have washed his Feet with
Tears, and wiped them with the Hairs of your Heads. Your Soul follow hard after
GOD. And, in a Word, all you Hopes, Fears, Defires, Difficulties, Comforts,
Loves Joys, and Company, are new. Happy Souls! Behold. I come to tell you glad
Tidings of great Joy; The Kingdom of GOD is WITHIN you; and Satan is cast on
into the Earth; he has fallen like Lightning from Heaven Behold, all Things are
yours; and ye are Christ's; and Christ is GOD's. Then let your Light so shine
before Men, that even your Enemies may be ashamed, having nothing to say justly
of your good Conversation. CHRIST. But rejoice, and be exceeding glad, wh^ they
speak all Manner of Evil against you falsely for his Name's Sake. Why should
you not rejoice to be counted worthy to suffer Shame for his Cause? Put an,
also, the Meekness and Gentleness of CHRIST; and the whole Armor of GOD, that
ye may be able to stand in the evil Day that is coming. Remember, that always
when GOD raised a People for himself, he purified them by Afflictions and
Persecutions. GOD will try you as Gold is tried in the Fire, until he purge
your Dross, and utterly take away your Tin: And then he will take your purified
Souls to the Regions of eternal Day. In Patience, then, possess your Souls: And
in the mean Time, sing Hosannas to the Son of David, and say,

Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the LORD to save us, Hosanna in the
Highest: Glory to GOD, because Peace is proclaimed on Earth, and good Will
toward Men. The LORD whom we sought, is come to bis Temple; we wait until He
come the Second Time.

Even so, come, LORD JESUS, come quickly. Amen. Amen.

Just Published, A Continuation of the Rev. Mr. WHITEFIELD's JOURNAL, from a
few Days after his Arrival at Savannah, June 4. to his leaving Stanford, the
last Town in New England, October. 29. 1740.

Philadelphia: Printed and Sold by B. Franklin.

[Price One Shilling.]

Just Published, A Particular CONSIDERATION of a Piece, entitled, The QUERISTS:
Wherein sundry Passages extracted from the printed Sermons, Letters, and
Journals of the Rev. Mr. Whitefield, are vindicated from the false Glosses and
erroneous Senses put upon them in said Querists; Mr. Whitefield's Soundness in
the true Scheme of the Christian Doctrine maintained; and the Author's
disingenuous Dealing with him exposed. By Samuel Blair.

Prove. xviii. 17. He that is first in his own Cause, s^emeth just; but his
Neighbor comes and searches him.

Printed and Sold by B. Franklin. [Price One Shilling.]

In the Press, and speedily will be Published, A LETTER from the Reverend Mr.
G. WHITEFIELD, to the Reverend Mr. JOHN WESLEY, in answer to his Sermon,
entitled, FREE GRACE.

But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the Face, because he
was to be blamed.

Gal. ii. II. Printed and Sold by B. Franklin.


