THE SPEECH OF SAMUEL CHEW, Esquire

Chief Justice of the Government of NEW CASTLE, KENT and SUSSEX upon DELAWARE:

Delivered from the BENCH to the GRAND JURY of the County of New Castle, Nov.
21. 1741; and now published at their Request.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by B. FRANKLIN.

M,DCC,XLL.

THE SPEECH, etc.
Gentlemen of the GRAND JURY,
IT is with Pleasure I see, at this time, a Grand Jury that I am convinced do
not require much to be said to them, to instruct them in their Duty, or the
Occasion of their being called here: However, Custom makes it necessary that
something should be said to you from the Bench: I hope therefore you will give
me your Patience, if, instead of confining myself to Subjects that relate more
immediately to your Office as a Grand Jury, I take up some Part of your Time in
treating of a Matter of more general Use, and of the greatest Importance to the
Public Safety; the LAWFULNESS OF DEFENSE against an armed Enemy.

IT may, perhaps, at first View, seem strange that there should be any Occasion
to prove a Thing in its own Nature so evident: But whoever reflects, that this
very Point has taken up a considerable Part of the public Debates in a
neighboring Government; to which we are nearly related, and what a Number of
Abettors the Assertors of the Unlawfulness of all kind of Defense have sound,
will be less surprised at it. For my own Part, I look upon this Doctrine not
only to be without Warrant or Color, either from Reason or Revelation; but in
its Consequences pernicious to Society, and entirely inconsistent with, and
destructive of all civil Government. But as Opinions, otherwise than as they
are supported by Reason, ought to be but of little Authority; I will endeavor
to discuss this Point fairly, and to set the Matter in a true Light. First, By
showing how the Case stood under the Law of Nature. Secondly, That no Religion
whatsoever, founded upon any pretended supernatural Revelation of the Will of
GOD, can be true, that is inconsistent with or repugnant to the Law of Nature:
And Thirdly, I propose to examine some of the principal Authorities from Holy
Writ, which the Patrons and Assertors of the Unlawfulness of Defense, under the
Gospel Dispensation, have adduced to prove their Point; and to show that these
Authorities are so far from supporting their Doctrine, that they are either
quite foreign to the Case, or that they militate directly against the Adducers
of them.

SOME Men of great Learning and Knowledge have amused themselves and the World,
with endeavoring to discover what great End the Supreme Being proposed to
himself in the Creation of the World, and of Mankind in particular; and have
formed various Conjectures about it. Certain, however, it is, that an Addition
to His own Happiness could not be the Motive; because He must necessarily have
been infinitely happy from all Eternity. And it is no less certain, that such a
Being, as we all understand GOD to be, a Being of infinite Goodness and
Benevolence, could not possibly intend the Misery and Unhappiness of a Number
of rational Creatures, by himself to be brought into Existence out of nothing:
On the contrary, no other End than the Happiness of Mankind in their Creation,
can consist with the natural Notions we entertain of GOD. If then it be
admitted, that GOD created them with a View to their own Happiness, it must
necessarily follow, that he afforded them the Means of acquiring such a Degree
of it as he intended them, and as was suitable to their Circumstances in the
World wherein he had placed them. Accordingly, we find the great Author of our
Being has so fashioned and contrived us, that a Desire of Happiness, which is
of so much Importance to us and the End of our Creation, is made the very first
Principle, or Law of our Natures. And it is reasonable to suppose, that in a
State of Nature the first Things upon which Men cast their Thoughts, were the
procuring Food to satisfy the Cravings of Appetite, Raiment and Houses to
shelter them from the Injury and Inclemency of the Seasons, with such other
Conveniences of Life as concerned their immediate Preservation and Comfort.
But, alas! Experience must very soon have taught them, that these Things were
vastly insufficient for their complete Happiness; and that, were they to stop
there, they would fall infinitely short of the End. Life and Liberty, the
immediate Gifts of GOD, were common to all Men; and every Man had a natural
Title to an uncontrouled Enjoyment of them, and, consequently, a Right to
preserve and de^end them from the Injuries and Attempts of others, as they
concerned his Happiness: And what is called Estate, or Property, was as
absolutely essential to humane Happiness as even Life or Liberty; and therefore
some Means of securing and preserving Life and Liberty, and what every
Individual had purchased and made his own, by his Labor and Sweat of his
Brows, were indispensibly necessary. If, indeed, all Men, from the Beginning,
had acted up to the genuine Law of Nature, and had done what was perfectly
right, all other Provisions or Laws would have been useless. But instead of
this, in the Order of Time, a Spirit of Rapaciousness and Corruption appeared
in the World; and some, by a fatal Mistake, endeavored to find their own
private Advantages and Happiness, by making a Prey of the Lives, Liberties and
Properties of others, by Violence and a strong Hand. And it is more than
probable, that Men in a State of Nature, before they had incorporated
themselves into political Societies, must have suffered much, as the more
Innocent and Weak were exposed to the Insults and Invasions of the more
rapacious and strong; and more especially, as it was no easy Matter for
interested Persons, destitute of any other Rule than Moral Rectitude for the
Determining Right and Wrong, to decide Disputes about Property and
Jurisdiction. The natural Desire then of Happiness, and that Principle of
Self-Preservation, common to all Men, must first have inspired them, for their
common Protection and Safety, with Notions of Compacts, of Laws, and of
Government, as absolutely necessary, and without which it was impossible for
them to be happy in any Degree.

NOW the Difference between Men in a State of Nature, and their being
incorporated into political Societies, consists in this: That in a State of
Nature there being no common Judge to whom Men could appeal, every Man had a
Right to judge of and to punish Offenses committed against him, according as
the Heinousness of the Facts, in his Opinion, deserved: But in the other Case,
having given up that natural Right of private Judgment into the Hands of the
Community, he resorts to the Community, when he thinks he is injured, as to a
common Judge or Umpire, and submits his Cause to be determined by the
established Rules of the Society for deciding Controversies between the Members
of it, indifferently. But Societies themselves, with regard to one another,
having no common Judge between them to whom they can appeal, may be properly
said to be in a State of Nature, and to retain that Right of private Judgment,
that every single Man naturally had, to repel and punish Injuries committed
against them. And it would be exceedingly ridiculous to suppose, that a Number
of Men, formed and united into a political Society for their common Safety and
Happiness, should thereby lose any Part of that natural Right, of preserving
and defending themselves from a foreign Enemy, that every Individual had before
such Union.

IF then Men must have been miserable without the Aid of Government and civil
Society; the Preservation and Defense of that Government or Society must
necessarily have been right by the Law of Nature, and consequently agreeable to
the Will of GOD, who was the Author of that Law, and had given Men no other
general Rule. Let us then consider in what Manner any political Society can
possibly be affected, so as to make any kind of Defense necessary for its
Preservation. And it cannot possibly happen but one of these two Ways, to wit,
either from some of the Members of the Society conspiring against it, and
acting contrary to the Laws and fundamental Constitution of it; or from some
foreign Enemy, by Force of Arms. It will be rea^^^^ yielded, by those that
oppose the Lawfulness of Arms, that R^b^l^ and Traitors ought to be punished
according to the utmost R^gour of the Laws they violate, because they
themselves are Parties to those Laws, and bound to the Observance of them by
their own Compacts. But what is to be done in case of a foreign Enemy, seeing
here is no Compact? I know of no Alternative, but the Relying upon Prayers and
Tears, or resisting by Force. And if the Aid of Prayers and Tears may be relied
on in such Cases, they may be depended on against Rebels and Traitors, and in
all other Cases, and consequently all Government is useless. But the Usefulness
and Necessity of Government has been already shown, as also the Right of
preserving it: And if Force is at all necessary or lawful, no Medium can
possibly be assigned between the least and the greatest Degree of it; and there
is no Way to resist an Army but by an Army, nor to repel Force but by Force. I
believe it will hardly be insisted on, that an Indictment against the General
and Principal Officers of an invading Army, would be any Security at all; and
any Attempt of that Sort would serve only to be laughed at, and to be a
standing Jest amongst the Rest of Mankind. If then Government is essential to
human Happiness, as has been seen; if the Preservation of Government is equally
essential; and if Force is necessary to the Preservation of Government; it very
clearly follows, that War was lawful by the Law of Nature; because if it were
otherwise, Men would be denied the Liberty of using the Means necessary to that
Happiness which GOD designed them, and which was the End of their Creation;
which would be absurd.

AS I have mentioned the Law of Nature to you, and have proposed to show, that
no Religion, founded upon any pretended supernatural Revelation of GOD's Will,
can be true, that is repugnant to the Law of Nature; it will be proper to
explain to you what I mean by it. By the Law of Nature then, is meant the Law
of Reason, or in other Words, it is such a Rule for the Doing what is fit and
proper for rational Creatures to do as they are capable of discovering by the
right Use of their natural Faculties, unassisted by supernatural Revelation.
This Law of Reason is the general Law of our Natures, and claims GOD for its
Author; and therefore may, with the greatest Truth and Propriety, be called the
Law of GOD Himself. And as GOD is infinitely wise and good, it would be
downright Blasphemy to say, or to suppose, that he would give Men a Rule for
their Conduct that was not adequate to the End for which he gave it; or that a
Conformity of human Actions to this general Law of GOD, would not justify Men
in his Sight; and much more to say, it would displease him. Whatsoever
therefore was right, whatsoever was fit, whatsoever was lawful for Men to do,
in order to procure Happiness, under the Law of Nature, must have been
eternally so, as being founded in the very Nature and Reason of Things: And
whatsoever is right, fit and lawful from the Nature and Reason of Things, must
necessarily continue to be right, fit and lawful to all Eternity. GOD is the
same to Day, Yesterday and forever: In him is no Change or Variableness at all;
but his Ways are constant and uniform. Hence it most evidently follows, that
any Religion, or any Part of a Religion, that is pretended to be built upon a
supernatural Discovery of GOD's Will, cannot possibly be true, that is
inconsistent with, or repugnant to the primary Law of GOD, or Law of Nature,
which is the same Thing; because it would imply Imperfection, Change and
Variableness in GOD, which are contrary to his very Nature. For Instance; the
Practice of Morality is of eternal Obligation; and Part of the Law of Nature,
and is so absolutely essential to Man's Happiness, that without it he cannot
possibly be happy in any Degree: Justice, Benevolence and Gratitude are moral
Virtues: Now, suppose it possible that any Person having a Power, or appearing
to have Power, to work the most stupendous Miracles, should pretend an
Authority from GOD to teach Mankind, that the Exercise of Justice, Benevolence
and Gratitude was wrong and displeasing to GOD; would such a Person deserve any
Credit? And would not all wise and good Men conclude him to be either a Devil
or an Impostor? Surely the would! And the Reason is plain, because such
Doctrine is diametrically opposite to right Reason, and contrary to our natural
Notions of GOD. Now as Government and political Society have been clearly
shown, from the very Nature and Reason of Things, to be essentially necessary
to human Happiness; that the Preservation of Society is no less essential; and
that Force is requisite to that Preservation; If any Man, or even an Angel from
Heaven, should pretend an Authority from GOD to pronounce all kind of Defense
to be unlawful, he ought to be rejected as a Liar and an Impostor. Those
therefore that pretend to make out from the Bible, that War, in every Shape, is
forbidden under the Gospel Dispensation, will infallibly prove the Bible itself
to be wrong, or themselves to be very wrong Interpreters of it.

LET none, from this Manner of speaking, imagine that I intend to insinuate any
thing to the Prejudice or Discredit of the sacred Writings, or to cast any
Imputations upon the Bible: Far, very far, be that from my Thoughts. On the
contrary, though I do insist that the Bible would be no Warrant, nor ought to
be of any Authority to support a Doctrine inconsistent with human Happiness, by
prohibiting the necessary Means leading to it; yet, I do likewise assert, that
it cannot justly be impeached with any thing of this Nature. And I hope I shall
be able clearly to make out, to your Satisfaction, that there is not the least
Color of Authority from the Scriptures, to prove that a just and necessary War
is forbidden to Christians; but that those Texts of Scripture that are commonly
made use of by those who deny the Lawfulness of Self-Defence to Christians, are
either misunderstood or grossly perverted by them. It would detain you too long,
Gentlemen, were I to examine and consider all the Parts of Scripture that have
been frequently cited upon this Occasion. I shall therefore select some of the
principal Texts that I find quoted by an Author of very great Note Barclay.
and some others on the same Side of the Question, and endeavor to show that
they carry no such Interpretation as these People pretend.

THOSE Parts of Scripture that are alleged as Authorities in this Case, are
said to be either Prophesies, importing an entire Cessation of War under the
Gospel; positive Precepts, forbidding the Use of the Sword to Christians; or
general Precepts, that prove War to be incompatible with Christianity, and
opposite to the Temper and Spirit of the Gospel. To the first of these, the
famous Prophesies in the Books of Isaiah and Micah are constantly cited, and
great Stress has been laid thereon. In order therefore to the clear
Understanding this Prophesy, I will trouble you with the Passage at large,
which runs thus: And it shall come to pass in the last Days, that the Mountain
of the Lord's House shall be established in the Top of the Mountains* and shall
be exalted above the Hills; And all Nations shall flow unto it. And many People
shall go and say, Come ye and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the
House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his Way, and we will walk in
his Paths; for out of Zion shall go forth the Law; and the Word of the Lord
from Jerusalem. And he shall judge among the Nations and shall rebuke many
People: And they shall beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears
into Pruning Hooks; Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither
shall they learn War any more. Oh House of Jacob come ye and let us walk in the
Light of the Lord. Happy, happy, oh happy indeed will the World be in the
blessed Accomplishment of this Prophesy! The true and genuine Construction of
this Passage appears manifestly to be, That in the latter Ages of the World, or
in the Fullness of the Gospel Times, all Nations shall so universally adhere to
the Law of GOD, that Righteousness shall be established in the Earth; every Man
shall do what is right and just; none shall injure or violate the Right of his
Brother, his Neighbor, or his Friend; and in Consequence of this, War will
naturally cease and be abolished, as the Effect will naturally vanish when the
Cause is taken away; Swords, Spears, and other warlike Implements will become
useless Lumber, or in the Language of the Prophet, may be converted into
Plow-Shares, and other Implements of Husbandry. Now as no Man can pretend that
the Prophesy in this Sense is yet accomplished, but that these happy Days, this
glorious Reformation is yet to be expected in GOD's due time, it is certainly a
most unnatural Conclusion, to infer, that War, which was lawful in order to
repel lawless Force, shall become unlawful before lawless Force is eradicated
and extinguished from amongst Men. Let us, for Illustration of this Matter,
suppose the Prophets to have said, That in the Fullness of the Gospel Times the
Earth shall spontaneously pour forth her Increase; Corn, Wine and Oil shall
flow without the Hand of the Labourer; Plow-shares and Pruning Hooks shall then
become useless; Labor and Toil, the sad Effects of the Fall of Man, shall
utterly cease and be no more. Would not that Man, who in the Expectation of the
Accomplishment of such a Prophesy, should neglect to cultivate and sow his
Field, or to prune his Vineyard, before the promised Time, be in Danger of
Starving? And might he not justly be reputed mad by the rest of Mankind? And
yet upon no better Foundation do they build, who affirm the Unlawfulness of
War, upon the Authority of the before-cited Prophesy.

THE noted Writer beforementioned urges against the Lawfulness of War, That
CHRIST said his Kingdom is not of this World, and therefore that his Servants
shall not fight: Preposterously inferring, that because CHRIST would not permit
his Disciples to fight in a Case wherein Fighting would have been quite
improper, that therefore those that fight in any Case are not the Disciples or
Servants of CHRIST. I have wondered to find the Place here alluded to, so
monstrously tortured and perverted by this Author, and others, contrary to the
express Sense and Meaning of it! Our Savior being questioned by Pilate
concerning his being King of the Jews, and of the Offense he had been guilty of
toward the Jews, by whom he stood accused, and who had delivered him unto
Pilate, answered, My Kingdom is not of this World: If my Kingdom were of this
World, then would my Servants fight that I should not be delivered to the Jews:
But now is my Kingdom not from hence. The Design of this Decalaration seems to
be in order to undeceive the Jews, who entertained gross and partial
Conceptions about the End of CHRIST's Coming; and believed it was to establish
an outward Kingdom at Jerusalem, and to restore the House of Israel. But this
was not the Case. He came to erect a spiritual Kingdom to be set up in the
Hearts of Men, there to bear Rule and Government, to reform a corrupt World,
and restore Men to their primitive Natures. Here Reason, Persuasion, and such
Things as tend to convict the Judgment and inlighten the Understanding, were
the proper Means, were the only ones used by him. Force would have been
absolutely improper, and therefore is disclaimed by him. But he is so far from
condemning Force, in all Cases, that he expressly tells Pilate, that were his
Kingdom of this World, then should his Servants fight in Defense of his Person.
As if he had said, Were my Kingdom a temporal Kingdom, to the Preservation of
which Fighting is not only lawful but necessary, my Servants would then have
done their Duty, and have fought for me, as the Servants of other temporal
Princes do in the like Cases.

THE Apostle says, That the Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal but
spiritual: But says our celebrated Writer, The Weapons of outward Warfare are
carnal, such as Cannon, Muskets, Spears, Swords, etc. of which there is no
mention in the Armor described by Paul, and thence infers that War is noways
lawful to such as will be the Disciples of CHRIST. A hopeful Inference truly!
Here was a Question about a Matter of Fact; whether the Weapons made use of in
the Propagation of CHRIST's Kingdom were carnal or spiritual: The Apostle, who
figuratively was a Soldier in CHRIST's Cause, decides the Question, and
declares the Weapons were spiritual and not carnal; Ergo, quoth our Author, the
Use of carnal Weapons are unlawful to Christians. Is this a fair Conclusion? It
is, no doubt, unlawful to propagate Religion by the Sword; but, surely, that
does not render the Use of the Sword unlawful in all Cases. It is somewhere
said, the same Apostle was a Tent-maker, and if it had been added, that he was
not a Shoemaker; the Conclusion that therefore Shoemaking was unlawful, would
be equally just, as to infer, that because carnal Weapons were not used by
Christian Priests in a Case wherein they could have been of no Service, that
therefore it is unlawful to use them in any Case.

THE Apostle James testifies, That Wars and Strifes come from the Lusts which
war in the Members of carnal Men: But, says our Author, true Christians have
crucified the Flesh with its Affections and Lusts: Therefore War is unlawful.
How does this Conclusion follow from the Premises? Every kind of Wickedness
proceeds from the same Cause here assigned by the Apostle for Wars and Strifes:
Does it therefore follow that no Sort of Wickedness is to be resisted or
punished? If so, we may shake Hands with all Government: Treasons, Murders,
Rapes, and every other Crime, shall go unpunished, seeing they all come from
the Lusts that war in the Members of carnal Men. It is not denied but War is a
very bad Thing, and brings dreadful Consequences along with it. The same may be
said of Lawsuits. But does it therefore follow that an unjust Invasion of our
Country, by foreign Enemies, is not to be opposed or resisted; or that we are
not to contest an unjust Claim set up against our Estates. In either Case, one
Side must be wrong; and it is the Agressor, the Wrong-Doer, that is chargeable
with the Consequences, and not those who innocently and rightfully defend their
Lives or their Properties. And I should be glad to learn from such as infer the
Unlawfulness of War from this Text, how any other Strife comes to be lawful;
and in particular, how they will justify going to Law upon any Pretense
whatsoever; for surely it will not be contended, that going to Law is not
Strife.

AGAIN, the Apostle says, That we fight not with Flesh and Blood: But, says
our Author, outward War is according to the Flesh, and against Flesh and Blood:
Therefore War is noways lawful to Christians. But how fairly is this
Consequence drawn? Saint Paul was a Christian Priest, employed to spread and
propagate the Gospel; Preaching was his Profession, not War. This being the
real Fact, the Apostle mentions it as such. And if he had said, we dispute not
about Men's Properties or Estates, which was likewise true, he would thereby as
much have condemned the Profession of the Law, as he does, in this Place, the
Unlawfulness of War.

BUT, it is said, we are commanded not to resist Evil, but whosoever shall
smite thee on the one Cheek, to turn the other: And if any Man sue thee at the
Law, and take away thy Coat, give him thy Cloak also, etc. Now these Words are
either to be taken in a restrained and qualified Sense, or in a literal and
unqualified Sense. Let the Advocates for the Unlawfulness of War, upon this
Authority, take them either way, and they will find themselves hooked into a
Dilemma. If the Words be taken in a qualified Sense, they will not prove the
Point contended for: And taken the other Way, they will prove too much; for not
only War becomes unlawful, but going to Law in Defense of Property, and all
Punishment of Criminals, will be likewise unlawful, which is contrary to their
avowed Principles and Practices. For it can never be pretended, that the
Hanging a Thief or a Murderer is not resisting of Evil; or, that he that
prosecutes another at the Law, for an unjust Violence committed against his
Person or Estate, conforms to the literal Sense of the Text. The Truth is, that
the Words cited, with all that follow to the End of the Chapter, were spoken by
CHRIST to his Disciples only, and seem to be intended as Rules to them, for
their Conduct and Behavior, in the Discharge of their Ministry, in order to
convert Men to Christianity. But if we admit that they were intended as Lessons
to Christians in general, they can import no more than that it is not lawful to
revenge Injuries, and that, in many Cases, it is better patiently to bear some
Injuries than to seek Redress and Satisfaction by returning them.

WHEN I consider the Abilities of the Author so often quoted, and how great a
Master of Reason he appears to be when he has Reason on his Side; and compare
therewith his Manner of Defending the Position, That War is unlawful to
Christians* I confess, I am tempted to call his Sincerity ^n Question. His
Inferences and Conclusions are certainly unworthy his great Parts. And his
constantly Coupling Revenge and War together, as if they were convertible
Terms, seems to ^e a Piece of Craft, calculated to deceive and mislead the
Unwary. No Christian, I believe, ever doubted that Revenge was unlawful to
Christians: but how will it be made out that there can be no War without
Revenge? As well may it be said, that putting a Malefactor to Death is Revenge,
as that Killing Men, in Defense of our Lives, is so. Nay, it looks more like
Revenge to put a Man to Death in cool Blood, after the Fact, than to kill him
in the Attempt, in order to prevent him. CHRIST, says our Author, the Prince
of Peace, has expressly prohibited his Children all Violence. Could this Man
be ignorant that the Violence here prohibited is an unjust and forceible Attack
upon the Rights of others* and not the Resisting of such unjust Force? I should
be glad to know how Hanging a Murderer or Thief can be done without Violence?
And if Violence is la^ful after the Fact is committed, I should gladly be
informed, by some distinguishing Head, how Violence comes to be unlawful (when
all other Means fail) in order to prevent the Mischief.

DOING Good for Evil, Loving our Enemies, and Praying for those that persecute
and calumniate us, are, no doubt, Christian Duties: So are Clothing the Naked
and Feeding the Hungry. But, as we are not required to cloth the Naked and
feed the Hungry, and want ourselves; so neither are we obliged to strengthen
the Hands of an Enemy against ourselves; nor to pray for his Success, when he
aims Destruction at our Heads; nor to love him as if he was our Friend. We
ought, indeed, to exercise Kindness and Humanity toward our Enemies, when we
have them in our Power, and may do it with Security to ourselves; try to win
and reclaim them, by Gentleness, Forbearance and Charity, and to pray that GOD
may turn their Hearts; which is all that these Precepts require.

I proved to you in the Beginning, Gentlemen, that no supernatural Revelation
of GOD's Will, can possibly be contradictory or repugnant to Reason, which is
the natural Revelation of his Will. I laid it down, as a Groundwork, that GOD
intended our Happiness in our Creation. I have shown that Government and
Political Society are absolutely essential to human Happiness; that the
Preservation of Government is equally essential; that Force is necessary to
that Preservation, and consequently, that War was allowable under the Law of
Nature. And, I think, it is so apparent, from what has been said, that the
Scripture cannot be justly impeached with Altering the Law of Nature in this
Point; or of having taken away Man's natural Right to seek that Happiness which
GOD originally designed him, by forbidding Christians to defend their Lives and
Properties when they are unjustly invaded; that no intelligent Man, who
examines it with an impartial, unprejudiced Mind, can have the least Doubt
about it.

IF the Right to use Force is not connected with and inseparable from
Government, and included in the very Idea of it, I should be glad to know, how
the lawful Commands or Mandates of the civil Magistrate can possibly be
executed in Case of Disobedience? We see that these very People who assert the
Unlawfulness of all Manner of Defense, willingly serve in the Legislature,
consent to the Enacting Sanguinary and other Penal Laws, act as Sheriffs, serve
upon Juries, sit in Courts of Judicature, and there try and condemn Men to
Death. Is it not Amazing, that any Men should take it into their Heads that it
is lawful for one Christian forceibly to put another to Death, after his Hands
are tied behind him, and yet think it unlawful to bind him by Force, or even to
kill him, in his unlawful Resistance? Suppose a Banditti of an Hundred stout,
resolute Fellows should assemble together, commit Murders, Rapes, Robberies,
destroy and lay waste all before them; what stead do you think the Constables
and their Staves would stand you in, in order to subdue so many associated
Villains; and more especially, if it be not lawful even for the Constables to
make any Use of their Staves in Case of Resistance. If it be said, that a
Constable, being an Officer of the Law, may be allowed to make Use of his Staff
in Case of Necessity, seeing the Law has put it into his Islands; I ask why ^e
may not make Use of a Gun, or a Sword, in the like Necessity, put into his
Hands by the same Authority. If it be answered, that a Gun or a Sword may kill:
I reply, so may a Constable's Staff. And if Constables, or other Officers of
the Law, may make Use of Guns and Swords, in Cases of Necessity, I would
willingly be informed, why all other Men have not the same Liberty under the
like Necessity. In a Word, Gentlemen, to admit the Usefulness of civil
Government to Mankind; and yet to advance the Position, that Force and all
Manner of Self-Defence is unlawful, is a System full of Inconsistencies, and
big with Absurdities and Nonsense.

PERHAPS some may think it strange, that I, who have been educated amongst, and
have always professed myself to be of the Society of the People called Quakers,
should, in this public Manner, declare myself so opposite to their Sentiments,
in the Point of Defense. I would have such to believe, that the Love of my
Country, the Love of Mankind in general, but above all, the Love of Truth, is
of greater Concernment to me, than what is called Uniformity, or the being so
attached to any particular Party in Religion, as to espouse, or seem to
espouse, any of the Errors of it. That of the Unlawfulness of Self-Defence to
Christians, is, to me, a most capital Error; not only dangerous to Society in
general, as I have already said, and inconsistent with the very Nature of civil
Communities; but, more particularly, of extreme Danger to ourselves, at this
critical Conjuncture. His Majesty is already engaged in a just and necessary
War with Spain: And a War with France is generally looked upon as unavoidable.
The Province of Pennsylvania, and these Counties, are in the very Center of his
Majesty's Colonies in America. The French are settled within a few Days March
of our Frontiers to the North-West of us: The Ocean bounds us to the Eastward,
and will admit of the Landing of any Number of Men, almost every where. In Case
then of War with France, so much to be apprehended; how dismal is our
Situation! seeing we are so much exposed on each Side, and of all his Majesty's
Colonies in America, are the only ones that are without Troops, without Arms,
and without Ammunition: And all this owing to an Opposition in our several
Assemblies, made by People whose religious Persuasion leads them to condemn the
Use of Arms in general. Military Provisions can only be made by the
Legislature. Our Governor, from a Zeal to his Majesty's Service, and the
Security of such of his Majesty's Subjects as he is by the Royal Authority
appointed to protect and govern, has frequently, in vain, warmly recommended
this Thing to the Assemblies of both Governments; and has been expressly
answered by one of them, that all Defense was, according to the religious
Persuasion of the Majority of their House, unlawful. And here I profess myself
at a very great Loss, in what Manner to justify, or even excuse, the Conduct of
my Brethren. The being really principled against the Lawfulness of
Self-Defence, is, in itself innocent, as proceeding from an ill-informed
Judgment, and only shows the Unfitness of those who are so principled to be
employed in Legislation. But when such Persons, by Plotting and Management,
procure themselves to be chosen into the Legislature, at a critical Time,
merely to keep out and tie up the Hands of others, whose religious Principles
leave them at Liberty to provide for the Defense of their Country, in Case of a
foreign Invasion; it amounts to a negative Persecution, and becomes highly
blameable. The General Assembly of these Counties, at the pressing Instance of
our Honorable Governor, has, indeed, very lately passed a Militia-Law, in
spite of the Opposition made, by those who affirm all War to be unlawful, who
happened to be the Minority. This is so far right, as it is Doing all in our
Power; but, in Truth, can be of very little Security to us, so long as the
Province of Pennsylvania continues unprovided of all Means of Defense; and it
must ever continue so unprovided, so long as nine Tenths of the Members of
Assembly are such as are persuaded Defense is unlawful. I therefore thought it,
Gentlemen, high Time to examine and expose a Doctrine so absurd in itself, and
so ruinous in its Consequences. It has been with this View that I have taken up
so much of your Time. How well I have succeeded in it, I leave others to judge.

New Castle County, ss. May it please your Honors,
THE Grand-Inquest for the Body of this County return You their Thanks for the
Charge delivered to them from the Bench. And as the same is intended for the
Benefit of Society, we desire Your Honors will order it to be printed, for the
Use of the Public.

THOMAS NOXON, Foreman.
November. 21. 1741.

