The Resort and Remedy of those that are bereaved by the Death of an eminent
Minister.

A SERMON Preached at Hatfield, Sept. 2. 1741. Being the Day of the Interment
of the Reverend Mr. William Williams, the aged and venerable Pastor of that
Church. And published at the united Request of those Reverend and Honored
Gentlemen, the Sons of the Deceased. As also by the Desire and at the Expense
of the Town.

By Jonathan Edwards, M. A. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST at Northampton.

James 1.17. -- The Father of Lights, with whom is no Variableness, neither
Shadow of Turning.

BOSTON, Printed by G. ROGERS, for J. EDWARDS in Cornhil. 1741.

The Sorrows of the Bereaved spread before JESUS.
Matthew. XIV. 12. And his Disciples came and took up the Body and buried it, and
went and told Jesus.


COncerning these Words I would observe three Things, 1. On what Occasion that
was, that we have an Account of in the Text; It was on Occasion of the Death of
John the Baptist, who was a Person whose Business it had been to preach the
Gospel of the Kingdom of God; He was a Minister of Jesus Christ, and had been
improved to do great Service, was an Instrument of much good to many in Judea
and Jerusalem, in his Life Time. He was cruelly murdered by Herod, at the
Instigation of Herodias, having exposed himself to her Malice by faithfully
reproving them for their incestuous Wickedness.

2. We may observe who are the Persons spoken of in the Text; they were those
that had been the Disciples of John the Baptist, that had sat at his Feet to
hear him preach the Gospel, that were his constant Followers, that were with
him as those that received great Benefit, by his Ministry, and were as it were
his Children.

3. We may observe their Behavior on this Occasion, consisting in two Things.

(1.) That whereby they showed their Regard to the Remains of the deceased,
They took up the Body and buried it: It had been used in a barbarous Manner by
others, that had also been his Hearers, and were under special Obligations to
have treated him with Honor. They cruelly murdered him, by severing his Head
from his Body; and his Head was carried in a Charger to Herodias, that she,
instead of paying that Respect that was due to the Remains of so venerable a
Person, might have her Malice and Cruelty gratified by such a Spectacle, and
that she might thence take Occasion to insult the Dead. While that Part of the
dead Body was thus used by Herodias, his Disciples out of Respect and Honor to
their Master and Teacher, decently inter the Rest.

(2.) That which they did, consequent on this, for God's Glory and their own
Good, They went and told Jesus. Him they knew to be one that their Master John,
while he lived, had testified a great Regard to. Jesus was he whose Forerunner
John was; whom he had preached, and of whom he had said, Behold the Lamb of God
that takes away the Sin of the World: And This is he, of whom I said, after me
comes one that is preferred before me; and whom he saw, and bare Record that
this is the Son of God. And probably they knew that Christ was one that had put
great Honor upon John their Teacher in his Lifetime. For he, though he was
the Son of God, and John's Maker and Savior, yet came to him to be baptized of
him, and had said of him, that among those that were born of Women, there had
not risen a greater than John the Baptist.

It was now a sorrowful Time with John's Disciples; when they were thus
bereaved of him whose Teachings they had sat under. And the Manner of his Death
was doubtless very grievous to them. They were like a Company of sorrowful,
distressed, bereaved Children; and what do they do in their Sorrows, but go to
Jesus with their Complaint. The first Thing that they do, after paying proper
Regards to the Remains of their dear Master, is to go to Christ, to spread
their Case before him seeking Comfort and Help from him. Thus they sought their
own Benefit.

And probably one End of their immediately going and telling Jesus was, that he
being informed of it, might conduct himself accordingly, as his Wisdom should
direct, for the Interest of his own Kingdom. When so great a Person as John the
Baptist the Forerunner of Christ was thus martyred, it was a great Event, in
which the common Cause, in which both Christ and he were engaged, was greatly
concerned: It was therefore fit that he that was at the Head of the whole
Affair should be informed of it, for his future Conduct in the Affairs of his
Kingdom. And accordingly we find that Jesus seems immediately to be influenced
in his Conduct by these Tidings; as you may see in the next Verse, When Jesus
heard of it he departed thence by Ship into a desert Place apart. Thus John's
Disciples sought God's Glory.

The Observation from the Words that I would make the Subject of my Discourse
at this Time is this,

When any one is taken away by Death, that has been eminent in the Work of the
Gospel Ministry, such as are thereby bereaved, should go and spread their
Calamity before Jesus.

Though in handling this Subject I might particularly speak to several
Propositions that are contained in this Observation, and many Things might
profitably be insisted on under it, if there were Room for it within the
Compass of a Sermon; yet I shall only give the Reasons of the Doctrine, and
then hasten to the Application.

The following Reasons may be given why, in Case of such an awful Dispensation
of Providence, those that are concerned in it, and bereaved by it, should go
and spread their Sorrows before Jesus.

1. Christ is one that is ready to pity the afflicted. It Is natural for Persons
that are bereaved of any that are dear to 'em, and for all under deep Sorrow,
to seek some that they may declare and lay open their Griefs to, that they have
good Reason to think will pity 'em, and have a Fellow-feeling with them of
their Distress. The Heart that is full of Grief wants Vent, and desires to pour
out its Complaint; but it seeks a compassionate Friend to pour it out before.

Christ is such an one, above all others. He of old, before his Incarnation
manifested himself full of Compassion toward his People; for that is Jesus
that is spoken of Isa. 63.9. In all their Affliction he was afflicted; and and
the Angel of his Presence saved them; in his Love and in his Pity he redeemed
them; and he bare them, and carried them all the Days of old. And when he was
upon Earth in his State of Humiliation. He was the most wonderful Instance of a
tender, pitiful, compassionate Spirit that ever appeared in the World. How
often are we told of his having Compassion on one and another? So Matthew. 15.32.
Then Jesus called his Disciples, and said unto them, I have Compassion on the
Multitude. So he had Compassion on the Man possessed with Devils, Mark 5.19. Go
home to thy Friends, and tell them how great Things the Lord has done to thee,
and has had Compassion on thee. So we read of his pitying the Mother, that was
bereaved of her Son, Luke 7.13. There we have an Account, when Christ went into
the City of Nain, and met the People carrying out a dead Man, the only Son of
his Mother, that was a Widow, that when he saw her he had Compassion on her. So
when the two blind Men that sat by the Way-side, cried to Jesus, as he passed
by, saying, Have Mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David. We read that Jesus had
Compassion on them, Matthew* 20.39. So we read of his being moved with
Compassion, Matthew. 14.14. And Jesus went forth, and saw a great Multitude, and
when he saw them he was moved with Compassion. His Speeches to his Disciples
were full of Compassion; especially those that he uttered a little before his
Death, of which we have an Account in the 13, 14, 15, and 16. Chapters of John.
His Miracles were almost universally Deeds of Pity to Persons under Affliction.

And seeing such a pitiful Heart appeared in him on all Occasions, no Wonder
that John's Disciples when bereaved of their dear Guide and Teacher, and their
Hearts were full of Sorrow, came to him for Pity: Which likewise induced Mary
and Martha to come and fall down pouring out their Tears at Jesus Feet, when
their dear Brother Lazarus was dead: Other Jews came to comfort them, before
Jesus came, whom they little regarded, but when they heard that Jesus was come,
they soon go and spread their Sorrows before him; they were assured that he
would pity 'em; and their Expectation was not frustrated; for he was most
tenderly affected and moved at their Tears: We are told that on that Occasion
he groaned in Spirit and was troubled, John 11.33. And when he came to the
Grave, it is observed, and a special Note seems to be set upon it, that he wept,
Ver. 35.

He was one that wept with those that wept. And indeed it was mere Pity that
brought him into the World, and induced him not only to shed Tears but to shed
his Blood: He poured out his Blood as Water on the Earth, out of Compassion to
the poor miserable Children of Men. And when do we ever read of any one Person
coming to him when on Earth, with an heavy Heart, or under (...) Kind of Sorrow
or Distress for Pity or Help, but what met with a Kind and compassionate
Reception?

And he has the same Compassion now he is ascended into Glory: There is still
the same Encouragement for bereaved Ones to go and spread their Sorrows before
him.

Afflicted Persons love to speak of their Sorrows to them that have had
Experience of Affliction, and know what Sorrow is: But there is none on Earth
or in Heaven that ever had so much Experience of Sorrow as Christ: Therefore he
knows how to pity the sorrowful, and especially may we be confident that he is
ready to pity those that are bereaved of a faithful Minister, because such a
Bereavement is a Calamity that concerns the Souls of Men; and Christ has
especially shown his Pity to Men's Souls; for it was chiefly for them that he
died: To relieve the Miseries of the Soul especially, is it that he has
provided; and it was from Pity to the Souls of Men that he made that Provision
for them that he has done, in appointing such an Order of Men as
Gospel Ministers, and in sending them forth to preach the Gospel: It was
because he had Compassion on Men's Souls, that he has appointed Ministers to
watch for Souls.

2. Christ has purchased all that Persons need under such a Bereavement. He has
purchased all that miserable Men stand in Need of under all their Calamities,
and comfort under every Sort of Affliction: And therefore his Invitation to
those that Labor and are heavy laden, to come to him for Rest, may be
understood in the most extensive Sense, to extend to those that labor under
any Kind of Burden of Sin or Sorrow, and to all that are heavy laden with
either natural or moral Evil: He has purchased divine Cordials and Supports for
those Hearts that are ready to sink: He has purchased all needed Comfort and
Help for the Widow and the Fatherless: He has purchased a sanctified
Improvement and Fruit of Affliction, for all such as come to him, and spread
their Sorrows before him: He has purchased those Things that are sufficient to
make up their Loss, that are bereaved of a great Blessing in an eminent
Minister of the Gospel: It Is he that has purchased those divine Blessings,
those Influences and Fruits of the Spirit of God, that the Work of the Ministry
is appointed to be the Means of: Faithful Ministers themselves are the Fruits
of his Purchase; and he has purchased all those Gifts and Graces whereby
Ministers do become faithful, eminent and successful; and therefore when he
ascended up on high, he received such Gifts for Men; Ephesians. 4.8. etc. -- So that
he has purchased all that is needful to make up for the Loss that is sustained
by the Death of an eminent Minister.

3. Christ is able to afford all that Help that is needed in such a Case. His
Power and his Wisdom are as sufficient as his Purchase, and answerable to his
Compassions. By the Bowels of his Mercies, the Love and Tenderness of his
Heart, he is disposed to help those that are in Affliction; and his Ability is
answerable to his Disposition. He is able to support the Heart under the
heaviest Sorrows, and to give Light in the greatest Darkness: He can divide the
thickest Cloud with Beams of heavenly Light and Comfort: He is one that gives
Songs in the Night, and turns the Shadow of Death into the Morning: He has
Power to make up the Loss of those that are bereaved by the Death of the most
eminent Minister. His own Presence with the bereaved is sufficient; if the
great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls be present, how much more is this than
enough to supply the Want of any under Shepherd? And then he is able to furnish
others with like Gifts and Graces for that Work.

Persons under sorrowful Bereavements are ready to go and lay open their
Sorrows to them that they think will be ready to pity them, though they know
they can but pity them, and cant help them. How much more is here in such a
Case to induce us to go to Jesus, who is not only so ready to pity, but so able
to help, able abundantly more than to fill up the Breach, and able to turn all
our Sorrows into Joy?

4. The Consideration of the special Office of Christ, and the Work that he has
undertaken for his People, should engage them to go and spread such a Calamity,
as the Bereavement of a faithful and eminent Minister, before him: For he is
the Head of the Body, the great Shepherd of the Sheep, and Lord of the Harvest;
that has undertaken the Care of the whole Church, and has the absolute
Government of it in his Hands, and the supreme Disposal and Management of all
ecclesiastical Affairs, to whom belongs the Care of the universal Church, and
every Part of it, with Respect to its Supply with such Guides, Officers and
Ordinances, as it stands in Need of. In Case of Bereavement of an eminent
Minister, it was he that sent forth such a Minister, appointed him his Charge
and furnished him for his Work, continued and assisted him in it, and in his
own Time removed him; and it is he that, in such a Case, by his Office has the
Care of filling up the Vacancy, and furnishing, establishing and assisting
Successors, and supplying all the Wants of bereaved Churches. It Is surely
therefore suitable and natural to go to him in such a Case, and spread such a
Calamity before him*

APPLICATION.
I come now to apply what has been said to the sorrowful Occasion of our being
thus assembled at this Time, even the Death of that aged Servant of God, who
has long been eminent in the Work of the Gospel Ministry in this Place.

There are many that may well look on themselves as nearly concerned in this
awful Providence, and Sharers in the Bereavement; all of whom should be
directed by this Doctrine, to go and spread their Affliction before Jesus, that
compassionate, all-sufficient Head of the Church, and Savior of the Body, that
merciful and faithful High Priest, that knows how to pity the afflicted.

And particularly it now becomes and concerns you, that belong to this Church
and Congregation, that are bereaved of your aged and eminent Pastor and Father,
that has so long been a great Blessing to you, now to go and tell Jesus.

The Disciples of John, spoken of in the Text, were those that were ordinarily
under his Instruction, and were his constant Hearers, as it has been with you
with Respect to your aged Pastor, that is now taken from you. Therefore be
exhorted to do as they did. Don't think that you have finished your Duty, when
you have taken up his Body and buried it, and have shown Respect to his Memory
and Remains at his Funeral: This is the least Part of your Duty: That which
mainly concerns you under this awful Providence, is between Christ and your own
Souls.

God has now taken away from you an able and faithful Minister of the
New Testament, one that has long been a Father to you, and a Father in our
Israel, a Person of uncommon natural Abilities, and distinguished Learning, a
great Divine, of very comprehensive Knowledge, and of a solid accurate
Judgment. -- Judiciousness and Wisdom were eminently his Character. He was one
of eminent Gifts, qualifying him for all Parts of the Work of the Ministry; and
there appeared a Savor of Holiness, in his Exercise of those Gifts in public
and private: So that he improved 'em as a Servant of Christ, and a Man of God.
He was not negligent of the Talents which his Lord had committed to him; you
need not be told with what constant Diligence he improved them, how studious at
home, and how laborious in his public Work: He ever devoted himself to the
Work to which he was called: The Ministry which he had received of the Lord he
took Heed to fulfill it, and pursued it with a constant and steadfast, even Mind
through all it is Difficulties.

You know his Manner of addressing Heaven in his public Prayers with you and
for you, with what Sanctity, Humility, Faith and Fervency, he seemed to apply
himself to the Father of Lights, from Time to Time, when he stood in this Desk
as your Mouth to God, and interceeding for you, pleading with God through the
Grace and Merits of a glorious Mediator. And you know his Manner of applying
himself to you when he came to you, from Time to Time, in the Name of the Lord.

In his public Ministry, he mainly insisted on the most weighty and important
Things of Religion; he was eminently an evangelical Preacher; evangelical
Subjects seemed to be his Delight: CHRIST was the great Subject of his
Preaching; and he much insisted on those Things that did nearly concern the
Essence and Power of Religion; and had a peculiar Faculty of judiciously and
clearly handling the Doctrines he insisted on, and treating properly whatever
Subject he took in Hand; and of selecting the most weighty Arguments and
Motives to enforce and set home those Things that concern Christian Experience
and Practice. His Subjects were always weighty, and his Manner of treating them
peculiarly happy, showing the Strength and Accuracy of his Judgment, and ever
breathing forth the Spirit of Piety, and a deep Sense of the Things he
delivered, on his Heart. His Sermons were none of them mean, but were all
solid, wise Composures. His Words were none of them vain, but all were weighty.

And you need not be told with what Weight the Welfare of your Souls seemed to
lie on his Heart, and how he instructed, and reproved, and warned, and exhorted
you, with all Authority, and with a fatherly tender Concern for your eternal
Good. -- And with what Wisdom he presided in the House of God, and guided its
Affairs; and also counseled and directed you in private, under you particular
Soul Exercises and Difficulties. You know how he has brought you up, (for most
of you have been trained up from your Childhood under his Ministry,) with what
Authority, and with what Judgment, Prudence and Steadiness, he has conducted
you as well as Meekness and Gentleness. You know his Manner of going in and out
among you, how exemplary his Walk and Conversation has been, with what Gravity,
Judgment and Savor of Holiness, he has walked before you, as a Man of God.

You have enjoyed great Advantages for your Souls Good, under his Ministry:
That you had such a Minister was your Privilege and your Honor; he has been an
Ornament to the Town of Hatfield; and his Presence and Conversation amongst you
has been both profitable and pleasant; for though it was such as did peculiarly
command Awe and Respect, yet it was at the same Time, humble and condescending:
It tended both to instruct and entertain those that he conversed with: As a
wise Man, and endued with Knowledge, He showed out of a good Conversation his
Works with Meekness of Wisdom.

But now it has pleased an holy God to take him away from you: You Will see his
Face and hear his Voice no more, in the Land of the Living: You Will no more have
the Comfort and Benefits of his Presence with you, and the Exercise of his
Ministry among you.

Therefore now go to Jesus, the supreme Head of the Church, and Bishop of
Souls. Your Pastor is dead, and will not live again till the last Day: But
Christ the chief Shepherd, though he was dead, is now alive! and behold he
lives for evermore. He ever lives to provide for his Church and to guide and
feed his Flock. Go to that Jesus whom your deceased Pastor preached, and to
whom he earnestly invited you while he lived, and give Thanks for the many
Blessings you enjoyed in him. Remember how you have received and heard, and
hold fast, that no Man take your Crown Particularly, Remember his late
affectionate Farewell at the Table of the Lord, not expecting such another
Opportunity with you. Exhorting you to follow Peace and Holiness, and to edify
one another.
; and go and humble your selves also before him, that you made no better
Improvement of the Ministry of your Pastor while he lived; and beg of him a
sanctified Improvement of his awful Hand in taking him away, and that he would
help you to remember his Warnings and Counsels that you too much slighted
whilst you had them, least those Warnings and Counsels cry against you, and
rise up in Judgment against you another Day, least you see your Pastor that so
affectionately and earnestly, and so often, and for so long a Time continued to
exhort you, and earnestly prayed for you, while he lived, rising up in
Judgment, and bearing Testimony against you, declaring how constantly and
laboriously he entreated and called upon you, and how obstinately some of you
slighted his Counsels; and least you see him sitting with Christ to judge and
condemn you, and adoring his awful Justice on your aggravated Punishment.

All you that have an Interest in JESUS, now go to him on this Occasion, and
tell him of your Bereavement, and beg of him that he would not depart from you;
but that he would make up his Loss in his own immediate Presence. Go to him for
your surviving Pastor, that he would be with him, and furnish him more and more
for, and assist him in that great Work, that is now wholly devolved upon him,
and make him also a burning and shining Light amongst you; and that you may
have of the Presence and Blessing of JESUS with you, and him.

And now, Since I am called to speak in the Name of Christ on this solemn
Occasion, I would apply my self to the near Relations of the Deceased, who are
especially to be looked upon, as the bereaved.

God in his holy Providence has taken from you one that has been a great
Blessing, Comfort and Honor to you, and deservedly very dear to you, and
honored of you. The Doctrine we are upon directs you what to do in your
present Circumstances, viz. To go to Jesus, to go and spread your Affliction
before an all-sufficient Redeemer.

And particularly I would apply my self to the honored Relict, who stood in
the nearest Relation of any to the Deceased, whom God by this awful Providence
has made a sorrowful Widow. Suffer me, honored Madam, in your great Affliction
to exhibit to you a compassionate Redeemer. God has now taken from you that
Servant of his, that was the nearest and best Friend you had in this World,
that was your wise and prudent Guide, your affectionate and pleasant Companion,
who was so great a Blessing while he lived, to you and your Family, and under
Christ, was so much the Comfort and Support of your Life. You see, Madam, where
your Resort must be: Your earthly Friends can condole your Loss, but cannot make
it up to you; we must all confess ourselves to be but miserable Comforters: But
you may go and tell Jesus, and there you may have both Support and Reparation:
His Love and his Presence is far beyond that of the nearest and most
affectionate earthly Friend. Now you are bereaved of your earthly Consort, you
may go to a spiritual Husband, and seek his Compassion and his Company; He is
the Fountain of all that Wisdom and Prudence, that Piety, that tender Affection
and faithful Care, that you enjoyed in your departed Consort; in him is an
infinite Fountain of all these Things, and of all good; in him you may have
Light in your Darkness, Comfort in your Sorrow, and Fullness of Joy and Glory in
another World, in an everlasting Union with your dear deceased Relative, in the
glorious Presence of the same Redeemer, in whose Presence is Fullness of Joy,
and at whose right Hand are Pleasures for evermore.

This Doctrine also directs the bereaved afflicted Children, that are with
Hearts full of Grief, now mourning over a dear departed Father, where to go,
and what to do. You will no longer have your Father's Wisdom to guide you, his
tender Love to comfort and delight you, and his affectionate Care to guard you
and assist you, and his pious and judicious Counsels to direct you, and his
holy Examples set before you, and his fervent, humble, believing Prayers with
you and for you.

But in the blessed Jesus, your Father's Lord and Redeemer, you may have much
more, than all those Things: Your Father's Virtues that made him so great a
Blessing to you, were but the Image of what is in CHRIST.

Therefore go to him in your Mourning: Go and tell Jesus; tell a compassionate
Savior what has befallen you. Heretofore you have had an earthly Father to go
to, whose Heart was full of Tenderness to you; but the Heart of his Redeemer is
much more tender; his Wisdom and his Love is infinitely beyond that of any
earthly Parent. Go to him, and then you will surely find Comfort. Go to him and
you will find that, though you are bereaved, yet you are not left in any Want,
you will find that all your Wants are supplied, and all your Loss made up, and
much more than so.

But here I would particularly, in Humility address my self, to my honored
Fathers, the Sons of the Deceased, that are improved in the same great Work of
the Gospel Ministry, or in other public Business for the Service of their
Generation. -- Honored Sirs, Though it might be more proper for me to come to
you for Instruction and Counsel, than to take it upon me to exhort you, yet as
I am one that ought to have a Fellow-feeling of your Affliction, and to look on
my self as a Sharer in it, and as you have desired me to speak in the Name of
Christ, on this Occasion, suffer me to mention to you that Source of Comfort,
that infinite Fountain of Good, one of the larger Streams of which, has failed
by the Death of an earthly Father, even the blessed JESUS. You will doubtless
acknowledge it as an Instance of his great Goodness to you, that you have been
the Sons of such a Father; being sensible that your Reputation and
Serviceableness in your Generation, has been, under Christ, very much owing to
the great Advantages you have been under, by his Instructions, Counsels and
Education. And it is not fit that Children that have learned of such a faithful
Servant of Christ and been brought up at his Feet now he is dead should do as
John the Baptist's Disciples did, go and tell Jesus? From whom you may receive
Comfort under your Bereavement, and from whom you may receive more of that
Spirit that dwelt in him, and greater Degrees of those Virtues he derived from
Christ, to cause you to shine brighter, and to make you still greater Blessings
in your Generation. Now Death has veiled and hid from Sight, a Star that shone
with reflected Light, our Text and Doctrine leads you to the Sun that has
Light in himself, and shines with infinite unfailing Brightness. And while you
go to Jesus, honored Sirs, on this Occasion for your selves, I humbly desire
your Requests to him for us the surviving Ministers of this County, that he
would be with us, now he has taken from us him that was as a Father amongst us.

I nextly would address my self to the surviving Pastor of this Church. We may
well look upon you, Reverend Sir, as one in an especial Manner concerned in
this awful Providence, and that has a large Share in the Bereavement. You
doubtless, are sensible what Reason you have to bless God for the Advantage you
have had, in serving in the Gospel of Christ, so long as you have done, with
the venerable Person deceased, as a Son with a Father, enjoying the Benefit of
his Instructions, Counsels and Example And particularly, you will often
recollect the affectionate and fatherly Counsels he gave you, to Diligence and
Faithfulness in your Lord's Work, with Encouragement, of his Protection and
Assistance, to carry you through all Difficulties: The last Evening of his Life.
And now, dear Sir, God has taken him from you, as he took Elijah from Elisha,
and as he took John the Baptist, the New Testament Elijah, from his Disciples:
Therefore now you are directed what to do, viz. go and tell Jesus; as those
Disciples did. You have now a great Work devolved upon you; you have him no
more who while he lived was as a Father to you, to guide and assist you, and
take the Burden of your great Work from you. Therefore you have no where else
to go, but to your great Lord and Master, that has sent you to labor in that
Part of his Vineyard, where his aged, and now departed Servant was employed, to
seek Strength and Wisdom, and divine Influence and Assistance from him, and a
double Portion of that Spirit, that dwelt in your Predecessor.

And lastly, The Text I am upon may be of Direction to us the surviving
Ministers of this County, what to do on this sorrowful Occasion. God has now
taken our Father and Master from our Head: He has removed him that has
heretofore under Christ, been very much our Strength that we have been wont to
Resort to in difficult Cases for Instruction and Direction, and that used to be
amongst us from Time to Time, in our Associations, and that we were wont to
behold as the Head and Ornament of those Conventions Very worthy of our Notice
was that his farewell Message sent us by one of our beloved Brethren (the Rev.
Mr. Williams of Springfield) after he returned from such a Meeting, where he
also preached. -- 'I don't expect (said he) to be with you another
Association-Meeting: but I give you this Advice, Love your Master, love your
Work, and love one another.' How very expressive of his own Spirit? like John
the beloved Disciple.
. Where else can we now go but to Jesus, the ever-living Head of the whole
Church, and Lord of the whole Harvest, the Fountain of Light, our great Lord
and Master that sends all Gospel Ministers, and on whom they universally
depend. Let this awful Providence bring us to look to Christ, to seek more of
his Presence with us; and that HE would preside as Head in our Associations:
Let it bring us to a more immediate and entire Dopendance upon him, for
Instruction and Direction, in all our Difficulties.

Let us on this Occasion consider what God has done in this County of late
Years: It was not many Years ago that the County was filled with aged
Ministers, that were our Fathers, But our Fathers, where are they? -- What a
great Alteration is made in a little Time, in the Churches in this Part of the
Land! The Rev. Mr. Stoddard, Mr. Tailor, Mr. Williams of Deerfield, Mr. Brewer,
and lately have died, Mr. Bull of Westfield, and Mr. Devotion of Suffield.
How frequent of late have been the Warnings of this Kind that God has given us
to prepare to give up our Account! Let us go to Jesus, and seek Grace of him
that we may be faithful while we live, and that he would assist us in our great
Work, that when we also are called hence, we may give up our Account with Joy
and not with Grief, and that hereafter we may meet those our Fathers, that have
gone before us in the faithful Labors of the Gospel, and that we may shine
forth with them, as the Brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars forever
and ever.

FINIS.

