Mr. Phillips's SERMON Preached to the Ancient and Honorable Artillery-Company
in Boston, June 1st. 1741.

Soldiers Counseled and Encouraged. A SERMON Preached at the Request, and in
the Audience of the Ancient and Honorable Artillery-Company in Boston, June 1
st. 1741. Being the Day of the Election of their Officers. And is now made
public at the Desire of many who heard it; To whom it is humbly Dedicated: By
SAMUEL PHILLIPS, M. A. And Pastor of the South-Church in Andover.

N. B. Several Paragraphs under the Doctrine, which, for Brevity, were omitted
in the preaching, are here inserted in their proper Places.

BOSTON: Printed by Tho. Fleet, for JOHN PHILLIPS, at the Stationers Arms in
Cornhill. 1741.

Soldiers Counseled and Encouraged.
JUDGES 5. 18. Zebulun and Naphtali were a People that jeoparded their Lives
unto the Death, in the high places of the Field.
THIS Chapter contains a Song, occasioned by a glorious Victory obtained over
Jabin King of Canaan, and is entitled, The Song of Deborah and Barak; The
former was a Prophetess in Israel; the latter by an immediate Call from GOD,
was General of the Army at that Time; and they both did worthily in their
Places. Deborah was truly a Mother in Israel, by being a Mother to Israel;
thoughtful and industrious, even as a tender Mother, to deliver the People, as
though her own Children, from Oppression, and to save them from Ruin: Yea, and
although it does not appear, that, in the Day of Battle, she fought with her
Hand, yet her pious Soul was in Exercise, being lifted up to GOD in the
Heavens, and doubtless contributed more by her fervent Prayers to the
vanquishing of the Enemy, than Barak by his Martial Weapons; and therefore says
she, "My Soul thou have trodden down Strength": Not but that the General acted
his Part prudently, and with a Spirit of true Courage, and had the Praise of
it: And not at that Time only, but moreover, he is celebrated by the Author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, as Israel's Deliverer, and a Man eminent for his
Faith. -- And it may not pass unobserved, that the Governors of Israel offered
themselves, at that Juncture, to serve in the War; and by so doing won the
Heart of the Prophetess, and she gave GOD the Praise of it; as also, because
the People offered themselves so very willingly. -- Particular Mention is here
made of the several Tribes which assisted, as Ephraim and Benjamin, Machir and
Zebulon, Issachar and Napthali: But then, alas! some there were which declined
the Service, as Reuben, partly, because of the Divisions among them, but
whether the Contest was between themselves, or with the other Tribes, is
uncertain; and partly, by Reason of their secular Occasions, or because they
chose to pursue their own private, rather than to promote the public Interest:
And truly, a contentious, as also a covetous and worldly Spirit, very often
proves the unhappy Occasion of Persons refusing to lend a Hand to promote the
public Weal. Dan and Asher also declined; but Meroz is especially condemned and
cursed; and the Curse, it seems, took effect, for we read no more of it: Not,
that GOD wanted their help; No; for rather than not accomplish his own Work,
"the Stars from Heaven must fight in their Courses"; which may probably refer
to the Thunder, Lightning, and Storms of Hail sent at that Time, and on that
Occasion: Yea, and not the Heavens only, but also the Waters under the Heavens,
and in particular, the ancient River Kishon ministered to the Salvation of
Israel, by sweeping away and drowning a Multitude of the Enemy, who probably
essayed to pass over to the other Side, and so escape. -- And then, the
Prophetess goes on to give Jael, her Sister-Heroe, the Praise of her valorous
Act, in putting a full End to Sisera's troubling of Israel, by Means of her
deadly Nail and Hammer: And having spoken of the Disappointment, which would
thereby ensue to his Mother and the other Ladies of the Court, she concludes
with a pathetick Request to GOD, for the like Destruction of all his Enemies;
and for the Encouragement and Salvation of all true Israelites.

AND now, O how much does it redound to the Honor of this Mother in Israel,
that she disclaimed all Right to the Honor of that great Exploit! As she had
been first in the Action, so also she now leads in the Thanksgiving, saying in
effect, "Not unto me, Not unto us, but to thy Name, O LORD, be the Glory."
Verses 2d and 3d, "Praise ye the LORD for the avenging of Israel, when the
People willingly offered them. Hear O ye Kings, give Ear O ye Princes, I, even
I will sing unto the LORD, I will sing Praise unto the LORD GOD of Israel." --
And truly, all the People had abundant Reason, for a long Time after, to
remember this Victory with repeated Thanksgivings; for, it not only brought
them a present happy Peace and Quiet, but moreover, the whole Land had Rest for
the Space of Forty Years.

BUT Zebulon and Napthali seem to have distinguished themselves, on that Day,
by their Boldness and Activity: They were the first that offered for that
Service, moved thereunto, it is probable, partly from the Consideration of
Barak's belonging to one of those Tribes, viz. that of Napthali; but much more
from the Sense which they had, above any other, of the Hardship of enduring the
Yoke, they lying nearest to the Oppressor: These People being spirited from
above, chose rather to die like Men, than to live any longer like Vassals to
the vilest of Men; and therefore, fired with Zeal for GOD, and their Country,
they soon listed into the Service, and being thus entered, they would not baulk
so good a Cause, but in the Day of Battle, jeoparded their Lives to the Death
in the high Places of the Field; or, in the plain and open Field. -- Indeed
Barak's Orders were to take Ten Thousand Men out of these two Tribes, and then
proceed; but because some out of some of the other Tribes willingly offered
themselves, therefore they were accepted: However, Zebulon and Naphtali were
doubtless the Vanguard, appointed to that Place by their General, yea and
choosing it rather than any other, although the Place of greatest Danger: And
behold, they did not, in the Day of Battle, shrink back nor seek to flee, but
like Men filled with heroic Courage, pushed on, and having set their Faces
like a Flint, they encountered even the Chariots of Iron without dread of
Danger, and disdained the King of Terrors himself in so just a Cause. -- It is
said indeed, that they jeoparded their Lives --; but the goodness of their
Cause made them quite unmindful of their Danger, being fully determined either
to conquer, or die on the Spot.

AND now, it is obvious to us all, that this was spoken, and is here recorded,
by way of Commendation to them, that they were thus forward and valorous; and
also, as a great Favor of GOD to Israel, that they had such Men among their
Tribes: So that, we may take this for our OBSERVATION,

THAT when a Number of Men do in a just Cause, and there is urgent Necessity
for it, jeopard their Lives to the Death, in behalf of their Country, it
affords Matter of Thanksgiving unto GOD, and Commendation to such Men.

AND our Observation will hold true, as to those who jeopard their Lives upon
the mighty Waters, as well as to such who do so in the Field of Battle.

AND this may be spoken to, as the Time shall admit, under Four General Heads.

I. THAT the Church and People of GOD have Enemies to Encounter.

II. IT is lawful, and sometimes highly necessary, for the People of GOD, some
of them at least, to take up Arms and go forth to War.

III. A Soldier's Life is in very great Jeopardy, especially in the Field of
Battle.

IV. THAT when a Number of Men do in a just Cause, and there be Necessity for
it, jeopard their Lives to the Death, in behalf of their Country, it affords
Matter of Thanksgiving unto GOD, and Commendation to such Men.

SOMETHING I shall say to Each of these; then, offer a few Words by way of
Address to the honorable Artillery Company; and then conclude with some Advice
to those, who are about to engage in the Spiritual Warfare under Him who is
stronger than the strong Man armed. -- And all with my usual and affected
Plainness of Speech.

First, THE Church and People of GOD have Enemies to Encounter.

PARTICULAR Christians have their Enemies, and meet with their Troubles in the
World, viz. Personal Troubles both inward and outward; and sometimes Domestic
Troubles of one kind and another, too many, yea, and some of them too bad, to
be here recited: -- And besides these, the People of GOD have oftentimes open
and professed Enemies to encounter; so that the Church on Earth may fitly be
styled the Church militant, to distinguish from the Church triumphant. It is
true indeed, GOD's People do not delight in War, or to breed and continue
Strifes with their Fellow-Mortals; No; but they are oftentimes obliged to
strive and fight, to kill or be killed.

AND as for their Enemies at this Day, they are such as are not only Enemies to
their outward Prosperity, seeking to impoverish them by preying on their
Substance and making Spoil of their Estates; as also, Enemies to their Liberty,
seeking to captivate and sometimes to retain them in Slavery and cruel Bondage:
But moreover, they are Enemies also, to that pure and holy Religion which they
make Profession of, and accordingly use their utmost Endeavors to bring the
true Worshippers to a false Way and Manner of Worship, even to pay divine
Homage unto Creatures not able to help and save: Yea, they would destroy, if
they could, even to the Foundation, such as have not their Mark, and do
disclaim the Pope's Supremacy; their Language is much like that of the Children
of Edom in the Day of Jerusalem's Trouble, in Psalm. 137. 7. Raze it, raze it
even to the Foundation: And this leads me to say, that they are Enemies to the
very Lives of GOD's People: Their tender Mercies are Cruelty, and that the
rather, because they are instructed, and do embrace it as an Article of their
Creed, That to destroy Protestants is to do GOD and the Church good Service.

AND truly, not only now, but even all along, the Church of GOD has had her
Enemies, namely, the Egyptians, the Canaanites, the Babylonians, the Grecians,
and the Romans, of old: -- And as for the Primitive Christians, they were
persecuted by the Heathen Emperors, at no less than Ten several Periods; which
were no sooner over, but the Arians arose, who although they called themselves
Christians, yet persecuted the Orthodox worse than ever professed Pagans had
done; insomuch, that the Church was in imminent Hazard of being swallowed up by
that Flood. And afterward Antichrist arose, known by the Name of the Man of
Sin, who has persecuted more than all that were before him: Yea, and as the
Quarrel between the Kingdom of GOD and the Kingdom of Satan among Men,
commenced from the Day of the first and grand Apostasy, so we may depend upon
it, that as long as there is a Pope in Rome, there will be Days of Trouble to
the Church of GOD on Earth.

AND now, If it be enquired, Who it is that stirs up Men to appear as Enemies
to the Church of GOD? I reply; That the LORD of Hosts orders and over rules in
this Matter: The Sword is one of GOD's sore Judgments; and agreably, we often
read, that it was the LORD who stirred up one Nation and another to vex and
disturb his People Israel: And even so it is at this Day. -- But then, it is
proper to add, that although the Enemies of GOD's People seek to impoverish and
even to extirpate them, yet, the most High has wise and good Ends herein: He
does it for his own Honor and Glory, to magnify his Name, and to make glorious
his Attributes, and more especially his Holiness, for hereby he clearly and
awfully testifies his Hatred of Sin, and his sore Displeasure against Sinners:
Also at such a Time, he takes the Opportunity to glorify his Wisdom and Power
in preserving his Church amidst so many Dangers, which may well be looked upon
as one of the great Wonders of divine Providence, and even like the Bush
burning and yet not consumed: Yea, and I may truly add, that the People of GOD
themselves are wont to glorify him in Days of Adversity more than at other
Times: In the primitive State of the Christian Church, which was a Time of much
Tribulation, how greatly was the Kingdom of CHRIST advanced, and his interest
promoted in the World, beyond what it was when a prosperous State came on. --
In a Word, GOD Almighty's Intent is not to destroy his Church, No, but rather
that the Faith and Patience, Courage and Fidelity of his Servants may for a
Season be proved and improved, and be found to Praise and Honor and Glory: And
doubtless, the Judge of all the Earth is Righteous in these his Dispensations,
for the very best of Men need to be purged that so they may bring forth more
Fruit; and as for the People of GOD in general, they stand in need of
Correction in Order to their Reformation. -- And it may not be amiss to add,
that the glorious God has an Eye herein to his People's Enemies also, even to
weaken and waste, and sometimes utterly to destroy them, or a considerable
Branch of their Power.

HENCE then we may infer, That External Peace and Prosperity is not a sure
Evidence of a true Church. -- Some have been too apt to break Charity with
particular Persons, because they have been exercised with many and grievous
afflictions in the World; Job's Friends (for Instance) were inclined to censure
and even condemn him on this very Account, but they were upon a wrong
Foundation, and were soon convinced of it: And truly, it was Matter of
Stumbling to the holy Psalmist, to observe, that, ordinarily, good People had a
larger Share of Trouble dispensed to them than others had, "until he went into
the Sanctuary of GOD, where he soon understood what was to be the End of the
wicked, namely, that they were exalted, that so their Fall might be the more
grievous and infamous." -- And as it is a Truth with respect to particular
Persons, that the Righteous may be in Adversity, and the Wicked in Prosperity,
so also as to Societies; and therefore, a true Church may be afflicted and
persecuted, and even almost destroyed; and at the same Time, a false Church may
be in great Power and Splendour. -- If we review the State of the Church of GOD
under the Old Testament, how frequently and how grievously was she afflicted.
Psalm. 129. 1, 2, 3. "Many a Time have they afflicted me from my Youth may
Israel now say; many a Time have they afflicted me from my Youth, -- the
Plowers plowed upon my Back, they made long their Furrows." And so, if we
consider again the State of the Church under the New Testament, we shall find,
that many a Time "she was killed all the Day long, and, for CHRIST'S sake, was
counted as Sheep for the Slaughter." The Primitive Christians (though in Reality,
the best, yet) were represented to the World as the very worst of Men, and
accordingly, unto them was given the most barbarous Treatment; so that the
Continuance of the true Christian Religion down to this Day, deserves, as was
before noted, to be looked upon as a standing Miracle: Yea, when we revolve in
our Minds, how Earth and Hell combined, what a mighty Force was raised, what
Books were written, and what Laws were made, against the Church, even in its
Infancy, we must needs say, It is the LORD'S doing that she is preserved, and
it ought to be mavelous in our Eyes: Behold, "This is GOD'S Heritage, which
has been as a speckled Bird, and which all the Birds round about have been,
and still are, against:" Nor may the Church expect to be at Rest for any
considerable Space of Time together, until the Man of Sin be taken out of the
Way. -- True indeed, it was the Expectation of the generality of GOD's ancient
People, that the Kingdom of the Messiah would be a Temporal Kingdom, attended
with worldly Pomp and Power, and that all Nations would, speedily after his
appearing, be subdued under him, and that there would be and continue to be a
universal Peace; and not only so, but moreover, that the People of the Jews
would be Chief and Princess among the Nations: But, this was no other than a
vain Dream, for although it is true, that there was an universal Peace in the
Empire when the true Messiah was born, and therefore the Temple of Janus was
then shut; yet, our Savior himself expressly said, "My Kingdom is not of this
World," and cautioned his Disciples, saying, "Think not that I am come to send
Peace," i. e. External Peace and Prosperity: Yea, and he foretold, "that there
would be great Commotions among the Nations, Wars, and Rumors of Wars," which
Prediction of his has been since abundantly verified, and is so at this Day. --
A way then with that false Position, namely, That External Peace and Grandeur
is a sure Note of the true Church: -- And let not any vainly imagine, that by
listing under CHRIST'S Banner, they shall be exempt from outward Troubles, or
get out of the reach of persecuting Foes; No, No; for says our Savior, "in the
World you shall have Trouble;" and "whosoever will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his Cross and follow me:" Christians must expect not only
inward and spiritual, but also outward and bodily Troubles, even Troubles from
the World as well as from the Flesh and Devil: Which I here mention, not to
discourage any of you from walking in the right Ways of the LORD, but that you
may not be surprised when such Days of Trouble come on, and to desert that good
Cause which you profess to espouse: Your best way is to expect and prepare for
Troubles of one kind and another, that so you may glorify GOD in and under
them, and may also see a glorious Issue of the same; that is, either be
delivered from them to your own spiritual Advantage, or be delivered by them
out of the reach of all Evils both moral and paenal. -- Which leads me to say,
Oh! How much more desirable is Heaven than Earth! And, Oh! how ardently should
the Saints of the most High long to be there, and be giving all Diligence to
make their Calling and Election sure! You may be sure that there are no
Contests there; No; for the Inhabitants of that better Country are cordial
Friends to one another, and unfeignedly delight in each other's Society. There
is nothing at all to offend or disturb you in that holy Mountain, nay, but
there is Fullness of Joy and Pleasures evermore; and good Reason for it, seeing
the Saints shall be perfect in Holiness, and be confirmed in that State.

I proceed now to the Second general Head, viz. That it is lawful, and
sometimes highly necessary, for the People of GOD, some of them at least, to
take up Arms and go forth to War.

I HAVE not Time to prove this at large, neither is there so much Need of it,
seeing it has been sufficiently done in your hearing, on the like Occasion, at
one Time and another: And therefore, I shall say in a few Words only: -- And,

THAT it is a Thing lawful on some Occasions to go forth to War, is undeniable;
inasmuch as we not only find the People of GOD so doing in Days of old, but
moreover, that they were directed and commanded by the most High himself to do
so: I suppose I need not stand to cite Texts of Scripture for the Proof of
this; any Child that has read the Historical Part of the Holy Bible cannot but
know that there are very many to this Purpose: Neither is it counter-manded by
any Text in the New Testament. And,

NOT only is it lawful, but sometimes highly necessary to go forth to War;
namely, that so the People of GOD may preserve and defend the pure Worship of
GOD among themselves against bold Corrupters: As also, that they may deliver
such as are persecuted for Righteousness sake from violent Oppressors: And it
is even sometimes necessary for the recovering, and so for the defending of
Lands and Goods; but rather for the defending of Lives and Liberties, and the
recovering of Captives: -- But then, whenever we take up Arms, either for the
Defense or the Recovery of our Cities and People, we should learn to consider
them not only as ours, but as the Cities and People of our GOD.

YEA, it may be sometimes necessary for People to take up Arms against their
own Countrymen; I mean, against such as go about to destroy the pure Religion,
and to introduce and impose the worshipping of false Gods. -- Also, against
such as resist public Justice, or those who will not deliver up, but protect,
notorious Offenders, and so prevent their receiving condign Punishment; for,
such Persons are Enemies to a Country or Nation, and deserve to be treated as
such: And it was for this Reason that the other Tribes in Israel made War with
Benjamin, yea, and they had Warrant from GOD himself to do so. -- Also, such as
wickedly rebel against their lawful Prince, and try to dethrone him, are to be
subdued by Force of Arms: And for this Reason King David made War first against
Ishbosheth and his Party; and afterward against his Son Absalom and those that
adhered to him. -- And in a Word, this is necessary, when a Nation cannot
otherwise preserve or recover its just Rights; and more especially, when the
Enemy is more bold and daring than common, and threatens speedily to waste and
destroy, and there is Information given of a mighty Host either come, or coming
forth on that Design.

BUT without these, or some of these Grounds and Reasons, the People of GOD may
not, as I conceive, take up Arms for War: The Provocation must be just, and the
Call of Providence clear, otherwise, by making War, People take a ready Course
to bring Mischief upon themselves; even as King Josiah, though a very good Man,
yet was slain in Battle and his Army routed, when he too rashly engaged against
Pharaoh-necho, who had neither done, nor designed him any wrong.

AND to what has been said it may be proper to add, That it belongs to the
Heads and Rulers of a People to make and appoint a War: Men in a private
Capacity plainly transgress if they pretend to make a War, or knowingly do any
Thing which leads thereunto, contrary to the Commandment, or without the
Knowledge, of their Civil Rulers; That is to say, unless those Rulers do so
violate their Oath, as to become a People's avowed Enemies, and do very
apparently join with such as seek their Ruin: For, although I constantly teach
"Submission to the King as Supreme, and unto the Governor as unto him that is
sent," yet, I see no Reason to exhort People to passive Obedience, and
Non-Resistance, in the utmost Latitude of the same.

AND now, from what has been said, we may see the Mistake of such, who affirm
that every kind of War is unlawful: They chiefly urge the Sixth Commandment for
the Proof of their Assertion; but as I conceive, this is not at all to the
Purpose; for doubtless, the Intent of that Law is to prevent our killing an
honest Man, for his Money's sake, and the like; as also, our slaying a Person
privately, because of some Wrong which he has done us, for the Magistrate is
GOD's Minister to execute Judgment. -- And, in a Word, This Precept was given
in order to preserve and maintain humane Society, by being tender of each
other's Lives; but was never understood by the Church of GOD as enjoining them
to spare the Lives of such, who evidently seek to destroy their Comforts and
their Lives too; for indeed, this would be, in effect, to destroy themselves.
-- But then, it may not be thought amiss for me to add, That as it cannot be
reasonably supposed, that a Protestant Prince will have Recourse to the Sword
until all other Remedies fail; so neither is it consistent with our holy
Religion, for People to proseute a War with a Spirit of Malice and Hatred, and
as though we took delight in dispatching Souls, unprepared for it, into Eternity.
Violent Invaders and barbarous Oppressors may be punished, yea, and put to
Death too, but then all this should be without Rancour and Malice in the Hearts
of the Conquerors: Nay, we ought so far to love even our open Enemies, as to
accept of any reasonable Capitulation; yea, and so as (suppose we are obliged
to proceed to Battle, then) to pray, that if any fall by our Hands, that GOD
would be pleased to have Mercy on them.

Thirdly, THE next general Head is, that a Soldier's Life is in very great
Jeopardy, and especially in the Field of Battle.

IT is very true indeed, that every Man's Life is exposed, and that
continually; for we have all of us forfeited our very Lives as well as the
Comforts of the same: The Wages of Sin is Death, and it is of the LORD'S
Mercies that we are not all consumed before this Day; even because he
delights not in the Death of Sinners, but waits that he may be gracious.
Many, many Dangers does the most High deliver us out of, yea, and doubtless,
many which at present we are not at all sensible of; we ought therefore to look
upon our Preservation in the World as a Wonder of divine Goodness, and to give
GOD the Praise of it, and study to live to his Glory. Oh! seeing we live from
Day to Day on the Fruits of his Bounty, let us live to his Glory, and not give
him Reason still to complain of us, that although "he has nourished and brought
us up, yet we rebel against him." Surely it becomes and concerns us all to be
humble, constant and sincere in the Way of Well-doing, and always upon our
Watch, as not knowing at what Hour our LORD will come: It is a presumptuous
boasting of to Morrow, that occasions Sinners to delay their Repentance, until
they have neither Heart nor Opportunity for it.

BUT then, all will grant that some Men's Lives are more exposed than others,
and these at some Times more than at others; and a Soldier's Life in
particular, and that more especially in the Field of Battle. This is a Time
when many, very many are slain, and one seems to be in hazard as well as
another: The Psalmist, most probably, considered himself in the Quality of a
Soldier, and as a Man of War, when he said as in Psalm. 119, 109. My Soul is
continually in mine Hand. Q. D. There is but a Step between me and Death; and I
look upon my Life to be in as great Danger, "as a valuable Treasure is of being
violently taken away, which a Man carries in his Hand:" And yet, this Man of
GOD did not expire, either in the open Field, or by the Treachery of a
dissembling Courtier, but in his Bed, and amidst his Friends: But, alas! Who
can say, how many Thousands, and Ten Thousands, have come to their End by the
Sword; some dispatched in a Moment, and others soon giving up the Ghost by
Reason of their mortal Wounds.

BUT I need not stand upon the Proof of so evident a Truth; and therefore shall
only add a few useful Reflections, and then proceed. And,

1. THIS teaches us that such Men are distinguishingly favored, whose Lives
are preserved in the Day of Battle: They and their Friends with them should pay
a very grateful Acknowledgment to the Preserver of Men, not only for what
Exploit may have been done by their own and other Men's Hands, but also for
that Preservation and Deliverance, which they in particular have experienced.
Oh! never learn to say after the Manner of the Heathen, viz. It was our good
Fortune to escape with our Lives; but extol the Name of GOD, and shout forth
his Praises, because he has covered your Heads in the Day of Battle. And,

2. HENCE let Soldiers be prevailed with to realize their Danger before they go
forth to War. You may not imagine, that you are going, at such a Time, only to
take a Walk, or a Voyage; nor that the Expedition will be no other than a
pleasant Diversion; Nay, -- but expect to meet with Hardships, and consider
well not only the Fatigue, but also the Hazard; and be persuaded "to set both
House and Heart in Order, as not knowing but you may die and not live." -- Yea,
and while you are in the Service, keep up a lively Sense of your Danger, and
indulge not (like many others) a secure, heedless Frame of Spirit; but very
often, and in the most humble Manner, resign your Lives into the Hands of your
Redeemer; and not your Lives only, but even your very Souls commit to him in
the Exercise of Repentance toward GOD, and of Faith in our LORD JESUS CHRIST,
earnestly entreating, that they, whenever called for, may see his Salvation:
And in an humble Expectation of the same, "be of good Courage, and play the
Men, for your People and for the Cities of your GOD, and the LORD do that which
shall seem good in his Sight."

AND let me go on to say, Oh! how very desirable is it, that even all such as
go forth to War be Soberminded Persons? -- Soldiers should not only labor to
be satisfied, that a War be begun and prosecuted on just Grounds, (or at least,
that the Grounds be not unjust and oppressive) and then be willing to go forth
in the Service; but moreover, they ought to be giving all Diligence that they
may be actually prepared for Death. -- Say not, this is to act the Part of
Cowards: For truly, it is not only the Way to die in Peace, but moreover, it is
the very best Course to become valiant in fighting: The good Man, caeteris
paribus, will certainly make the best Soldier; so then, all such as would be
good Soldiers let them become good Men; that is, let them repent of their Sins,
and make their Peace with GOD, and War against their Lusts, because these war
against their Souls; for such as these are (as I said) most likely to be truly
valiant in Battle. Death, you know, is styled the King of Terrors; well then,
he who can with some Comfort look Death in the Face, needs not much fear the
facing of any other Enemy: The religious Heroes who were very famous for
Exploits, became (as is observed in Heb. 11.) valorous and victorious by Faith:
For, "this emboldens Men's Minds by looking unto Things not seen, and by
deriving Strength from above; yea, and it engages the LORD of Hosts on their
Side."

AND suffer me to add, That as I am fully persuaded, that neither our gracious
Sovereign, nor his Excellency our Governor, will knowingly honor any Man with
a Commission, who is noted among Men for persisting in some foul Immorality; so
I should think, it highly concerns all such Gentlemen, who shall receive, or
have received Commissions for prosecuting the War, to see to it likewise, that
they don't (if possible to prevent it) admit any of the aforesaid scandalous
Character to serve as Soldiers under them; or, if they be admitted, then to
oblige them to reform their Manners, "and for this End, it Lenitives will not
answer, then to dispense the Corrosives of Martial Discipline;" and this not
only in Pity to such Men, but also in Kindness to the whole Company or Army,
lest GOD Almighty be provoked by Reason of the Offenses of those bold
Transgressors, and their Commander's Connivance at the same, to deliver all up
to the Will of the Enemy. We find in Josh. 7. That the Host of Israel was put
to Flight before the Men of Ai because of the Trespass of Achan: True indeed,
his Trespass was great, for it was Sacrilege, which is the converting to a
private Use, that which is devoted to the Glory of GOD; but then, this Sin of
his was unknown to Joshua, and most probably to the People too, and yet they
were forced to flee before their Enemies. Is it reasonable then to expect, that
such Commanders shall prosper, who are fully 'acquainted with the foul
Transgressions of these and those private Soldiers, and that they persist
therein, and yet admit them to join in Battle against the Enemy.

PERHAPS you will say, if this Doctrine be received, we shall have but few
Soldiers indeed: To which I reply, that if a due Care was taken about this
Matter, it would most probably promote a Reformation of Manners both in the
Army and Navy, and be a Means of Restraint unto many Persons, and to those at
least who delight in nothing so much as to serve in the Wars: And as for such
who refuse to be reformed, what great Matter of Service can be expected from
them? Will not a few Men under the Smiles of Heaven, do far greater Exploits
than ten times that Number, who (the most of them) by their bold
Transgressions, are continually bidding Defiance to Heaven it self?

AND the Truth is, it becomes and concerns even a whole Land, before the Host
goes forth to War, to humble themselves, and turn to the LORD, and to implore
the Pardon of their Sins, and the divine Presence to be vouchsafed to their
Forces; and otherwise not to carry them hence. It is worthy of our Observation,
"That the Men of Israel were defeated in their first and second Battle with the
Benjamites, but in the third Engagement they obtained a complete Victory; for
now at last, they came up to their Duty which they had before neglected:
Indeed, they had before enquired of the LORD, Who shall go up first? And then
again, Shall we go up? But the Third Time they fasted and prayed, and implored
the divine Favor, and then they had the desired Success." And doubtless, the
People of GOD should also, in these Days, seek, and continue to seek, his Face
in the Ways of his Appointment, as they would expect his Presence to be with
them. -- A People's Cause may be good, and their Number great, but although they
have both Right and Strength on their Side, yet these may not be depended upon,
to the Neglect of the Duty of seeking, in the most solemn Manner, the Presence
and Favor of the most High. Certainly, we have abundant Reason to humble our
selves before GOD, because our Nation and Land, and our selves among others,
have provoked Him to stir up a Nation of so mean a Character, The Spaniards.
to disturb and impoverish us at the Rate they do: And O! that our Days of
Prayer with Fasting, may be always duly attended, as knowing, we have to do
with that GOD who will not be mocked, and who hearkens whether Persons speak
aright; that is to say, whether each one for himself enquireth, saying, What
have I done? And then breaks off from Sin, and casts away his
Transgressions, and returns unto the LORD. Oh! that there were such an Heart
in us! "Then would GOD quickly subdue our Enemies, and turn his Hand against
our Adversaries; but our Times would endure."

COME we now to the

Fourth and last general Head, viz. That when a Number of Men do, in a just
Cause, and there be Necessity for it, jeopard their Lives to the Death, in
Behalf of their Country, it affords Matter of Thanksgiving unto GOD, and
Commendation to such Men.

1. THIS is Matter of Commendation unto such Men. True indeed, it cannot be a
pleasant Exercise, in it self considered, to any, but only those who are lost
to the common Principles of Humanity, to destroy their Fellow Creatures: But
yet, for Persons to engage in Battle with an Eye to the Will and Glory of GOD,
and for the Preservation of a Town or Country, this is Praiseworthy: They
take, as we suppose, the most proper and effectual Method to secure and defend
the Liberties, Properties, and whatsoever else is precious unto a People: And
without Doubt, all will readily acknowledge, That when some particular Persons
from among themselves, do willingly offer to expose and jeopard their Lives,
for those good Ends and Considerations, they do worthily in their Day. -- And
as this has a direct Tendency to preserve a Country from Ruin, and to prolong
the Lives and Liberties of the People, so also to extirpate the Enemy; or at
least to subdue them so far as to bring them to submit to proper Terms.

AND if I may be allowed to make a particular Mention of the Aboriginal
Natives, who have at one Time and another, from Generation to Generation, even
compelled the People of this Land to take up Arms against them: There is (as I
conceive) no Method so likely to subdue, or to humble them, as to March forth
in Quest of them; for, by so doing, they are not only prevented coming into our
Towns, and slaughtering, or captivating the Inhabitants, and making Spoil of
their Goods; but moreover, they become weary of their usual Places of Resort,
and finding that they can be no where secure, they are therefore under a
Necessity to petition for Peace. -- And we may be sure, that such Men as shall
(having proper Encouragement) voluntarily offer themselves for this Service, if
there be again Occasion for it, (which we pray GOD to forbid!) are most likely
to trace the Enemy carefully, and fight them valiantly: And the Truth of all
this, I think, appears from the Instance of the brave LOVEWELL and his resolute
Soldiers, in the last Indian War, whose Activity and Courage, I doubt not, was
what, under Heaven, brought that War to a Period.

2. AND as it is Matter of Commendation to such Men, so also, and indeed much
more, of Thanksgiving unto God; for surely, it is He who inclines and spirits
them unto this difficult and dangerous Service: Yea, and it looks like a very
signal Smile of Providence upon a Land, when a Number of its Inhabitants are so
disposed: It may be hoped that the most High has not determined speedily to
abandon such a Country, and to give it up to the Will of the Enemy; but that
there is Mercy still in Reserve for such a People.

BUT I need not enlarge. -- Only let me add a few Words by Way of Improvement:
And here,

1. LEARN that such Men are worthy of Blame, who after they have engaged in
this Service do desert and forsake it: Much better it is not to enter upon it,
than afterward to abscond, and so relinquish the Service of GOD and their
Country.

2. THIS also teaches us, That it is just Matter of Lamentation, when such Men
as offer themselves to this kind of Service, are either slain in Battle, or
taken off in the Camp by some fatal Malady: They deserve that Honor from their
Country, even that their Fall be lamented: The Loss thereby sustained is
considerable, and very ungrateful as well as stupid are such a People, who do
not sorrowfully resent it: And I wish, we may not have many such Deaths ever
long to mourn over Preached at the Time of the Expedition to the Spanish
West Indies.
. And further,

3. WHAT we have heard may afford some Satisfaction of Mind to those among us,
who have been, or may be, in this Way, bereaved of desirable Relatives: It
should be some Allay to your Grief, to consider, that these your departed
Friends died in the Service of GOD and their Country, and therefore died
honorably, and will be remembered with Respect, as their Country's Friends and
Benefactors: Yea, and if they were good Christians, then the LORD of Hosts
himself will graciously reward their Desires and Endeavors to serve his Cause,
and to advance his Interest in the World.

4. WHAT we have heard may also teach us, That it is but just and reasonable,
that such as tarry at Home be helpful, all the Ways they can, to those who go
forth to War. -- And more especially in these two Ways, viz.

(1.) By Prayer to GOD on their Behalf. We are obliged by the Bonds both of
Nature and Religion to pray one for another; but in a peculiar Manner for those
of our Friends, who voluntarily hazard their Health, their Limbs, and even
their very Lives, in the Country's Service: Pray therefore for them, that the
LORD would go forth with them, to direct and safeguard them, and to make them
both valorous and victorious: We may not depend on their Conduct and Courage,
their Number and Strength; No, No; but seek to engage the LORD of Hosts on our
Side; and if he be for us, who can be against us? This is a safe, a cheap, and
easy Way of helping them, and even the Handmaids of the LORD may in this
Respect be very helpful in a Time of War. And truly, we shall all be very
unkind to our Soldiers, yea, and to our selves too, if we either neglect or
trifle in this Exercise. And,

(2.) WE must reform our Manners as well as pray for Success. See for this,
Deuteronomy. 23. 9. When the Host goes forth against thine Enemies, then keep thee
from every wicked Thing: Not then only, but then without fail: Not some only,
but all the People are hereby enjoined to keep themselves, not from some only,
but from every wicked Thing. -- And it concerns us all, at this Day, carefully
to observe it, left GOD be provoked to give the Victory to our Enemies. A Time
of War, we all say, should be a Time of Reformation; and truly, we may not
otherwise expect the holy One of Israel to hear and answer our Prayers for
Success, (1 Samuel 7. 3.) Is it not our Wish, that GOD would be graciously
present with our Brethren and Neighbors in the present War? But now, we do not
in a suitable Manner desire this Thing, and our Prayers are no better than
Mockery, unless we put away Iniquity far from our Tabernacles, and also
endeavor every one to keep himself from his own Iniquity: Our Sins ( Sirs!)
are our most deadly Enemies; these war against our own Souls; yea, and they are
GOD's Enemies too, and consequently to repent of them, and to return unto the
LORD, is the very best Way to prosper; for, as King David acknowledged, "Thine,
O LORD, is the Greatness, and the Power, and the Victory." -- And if there be
any other Way wherein we can show Kindness to such as are already gone, or that
may hereafter go forth in this Service, whether by sending a fresh Recruit of
Men, or of Provisions, or by ministering Relief to the sick and wounded, and the
like; O! let us not be wanting herein, but readily embrace the Opportunity; for
both Humanity and Justice demand it of us. -- And as for their being well
rewarded, our honored Rulers will not be Strait-handed in that Article: And
Oh! that Heaven may graciously recompense them infinitely above what is in the
Power of Man to do! To proceed,

5. IF such do well who freely jeopard their Lives when there is just Occasion
for it, then it is not advisable for any of us to go about to discourage such
as offer themselves, and are suitably qualified for this Service: By those that
are suitably qualified, I intend, such as are capable of weighing Matters, and
acting prudently, and who, being Persons of a strong Constitution, are likely
to undergo the Hardships of the Service, and who are Men of Courage and
Activity, and are strongly inclined to this kind of Service; and especially, if
they are also Religious Men: Yea, and such as are not bred to War (as the
Phrase is) may not be discouraged from going forth on this Occasion, they being
spirited for such above any other Service, and having obtained a competent
Degree of Skill for that End, also able to endure Hardness; and deserving the
good Character of Sober-minded Persons: Thus, Deborah in our Context, Verse 14.
takes particular Notice, that out of Zebulon came those to Battle, who handled
the Pen of the Writer. And in a Word, to discourage suitable Persons from going
forth on such an Occasion, is to prefer a private before the public Interest,
which is a Thing that may not be indulged: Yea, and tender Parents have
sometimes a Call to deny themselves in this Article; as, when their Sons
discover that they have a very great Inclination to this kind of Service: --
And yet, I would take the Opportunity to say unto Children who are so inclined,
that I cannot advise you to break away, contrary to your Parents Mind: If they
cannot be prevailed with to give their Consent, I should think you had better
deny your selves, and by so doing, honor your Father and Mother, who are the
Instruments of your Being, and by whom, under GOD, you have been also nourished
and brought up.

6. and lastly, I shall offer a few Words by Way of Direction to such as may
hereafter offer themselves to be improved in this Service. And,

(1.) BE free and voluntary in this Matter: Not only pretend to it, but be so
in the Sight of him who searches all Hearts: It is not proper to go forth
merely to gratify some particular Friend or Acquaintance of yours, but let your
own Spirits be free and cheerful in this Affair, that you may be properly
Volunteers, and be reckoned by Heaven as such. We read, "that the LORD loves
the cheerful Giver," or, him who cheerfully disposes of Part of his Substance
to pious and charitable Uses; how much more, the Man who cheerfully hazards his
Life in the Service of GOD and his Country. -- And it may be proper here to
add, That such Men as are pointed out by lawful Authority, and pressed by Order
of the same, to go forth in this Service, they should not only, either go
themselves, or provide others to go in their Room, but they should do it
willingly; for they ought to look on themselves as called by Providence to
assist in the War, either in Person or by Proxy; and therefore may not so much
as in their Hearts decline the Service, lest they expose themselves to that
bitter Curse denounced in our Context, against such as came not to the Help of
the LORD against the mighty.

(2.) GET well armed, as also well instructed in the Arts of War. -- Be well
armed with Instruments proper for the Service: Counsel and Strength for War are
not enough without Weapons of War. We find in our Context, Verse 8. That there
was not Shield or Spear seen among Four Thousand in Israel: And it was
doubtless Policy in their Oppressors thus to disarm them, well knowing that
unarmed Men are quite unfit for Service, and an easy Prey to the Enemy: And,
let your Armor be Armor of Proof, such as you know to be good by your own
Experience; and such as you are used to, and so can the more readily manage it.
-- And labor to be expert in handling your Weapons; skilful and dexterous,
that so you may be able the better to defend your selves, and annoy your
Adversaries. -- And I may not omit to advise you, to get well acquainted with
the Way and Manner of the Enemy which you are to encounter, and how they
commonly manage their Battles, whether in the plain and open Field, or else by
lurking in Swamps, and behind the Trees of the Woods, watching for an
Opportunity to discharge unexpectedly upon you; that so your Conduct may be
agreeable. -- And I shall still further add, That what Nation soever you shall
be called forth to oppose and war against, you may not imagine that Stratagems
of War are unlawful. We find in that forecited 20th Chapter of Judges, "That
notwithstanding GOD had given to Israel an Assurance of Success, yet, they were
not remiss and negligent, nay, but improved the best of their Skill for the
effecting of what GOD had promised: In the two first Engagements they thought
it needless to use any Art, or to form any Stratagem; but the third Time they
made Use of some Policy, for they set Liars in wait, and laid an Ambush, and so
gained the Point, even as their Fathers had gained Ai, and that by divine
Direction too." Josh. 8. So that Piety and warlike Policy do very well consist
together, and may not be looked upon as preventive or subversive of each other.

(3.) Put your Trust in the Hope of Israel and the Savior thereof. Trust in
him to lead you forth and inspire you with Courage; to teach your Hands to War,
and to cover your Heads in the Day of Battle, and to grant you the desired
Success. Though you be ever so well armed, yet trust not in your Armor; and though
ever so well instructed in the Arts of War, and fully acquainted with the
Manner of the Enemy as to their Way of Fighting, yet do not trust to your own
Skill; and though ever so void of Fear, yet trust not to your own Prowess and
Courage; and suppose your Leaders, as also your Fellow Soldiers be ever so
expert and valorous, yet do not place your Confidence in them; "For it is
better to trust in the LORD than to put Confidence in Men, yea, than to to put
Confidence in Princes." I beseech you to realize, that there is absolute
Necessity of the divine Conduct to lead and guide an Army, and so also a Navy,
in such an important Affair; for what is even an Achitophel but a Fool, and
what is his Counsel but Foolishness, when GOD hides Counsel from him? Yea, and
there needs the divine Presence also to strengthen Men's Hands and to encourage
their Hearts in the Day of Battle, because they have neither Strength nor
Courage at Command; Self-Confidence therefore is but vain Confidence, "and he
that trusts in himself is a Fool; yea, cursed is the Man that trusts in
Man, and that makes Flesh his Arm; but blessed is the Man that trusts in the
LORD, and whose Hope the LORD is." -- In a Word, you must labor (as I said
before) to be well accoutred and instructed for War, but yet, think not that
your Gun or your Sword shall save you; No; but when you March, let your Trust
be in GOD to direct your Path, and to safeguard your Persons; and when you
Watch, put your Trust in the Keeper of Israel, who never slumbereth nor
sleeps; and when you Fight, let your Trust be still in him to fight for you:
And finally, by Faith in Prayer be casting all your Burdens on the LORD, and he
will care for you.

(4.) SEE that your Aim and End be right in this hazardous Undertaking. Oh! do
not aim chiefly at the gaining either of Honor, or Wealth; for what will it
profit a Man, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? And how
can you expect any other but the Loss of that, if your Hearts be not right with
GOD? Go not therefore for Lucresake, but of a ready Mind, and with an hearty
Desire to serve GOD and your Country; namely, by helping to pull down and
destroy the Kingdom of Satan in the World, and so to make more Room for the
Growth and Increase of the Kingdom of CHRIST. -- Not that you may imagine, that
the most High cannot accomplish his Purposes without you; No; but yet freely
put your selves into his Hands, to be made Use of as Instruments for the
subduing his Foes, and making the same to become his Footstool.

WHAT shall I say more? -- Keep your selves from every wicked Thing: That is to
say, Keep your Hearts with all Diligence; as also your Eyes that you may not
covet; and your Hands that they may do Violence to no Man; your Tongues that
they may neither curse Men, nor take the Name of the LORD your GOD in vain, nor
utter any Thing false or reproachful; shun Sloth and Luxury; and keep holy the
Lord's Day, as you would expect to prosper (so far, I mean, as is consistent
with your own Defense and Preservation): And be not of a mutinous and
ungovernable Spirit; but keep your Places, observe good Orders, and obey such
as are, or may be, set over you; and keep faithful to one another: Be of one
Heart, and stand by each other for mutual Relief and Succor; and fail not to
keep a good Watch, considering how many Lives depend upon it. ( Judge. 8. 11.)
And above all, get and keep in good Terms with the LORD of Hosts; and behave in
all Respects, as becomes those whose Souls are continually in your Hands, and
yet, your Times are not so, but in the Hands of the LORD of the whole Earth. --
Oh! be prevailed with to be in the Fear of the LORD every Day, yea and all the
Day, for in that there is strong Confidence; but on the other Side, Sin takes
off the Edge of Valor, and Guilt will make Men Cowards: All such as would look
Death in the Face without Terror, must keep Peace with GOD, and preserve a
Conscience void of Offense. -- And finally, whenever you shall prove
victorious, give GOD the Praise, and in Token thereof, devote a Part of the
Spoil you shall take from the Enemy, a Tenth at least, to pious and charitable
Uses, after the Example of faithful Abraham, as you may find it recorded in
Genesis 14. 20.

AND now, Brethren, our Prayer for you is, that when you go forth to War, then
"the LORD JESUS, the Captain of our Salvation and the LORD our Righteousness
may go before you, and the Glory of the LORD be your Rere-ward."

AND thus having spoken to the Four General Heads,

I AM now to proceed, as I proposed, to offer a few Words by Way of Address,
with all due Respect, to the Ancient and Honorable Company, who have invited
us hither this Day;

Gentlemen!

ALTHOUGH what has been said is designed principally, though not solely, for you,
and you have so much Goodness as to make a proper Application, yet give me
Leave to add as follows, viz.

YOU are not ignorant, that three Years over and above a Century are now passed
and gone since the giving forth of your Charter, containing certain valuable
Privileges and Immunities; whereby it evidently appears, that the Honorable
General Court, being willing to encourage a Military Spirit in New England, did
put great Honor upon this Company, even in the early Days of the Country;
which, as it was a bright Instance of their Wisdom and Goodness, so, we are now
thankful to the most High, that the Reputation and Honor of this Company has
been so well preserved unto this Time; and the rather, because I cannot but
think, this same has been a good Means of casting the greater Dread upon those
Nations which are no Friends to our Religion, and envy us the Possession of so
good a Country: -- Indeed, New England in general has been famous abroad for
the Spirit of Soldiery, and for setting apart several Days in a Year for
Military Exercises; but, Sirs, Strangers as well as your own Countrymen, all
readily acknowledge your selves to be the Flower and Choice of all our Forces:
And we doubt not, but you will, the Smiles of Heaven continuing upon you, as we
pray they may, still preserve the Credit of the Honorable Company, and keep
alive our Hopes concerning it: -- And in Order hereunto, there are Two Things
which you will bear upon your Minds, and endeavor the Prosecution of.

THE First is, The Original Design of forming the Artillery Company in this
Town; even, that Gentlemen of the best Fashion, and of exalted Stations in the
Militia, in every Part of the Province, as well as Persons of a lower Rank,
might have the Opportunity to become more and more skilful in the Use of
Martial Weapons. -- You are very sensible, I conclude, from the Appearance
which you make this Day, that the happy Time is not yet come, wherein the
Nations shall learn War no more; and therefore you judge it to be still needful
as well as lawful to know how to use the Sword and Musket, and to understand
the whole Art of War in the various Parts of it, which, considering to whom I
speak, I need not go about to enumerate; you will therefore, I trust, admit of
scarce any Avocation, but will all, to a Man, constantly attend and diligently
improve your Exercises at the appointed Seasons for the same, and more
especially in this gloomy and dark Day; and that not only as a manly Diversion,
but, on purpose that you may be still more expert for War, and so the better
prepared (if there should be Occasion for it) either to Face the Enemy your
selves, or to furnish the Country with expert Commanders for that End; "Each of
them resembling the Son of a King." -- And whereas it is now (as you well know)
a Time of War, you will therefore the rather make Choice of such Gentlemen,
this Day, for your Officers, as are most capable of leading you, and are most
likely by their own Example to inspire you with Valor, and whom you have good
Reason to think you can willingly fight under. -- And now, if there was Need to
add any Thing by Way of Encouragement to preserve a Martial and Warlike Spirit,
I should only put you in Remembrance of what you are not unacquainted with;
namely, "That Skill and Experience in Arms has in all Ages been the Original of
Nobility; and that many Persons, even of mean Extraction, have, by Feats of
Arms, risen to the highest Honors which their Fellow Soldiers were capable of
conferring upon them." -- But being Christians, and many of you, to the Praise
of GOD be it spoken, some of the first Rank, therefore a Gospel Motive will be
more acceptable; namely, that hereby you will be the better qualified for the
special Service of The Man upon the Throne, who is no other than our LORD
REDEEMER, whom to serve is Honor indeed; and all whose faithful Servants and
loyal Subjects shall be crowned with Glory and Honor immortal.

Secondly, THE other Thing which you will also bear in Mind, is, The true
Design of setting up and still upholding these your Anniversary religious
Solemnities; Namely, that so your Military Exercises may be sanctified by the
Word of GOD and Prayer: And accordingly you will, doubtless, heedfully observe
the good Instructions of the former, and follow our Prayers with and for you,
with your best Endeavors, that so you may not, any of you, occasion any
Blemish to your Profession and Character, whether as Soldiers, or as
Christians; And therefore, will not only improve your Powers in order to excel
in Military Skill, but also be upon your Watch that no corrupt Communication
may proceed out of your Mouths; and instead of approaching to the least Degree
either of Intemperance or Extravagancy, you will labor to be making a
religious use of your Military Exercises, which, indeed, are capable of being
improved to very great Advantage in your Spiritual Warfare; and by so doing
will set a very bright Example before the Militia of the whole Country, (whose
Eyes are much upon you) even of all Christian Virtues, as well as of Military
Skill and Valor. -- And truly, Gentlemen, I cannot but hope, that you may be
Instrumental to reform the too general Abuse of our public Trainings; for, the
Officers and Soldiers in our several Towns cannot, I think, for Shame, do any
other but improve such Days to better Purposes than of late, when they shall
behold your Order, and are given to understand, that even your whole Conduct
both in and out of the Field, is such as well becomes Christian Soldiers. -- I
hope, Sirs, it may, and I have no Reason to think any other but it may, be
truly said concerning the Honorable Artillery Company on this Day, as I find
it was, on the like Occasion, just Fifty Years ago, namely, "Here is a large
Band of Soldiers, among whom, this whole Day will not afford one Man drunk, nor
one Oath sworn, nor one Curse dropped, nor one observable Misbehaviour." -- Oh!
go on, go on, to excel. --

AND thus I have spoken to the Two Things which you are to bear in Mind: -- And
I need not enlarge --, for I make not the least Doubt, but that you will, to a
Man, preserve and maintain a loyal Spirit and Behavior toward our rightful
and gracious Sovereign KING GEORGE IId; As also, yield all due Subjection to
his Excellency; Governor BELCHER, in whose Audience it was delivered.
as to him who personates His Majesty among us. -- Nor have we any Reason at
all, Gentlemen, to think any other, but that Love to your Town and Country
mightily prevails in you; and are persuaded it will do so, to that Degree, as
to constrain you voluntarily to devote your Estates, as also to jeopardise and
even sacrifice your very Lives, for the Defense and Preservation of the same,
if Need requires: -- And how soon, My honored Friends, your selves, and others
with you, may be put upon so severe a Trial, GOD Almighty knows; for when a
People are seated on a good Soil, and are generally very solicitous to heap up
Wealth, and are so far succeeded as to be reckoned flourishing, and at the same
Time noted for being at Discord among themselves, methinks, they invite the
Enemy to come in upon them like a Flood; and doubtless, they will the more
readily accept the Invitation, if there be no Danger of meeting with much
Resistance: -- And if this be indeed the present State of this Province, "O!
Tell it not in Gath, left the Philistines rejoice, and the Uncircumcised
triumph." -- Triumph, I said, as well they may, even before the Battle. -- But
why did I say, Tell it not abroad? Seeing the Enemy is already fully apprized
of our Negligence, and justly have us in Derision on the Account thereof. --
And indeed, we our selves generally acknowledge it to be a great Neglect, that
the Province should be, and remain for so long a Time, and more especially in
this Time of War, in so weak and unfortified a Posture; but yet, as I
understand it, People differ in their Sentiments as to the Cause of it, nor am
I about to undertake to determine at whose Door it lies; but, I think, I can do
no less than pray, that such Light may break forth upon us, as may speedily and
effectually discover how to redress this Grievance; and that if any are
Blameworthy in the Matter, they may be convinced of it, whoever they be, and
be led to the Discharge of that Duty, which they, in this Article, owe to GOD,
their King and Country; and no longer leave so good a Land, and which has
already cost so much Blood and Treasure, Naked and Defenseless. -- Pray,
Gentlemen, mistake me not, for I do not imagine, that it belongs to this
Honorable Company to provide Walls and Bulwarks for us; nor do I intend to say
much more upon it; for if a Man at a Distance may be allowed to conjecture, I
am inclined to think, that it is a very tender Point; however, I shall take the
Opportunity, and as I conceive, without giving just Offense to any, to make my
affectionate Moon to you on this Head, as one deeply concerned for
New-England's Welfare, and to say in one short Sentence, viz. I am heartily
sorry, that the Government cannot unite in Measures for our necessary Defense;
and do as heartily wish, that there may be no more Occasion for this
Lamentation: And I doubt not, but that each of you concur with me herein. --
Not that I am come hither to teach you, that Means of Defense, suppose we were
ever so well provided with them, may be confided in; No, No; but yet, I think,
all will grant, that it is High-handed Presumption to live in the Neglect of
proper Means, and at the same Time to expect Protection, unless we had a
Promise made us of some miraculous Preservation, which I hope none among us are
so ignorant and unwise as to pretend to.

BUT lest any should think that I discover more Zeal than Prudence, or, that I
harp rather too long upon this String, I will cease from Man, and direct mine
Eye to an Overruling and All-governing Providnece in this Matter: And, if our
Day be almost expired, and our Part of the New-World (as America is sometimes
called) has sinned away their Privileges, no Wonder that Things are thus, nay,
but rather, that we are not all consumed: -- You are not ignorant, that we have
already run out, since the laying the Foundation of Plymouth Colony (so called)
One Hundred and Twenty Years complete; (it ended the last Winter) which, you
know, was the very Space of Time granted by Way of Reprieve to the Old World,
to repent in: I don't mean, that it from hence necessarily follows, that our
Years are certainly numbered and finished, and our Sands quite run down: And
yet, if you will be at the Pains to consult the Historical Part of the Holy
Scriptures, you may easily learn from thence, that because GOD's professing
People would not be reformed, neither by the Judgments of his Mouth nor of his
Hand, but persisted in their Rebellion, therefore he cast them off; yea, and
this is written for our Warning; so that, without a Spirit of Prophecy,
considering, that New England has left her first Love, and not been prevailed
with to remember from whence she is fallen, and to repent, and do her first
Works, it seems as though, either a Reformation, or a Desolation, will come on
before long. -- And now, this leads me to say, Thanks be given to Zion's King,
that there are so many at this Day, more especially in this Town, who are
asking the Way to Zion with their Faces thitherward, insomuch that the Kingdom
of Heaven seems to suffer Violence, and as though People were determined to take
no Denial. -- And yet, whether this be a Token for Good to the Land in general,
or whether those particular Persons only shall save their own Souls, is what I
must leave undetermined: -- But whoever they be, Oh! let them still press
forward, and hasten to the City of Refuge, before the Pursuer overtake them. --
Such as these I am further to speak unto, when I have expressed my ardent
Desire, that this Honorable Company may be a Nursery of renowned Soldiers, and
that each Man may do worthily in his Day, "and come off at last more than a
Conqueror;" and all of you together "stand before the Throne, and before the
Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in your Hands, and cry with a loud
Voice, saying, Salvation to our GOD which sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb for ever and ever;" Amen!

AND now I come, as you remember I proposed, and which I have my Eye and Heart
more especially fixed on, viz. To offer something respecting the Christian's
Spiritual Warfare; and direct my Speech more especially to such as are now
under Convictions and awakenings.

AND if it be Praiseworthy for Soldiers to jeopard their Lives in a Time of
War, in Defense of their Country, Then surely it is highly commendable for
every Christian to engage in and prosecute the Spiritual (which is the more
necessary) Warfare, under JESUS the Captain of our Salvation. -- And for this
End, suffer me to beseech and advise you as follows, viz.

1. Weigh the Matter well in your own Minds: Not as though there is any just
Reason to hesitate; but, that you may know and understand what you do, and may
not be surprised and discouraged by Temptations when they come: Consider well,
I say, what the Christian Religion will cost all such who espouse it, namely,
"That they must deny themselves, and take up their Cross, and follow CHRIST. --
Oh! cherish your Convictions, and pray over them, until you have good Reason to
think that your Hearts are right with GOD: Now, Now if ever, you must be
Volunteers, for, "all the LORD's People are a willing People."

2. BEING made not only sensible, but also weary, quite weary of your Slavery
and Bondage, and fully determined to cast off the Devil's, and to take upon you
the Yoke of CHRIST, then come and list under CHRIST's Banner, and yield up your
selves to the LORD in an everlasting Covenant never to be forgotten. Let this
be done first in Secret, between GOD and your own Souls; and then, in the
public Assembly avouch the LORD to be your GOD, cheerfully binding your selves
out and off from Sin, all Sin; and as freely obliging your selves to serve the
LORD, and to keep all his Commandments, always unto the End: -- And that in
order hereto, you will wage War with the World, Flesh and Devil: Which leads me
to say,

3. GET and improve, yea, and be expert in the Use of the Spiritual Armor. No
part may be left naked and exposed without great Hazard, and therefore the
whole Armor of GOD must be put on: Thus for Instance, You must have on the
Breast Plate of Righteousness; namely, all Christian Graces, or the Love and
Practice of universal Holiness: And your Loins must be girt about with Truth;
that is, be not Double-minded, or of a double Heart, but sincere and upright:
And Faith acted on the Promise, Grace, and Righteousness of CHRIST, must be
your Shield: And Hope, such as is well-founded, must be your Helmet: And you
must take with you the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of GOD; for
Scripture Arguments are the most powerful: And your Feet must be shod with the
Preparation of the Gospel of Peace; that is, You must be stocked with Patience,
and your Spirits steeled with Resolution, that so you may walk on, in a steady
Pace, amidst all your Difficulties and Temptations: And finally, You must pray
always with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto
with all Perseverance, and Supplication for all Saints. -- I have not Time, you
see, to say much of the several Parts of this divine Armor; nor may I stand to
show you the Usefulness and Necessity of the same: -- But this I would say,
Stand your Ground, and be not discouraged because you meet with Oppositions;
for you must reckon upon it, that not only many a scoffing Ishmaelite, but
moreover, a malicious, tempting Devil will often annoy and trouble you: Yea,
it is probable, you will have it frequently suggested to your Minds, either,
that there is no GOD; or, that He is unjust and unkind; or, that the Scriptures
are not the Word of GOD; or, that you have committed the Unpardonable Sin, and
the like: -- But marvel not at all at the Matter; for many, very many have
already experienced the like; yea, and as the Apostle expresses it, "There has
no Temptation taken you, but such as is common to Man;" at least to such Men,
who are making their Flight from Sodom, or Egypt, spiritually so called, and
are hastening toward the promised Land, the Heavenly Canaan.

BUT now, lest you should run into a fatal Mistake; let me here caution you
against looking upon every Reluctance against Sin, which you may find and feel
in your own Breasts, as a sure Indication that you are really engaged in the
Christian's Spiritual Warfare: For, there is certainly a very great Difference
between that Reluctance which is in the unrenewed, and the Combat which is in
the Regenerate; And that first, As to the Principle thereof; for in the
unrenewed it arises from Love to Reputation, or Fear of Wrath, and the like;
but in others, from a real Hatred of Sin, and a true Love to GOD. -- And then,
there is Difference as to the Seat of it; for in the Natural Man, the Combat is
between one Faculty and another; thus, the Affections go one Way, and the
Judgment and Conscience another; but now, in the Regenerate, there arises a
War with every Faculty, as, the Judgment against the Judgment, the Will against
the Will, etc. and the true Reason of it is, because there is Sin and Grace,
Flesh and Spirit, co-habiting in every Faculty. -- And then moreover, there is
Difference as to the Extent of it; for the Unrenewed do combat only with some
grosser Sins, but the Renewed with all Sins. -- And finally, as to the Event
and Issue of it; for in the Unregenerate, there is, at best, no more than a
temporary refraining from some Sins; but in others, their Lusts are more
subdued, and they become still more constant and resolute in resisting Sin, and
in serving GOD. -- And now, from what has been said, if your Combat proves to
be that of the true Christian's, Oh! be very thankful for it, and take Courage;
fear not, but go on and prosper; for the LORD is with you while you be for him.
-- Yea, and if your Combat be no other than the Reluctance of an Enlightened
Conscience, yet be not discouraged, saying, There is no Hope; Nay, but be
thankful for the Convictions you are under, esteem them as a great Mercy, and
cherish them as you would a dear Friend; hearken to the Voice of GOD in and by
the same, and follow them with serious Meditation, also with fervent Prayer to
the GOD of all Grace. -- And thus, according to the very utmost of your
Ability, open the Door to CHRIST, and then you may humbly hope that He will so
display his mighty Power, as to open it effectually, and that he will come in,
and set up his Throne in your Hearts. And this brings me to say,

4. HAVE your Eye to the Captain of your Salvation, even JESUS, whom the Father
has given to be a Leader, and a Commander to the People: Unto him must you
look if you would be saved: That is to say, you must look and mourn, because
you have by wilful Sin, as it were, crucified him afresh: And moreover, so look
to him as to believe in him, that is, accept of his kind and gracious
Invitation in such a Manner as to close with him and embrace him in all his
Offices, cheerfully depending on him both for Strength and Righteousness, and
very gladly venture your Souls and their Salvation in his Hands. Yea, every Day
be looking on him, and admire him as the Chief among Ten Thousands; and this
will lead you to look and long after a further Acquaintance with him: Yea, and
you must look and follow after him; that is, labor to imitate him in all his
imitable Perfections, and to be sincerely obedient to all his Words of Command.
Also, Look and follow him in the Way of passive as well as active Obedience;
Eye his Hand and Counsel under all afflictive Dispensations, and resign your
Wills to his. And finally, with the Eye of Hope and Expectation, look and wait,
until he shall fulfill all your Desire, and cause you to see his Salvation.

AND as you must look to your Leader in the forementioned Respects, so also,
you must take the utmost Care to aim aright in whatever you do, and so become
good Marks Men in a spiritual Sense. Not only in your religious Performances,
but moreover, in your natural and civil Actions, let the Glory of GOD be your
Scope and Mark: Yea, and let Holiness unto the LORD be written upon all your
Enjoyments, as well as your Employments: And in a Word, Let all be done as to
the LORD and for the LORD, that so you may taste that he is gracious. -- Not
that you may be over-solicitous, as awakened Sinners commonly are, to obtain
speedy Comfort; No; but rather desire that you may become truly humble, and be
prepared for the Consolations of GOD; and learn to be very willing, that He
should take his own Time to apply the same to you: And whenever the good
Spirit shall see meet to do this, I now solemnly caution you against being
puffed up, as also against a secure Frame of Spirit: Indeed, you must be very
thankful, but then at the same Time be also very watchful, and be ye clothed
with Humility.

AND now, Is there any Need that I should tell you, that if you are Christians
indeed, then, of what Age, Sex, or Quality soever you be, you are certainly
engaged in an holy War; yea, and nothing less than your future and everlasting
Weal depends upon your fighting the good Fight of Faith under the glorious
JESUS. -- Neither are you unacquainted, and O! that you would keep it in Mind,
that your Enemies are not only numerous, but also malicious, and very politic;
yea, and unwearied in their Assaults: True indeed, if you resist them, steadfast
in the Faith, then they will flee from you; but alas! they will soon rally
again, and be upon you; either with the same, or with some new Temptations: And
therefore, as says the Apostle, "Be sober, be vigilant;" Be sober; that is,
Govern your selves, both the outer and inner Man, by the Rules of Temperance,
Modesty and Mortification: And be vigilant, or watchful; that is, Not only in
Prayer and other religious Exercises, but at all other Times, both when alone
and in Company. -- And the Truth is, The Strength of our Adversary as to us,
lies in our Treachery and Falseness; if we are but faithful to CHRIST, and true
to our own Interest, we shall be in no Danger at all of being led Captive by
the Prince of Darkness. -- O! Beware, beware Children, of giving Place to the
Devil, and of deserting, in any Measure, so good a Cause, and so kind a
Savior. Are not your Ministers, and your other godly Friends jealous over you,
lest you should turn again to Folly, and, like too many others, begin in the
Spirit and end in the Flesh: Wherefore, I beseech you, be not high-minded but
fear; and yet, be not timorous and faint-hearted, but strong and very
courageous; Go ye forth in the Name of the LORD of Hosts, and fight not as
those that beat the Air, and only make a vain flourish; but be resolute and in
good earnest, as those that must either conquer or be conquered, fight or die.

AND Oh! How can you choose but be valorous, when you consider (and I hope you
will often consider) the Goodness of your Cause; as also the Presence, Skill,
Power and Good Will of your HEAD and GENERAL; and moreover, that your Armor
(it being such as the Gospel directs to and enjoins) is Armor of Proof; by the
Improvement of which, great, very great is the Army which has, through our LORD
JESUS CHRIST come off Conquerors: Yea, and you shall do so too, if you are not
wanting to your selves. -- And then, O then, What a glorious Reward shall be
given you! No less than "to sit down with your glorious LORD on his Throne,
even as he overcame, and is now set down with his Father on his Throne." --
Yea, and let me tell you, that he has overcome, not only before you, but also
for you, if you will but prove loyal to him; so then, what have you to do, but
only to pursue the Victory under that glorious Conqueror, through whom your
Weapons, which are not carnal but spiritual, shall be mighty for the pulling of
strong Holds? -- And if you should be, at any Time, through Surprise, obliged
to Retreat; O! make haste and delay not to make good your Ground; and for that
End, come on charged afresh with a greater Degree of Courage and Resolution;
renewing (without fail) your Trust and Confidence in the Wisdom, Power and
Goodness of your great Commander, and skilfully improving, more especially,
that particular Part of your Armor which you have Reason to think will be most
serviceable at that Juncture. -- And, what though the Devil be styled the God of
this World, yet be not dismayed, for he is so to those only who submit to him
as such, and are led Captive by him at his Will; and both they and their god
(such an one as he is) shall be cast together, they continuing in Bondage to
him, into the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone. -- And this leads me
to say, That as you would not be triumphed over by the Prince of the Power of
the Air, O! Beware of his Agents; I mean, Enticers to Sin, who are no other
than Factors for Hell; shun their Company as you would a Pesthouse; yea, and
"have no Fellowship with any of the unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather
reprove them, for one Sinner oftentimes destroys much Good." -- And let me go
on to exhort you to be very watchful also, left the Things of the World prove a
Snare to you; namely, the Honors, Pleasures and Profits of the same, all and
every of which the Devil is wont to improve (or rather abuse) for the choking
the good Seed of the Word, and diverting the Soul from GOD and Duty: Watch
therefore and Pray lest you be thus overcome by the evil one. -- And not only
shun and avoid all Appearances of and Approaches to Sin with your outer Man;
but moreover, suppress and subdue the very first Motion to Sin which may at any
Time arise in your own Breasts, lest it spread like the Cloud we read of, which
at the first appeared no larger than a Man's Hand, but soon covered and
blackened the whole Heaven: And thus with the best of your Skill endeavor to
pull down the strong Hold of inbred Lusts which war against your Souls, as
well as to ward off surrounding Temptations; for (believe me) the Flesh, with
its Affections and Lusts, must be crucified, otherwise you shall never obtain a
Conquest over the World and Devil. -- Yea, and not only your Inclination to
Vice and Wickedness, but moreover, that Disposition which is in you to rely and
depend upon your own supposed Virtues and virtuous Actions, must be subdued and
abhorred, otherwise you will perish, after all your Labor and Pains, with a
Lie in your Right Hand. -- And I shall further add, that being sensible where
your Weakness chiefly lies, and from what Quarter you are most in Hazard, you
may not fail to double your Guard there, and to use all needful Precaution,
lest you be surprised and taken. -- And although at present, indeed, through the
Goodness of GOD, you are not called to resist unto Blood, yet, you are always
obliged to strive against Sin, "and especially, that Sin, or those Sins, which
do more easily beset you, and (...) with Patience the Race set before you,
looking (as I said before) unto JESUS the Author and Finisher of Faith: And by
so doing, you will be in the Way to be prepared for all Events of Providence,
even the Fiery Trial it self, and nothing shall be able to separate you from
the Love of GOD: Nay, but having in the presence, and by the Assistance of GOD,
CHRIST, and good Angels, acted your Part in the Field of this World, as becomes
the Followers of the Lamb; you shall, without fall, be conducted by some of
those benign and spotless Spirits, into the Presence Chamber of the LORD of
Glory, and shall live and reign with him for ever and ever.

MUCH, very much more might be said upon the Subject, and it is no easy Thing
to forbear; but truly, I begin to feel something of a Rebuke in my own Mind,
for having gone the Length I have, considering that this People and their
Children are under the Inspection and Guidance of several spiritual Leaders in
the Church, and under CHRIST, who are eminently Men of GOD; have themselves,
without Doubt, experienced the New Birth, and are much more able than I am,
Experimentally as well as Doctrinally, to lead you in the Paths of
Righteousness: I hope you are thankful for, and very careful to improve those
burning and shining Lights, which the great Head of the Church has here set up;
otherwise, you may justly fear that Darkness will ere long come upon you. --
Not that you may look on any Man or Council upon Earth, as the Father, Founder
and Author of your Religion; No, No; but yet, you must follow the Footsteps of
the Flock, under the Conduct of such who are eminently and really, as well as
professedly, and by their Office, the Bridegroom's Friends; being themselves
sound in the Faith, and preach up the Doctrines of Grace; and especially
instruct you to build your Hope of Heaven and Happiness upon the Free Grace of
GOD, and the Precious Merits of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, which are the only
Pillars on which your Hope must stand, if you would not have it fail you in
that Day when GOD shall take away your Souls: Yea, a Hope thus founded is
necessary not only to your future Safety, but also to your present Fruitfulness
and Flourishing: -- And though I know but little, yet, so far as I do know any
Thing of the Matter, I must needs say, that I am fully persuaded, that the more
you adore and rely upon Free Grace through JESUS CHRIST, the more will your
Souls be in Health and prosper: And let me entreat of you to make the
Experiment. -- True indeed, you must have Respect to all GOD's Commandments;
this we constantly teach and affirm; yea, and you will, without Doubt, be
careful to maintain good Works, if you have a good Principle within you: But
what I say is this, that you may not have the least Dependence upon your Works
of Righteousness, Charity, or Piety, to justify you before GOD, but must build
on CHRIST, the Rock of Ages, and the Hope of all true Israelites: "He is the
Way, the Truth, and the Life;" and (although there be some that cannot relish it,
yet) it is a certain Truth, "that there is no other Name under Heaven, given
among Men, whereby we may be accepted and saved:" -- Wherefore, as you love
your own Souls, I beseech you, Let those three Words, which are often used in
Military Exercises, and are more instructive than any other that I remember to
be in Use on such Occasions, Namely, To your Leader, be often sounding in your
Ears; and let the same have their due Influence on your whole Man, and at all
Times; so that whatever you do, see that you do it in the Name of CHRIST, and
don't dare to perform any Duty, nor to stir one Step, without having your Eye
to him for Guidance, Strength, and Righteousness; and so, let the Life which
you live here in the Flesh, be by Faith in the Son of GOD, who has commanded,
saying, " Look unto me, and be ye saved."

BUT though it be hard to forbear -- yet, lest I should trespass too much upon
your Patience, I shall now draw toward a Close.

AND notwithstanding I readily acknowledge, that it is the Duty of Christians
firmly to adhere to all the Principles of our holy Religion, as revealed to us
in the holy Scriptures, "and not be like Children tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every Wind of Doctrine"; yet, I would advise you to hold
fast, more especially, the Doctrine of Original Sin; and that of the Necessity
and Nature of the New Birth; that also of Justification by Faith, without the
Works of the Law; and finally, that of The Decrees; to which I may add, that of
the Saints Perseverance; viz. as the same have been taught by the godly
Reformers, and as they now stand asserted and explained among the famous
Articles of the Church of England: And which, whatever some may think of them,
yet, being suitably improved, do mightily serve to promote practical Religion,
and vital Piety. -- And in a Word; Oh! Let the Riches, the Riches of GOD's
glorious Grace be daily admired, in providing a Savior for perishing Sinners;
and learn more and more the Need, the absolute Need, which you stand in of this
mighty Savior; and O let him in all his Offices, and with all his Benefits be
precious, exceeding precious to you: And seeing he has purchased spiritual Life
for all such as will come to him for it, let your Dependence therefore be upon
him, first, to bestow it; and then, to preserve and increase it in you and for
you; and finally, to complete it in Eternal Life. -- And, as it becomes
Fellow Soldiers, you must be helpful to one another, encouraging and
strengthening each other's Hands and Hearts, speaking often one to another
concerning the Things which pertain to the Kingdom of GOD, and which have the
most direct Tendency to promote one another's Salvation: Also praying one for
another, that you may be healed and saved.

AND to conclude the Discourse; Let every true Christian here present, of what
Order, Age, Relation, Complexion, or Language soever, be exhorted, in the Words
of the Apostle, "to awake out of Sleep, because now is your Salvation nearer
than when you believed." -- Let the Scoffers of the Age, and such as refuse to
be reformed, mock on, if they please; but be you up and doing, and so get ready
for your LORD'S Coming. -- As the Damnation of impenitent, hardened Wretches
draws daily nearer and nearer, and their Steps do even now take hold on Hell;
and it will not be long before Almighty GOD will mock at their Calamity, even as
now they mock at his Counsels: So does the Salvation of all those that love our
LORD JESUS CHRIST in Sincerity draw near apace; and surely, O ye Children of
the most High, as you draw nearer to the Center of your Delight and Joy, so
your Motion should be the more quick and lively, and your Souls more on the
Wing of Faith and holy Love, and be going from Strength to Strength, until
every one of you shall appear before GOD your Savior in the heavenly Zion,
with Songs and everlasting Joy upon your Heads; and where you shall obtain Joy
and Gladness, not only without Period, but also without Mixture or any
Interruption; for then all Sorrow and Sighing, by Reason of Sin, or on any
other Account whatsoever, shall flee away, even as the Shadows of the Night
before the rising Sun.

Amen and Amen.
FINIS.

