JOY, the Duty of Survivors, on the Death of PIOUS Friends and Relatives.

A Funeral Discourse On the Death of Mrs. Lucy Waldo, The amiable Consort of
Mr. Samuel Waldo, Merchant in BOSTON; Who departed this Life August 7 th 1741,
in the 38th Year of her Age.

By Charles Chauncy, A. M. Pastor of the first Church of CHRIST in BOSTON.

Eccles 7.1. A good Name is better than precious Ointment; and the Day of
Death, than the Day of ones Birth.

BOSTON: Printed by S. Kneeland and T. Green, in Queen Street. 1741.

A Funeral Sermon.
JOHN xiv. 28. -- If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go to the
FATHER. --


THEY are the Words of our blessed SAVIOR; and he spoke them to his Disciples,
at a Time, when their Hearts were troubled.

The Case was this: The Hour being just come, in which he knew, he should
depart out of the World, he though it proper to acquaint his Disciples with it. Yet
a little while, says he, I am with you. And again, Whither I go ye cannot come
Preceding Chap. Ver 33.
. At this sad, and unexpected News, they were filled with Grief. They could not
bear the Though It of parting with so dear a Friend, so good a Master and Lord.

Upon which, that they might not be swallowed up of overmuch Sorrow, our
compassionate SAVIOR proceeds to say that, which might have a tendency to ease
their Minds, and make them calm and quiet. He assures them, in his FATHER 's
House were many Mansions; and that he was only going to prepare a Place, where
he and they might be together for ever. I go, says he, Context, ver. 2, to
prepare a Place for you. And if I go, and prepare a Place for you, I will come
again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also As
if he had said, "Though I am going from you, it is only for a Time; and this, in
order to your Happiness, to prepare Mansions of Glory for you: Nor will it be
long before I shall see you again, and admit you into my FATHER 's House; when
there shall never more be a Separation between us. A most refreshing
Consideration this! enough to compose their Spirits, and make them cheerful at
parting with their dearest SAVIOR.

He then, after some other Disswasives from too much Grief, fetches Consolation
for them, in the Words of the Text, from that which was the Source of all their
Sorrow on his Account, even their Love to him. If ye loved me, says he, ye
would rejoice, because I said, I go to the FATHER. It Is as if he had spoken in
such Language as this, "I have already told you, where I am going when I leave
you; that I am going to the FATHER, to receive at his Hands, in Reward of my
Services and Sufferings for the good of Men, a Name that is above every Name,
at which, every Knee shall bow, that is in Heaven, and that is on Earth: And
shall not this be Matter of Joy to you? If you love me, as I see you do by the
Tears you drop, at the Prospect of my Departure from you, you cannot but
rejoice. There will, with your Sorrow, be a mixture of Joy. It Is fitting you
should rejoice for me, if you mourn for your selves. Yea, your Regards to me
will make you to rejoice".

The Subject fairly offering it self to Consideration, as suited to the present
Occasion, is this,

Love to our deceased, pious Friends, and Relatives, should influence us to
rejoice, in Consideration they are gone to the FATHER. Sorrow, perhaps, we may
imagine to be the most proper Expression of Love, upon the departure of our
pious Friends: And it may appear strange, to hear it said, we ought to rejoice.
Joy, we may think unnatural; at least, very unbecoming at so mournful a Time.
But we are herein greatly mistaken. There is no Occasion more proper for the
exercise of religious Joy, than when our pious Relatives, though dear to us as
our very Lives, are called out of the World: Nor is there a more generous
Expression of our Love toward them. This our blessed SAVIOR has taught us, by
saying to his Disciples, if ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go
to the FATHER.

In prosecuting this Subject, I shall,

I. Say some Things tending to limit and explain the Truth of it.

II. Illustrate the Force of our Savior's Argument, by showing what there is
in the Consideration, that our pious, departed Friends, and Relatives are gone
to the FATHER, that should influence us to rejoice.

The whole will then be followed with the APPLICATION that is proper.

I. In order to limit, and explain the Truth in the Text, which is the first
Thing, let it be said as follows,

1. That it must not be understood, as if they did not love their Friends and
Relatives, who mourn their decease. Oar SAVIOR does not charge his Disciples
with want of Love to him, because they were in Tears at the foretho't of his
Death. He knew they had a tender Affection for him; and indeed, this is
supposed as the Cause of all their Sorrow, in the Argument, he here uses with
them. Nor may our lamenting the Decease of our Christian Friends, be looked
upon as an Instance of want of Love to them. So far from this, that the very
Reason why we mourn for them is, because we love them. Love is the Spring from
whence all our Tears flow: Nor, if we did not love them, should we be affected
with Grief at their departure from us.

2. Nor, yet, is our SAVIOR to be understood, as though he meant to prohibit our
sorrowing, at the Death of our dear Relatives. He does not find Fault with his
Disciples for expressing their Grief at the News of his approaching Departure.
We may rather suppose, he was pleased to think they were so much his Friends,
and that he was like to die lamented by them. He takes Care indeed to restrain
their Grief within due Bounds. And immoderate Sorrow is always a Fault, let the
Friend or Relative, we are called to part with, be ever so dear. But as to the
Thing it self, it is not to be condemned. We may lawfully mourn, if we don't
mourn too much; yea, all the natural Expressions of Sorrow, are but a decent
Respect to the Memory of our departed Friends. It Is Stupidity, not true
Greatness of Mind, to be unmoved at their Death. Our SAVIOR himself wept over
the Grave of his dead Friend Lazarus. And that is the Remark made upon it John
11.36.
Behold, how he loved him! And if Tears were a proper Expression of Love from
our blessed SAVIOR, they cannot be an unsuitable one from us. He who was once
touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, and knows our Frame, and the
Weakness of it, will indulge us in a few Tears, on the Death of a beloved
Friend; yea, he would take it ill, if we should suffer them to die unlamented
by us. To go on,

3. When we are bid to rejoice on Occasion of the Death of pious Friends and
Relations, the Meaning is, we should, at least, mix some Joy with our Sorrow.
Sorrow there will be, and there ought to be Joy also: Nor will these Passions
destroy each other. They may both subsist in the same Breast; and indeed, there
is just Reason, upon the Death of every valuable and pious Friend, for the
Excitement of both these different Affections. For in all such Dispensations,
there is "a dark and a bright Side"; there is "our Loss, and their Gain": And
while we mourn the one, we should rejoice at the other. When we consider their
Death in Respect of our selves, the Pleasure and Happiness we are deprived of,
as well as the Inconveniences, Difficulties and Troubles, we are become
exposed to, we have Reason to be grieved, and ought to be so: But when we turn
our Thoughts, and take a View of their Death, in Respect of themselves, the
Miseries they are freed from, and the Blessedness they are gone to partake of,
there is proper Occasion for Joy, and we ought, in Love to them, to rejoice.
But there may be a further Meaning in the Words. Wherefore,

4. When Love to our departed Friends is spoken of as that which should
influence us to rejoice, the Sense is, we should rather rejoice than mourn; our
Joy should be greater than our Sorrow. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice. The
Words are comparative; "Ye would be in a Frame of Mind disposing you to the
exercise rather of Joy than Grief; ye would nor so much mourn, as be glad and
triumph." Not that an outward Joy, expressed in Merriment and Laughter, is here
at all encouraged; so far from it, that it would be a monstrous Incongruity,
It Is an inward, rational Satisfaction, that our SAVIOR would recommend; a Joy
arising from the Principles of Religion: And such a Joy does most become us,
upon Occasion of the Death of pious, though the dearest Relatives: And we should
chiefly be in the Exercise of it, as being the most noble, and truly Christian
Expression of our Love to them. It Is a poor, ordinary Frame to mourn for our
Dead, as arising from mere sensitive Nature. One needs no Improvement of Mind
in order to this. There needs neither Philosophy nor Christianity, Virtue nor
Religion, to teach us this low Lesson; but to rejoice in their happy Change, to
be glad that they are laid in a Bed of everlasting Rest, while we suffer the
Loss of their pleasant Society; this is generous and truly noble Love! This is
such an ingenuous greatness of Mind, as is only the product of divine Faith,
and christian Hope; which regulates our Love, and raises it to such a Pitch, as
nothing below the Grace of GOD, and the Light of the Gospel, can advance it to.

But having said, what may be though it sufficient to limit, and explain the Truth
in the Text, I now go on,

II. To illustrate the Force of our Savior's Argument, by showing what there
is, in the Consideration that our pious, deceased Friends are gone to the
FATHER, that should influence us to rejoice.

Now this includes in it several Things, all which are so many just Reasons for
rejoicing.

1. Their being gone to the FATHER obviously supposes, that they are still
alive. Though they are dead, their Being is not extinct; they are not fallen from
their Existence. Their Bodies, it is true, are rendered senseless and inactive,
but not so their Souls. Death has had no Effect upon these, but to translate
them to the other World; where they still live, and act more perfectly than
ever. It Is with them as with the Sun; at Evening it leaves our Horizon under
disconsolate Darkness, and some weak Persons may think it is Glory buried and
extinguished; but it is only gone to the other Hemisphere, and there shines with
as much Beauty and Brightness as ever. A most reviving Though It this! And should
fill our Souls with Joy and Gladness. If, at Death, the Friends whom we loved
like our selves, went out of Being; if there was now an End put to their
Existence, we might well refuse to be comforted, because they are not. But the
Case is far otherwise. Though they are dead, they are yet alive: They are only
gone to the FATHER. And shall we not rejoice at this? We may break forth in the
Language of good old Jacob, upon the News of his Son Joseph's Welfare, It is
enough, be is alive. Our dead Friends are alive; they are alive with GOD in
another and better World, as truly so as ever they were in this.

2. Their being gone to the FATHER plainly intends that they are gone to be
rewarded by him, Their full Reward they will not indeed receive, till the Day of
the appearing of the Son of Man, when he shall say to them in those Words, Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from before the
Foundation of the World. But they are no sooner dead, but they begin to be
happy. The Day of their Death is the Day of their Entrance upon the future
Blessedness. So the holy Apostle John heard it declared by a Voice from Heaven.
I heard, Rev. 14.13.
says he, a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write, Blessed are the Dead
which die in the LORD from HENCEFORTH: yea, says the SPIRIT, that they may
rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.

But what is this Reward, our pious Friends and Relatives receive by going to
the FATHER? To which I would say,

1. They hereby obtain Deliverance from Sorrow and Trouble of every Kind. While
here they were subjected to Grief and Pain, and often groaned under the uneasy
Burdens that were laid upon them; but being gone to the FATHER, they are
forever set free from those innumerable Distresses and Sorrows, which imbitter
the present Life, and render it so uncomfortable, even under the most
advantageous Circumstances.

They have now nothing to disquiet them; no Cares, nor Fears; no Losses,
Crosses, nor Disappointments; no painful Diseases, nor pining Sickness; no
weariness, nor faintness; neither Hunger, nor Thirst. These Occasions of Grief
are all past; they are eternally at rest from them all.

Nor are they now exposed to those spiritual Griefs, which once pained their
pious Minds. They have no Doubts of the Love of GOD, for they are in the actual
Enjoyment of it; they have no Fears least they are not interested in the great
SAVIOR, for they are with him in PARADISE; they have no Suspicion of their own
Uprightness, for they have been approved of their Judge, and are entered into
the Joy of their Lord; they have no Complaints to make of their Frailties and
Imperfections, the want of Love, and Zeal, and Activity, in the Service of GOD,
for they are now in his Presence without Spot or Wrinkle, and do his Will, with
like Perfection, as do the holy Angels.

Neither are our departed pious Friends liable to Grief, on Account of those
Effects of their Death, that are apt to trouble us. We are touched with Concern
and Pity to see them called away from their earthly Possessions, and worldly
Accommodations; we are grieved to behold their Ghastliness and Deformity, and
weep bitterly when they are laid in the Grave to be destroyed by Worms; we are
moved with Sorrow to think, they are gone from our World, so that we shall see
them no more, nor enjoy their Society which was once so pleasant to us. We
often speak of such Things as these; or, at least, employ our melancholy
Thoughts upon them: But so do not they. It troubles them not, they have left
this Earth, with its greatest Advantages; it moves them not, their Bodies are
laid in the Dust, to return to Dust; yea, it is no Matter of Uneasiness to them,
they are parted from their Husbands or Wives, once dear to them as their very
Souls: Nor are they in Sorrow, they are gone from their desirable Children,
who, it may be, are become poor, helpless, destitute Orphans. We are troubled
at this, and it once caused great Sorrow of Heart to them. They were grieved at
the Though It of leaving their beloved Children; it bore hard upon their tender
Minds; they found it difficult to reconcile themselves to the Will of Heaven in
this Matter; it was one of the greatest Trials to their Faith: But they are now
above the reach of Sorrow from these, or any Considerations whatever. For being
gone to the FATHER, they are in that State, where there shall be no more Death,
neither Sorrow, nor Crying; neither shall there be any more Pain. They shall
hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the Sun light on them,
or any Heat: for the LAMB which is in the midst of the Throne, shall feed them,
and shall lead them to Fountains of Waters: And GOD shall wipe away all Tears
from all their Eyes.

And now, shall we grieve for our departed Friends, who are thus delivered from
the Miseries of this evil World? Is it not rather Matter of Joy, that they are
redeemed from Sin, and the unhappy Fruits of it, and are possessed of eternal
Ease and Peace? Their Death is their JUBILEE, the Year of their Release from
the Trials and Labors, the Vexations, Fears and Hazards, which attended them
in the present State; yea, from all manner of Evil. And shall we not rejoice?
We have just Ground for a holy Joy: And we shall certainly be in the Exercise
of it, if we have any religious Love for these our dead Friends. If we mourn,
let it be for our selves; as for them, there is no Cause of Sorrow; true Love
will rather urge us to rejoice.

2. By being gone to the FATHER, they are not only delivered from all Manner of
Grief and Trouble, but have entered upon the Enjoyment of positive Blessedness.

Being gone to the FATHER, they are gone to a blessed Place; called, in
Scripture, sometimes Abraham's Bosom; sometimes Paradise; sometimes the City,
whose Builder and Maker is GOD. And to be sure, it is a Place of exceeding great
Joy and Delight. For it is the Place, where the SUPREME MAJESTY dwells, and has
erected the Throne of his Glory, and makes the brightest Manifestations of
Himself to the ineffable Happiness of his Creatures.

Being gone to the FATHER, they are gone to the best and most blessed Company.
They are gone to dwell with Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles; with their
pious departed Friends, and Progenitors; and with all, whom GOD, in all Ages,
from the Days of Adam, has been selecting from among Men, and preparing to be
Heirs to the future, eternal Inheritance; yea, they are gone to an innumerable
Company of Angels, to JESUS the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to GOD the
Judge of all.

Being gone to the FATHER, they are gone to the most noble Employment; to
worship and serve the GOD that made them, without Interruption, without
Weariness, without Sin, without the least Frailty or Imperfection: Being ever
full of Love, Reverence and Obeisance, they are ever in a Disposition to the
Work of Praise and Adoration; yea, they cease not Day nor Night, saying, with a
loud Voice, Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Power, be to HIM THAT SITS
ON THE THRONE, and to the LAMB for ever and ever.

In a Word, being gone to the FATHER, they are gone to be made perfected
Spirits in Glory; perfect in the Love of GOD; perfect in the Service of GOD;
perfect in the Enjoyment of GOD, that GOD, in whose Presence is fullness of
Joys, and at whose right Hand flow Rivers of Pleasures for ever more.

And shall we now mourn for these our departed Friends? What is the genuine
influence of true Love? Does it not put us upon wishing the Happiness of our
dear Relatives? And does it not constrain us to rejoice, when they come to the
Possession of it? And shall we not then be glad, when we take a view of them,
as gone to the FATHER, as gone to the Glories of the upper and eternal World?
However it may appear to an Eye of Sense, it is, in the Eye of Faith, a blessed
Truth, that our departed, Christian Friends are gone to a Paradise of Delight,
where they have perfected Spirits, and glorious Angels to converse with; yea,
and an infinite GOD to enjoy: And are these fit Persons to be lamented? O no!
The greater our Love to them, the more should we exult at their Felicity. Can
we find in our Hearts to desire they should leave the Company of Heaven for
our's? Would we, were it in our Power, recall them from the Joys of GOD's right
Hand? Certainly, our Love to them will nor suffer us to be so unkind: nor
should we so much grieve for our selves, as rejoice for them, that they are
blessed in the Kingdom of their FATHER. To go on,

3. The Truth that we are upon, that our pious, departed Friends are gone to
the FATHER, suggests this further Ground of Joy, that they are gone to the same
Place, whither we our selves, if good Christians, shall go our selves. Our
SAVIOR, not only tells his Disciples, in the Context, that he was going from
them; but adds for their Consolation, that where he was, there they should be
also; in the same Place, with the same FATHER. This also is our Comfort upon
the Death of pious Relatives. Where they are gone, we shall go our selves, if
Partakers of the same Faith and Holiness with them. They are not gone where we
cannot come, but to the "same Harbor we are bound to, and are upon our Voyage
for; Nay, where we our selves have already cast Anchor, by a steadfast Hope,
though we are not yet landed, as they are". And what a Motive to Joy is this?
Whither could we wish our Friends, but where they are gone? They are gone to
the very Place, we call our Home; to the very Place, whither we are hastening
our selves; yea, to the very Place, which is the great Object of our Desires
and Hopes, of our Prayers and Endeavors. O what a joyful Consideration is
this! How should it fill our Hearts with Gladness! It Is Love to our Friends
that makes us grieve, because they are gone from us: and should not the same
Principle cause us to rejoice also? since they are gone, where we shall see
them again, and live with them again, and that for ever. If we are our selves
truly pious, having good Hope toward God, it will be Matter of Joy to us, upon
the Death of christian Relatives, to extend our View to GOD's eternal Kingdom,
in expectation of Meeting, and dwelling with them in that blessed Place.

The APPLICATION yet remains. And,

1. How joyful should be the though it of dying to Christians themselves! To be
sure, if they should rejoice, that their departed pious Friends are gone to the
FATHER, they should much more rejoice at the Though It of going there themselves.
And yet, how far are they, commonly, from being joyful on this Account? How
unwelcome, to the generality of Christians, is the Though It of dying, the one only
way of going to the FATHER? When laid upon a Bed of Sickness, and bro't within
View of the Grave, how unwilling to go the Way, whence they shall not return?
How earnest in their Requests for a longer Reprieve? But it is certainly a Shame
for Christians, who are favored with such blessed Hopes, to be unwilling to
die. The Though It of Death should be pleasant to them; they should reflect upon
going out of the World, with a holy triumph of Soul, as knowing they are going
to the FATHER, to have all Tears wiped away from their Eyes, and to be crowned
with Glory, Honor, and Immortality, in GOD's everlasting Kingdom.

If we were clearly satisfied of this, we may be ready to say, we should be
willing rather to be absent from the Body. Our Desire would be to depart, and
to be with CHRIST, which is far better.

And it must be acknowledged, it is only a good Hope, that we are in the Number
of those, who when they die, will go to be with the FATHER, and with his Son
JESUS CHRIST, that can make the Though It of dying set upon our Minds with Ease and
Comfort. This therefore we should endeavor after; giving all Diligence, as the
Apostle exhorts, 2 Pet. 1.10.
to make our Calling and Election sure. And the more watchful we are over our
own Hearts and Lives; the more we keep upon our Guard against Sin, and all the
Temptations to it; the more we give our selves to Prayer, and an Attendance on
the Institutions of Religion; the more frequently we renew the Acts of our
Repentance toward GOD, and Faith in our LORD JESUS CHRIST; and in a Word, the
more we take off our Affections from the Earth, and the more we have our
Conversation in Heaven, the more likely we shall be, to come to a fixed,
satisfactory Hope of our good Estate GODWARD: And having this good Hope through
Grace, we shall have no Cause of Fear upon the Prospect of Death; but may, at
any Time, welcome a Message to leave all Things here below; rejoicing in the
Though It, that we are now going to the FATHER: And we shall have the more Reason
for this, as so many of our dear Relatives are gone before us. The Departure of
every pious, amiable Friend, is a fresh incentive to our Desires to follow
after, since we shall go to the FATHER, and to them too: Nor can it be, but
that the Though It of Death should be highly pleasant to us, while we reflect upon
it, as that which will translate us to those Friends above, whom we loved so
much here below.

2. Such are taught to be in the exercise of religious Joy, whom it has pleased
GOD to bereave of pious Friends and Relatives. This, I confess, is no easy
Attainment. Our Passions are apt to be soon in a Tumult; and too commonly, our
Voice is that of Lamentation and Mourning. But we ought, certainly, at such a
Time, to keep our selves under the Restraints of Reason and Religion; and though
we are allowed to mourn, it should not be as those who have no Hope; yea,
having so good a Hope of it is being well with them, in the Kingdom of their
FATHER, we should rejoice: Our Love to them should constrain us to do so. The
Though It, that they are gone to participate of the Pleasures that flow at GOD's
right Hand, should be grateful to us. There is Joy among all their Friends in
the upper World, upon their arrival at that blessed Place. JESUS their SAVIOR,
and LORD, has welcomed them to his heavenly FATHER's House; holy Angels, and
the Spirits of just Men made perfect, have congratulated them on their
admission to their Society. And shall we alone be dejected with Sorrow? Let us
rather join in a Song of Praise to him, who has loved them, and washed them
from their Sins in his own Blood, and has made them Kings and Priests unto
GOD, and his FATHER.

But I would be particular here in recommending this Duty of holy Joy to those,
who were the near Friends and Relatives of that amiable Person, whom we
followed to the Grave the last Week. Not that I mean to fault you, because your
Hearts are troubled at her Departure. Nature leads to this, nor does
Christianity forbid it. The blessed JESUS did himself weep, on Occasion of the
Death of a beloved Friend: And he will not be displeased, if you also are in
Tears. You have indeed just Cause of Grief; and if you grieve much, 'twill be
the more excusable, as the lovely Person, whose Decease calls you to lament,
had united in her all the Attractives to Esteem and Love while living, as well
as the strongest Excitements to a pungent Sense of Sorrow, now the holy GOD has
removed her from you.

I am sensible, it will open the Springs of Grief in you, if I bring to
Remembrance those Things, in your departed Friend, and dear Relative, which
rendered her so much the Delight of all acquainted with her: Yet, in Justice to
her Memory, I cannot forbear saying, The GOD, who made her, was pleased to give
her a comely Body, so that none was more praised for Beauty than she; but the
Endowments of her Soul were far more worthy of Notice, as they were of superior
Excellence. She had a good Understanding; a Wit that was sprightly, yet
conjoined with solidity of Judgment, and a becoming Tho'tfulness; the effect
whereof was, her being cheerful and pleasant, yet serious and grave; free and
open, yet prudently cautious and reserved.

She was singularly sweet in the Temper of her Mind; not soon angry, never
pevish, never clamorous: but on the contrary, calm and placid; possessing a
serene Breast her self, and making all easy who were about her.

Her whole Deportment was agreeable; and she particularly set a good Example in
filling up the several Relations she sustained, with the Virtues proper to
them: As a Friend, sincere in her Professions, true and faithful: As a Wife,
engaging in her Carriage, reverent and dutiful: As a Mother, tender and
affectionate, yet exercising all due Authority over her Children: As Mistress
in the Family, prudent in her Economy, yet generous and noble; a promoter of
good Order; mindful of all under her Care; compassionate to her Servants: In
her treatment of Visitants, hospitable, courteous, pleasant and obliging.

But what is more than all, she was, in the Judgment of those best acquainted
with her, a real, serious Christian. She all along, in her Life, behaved as
such; and eminently so, under that grievous Trial, it pleased the holy and
righteous GOD to bring upon her, in the Sickness whereof she died. Those, who
were then most about her, speak highly of her patient and quiet Spirit;
wondering, she complained no more, discovered no greater Uneasiness: when, by
Reason of that CANCER, which eat up her Flesh, she might have wearied them out
with her groanings.

She often took Occasion, as is certainly proper for such imperfect, sinful
Creatures, as the best of us all are; especially, when upon the Confines of
another World: I say, she often took Occasion to look back, not only upon her
past Life, but Frame of Heart; and wherein she though it any Thing had been amiss,
she was free to judge and condemn her self, and humbly and penitently repaired
to the Mercy of GOD, through the Merits of the GREAT SAVIOR: And though, for a
Time, she had a Fear upon her Spirit, respecting her eternal State; yet, her
Fear was mixed with Hope: And she was, at length, in a good Measure, raised
above Fear. She appeared, upon the near Approaches of Death, to be entirely
resigned to the Will of Heaven; and such was the composure of her Mind, that
she was able, with all freedom, to speak of her own Decease, and to give
Directions about her Interment: which, when she had done, she set her self to
the Work of dying. And as, we trust, she LIVED TO CHRIST, we charitably hope
and believe, she DIED IN HIM; and is now gone to the FATHER.

You, her Friends, believe thus concerning her: And while these are your Hopes;
while, by an Eye of Faith, you look beyond Death and the Grave, and view your
dear Relative, as gone into the Heavens, to take Possession of the Inheritance
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, we may well suppose, you
grieve not for her, but rejoice; rejoice that she is got beyond the reach of
Sin and Sorrow, and is entered upon the Reward of Righteousness, which is Joy
and Peace, Quietness and Assurance for ever: nor can it be though it, you so much
as wish for her back again, into such a World of Vanity and Vexation, Distress
and Trouble, as this is that we live in. Upon her Account, surely, you don't
desire such a Thing, though upon your own you may; as suffering, in respect of
your selves, a great and heavy Loss.

We heartily sympathize with you all; wishing for you, not only the
Consolations of GOD, which are not small; but those Influences of divine Grace,
whereby you may be enabled so to improve this Affliction, as that GOD may be
honored, your own Holiness promoted, and eternal Weight of Glory inhanced.

We pray GOD to return in safety his Servant most nearly allied to the Person
deceased; to prepare him for the sorrowful News that waits for him, and to
sanctify it to him; teaching him therefrom the Vanity and Uncertainty of all
earthly Enjoyments, and exciting him to place his Happiness, not in this World,
nor any of the Comforts or Prospects of it, but in GOD, through JESUS CHRIST.

We wish also for the bereaved Children a double Portion of that good Spirit,
which rested on their departed MOTHER. Be ye Followers of her, wherein she
followed CHRIST. -- Devote your selves to GOD in your early Days; seek and
serve him with a perfect Heart and a willing Mind: -- So will you, her SONS,
appear as beautiful Plants grown up in your Youth; and y^^ her DAUGHTERS, shall
shine as Corner Stones, polished after the Similitude of a Palace.

And may we all make a suitable Improvement of this Dispensation of Providence!
We are herefrom presented with a very lively and affecting Instance of humane
Frailty. It should awaken our Consideration, and make us seriously tho'tful of
another World. That is the Call of GOD to us all, Be ye also ready. But this is
the Voice of Providence, in a particular Manner, to us, who are in the height
of our Strength and Vigor. O let us take the Warning GOD is giving us! Let us
learn herefrom our liableness to be taken away, by some fatal Stroke, in the
midst of our Days: And let us give our selves no Ease, till we have got into
such a State, as that it might be happy for us, if so it should please the
sovereign Lord of Life.

And let the Daughters of Zion hear the Voice of GOD, yet more particularly
directed to them. You are herefrom taught, that, at your best Estate, you are
altogether Vanity; that you are in Death, in the midst of Life. And O live, as
it is proper such frail, dying Creatures should live! -- Let your Behavior be
as becomes Godliness. -- Get your selves possessed of real and substantial
Religion; that, as the King's Daughter, you may be all glorious within. -- Be
sober, discreet, chasts, exemplary for all good Works. -- And your adorning,
let it not be that outward adorning of plaiting the Hair, and of wearing of
Gold, or of putting on of Apparel; but let it be the hidden Man of the Heart,
in that which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit,
which is in the Sight of GOD of great Price. For after this Manner, in old
time, the holy Women, who trusted in God, adorned themselves: whose Daughters
ye are, as long as ye do well. -- But I must hasten,

3. Near Relations should be excited, from what has been discoursed, so to live
together, as that when parted by Death, there may be Ground of Joy to those,
whose Lot it is to survive. Death will certainly sooner or later dissolve our
Relations; seperating between the nearest and dearest Friends. And what will be
able to afford Comfort to those who survive, but the Consideration, that their
Friends departed, are gone to the FATHER? O how lamentable is the Condition of
those, and how much to be pitied, who mourn for wicked, though near Relatives,
who, they are afraid, are gone to the Place of blackness of Darkness! where the
Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched. No wonder, where this is the
Case, if pious Minds are bowed down greatly.

Is it the Character of any of us, who are nearly related to each other, that
we lead sinful and unholy Lives? O let it have some Influence upon us, to
engage us to repent and turn from our evil Ways, to think, if we should be
called to depart hence, what Grief of Heart we should occasion to our surviving
Christian Friends. If we are seized with Sickness, they tremble for us, as
knowing the hazard of our Souls, as well as Bodies: And if we are smitten with
Death, they are filled with Distress and Agony, and can take no Comfort, as
fearing we are gone to be made miserable in the Place of future Torment. O let
us have Compassion upon our pious Friends, who love us, and wish us well as our
own Souls! And let us, for their sakes, behave after such a manner, as that
they may have Joy in us both living and dying.

O let us all, both Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Brethren and
Sisters, be entreated to live together as Heirs of the Grace of Life! -- Let us
be sincere and faithful in filling up the Relation we bear to each other, with
all that Duty, which, as Christians, is expected from us. -- Let us encourage
one another in every Thing that is serious and godly. -- Let us be mutual Helps
to each other, by Conversation, by Prayer, by good Example, in the way to GOD's
heavenly Kingdom: so shall we have a good Hope as to the good State of each
other; and whoever are called out of the World first, they who survive may
rejoice, while by Faith, they behold their departed Friends, as gone to their
FATHER, and our FATHER; to their GOD, and our GOD, to be happy, eternally happy
in the Enjoyment of him.

And now, as the Conclusion of all,

4. Let me call upon you to be thankful to GOD for JESUS CHRIST. For it is owing
to Him and his blessed Gospel, that we are able to take Comfort in the Though It of
Death, respecting either our selves, or our dear Relatives. If it were not for
CHRIST, we had not known, that Death, in regard of good Men, was nothing worse
than going to the Father; which Notion of Death carries in it all the Support
and Comfort, we can desire. We may now rejoice in the Expectation of dying our
selves, or at the burial of our nearest and most beloved Relatives, if
Believers in CHRIST.

And what though at Death, the Body is laid in the Dust, and returns to Dust, so
long as JESUS the SAVIOR has assured us, that this is the FATHER's Will, which
sent him, that of all which was given him, he should lose nothing; but will
raise it up again at the last Day.

Death indeed is a horror of Darkness, to those who can look no farther than
the Grave: But to us who are favored with the Gospel, which has brought Life
and Immortality to Light, a glorious and happy Immortality, in respect of all
the true Followers of CHRIST, there is Comfort in Death, for that there is Hope
beyond the Grave; yea, and of that which is laid in the Grave: For the Time is
coming, and it hastens apace, when that which is sown in Corruption, shall be
raised in Incorruption; when that which is sown in Dishonor, shall be raised
in Glory; when that which is sown in Weakness, shall be raised in Power; when
that which is sown a natural Body, shall be raised a spiritual Body: So when
this corruptible shall have put on Incorruption, and this mortal shall have put
on Immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying, that is written,
Death is swallowed up in Victory.

Upon which Account, let all who are the faithful Servants of GOD, and sincere
Disciples of CHRIST, unite in that Song of Triumph, O Death! where is thy
Sting? O Grave! where is thy Victory? The Sting of Death is Sin, and the
Strength of Sin is the Law. But Thanks be to GOD, which gives us the Victory,
through our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

Therefore, my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding
in the Work of the LORD, for as much as ye know, that your Labor is not in
vain in the LORD.

FINIS.

