THE QUERISTS, PART III. OR, An EXTRACT of sundry Passages taken out of Mr. G.
Tennent's Sermon preached at Nottingham, of The Danger of an Unconverted
Ministry.

TOGETHER WITH Some SCRUPLES proposed in proper QUERIES raised on each Remark.

By the same Hands with the former.

Acts 20.30. Also of your own selves shall Men arise, speaking perverse Things,
to draw Disciples after them.

Prove. 14.16. The Fool rages and is confident.
-- Errore sub illo
Pro vitio virtus crimina saepe tulit.
PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN in Market-Street. 1741

The Humble ADDRESS of the QUERISTS to the Presbytery of New Castle; Or in
their Absence to a Committee of said Presbytery.
REVEREND SIRS,
HAVING already addressed you upon the like Errand with our present one, we
shall not make any long Apology at this Time, judging it needless; because we
trust we have already given you some Proof of the Goodness and Honesty of our
Design, in speaking our Part in this public Manner, in the Defense of despised
Truth and Order, against the Errors and Disorders of the Times. It is enough
(we suppose) to tell you, that we design to prosecute the same Cause at this
Time: For though we are sensible, by late Experience, that we cannot escape the
Lash of virukent Tongues, if we speak Truth without Disguise, as formerly; yet
we are in great hopes, that our speaking the Truth without Palliation, will
prevent our falling under the severer Stings of our own Consciences; when Times
appear such, that the Lovers of Truth cannot be silent and innocent. We
entirely agree with a Paragraph in a lace Writer, who says, That such as are
Friends to Liberty, will find it equally necessary to be Friends to the
Principles of the Reformation: I am, says he, always of Opinion, that
Protestant Liberty and Protestant religious Truths are closely linked together,
and together must stand or fall. The Reformation can only subsist and flourish
by the Principles it began upon: Every thing else, in some Shape or other,
tends to Popery and Slavery. There is a false Policy in the World, an
over-valued Learning and mistaken Wisdom: Nothing except Consistency will bear
Examination. Truth only is great, and at one Time or other will prevail. Upon
this Score we are much surpised at the Conduct of many dissenting Protestants
among us, who (though they seemed lately zealous for Protestant Principle^) are
all on a sudden, either for Want of Judgment or Consideration, fallen into an
uncommon Liking and Admiration of Mr Whitefield's patched, and in many Places,
false Scheme, as we have already shown; which to the considerate Observer
carries in it ((...) we think) as plain a Design against Protestant Principles,
as the Interim of Old, in Germany, in King Henry the Eighth's Times did.

We cannot but ^ook upon it as a plain Proof of Men's Fickleness and Want of
Judgment, or of their Want of right Attachment to Presbyterian, or even to true
Protestant Principles, that such an enthusia^tick, incoherent, and in some
Places, vain and fabulous Scheme, smelling so rankly of Popery, should all on a
sudden prevail among Non-conformists, after all their Scuffle with Conformists
about Popish Relicts: For what is Popery, if ascribing to the holy Scriptures a
twofold Sense, viz. a literal and mystical or hidden Sense, and asserting,
that Sacraments are essential Means of Salvation, etc. be not true Popish
Dialect: And where but here can we rank Mr. Whitefield's superstitious fasting*
on Wednesdays and Fridays, Pharisee and Popish like, as well as on the holy
Season of Lent, as he calls it? And what but a popish Penance was his
abstaining from eating of Pyes, wearing woollen Gloves, patched Gown and dirty
Shoes; what could this be, but a ^ind of voluntary* Humility, of which the
Apostle speaks in Col. ii. 18? What Reward can Men expect from God for such
vain Superstitions; but who has required this at your Hands? as Isa. i. 12.
What but monkish Holiness can be promoted by such Dirt? Can any suppose that
the holy One, who once injoined diverse bodily Purifications or Washings, in
order to instruct Men in the spiritual Lesson of Soul Purification, in which
his Soul delights, has any where injoined Men to wallow in Dirt, in order to
make their Souls clean? But what but monkish Holiness can be expected in a
seeming Convert and professed Admirer of K^mpis? For is not Mr. Whitefield
such, if the Account he gives of himself be true? It is very remarkable, that a
Party among us, who having imbibed some enthusiastic Notions, and do on that
Account judge and proclaim themselves our only spiritual Men, condemning all
that differ from them for carnal Men and Hypocrit^s are very industrious to
establish Mr. Whitefield's Character, and to propagate the Credit of his
Scheme, and also to palliate and defend his Errors: and Mr. Whitefield makes
grateful Return to them in Specie; and this puts us in Mind of an old Story,
which we read somewhere; How that Sanctius, the King of Arragon's Brother, who
marching against the Saracens, diverted himself a while at Rome: The bountiful
Pope, who is always prodigal of what costs him Nothing, causes him to be
proclaimed, Sanctius, by the Grace of God, King of Egypt, etc. The Noise of the
Trumpets calls him to the Balcony, and he asks, what was the Matter? He was
answered, that his Holiness had presented him with the entire Kingdom of Egypt.
Presently he commands his own Trumpeters, to go and salute the Pope, in
Requital, Caliph of Bal^ash. How like this are the Proclamations made among us
at Seasons, we leave others to determine, only we shall take Notice, that it
has been observed. That when it is Mr. Whitefield's Turn to speak, then Mr. G.
Tennent is proclaimed the most able and most eminent Servant of Christ, and all
his Associates or Party spiritual Men and faithful Ministers of Christ, etc.
etc. On the other Hand, if their Turn comes to speak or write, then Mr.
Whitefield is proclaimed the most able and most eminent Servant of Christ:
Whereas, by his Writings he appears to be either weak or worse; How else comes
it to pass, that these are so incoherent, empty, vain and trifling, and even
fabulous in many Places, as we have partly shown already? When there is such an
Hue and Cry after Pharisees, we would be glad to know, whether it would be safe
for the other Side to trumpet one another's Praises so loudly and highly as
this Side does, without being in Danger of being taken up for Pharisees, and
having the Crow's Eggs cast in their Teeth? Because Christ says to those
Pharisees that were offended at him for healing a Man on the Sabbath, How can
ye believe, that receive Honor one of another? John v. 44. Besides, is it not
some Difficulty to understand, how two most Eminents can orderly subsist among
Catholics, unless One be content to reside at Avignon, and leave Rome for the
other? For, according to the old Rule, two Suns in the Firmament is one too
many, because ominous. It was remarkable, how highly Mr. Whitefield publicly
did commend Mr. G. Tennent's printed Sermon, preached at Nottingham, of the
Danger of an Unconverted Ministry, as an excellent Piece, and as be judged, an
unanswerable one: This, together with the general Applause given to the said
Sermon, by many of our Party-Zealots, so far influenced us, as to incite us to
read said Sermon again; and upon the best Perusal we could make of it, we are
so far disappointed, that though Mr. Tennent, in some of his former Sermons, gave
us tolerable Satisfaction; yet in this he seems to us to have fallen into
several palpable and unhappy Mistakes, which have influenced him (as we think)
to express himself otherwise than according to Truth, and Christian Charity: if
we have been any Ways mistaken herein, we are very willing to submit the
Paragraphs we have extracted, and our Remarks thereupon, to your more mature
Judgments. To proceed then in Order, we shall in the first Place take a cursory
View of the Epistle Dedicatory, so that we may make an orderly Entrance, and
let us come out as we can.

I. Epistle Dedicatory, Paragraph the First, "I thought it proper to dedicate
to you the following Sermon, which I have delivered among you, as a Testimony
of my Regard for you, and Desire that you might be directed in the Choice of a
Minister, that so that important Affair might be managed to your spiritual and
immortal Benefit.

Query I. When it was Mr. Tennent's professed Aim to direct the People of
Nottingham, in the Choice of a Minister, does not he seem to be very deficient
in giving them proper Directions for that Purpose? For what can we find, that
looks like Directions, but the following Paragraph in page 30, 31. And O! that
vacant Congregations would take due Care in the Choice of their Ministers! Here
indeed they should hasten slowly. The Church of Ephesus is commended for trying
them which said they were Apostles, and were not, and for finding them Liars.
Hypocrites are against all knowing of others, and judging, in order to hide
their own Filthiness; like Thieves they flee the Search, because of their
stolen Goods: But the more they endeavor to hide, the more they expose their
Shame. Does not the spiritual Man judge all Things? Though he cannot judge the
Estate of subtle Hypocrites infallibly; yet may he not give a near Guess, who
are the Sons of Sceva, by their Manner of Praying, Preaching, and Living? Many
Pharisee-Teachers have got a fine long String of Prayings by Heart, so that
they are never at a Loss about it; their Prayers and Preachings are generally
of a Length, and both as dead as a Stone, and without all Savor. Dixi.

Qu. II. Though we join with Mr. Tennent, That vacant Congregations should take
due Care in the Choice of their Ministers; it being a weighty Concern of the
greatest Importance on many Accounts; yet we would ask, What sort of a Proof of
due Care is hastening slowly? or how will both consist? For is not the Danger
of those Sheep that want a Shepherd great, as well as that of those who have
only unconverted Ministers? For is not a dry Morsel, or half a Loaf, better
than no Bread? And is not the Privilege of a Gospel Ministry, so precious, as
to deserve all possible Speed in procuring it? Or is it supposed, that a
settled Minister will stand in the Itinerant's Way or Light? If there be any
such spiritual Men in vacant Congregations, as can on the bare Hearing of the
Declaration of Men's Experiences, presently tell, whether they are carnal or
converted; where is the Prudence or Care in being tardy, when it can be
dispatched to a good Purpose at once? Or if the Members of vacant Congregations
dare not trust their own Skill herein; would it not be a good Deed, if the
Congregation be able, to pay Ten or Twenty Pounds to a new-fashion'd Rabbi, for
a Visit, who can in an Hour or two, by keeping a Judgment-Meeting, guess the
Matter at once, and then pronounce the Judgment with as much Authority, as if
he sat in Peter's Chair? Or if the Congregation be poor, would it not be a Deed
of Charity in such Rabbis, to give a vacant Congregation such a Visit gratis,
or only upon their paying a small Modicum to bear the Charges of their Journey?
And when in settled Congregations every Member is supposed to be endowed with
present Skill, to judge the Itinerant more gifted and gracious, and the Parish
Minister less gifted or carnal, How comes it to pass, that a whole
Congregation, when vacant, are or ought to be at a long Stand before they can
possibly guess the Point; unless it be that the carnal Minister, upon his
Removal, has carried away the Urim and Thummim, out of the Bounds, among the
rest of his stolen Goods; and the People, though they have Materials to make new
ones, yet for want of a Leader, must spend a long Time in melting and forging
them out? Or is this to suit their Matter to People's Inclinations, who
naturally cast off, but are slow to take on them Christ's easy Yoke?

Quer. III. We grant, That the Church of Ephesus was justly commended for
trying them which said they were Apostles, and were not, and for finding them
Liars. Why then should those Ministers and Congregations be discommended by
some, who suspect such ordinary Ministers, who put themselves in a Level with
Christ's Apostles, if not with Christ himself, at Seasons, by pretending to an
immediate Call and Mission to the Ministry, to cloak their Disorders and Want
of Conformity to Gospel Rules; and pretend to act and think by the immediate
Guidance of Divine Inspiration, to palliate Errors and Enthusiastic Rovings;
yea, who pretend to have done greater Things than Raising dead Bodies, for
Proof of their pretended inward Manifestations; when in Reality there is
nothing done, but an artificial Raising of the tender Passions of the weaker
Vessels, and making of Parties and Factions, by glaring Sights, Sounds and vain
Boastings? Will Mr. T. tell us, what Names such high Pretenders deserve? For if
by the Sons of Sceva, Mr. T. means false Pretenders to extraordinary Gifts and
Works, we will readily grant, that by the Help of Scripture-Rule, by the
visible Failure of their Performances, and the Names of Blasphemy written in
their Foreheads, Men may do something more than give a near Guess who are such;
for if there was not some sure Way to know such Impostors, how should it be
impossible to deceive the Elect?

Qu. IV. Whereas Mr. Tennent affirms, That Hypocrites are against all knowing
and judging of others, in order to hide their own Filthiness: What Allowance is
to be made to different Climates, or whether Antipodes are endued with
Dispositions as opposite as their Situations are to each other, we will leave
to long Heads; but we would desire to know, in what World do those Men live,
that are against all knowing of others? Can it be supposed, that Hermits and
Amazons are arrived to this Pitch of Hypocrisy? Or what Sect is that among
Christians, that are against all judging of others? For is not there a wide
Difference between Men's being against positive and peremptory judging of Men's
carnal or gracious State, and their being against all judging of others? For
may not such hold their Duty to make a probable Judgment of others, without
contradicting themselves in the least? May not Men be against judging the
Hearts of others, because it is their firm Belief, that God alone is Judge
concerning Regeneration, as to its internal real Principle and State in Men's
Souls; and yet hold it their Duty to judge of its Evidences and Fruits in their
external Demonstration, still leaving the Heart to God? May not Men be against
making the secret State of Men's Souls toward God, the Foundation of Judgment
concerning them, because secret Things belong to God; yet judge it their Duty
so far to judge Men's Doctrines and Professions, and their Deportment, as to be
able to make a probable Judgment of Men's secret State, as a Conclusion
inferred from the Judgment they are called to make of the Fruits and Evidences
of Grace in their external Demonstration or Appearance? But if it were so, that
Hypocrites are against all knowing of others; how then did Jehu venture to ask
Jehonadab such a dangerous Question, as, Is thy Heart right, as my Heart with
thy Heart? unless he believed, that notwithstanding Jehonadab's Declaration, he
was sure to remain as ignorant of Jehonadab's Heart as before? And if
Hypocrites are against all judging of others, what unhappy Signs or Planets
reigned in Judea in the Days of Christ's Incarnation, that had such a strong
Influence upon the Scribes and Pharisees, as to overruled their natural Bent;
so that though Hypocrisy (of which they had a large Stock) fortified them against
all judging of others; yet against Wind and Tide they judged Christ a Sinner,
Deceiver, Traitor and Conjurer, etc. and damned the People that had respect to
Christ and his Doctrine, for a cursed Crew that knew not the Law, Joh. 7.49.
Can Mr. T. think, that he himself is more for judging others, than the
Pharisees were? Nay, may we not defy the Pope to judge our Ministers more than
the Pharisees judged Christ? If there be any Hopes at all of Mr. T.'s seeing
his Error, may not we hope, he may soon espy it here? For does not Scripture
and Experience tell us, that it is the native Temper of the Hypocrite, to
pretend to know and judge others, as well as to neglect looking into his own
Heart? Mat. 7.1, -- 5. Is not his judging and condemning others, as well as his
vain Pretense to know their Hearts, Satan-like in Job's Case, one great Part of
his Art to hide his own Deformity? For how can the Hypocrite be white, unless
he first casts Dirt upon his Betters, to make them look black?

Qu. V. Granting, That Thieves flee the Search by honest Men or indifferent
Persons, because of their stolen Goods, and that the more they endeavor to
hide, the more they expose their Shame; yet will not Thieves readily submit to
be searched by their own Familiars and Companions, and be glad of the
Opportunity; because they know beforehand, that the Judgment will fall in
their Favor, by their giving their Judges a Share of the Booty? And will not
this be a likely Way to make a Companion pass for a legal Witness, when Trial
comes? Let the Query then be Whether such Candidates as are unwilling to be
tried and judged by indifferent Persons chosen by the Synod, but run into a
favorite Presbytery, contrary to a late Agreement made in the Synod; or those
that are willing to submit to Examination both by the Synod and Presbytery,
look most suspicious in the Point?

Qu. VI. Is not Mr. Tennent after all the Noise made about a carnal and
converted Ministry, obliged to give up the high Pretense of the spiritual Man's
Ability to discern the true Christian from the close Hypocrite? When after a
bold towering Question, which at the Proposing of it, would seem to promise no
less than a complete Victory, viz. Does not the spiritual Man judge all Things?
Well, but will Mr. T. say, that the spiritual Man can make a positive Judgment
of the secret State of Professors? No; he intends no such Thing; for does not
he answer his own Question, (1) Negatively, by saying, that he, i. e. the
Spiritual Man, cannot know the State of subtle Hypocrites infallibly; (2)
Positively, by proposing a very modest Question, thus, May not he, that is, the
spiritual Man, give a near Guess, who are the Sons of Sceva, by their Manner of
Praying, Preaching and Living? If it were not for what fore-goes and follows,
would not this be apt to tempt a Body to think, that Mr. T. is as sober in his
Judgment about judging of others, as any of his Brethren? For might it not
puzzle any Body to demonstrate the Difference between near Guess and probable
Judgment? Nay, of the Two, is not the latter, in Propriety of Speech, more than
the former? And if this were conceded, would not the Controversy on this Head
be at an End? But yet it may be said, that seeing the Scope of the whole Sermon
seems to imply, that Mr. T. would have Men believe, that they may know a
converted from an unconverted Minister; or else would not the main Part of the
Fabric fall? May it not therefore be objected, that we are to take Mr. T.'s
near Guess in its due Connection with what foregoes and follows? And if it be
thus, must it not intend something more than a probable Judgment; or else does
not Mr. T. knock under? Supposing then, that Mr. T. by a near Guess means some
Degree of Knowledge beyond a Probability, as the Scope of the Performance seems
to dictate, and as his Partisans seem ^o understand the Matter; we would ask,
When Pharisees in Mr. T.'s Country are orthodox, regular, as well as
letter-learned; or else does not Mr. T. either wrong them or the Truth? May it
not be justly feared, that the near Guess which Men can make of the secret
State of others, may prove to be no more than a poor blind Guess by Mr. T.'s
Rule? And can it amount to any more, in an ordinary Way, than a Probability at
the most, by a better Rule than his seems to be as yet? What can be the Meaning
of this near Guess, if not, that we may almost come to know the Matter; for
what comes only near the Mark does not hit it, be it ever so near? And after
all, though we hasten as slowly as Tom Long the Carrier, or even as slow as the
Pope with his Reformation, by putting One Hundred Years at least between every
Step, and so spend the greatest Part of the Life of the Father and Son in
guessing; if we can arrive no farther than a near Guess, that he is either a
true Saint or a subtle Hypocrite at last; had not People much better make an
exquisite Trial of what comes within the Verge of their Cognizance, and leave
the rest to God? Now in making Choice of a Minister, we own, that People should
consult with God by Prayer for Direction, and with God's Ministers as their
Watchmen under Christ, make use of their best Judgments in trying the
Suitableness and Sufficiency of the Gifts, and Soundness of the Doctrine, and
Blamelessness of the Character and Life, and good Appearance of the
Faithfulness of the Candidate; if in these he gives Satisfaction, ought not Men
to judge him a gracious Man? If notwithstanding a Man's good and comfortable
Appearance in the Particulars aforesaid, Men proceed to make Guesses of
Ministers gracious or carnal States, without, beyond, or contrary to the
well-grounded and considerate Judgment, formed upon due Trial of his Gifts,
Orthodoxy, and Regularity, as aforesaid; will any tell us how it will be
practicable to follow Gospel-Rules in the Choice of a Minister? For let us
suppose for Arguments sake, even more than we can grant in the Point, that the
spiritual Man can know the close Hypocrite from the true Christian, without
seeing or perceiving any external Fruits of his Hypocrisy any way; is not the
Choice of a Minister, if regularly carried on, to be the Act of the whole
Congregation, and accordingly all the Male Members are to have a Vote or Voice
therein? Now in Case there be any unconverted Members in the Congregation, will
not these be incapable of judging in this Matter, and of Consequence must not
such be debarred of their Vote? And of Consequence must not the whole Choice be
devolved on the converted Part, to judge and choose for the Whole? But then how
shall this be done? For first how shall the converted Part be known? Must not
Men learn to swallow one Error after another to support a Diana? For must not
Men suppose, and then believe, without and contrary to Scripture Evidence and
Experience, that every one that is in a State of Grace knows it? And when that
is done, must not they suppose and believe in the same Manner, that true
Converts can both know another, and can distinguish them from the Unconverted?
Well, Men may please themselves with these fine Notions, as thinking they have
got the true Philosopher's Stone; but then, when they come to Practice, will
they tell us, how shall the Unconverted again know the Converted, in order to
choose them for Voters? Or have true Believers, or those that call themselves
so, a Right to choose a Minister for themselves and their unconverted
Neighbors, because all is theirs? What if the converted Part again disagree in
their Choice, as Paul and Barnabas did about Mark? Or can Mr. T. think, that
the unconverted Part of Nottingham, to which People this Sermon is dedicated,
will freely act an implicit Faith in the Skill of those who call themselves
converted? Or will not they rather think, that it is their inviolable Right and
just Privilege to choose for themselves? Is it not therefore evident, that such
Enthusiastic Notions can serve no other End, but to build a Babel on the Ruins
of a Gospel Church and Order? Besides, is it not notorious, that Candidates
pass their Trials as fast and as easy (if Reports be true) in Brunswick
Presbytery, as in any other in our Bounds? How else comes it to pass, that such
as had no Scruples to comply with the late Act of the Synod, till they went
thither, chose to pass their Trials there, when, as Things appear, there was no
Probability of their settling there?

Qu. VII. Granting, that many Pharisee Teachers have got a fine long String of
Prayer by Heart, so that they are never at a Loss about it; yet may not a
gracious Man, that has the Spirit or Gift of Prayer, equalize them herein? Or
is a short Prayer the best Proof of the Spirit of Prayer always? Yea, grant
that their Prayers and Preachings may be generally of a Length; yet will any
say, that they are any Worse for that? For may not Study, Skill and Experience
help the gracious Man to suit his Prayer and Sermon to the allotted Time, when
he is under an Appointment to preach twice a Day, and that in two different
Places some Miles distant one from another? Grant, that to some of his Hearers,
a Man's Performances in both are as dead as a Stone, and without all Savor;
may they not be lively and savoury to the Unprejudiced for all that? Was not
this the Case with CHRIST and Paul? Where is the Wisdom of pelting witty
Sentences or Apothegms at the Reader's Head, as Boys do Snow-balls, which with
equal Ease and Execution may be retorted? For is it not easy to render trivial
Matter plausible to the Ear, when we are cheated with the Charivary of sounding
Brass, and the Ditty of a sounding Cymbal?

Par. II. Mr. Tennent says, If any should object against the Style, and says
that it is too pointed; I answer, that it is no keener than the Reflections of
Christ himself against the old Pharisees. So far as I know my Heart, it is
Grief for the Injuries that have been done to the Church of God by natural
Ministers, that has extorted such Acrimony from my Pen.

Query I. Granting, that Christ used as keen Reflections against the Pharisees,
as Mr. T. uses here; yet with what Face can Mr. T. compare the Body of the
Clergy of this Generation with Pharisees, who were degenerate in Principle and
Practice, yea, not only natural, but also unnatural in many Principles and
Practices? Mat. 15.4, 5, 6. Besides, with what Face can Mr. T. set himself upon
a Par with Christ, who knew what was in the Hearts of the Pharisees, as being
GOD-MAN, and therefore knew how to point his Arrow to the proper Mark, without
any Danger of missing it? Is Christ's Example, or even the Example of inspired
Writers, who were guided by an infallible Inspiration in pronouncing bitter
Reflections or Curses against or upon particular Persons, imitable by others
who want such an Inspiration? Or is it not irreconcilable to the Law of Love,
under which Christians are? Besides, does not Christ point out the Crimes in
Principle or Practice of those, whom he reflects upon, and not raise a general
blind Outcry against them? If Acrimony be fit for one Minister, why not for
all? If for Ministers, why not for Church Members? For are not they to follow
their Leaders in what they follow Christ? Yea, may not they take a little more
Liberty than their Teachers? For are not some of them well paid for their
Gravity; whereas the People are obliged to be sober at their own Cost? And so
who must be a Pattern of Meekness, but the poor natural Man? And how shall he
be either, for he is forbid to meddle in Things sacred? O strange! what will be
the End of these Things?

Qu. II. May not we ask Mr. T. if he had Reason to resent the Injuries done to
the Church by some natural Ministers, as he calls them, which he signifies to
have extorted such Acrimony from his Pen; is the unnatural Acrimony of the
spiritual Man's Words or Behavior, or bitter Railings, and disorderly general
Clamours, fit or valid Proofs of his Spirituality? Or are they fit or proper
Remedies to cure the Wounds made by the Corruptions of others? Or do not these
smell as strong, and savor as Rank of the Flesh, as those very Corruptions Men
pretend to purge by them? If some had given just Offense, does Mr. T. do well
to be angry with all, or most of his Brethren, upon this Account? Is not there
a great Difference to be made between those that prove disorderly, and were
rejected for their Disorders, and those that remain still orderly; albeit they
differ from Mr. T. in some disputable Points, which are not as yet fully
determined? For may not the other Side be in the right, for aught has appeared
as yet? Have not some of Mr. T's. Opponents about the late Act of the Synod,
given as good Proofs (if not better than Mr. T. or his Party ever did) of their
firm Attachment to Truth and Order; and have they not appeared to as good
Purpose as he, against the Disorders of some disorderly Brethren, who were
swayed, by their Corruptions, to act like Weather-Cocks, by turning with the
Tide of Lust, Gain or Applause? Have not some Ministers, by their much longer
standing than himself in the Ministry, been a Means to convey the Truths of God
to him and his Equals? And did not such deservedly gain a good Reputation for
their Works Sake, before he came to the Stage? And consequently do not such
deserve the Respect of Fathers from him? Was it any Sign of Prudence or Piety
in Rehoboam to reject the Counsel of the Elders that stood before his Father,
and to make young raw Novices his Counselors? And will any tell us, what will
become of Truth and Order among us now? For must not some Ministers in all
Appearance make a bold Stand against the Catholic Tide of Errors and anarchial
Disorders of the present Time, which are propagated among us by Mr. W. and T.
and their Adherents, who make it their Bussness to justify and palliate Mr. W's
Errors; and to throw in some Grains of their own to make good Weight, and good
Measure pressed down, to the confounding of Truth and Order? If the Injuries
done by natural Men can excuse the Acrimony dropped from Mr. T's Pen, must not he
bear with the Complaints of those that are condemned for natural Men without
Proof or Trial? For does not Mr. T. condemn the Body of the Clergy of this
Generation in the Lump for Pharisees? If Injuries have been done as aforesaid,
ought not Mr. T. to mourn rather than glory and be puffed up, as he seems to
be? And ought not Mr. T. to take good heed to his own Ways and those of his
Party, who call themselves spiritual Men, lest that they by their Errors,
anarchial Disorders and Intrusions, do greater Injuries to the Church in a few
Mont^^^ than they and others can mend in an Age? And seeing there is such an
Appearance of Pride, Superciliousness and Love of Pre-eminence, as well as of
Ill will to and Contempt of his Brethren and fellow Christians, in his keen
Reflections and rash Censures, is not there just Ground for Mr. T. to ask his
own Heart a second Time, whether there be not some other Reason in the Matter,
besides what his Heart gave him an Account of upon the first Enquiry? Did not
Christ question Peter thrice? Besides, we would desire to know, how this will
justify any Expressions or Practice, that is disagreeable to Gospel Rule? For
did not Paul walk in all good Conscience even while a Pharisee? Acts xxiii. 1.
And even when he persecuted the Church, did not he do it in Zeal? Phil. iii 6.
And may not Mr. T's Heart be a deceitful Heart as well as the Hearts of others?
And will not the Disorders of those that call themselves spiritual Men in our
Day be injurious to the Church, by grieving the Godly and hardening the Wicked,
as well as David's Sins did of old; and the more they are palliated and
justified, the more injurious still?

Par. III. Mr. Tennent vindicates his Performance against an Objection, which
he foresaw might be made against it, because of its Inconsistency with Church
Rules; which we suppose refers to the Encouragement he gives to People, to
leave their own stated Pastors, etc. To this he offers two Things by Way of
Answer, viz, 1. That there is great Difference between the flourishing and
declining State of the Church. 2 That every general Rule admits of Exceptions.

Qu. I. Whereas all Church Rules are or ought to be well founded on Scripture
or the Light of Nature, no other Rules being according to our professed
Principles necessary for the Being, nor consistent with the Well-being of a
Gospel Church; And if the Rules Mr. T. speaks of, be not of this Kind, but
those of mere human Invention; What Need was there of an Apology from a
Protestant Dissenter for contradicting Rules, which are professedly pronounced
null and void by the whole Party, of which he is a Member? Have not we
therefore just Reason to think, that Mr. T's making of such an Objection, and
giving such Answers to it, supposes the Rules to be of the former Kind?

Qu. II. Whereas it seems to be agreed by all regular Religious Societies, that
hold Scripture to be the Rule of Faith and Practice; that it is not only
l^wful, but also the manifest Duty of all Christians, in all their religious
and civil Concerns, to act agreeable to scripture Rule; will Mr. T. tell us how
this can be, but by a due and careful Application of general Rules to
particular Cases, as well as by attending to the native Inferences, that by the
Help of right Reason may be drawn from what is written? Is it not therefore
observable, that every religious Sect or Society, in order to act harmoniously
and unanimously among themselves, have in their Turn thought it necessary to
agree upon the true Meaning of Scripture Rules, or what appeared such to them,
as well as to fix and frame particular Rules out of general Ones, for the well
Government and Order of their Community in particular Affairs? And can any
doubt, but that a Community keeps within due Bounds of Christian Obedience and
Liberty in this Point, when they neither claim nor use any other Power of
establishing Orders, Rules, Resolutions, Agreements, Determinations or Acts,
call them what you will, than to confirm such Determinations as upon mature
Deliberation, after free and open Debate had in the most public Judicature,
belonging to that Community in the Parts, appear to the respective Members
agreeable to and deducible from the general Rules of Scripture, or else
necessary in their Nature, or at the least necessary pro hic and nunc by Reason
of some Emergency making them so, by Reason of some weighty Circumstances
serving under some general Command of God, whereby they become at that Time and
under such Circumstances necessary; still leaving Room to alter such Rules, in
the same public and solemn Manner, upon farther and better Light, or upon the
Variation of the Circumstances of Matter by common Consent? And without a
careful Observation of such established Rules, while in Force; how is Unity,
Peace and Order maintainable in such a Society in Matters of common Concern?

Qu. III. Besides, seeing the Controversy of the Day is, in a great Measure,
about the Extent of the Power of Communities, of making, forming or framing
Rules for their own Society, and the Obligation of those Rules when agreed
upon, we shall endeavor to put the Matter in as fair a Light as we can, in
order either to be resolved or to resolve others. We suppose it will be granted
by all Hands among Non-Conformists, (1) That no Church Judicature, in making
Rules, has Power to make any thing necessary by their Determination, which is
not one Way or other necessary, prior or antecedent, to such a Determination;
and therefore we reject the Notion of the Power of imposing Things merely
indifferent, dubious or unlawful; but here the Query is, Whether or no Things
may not become necessary for the present, by Reason of some Emergencies
happening, which are not absolutely necessary in their own Nature, nor made so
by any positive Law of God in particular? Yea, may not Circumstances so far
alter the Nature of Things, in their own Nature indifferent, as to make the
Observation or Non-observation of them necessary in such Circumstances for the
present; yea, so as to give Grounds to a Judicature, to determine the
Observation or Non-observation of them necessary for the present, and as such,
to impose them upon their Community during present Circumstances? How else
could the Apostles and Church at Jerusalem judge abstaining from Things offered
to Idols, Blood and Things strangled, necessary Things? Is it not evident, that
it was not their Determination, but the concurrent Circumstances, that made
abstaining from these Things necessary, they only judging them so, because
Circumstances rendered them so? And did not they judge, that the Necessity
arising from such an Emergency gave sufficient Grounds to impose such a Canon
for the present? Acts xv. 28. (2) Let it be granted, that no Church Judicature
can determine any thing to be Duty, but what comes under some general Command
of God, one Way or other, so that there is no Room to bring in any new Duties,
Ordinances or Orders; But yet the Query is, when the Duty is commanded plainly
and expressly, but the Manner thereof is undetermined, so that there may be two
or more Manners disjunctively under the Command, so that the Duty may be
performed this Way or that Way; whether or no some Emergencies or weighty
concurrent Circumstances may not require a Judicature, to determine one of
those different Manners preferable to the other, during the present Exigency,
and thereupon enjoin the Observation of it for the present, until a better
Expedient can be found out? For, is it not plainly demonstrable, that what is
best in itself is not always the best Expedient in all Circumstances; or else
must not Necessity, that old evil and sturdy Counselor, be forced, will he
nill he, to conform unto the Law? And supposing there be two Manner of Ways of
Performing a commanded Duty, if the one be either difficult, hazardous or
impracticable, during the present Circumstances, when the other is easily
accomplished to a good Purpose; if the one appears more subject to Abuse than
the other, or has been abused, when the other appears safer and less subject
to Abuse; if the one appears more edifying than the other, or better adapted to
secure the complete and decent Performance of the Precept than the other, by
Reason of some concurrent Circumstances; is it any Infringment on Christian
Liberty, for any Society, in such Cases, to make it a temporary Rule for their
own Community, to observe that Manner of the two, which appears most apt to
obtain the End, when both come under the Rule of God's Command; or to enjoin
what is most expedient according to their best Judgment, during the present
State of Things? If any will say, that this is assuming too great a Power in
this Matter, will any tell us, where was the Church, Sect or Party of
Christians, that were of any Standing in the World, that have not, in their
Turn, assumed as much Power as is here claimed? (3) Let it be granted, as to
Rules made in Emergencies, that the Necessity must extend as far as the
Determination: for if they become necessary to one particular Church, and not
to another, it will not oblige the other Church to come under the Imposition,
unless they come under the Necessity also: And so may not a Rule be necessary
in one Time or Place, which is not so in another? (4) Let it be granted, that
when the Necessity evidently ceases, the Imposition in such Cases ought also to
cease, and the Members of the Church may claim it as their Right, to be relaxed
of the Burden, and may reassume their former Liberty, which the present
Necessity did restrain: And so, may it not be the Duty of Synods as much to
repeal such Acts, when Circumstances alter, as it was their Duty once to make
them? May not we hence also see, that altering circumstantial Rules occasioned
by Emergencies, when Circumstances alter, is so far from being inconsistent
with Reason or Religion, that on the contrary, Men's Attachment to obsolete
Canons, occasioned by particular Emergencies, in or under different
Circumstances, would be a Proof of the Lameness of the one, and the ready Way
to make the other to use a Crutch, when it has no need of it. (5) Let it be
granted, that no Judicature is to feign Necessities and imaginary Exigencies,
as an Engine for ambitious Spirits, to try Conclusions upon Men's Consciences,
or to practice upon Men's Tameness; and therefore the Necessity ought to be
such as carries its own Evidence along with it to the unprejudiced; and that
therefore Men should be fair and above Board in pointing out the Necessity, and
not to depend upon a mere Determination in the Matter: For does not Experience
prove, that Sparingness in pointing out the Necessity requiring such
Determinations, for Fear of offending some, has often wronged a good Cause;
and has been a Means to help such as were disposed to quarrel, to carry their
Resentments higher, to the Offense of many? If any grant, that this Power of
forming Rules in religious Communities, should be further limited than is here
specified, will they tell us what Limitations they want more? Or does our Synod
claim or exercise more than is here contended for?

Qu. IV. When therefore any Community, be it less or more Public, after mature
Deliberation, asking Counsel of God, and consulting with his Word and one
another, do in a solemn Manner agree, that such and such Rules are Scriptural
in one or other of the Senses aforesaid, and therefore meet Expedients to
prevent Sin, or to preserve Order, and therefore establish them as aforesaid in
their Community; how is it consistent with Reason or Religion, to suffer such
Rules to be counter-acted by particular Members, without calling them to an
Account? If this be allowed in such weighty Matters, as the Choice of a
Minister, and the practical Dissolving of the Relation between Minister and
People, after the solemn Contracting of it with uplifted Hands, Fasting and
Prayer, in Obedience to Christ's Institution; why not in many more Cases of
less Moment? And so, if in particular Matters, Men are allowed to multiply
Exceptions, as often as their Humors move them, of what Use or Service will the
general Rule be at last, excepting only to make a fair Show to deceive the
Simple? For is it not evident, that no general Rule can be put in Execution but
in particular Cases? If therefore it be necessary to make Exceptions, in any
particular Case, against a general Rule established in a Community, ought not
all regular Members of such a Community apprize their respective Community of
such Matters, as seem to require such Exceptions, that so the Circumstances of
such Affairs may be balanced and considered according to Merit, that so common
Consent may be obtained for making such Exceptions, if none be expressed in or
under the general Rule already? How otherwise can Men expect to walk without
giving their Brethren just Offense? Is not that Power too great which the Pope
challenges, when he asserts his Right and Authority to dissolve Contracts,
Relations, and Obligations, at his Pleasure, under the Pretense of the greater
Good of the Church? And does not he deserve the Title of Man of Sin upon this
Account, very richly? And can any suppose, it were possible for him to impose
the Belief of such a monstrous Power, if it were not, that his Followers are
first possessed with another false Notion, which makes Way for this, viz. That
he can forgive Sins? Otherwise would not the former be dari^g to Reason and
Religion? And to give every Church Member such a Power as to his Relation to
his own Minister, how monstrous does it look in a Protestant Country?

Qu. V. That there is a vast Difference between the flourishing and declining
State of the Church is easily granted; for does not Experience tell us, that in
declining Times there are always some ingenious Fellows, who will justify any
thing that seems to serve a Turn? But then, though there is a Difference between
Winter-frize and a Summer Suit, a Wedding Garment and a mourning Gown, and
between the flourishing and declining State of the Church, will it thence
follow, that Men's Obligations to observe good Rules laxen or lessen in
declining Times from what they were in flourishing Times, as Mr. T. insinuates
here? Will not such leaden Rules, that will gently bend with the Times, be a
means, wherever they prevail, to make a crooked World ten times more crooked
than it is? For what makes the Difference between the flourishing and declining
State of the Church, but the careful and conscientious, and the careless and
hypocritical Observation of Gospel Rules and Order? Is it not therefore
self-evident, that the due Observation of good Rules, is the only Way to
prevent and cure Declinings, unless Men would decline away the very Form of
Religion, and bring it to Sunset? In what Country was it found, that breaking
through good Rules was a ^^^ns of Reformation, much less a Step in it? Besides,
is not our Standard of Doctrine and Discipline very good, and do not those
Ministers, that are accounted carnal Men, keep to it in both, as well, if not
better than Mr. T. and his Party do? And if there be any Declinings in
Practice, is breaking industriously through good Rules the Way to mend the
Matter? Will Mr. T. name the Minister of the other Side, who, in Pulpit or
Press, so much countenanced breaking through Church Rules, as he does here? And
let him in a calm Hour consider, whether or no, such Ministers as are not
content with walking disorderly themselves only, but also in the most public
Manner industriously encourage others to break through good Rules, in order to
make Factions and Parties, do not appear to be in as declining a State as any
other whomsoever? Are not they poor Empiricks, that prescribe knocking Men on
the Head, or cutting it off, to cure the Headache, albeit it may prove
effectual?

Par. IV. Mr. Tennent adds, May the Lord scourge out Hirelings out of his
Temple, and supply you with a faithful Minister, etc.

Qu. I. As to the first Petition, viz. That God may scourge out Hirelings out
of his Temple, if we consider it separately, who more willing to say Amen than
we? But yet, when we consider what follows in the same Paragraph, viz. and
supply you with a faithful Minister, and compare it with the Scope of the whole
Performance, which is to condemn the Body of the Clergy of this Generation for
Crowds of covetous Pharisees, must not the true Meaning thereof be, scourge out
the Presbytery of Donnegal and their Candidates, that there may be Room for
Brunswick Men, who are the only faithful Men in their own Esteem, if Fame be
not a cruel Liar? And may not Donnegal Presbytery well reply in the Apostle's
Words, They zealously affect you, but not well; they would exclude US, as you
have it in the Margin, that you may affect them? Gal. iv. 17.

Qu. II. If Mr. T. judges not the Workman worthy of his Hire, why does he take
it? If the Hireling be he that takes most, let the Query be, Who got most at
Nottingham, in Proportion to his Labors, since the Decease of the late Pastor?
Whether he that carries the biggest Bag under a Cloak, or he that carries a
little one openly, be the Hireling? Or whether he that takes Wages at Home, and
yet spends a great Part of his Time abroad, in order to increase his Wages, or
he that tarries with his own Flock, as being content with a poorer Pittance by
far, be most worthy of the Name? Is it not notorious, that Brunswick Men are as
apt to remove for the Sake of richer Benefices as any other? Whether Hirelings
would not take a very preposterous Method, by joining with Dissenters, to gain
their End, as Matters go in most Places, albeit, Providence is to be admired in
making their little much in the Enjoyment? Yet have not we Reason to be
thankful for our very great Liberty, which many precious Saints were deprived
of? But yet, may not he gape for Dignities and Honors, till he is Chap-fallen,
whose Conscience shall cast his Lot among Dissenters? And when he angled all
Day, may not be come Home with a Diverb, saying, I have fished fair and caught
a Frog?

Qu. III. But to trace the Matter a little further, What sort of Creatures are
these Hirelings? Have we not their Picture pretty well drawn in Mic. 3.5. Thus
says the Lord concerning the Prophets that make my People err, that bite with
their Teeth, and cry Peace; and if any put not into their Mouth, they proclaim
a War against them? May not a small Comment upon this Text, put the Matter in
better Light, viz. Who is the Hireling, but he that causes the People to err,
by encouraging them to break through good Rules, that bites with the Teeth of
terrible Menaces and roaring Bulls? and if these tame any Asses fit for riding,
will it not be Time to cry Peace, by proclaiming all tamed Creatures, Converts?
But what else can be done to such knotty Pieces, as will not open their Purses
or Butteries by either of these Ways, but proclaim a War against them, by
damning them for a cursed Crew of carnal hard-hearted Pharisees, hypocritical
Varlets, etc.? And then it follows by the old Rule, that no Faith is to be kept
with Heretics; and by the new Rule, are not all carnal Men such? For who will
dare say, that there is any Difference between a carnal Man and a corrupt
Pharisee? But after all, though these Hirelings should be scourged out of the
Temple, unless the Church Doors be well guarded, and the Church Windows be well
watched, that they do not re-enter by the one, nor climb up by the other; may
it not be feared, that for every one that is driven out, seven will enter in at
a Backdoor, as long as Catholic Anarchy prevails to keep an open Door to all
Comers? And who knows but that the latter may be more hungry than the former;
when it is well known, that Pharaoh's leaner Kine came up last? And was it not a
little strange, that the ill-favored Kine were of such an untoward, envious
Nature, that neither the fat Cattle, nor Joseph's Granaries, could make them
alter their shabby Ill-favour?

Having thus taken a View of the Epistle Dedicatory and the Directions given in
the Sermon, we now proceed to consider the Main of the Sermon in order.

The Text was, MARK vi. 34. And JESUS, when he came out, saw much People, etc.

We entirely agree with Mr. Tennent, That a faithful Ministry is a great
Ornament, Blessing and Comfort to the Church of God, so on the contrary, that
an ungodly Ministry is a great Curse and Judgment.

If we mistake not, the Consideration of the Circumstances of the Place,
compared with the main Scope of the present Performance, affords us just
Grounds to propose one general Query, by Way of Introduction, viz.

Query I. Whether it be not an effectual Way to comfort People, when under
Sorrow for the Loss of a Gospel Minister, to possess them with the Notion, that
what they lost, was not only worthless, but also their Curse, and that their
Bereavement was a great Deliverance from a sore Judgment, which put them in as
fair a Way to obtain a great Blessing, as Rebecca did Jacob; so that if People
understood their own Good, they ought not only to bless God for the happy
Change, but also to awaken a much deeper Sorrow upon the Account of the
Enjoyment of what they once wrongly counted their Mercy, but really was their
Curse? And so may not we learn hence the speediest Way imaginable to comfort a
poor distressed Widow, bemoaning the Loss of her kind and dear Husband; for
what is it but telling her, that it was her blind Love and fanciful Fondness,
that made her to think much of him, when in Reality he was the sorriest Tool
alive, good for nothing but to stand in the Way, and to hinder Room for a
Better; or if he were not so, tell her it is her true Interest to bury the
Memory of all his Endowments in the Ditch, and at least feign him to be such a
one as is aforesaid now, whatever he was; for what is a dead Lion worth? And so
divert Sorrow for the Loss, with a greater Sorrow for the Enjoyment, during her
Days of Mourning; and this will ripen for a second Match in a Hurry, when
yonder brisk, topping Fellow comes, who is worth ten of what she lost. Or else
let her try the Experiment; and will it not be probable, that some Body will
gain his End, if the Widow be worth Money? Is this distinct Application? But to
proceed.

Mr. Tennent's Doctrinal Proposition is, That the Case of such is much to be
pitied, who have no other but Pharisee Shepherds or unconverted Teachers.

Query I. Whereas Mr. Tennent gives it as a Mark of Pharisee Teachers, That
they are very indistinct in the Application of their Discourses, page 9. We
would ask Mr. T. what sort of Teachers are those that are very indistinct in
their Doctrinal Propositions? Will Mr. T. tell us, how an Error in the first
Concoction can be rectified in the second? And can any be more indistinct in
his Application, than Mr. T. is here in his Doctrine? For is not there a vast
Difference between a corrupt, degenerate, blind, unnatural Pharisee Teacher,
full of Bigotry to human Inventions, and an orthodox, regular, letter-learned,
sober, judicious, knowing and gifted Minister, even though he were unconverted?
But who can prove him unconverted while such? Is there no Difference between
those who industriously took away the Key of Knowledge, even Scripture, to make
Way for their own Traditions, and those who industriously make Use of the right
Key to instruct themselves and others? Is there no Difference between such
abandoned Wretches, who for their sore Abuse of the Means of Light and
Knowledge, were given up to Blindness of Mind, Hardness of Heart, Deafness of
Ear; yea, to Pride, Delusion and Vainglory, so that they became thirsty
Persecutors, and virulent Opposers of Christ and his true Followers; for were
not the Pharisees such? And a natural Man, orthodox in Principles, regular in
Practice, endowed with a great Degree of common Gifts of God's Spirit, such as
Knowledge, Convictions, etc. capable of speaking with the Tongues of Men and of
Angels, of understanding all Mysteries, and having all Knowledge? Though it be
true that a natural Man may arrive to this Pitch; yet, who but blind Ignaroes,
stuffed with Enthusiasms, will pretend to judge such a one a natural Man,
unless some different Fruit appears? Though we grant, that the Want of Grace may
and does hinder his own Soul's saving Benefit; yet surely, is not there a vast
Difference between the Ministry of the one and that of the other, as to others,
even as much as there is between Light and Darkness, Meat and Poison, Bread and
a Stone, Fish and a Scorpion, Truth and Error, and between human Inventions and
divine Institutions? When therefore Mr. T. seems designedly or inadvertently to
jumble and confound these two together, in the Doctrine, and throughout the
whole Performance, making the Pharisee Shepherds and unconverted Teachers
synonimous Terms; where is the Distinctness of the Doctrine or Application? We
readily grant, that it would be the Duty of every one that duly regards his own
Salvation, to forsake such a corrupt Ministry as that of the Pharisees was; but
we challenge Mr. T. and his whole Tribe to show us that Scripture, which
warrants a Churchmember to forsake an orthodox, regular Minister, upon a blind
Guess of his carnal or unconverted State, when there is Nothing in his
Principles or Practice to support the Charge? For is it not evident, that
Anarchy in Armor must be set up in God's Temple, if such a vain Opinion once
prevails?

Mr. Tennent's first doctrinal Query is, To enquire into the Characters of the
old Pharisee Teachers.

Qu. I. Does not Mr. T. discover a very great Inconsistency both with Truth and
himself, in drawing up the heterogeneous Character of the Pharisee Teacher? For
will any tell us, how one Skin, unless it were such a Skin as Rebecca's Womb,
could hold both Parts of the Pharisee Character? For if we look into the
Opening of the Words, have not we there a very fair Set of Characters bestowed
upon the Pharisee? viz. 1. That they were Graduates, having been at Gamaliel's
Feet the usual Time, according to the Acts, Canons and Traditions of the Jewish
Church. 2. They were orthodox. 3. Letter-learned. 4. Regular. Is not this
enough to tempt a Man to fall in love with the fair, fair Pharisee? Who could
think that the Cat and the Fiddle could by Man's Art be metamorphosed into a
beautiful Lady, that had not seen it acted? And have not we here something like
it in a reverse Way? For in the Space of Time that Mr. T. declared his
Doctrine, and pointed out his doctrinal Queries, have not we a secon^^ Set of
Pharisee Characters, which though possibly more agreeable to the Persons
delineated by them; yet are not they as different from the first Set, as black
and white? For what now are the Characters of Pharisee Teachers? Does not Mr.
T. tell us, that they are, 1. Pride and Self-Conceit. 2. Policy and Craft. 3.
Cruelty and Malice. 4. Ignorance of the New Birth. 5. Covetousness. 6. Bigotry
to human Inventions and small Things. 7. Party-Zeal? Was not there some Reason
why Mr. T. did not add Censoriousness to the rest, as well as some other as
material Branches of the Pharisee-Teacher's Character, to make the Picture more
complete?

Qu. II. If Mr. T. was a weak Divine, might not such a^ heterogeneous Draught
of the Pharisee Teacher's Character tempt a Body to think, that like Hackney
Versifiers and Water Poets, he makes one Verse for the Matter, another for the
Rhyme? If he was a wicked Man, might not he justly be suspected of having a
Design against Colleges, Learning, Orthodoxy and Regularity, by ascribing these
to the Pharisees, in a Time when he was going to draw up an heavy Bill of
Indictment against them? Or was it his Design to pay them in their own Coin, by
serving them in the same ludicrous Manner that they served Christ? But when Mr.
T. is a great and a good Man, at least said to be so, what can be the Meaning
of this, unless it be, on the one Hand, to force the Pharisee and natural Man
into an Identity, by ascribing unto the Pharisee all the Good that a natural
Man may attain to, that so he might have some Color to pelt the natural Man's
Hide with all the bad Characters of the Pharisee? But yet, is not this as
difficult a Task as the Blacksmith once undertook, viz. To mix the black and
the white Horse, in order to make one, of a mixed Mettle, of both? Must not the
Case be desperate, that requires such poor Shifts to lay a Foundation for it?
And must not Mr. T. have some high Mark in his View, to make him undertake such
an Herculean Labor as this seems to be? Could any thing less than advancing
either Mr. W -- d or himself into something like a papal Chair, be a Temptation
strong enough for him, to possess him with such a vain Notion, as that his bold
Say-so will convince the World, that the Body of the Clergy of this Generation
are, 1. natural Men, and because natural Men, therefore, 2. Pharisees? Who must
be the Persons chiefly levelled at, but the Body of our Synod? And, is there no
Difference between the Principles of dissenting Protestants or Presbyterians
and those of the Pharisees? If the Pope's first Pair of Stairs were more rotten
than these, was not he a courageous Fellow to climb them up.

Qu. III. If the Pharisees were bigoted to human Inventions in Religious
Matters, as ignorant of the Truth, as Nicodemus of the New Birth, and looked
upon the common People that respected Christ and his Doctrine, with an Air of
Disdain, How could they be called orthodox?

Qu. IV. If Pharisees were proud, malicious, ignorant, cruel and Persecutors;
how could Mr. T. pronounce them regular?

Qu. V. If they were ignorant, blind as Moles; how could Mr. T. style them
letter-learned?

Qu. VI. If a letter-learned, orthodox and regular Man should present himself
to Brunswick Presbytery, in order to be entered upon Trials; how could Mr. T.
according to Scripture-Rule reject him?

Qu. VII. Can Mr. T. or any of his Party, give any Proof to others of their
qualified Fitness for the Ministry, save only what appears in their Orthodoxy,
Letter-learning and Regularity? Can any Church-Judicature make any Trial of
Men, but in the above Particulars? Yea, can any Judicature of Men in an
ordinary Way, form any Judgment of the gracious State of Ministers or Church
Members any other Way, but by the Evidences of Grace appearing in their
Orthodoxy and Regularity? Can Men by the Declaration of their Experiences prove
any Thing to others, but their Orthodoxy in such Points of Faith or Holiness as
they profess Experience of?

Qu. VIII. Whether the first Set of Characters Mr. T. bestowed upon the
Pharisee Teachers, be not their feigned and not their real Characters? If any
of Mr. T.'s Opposers should give such fair Characters to Pharisees, would it
not be deemed Ground sufficient to call him one of them? If Mr. T. will say,
that he meant no more, but that they esteemed one another such; do not Papists,
and even the very worst Heretics, count their Companions or Party orthodox and
regular? Will that give Ground to orthodox Protestants to proclaim and assert,
that they are so in their public Sermons and printed Books? Or is not this a
plain casting a Stumblig-block before the Blind to cause him to fall? Lev.
19.14. Deuteronomy. 27.18.

But to proceed to the second Catalogue of Pharisee Characters; if these were
given only to the Pharisees, we might well join with Mr. T. by casting in some
more, and as material Ones, to increase the Number; but as they are levelled
against the Body of the Clergy of this Generation, particularly against the
greatest Part of the Ministers of our Synod, with whom Mr. T. is at some
Variance, as we apprehend the Matter; if Mr. T. or any other have aught to
charge their Brethren with, should not he and they come Face to Face, name
Persons and prove Charges, that so Judgment may be obtained against them
according to Merit? Are not bitter outrageous Railings, disorderly general
Exclamations, and general defamatory Libels, as contrary to the Gospel Rules of
Discipline as any other lawless Practice? But when contrary to all Reason and
Equity Men are condemned without Proof or Trial, or even Summons to appear to
answer for themselves; can any take it amiss, that we speak a Word in their
Behalf? If we suffer our Ministers, who stand in the Front, to be thus unjustly
condemned, what may we expect, but that our Turn will be next, if we appear for
Truth and Order, against the Errors and Disorders of factious-spirited Men? We
shall therefore trace Mr. T. through the several Branches of the Pharisee
Teacher's Character, and when we have offered but a small Part of what we have
to offer in the Matter, we shall leave the Unprejudiced to judge, whether Mr.
T. and his Party, or his Opposers, act most conformable to the Character he
assigns unto the Pharisee. When it is Mr. T.'s Turn to be Carver, can he take
it amiss, that we serve his Brethren with the first Cut of Pharisee Characters?
And if that will not serve him and them, is not the second Cut large enough for
Mr. T. and his Party? For when he frankly bestows the first fair Set of
Characters upon the Pharisees, does not he assign over his Right to them under
Hand, before a competent Number of Evidences; so that if his Brethren can but
show a better Claim to them than the Pharisees, must not the Trial or Judgment
fall in their Favor? For how can Mr. T. claim Orthodoxy and Regularity in the
present State of Things, when by his own Donation he has made these the
Pharisee's Property, without turning Pharisee? And will not this entitle him to
the second Set of Pharisee-Characters by his own Law? To bring the Matter then
to a Decision, let the Query be, whether Mr. T. who has resigned, or his
Brethren who have not resigned, have the best Title or Right in the first fair
Set of Pharisee-Characters, viz. Orthodoxy, Letter-Learning and Regularity? If
they have not resigned, are not they in Possession? If Mr. T. has resigned,
must not he make a new Purchase, before he can come to have a legal Possession?
when therefore there is no Medium, must not giving up a Right in the first, be
the procuring of a just Right in the second Set of different or contrary
Characters? which are as follows, viz.

1. The first Branch of the Pharisee Teacher's Character is Pride and
Self-Conceit. We grant, that the Pharisee deserved the Character; for does not
the Scripture tell us, that they were a People that trusted in themselves that
they were righteous and despised others, Luke 18.9, -- 14. But as for loving
the uppermost Seats in the Synagogues, we query, whether that was a Part of the
Character of that proud Sect, and not the peculiar Character of the Pharisee
Teachers? For does not Reason and Scripture both allow, that the Pulpit should
be higher than the common Seats? For did not Ezra stand upon a Pulpit of Wood,
and was he not higher than the People? Neh. 8.4, 5. Or will Men condemn Ezra
for a wicked Pharisee, because he was a Scribe? Would not that Man make himself
ridiculous, who would call Mr. T. a proud Pharisee, because when preaching, he
makes Use of a Pulpit within Doors, or a proper Stage or Balcony without,
higher than the People, that his Auditors may hear the better? And does not Mr.
T. accept of the Title of Master, by way of civil Respect, and can he say, that
others have done more, or contested with any about it? Or would Mr. T. that
others should reject it, that he may wear such Feathers solely in his own Cap?
Can Mr. T. with all his Skill in Rhetoric tell the World, what is that
material Difference, that is between him and the Body of the Clergy of this
Generation in such Matters? Where then is the Edification of turning Scripture
thus into an empty Sound, by quoting it to no Purpose, but to amuse the Weak,
by making People believe that the Point is proved, when it is only darkened and
palliated with Sounds? Who are more masterly and positive in their Assertions
than those, who strive to advance mere and false Opinions into the Rank of
Articles of Faith, such as, 1. That every one that is in a State of Grace,
knows it. 2. That we must know, that our Ministers are truly gracious, before
we can know that they are called of God to the Ministry. 3. That a Minister
must have Assurance that he is converted, before he can know that he has a
divine Call to the Ministry. 4. That a Minister must know that Christ is formed
in the Hearts of his Hearers, before he can take Comfort that he does Good.
Will Mr. T. tell us, whose Mark or Inscription have these? and how can these be
proved? Who are those that look upon others that differ from them with more Air
of Disdain, than those who (like the old African Conventicle, much reviled and
much imitated, who monopolized Salvation to those that were of Donatus's Part)
condemn all that differ from them, and judge them accursed, carnal,
hypocritical Varlets, Pharisee Teachers, covetous Locusts, etc.? Is there not a
remarkable Air of Disdain in these opprobrious Names, as well as in calling Men
Dupes, Dunces, dead as Stones, blind as Moles, stone blind, stone dead, how can
these be politic? Whereas as Matters go, is it not Men's Unhappiness, if we
may so call it, that they cannot wink so hard, as to overlook Mr. W -- d's and
T.'s Errors and Anarchies? For is it not Matter of Fact, that those who embrace
crude Nonsense with an implicit Faith, are proclaimed knowing Men? If there be
any Writings penned by the other Side, that have more or half as much of an Air
of Disdain, than this Sermon seems to have, let them be produced; for if any
other bids more Gentleman-like for this Part of the Pharisee-Character than Mr.
T. Would it not be Justice to adjudge it to him?

2. The second Branch of the Pharisee-Teacher's Character, is Policy and Craft:
We hope it will be allowed by all, that to be wise as Serpents, and innocent as
Doves, is wholesome Counsel; but yet is not Craft another Thing? Did not he
speak home to the Point, though he spoke roughly and in haste, who said, You
shall not meet with a Man in a Thousand, but will liberally rail at damned
Machiavelian Policy, which yet according to the Proportion of their little Wit,
they strive to imitate; which tempts me to think, that they hate not so much
his Knavery, as they repine at their own Folly; and judge not his Politics so
evil, as they are vexed that they cannot equalize him; they nibble at his
Principles, because they cannot reach his Wit. Might not a Man know by this
Man's Words, that he was a politic Hugonot? Did not Satan more befool the
Pharisees, by tempting them to ensnare Christ with their captious Questions,
than they discovered their Policy in the Fact? Was not that less politic, than
if they had attempted to bind Sampson with Tow-yarn? And are not they as
unpolitick, that attempt to build their Nests high upon the Ruins of the
Government and Order of God's House, as well as of their Brethren's Characters,
by putting themselves and others in false Colors? For is not this kicking
against the Pricks? But who are those, that are most industrious to get the
Applause of the Populace, and use most Craft, and sly and sneaking Methods, to
keep the People in their Interests? What else but this is the meaning of Men's
intruding into Vacancies in the Bounds of other Presbyteries, into dissatisfied
Corners of settled Congregations, and their creeping into Houses to lead
captive the Silly? What means the Noise made of Catholicism and Reformation, as
if Reformation consisted in an Indifferency about Truth and Order, and in Men's
becoming such Latitudinarians, as to have a Conscience of between 70 and 80
Degrees of South and North Latitude; or in making the Church Doors wide enough
to let in all Preachers, though never so erroneous and disorderly? as if it was
our Duty to keep fair Play between God and the Devil, without siding with the
one more than the other; or as if Reformation consisted in changing Sides and
Guides, and becoming Fire and Tow for Party, but as cool as Patience itself in
the concerning Truths of the Gospel, or even in becoming disorderly? What mean
the disorderly general Exclamations and Defamations of pious Ministers,
Pharisee like? What means the smoaky Whiff of pretended Charity, whereby Men
profess a Willingness to die for their Auditors, whom it may be they never saw
before, nor have had any intimate Converse with them either before or after? Do
not Men betray an high Degree of Ignorance, if not what is worse, by
pronouncing such glaring empty Expressions? And do not others discover an high
Degree of Silliness by admiring such vain Flatteries? For who can be so
ignorant, that allows himself to think, but may presently know, that Saying is
easy; Doing, hard; Suffering, much harder, and Suffering unto Death, such
sweating Work as the Living cannot well form proper Conceptions of, nor of
their own Strength to go through it, while it is out of Sight and unfelt? For is
not the best Man at the best Vanity and Nothing, and less than Nothing too?
Besides is not Ability to suffer for Christ, the Gospel, or his Church, a
peculiar Gift? Phil. 1.29. Can any suppose that God gives this peculiar Gift to
any in quiet and peaceable Times, wherein Men have not the least Call to
Sufferings? Can any expect that ordinarily God will impart to us any more, than
Grace to help in a Time of Need? Heb. 4.16. Can any think that the highest
Stock of inherent Grace, that ever a mere Man was endowed with, is sufficient
to make one stand in a suffering Hour, without a suitable Supply from without
of exciting and assisting Grace? When therefore the Ignorant fondly admire such
glaring, empty Expressions; must not the understanding Hearer have a vast Stock
of Charity, before he can believe, that such frothy Preachers are as much as
orthodox in Principle, with respect to Sufferings, when their Mouths utter such
Expressions as savor so rankly of Ignorance and vain Confidence? Does not the
Devil preach more orthodoxly than this in Job 2.4.? What mean the vainglorious
Boastings of themselves, and the high Praises Men bestow upon one another in
Public? Who uses most of Absalom's Wiles in the Gate, to ingratiate
themselves with the People? What means the Outcry made of the Church's Danger,
because of her present Guides; and the Terrors and Flatteries sounded? If the
People's Favor be the main Chance; who has obtained most Success in securing
this as Proofs of their Diligence? Have other Ministers used the same Wiles in
the Bounds of Brunswick Presbytery, which those Gentlemen used elsewhere?

3. The third Branch of the Pharisee-Teacher's Character, is Cruelty and
Malice. Will it not be hard for Mr. T. to instance any Acts of Cruelty, which
the protestant Clergy of this Generation, of any Denomination, have committed
against any upon the Account of Religion, in our English Dominions? And is it
not notorious, that edged Tools are pretty well taken out of their Hands? And
have not many of them, of all Denominations, given good Proofs of their being
Men of a quiet, peaceable and harmless Disposition, by their meek and
inoffensive Behavior? And for all, that some of them, as well as of other
Ranks, are fiery Zealots and Make-bates, will not the Body of the Clergy of
this Generation afford a very considerable Number, that may justly be called
merciful Men? We hope that all orthodox Christians will own, that to assert
Truth, to confute Errors, to stop the Mouths of Gainsayers, to reprove the
Unruly, to comfort the Feeble-minded, to support the Weak, to command the
Observation of Christ's Commands, and even to take the little Foxes, that creep
in through Holes to spoil the Vines, is a commendable Practice in Gospel
Ministers; But who are those, that breath forth most of the Cruelty of Wolves,
by an imprudent and an uncivil denouncing of Terrors, by damning and devilizing
Men, giving the Devil more than his just due? Who are those that discover most
Malice, by aspersing their Brethren, dressing them in Wolves Skins, by crying
out Pharisees, carnal Hypocrites, Ahitophels and Locusts; drawing their
presumptuous Censures through the very Hearts of their Opposers, even when they
are in the Right in opposing them; tearing their Characters, marring their
Usefulness, disquieting their Peace, encouraging their People to leave them
without any just Reason for it, fomenting Factions, to the occasioning the
Removal of some Ministers from their People, and the disheartening of others?
Was not it an Instance of some Cruelty, that some were guilty of, if Fame be
not a Liar, who were industrious to hinder the Reception of a Minister in a
second Place, when he was driven by a Storm of Contention from his proper Seat?
What is that Truth or Power of Religion, that the other Side have opposed?
Where have People been opposed in any of the regular Exercises of Piety? Can
Mr. T. give any Instance of a Minister of the contrary Side, who rashly judged
their, or any of their spiritual State? And had not they a just Call to speak
against what was unsound in their Doctrine, as well as uncharitable and
disorderly in their Conduct, when contrary to God's Word?

4. As to Ignorance of the New Birth. Has Mr. T. or his Party advanced the
least Tittle or Scrap of divine Truth or Accuracy in that Point, or any other
Point of Divinity beyond what his Opposers did? Will not his Brethren, at his
Invitation, be willing to confer with him on the Head, and compare Notes,
whether he will privately or publicly? Or if they will not, should not Mr. T.
acquaint the Public in Print, what are the Truths, relating to the New Birth,
which others oppose? Does not Mr. T. discover an intolerable Air of Disdain, if
not something that is worse, in his calling his Brethren's Preaching, when
according to his own Concession they do it orthodoxly, Prating? For is not this
casting Contempt on God's own Ordinance, when rightly administered? If Mr. T.
has a Mind to divert himself, let the Query be, whether the old or new Method
of Preaching be most like Prating? And may not the next be, Whether a great
Part of the late Sermons of some be not downright Scolding and Railery, unfit
for the Stage, much more so for the Gravity of the Pulpit? Did not he speak
pretty well home to the Point, who said, He that will call Preaching Prating,
will hardly scruple to call my Ears Horns? What then?

5. As to Covetousness, has Mr. T. or his Party ever refused to take a good
Salary, when they could catch it? Or did they ever refuse a Place upon the
Account of the Greatness of the Salary? Or have they been out of Humor, when
Money was offered them? Will not Pockets sometimes receive Money, without
defiling Men's Hands with such Trash? Have not some of these Gentlemen removed
from the Places where they were first settled, in order to better themselves
that Way as well as others? If all was known, would it not be merry Work to
talk of great Salaries among Dissenters; for are not these almost as rare as
black Swans? Have not others accepted of, and contented themselves with as
small Salaries as any of these? Have these Gentlemen any settled Minister in
their Bounds, who received no more Salary from his People than between Eight
and Ten Pounds this last Year, and the Year before last, no more than Thirteen
or Fourteen Pounds, and for several Years past no much more? Will they send
some of their able Hands, to take such bulky and rich Benefices, if we tell
them where they can get them? Is not there great Reason, why such Ministers
should be very careful to keep the People to their Favor? Or if their People
should combine with Mr. T. or his Party against them, can it be supposed, that
they will speak a Word against them for fear of losing their Bread? Or will not
such bold Fellows, that have little or nothing to lose, sing boldly, when they
see the Robbers coming, and whet their Knives at the Counter against the common
Vogue, because their Interest that Way is so low, that they are wholly out of
Fear about it? If it be true, as Mr. T. seems to insinuate, that the one fixes
his Eye on the Bag is it not notorious, that the other fingers the Money in
their own Bounds, in Vacancies, faster and plentier than they? And whether the
feeling of a full Purse, be not a better Prize to the covetous, than the Sight
of an empty Bag? Have the other Side entered into these Gentlemen's Labors, as
they did into those of others, in order to get more Money? Or have not the most
able Places got most Visits from Itinerant Ministers, when the Places that were
wholly destitute of Preaching before, are neglected, except they lie in the Way
to the Carcass? Was not the Invention of Bell's Priests to get a rich
Maintenance, under the Notion of Sacrifices to hungry Bell, a cunning Trick?
And may not crafty Pharisees invent something like it in these latter Days,
which will bring in Money by the Hundreds? And will not Mr. Receiver fare the
better of that, though Mr. Somebody gets Part of the Booty? But who more blind
than they that will not see? Would it be any Breach of our Charter, if an
Office was erected with proper Officers, to make a Cry in the Camp to all well
disposed Persons, Who will throw in, throw in their Mites, to release a penny
Prisoner out of Turkish Slavery? How can this be done without a round Sum to
purchase or hire a Vessel for the Voyage, as well as to fit her with a proper
Cargo to defray accruing Charges?

6. As to Bigotry to human Inventions and small Things: Was it any Fault in the
Pharisees to be zealous and precise in small Matters? For does not our Savior
say, these Things ye ought to have done, as to their tithing Mint, Anise and
Cummin? Matthew. xxiii. 23. And yet does not Mr. T. seem to draw the Indictment
against this Part, page 6. albeit he quotes the Verse that contains their
omitting the weightier Matters of the Law, which appears to us to be the main
Thing reproved? Let the Query then be, Whether their swallowing the Camel or
their straining at a Guat was the Sin? Or is anybody obliged to swallow a
Guat, because it is small? Is not the Authority great, when the Things in
themselves, prior to God's Commands, are but small? Is not this to be seen
plainly in Adam's first Sin? And as to Bigotry to human Inventions, if Mr. T.
has aught to charge his Brethren with on that Head, ought not he to descend to
particulars, and speak out, that they may be either foiled or cleared? In the
mean Time, will he tell us, what but human Inventions or worse, are, 1. The
general, disorderly and seemingly malicious Exclamations against Ministers in
the Lump; 2. The Pretense of positive judging Men's carnel or gracious States,
by or upon Men's Declarations of their Experiences, and erecting Societies for
this Purpose, as one main End of them; 3. The vain Pretense of ordinary
Ministers to an immediate Call to the Ministry; 4. The industrious hiding or
concealing of Gospel Promises, or the Grace thereof, for a Time, from convinced
Sinners, in order to raise their Terrors and Distractions higher by the Law; 5.
Their sending Missionaries into Vacancies in the Bounds of other Presbyteries,
without their Invitation, and against their declared Judgment, without as much
as hearing their Reasons, or striving to satisfy their conscientious Scruples
in the Matter; is not this Lording it over their Brethren with a Witness? Is
not such a Practice not only inconsistent with our Constitution, but also a
Violation of the Rights and Order of all regular Societies in the general? Is
not Gospel Liberty a Right or Privilege to observe, and not to destroy Gospel
Order, much less can it be a Liberty to set up Anarchy in its Room? Should not
Dissenters, who plead for Liberty of Conscience, let the World see and know,
that they want not an universal Toleration of all Things; but a well bounded
Toleration to discharge their Duties to God and Man in their proper Places,
Callings and Relations, without disturbing others in their proper Stations? 6.
What but an human Invention, is a Non-resident, indefinite Ministry? For is it
not easy to show, that it is subversive as of Gospel Order, so of a Gospel
Ministry? For either Men must own, that a stated Ministry is God's Ordinance,
or not: If they say not, does not their own Practice contradict that? If they
own it to be so, are not Gospel Ordinances not only institutive of themselves,
as requiring their own Observation; but also exclusive, not only of what is
directly opposite to them, but also of collateral Institutions set up in
Opposition to them? For how can there be Room to set up an itinerant Ministry,
where there is a stated orthodox Ministry already, without setting up Threshold
against Threshold, and Altar against Altar? And how can there be Room for that,
unless there be such weighty Differences between both, as will afford at least
one Side just Causes of Separation? And supposing there be just Causes of
Separation, must not Men, before they regularly clear the Way for it, use
Gospel Methods, by treating with their Brethren in a Christian Way and Manner,
in order to try all proper Measures of God's Appointment, to remove their
conscientious Differences, whether by their own Resolution or Conviction, or
that of others? If Men divide abruptly without Cause, or if they have just
Causes of an orderly Separation, without trying orderly Methods to remove such
Causes, if possible, as aforesaid; How can they clear themselves of being
guilty of making Schisms? For does not a different Manner, as well as different
Grounds or Matter, alter the moral Nature of an Action?

7. As to Party-Zeal; Who are those that encompass Sea and Land most, to make
Proselytes? Does not Mr. T. seem quite to forget himself in such left handed
Pushes? And is it not notorious, that many of Mr. W's and T's blind Admirers,
for we do not see how we can call them Followers, are worse than their
Teachers, being more full of Ignorance, blind Zeal, Fury and Censoriousness, as
well as vicious, many of them? How then do some justify those Errors of W -- d,
which he himself condemned? And how had a certain Minister of the opposite
Side, in one Night, his Meeting House broken open and abused, in which Action
there was no less than breaking two Locks; and in another Night had his own
House broke open, when it was not known, that he had any Controversy with any;
but upon the Account of the late Scheme and anarchical Practices? Who are
those, who though they profess great Love to pious dead Prophets, and other
Reformers, yet condemn the Body of the Clergy of this Generation for Pharisees,
one while, another while ranking them with Baal's Priests, when it is well
known, that a great many of the Clergy of this Generation lay and hold no other
Foundation but that of the Apostles and Prophets, in Doctrine and Disciple? And
is it not easy to show, that they keep closer to it than such rash Censurers?
For is it not evident, that Mr. W. and T. build more Hay and Stubble than many
of the other Side, as we have partly shown already; and will not this prove it
more, if it comes to Light? Have not some Ministers of the other Side, had
their Characters blackened, by alleging, that they denied the Doctrine of
Assurance, and all sensible Operations of the Spirit, for no other Reason, but
because they asserted, That every true, though weak Believer, is not assured of
these Things in himself? Is it not one Thing to feel Operations in the general,
and another Thing to know, that such Operations as they feel, are special and
saving Operations and not common ones? And whereas Mr. T. justly observes, That
the Pharisees pretended a mighty Respect for the Sabbath, insomuch that they
charged Christ with the Breach of it, for doing Works of Necessity and Mercy;
but in reality, that not so much Respect to the Sabbath, as Malice against
Christ, was the Occasion of the Charge, they wanted a plausible Pretense to
offer against him, in order to blacken his Character: What mean the late
general Exclamations against carnal Ministers, and the general Libels exhibited
in the Synod, when at the same Time the Subscribers are unwilling to let their
Brethren have fair Trials in proper Judicatures, if it be not a Design to
blacken Men's Characters? Yea, what mean the Outcries made against the Synod's
late Act, as if Men were very tender of the Rights of Presbyteries, when to use
Mr. T's own Words; must not he be blind that does not see, that Brunswick
Presbytery, by their disorderly Intrusions, invade the Rights of other
Presbyteries, more than the Synod could by Ten such Acts? For do not they do
this without any Order or Measure? What was the Reason, why the Arians
reproached Athanasius's Person, the Pelagians Augustine's Person, the Pharisees
Christ's Person, and the Papists the Hugonots; but because they could not stand
before their Arguments? What was the Reason, when the Jesuit wanted to nick an
Hole in Calvin's Coat, he took the hind Quarter, silently behind his Back? What
is the Reason of the general Outcries made of Ahitophels, Ahitophels, in
public Sermons, as well as some Men's Unwillingness to argue the Point fairly
Face to Face, and the public Warnings given to their blind Adherents, not to
speak with carnal Men, unless it be Men's Consciousness of the Weakness of
their own, and of the Goodness of their Antagonist's Cause? For when there are
Men of Learning on both Sides, can any think, that Grace extinguishes Reason
now, no more than it did it in Christ and in his Apostle's, who silenced
Gainsayers to the Face for all their silly Craft? And if Men had such high
Degrees of the Spirit of Wisdom, as they sometimes pretend to, would not they
do the same with Ease to Men's Faces, without being obliged to use such silly
and sinful Shifts, as general Clamours and blind Pushes, without naming
particular Persons or Crimes?

Does not Mr. T. omit as material Branches of the Pharisee Teacher's Character,
as any he mentions, if not more material Ones: For,

Qu. I. Does not their very Name show, that they were a Sect of precise,
vainglorious Separatists? And does not Scripture show, that they were a
Self-righteous Sect, that despised others? Luke 18.9. Did not their Principles,
who were full of Self-conceit of their own Holiness, incline them to despise
others? And do not Histories tell us, that they counted the common People the
Men of the Earth, reckoning them as the Dung thereof, judging them Sinners and
profane, yea even accursed, because they knew not the Law, i. e. as to their
corrupt Glosses upon it, counting none Saints but such as followed them,
pronouncing Damnation to all others? Does not their Practice of forbearing to
eat with the Vulgar, and of their washing of their Hands when they came from
the Market, show that they were very precise, and what contemptuous Opinions
they entertained of the common People, as if they were unclean and polluted?
And is it not remarkable, that their abusing the common People at an odd Rate,
by casting Disdain and Contempt upon them, when it was done under the vain and
specious Pretense of Religion, drew the People after them in Droves, they being
above all others in their high Esteem and Veneration; when the honest
Karraites, that stood up for the People's Privileges, by rejecting and opposing
their vain and burdensome false Traditions, were scorned and despised? And may
not this help to lessen our Admiration, that after this the whole World wondered
after the Beast, who abused them at an odder Rate? Rev. 13.3. And if such a
Thing should happen in these latter Days, will it not be a Sign of greater
Darkness than Light? How much of the like Principles appears in Men's public,
clamorous, and vainglorious Boastings of their high Degrees of Grace,
Comforts, Experiences, Feelings, and their Outcries against others, that speak
against such Practices, calling them carnal Men and Hypocrites, we leave others
to judge at their Leisure. Is not there a Spice of the same Spirit to be seen
in the Practice of some Ministers, who refuse to assist their Brethren at the
Sacrament, and to communicate when present, and assisting in preaching, upon a
vain Conceit of their own Holiness, and others being carnal Men; when for aught
that appeared before or after, they could not fix a Charge against them in
Principle or Practice; nor advance any Thing but their own Notions and Boasts,
true or false, to render themselves preferable to others? Is not this plainly
making vain Opinions or Traditions a Rule, when Scripture is wholly laid aside?
Would not Men of such Principles, if once they had the Upper-hand, soon cast
others out of their Synagogues, when they thus excommunicate themselves from
God's Ordinances, in order to cast an Odium upon their Brethren? And what but a
Desire to undermine and to cast them out of their own Synagogues, can tem^^ Men
to creep into disaffected Corners of their Brethren's Congregations in such a
disorderly Way as this is done?

Qu. II. Was not Censoriousness or rash judging of Men's carnal and gracious
State, according as they found them by their Declarations, affected or
disaffected to their Party and Traditions, another notable Branch of the
Pharisee-Teacher's Character? For did not they boldly and loudly call Christ a
Sinner, a Sabbath-breaker, a Glutton, a Wine-bibber, a Samaritan that had a
Devil, a Deceiver, and a Companion of Publicans and Sinners, because he opposed
them, and chose Unbelievers that were kind to him for his Companions, by going
frequently into their Houses and Company, albeit this proved to be for the
Conversion of some such? Now when they called the Master of the House
Beelzebub; what could be expected, but that they would have called them of his
Household petty Devils? Mat. 10.25. Did not the Pharisees agree to cast all out
of their Synagogues, who would own Christ to be the Messiah? John 9.22. Did not
the Pharisees as roundly pronounce the People that respected Christ and his
Doctrine, a damned, cursed Crew, and as blind Men that knew not the Law, as
others do the Adherents of their Opponents, in some Points, carnal Men, Dupes
and Dunces, blind as Moses, dead as Stones, silly Souls, poor Fools? Would not
a few more Names be enough to make up a Welshman's, or even an Irishman's
Pedigree? May not we then desire Mr. T. to put on a Pair of Spectacles, and to
turn the Crow's Eggs, that he may view the other Side of them? For may not a
second Sight as well as Thought, alter the Matter?

Qu. III. Was not their broad Phylacteries another Characteristick of that
proud Sect? And do not others make as vain a Show in Journals and Gazettes,
proclaiming their own Sanctity as the Pharisees did?

Qu. IV. Was it not another Peculiarity of the Pharisees, that they lade Men
with heavy Burdens, but did not touch them themselves with one of their
Fingers? And do not we need a large Stock of Candor, to keep up a good Opinion
of Men's Experiences of Soul Trouble, who industriously labor to raise high
Degrees of Terror in weak Christians, and rejoice to see them distracted with
Shocks and Terrors? Can such sneering Joy consist with a Fellow-feeling
Sympathy with such Souls, in the Heart of an experimental Christian?

Qu. V. Was not the Pharisees shutting the Kingdom of Heaven against themseves
and others, by corrupt Doctrine and Practice, by destroying the Law by their
corrupt Glosses and vain Traditions, and the Gospel by their striving to
establish Self-Righteousness in Point of Justification, a main Branch of the
Pharisee Character? Luke xi. 52. how else did the Pharisees take away the Key
of Knowledge? Besides, were not the Pharisees Statesmen as well as Churchmen in
our Savior's Time? And do not those that allege, that every one that is in a
State of Grace, knows it; which is as much as to say, he is assured of it; when
at the same Time many of such will own, that they have not Assurance
themselves; at least doctrinally shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against
themselves, and all such weak and doubting, though true Christians, that are in
the Dark about their State, and even against such strong Christians, as have
arrived no higher than a well-grounded Hope through Grace? And do not such fasten
Terrors in the Hearts of the Righteous, whom God would not have made sad?
Besides, though the Pharisees cried up Tenderness of Conscience abroad; yet were
not they all for blind Obedience at home? For without this, would not they
carry their vain Traditions to a poor Market? And must not all, that take up
with enthusiastic Notions, be as much for blind Obedience at Home, as the
greatest Masters of Ceremonies and Traditions, for all the seeming Difference
of both at the first Sight? And in one Word, what is Pharisaism but Irreligion
dressed with a Cloak of Fervency against Atheism? Had Mr. T. insisted but a
little upon and displayed the Leaven of the Doctrine of the Pharisees, how
easily might he have proved, that such People are to be pitied, who have no
better than old Pharisee Teachers? And so, would it not follow, that if others
now symbolize with them in Doctrine and Practice, that the Case would be plain?
Which leads us to the second Doctrinal Query, viz. Why such People, who have no
better than old Pharisee Teachers, are to be pitied?

We could easily give our Assent to the Proposition contained in said Query,
viz. That such People as aforesaid are to be pitied, without any Proof at all;
but yet, has not the Impertinency and Weakness of Mr. T's Proofs a native
Tendency to render the clearest Truth more suspected, than it was in its own
proper Light? For is it not evident, that Mr. T. spoils it in the Proof, by the
same Indistinctness which we have shown to be in the Doctrine, viz. His
confounding the natural Man and the Pharisee Teacher, as if they were one and
the same? Or rather does not he in the Proof quit the Pharisee Teacher with his
leavened Doctrine, and draw his Arguments wholly from the Defects and Danger of
the natural Man's Ministry? We would be glad to know, what was the Reason, when
the Pharisee Teacher was tied fast to the Stake in the Query, that Mr. T. in
the Proof puts the natural Man to do Penance, and to bear all the Blame, the
Pharisee Teacher having no more but a By-blow at the most? Must not the Reason
of this be, because Mr. T. either respected the Pharisee Teacher more, or hated
him less, than those he calls natural Men, or rather would call so? We own it
would have been an easy Matter, to prove many of the Pharisees by all
Appearance natural Men; yea, and that some of them were very unnatural too; but
yet, would it not be too great a Task to prove, that natural Men are or were
Pharisees? ^ut according to Mr. T's Way of Arguing, ought not he to prove the
latter? Or else, what does he but amuse his Reader, confound the Matter, and
lose himself in the Labyrinth? We grant, it was an easy Matter to know, who was
a Pharisee, for that Sect, as well as other Sects, was distinguishable from
others by their proper Tenets; but will any say, that it is as easy to know who
is a natural Man, as who is a Papist, Churchman or Presbyterian? Might not a
natural Man be a Sadducee, Ess^^, Karraite, or even a Christian? And does Mr.
T. think, but that a natural Man may be a Catholic, Whitefieldian or Ten^nite;
yea, for aught any or all their warm Admirers or even themselves can prove to
others, may not this natural Man be Mr. W. or T. themselves? where then is
Distinctness now?

1. The first Argument then to prove, that such People, who have no better than
the old Pharisee Teachers, are to be pitied, is, 1. Because natural Men have no
Call of God to the ministerial Work, under the Gospel Dispensation. If this
were true, how does it prove the Point? For may not a natural Man's Ministry,
if he be orthodox, vastly differ from an heterodox Pharisee's Ministry? Yea,
does not a private Conference with a private Christian, or even bare Reading of
Scripture by private Christians, or even reading of good Sermon Books vastly
excel a Pharisee Teacher's Ministry? And if a Minister be gifted and sound in
the Faith, as well as regularly called, is not there a vast Difference between
the Ministry of one that preaches sound Scripture Doctrine, and one that
preaches vain Traditions and corrupt Glosses!

But before we come to the Point, we may premise a few Things to prevent
Mistakes: We do then freely grant, 1. That Grace is absolutely necessary to
make a Man a true Christian, and none doubts, but that a Minister should be a
true Christian; nor do we suppose, that any among us will say, that without
true Grace any can fulfill his Ministry acceptably, as to himself; and therefore
it is very evident, that no Man can be looked upon, as fit to be called to the
Ministry, but such as are esteemed gracious Men: So that it is not our Aim, in
the least, to plead for an unconverted Ministry; for we are against having such
as much as Mr. T. And if Mr. T. undertakes to prove any of our Ministers such,
we promise upon good Proof made, to reject them forthwith; but the Query is,
Who are to be esteemed carnal Ministers, or how to know them? 2. We grant, that
it is the unquestionable Duty of every private Christian, much more of a
Christian Minister, to examine himself about his State often, and to labor
diligently in the Use of appointed Means, to attain all possible Evidences of
their gracious State. 3. That the Ordainers of Persons to the Ministry, should
make an exquisite Trial of the Gifts and Orthodoxness of Candidates to the
Ministry, as well as make a due Enquiry into their Deportment and Conversation,
and should by no means call or ordain any, but those who by their Gifts appear
apt to teach, and who in their Profession and Conversation carry a fair and
good Appearance of gracious Men, so that the Ordainers are in Conscience
satisfied, that all Things considered, it looks at least probable, that they
are such, still leaving the positive Judging of Things secret to God, to whom
it alone belongs. But then,

Qu. I. Does not Mr. T. allow, that even the spiritual Man cannot infallibly
know the States of subtle Hypocrites; but only make a near Guess of it at the
best and furthest, as we have noted already? And does he here also allow, that
Men may put a natural Man into the Ministry, not only through Unfaithfulness, but
also through Mistake, i. e. as we understand him, though they act a faithful Part?
page 8.

Qu. II. Seeing therefore there are but two Sorts of a Call to the Ministry,
viz. one immediate to extraordinary Offices, both which Call and Offices are
now long ago ceased: Can any ordinary Ministers in Faith expect any other Call
to the Ministry now, but only a mediate Call, wherein God makes Use of the
Ministry of Men, as the immediate Agents in said Call? And when those that are
authorized by God for this Purpose, do in the Simplicity of their Hearts act
according to their best Light, in Christ's Name, and according to his
Institution, in calling any into the Ministry, wherein Ministers act
ministerially, with the Concurrence of the People, inviting or calling in a Way
of Gospel Privilege or Obedience to Christ; Is not every one that is thus
called according to Gospel Rule, at least mediately called of God? What then
will become of the Distinction Mr. T. makes between a divine and human Call to
the Ministry? For what but an human Call is the divine mediate Call to the
Ministry?

Qu. III. Seeing many profess at Seasons, that Mr. W's Attachment to the
doctrinal Articles of the Church of England, is the Grounds of their high
Regard for him, we would ask Mr. T. how he approves of the latter Clause of the
Twenty-third Article of the English Church, which Clause, if we mistake not, is
subscribed to by all the orthodox dissenting Ministers in England? The Clause
runs thus, And those we ought to judge lawfully called and sent, which be
chosen and called to this Work by Men, who have public Authority given unto
them in the Congregation, (...) call Ministers into the Lord's Vineyard.

Qu. IV. If fallible Men, acting according to Scripture Rule, without any more,
at the most, than the ordinary Guidance of God's Spirit, are the Instruments or
immediate Agents in this mediate Call; can Mr. T. assign any solid Reason, why
may not a natural Man have a mediate Call to the Ministry, as well as an
unconverted Judas had an immediate Call to an Apostleship?

Qu. V. What is the Call of God to the Ministry? Is it not some public
authoritative Declaration of God's Will concerning the Person to be employed in
the Ministry, requiring and commanding him to take this Office upon him, and
investing him with Authority to discharge it, requiring also the Church, over
which he is set, to hear and obey him, as an authorized Minister of Jesus
Christ and their proper Watchman?

Qu. VI. Whereas therefore Mr. T. in p. 7. asks this Query, Is Not it a
principal Part of the ordinary Call of God to the ministerial Work, to aim at
the Glory of God, and, in Subordination thereto, the Good of Souls, as their
chief Marks in their undertaking that Work? We answer, that this is no Part of
the divine Call to the Ministry, much less is it a principal Part of it; but
the Duty of the Person called: The Call is God's Act either immediately or
mediately, but this Aim is the Act of the Candidate in Obedience to the divine
Call, whereby God calls Persons not to be Ministers, but Christians; for is not
it the Duty of all Christians, as well as Ministers, to aim at God's Glory,
etc.? And can any think, that what is the Duty of all Christians in common with
Ministers, is any Part of the Call to the Ministry, which is a peculiar Office
belonging to some only in the Church and not to all? And therefore we would ask
Mr. T. again,

Qu. I. Whether or no the Candidate ought not to have this Aim, if he acts
conscientiously, before a Call be given him? Yea, whether or no he may not have
this sincere Aim many Years before a Call be given him? Yea, may not this Aim
be in some who never receive a Call, by Reason of some providential Lets, though
such a Call was really once designed both by themselves and others?

Qu. II. If the Call to the Ministry consists principally in such an Aim, as is
aforesaid, will it not follow, that every Godly Man has a Call to the
Ministry? For will Mr. T. say, that a Man may be Godly, without having such an
Aim? And must not every Godly Woman have such an Aim too, as well as the Godly
Man? What Need then is there of using the Ivory Chair in choosing Popes? For by
this Rule, may not a second Pope Joan be admitted in her Hoop-Petticoat? For
who can say, that her Sex is any Hindrance to her having a good Aim?

Qu. III. If the divine Call to the Ministry consists principally in such an
Aim; is it not in the Power of a godly Person to call himself with a divine
Call, at least as to the principal Part of it, and would not this be a flat
Contradiction? And when he has the principal Part of a divine Call in himself,
may not he make a Shift as to the rest, especially if others are a little
backward, as not being clear in the Matter? For how can he stop at Man's
Judgment, if others judge him unfit, who knows, that he has the principal Part
of the divine Call? Can Mr. T. expect, that any but mere Enthusiasts, will join
with him, in placing the principal Part of the divine Call in such an Aim?

Qu. IV. Does not a divine Call not only authorize, but also require and oblige
the Person called, to set about the Execution of his Office, as soon as
Providence opens a Door for it, without any further Inauguration? And will Mr.
T. say, that such an Aim will warrant or justify a Man in so doing, though never
so sincere?

Qu. V. If the principal Part of the Call to the Ministry consists in the
secret Aim of the Person called, how shall it be possible for People in an
ordinary Way, to be satisfied about the Validity of the Call of their Minister,
seeing it is well known, that the most notorious Deceivers have made the most
vaunting Boasts of their good Aims, to hide their bad Designs and anarchical
Disorders, for which this Notion opens a wide Door; for if this be admitted,
may not every one that wills, consecrate himself a Priest?

Qu. VI. It is readily granted, that a natural Man, while such, cannot aim
singly at God's Glory; but yet when the Call to the Ministry does neither in
whole nor in part consist in such an aim; why may not a natural Man have a
regular Call to the Ministry for all this? And this leads us to Mr. T.'s second
Attempt, to confirm his beloved Tenet, viz. That a natural Man has no Call of
God to the Ministry under the Gospel Dispensation; which Tenet is made the
He-Goat of the Flock, or the main Battering-Ram to win or keep the Fort: But
here we think it may not be amiss to caution the Reader, not to be frightened at
the odd Sight he is like to see; for if we mistake not, he shall by and by see
such a Sight as Moses his burning Bush, viz. Scripture set on Flame by this
Fire of Contention, burning, but not consumed; but let him not fear; for it is
only a Fire of one Man's kindling, and why may not another Man quench it, at
least with God's Help? Mr. T.'s second Confirmation of his Tenet or first
Reason, seems to consist of three Parts, viz. A Query before, a Query behind,
and a Scripture Text in the middle, containing a Query to cement both; and here
we cannot expect to make a quick Dispatch; for does not the Scripture say, that
a threefold Cord is not easily broken? Mr. T.'s Words are these, Are not wicked
Men forbid to meddle in Things sacred? Ps. 50.16. But unto the Wicked, God
says, What have thou to declare my Statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant in thy Mouth? Now, are not all unconverted Men wicked Men?

Here, before we proceed further, we shall premise a few Words to clear the
Way. We shall remark then, 1. That we are slided unawares from wicked Ministers
to wicked Men in general, and from the ministerial Office to sacred Things in
general, and the unconverted Man is fairly excommunicated not only from the
Ministry and special Ordinances, but from meddling with whatever Things that
can be called sacred; so that if this Rule stands, if the carnal Man makes or
meddles in Things sacred, such as Prayer, Reading or Hearing God's Word, he
must venture at his own Peril, by kicking against the Pricks, or bidding open
Defiance to a plain divine Prohibition; and if this be not strange Divinity,
what can be called so? 2. Because it is hard to venture at once to the Head of
this horned Argument, we shall take it by the Tail, and grant, that all
unconverted Men may be rightly called wicked Men; but before we will yield any
more, we will try the Force of a few Queries on the Head.

Qu. I. If the wicked, i. e. the unconverted Man, be forbid to meddle in sacred
Things, will it not thence follow, 1. That Sins of Omission are no Sins in an
unconverted Person; for if it be supposed, that the Command makes Obedience his
Duty, will not a Prohibition by the same Authority, release as fast as the
Command binds? And is not there this Advantage in the Case, that the
Prohibition binds always and at all Times? And if Mr. T. could but prove this
Doctrine true, would it not be worth its Weight in Gold for the slothful
Servant, when called to an Account for hiding his Master's Talent, or tarrying
idle in the Marketplace, under a Gospel-Call? For if Mr. T. here declares
God's Counsel, as he pretends to do, may not the slothful Servant tell Christ
boldly, that the Reason why he sat idle was, because he forbad him to meddle in
sacred Things by the Mouth and Pen of his faithful Servant Mr. G. T.? Can Mr.
T. think that Christ will admit of such a Plea and judge accordingly, or that
he himself will be able to stand his Ground in this particular.

Qu. II. If the unconverted Man be forbid to meddle in sacred Things; will it
not follow, that Duties, such as Prayer, Reading or Hearing God's Word,
conferring about it, or meditating upon it, are in their own Nature, or as
Duties, as truly Sins in a natural Man, as Stealing, Lying, Idolatry or
Adultery are Sins in a spiritual Man? For will not a Divine Prohibition, if
there be any such, make the forbidden Duty formally a Sin? And has not such a
Doctrine a native Tendency to confound the Difference between Sin and Duty,
Good and Evil, and to demolish the very Form of Religion, under a Pretense of
advancing the Power of it? What a strange Divine Law would that be, that would
forbid Men that are under it, the Performance of the Duties required by it?

Qu. III. If the unconverted Man be forbid to meddle in sacred Things; will Mr.
T. tell us, what shall he do? For if the Divine Law forbids him to perform
Duty, or to meddle therewith; does not it also forbid him to commit Sin, or to
meddle therewith? And can any find a Medium in this World between both, or in
the next either? And all the While is not Man such a Creature, that cannot be
wholly idle; and if God will not find him Work, can we think but the busy Devil
will employ him fast enough? For is not the idle Person the Devil's Shop? It is
well known, that an unconverted Person cannot exercise Grace, whereof he has
none, so as to be busy in the Power of Religion; and if he be forbid to meddle
in the Form, poor Soul! whither shall he go? What miserable Preaching of Christ
and the Gospel have we here, where we have neither Law nor Gospel? What can be
the Reason, that such a Man as Mr. T. thus halts at Noonday in a plain Case?
Must not it be, either because he did not consider the Point, or else has not
he imbibed some enthusiastic Notions unawares? Is not there room enough for
God to blame and reprove the carnal Man for going on in Sin, and his wrong and
defective Performances, to require better Duties from him, as well as to
declare the Unacceptableness of his present Duties; because of his great Sins
and Failures in the manner of the Performance of them, as well as because of
his Out-breakings otherways; without in the least forbidding, but in all
requiring him to meddle to a better Purpose with sacred Things, and to render
unto God the Tribute of Obedience due to him from his Creature? Can any be so
senseless as to argue, that because the Scripture says, that the Prayer or
Sacrifice of the Wicked is an Abomination to the Lord, as Prove. 21.27. and
28.9. that therefore God forbids all unconverted Persons to pray or sacrifice?
For by the same Rule, may not Men prove, that God forbids the unconverted Man
to plow his Ground, because it is said in Prove. 21.4. that the Plowing of the
Wicked is Sin? And by parity of Reason, may not Men say, that God forbids the
carnal Man to eat or drink, to buy or sell, to walk or fit, etc.?

Qu. IV. If God forbids the unconverted Man to meddle in sacred Things, will
Mr. T. tell us, how did God so far approve of Ahab's Humiliation, as to delay
the Judgment threatened o^ his House in his Days, upon the Account thereof? 1
Kings 21.29. Or was it any Mistake in Peter, to enjoin the Duty of Prayer upon
Simon Magus, when he saw him in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity?
Acts 8.22.

Qu. V. When a poor convinced Soul is sorely humbled under a Sense of its
sinful and lost State, or else a Godly Person is sorely oppressed with
melancholy; is it not one of Satan's most usual Temptations, whereby he
labors to ensnare such, his possessing them with an Opinion of their Unfitness
for any Duty; and would not he get double Advantage over them, if he could but
possess them with such an Opinion, as that God forbids all unconverted Persons
to meddle in sacred Things? For must not he be a great Stranger in Israel, who
knows not, that such are the most likely to condemn themselves for unconverted?
Whose Interest then will such a Doctrine serve?

Qu. VI. When the Proposition to be proved by M. T. was, That natural Men can
have no Call of God to the Ministerial Work under the Gospel Dispensation; is
it not a little odd, that Mr. T. was obliged to run as far back into the Old
Testament as the Psalm. 50.16. to fetch his first and main Text to prove the
Point? And after all will he tell us, how to apply this Text, to prove what is
peculiar to the Gospel Dispensation, without borrowing Help from some such
Maxim, as far sought is good for Ladies? For does not God speak there to such
People and Priests, whose continual Practice it was to offer continual or daily
Sacrifices, as the Law required under the Old Testament Dispensation? And was
not that Practice peculiar to the Old Testament Dispensation to distinguish it
from the New? Where is Distinctness now? For would not this strike against the
Continuance of the Priesthood in the House of Aaron and Tribe of Levi, as much
as against Gospel Ministers, unless they were converted?

Qu VII. Does not Mr. T. strangely wrest this Text to serve a Turn, when he
insinuates, that God herein forbids the unconverted to meddle in sacred Things?
For does not God in the Context plainly forbid such an Interpretation of his
Words? when he says in Verse 8. I will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices or
Burnt-Offerings continually before me: For is it not remarkable, that God, who
foreseeth all Things, calculateth his Expressions here, as if he was purposely
guarding of them against such Cavillers, who would be apt to improve his Words
contrary to his Intent to drive Men from their Duty, when it was his plain
Intent to forbid their Sin, and not their doing their Duty in the least? For
does not he say, I will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices, and is not this as
much as if he should have said, as for this offering Sacrifices, O Israel, thou
do well so far, that is thy Duty; I do not reprove thee for doing thy Duty,
but do approve of thy Diligence herein: Thy Sin is not thy offering Sacrifices,
but thy Sin is thy Covenant Breaking with God instead of paying him thy Vows,
ver. 14. and thy dishonouring God's Name by thy wicked and perverse
Conversation instead of ordering it aright ver. 23. Do not thou see, O
Israel, how inconsistent is thy vile and sinful Practice with thy offering
Sacrifices, and taking my Covenant in thy Mouth? What signifies thy offering
Sacrifices, though good in its Place, without Obedience to the moral Law, which
is greater than the ceremonial One? What signifies thy making Covenant with
God, if thou do not pay thy Vows? Does not thy breaking instead of paying thy
Vows spoil thy good Deed in making them? What signifies thy making a fair
Profession by declaring my Statutes, does not thy wicked Practice mar all the
Good that is in such a Profession? To declare my Statutes is thy Duty, I do not
reprove thee for that, but have not I just Reason to reprove thee for thy
hating Instruction, and casting my Words behind thee? When thou prayest,
preachest and professest in thy own disorderly Way and for thy own Ends, what
Glory have I thereby? Or what Acceptance can thou expect with God, though Men
may praise thee? Can thou think that thy fair Profession will be a Cloak
thick enough to hide the Deformity of thy Theft and Adultery from me, though it
may do it from Men for a Time? Can thou think, O vain Israel, that thy
towering religious Show will stand thee in any Stead, if at the same Time thou
give thy Mouth to Evil, and thy Tongue to frame Deceit, by flattering thyself
and others with vain Words to break their Vows, to cast my Statutes behind
them, and to go on in rebellious Disorders contrary to the Rules and Order
prescribed in my Word? Yea, can thou think, that thy Sacrifices and fair
Declarations will be acceptable to me, if thou joinest thereto such wicked
Practices, as sitting as a censorious Judge and speaking against thy Brother,
by slandering thy own Mother's Son, by perverse Exclamations and general
Libels, representing him as an Hypocrite and carnal Man, a corrupt Pharisee, a
Dupe, a Dunce, and a Fool, etc. God may for wise Ends suffer Men to swagger a
while in such irreligious and wicked Practices, and may suffer them to carry
this under a religious Covert, and even to be prosperous therein; but will not
there be Bitterness in the latter End, if such do not repent in Time? For who
will be able to stand before what is spoken in ver. xxi. 22? Will not God call
to such one Day as he did to Job in Chap. xl. 7, 8? What is there in all this
to forbid the Unconverted to meddle in Things sacred? For is not joining of a
wicked Practice to a religious Form and a fair Profession; and making the
latter a Cloak to the former, the only Thing forbidden here? For who should
hasten faster to meddle in sacred Things, in due Order, than the unconverted
Man, if we take Scripture for our Rule? Cannot God forbid the Treachery of a
Judas Kiss, without forbidding the natural Man to kiss the Son, as all
Converted or Unconverted are commanded to do in Psalm. ii. 12? Would not it be
as good Divinity to say, that a Judas Kiss is the fulfilling of that Precept,
as to say the former? And does not Mr. T. in p. 19. encourage People to
something like this, where, if we take him right, he would teach Men to cover
their disorderly Wanderings from their own pious Pastors upon secret Surmises,
that others are more gifted than they, with the fair Show of the Spirit of
Meekness and Love? So that if they have but Brass and Deceit enough to give
their Ministers such a parting Kiss as Judas gave for a Salutation to his
Master, may not they according to Mr. T's Rule, bid them such a Goodnight as
the Raven gave Noah, without any Regard to present Relation, or former
Kindnesses or Benefits by them? For how shall he be a clean Mule, that will not
give his Dam a clean Kick after getting a good Suck? Cannot God forbid the
Deceit of an impudent Trollop, that makes a clamorous Noise about her Vows and
Peace Offerings, to hide her filthy Market, which she is ready to cry at every
Corner, where she can get Customers void of Understanding, without forbidding
unconverted Men to make orderly Sacrifices and Vows? Cannot God forbid the
Villainy of such Sacrificers, who had the daring Confidence to offer Sacrifices
to him with Hands polluted in the Blood of their Brethren, without forbidding
the Unconverted in Israel to offer Sacrifices? Isa. i. 10 -- 15. Who can doubt
but that such bloody Villains, as had Confidence enough to rush upon the thick
Bosses of God's Buckler, would be ready enough, to serve a Turn, to swear by
the great Osyris a thousand Times, that they had a very tender Conscience? And
might not they give their offering Sacrifices and abstaining from eating
Black-Puddings throughout the whole Year or Lent for Proofs thereof, without
telling the World, that they loved Wine and Eggs better than such Fare? But to
return to the Point, when God endowed unconverted Men with the Gifts of
Prophecy, and of Working of Miracles, like those spoken of in Matthew. vii. 22.
Or with the Gifts of an Apostleship as Judas, and gives them a Call and an
Opportunity to exercise such Gifts for the Good of his Church, was it their
Duty to obey or disobey the Call, supposing them to be in Doubts about their
State? Or in such a Case, that when a Person gives such satisfying Proofs of
his being duly qualified for the Ministry, as to Gifts; having also such a fair
Appearance of Grace in his Orthodoxy and Regularity, as encourages others to
call him to it, though neither he nor they are sure of his gracious State, ought
such a one to tarry in Jericho till he gets Assurance? Or ought not he, with an
humble Reliance on God's Grace, to accept and obey the Call given him; or, at
least, may not he do this in Faith?

Qu. VIII. Does not Mr. T. strangely confound that Text in John 10.1, 9. by
making the Door of regular Entrance into the Ministry, spoken of in verse. 1.
and the Door of Salvation, spoken of in verse. 9. one and the same? Is this
Distinctness too? For what orthodox Protestant doubts, but that Faith in Christ
is the Way of Salvation? But will any infer thence, that Faith is the Door of
Entrance into the Ministry? For if so, will it not follow, that every true
Believer, Male or Female, should be admitted into the Ministry? For according
to Mr. T. do not they come in by the Door? Is it not very strange, that such a
Man as Mr. T. who blames others, and condemns them for carnal Men, for want of
Distinctness does thus confound Matters so different? For are not the Keys of
the visible Church, which open the Door of Entrance into Membership and the
Ministry therein, committed to Church Officers, to open and shut it according
to Divine Prescriptions? But does not Christ keep the Key of the Door of
Salvation at his own Girdle, and in his own Hand, as he tells us in Rev. 3.7.
What else is the Key of David there spoken of? Besides ought not Men to have
Faith, or at least deemed to have it, before they are looked upon as fit to be
called into the Ministry, How then can Faith be a Door of Entrance into it?

Qu. IX. Whereas Mr. T. to confirm this false Gloss, says, that remarkable is
that Saying of our Savior in Mar. 4.19. What though it be true that Peter and
Andrew followed Christ is a spiritual Sense, Will it follow thence, that Christ
will not make Men Ministers, till they are true Followers of him in the same
Sense as they did? For is it not remarkable also, that Christ himself made
Judas not only a Minister, but also an Apostle, though he was no true, but only a
feigned Follower of him? And will Mr. T. pretend to be wiser than the Wisdom of
God?

Qu. X. Whereas Mr. T. says, that Christ reproved Nicodemus for taking upon
him the Office of the Ministry, etc. Does not he misrepresent the Matter? For
is it not evident, that his Ignorance in a fundamental Article of Faith, was
the only Article he was reproved for? And may not any Minister, or even private
Christian, give Mr. T. or any other Minister, a modest Reproof, for discovering
Ignorance in talking on any common Head of Divinity, without in the least
calling the Validity of their Call to the Ministry into question? Besides might
not Nicodemus be a Ruler of the Jews and a Master in Israel, without being a
Minister? For were not Pharisees Civil as well as Ecclesiastical Rulers? And
for aught that is written to the contrary, might not Nicodemus be of the former
Rank, and so no Minister; unless it be thought, that their Civil Rulers were
not dignified with the Title of Rabbi, or were not concerned in Scripture
Knowledge, because the Jewish Government was wholly a Theocracy?

Qu. XI. That 1 Timothy 1.12. proves that Paul was a faithful Minister, we own;
but we would desire to know, what is there said of the natural Man? Is not the
Argument that runs from one to all very lame? For might not the single Instance
of an unconverted Judas be as well urged to prove all Ministers unconverted?

Qu. XII. Whereas Mr. T. asserts, That the Devil may drive Men into the
Ministry, we would ask Mr. T. who are in greater Danger of being driven into it
by the Devil, than such who plead for an inward or an immediate Call in an
ordinary Way, and place the principal Part of the ordinary Call to the Ministry
in the Aim of the Person called? Who but the Devil drives Men into anarchical
disorderly Ways, contrary to Gospel Rule and Order, under the Pretense of an
inward Call? Further we suppose Mr. T. will own, that the Devil drives none
into the Ministry without God's most holy and wise Permission; is it any Way
contradictory to God's most holy Perfections, to suffer others to be admitted
into the Ministry, by the Door of a regular Call? Will God's Grace or Power be
less glorious, if he works any saving Effects by the Ministry of such? May not
some such be converted afterward, and others be Cast-aways after preaching
edifyingly to others, though they had a regular Call to the Ministry, according
to Christ's Institutions? We own, that the Ordainers are under a Rule, and are
to follow Christ's Prescriptions, and ought not to commit the Ministry to any,
but such as have the good Appearance of faithful Men, and if any discover their
Hypocrisy afterward in the apparent Fruits of it, they ought to reject them;
but yet will any infer from hence, that God is under such a Rule?

But to set the Matter in a clearer Light, we shall trace Mr. T. a little
further: Mr. T. says, page 8. But God sends not such hypocritical Varlets, i.
e. into the Ministry. Must not Mr. T. mean then, that God sends only gracious
Men or true Believers into it? Whereupon we shall ask,

Qu. I. Is not that Act, whereby God sends Believers into the Ministry, the
Call of God? Will it not unavoidably follow, that those Qualifications, such as
Faith and a good Aim, are not the Call of God, but something different from it,
and antecedent to it? Otherwise must not a Man be called before he is called,
which is absurd?

Qu. II. If the Call to the Ministry consists in these Qualifications, will it
not follow, that no Person ought to enter upon the Work until first he be
assured of his own gracious State, and that he has true Faith? Again would it
not follow, that every Minister ought to desist from his Work, whenever or as
often a^ he doubts or is uncertain of his gracious State; because that in such
a Case, he is not sure that he has a Call to the Work?

Qu. III. Suppose an empty Formalist or an Hypocrite to have been in the
Ministry for some time, who afterward comes to be awakened, and see and be
convinced of his sinful State; must he then in Conscience lay down his
Ministry, and look upon his Ordination null and void, because he sees himself
to want those Qualifications, in which Mr. T. makes the divine Call to consist,
l^st he further provoke God by running, and so incur that dreadful Challenge in
Ps. 40.16. What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, etc.? For if these
Words imply a Prohibition to the natural Man to meddle in sacred Things; will
not his Praying or Preaching be kicking against the Pricks? Again, if in such a
Case a Man's Call or Ordination be null and void, whether he must be
re-ordained when or if he be converted?

Qu. IV. If the divine Call to the Ministry consists in these Qualifications,
and we should not hear such Ministers who are not called of God, how can a
Person in Faith hear a strange Minister, or any of whose Conversion he has no
Knowledge or Certainty, and knows not but that he may be one of those Locusts,
or cruel covetous Pharisees, or hypocritical Varlets who are not called of God,
and can do his Soul no Good, let his Gifts be never so great? And if he comes
in a disorderly or anarchical Way, will not there be more ground to suspect it?

Qu. V. If the divine Call to the Ministry consists in these Qualifications,
will it not follow thence, that the weak though true believing Minister has not
so good, so strong or sufficient a Call as the strong Believer has? Yea, may
not the same Minister's Call grow stronger and weaker as the Evidences of his
Graces do ebb and flow? And would not the Asserting of both or either be
ridiculous?

Qu. VI. Whence then does this Confusion, under which Mr. T. seems to labor,
proceed* Does it not proceed from his jumbling and mixing Things together,
which are of a quite different Nature and Order, as if they were one and the
same Thing? For does not he confound the authoritative Call, Commission or
Command of God, which is the divine Act, either mediately or immediately, with
the Qualifications requisite in the Persons called, to render them ^it for the
Work they are called to, as if they were the self-same Thing? But are not these
very different? For Instance, Was not both Saul and David equally called of God
to the Kingdom? but yet were not they very differently qualified for the
Office? Was not both Peter and Judas equally called to the Apostleship? but yet
were not they very differently qualified for the Work? Had not Nathaniel these
Qualifications before he received a Call? And who can say, but that it was so,
with all the Apostles, except Judas? Does not all this show, that the Call to
the Ministry is one Thing, and the Qualifications requisite to fit for that
Work another? What then is become of this towering Argument, which is the
He-Goat of the Flock, in which Mr. T. so much triumphs? Does not it fall flat
to the Ground upon a small Handling? For what is the whole of it but barefaced
Sophistry, candied over with rhetorical Strains? Can any think there is any
Need to awake Sampson to break such Tow-yarn more than half rotten? Is this the
Book that our Great Man counts unanswerable? Can any lay any Stress upon his
Judgment and Commendations of Men, when it appears so shallow in Judging of
Books?

Qu. VII. We would further ask Mr. T. whether the seven Deacons spoken of in
Acts 6.5. were called of God to that Office before they were chosen by the
Apostle's Direction or not? If they were, why did not they execute their Office
before? If they were not called of God to that Office before, how can any say,
that their Call consisted in their good Qualities? For is it not said that they
were full of the Holy Ghost before? Does it not seem, that the Imbibing and
Improving the false though vulgar Distinction between the outward and inward
Call, the Call of God and the Call of Man to the Ministry, is the Foundation of
the above Mistake in Mr. T.? If it were not for this, would it not be
altogether needless to insist upon a Thing so plain and obvious to any
unbyassed Person, though but of an ordinary Capacity? We grant that the above
Distinction will hold, and is clearly warranted by Scripture, when it is
applied to the Gospel Call to Christianity; for Scripture tells us, that many
are called by the Word, who are never called inwardly by the Spirit: But is it
not as evident, that God never appointed, and that Godly Men never used, nor
could in Faith use, the Institution of a Call to the Ministry, to convert Men,
or to beget Faith in them? For in giving this Call, do not Ministers and People
call a Man to the Ministry, not to make him a Christian or faithful Man, but
because they charitably judge him a faithful Man already, by the Trial made of
him? Is it not very evident, that the Call to the Ministry is not given to
convey Gifts or Graces to fit a Man for the Office, but to give a Man Authority
and Opportunity to exert the Gifts and Endowments, which he is judged to be
endowed with, before a Call is given? Else, what Need would there be of making
an exquisite Trial of Men's Gifts and Fitness beforehand? We grant also, that
there is a plain Distinction between an ordinary and an extraordinary Call to
the Ministry, the one being mediate the other immediate, the latter was
peculiar to extraordinary Officers, such as Prophets and Apostles; the former
only is what ordinary Ministers can in Faith expect. Where then is the
Scripture Foundation for the Distinction between the Call of God and the Call
of Man, the inward and the outward Call to the Ministry? We challenge Men to
quote one single Scripture to support this feigned Distinction in the whole
Book of God: For is it not evident, that the outward Call, of which Men or Man
is the Mean, Instrument or immediate Agent* when gone about according to
Christ's Institution and Direction in his Word, is the Call of God; yea, the
only ordinary Call which we may justly name the Call of God? And is it not a
reproaching of Christ's Institution, to name it the Call of Man by Way of
Disparagement, to distinguish it from what we name the Call of God? Is not
making Distinctions where the^^ is no Room for them, Pharisee-like, who
distinguished between swearing by the Altar and the Gift upon the Altar, the
Temple and its Gold, as indistinct a Way of Preaching as omitting Distinctions,
where the Nature of the Matter requires them* And is it not observable, by what
we have said already, that Mr. T. is chargeable with both in this Sermon? And
seeing he makes Indistinctness in the Application of Doctrines, one of the
Characteristick Defects of the natural Man's Ministry, will he tell us in his
next a Sign of what is Indistinctness in a spiritual Man throughout his whole
Sermon? We grant, that some do run uncalled or unsent into the Ministry, as the
false Prophets and false Apostles of old, and those even now, that upon a
Pretense of an inward and immediate Call enter into the Vineyard in a
disorderly Way, disagreeable to Christ's Institution; but yet can any that are
outwardly regularly called, be said to go unsent or uncalled? For is not the
Call to the Ministry an external Call, and is not the Effect of it an external
visible Relation in the visible Church, as visible between the Persons calling
and the Person called; or a visible Separation of a Man to an Office and
Authority in the visible Church? For is it not evident that Offices and
Officers have a Relation only to the visible Church, and not to the invisible?
It is true, the Minister may and ought to be an invisible Member of Christ's
invisible Body; but will any say, that there is room for or need of Ministers
to be invisible Pastors in the invisible Church as such? If then, there be an
inward Call to the Ministry, must not there be some inward Effect of this
inward Call, or else is it not in vain? To put the Matter in fairer Light if
possible; In the Call of the Gospel to Christianity, there is a double Effect,
viz. 1. An outward Effect, the Winning of Men to an outward Profession and
Membership in the visible Church and Duties therein. 2. An inward Effect, the
Bringing of Men into a Membership in the invisible Church or Body of Christ, by
or through a lively Faith; and therefore, is it not evident, that there is room
for and need of an outward and an inward Call, the one by the Word, the other
by the Spirit, in this Step? If any will say, that the Call to the Ministry is
a parallel Case; will they be so kind as to try their Skill in running the
Parallel, and we will promise Attention. When Men are chosen into any Church
Offices, are not they chosen out of the Church, which is or ought to be an
Assembly of Saints, in which none should be admitted, and in which none should
be tolerated in full Communion, but such as by their Profession and
Conversation, bear a credible Appearance of their being Saints indeed? When
therefore Men choose a Minister, should not they in all Reason choose an orderly
Member, against whom there is no Charge of Accusation depending, and who
appears upon an exquisite Trial and Enquiry, to be gifted, and sound in the
Faith, and regular in Practice? And yet when Men are but Men, short-sighted
Creatures, may not the best and wisest Men upon Earth, after all possible
Pains, be foully mistaken, as to Men's secret State of Grace, which none but
God knows absolutely, and those to whom he reveals it? Yet when in Obedience to
Christ, and according to his Institution, they act a conscientious Part in
calling any to the Ministry; is not such a one rightly and legally called to
the Ministry; so that there is no Deficiency in the Call, whatever may be in
the Person called? And so, who can deny but that Nadab and Abihu, Hophni and
Phinehas, Judas and Demas, together with all the unconverted Men that ever
entered into the Ministry in a regular Way, according to Christ's Institution,
had a divine ministerial Call, though they wanted Grace, which Mr. T. names the
Call of God? But is it not wrong thus to miscal sacred Things? For is not
changing of the true Names of such Things, the ready Way to lose their true
Ideas, and thereby to bewilder ourselves and others, to the great Hazard of
Truth?

2. The second Argument, to prove, that such People who have no better than
Pharisee-Teachers, are to be pitied, is, because the Ministry of natural Men is
uncomfortable to gracious Souls.

Qu. I. But what is this to the Matter in Hand? For may not the Ministry of a
spiritual Man be as uncomfortable to carnal Men, or even to spiritual Men under
Decays and Slumbers; how else are Men made to cry and roar so loud at Seasons?
If Reports be true, have not some Hearers of late Sermons been made so
uncomfortable as to choose Strangling rather than Life? Have not many more been
put into such Shocks and Fits, as made them Objects of Pity and Grief to most
of their Beholders; when it may be those who had got the Second-sight, could
rejoice at such mournful Sights, in Token of their Tender-heartedness? Would it
be safe then to call every Minister that will make his Hearers uncomfortable a
carnal Man? Who then are these carnal Ministers? Messrs. Somebodies, Messrs.
Every Bodies, but Somebodies; and after all is said, are not they Messrs.
Nobody knows them? Are not those edifying Sermons wherein the Preacher makes
clamorous Outcries against Pharisees and carnal Men and Ministers, upon mere
Guesses; when for aught is said in public, the Preacher may be levelling his
Arrows against the Papal Crew in the German Empire; and so, as to the main
Thing driven at, is not the Hearer obliged to return Home, after a tedious
Journey, as wise as he went, only he has got a Flea in the Ear, to put him
upon making Guesses upon Guesses upon the Preacher's Outcry, founded upon
Guesses, and as his Humor balances to the one Side or the other, will he not
pass his Censure, and draw it through the Heart of Somebody, to make the Devil
Sport? O rare Edification! For what is rash censuring and accusing the Brethren
on such Footings, but Playing a Tune upon the Devil's Fiddle? But will Mr. T.
and his Party, first prove themselves to be spiritual Men, by some stated Rules
besides their own bold Say-foes? And if the other Side afterward will not
venture as severe a Trial before indifferent Judges, will not the Way be in
some measure cleared, to treat them accordingly? Besides, Is not Truth much
more comfortable than Error; and so is not there a great Difference between
Hearing an orthodox Minister and an heterodox Pharisee as to Comfort? And may
not a carnal Man greatly excel many a godly Man, in all common Gifts of Memory,
Judgment, Oratory, Eloquence, as well as the Heathen Orators did, and so be
able to deliver their Discourses with all the Advantage of Diction, Pathos,
Emphasis, Cadence and Accent? Does not the Apostle plainly grant this in 1 Cor.
13.1 -- 3.? Besides, when Ministers are orthodox in Doctrine and regular in
Practice (for if they be not such, we plead not for them) How can Men know that
they are unconverted? When therefore the Word is preached in Purity by a
Minister that is regularly called, behaving orderly, and who has not forfeited
his Character by false Doctrine or Misbehaviour; ought not his Auditors
cheerfully and thankfully to attend there-upon, looking to God for his Blessing
upon his own Ordinance, without needless and hurtful Jealousies, Doubts or
Queries about the Minister's secret State toward God? But to proceed,

Qu. II. Though we own, that there is an Emnity between the Seed of the Woman and
the Seed of the Serpent, and that this will be now and then creating Jarrs
between unconverted Ministers and godly People; and will it not do the same
between unconverted People and a godly Minister, especially if People
counter-act good Rules, as Mr. T. advises them? If Ministers are the Make-bates
in every Quarrel between them and the People, would it not be good Advice to
get them indicted for common Barrators? Only lest honest Men suffer Wrong, will
it not be necessary to except the Raisers of Feuds and Factions in their
Brethren's Bounds, for peaceable Men? For who knows, but that this may make
some of them love Peace the better for the future? Besides will not the Relics
of Corruption in the godly Ministers and People, often cause them to jarr and
contend one with another, as Paul and Barnabas, Luther and Calvin, Hooper and
Ridley did? And may not these polish their Pleas with Wit and Rhetoric, and
gild them with the specious Names of Zeal, Fidelity, Peace, good Order and
Unity? How then shall we catch the natural Man with this shattered Net?

Qu. III. Though it is true, that natural Men have no true Love to Christ, and the
Souls of their Fellow Creatures; yet may not they outdo a faithful Minister in
pretending Love to both, as well as their Great Grandfathers the false Apostles
outdid Paul, both in commending themselves, and pretending great Love to Souls?
2 Cor. 10.12. Gal. 4.17. And did not their fair though false Pretenses prove very
bewitching to some? Gal. 3.1. Can Mr. T. produce any Writings, wherein any of
his Brethren appear so void of Love to their Brethren, as he appears in the
present Sermon? Or is the Tribute of Love fully paid to Ministers already, so
that the little Remainder of it left is due only to the People?

Qu IV. Whereas Mr. T. says, that the Discourses of a natural Man are cold,
sapless, and freeze between their Lips; we would ask, whether a warm natural
Temper may not do Wonders to mend that Defect? Yea, may it not outdo Grace
poured into a more cool-temper'd Soul? Further, how can natural Men fis^
faithfully for Fame, a good Name and worldly Pelf, without they strive to make
grim Faces, and Smiles too, to warm the Affections of others to them, or else
may not there be Danger of parting from them with empty Pockets, and without
Notice* Can any doubt, but that some natural Men in times of yo^, had the Knack
of blowing up the Fire of Purgatory into such a blazing Flame, as to heat the
Heart of the most frozen Usurer, inasmuch as Men's Money burnt their Pocket's
Bottoms out, so that they could not hold them any longer? And are not natural
Men crafty Fellows still; so that if they find that a little Warmth in the
Delivery will give Money or Praise, will not the Love of Money warm them to a
due Pitch, to offer the Expense of their Passions in Sacrifice to their dear
Mammon, although they care not a Fig for the People?

Qu. V. Let Teaching with Authority be for ever ascribed to Christ as his just
Praise, who spoke in such an incomparable Manner, that never a Man did or will
speak like him; but yet we would ask, whether Men's speaking with Authority
consists in furious Passions, strong Voice or Accent, and masterly positive
Assertions and Harangues, without Order, Reason, or Scripture Proof; or in a
clear stating of Truth, and confirming it with clear Scripture Proofs, with
becoming Gravity, and commending themselves not to the Ears, but to every Man's
Conscience, in declaring God's whole Counsel without Reserve or corrupt
Mixture? For is not the mighty Man in the Scriptures the most authoritive
Divine, albeit his Language is less fluent than gaudy Rhetoricians?

Qu. VI. Granting, That Pharisee-Teachers had no Experience of a special Work
of the Holy Ghost upon their own Souls, while Pharisees; but yet, when they
turned Christians, and embraced Christ and the Gospel, in Purity, did not the
Case alter? For who can say, but that Paul and Nicodemus had as clear
Experiences of the Work of Grace as any others, when converted? Is there the
same Reason for orthodox Christians to turn Followers of Mr. W. or T. as there
was for Pharisees to turn Christians, in order to learn Experiences of Grace?
It is probable others are not inclined to discourse so frequently on any
particular Subjects, as those who force the same common Heads of Doctrine
almost into every Sermon, because they know God's Law is exceeding Broad, and
affords great variety of important Subjects, they knowing it to be their Duty
to declare the whole Counsel of God; yea, it may be further granted, that they
have been sometimes longer and sometimes shorter in their Applications; and
has not Mr. T. W. and Blair been so too, as some of their printed Sermons
witness? But who more general in their Application than those, who generally
make one common Application, which is at least the same in the main to suit
most of their Doctrines? It is probable others are not ordinarily so distinct,
as to divide their Auditors their particular Shares, according to their
different Ages, Sexes and Colors; but yet, will Mr. T. tell us what are those
important Subjects, that are better cleared by him and his Party, than by other
pious Ministers? Where are their new Marks, to distinguish the precious from
the vile? What new Distinctions have they brought to light? Is it the
Distinction between the Call of God and the Call of Man, in the ordinary Call
to the Ministry? Who of the other Side have been so Indistinct, as to confound
an orthodox regular Ministry with an heterodox disorderly Ministry, as if they
were one and the same? Who of them have shown so little Skill, in
distinguishing between Law and Gospel, as to assert, that Judas's Ministry, as
an Apostle, was a legal Ministry, at least in Part? As for misapplying the Word
through Ignorance, let Men's Performances decide that. If the Texts in Psalm.
50.16. and John 10.1, 9, and some more in the present Sermon, are not
misapplied, let what we have said, and shall yet say, on that Head, be
answered. As for misapplying the Word through Anger, who are in greater Danger of
that, than such who are like furious Phaeton, who resolved to drive, though he
set the World on Fire? Or like a driving Jehu, who, in his flying Career,
thought himself a Sort of a petty God, proclaiming his own Heart right, and
questioning that of others; or like hair-brained Drivers, who resolve to
whistle out their Whistle, though the Cart turn over? Who are those that use
Raging, Railings, and utter frightning Surmises, damning and devilizing Men at
an odd Rate, to the casting of some weak Souls into Distraction and Despair? It
is probable those of the other Side have not the Courage to use such Ways,
because they fear God, pity the weak, and look upon such Methods as are
sometimes used undecent for the Stage, much more for the Pulpit, if current
Accounts be true? Is there no Appearance of Anger in Mr. T's proclaiming the
Body of the Clergy of this Generation, swarms of Locusts, Crowds of covetous
and cruel Pharisees, who, if they could help it, would not let one faithful Man
come into the Ministry? Did ever a dissenting Protestant paint the Body of the
Protestant Clergy in such black and dismal Colors, in any Age? Is not there
barefaced Slander contained in these Expressions? Is there no Appearance of
Anger in Mr. T's pronouncing such orderly Members, as content themselves with
and adhere to their own pious Pastors, and will not ramble over the Parish-line
to him and his Party, Dupes and Dunces, as blind as Moles, as dead as Stones,
without any spiritual Taste and Relish, poor Fools, silly Souls, etc? But we
shall meet those Things in our Way again, and therefore pass them here: Who are
those that are more guilty of strengthening the Hands of the Wicked, by
promising them Life, than such who proclaim disorderly Ramblers, Criers,
Roarers, and Tumblers, and Rowlers, if not Demoniacks, Converts, and that upon
the Account of such odd Doings, whereas it is well known, that many such
behaved exceeding vile afterward as well as before? Who are those that fasten
Terrors into the Hearts of the Righteous more than those, who pronounce all in
a damnable State, who do not know that they are in a gracious State? Whereas
Mr. T. brings it in as a Charge against the carnal Men that they sow before
they plow; We would query, whether some Sort of Ground or Grain will not yield
a better Crop in that odd Way? But how does Mr. T. plow God's Vineyard, if not
by sowing God's Word? Has he any Sort of Plow to prepare his Hearers before
sowing the good Seed? What have we here then but a jingling empty Sound? If the
Meaning is, that Ministers should industriously preach the Law and Terror to
their Hearers first, and hide the Gospel from them at least for a Time, as it
would seem to be, by what foregoes and follows; We would ask, how is this
possible in a mixed Multitude, without serving Men with a common Mess? Whether
feeding the Child or beating the Dogs is the main Care of the Nurse? If the
Children must be neglected for a Time, for fear that the Dogs may snatch away
some Crumbs, or till the Dogs are so well lashed as to run away or change their
Nature, may not there be Danger of neglecting them too long? Where can we find
that Wheat growing in the Field of the visible Church, that is without Chaff
and Tares? If so, will not there be as great a Danger, to preach the Gospel an
hundred Years hence, as there is now? What a fine giddy Counselor is carnal
Wisdom in religious Matters? For is not the Gospel the Foundation in the second
Covenant, how else shall Christ be the Foundation and chief Cornerstone? Is
not the Law as a Rule, and a broken Covenant added as an Appendix unto the
Promise, as we read in Gal. iii. 19? Must we then always begin with the
Appendix, or can we lay any Foundation for Faith or Gospel-Obedience by the
Law? Before Men condemn Ministers for carnal Men on this Account, should not
they take heed, that they do not rush unawares upon the thick Bosses of God's
Buckler? For is it not evident, that the great Jehovah, whose Wisdom is
infinite, revealed a Savior to fallen Adam, before he pronounced the Curse of
the first Covenant upon him? Genesis 3.15. Is it not one main Difference between
the first and second Covenant, that in the first the Law was before the
Promise, but in the second after it? And is it not impossible to place the
Command before the Promise in the second, without turning it to be a legal
Covenant under some Form or other? Is not Christ's Sermon on the Mount one of
the first and longest Sermons of his that we have upon Record, and does not he
therein pronounce the Beatitudes first? Might it not be supposed, that many of
Christ's Hearers were as carnal as the Hearers of our Ministers, who are staged
for carnal Men, for not conforming to carnal Rules? Was not it Christ's
Commission to his Disciples, when he sent them forth, into whatsoever House ye
enter, first say, Peace be to this House, Luke 10.5. And could they proclaim
Peace by the Law to any one House? Who the^ are those, that are busy in raising
the Fabric before they lay the Foundation, but those that put Men upon legal
Humblings, to prepare themselves for Christ and the Gospel? When Minister
therefore have first laid down the Doctrine of Justification orthodoxly,
agreeable to our Standard, and keep to it, how can they press or drive Men to
Duty and good Order too much, in Po^^^ of Gospel-Obedience? And let the World
judge, whether they are worst Drivers, who press even natural Men to wait upon
God in the Way of Duty, or those that forbid natural Men to meddle in sacred
Things? For if there was no more than a Peradventure itself of obtaining Mercy,
to encourage us to take up with the Way of Duty, if they go wholly out of it
and hang themselves, is not that Peradventure lost? But yet, if there be such a
Thing as certain Decrees, must not the benefiting of some by Duty be as well
secured as their Eternal Happiness; or else, is it not time for us to form a
new Creed, by casting away the Doctrine of absolute Decrees to the Means and to
the End? Though it is true, we cannot beforehand have any more than a
Peradventure of our being of that happy Number; yet, is not be faithful, who
has promised, him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out? John vi.
37. and who has pronounced a Blessing upon the Man, that hears him, watching
duly at his Gates, and waiting at the Posts of his Doors, Prove. viii. ^4. (...)
Mr. T. think, that Failure in the Manner, will excuse Men for neglecting the
Matter of Duty; or that the Plea of the Fear of the former will clear Men of
the Guilt of the latter? Who a^ those, that discover more Want of Experience of
those spiritual Difficulties, that pious Souls are exposed to, in this Vale of
Tears, than those who study frightful Expressions and Postures (...) terrify
weaker Vessels; who rejoice to see poor frightened Creatures in shocking
senseless Fits; who tell the poor convinced Soul, who is persuaded of his being
in an unconverted State, That God forbids the unconverted to meddle in sacred
Things; who tell the doubting Soul, that every one that is in a State of Grace
knows it? Is not it an high Degree of Misery, to fall into the Hands of such
Physicians in a Strait, whose Remedies are full worse than the Disease? And
seeing Mr. T. speaks of the natural Man's cold Prayers, is it not observable,
that some, who call themselves spiritual Men, seem to be somewhat barren in
Matter and soon weary in that Duty? And is not their Warmth therein very
disproportionable to what they discover in Preaching?

Qu. VII. Whereas Mr. T. page 11. charges carnal Ministers thus, They love
those Unbelievers that are kind to them, better than many Christians, and choose
them Companions; We would ask, whether Unkindness to his own orderly Minister
be not a surer Sign of a factious Partizan than of a Believer? Whether Kindness
to his own Minister, if he is clear in the rest, be a proper mark of an
Unbeliever? Or may not these Publicans by Chance go to Heaven before Mr. T.'s
unkind Saints? Is it not an hard Case, if there be Jarrs, whoever is in the
Fault, the Minister is carnal: If there be Love between Ministers and People,
the Minister is carnal, and the Kind to him, Unbelievers; if he be of a calm
Temper, he is cold and carnal and a Coward; if he is warm, and presses Men to
Duty, he is a carnal Driver; if he comforts People, he is carnal, for he
strengthens the Hands of the Wicked; for none else will be so kind as to come
and hear such; if he reprove the Unruly and Disorderly, he is carnal; for these
are the Saints of the Day, however it may go hereafter, when the first will be
last and the last first? Are not they born under some unhappy Planets or Signs,
or else very unhappy in their Judges, against whom all Sorts of Premises shall
conclude to their Disadvantage? But yet will the Disciple expect to be above
his Master? If the Matter were really so, that those that call themselves
spiritual Men prove unkind to the Ministers, and those that are accounted
carnal Men are kind to them, grant they were really so, without they show Love
and Respect to such in a civil Way, how can they be true Followers of him that
upon the same Account was styled the Companion of Publicans and Sinners? and
who but Pharisees will be offended at them for so doing? Mat. 9.10, 11. But
when countenancing and palliating of Errors, Anarchy and Disorder, as well as
Unkindness to and exclaiming against orthodox and regular Ministers, are
counted Signs of Conversion; is it any Wonder that Preaching of Truth,
Confutation of Errors, Pressing of Duties, bearing Witness against Disorders,
is unpleasing to such irregular Converts; who, though they love dearly and are
greatly edified in hearing others lashed in a blind Way, yet they will not have
their Tammuz or Dalilah touched with a Finger, for fear Dag^^ may fall before
the Ark of the God of Israel? Is it not some Difficulty to find out, what is
that great Comfort such have in Hearing the godly Ministers of the Age
carnalized, pharisized, reproached, reviled; their pious Adherents miscalled
Dupes and Dunces, etc. themselves damned and devilized for want of Assurance;
and if it were not that they are encouraged to Disorders, and upon that Account
and their Unkindness to their own Ministers and Kindness to Intruders, fainted;
might not they as to Comfort sing, Whoop Barnaby, and return to their
Recreations, the longest Holy Day in the Year? But who ever heard stinking
Mackerel cried in the Market?

3. Mr. T.'s third Argument to prove his Doctrine, is, The Ministry of natural
Men, is for the most Part unprofitable. And would not Somebody obtain his End,
if by silly and sinful Arts he could make the Ministry of those, whom he calls,
right or wrong, natural Men, not only for the most part, but altogether
unprofitable and unacceptable in the World? When on the one Hand God is prayed
unto, to confound them, and when this prevails not, do not Men take the Devil's
Way by defaming, reproaching, false accusing and censuring them, by oblique
Insinuations and indirect Suggestions, casting Dirt in a blind Way, as if they
were resolved neither to act the Part of Friends nor of fair Foes; and can Men
think that God will be always silent, though he may be for a time; or can they
think God will be thus served, and that the Interest of Christianity will be
thus promoted, or their own Ends will be gained in such immoral, wicked and
deceitful Ways, which Scripture and even Nature's Dictates reprove; and can any
Thing but enthusiastic Rovings fortify Men to act thus under a Cloak and Cry
of Religion? But to proceed,

Qu. I. As to real Benefit, may it not be justly feared, that the Ministry of
the most godly Men has been less profitable than the Pious could have wished
in all Ages, and in most if not all Places? But as for making Parties, such is
the Biass of corrupt Nature, that we would ask, Who ever that had Wickedness,
Courage and Policy enough to paint gross Errors with glaring Colors, but have
been successful, at least for a Time, to draw Multitudes after them? Have not
the Pharisees, Sadducees, and Essenes, outdone the Karraites? Have not Theudas,
Judas of Galilee, and Barchochebas, played their Pranks with Success? Has not
Simon Magus and the false Apostles had their Crowds? Has not the Romish Beast
had the whole World wondering after him? And has not Mahomet been as
successful as to claim the Empire of three Parts of the World? Have not Arrius,
Pelagius, Arminius, Socinus, Fox, had their Tribes; and have not some of them
too many still? Had not Dancing Sacheverel his Mobs? And might not the Zeal of
these in their Time, compare Notes with our present Rabble, unless Enthusiasm
will help to make a better Story? Has popular Applause in bad Ways been of any
Service to any, but to lift Men up, like Icarus's Wings, for a surer Break-Neck?

Qu. II. Had Noah, Moses, Aaron, Elijah, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Hosea, Ezekiel, or
even our Savior himself, any great Reason to boast of their great Success in
the Ministry? Did not more than one of them cry out, Who has believed our
Report? Yea, did not He that was incomparably the Greatest of all, make this
Moan, in John 12.38.?

Qu. III. We plead for no Ministers who by the Unsoundness of their Doctrines
or Misbehaviour, give just Offense; for if any can be proven such of either
Side, we would have Men join in discarding them, albeit they would pretend to
be spiritual Men; for by their late Conduct we are afraid of none more than
those, that make a fair Show in the Flesh, and glory much in Appearance and
despise others, who seem to have bid farewell to Charity and Gospel Order, and
we are afraid are going to barter the Love of Truth, for Love to Mr. W -- d,
and his incoherent corrupt Scheme; and we would have our spiritual Watchmen to
look diligently to it, lest there be a Root of Bitterness springing up, which
may trouble them and defile many. In the mean Time say we, Let the Blind have
proper Guides, and, if possible, Eye Salve; let the Dead be buried, or bury
their Dead; let Madmen be purged, bleeded and disciplined, and let Swords and
Halters be put out of their Way; let possessed Men be bound, watched and prayed
for; let Rebels and Enemies to God be sharply reproved by Ministers, and
punished by Magistrates, if upon Trial it appears they deserve it; let the
Captives of Darkness be pitied, instructed and prayed for; let Lepers be shut
out of the Camp for seven Days, and if possible cleansed; let ignorant Rusticks
have their Plows mended, or be put to Trades; let the Unconverted, if known, be
put among Catechumens, and wait upon God in the Use of Means: Thus much of the
rational Part of this Argument.

2. As to the Scripture brought to confirm it, viz. Jer. 23.32. Behold, I am
against them that prophesy false Dreams, says the Lord, and do tell them, and
cause my People to err by their Lies and by their Lightness; yet I sent them
not, nor commanded them: therefore they shall not profit this People at all,
says the Lord.

Qu. I. Was not there some Reason why Mr. T. Pharisee-like, quoteth Mr. Pool's
Gloss upon the Text, instead of the Scripture Words themselves; and who is he
like, when he cites only such a small Part of the Gloss, and leaves the Persons
there intended, wholly under a Veil for any Thing that is said to discover them
to his Readers? Was it Ignorance or Anger, or something else, that prompted Mr.
T. to misapply this Text, by appropriating it to the Ministry of the natural
Man in general, whether orthodox or heterodox? For who but Enthusiastic
Dreamers, that falsely pretend to an immediate Call and Mission, and to an
immediate Guidance of a divine Inspiration, or immediate Revelations, when in
Reality they only declared their own Dreams and Fancies, and delusive
Experiences, who ran in a disorderly Way, contrary to God's instituted Order,
causing the People to err by preaching Lies and Lightness, and not sound
Doctrine, are the only Persons here intended and spoken of? Is it not therefore
evident to the meanest Capacity, that there is not a Word here that strikes
against an orthodox orderly Minister, that preaches sound Doctrine, and is not
turning its Edge against such, a plain Perverting of Scripture? And we appeal
to the whole World, whether or no Mr. W -- d appears in his Writings to come
within the Verge of this Text, more than any Minister of our Denomination
within the Bounds of the Synod? And are not those that are attached to his
Enthusiastic Notions, them that are next in the File? What then will become of
Men's high Pretenses to great Edification, in hearing Men preaching glaring
Experiences, which to the Auditor can be no better than a waking Dream,
whatever it be to the Preacher? For how is it possible for the Hearer to come
to any Certainty in the Matter about such Declarations, viz. Whether such
boasting Accounts are delusive Fancies, Deceits, or Realities? At the most, can
the Hearer arrive to any more than a bare human Faith, in an ordinary Way, in
such Matters? And is not advancing an high Degree of human Faith, in Matters of
Religion, the Bane of it, and the only Way to make Pharisee Rabbis, contrary
to the plain Caution given in Matthew. xxiii. 8, 9, 10. For who more blind than
those who have their Consciences tailed to one Fore-Horse? And if such Relators
appear deficient, as to Solidity, Orderliness, or Consistency with Scripture,
Reason or themselves, is not human Faith itself rendered thereby a doubtful
Wavering, if Men do but act as rational Creatures?

Qu. II. As to Experience of Success or Unsuccessfulness; Who that has read
any thing considerable, and allows himself Leave to think, but knows that this
is a very precarious Rule to judge of the Goodness or Badness of Things and
Persons? For how often shall we find, that decoyed Villainy hith been
successful, when real Virtue strove against the Tide to no Purpose; how else
could Christ say, I have labored in vain, I have spent my Strength for naught
and in vain? Isa. xlix. 4. Will not the Instances that we have given already of
good and bad Ministers, if duly considered, put the Matter in a fair Light? But
to follow Mr. T. in his Ramblings; grant that there is too much Appearance of
Security up and down, and that Ministers may have their Share in the Guilt, by
their Slackness in some or most Places; yet may it not be owing, in other
Places, more to the Want of due Improvement in the People? But is it not hard
to judge, whether this proceeds from the total Want of Grace, or the Want of
the due Exercise or Excitation of it, especially when Men are orderly? For had
not the wise as well as the foolish Virgins their Slumbers? In what Age was it,
wherein the Church enjoyed Liberty, Peace and Prosperity, for any Time, but the
most faithful Ministers had too much Reason to mourn in secret, because of the
Security and Unconcernedness of their Hearers? And how can Mr. T. tell, but
that this is the Case at present with many or most of his Brethren? Yea grant,
that other Ministers are not Successful in fixing Terrors and Convictions to
that Degree that Mr. W -- d, T. and their Adherents fix them, or which they
judge necessary as Preparative to Conversion; yet if the End of winning Souls
to Christ, can be obtained with less Degrees, whether are those high Degrees
desirable for themselves? May not therefore their Want of Success in such
Matters, be owing to their Faithfulness? viz. Because they are not clear in
Conscience to use such artful Ways to raise Men's Passions in a blind Way as
others use, as judging, that God comes not in the Earthquake nor Whirlwind, but
in the still Voice, now as well as formerly. For is it not notorious, that they
clear up Truths, and preach as convincingly, to the understanding Hearers, as
the other Side, as well as more orthodoxly? And may we not further enquire,
whether or no the solid Exercises and Power of Religion do not seem to lose
Ground apace, by Men's crying up such Awakenings in the Manner it is done? For
do not Pride and Peevishness, Self-conceit and rash Censures, Factions and
Contentions, in many Places, seem to threaten to destroy the very Form of
Religion and Gospel Order? For though we own, that keeping up the Form is not
enough to prove, that the Gospel flourishes; yet, when hearing the Word,
partaking the Sacraments, and even paying the Salaries of Ministers, are plain
Gospel Duties; and when done or performed in a becoming Manner, are not these
better Signs of the Success of the Gospel, than the Contempt and Neglect of
these and other Duties, upon the Account of causeless Offenses, groundless
Jealousies, Factions and Party-Zeal, divisive litigious Quarrels and disorderly
Rovings?

Qu. III. Whereas Mr. T. seems, in page 12. to explode the very Notion of a
Minister's taking Comfort in his acting a faithful Part in doing his Duty,
without seeing Success: It must be owned, that to labor in vain, is double
hard Labor; yet, it not the Success of our Labors wholly and solely the
Lord's, and not ours, how fit soever the Instrument be, as may be seen in 1
Cor. iii. 7? And yet, did not God lay such a Burden, as laboring in vain,
upon some of his very dear Servants, to their great Trial and Exercise? And did
not he tell some of them beforehand, that their Ministry would be succesless;
and was their Obedience and Faithfulness less or more glorious, in that they
acted a good Part in Submission to divine Authority, when they knew they should
have no Success, or at least no great one? Was not this the Case with Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and even with Christ himself, as may be seen in Isa. vi. 9,
10. Jer. vii. 27. Ezekiel. iii. 7. Matthew. xiii. 14, 15? What had Christ himself to
comfort him, but that his Judgment was with the Lord, and his Work with his
God? Isa. xlix. 4. And does not he comfort himself in his doing his Duty, even
when he labored in vain, when he says in the next Verse, Though Israel be not
gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the Eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be
my Strength? And has not God given Grounds to his Servants, to comfort
themselves in their doing their Duty, as in Ezekiel. iii. 19, 21. and xxxiii. 9?
And as to ourselves, is not our acting a faithful Part, in the Way of Duty, the
only solid Grounds of Comfort, in our several Callings and Works thereof, Gal.
vi. 4? But as to Comfort in others, we readily grant, that a conscientious Man,
who travels in Birth that Christ may be formed in the Hearts of his Hearers,
cannot take Comfort, without seeing probable Grounds of Hope of it, appearing
in Men's Attachment to Truth in Principle and Practice; but if Ministers, who
are but Men at the best, cannot take Comfort in the Success of their Labors
without knowing or being assured, that Christ is truly formed in the Hearts of
his Hearers, as Mr. T. seems to insinuate here; how is it possible for
Ministers in an ordinary Way, to take Comfort in their Labors, while in this
Life? Must not they therefore, according to this Rule, resolve, while here, to
sow in Tears, without expecting to reap as much as the First Fruits of Comfort
in the Success of their Labors, till the Time of reaping in Joy comes? For is
not the Pretense of the certain Knowledge of the secret State of others in an
ordinary Way, a vain Dream of an empty senseless Brain? Though we will not deny,
but that such Dreamers may have full Bellies of Fare good enough, yet does it
not appear, that their Brains are as full of enthusiastic Whimsies, as their
Bellies can be of better Fare?

Qu. IV. Does not Mr. T. seem to be very wavering in his Judgment, as if he was
double if not treble minded, whereto to ascribe the Success of the Ministry, or
the Benefit of the Hearer in attending thereupon? For,

1. Does not he seem to suspend the Success or Efficacy of ministerial
Performances, as if it depended upon the Grace of the Minister? And does not
what he says, from page 9 -- 15, seem to be built on this Suggestion? But yet,
seeing Mr. T. in another Point, as may be seen in its proper Place, would fain
twit his Brethren with being worse than Papists, may not we here remark, that
Papists are more orthodox than this; for though they say, that the Efficacy of
Sacraments depends upon the Priest^ Intention, but that it depends upon the
Condition of the Priest as to Holiness, they say not, if our Books be right?
But do not Protestants deny both?

2. Does not Mr. T. seem to suggest, from page 17 -- 22, That the Efficacy of
ministerial Performances depends upon the different Degrees of the Gifts of
Ministers, though both or all be gracious? But is it any new Thing for God to
give gracious Ministers of smaller Gifts great Success; or to give Men of great
Gifts and Graces small Success? And has not God given great Gifts to many, on
whom he bestowed no Grace at all? But are not these Notions directly opposite
to Question 91 of our Shorter Catechism, and to Quest. 161 of our Larger
Catechism? Though we freely grant, that both Gifts and Graces in a Minister,
furnish him with an Aptitude, as an Instrument, to do good to Souls in a Way of
Profit or Comfort, for Conversion and Edification, and the greater the Degrees
of either or both are, the greater the Aptitude of the Instrument; but yet, as
the Necessaries of Salvation are plainly revealed, and as the true Success of
Men's Labors is wholly owing to God, must not appropriating it to any thing in
the Instrument, be idolizing of it?

3. Does not Mr. T. also seem to suspend the Success of the Ministry upon the
Hearers Inclination or Judgment, how else can this be pleaded a sufficient
Reason to dissolve the Relation between Minister and People, or to justify
their Non-attendance upon the pastoral Administration of their Pastors, to go
to hear others for ordinary? But is it not the Truth in the Matter, that the
Success or real Efficacy of sacred Administrations, depends wholly and solely
upon the divine Blessing and Cooperation therewith? And if Men desert the
Truth in any Point, may it not be seen, that their great Capacities will only
serve to entangle themselves and others with vain Notions?

Qu. V. May not a carnal Minister one Way or other make himself Master of the
same Words and Phrases, which Godly Ministers use in speaking of the highest
Mysteries and Exercises of Grace, and of the most experimental Parts of
Religion? As for Example, may not such a Minister get, by Memory, Mr. J. T's
and Mr. Blair's Sermons of Regeneration and Adoption: yea Mr. G. T's
expostulatory Address, or such like Pieces, so as to be able to deliver them to
an Auditory with all the Advantage and Elegancies of a beautiful, graceful and
moving Delivery? And can any doubt, but that such a Minister would be as
careful and industrious this Way, as if he acted from better Principles?
Besides, has not every Grace its Counterfeit? And are not these as like true
Grace, that Men deceive themselves with them, and others with their Luster; and
when great Gifts are added to these, may not Men in the Strength thereof go
very far in the Theory of the Doctrine of Experiences; and if they feel the
less, may not they pass with Men, if they have but Courage to pretend the more?
For does not the Acceptance that the barefaced Pretense of Men's Ability to
know and judge the secret State of others, show, that bold Pretenders may pass
with many for great and good Men?

Qu. VI. We would ask Mr. T. further, whether he really judges, that the Truth
of God delivered by a gifted, orthodox and regular Minister, though he were
unconverted, have not a far greater Aptitude, as means to convince, convert and
edify Hearers, than any Temptation of Satan, or any thing else that produces
its Effect by mere Chance-Medley, as Mr. T. is pleased to express it page 13? 1
Because the Ordinance is of Christ's Institution. 2, The Power of God's Word,
which is supposed to be spoken truly and decently. 3, Because of the Prayers of
the Godly Hearers. 4, The due Attention given to the Word as the Word of God.
5, Because of the Prayers of the whole Church of God for a Blessing upon his
own Ordinance. Will not these, together with other Circumstances that may
concur, make the good Effect following thereupon, an Effect of God's Blessing
upon his own Institution, and not of Chance-Medley, though Grace should be
wanting in the Preacher, which neither he nor the Hearer knows, nor suspects?
Is God's Power, Grace or Holiness any Way less glorious, if God owns his own
Ordinances, regularly administered, as to the external Part of it, to do a
saving Good to the Hearer, when the Preacher, for Want of Grace, receives no
saving Benefit thereby? Does not Mr. T. seem to allow, that some Instances
could be shown of unconverted Ministers being instrumental in convincing
Persons of their lost State, i. e. effectually, as we understand him, or else,
can any suppose it a rare Thing for them to convince Men in some Degree of
their fallen State? Can Mr. T. give any one Instance of a Person effectually
convinced of his lost State by Satan's Temptations? For are not all Satan's
Temptations, even those that he transacts as an Angel of Light, blinding and
not enlightening? It is true, God may overruled Evil, so as to bring Good out of
it, but can that Good in any Sense be said to be the Effect of the Evil, or is
it not the sole Effect of some good Cause? Is there the same Ground to think,
that God will make use of Satan, who has no Right nor Call to use any one of
God's Ordinances, as often as he does a natural Man, well gifted and regularly
called, according to God's Institution, making Use of his own Ordinance in
Obedience to him, to convince, convert and edify Souls? Does not God bestow
Gifts on natural Men, either for their own Good, or for the Good of others; or
else, must it not be, that he bestows them in vain? Is there any Ground in all
the Book of God for Men to think, that God will own Satan as an Instrument of
conveying any saving Benefit to the Souls of Men? If there is, had not Men
better to wait upon him, than upon an enthusiastic Dreamer's Ministry; for
does not that Text in Jer. xxiii. 32. plainly assure us, that such shall not
profit God's Israel at all, be their Dreams never so pleasing to Flesh and
Blood? We grant, that God may make Use of Satan, to chastize and afflict the
Bodies and Minds of Persons, for does not Scripture and later Experience prove
this? But who can prove, that God has made use of him to subdue any Sin? It is
granted, that the Body may be mortified by Satan; but is it not the proper Work
of God's Spirit to mortify the Deeds of the Body? Is it therefore supposable,
that God will make Satan instrumental of conveying any saving Good to Souls by
his wicked Temptations, in all which he rebels against God and seeks the Ruin
of Souls? If Men will once swallow this wicked Suggestion, may not they as well
believe, that wicked Men, who are Satan's Instruments, may, by their
Temptations, convince Persons too, and consequently that they may do at least
as much Good to Souls by serving the Devil as ever they can do by serving God,
seeing there is no more than a Chance-Medley in both? Is it not one of the most
unjust and wicked Censures of the Age, to rank all natural Men with Pharisees,
in order to condemn the Body of the Clergy of this Generation for natural Men
and Pharisees; and, as if this was too little, to rank them with Devils, in
order to raise Prejudices against them, to the marring of the Success of the
Gospel and the Good of Souls, by their Ministry, as far as such wicked
Insinuations can prevail? How much of the Pharisee Mr. T. acts herein; yea, how
much he has rejoiced the Devils in Hell by such Censures, we leave him, at a
calm Hour, to consider. In the mean Time we recommend to his Consideration,
what is written in 1 Cor. x. 1 -- 3. Could any Thing but rash Anger and
Party-Zeal, or worse, inspire a Minister of Christ, to take so much of the
Devil's Part against orthodox and orderly Ministers, and the regular Exercises
of Religion, upon blind (and for aught appears, or for aught he or any of his
Party knows) false Guesses of their carnal State, as to many of them? Should
not Mr. T. consider, whether or no what Christ told his Disciples, in Luke ix.
55. be not very applicable to him on this Account?

Qu. VII. Is not reading of Scripture an Ordinance of God's Appointment,
enjoined upon natural as well as spiritual Men, for Conviction, Conversion and
Edification; and is there not a Blessing pronounced upon him that reads, in
Rev. i. 3? We would therefore ask Mr. T. are not there some natural Men
convinced and converted by reading the Scripture? If so, can Mr. T. give us any
Reason, why a gifted natural Man's preaching the Word, convincingly and
clearly, should be less efficacious to convince and convert others, than a
natural Man's own reading the Word, when the latter may be more ignorant than
the former? Or will Mr. T. tell us, that Conviction or Conversion by reading
the Scriptures is an Effect of Chance-Medley too, in order to persuade People
to cast away their Bibles, or the reading of them, with or after their old
Pastors, that they may seek the Law wholly at the Mouth of the Priests, for the
Priests Lips should keep Knowledge? But by Experience, by the Help of their
Bibles, may not People know that they may utter Dreams? Well, is not it some
Comfort to the old Ministers, that they are not contemned, but where the Truth
and Ordinances of God are slighted, and juvenile Inventions, having hoary
Periwigs clapped on their Heads to make them look Grave, are admired? For when
the former regain their lost Credit, and the latter, by their being well
viewed, lose it, may not they stand a fair Chance of being accounted honest Men
again, for all this empty Noise?

4. Mr. Tennent's fourth Argument to prove, that the People are to be pitied,
etc. Because the Ministry of natural Men is dangerous, both in respect of the
Doctrines and Practice of Piety. The Doctrines of Original Sin, Justification
by Faith alone, and the other Points of Calvinism, are very cross to the Grain
of unrenew'd Nature. And though Men, by the Influence of a good Education, and
Hopes of Preferment, may have the Edge of their natural Enmity against them
blunted; yet it is far from being broken or removed: It is only the saving Grace
of God, that can give us a true Relish for those Nature-humbling Doctrines; and
so effectually secure us from being infected by the contrary. Is not the
Carnality of the Ministry, one great Cause of the general Spread of
Arminianism, Socinianism, Arianism and Deism, at this Day through the World?

Qu. I. We freely grant, that this last Argument, for Solidity, is worth all
the rest; for as David once said of Goliah's Sword, none like that, 1 Samuel
21.9. so may not we say none like this? For if Mr. Tennent stands to what he
says here, does not it amount at least to thus much, That a firm Attachment to
the nature-humbling Doctrines of Calvinism, is a good or at least a probable
Sign of the gracious State of the Person thus attached? If so, must not the
Body of our Synod, while Calvinists, pass for gracious Men? And must not Mr.
T.'s Outcries and Exclamations against carnal Ministers and Pharisees, in
order to raise Jealousies in People about their proper Pastors, appear
groundless Surmises, and rash uncharitable Censures, unless such can be proven
unsound in some Points of Calvinism, or else infected with somewhat that is
contrary thereto? And will not this blow up the whole Fabric at once? What
will Mr. T. say, If we will venture to lay a Hundred to One, that before equal
Judges we will prove, that by all Appearance, many if not all the other Side,
are better attached in Principle and Practice to the Calvinistical Scheme, than
he and his Party appear to be of late? Will Mr. T. engage for himself and his
Party, if we engage for the other Side, to refer the Debate about carnal Men to
be fairly determined, as Men can be proven to stand attached to Calvinism, or
infected by what is contrary? For will not Mr. T.'s and his Party's great and
public Approbation of Mr. W -- d's Scheme, which is nothing else but a motly
Mixture of Enthusiasm, Popery, Arminianism, Antinomianism, and Conformity to
the Liturgy and Ceremonies, cast into a Vehicle of Calvinism, put the Matter
beyond Controversy with all judicious unprejudiced Persons, viz, that those
that oppose this patched Scheme are better attached to Calvinism, than the warm
Admirers of it? Was not Mr. T. then very unadvised, to open a Door by this
Argument, for his Opponents to put in their Stake upon such a Lay, as will be
too likely to put them in a fair Way to win the Plate? Can Mr. T. with all his
Skill in Rhetoric, varnish the Matter, so as to blunt the Edge of Truth
couched in this Argument, viz. That such Men as are sound in the Faith, if
their Practice be answerable, are to be accounted gracious Men? Can Mr. T.
think, that he will be able with all his Oratory, to paint the Matter so as to
hide the Deformity of Mr. W -- d's Scheme, and of this Sermon of his, as well
as of the late anarchical Disorders and Intrusions, which are so contrary to
the Calvinistical Scheme, and to Scripture and Reason, and subversive of the
Rights of Presbyteries, and of all regular Societies in general? Yea, may not
we use Mr. T.'s own Words here, Are not they blind (or next Door to it) who do
not see this? Can Mr. T. think, that the World is so little acquainted with
Calvin's Doctrine, that Mr. W -- d or himself will be able to persuade
judicious Men, that Calvin was an Enthusiast, or countenanced enthusiastic
Fooleries? Can Mr. T. prove, that any of the Ministers of our Synod are any Way
tainted with Arminianism, Arianism, Socinianism or Deism, let him speak out to
the Point and not spare? for if there be such, why should not they be fled? If
there be no grounds of Suspicion that Way, wherefore serves the Cry about such
now in a Time of Variance, but to raise groundless Jealousies? But to follow
Mr. T.

Qu. II. That some Persons are afflicted with Melancholy, is too well known to
themselves and others, to be denied; that the Number of such increased in many
Places by the late lawless Railery and noisy Outcries of damning and
devilizing Men, under the Name and Color of preaching Law-Terrors, when it
would seem, that Men did at Seasons leave the Grace of the Gospel under the
Veil, if they did not designedly draw a Veil over it, is Fact; and is it not
notorious, that some weaker Vessels were put into such Frights and Shocks as
caused Convulsions, Tremblings, Foamings at the Mouth, Workings at the Stomach,
Grovelling on the Ground, some as it were Swooning, others making horrid Noises
and Outcries, others spurning with Legs and Hands and could not be held quiet;
some after they had several of such Fits, pretended to see Lights, Visions,
Apparitions, and to have had Revelations, upon which they were filled with
seeming delusive Joy, such as had such Fits being thereupon proclaimed
Converts, the poor deluded Souls grew confident that these Fits were
Conversion-Work; and those that imbibed this Notion of them, wished themselves
in the like Condition; the baser Sort hearing such as had them Fits admire^ for
gracious Persons, and those that had them not, censured for carnal, by all
Appearance counterfeited them, if Accounts can be believed: It is granted, when
Things came to this mournful Pitch of Delusion, some of our faithful Ministers
ventured, notwithstanding the Rage of unreasonable Men against them, to
undeceive the Deluded, by telling them that such bodily Conversions and Fits
were not to be depended upon for Soul-Conversion, which was a Work of a quite
different Nature; and upon this Account have such Ministers been proclaimed
Opposers of God's Work! And if Mr. T. does not intend this here, will he tell
us, how our Ministers opposed God's Work, except Men will call the Bearing of
faithful Witness against unsound Doctrine and the anarchical Practices of some
disorderly Brethren, opposing of God's Work? But who are they that seem to
slight spiritual Troubles, but such as study to put Men into such Distresses,
rejoice to see Men in them, and ridicule those that count Despair a terrible
Thing? Who are those, that dawb those that are troubled with more untempered
Mortar, than those who proclaim Cries and Fits Conversion? And whether moral
Negroes who have white Mouths, or immoral White Men who have black-barking
Mouths, have the best Right to pass for spiritual Men?

Further in page 14. Mr. T. takes upon him to answer as Objection, which he was
aware might be made against what he offered to prove, that a natural Man has
no Call to the Ministry, and the Objection is, "That Judas, though a graceless
Person, was called or sent by Christ to the Ministry," to which Mr T. answers,
1. That Judas his Ministry was partly legal, insomuch as during that Period the
Disciples were subject to Jewish Observances, and sent only to the House of
Israel, Mat. 10.5, 6. and in that they waited after Christ's Resurrection for
another Mission, Acts 1.4. which we find they obtained, and that different from
the former, Mat. 28.19. 2dly, That Judas 's Ministry was extraordinary
necessary, in order to fulfill certain ancient Prophecies concerning him. Acts
1.16, 20. John 13.18.

Qu. I. Is it not very strange what an Influence a Biass has upon Men
otherwise penetrating, to bind them up with Ropes of Sand? For what does Mr. T.
do in his Answers here, b^^ give us full Proof, that when once a Controversy
gets fair Quarter in the Affections, it will soon blow up the Understanding? We
would desire to know, in what Respect was Judas's Ministry legal? Did not he
preach the Gospel and baptize? Did the Disciples act as Apostles in any legal
Administration? Or were they in any respect subjected to the Ceremonial Law of
Moses, by their Call to be Apostles? How then was their Ministry legal? Did
their being confined to the House of Israel, make their Ministry legal, while
their ministerial Works were ^ely evangelical? Wherein was the Mission, which
they waited (...) after Christ's Resurrection, different from what they had
^^fore? Was it not the very same in Kind, different only in an extra-essential
Circumstance, which no Way contradicted, much as disannulled the former, but
confirmed the Whole of it; only it was enlarged as to the Extent of the Object?
For were not they according to the second Commission to begin at Jerusalem?
Luke 24.47. Acts 3.26. Did the Extending the Commission to all Nations, any way
exclude the Jewish Nation, to whom it was before confined? Will Mr. T. answer
us, was John the Baptist's Ministry or Christ's Ministry legal, because they
were subject to Jewish Observances, and sent only to the House of Israel? For
does not the latter tell us in Mat. 15.24. I am not sent but to the lost Sheep
of the House of Israel? Besides, if Judas's Ministry was partly legal, and the
Mission given to the eleven Apostles was different in Kind from what Judas
received in common with them; how could Matthias be said to take Judas his
Bishopric, as is said in Acts 1.20.? Was Matthias's Ministry also partly
legal, or did he only take Judas's Ministry in part? Or was he not rather
installed or ordained upon a fuller Commission, that invested him with
Authority to (...) Judas's Bishopric, and something more too? And so may not
we rather justly say, that Mr. T. partly wrongs the Truth and confounds Law and
Gospel, by asserting, that Judas's Ministry was partly legal? Besides we would
ask Mr. T. one ^ort Query more, viz. Whether properly speaking there were ^^ y
legal Ministers, but the Priests and the Levites? For might not the Prophets,
even under the Old Testament Dispensation, were properly be called evangelical
than legal Ministers? For (...) any say, that their Mission was any Part of the
legal ^pensation? On the other Hand, though it were supposed, ^^ntrary to Truth,
that Judas's Ministry was partly legal; yet that says that to the evangelical
Part of his Office? Must not ^^at which was peculiar to the New Testament
require Grace to fulfill it still? And even as to the legal Part, if there was
such, was not Grace as necessary to fulfill a legal Ministry in due manner as an
evangelical One? Or did God require no more from legal Ministers but empty
Ceremonies? Or would Grace spoil a legal Minister? And so may not we say, O
rare Distinction! which is both false; and if it were true, what is it but an
empty Sound, good for Nothing but to blindfold the Matter and the Hearer?

Qu. II. Is not Mr. T's second Answer as weak and of as little Force as the
former? We must own, that we do not well understand what it is that Mr. T.
means, by saying, That Judas's Ministry was extraordinary necessary, in order
to fulfill ancient Prophecies concerning him: is not there something less or
something more than the Truth here? However, That Judas his Ministry was
extraordinary, is readily granted; but yet, can any imagine, but that Grace was
as necessary to fulfill an extraordinary Office as to fulfill an ordinary one?
But will Mr. T. tells us, what extraordinary Necessity was there of fulfilling
the Prophecies concerning Judas his Ministry, more than for the fulfilling of
all other Divine Prophecies, as for Instance, the Prophecy concerning the
Coming of the grievous Wolves into the Church of Ephesus, concerning the Coming
of Antichrist, and of false Christ's, and of the Perillousness of the latter
Days, because of the false Teachers and the Degeneracy of Professors? Was the
Ministry of Judas any more necessary to fulfill Prophecies, than the Ministry of
the Asses Colt to carry Christ to Jerusalem? For was it not as necessary, that
the Prophecy in Zech. ix. 9. concerning this, should be fulfilled, as any
Prophecies concerning Judas? Matthew. xxi. 4, 5. Besides, was there any
Necessity, that God should make any Prophecies concerning Judas's Ministry; but
only God's good Will and Pleasure to order Matters so? And if there was any or
the least Inconsistency with God's holy Perfections or his revealed Will, in
his giving a Call to an unconverted Judas, under the New Testament
Dispensation; might not God easily have prevented that necessity, by decreeing
and prophesying in another Manner? And even after this Prophesy was made, was
not there as great Necessity to fulfill every other divine Prophesy, when ones
made, as there was to fulfill the Prophesies concerning Judas? For did not God's
Truth, Faithfulness and Immutableness, bind him to fulfill all, as much as any
one of his Prophecies? Where then is there Room for this extraordinary
Necessity to take Place? Is not this a false and an empty Sound as well as the
former?

Qu. III. As for the Abuse made of the Instance of Judas's Ministry, let those
that are guilty look to that, we are only for getting what Light and
Instruction that Part of Scripture affords us; for is not that wrote for our
Instruction, as well as the rest of our Bibles? But as for Halters, if they
were not thrown in (...) Way, might not we well let them alone, as what no way
(as we know of) belong to either Side in this Controversy, to feel or to
handle? For whatever Evil may be supposed to be in Men's different
Apprehensions in religious Matters, or even in Men's different States, as to
Grace, has not God and Man judged Halters unfit Engines for zealous Kirk-men
among Protestants to handle? And can there be any Room to fear, that they shall
be entrusted in such Hands, but where Lord Inquisitors are first chosen to make
Inquisition into, and Discoveries of the unknown Land of Conscience? Till
therefore we hear Rumors of the one, what need Protestants be afraid of the
other? But seeing such Tools are good for nothing but to break the Neck, and
not to convince the Judgment; have not we Reason to bless God for wise Rulers
and an equitable Constitution, which adjudge them to proper Persons and Crimes?
And is it not the Duty of all Christians, earnestly to pray, that God may in
Mercy preserve Men from such a Degree of Despair, and all the native Causes of
it, as may drive Men into Halters undeservedly, as well as from such Practices
as may justly deserve them? Let none say, that this is the last Shift of legal
Preaching.

In page 15. Mr. T. endeavors to take off the Force of another Objection,
taken from Paul's rejoicing at the Gospel's being preached by some, out of Envy
and Contention, and not sincerely, Phil. 1.

Qu. I. Is not Mr. T's Answer so weak and feeble, that one night justly think,
that his Cause would have appeared every whit as good and strong, if he had not
at all meddled with the Objection, unless it be with those, who are disposed to
take every Thing Mr. T. says and writes, upon an implicit Faith? For though it
be allowed, that the Apostle was well versed in ^^e Doctrine of Self-Denial,
which made him easy about his ^^me and Character, as it was a personal
Interest, counting it but a small Matter to be judged by Man's Judgment; yet,
as his Character subserved the Credit of the Gospel, was not he a zealous
Maintainer and Defender of it, in Opposition to the false Apostles, who
endeavored to raise their own by vainglorious Boastings, and to blacken and
eclipse the Apostle's Character, by Clamours and Misrepresentations, as knowing
that they could not overturn his Cause, unless first they could wound his
Character, no more than the Pharisees could Christ's? Can any unbyassed Reader
think, but that the Apostle's Joy or Rejoicing, there spoken of, was upon the
Account of the Preaching of Christ, as a Savior, to lost Sinners, when he
plainly says, What then? notwithstanding every Way, whether in Pretense, or in
Truth, Christ is preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and I will rejoice?
Where have we in the Text the least Grounds for the idle Glosses Mr. T. makes
here, intimating that the Apostle's Joy or Rejoicing was upon the Account that
such Preaching as is aforesaid, gave him an Opportunity to exercise Self
Denial, or should be a Means to promote his spiritual Progress in Goodness, and
perhaps prove a Mean to procure his temporal Freedom? Was not giving Way to the
like fertile Invention, in glossing upon Scripture the very Method by which
Pharisee Doctors formed their Gemara upon their Misnah, and of both framed
their Talmud, whereby they at last quite evacuated Scripture of its proper
Sense?

Qu. II. Does not Mr. T. here plainly give up the Cause, and allow the
Objection its full Force, when he says, the Apostle would rather, that Christ
should be preached out of Envy, than not at all; because their Preaching might
be a Means of curing the gross Ignorance of Gospel Doctrine reigning in that
Age? Does not he here seem to make a fair Concession, that unconverted
Ministers might do good to Souls, by turning them from Darkness to Light, and
why not, from the Power of Satan unto God? For seeing, as the same Apostle
notes elsewhere, that unsanctified Knowledge puffs up, but edifieth not, as
in 1 Cor. viii. 1. How could he, agreeable to his own Doctrine, rejoice at such
Preaching, if he did not believe, that the Knowledge conveyed thereby might be
sanctified? We entirely agree with Mr. T. that the Apostle's Joy was a
comparative Joy, for how could any knowing Objector dream, that the Apostle
should rejoice as much at such Preaching, as if it was done sincerely? Seeing
therefore Mr. T. seems to grant the main Thing contended for, in this
Objection, does not it appear needless, to follow him in his conjectural
Glosses any further? For do not the Apostle's Words plainly import thus much at
least, viz. That the Preaching of Christ and the Gospel in Purity, whatever
Men's secret Designs be therein, good or bad, yet the Work done, affords Matter
of Joy to the pious Soul? Will Men then consider, what Sort of a Spirit sways
such, who endeavor to suppress orthodox Preaching of the Gospel, upon mere
Guesses of the Preacher's unconverted State, if not the Spirit of Envy?

3. Mr. T's third doctrinal Query, is, How Pity should be shown, on this
mournful Occasion, to the World, now groaning under the intolerable Burden of
unconverted Ministers: And his Answer is,

1. By mourning for and sympathizing with them, with compassionate Tenderness.

Qu. I. Was it not a pretty Piece of Machiavelian Policy in wicked Jezebel, to
proclaim a Fast to mourn for Naboth's Sin, when the Eyesore was Naboth's
Vineyard; which could not be procured for Money, and therefore must be
purchased at the vast Expense of false Swearing and cruel Murder, colored over
with the Paint of a religious Fast? And who better prepared for such a Fast as
was designed, than an Ahab, that was sick and bedrid with Discontent? Is not
mournful moaning of a Child that has got a Fall, the ready Way to make him cry
heartily, though he is not hurt?

2. Mr. T's second Answer, is, That this Pity is to be shown, by praying for
them with Earnestness.

Qu. I. When like People, like Priest, is an old Scripture Phrase, how comes it
to pass, that in this Age, the Crowds of the People in most Places are
exceeding Godly, but the Body of the Clergy exceeding carnal? When there is
such Talk of tender Pity and earnest Prayer for the godly People, as being in a
poor melancholy State, is it not a little strange, that there is not a Word of
Pity, nor of Prayer, for the unconverted Ministers, who are supposed to be in a
much poorer State, neither in this Instruction, nor in the whole Sermon? Are
they so far gone, that they are unfit to be prayed for, or to have a little
Room in some Corner of the new Calendar; Is the Prayer that they may be
converted, or detected, or confounded, which some use, a Piece of
Supererogation? Are not orthodox, regular Ministers as fit to be prayed for, as
an heterodox disorderly Itinerant? Is it not a little strange, that when he was
directing to pray for a Blessing upon the dry Morsels, got in dry Pastures, and
from dry Nurses, that Mr. T. did not think it proper, to direct Men to pray for
Heaven's Blessing or Influence, to increase the Grass of the one, and the Milk
of the other? If Mr. T. rightly applies that Text in Jer. xxiii. 32. to the
proper Persons, when it is expressly said, that those there intended should not
at all profit God's Israel, how can such a Prayer for sanctifying and sweetning
their dry Morsels be made in Faith? Does not Mr. T's pressing Men to pray as
aforesaid, imply, that he has some Hopes, that such Prayers of the Godly may
conduce to render such Preaching successful; and is not this more Appearance of
Charity, than seems to be reconcilable to his Expressions elsewhere? For if
there be any Grounds at all for the Soul to rest in Hope, in the Use of such
Prayers, must not there be some greater Probability of obtaining the Blessing
prayed for, than a mere Chance-Medley?

3. In page 16. Mr. T. goes on to a third Direction, how to show Pity in this
sorrowful Case, and that is, by liberal Contributions to encourage private
Schools and Seminaries of Learning, which are under the Care of skilful and
experienced Christians, in order to educate Youth for the Ministry.

The Motion, for aught we know, is very good, and if Congregations in general
would contribute a little that way, may it not be of some Consequence, for an
after Supply? Only we would desire to know, how such a Design can be carried on
better for the common Interest, than by putting such a School under the Care
and Inspection of the Synod? But yet, though we would not be so far
misinterpreted, as if we spoke any thing against encouraging such Schools, for
we believe it a very good Motion; yet is it not observable, that when Mr. T.
makes such Outcries against Hirelings, yet he himself expects some Fruit from
Gospel-Hearers, more than cheap Prayers, when it would seem, that he judges it
too great a Favor for such Ministers, whose hard Lot it is to be accounted
unconverted upon Guesses, to have a Share of People's cheap Prayers; albeit it
is well known, that the Ministers thus abused, at least many of them, have had
their great Share in planting and watering those very Congregations, in which
upstart Innovators now so much crow over them? We would further ask, Whether
the unpecedented Strictness in the Admission of Scholars; which Mr. T.
prescribes here, viz. That none should be admitted into such Schools, but such
as have plain Evidences of experimental Religion, be approveable or
unreasonable? Would it not be soon enough to require this of a Candidate, when
he enters upon Trials? Or might not Godly Tutors be probable Instruments of
Conversion in the Youth under their Care? And does not Experience tell us, that
Youth under Tutorage have strangely altered, some for the Better, and some for
the Worse? But Mr. T. insinuates, that he had some Apprehensions, that the
Pharisees would be against such a Proposal; if he intends by Pharisees, the
Ministers of our Synod, who are at some Variance with him, for who else can be
thought to concern themselves with our Schools; might not he know the Contrary
by the Motion that was on Foot last Year in our Synod, for such a School to be
erected among us, under the Care and Inspection of the Synod? And if Mr. T.
intends the Ministers of our Synod in another Insinuation, viz. his saying, if
they could help it, they would not let one faithful Man come into the Ministry;
and when it is notorious, that Mr. T. never had any Debates with any others but
the Synod about Admissions of Men into the Ministry; and when there is a Debate
on this Head depending between him and the Synod; how can any understand them
of any other? Did any professing the Christian Religion among the
Non-Conformists, show themselves so bare-facedly void of Charity and more cruel
in rash Judging than Mr. T. does appear in these Words? Is it not hard for his
Brethren, that are thus abused, to entertain a favorable Opinion of his
Christianity, who appears so monstrously void of Truth and Charity, as these
Words import? For can their very worst Enemies, if they have any such, say that
they ever admitted any into the Ministry, but such as had at the Time of their
Admission, a good Appearance of Piety? And if it happened afterward, that any
such discovered any Unsoundness in Doctrine or Irregularity in Practice, have
not his Brethren acted as faithful a Part in bearing Witness against such in a
Way of regular Discipline, as ever he or any of his Party did? Though it is
probable, they did not publicly libel them, in a blind Way, nor make
disorderly public general Exclamations against them, after the new Mode, which
we judge uncivil as well as unchristian, as being contradictory to Reason and
the Rules of Scripture-Discipline, which teaches us that all Authority and
Church Power is given for Edification, and not for Destruction, as it is
written in 2 C^^. 10.8. and 13.10. For how can any Set of Men clear themselves
or satisfy others, when wrongly traduced in such a blind Antichristian Way?
And do not such as use such Methods, copy more after the Pharisees in aspersing
Christ and his true Followers, or after Ovid, who in his Rage cursed Caesar
under the feigned Name of Ibis, than after Christ, who though it is true, reproved
both the Pharisees and Sadducees sharply, yet were not those Names the
distinguishing Characters of particular Sects, known by their distinguishing
Principles and Practices, among whom he lived? And does not he always point out
some particular false Doctrine or Male-practice, which he reproved them for?
How contrary then to his Practice are Men's dark Insinuations, Reproaches and
blind Pushes made at the Characters of some Ministers, under the Umbrage of
crying against Pharisee-Teachers and carnal Ministers? For if some of our
Ministers be not intended, why is this Noise made now in a Time of some
Variance in our Congregations, to raise groundless Jealousies and Suspicions?
And if some of them be intended, why are not they prosecuted in a Way of
regular Discipline? For how else can such Exclaimers clear their own
Consciences toward such, or convince their Hearers of their Integrity, or
direct them in rejecting unworthy Ministers, if such there be among us? For if
Hearers go to act herein by blind Guesses upon general Outcries against we
know not whom, nor for what, will it not be something worse than their acting
upon an implicit Faith? But to return to the Matter in Hand; if it be enquired,
where these private Schools or Academies might be had, and who are the Masters?
Although Mr. T. does not particularly point them out in his Sermon, yet if we
compare what is here said, wish what Mr. T. (as we are informed) declared
publicly in the last Synod, will it not put the Matter in clearer Light? For
was it not remarkable, that when the Synod was cognoscing upon the Proposal
then under Consideration, concerning erecting a public School to train up Men
for the Ministry, that Mr. T. openly disapproved said Proposal? And was not the
Reason he then gave of his Disapprovement, because he believed said Proposal
was levelled against his Father's School? Will not this, together with some
concurring Circumstances of the same Nature, which we may declare if Need be,
afford us a probable Commentary upon this Direction of Mr. T.? So that though he
speaks of private Schools in the plural Number; yet does not it seem likely,
that his Father's School is the only One he wants to be encouraged with liberal
Contributions? And if so, what is the Meaning of that solemn Epiphonema or
Exclamation, Who is upon God's Side? Who? but this, Who will contribute to my
Father's School? Who?

It were endless to follow Mr. T. in all his blind Pushes; but will he tell us,
what he means by the Kingdom and Credit, which the Pharisees are wont to be
scared about? When both his Partisans as well as we understand, that this is
levelled against some of our Ministers, we cannot but think that we make a
nearer Guess of the Persons aimed at in those Words, than is made of Men's
carnal and gracious State often by those that make high Pretenses of being
spiritual Men, or else let Mr. T. confute us. We would therefore ask, Has Mr.
T. ever heard any of our whole Party uttering the least Mum in the Behalf of
the Title of any King in our Dominions, but King JESUS and King George, ever
since the latter came to the Throne? Must not this be a blind Push to blacken
Men's Credit, or else a sly and sneaking Method to secure the Favor of
Grandees or Applause of the People to a Party? Or must it not be to incense
them against others, Pharisee-like, who said to Pilate, Thou art not Caesar 's
Friend, if thou let this Man go; Whosoever makes himself King, speaks
against Caesar? But though we are confident our wise and good Rulers understand
our Constitution better, than to be incensed against any Man upon mere Slanders
and false Surmises, especially when they consider there are some Outcries made
against the Christianity of some Civil as well as Ecclesiastical Rulers, by
some of the same Catholic Knot, who in spite of Right and Truth, would take
from all others that differ from them the very Name of true Christianity, by
miscalling them carnal Men and Pharisees; yet does not Experience prove, that
any vain and false Outcry may do Wonders with the giddy Multitude, to drive
them into Disorders? But if Truth be told, who are those among us who seem to
meddle with State Affairs more than those who in a blind Zeal make some faint
Essays, in some Sermons, to revive the Debates about the solemn League and
Covenant? But suppose a Knot of Gentlemen, by their Libels, Reproaches,
disorderly Exclamations and Misrepresentations of Ministers, have brought their
Credit as low as they can wish in the Books of their warm Admirers, as well as
advanced their own high, by their vainglorious Boastings and Noise of
Catholicism, and of Zeal for Reformation, etc, is it Christian-like or
Gentleman-like to triumph over those that are down? For besides that the Wheel
always goes round, has not every Leaf two Sides, and every Controversy two
Parties? May not their Credit be as high in the Books of their Party, as Mr.
T.'s is in those of his Party? And if Mr. T. does not take better Care to look
what he preaches and writes than he seems to have done in this, may not there
be Danger, that the Wheel will turn faster to its proper Place than it was
forced out of it? But why should Men fight for a Bundle of Straw? Did not he
that of all Men had the best Claim to a good Name, an high Credit, and a
glorious Reputation, know what it was one Day to hear the Multitude crying,
Hosanna to the Son of David, shortly after hear the Multitudes in the same City
crying out, Crucify him, with as much Fervency? Was not Paul and Barnabas, as
we read in Acts 14. in Danger of being Deified? And yet, when designing Jews,
it may be of the Sect of the Pharisees, came to Lystra and misrepresented the
Apostles, was not their Credit so low, that Paul was stoned and dragged out of
the City? Here were two Conversions, and Men were very zealous in both; and
would not Men do well to consider, whether we have not many like them? But was
it not good Advice, whoever gave it, He that wishes well to his own due
Praises, let him never desire they should be yoked with another's unjust
Reproaches, lest the Hearer, knowing the one unrighteously slandered, conclude
that the other is as unjustly flattered; For is it not an unquestionable Maxim,
that he that will be a Sycophant against one, will be a Parasite to another?
And should not Men that have great Credit, of all others, take heed how they
improve it?

But to come to the Improvement.

Qu. I. Does not Mr. T. in his first Inference, discover the Mark or Butt of
all the bitter Arrows, which he has been shooting against the
Pharisee-Teacher, viz. the Body of the Clergy of this Generatiom? And lest any
Body should be in Danger of mistaking him, by thinking, that he means only the
heterodox Clergy, who have swerved from the Form of sound Words; does not he
come nearer to the Purpose by saying, That some of the modern Pharisees Prate
(for that is a diminutive Word, forsooth, for Preaching, to help the little
Credit of the Clergy) more orthodoxly about the New Birth, than their
Predecessor Nicodemus? And if by these latter be not intended the Body of the
Ministers of our Synod, why do Mr. T's own Partisans interpret the Matter so,
as if they were the Persons here pointed out? For will any tell us, where we,
at such a Distance from Mr. T. himself, can learn the true Meaning of such
Expressions better, than from the declared near Guesses of such as call
themselves spiritual Men? For is it not probable, that they might hear more of
the Matter in the Conclave than is told in the Public? And have not some of
our Ministers, that are both orthodox and regular, been proclaimed carnal Men
and Hypocrites, more publicly, without any just Charge tabled against them,
that deserved a just Reproof, much less such a merciless Censure? Is all this
no Grounds to appear against such base Outcries to raise unjust Prejudices,
albeit, Men have no Consciousness of Guilt in the Matter? If therefore Mr. T.
can prove any Articles of Charge, of any Weight, against any of his Brethren,
why does not he appear against them in the Way of regular Discipline, so that
they may be rejected, if they deserve it? And have not Messrs. T. and B -- r
been desired to do this in our Presbytery, and yet refused to comply? What will
Mr. T. think of a late Writer, who says, It was an hateful Spirit in Cain, the
Companion of a bloody Principle, that made him say, Am I my Brother's Keeper?
And we do generally find that Person, who is backward to be his Brother's
Keeper in an evangelical, forward enough to be his Murderer in a moral
Consideration: but let Brotherly Love continue. But to trace the Matter a
little further, 1, One Branch of the heavy Charge against the Clergy, is, That
Swarms of Locusts, Crowds of Pharisees, have as covetously as cruelly, crept
into the Ministry, in this adulterous Generation! who as nearly resemble the
Character given of the old Pharisees, in the Doctrinal Part of this Discourse,
as me Crow's Egg does another. And to strike Home, this is said to be the Case
of the Body of the Clergy of this Generation. Hear your Charge, your heavy
Charge, O ye Clergy! Come to the Bar, answer to your Indictment, or else, must
not you be damned at once? For is it not Part of the new Mode of Preaching,
when some Men come across the Word Condemned in a Scripture Text, to choose to
read it damm'd; whether because this Mode is less Scriptural, or because they
would conform to the usual Dialect of roaring Boys; let them answer that? If
the Attorney for the Defendant, Judge, or Jury, call for the Evidence, to prove
this heavy Charge, is not the main and only Evidence this, They are blind, who
do not see this to be the Case! There is your Charge, and there is your
Evidence, and if Judge or Jury be so saucy as to desire more Clearness in the
Matter before they pronounce Judgment, let them know their Doom beforehand; for
is it not past all Doubt, that, by the last rehearsed Clause, they are damned
for blind Men already, if they offer to demur in the Case? Are not these big
Words and bold Say-soes, uttered with that Confidence, which bad Men commonly
assume, that would be believed in an unproved Falsehood? Is not this a brave
ready Way to conjure down any Controversy at once, and to blow up the Castle of
the Credit of the whole Body of the Clergy with a single Puff of vain corrupt
Breath? Let none ask, is this powerful Preaching? For is it not all Thunder,
without the least Flash of Lightning? And what is the Sum of it but this, I
know it, I believe it, I assert it, and I will stand to it, and I will damn him
that will say, Nay? But then, if any one should say, in the Behalf of the
Clergy with their storm-beaten Credit, are not many of them orthodox, and for
aught that is proven against them, live regularly? And does not Mr. T. in the
Doctrinal Part, own, That nothing but the Grace of God, can give Men a true
Relish of the Nature-humbling Doctrines of Calvinism, and effectually secure
them from being infected by the contrary? What will Mr. T. then say to those,
who are of a longer Standing than himself in the Ministry, and yet seem fully
as well, if not better attached to these Doctrines, than he and his Party seem
to be of late? Can this ward off the Blow? No, no: For have not we a. 2d.
Branch of the Charge, which shall do the Execution of blowing up all such
Pleas? behold! it comes, It is true, some of the modern Pharisees have learnt
to prate a little more orthodoxly, about the New Birth, than their Predecessor
Nicodemus, who are, in the mean time, as great Strangers to the feeling
Experience of it, as he. Surely! Do not these Men feel well, who feel for
themselves and all the World besides? But how shall we steer now, for are not
we gone into some Latitude beyond the Thirty-two Points of the Seaman's
Compass? And so, is not the Matter past Trial, at the Bar of Man, or even of
Angels? For when Men prate orthodoxly, though they were such Bunglers as not to
be able to preach, how can Mr. T. prove, that they are as great Strangers to
the feeling Experiences of the New Birth, as Nicodemus, or even, that they are
greater Strangers to it than himself, seeing it is no false Latin to say, that
he cannot search the Heart? And on the other Hand, how can the Clergy prove
their feeling Experiences, when it is a Maxim in Divine, as well as human Law,
that no Man is a proper Evidence in his own Case? Unless therefore Mr. T. can
prove, that he sees other Men's inward Feelings, and that they are heterodox,
when their Words are orthodox, must not he be nonsuited in all our lower
Courts, and consequently must not the Trial be adjourned to the great Assizes,
at King Jesus's Bench, at once, unless some can be so happy, as to produce
authentic Commissions, under the Broad Seal, to constitute them general
Vicars, to judge the Secrets of other Men, by Feelings? Indeed, it must be
owned, that Mr. T. has acted a dexterous Part, in painting the Pharisee with
two opposite Faces, under one Hood, so that if Men are orthodox, letter-learned
and regular, or the contrary, they still answer the Character given to the
Pharisee; and must not Mr. T. have some cunning Art, beyond what is common to
Man, if he can paint his own Face, so that it will not answer either of the
Pharisees Faces, and be a good Man too? But if the News be true, that Pharisees
are now become orthodox and regular, let alone their letter-learning, we would
ask, whether such Pharisees ought not to pass, with Men, for brighter
Christians than Mr. W. or T. or their Adherents, until they reject openly Mr.
W's false Scheme, as well as the false Divinity contained in this Sermon,
together with their late anarchical Tenets and Practices, which are
inconsistent with Truth and Gospel Order? And seeing the New Birth is the only
Point here touched, will Mr. T. tell us, who of our Ministers of the other
Side, appear to grope so much in the Dark about the Doctrine of it, as Mr. W.
seems to do, when one while he makes it a spiritual Conception of Christ, as
the Seed of the Woman, in the Hearts of Believers? And another while, does not
he seem to make it the Work of the Minister, to regenerate those that are
baptized by him, by asserting, that Christ gave a Commission to his Apostles,
and their Successors in the Ministry, to baptize Men into the Nature of the
Holy Trinity? Another while, does not he seem to make it Man's own Work, when
he presses Men, as sunk into the Nature of the Beast and the Devil, to believe
in Christ, in order to receive the quickening or sanctifying Spirit? How will
Mr. T. prove, that this Man seek well, when it appears to ordinary Capacities,
he does not speak well in this, and many other weighty Points of Doctrine? Will
Mr. T. name us that orthodox pious Writer, that is guilty of such a monstrous
Degree of Uncharitableness and rash Judging, as seems to be couched in those
Charges against the Body of the Clergy of this Generation, when he thus
unmercifully and groundlesly draws his Censures through their Hearts, without
proving one single Charge against them, in Principle or Practice, but on the
contrary, owns them orthodox? Might not such Language, without Surprise,
provoke some Acrimony or Repartee, if it were not that our Lord forbids, to
render Railing for Railing? May not we therefore rather choose to pray, that God
may in his due Time, put a Stop to such reproachful Tongues and Pens, which in
this particular seem to be subservient to his Interest, who is the Father of
Lies, and the great Accuser of the Brethren? In the mean time, what is the
Comfort of such pious Ministers, who are thus condemned without any Trial, but
that they well know, that it is but a small Thing to be judged of Man's
Judgment, and that the righteous Judge of the Quick and the Dead, who stands at
the Door and sits at the Helm, will one Day overhall such rash Judgments, and
discover who are Holy, and who are Strangers to the Feelings of the New Birth?
In the mean time, we wish Mr. T. no worse, than to see his Error in Time, in
thus offending against the Generation of God's Children; for though every Bean
has its black, and every Rank of People their Cullers, yet, may not we on good
Grounds hope, that God has many a precious Saint in the Body of the Clergy of
this Generation? But who are those that increase the Adultery of this
Generation more than such, who forsake their own Charges, and industriously
enter into other Men's Labors; who use sneaking Methods, to alienate the
Hearts of People from their stated Pastors, to affect and follow them; and who
intrude into Vacancies, in the Bounds of other Presbyteries, in order to
withdraw them from their proper Watchmen and to turn them to their Party; and
where they cannot gain the whole, encourage Divisions, that there may be
Adultery however, wherever they can find or make Holes, even though they are
obliged to make their Entrance at Back-Doors? And does not the doleful Case of
the Church of God, upon this Account, call more loudly for bitter Lamentation,
than upon any other, lest the tottering Candle-Sticks, that hold forth the
Light of God's Word in Purity, be removed, and we be left to wander after
glaring Sights and Feelings, under the thick Clouds of enthusiastic Dreams?

But to proceed to the Second Inference.

Qu. I. Is not Mr. T. in his second Inference, as hard and bitter upon the
Hearers of such Ministers, or those that content themselves under their
Ministry, as he is in the first upon the Ministers themselves? For are not they
condemned as such as have not in them the Temper of Christ, and are not they
called as blind as Moles, as dead as Stones, poor Fools, poor silly Souls,
without any spiritual Taste or Relish?

Qu. II. Will Mr. T. tell us, Whether the Caution Christ gave, not to call our
Brother a Fool, was given to the Laity, or Clergy, or to both? For what puzzles
us is, that we have heard something of some Privilege called the Benefit of the
Clergy, and we would know, whether there be some secret Law that gives the
Clergy Liberty to revile, rail at, abuse and reproach their Hearers, if they do
it under the Name or Pretense of Preaching? For if it be true, that God's Law
forbids the natural Man to meddle in sacred Things, may not there be some Law,
that gives the spiritual Man Liberty to use his Tongue as if it was his own? Or
else why is there so much of this done by some? Or is there some Mystery in the
declining State of the Church that warrants this? If Ministers go to rail in
the Pulpit, can there be any solid Reason given, why the People should not have
Liberty to answer them? What is the Reason, why by the Laws of England,
Noblemen have the Privilege that none of them can be bound to the Peace, but
because the Peace is supposed to be always bound to them? And can
Gospel Ministers think, that they should have Liberty to crow over their
Hearers any longer than they are the Messengers of Truth and Peace? Will Mr. T.
tell us, what sort of Creatures are those, that count mere Railery, bold
Assertions, bitter Invectives, and clamorous Exclamations, powerful Preaching?
Does Mr. T. think, that People are silly, because they are silent, or because
they will not stoop to kiss the Pope's Toe, in order to be made Saints; or
because they will not go over the River to fetch muddy Water, when they have
much clearer Water running in their own Spouts, and at their Doors? Would it
not be good Advice to Mr. W-d and T. to winnow their Seed a little better than
they seem to have done of late, lest they provoke some of these silent Fellows,
to speak rough-hewn Scotch or Welsh to them? For have not such silent Fellows
time to think, and their Fortunes at command? Can any then think but that they
dare speak the Truth bare-facedly, without Palliation? Can Mr. T. think that
abusing People at this odd Rate, is the Way to proselite any People, but those
of whose Intellectuals he has just Cause to think nothing but what is mean and
contemptible, or else are some way disaffected to their own Ministers, or their
Fellow Members? But in case we were such silly Souls, is not the Cure easy? For
if we take good Courage to rail at our own Ministers and Presbyterial Order,
wink hard, and lift up our Legs, so as not to stumble at Mr. W-d's and T.'s
Errors and Disorders, resign our Reasons by taking other Men to see, feel,
taste, relish and judge for us; may not we hope to hear ourselves proclaimed
Converts for all this? And seeing Mr. T. would have us consider Jer. v. 30.31.
We have done it; and now propose this short Query thereupon, viz. Is it not
Fact, that Mr. W -- d pretends to an immediate Call and Mission; to act and
think by the immediate Guidance of a divine Inspiration; and yet does not he
preach and print many Falsehoods? Does not Mr. T. and his Party get greater Sway
by his means, viz. his proclaiming them faithful Ministers of Christ, etc.? And
do not many of the People love to have it so? And is not the Beginning of these
Things the Beginning of Sorrow? And must not Time answer what the End of them
will be? But can it be expected, that sowing Thistles will produce a better
Return than a Crop of Thorns? Further, seeing it is our Turn to speak, We would
have Mr. T. consider, whether or no he discovers Prudence, Piety, or even great
Experience of the Difficulties which pious Souls are exposed to in this Valley
of Tears, in his reflecting in such a taunting scoffing manner upon Ministers
and People, for counting Despair a terrible Thing, and cautioning People
against it? Who can believe Mr. T. is in earnest? For is not Despair really a
terrible Thing? Is it not one of the greatest Sins that Men can be guilty of
under Gospel Light and Offers, upon many Accounts? And if we consider it as a
Punishment; is it not a little Hell upon Earth to the Soul that is burdened
with it? And is it not one of the worst Ingredients of the Misery of damned
Souls? For how could their Misery be complete if they had but Glimmerings of
Hope? What Temptations more dreadful than those which Despair disposes the Soul
to fall in with, if preventing or restraining Grace steps not in? And has not
the false Doctrine so much harped upon, viz. that every one that is in a State
of Grace, knows it, a native Tendency to draw weak and doubting Christians into
Despair, as well as to hinder their Comfort? For how can any answer it to God
or their own Consciences, when duly awakened, if they drive Men to Despair by
mere Falsehoods, when in Reality they betray the true Scripture Doctrine of
Assurance by such blind Pushes? For when professed Calvinists assert, that all
true Christians have Assurance, which is the same as knowing that we are in a
State of Grace, when their Opponents can prove, that many true Christians are
under Fears and Doubts, and that others arrive no higher than a well-pounded
Hope; will not this have a native Tendency to render ^^e very Doctrine of
Assurance more suspicious to the Contrary-minded? And so what do Men do by such
blind Pushes, but on the one Hand betray Truth with a broad Kiss, and on the
other ^^and form a Club to its Antagonist, to dash out its Brains? Besides, are
not Ministers as great, if not greater Debtors to the Weak, than the Strong?
Should not they therefore feed them with Milk, if they are not able to endure
strong Meat? For is not he an unmerciful and an unnatural Father, that gives a
Child crying for Bread, a Stone to break his Teeth, or crying for Fish, a
Scorpion to poison him, by telling him a rough terrifying Error instead of
Truth, in order to cast him from Fear to Despair?

3. As to the third Inference we approve of it?

4. As to the fourth Inference, which seems to have been the main Scope of the
Performance, viz. To dissolve all relative Bonds and Ties between Pastor and
People, at least to proclaim them null and void, as to People's Obligation
therefrom to attend upon the Administrations of their own fixed Pastors
statedly; so that if we take Mr. T. up right, his declared Judgment here is,
that People, after the Choice of a Minister to be their stated Pastor, are at
their free Liberty to absent themselves from his Ministry, as far and as often
as they or any of them pleases, whether the Minister be godly or graceless: If
godly, then the Opinion of another's superior Gifts, yea, the Judgment or
Inclination of any Person, or even the Conceit or Hope of getting greater
Benefit elsewhere, are pleaded by Mr. T. to be sufficient Reasons for any
Person to leave his own Pastor, and to go for ordinary to hear another, (for
occasional Hearing is out of the Question;) much more if any of them guesses
that his Minister is a carnal Man, then he ought to leave him; so that there
seems to be a wide Door opened for any Member to desert his Minister upon any
kind of Distaste or Dissatisfaction, without being accountable to any about it.

To prevent Mistakes, we shall premise a few preliminary Questions, then state
the Matter, and afterward examine the main Hinges of Argument used by Mr. T.
here.

Qu. I Let it be granted, that People may go to hear other Ministers besides
their own occasionally, without Offense; yet is it not too great a Stride to
argue from thence, that Men may make a common Practice of this? For does not
the latter carry in it a plain Contempt of the sacred Administration of their
own Minister, and many other Evils? And to pretend to do this in a Spirit of
Meekness, when no apparent Reason is assigned, what is it better than a Judas's
Kiss? Can any like Jacob's smooth Voice, when he feels Esau's rough Hands and
heavy Fists?

Qu. II. Let it be granted, that Men may go without Offense to hear other
orthodox and regular Ministers at Seasons, besides their own; yet will not the
Case alter, if Men are heterodox or blemished in their Doctrine, or disorderly
in their Manner of Entrance, whereby the Rights and sacred Order of Religious
Societies are infringed?

Qu. III. Let it be granted, that People may to go hear other Ministers, that
are for carrying on the common Interest in an united peaceable Way and Manner,
by endeavoring to strengthen the Hands of the stated Pastors, and to cultivate
a good Understanding between Pastors and People; yet will not the Cause alter,
if Itinerants use divisive factious Methods in the most barefaced manner, by
crying up themselves, and exclaiming against all but their own Party, setting
up Threshold against Threshold, and Altar against Altar, encouraging Factions,
by pressing People to forsake their own Ministers, whether they are gracious or
graceless?

Qu. IV. Let it be granted, that if Men can prove any Articles of Charge
against their Minister in Doctrine, Discipline or Deportment, that they ought
to be heard, and that Ministers and People ought to be dealt with accordingly;
and that if after due Trial to accommodate Matters in a Gospel-Way, the Party
offending proves obstinate, and will not submit to Gospel-Rules, that then the
injured Party should be set at Liberty; if Matters are come to that Height,
which ought to be the last Remedy; ye^ more, let it be granted, that if People
acting a conscientious Part, can produce any true Account, that may satisfy
impartial judicious Persons, that they have proved any Charges of Weight
against their Ministers, for which they ought in Justice to be discarded, but
were kept in, contrary to Rule; if after patient Writing and due Remonstrances
of just Grievances, in lower and higher Judicatures, People sail to get the
Causes of just Offense removed, that then the People may and ought, in
Obedience to God and the Dictates of their own Consciences, to seek for the
best Expedient they can get elsewhere; but yet, can any prove from any Part of
Scripture, that any thing will warrant the common Practice of insulting the
sacred Administrations of our own stated Pastors, but what will warrant a total
Separation from such? And will any say, that a Separation from a Church, with
which we have ^^ined according to Scripture Rule, can be regular, without we
first produce apparent Reasons, that may come within the Verge of other Men's
Cognizance, to cognosce upon, and make use of Christ's appointed Method, to get
our Grievances removed, in the U^e of regular Discipline, established in such
Communities? And will any tell us, what is Schism, if it b^ not such an abrupt,
disorderly, uncharitable, proud and obstinate breaking off from Church
Communion, upon secret Surmises, as Mr. T. seems to encourage People to here?
And ought not all orderly Non-conformists, to bear a public Testimony against,
and Abhorrence of such impious Insinuations, as have a native Tendency to wound
and expose Religion, and the Credit of its true Professors, to the Derision of
its Opposers?

Having premised thus much, we come now to state the Debate.

Qu. I. Is not the Relation between Pastor and People a sacred and a solemn Tie
or Bond, as clearly warranted by God's Word, as any other Relation whatsoever?
And do not the Beauty and Power of Religion, as to the Public Exercises of it,
consist in the regular and conscientious D^^c^^^ge of the mutual Duties of this
Relation, by the Continuance of Min^^^^s and People in Unity and Fellowship;
and then keeping t^eir stated Meetings, to wait upon God in the Use of public
Ordinances, in which both Minister and People are to act their respective Parts
with Constancy, Diligence and Perseverance? Did not the Apostles and
Evangelists, by divine Authority, fix a mutual and particular Relation between
particular Pastors and particular People, when they ordained Elders in every
City? Tit. i. 5. And has not God's Church, in all Ages since, thought this a
sufficient Warrant, to act by the Pattern then given, both as to forming
particular Congregations, and in giving the Oversight of them to particular
Pastors in the Lord? And is it not the peculiar Privilege of the Members of a
particular Church, as such, to have a Vote in choosing and calling a particular
Minister, to take the Oversight of them, in the Lord, as a distinct Body or
Society, into which none is to be admitted but upon Trial, Approbation and
Consent, and out of which none is to depart orderly, but upon weighty Reasons
offered, which in their very Nature demand Consent? And has not the Minister
thus chosen, as the Charge of the Work and Flock devolved upon him, so also the
Rule and Authority over his Flock, to command their Attendance upon his orderly
and timous Administrations? For as the Minister at his Ordination, declares his
Resolution to act his Part with Faithfulness, do not the People also, with
up-lifted Hand, vow and declare their Willingness to receive and acknowledge
him, as a Minister of Christ, and to obey and submit unto him, and to wait upon
his sacred Administrations, as having the Rule over them in the Lord, as well
as to maintain, encourage and assist him in all the Parts of his Office? Now
when this is done in the most solemn Manner, with Fasting and Prayer, by what
Authority or Rule may a Person break or dissolve that Relation, by acting as if
he stood not in such Relation, as soon as any bold Intruder shall come to make
a Party, by entering into other Men's Labors? How can a Shepherd feed his
Flock, if they are not obliged to keep under his Care? How can he lead them to
Pasture, if they are not bound to keep under his Pastoral Rod? What signifies
the Steward's dividing every Man his Portion, and studying to do it with
Faithfulness and Impartiality, if the Household come not to receive it? What
signifies choosing of Guides, if Men are not bound to follow them? What
signifies choosing Watchmen, if Men keep not within hearing of their Warning,
nor take Warning when our proper Watchmen give it? What signify spiritual
Fathers to bring up spiritual Children, and Nurses to provide them Food, if
they steal away from the one and the other, to play the Truants? How can our
own Ambassadors par^ey with us, to carry on the Treaty of Peace between us and
God, if we do not attend upon their Embassage? What signifies studying of
Sermons to suit the Case of the Flock, if they be not bound to attend the
public Meetings? Yea, how shall public Worship be established, and kept up
statedly, any where, if the Members of particular Congregations are at Liberty
not to attend, at their own Humors? Does not such a Principle encourage People
to Humorousness, Wantonness, Anarchy and Confusion, so that whenever they take
any Disgust upon any Occasion, be it never so unjust and unreasonable, they may
go and come at Pleasure, as if they were under no Bond at all? Would not
establishing such Rules as Mr. T. lays down here, with Respect to People's
leaving their own Ministers, be Pharisaical with a Witness? For would not they
as effectually make void God's Institution of particular Congregations and
Ministry, to all Intents and Purposes, as ever the Pharisees made God's
Commands of none Effect, by their Traditions?

If we mistake not, Mr. T's Arguings here are built upon some obsolete or new
coined Maxims, which have not been current among Protestants in these last
Ages, whether because of their Orthodoxy or Declinings, we will leave that to
the Reader's Judgment, after we have given our Opinion in the Matter? For though
we are not so vain, as to pretend Infallibility in making Guesses, yet we see
no Reason, why we may not be supposed to be as capable of forming nearer
Guesses of the Topics of a Man's Arguments in his Writings, than the spiritual
Man can of the secret States of Men's Souls by their verbal Declarations: If
therefore we guess right, we are of the Mind, that Mr. T's Arguments are
fetched from or founded on the following Topics, or at least, that the
following Propositions are the Native Consequences of his Doctrine here, viz.

1. That People have a Right to their stated Minister's Labors; but yet, that
he has no Right or Authority, to command their Attendance upon his sacred
public Administrations, any further than their Humors are pleased or their
Inclinations lead them: So that though in all other Relations the Possession is
mutual, as 1 Cor. vii. 4. but yet in the Relation between Pastor and People, it
is wholly of the People's Side: So that it is good English for People to tell
their Minister, All that is yours is ours, but we are wholly our own for all
that. How else can we force that Text in 1 Cor. iii. 22. to prove, that God's
People have a Right to the Gifts of all God's Ministers alike, and that
therefore they are at their own Liberty to leave their own Ministers, and to
make use of the Gifts of another at their own Pleasure, without wronging any?
But can Mr. T. think, that Gods Intent in that Text is, to tell every
particular Congregation, or any Sect of People, that all the Particulars
contained in that Text were theirs equally, as to their Use, upon their
clearing to themselves and Party their Title to Christ? For would not they be
unholy Saints, that would claim and use such a Right? And would not others have
a very unhappy World to live in, if ever such unruly Creatures should become
the most numerous Party? Witness Munster. Is it not remarkable, that the
ra^ting Anabaptists in Germany, founded the Community of Goods and Wives upon
the same mistaken Gloss upon that Text, which Mr. T. founds the Community of
Ministers upon? And will he tell us, what are his Arguings better than theirs?
For if this Text may serve to dissolve one sacred Relation, why not all
Relations? And why may not Things present, and Things to come, and the World,
include the Community of All? And what miserable Work may ensue, if such a
Conceit, as that Life and Death is theirs, in the same extensive mistaken
Sense? It cost us some Thoughts what could be the Meaning of the Pope's
Liberality (who is otherwise Niggard enough) in bestowing the Title of
Catholics upon his meanest Followers, until we read upon his Mitre the Name of
Catholic or Universal Bishop; Is not he hereby entitled to all the Cream that
drops from the Name, when the poor People have no more than an empty Title;
which entitles them to no more than the heavy Burden of feeding and maintaining
Swarms of greedy Locusts with the Sweat of their Brows and their Hearts Blood?
How vain then is it for Protestants, to cheat themselves with the Noise of the
Name of Catholics? For may not Catholic Ministers, if we make such, claim to
be spiritual Men two Ways viz. By Office and Grace; whereas the People have but
a single Claim, and so, instead of the Tenth, claim all to be theirs? And if
Men will make an Engine of false Glosses upon Scripture Texts, to rob Ministers
of their just Authority over their People, may not we soon see the Time, when
such Glosses will be made use of, for Ropes to hang the religious Rights of the
People? For are not both founded on the same Bottom? And if we do not maintain
both, how soon shall we lose both? Is not this Catholic Mode the ready Way for
Men to increase the Number of Teachers to an unsupportable Burden, when in
reality they are destitute of a Pastor to take Care of the Flock? Is not
grasping at all, the Way to lose the little one has? Can any think, that those
Congregations are better supplied, whose Ministers are whole Months abroad,
than those whose Ministers tarry with them? To have a Right to the Gifts of all
Ministers are big Words; but if at the same Time others have as good a Right as
we to our own Minister's Labors, so that he must act accordingly, will this
big Right make us fat? And if on the other Hand Mr. T. once allows, that a
Minister has Authority to command his People's Attendance upon his public
Administrations, will not his Arguments on this Head prove mere Cobweb?

2. Another Maxim, which seems to be at the Bottom of Mr. T.'s Arguings here
is, That a Minister is bound to his People, but that the People are as free
from their Minister after a Call, Choice, and contracting the Relation of
Pastor and Flock, as before. How else can there be room for Men's coveting the
best Gifts and proving all Things after the Match is made? Is it not enough
that Men have Liberty to dandle and kiss other Women when they are single; but
when married, should not they delight themselves always in their own Fountain
or Cistern? For how can Men hope that God will deliver them from Evil, if they
lead themselves into Temptation, by embracing the Bosom of a Stranger? And what
but this can we make of the Out cry made here against binding Men to particular
Ministers against their Judgment and Inclinations, when they are better edified
elsewhere, calling it carnal with a Witness, a cruel Oppression of tender
Consciences, compelling Men to sin; for he that doubts is damned if he eats?
What is the meaning of this Outcry? Is it not very like the Outcry A. B.
Whitgift once made about their woeful and distressed State, when the Parliament
was like to pass a Bill against Pluralities? But what is this cruel Yoke that
Men are in Danger of now? Is it any more than this, let every Man have his own
Wife, and every Woman her own Husband, and let every Flock that have got an
orderly Pastor attend for ordinary upon his Administrations, obey him in the
Lord, and esteem him highly for his Work's Sake? And what if it was added to
this, Let every Minister for ordinary reside with his own Flock, would any Man
deserve the Character of an Opposer of God's Work for saying so? Will Mr. T.
tell us, where among the Non-Conformists have Men been bound to a Minister
against their Judgment and Inclination? Has ever a Minister been settled in
any of our Congregations, but upon the Call and Choice of the People? And is it
not a greater Privilege and Liberty for a People to have a pious Minister of
their own Choice to attend upon, than to be vagabond Stragglers from Place to
Place as Sheep without a Shepherd? And when Men have an orderly Minister, where
is the Carnality of obliging them to discharge their Duties to God and to their
o^^ minister, any more than that of binding Men to perform (...) of other
Relations? What if Men plead tender Consci^^^es for the Community of Goods and
Wives as well as of Ministers, or for deserting their own Wives, as well as
Flock or Pastors, to cloak Sin and Disorder? And are not the Duties of
Ministers and People as plainly required as the other? What is that
unscriptural Doctrine or Practice that is imposed? Who can set Men at Liberty
from relative Gospel Duties? Is there no Difference between Christian Liberty
and Licentiousness, Anarchy and Disorder? Is not the one a Liberty to preach
and profess Truth, to observe Order, and to perform the Duties of their Place
and Relations peaceably? What do conscientious Non-Conformists want more than
this? Must Men have Liberty besides this to spread Errors, to confound Order,
to disturb others in the orderly Exercises of Piety, by rambling up and down to
raise Factions, Feuds and Contentions, and to carnalize, devilize, pharisize,
and abuse Men, with the Nicknames of Dupes and Dunces, merely because they do
not run with them into the same Excess of Riot, as they do?

3. Another Maxim is, That the Determinations of Ministers and Sessions
touching the Liberty or Dismission of particular Members, is to be founded upon
and overruled by the Judgment and Inclination of such Members; so that all the
Authority that Church Rulers in such Matters seemingly are allowed to exercise,
is no other or more, but only to enquire what are the Judgments and
Inclinations of particular Members, with respect to adhering to or leaving
their own Pastor, and then to give them Liberty to act herein as they see fit;
for how without this, can there be room to plead Men's Judgment and
Inclinations as just Reasons to justify their forsaking their own Assemblies,
where God's Word is purely and therefore powerfully preached, and his
Ordinances administered in Purity? Have not the best Men in this imperfect State
often such corrupt Inclinations as will as naturally lead them to Sin and
Disorder, as the Eagles fly to the stinking Carcass, if Men give Way to them?
What if the Judgment or Inclination of the Member appears to the Minister and
Session inconsistent to Gospel Rule and Order, must they thereupon give Way to
Men's Neglect of Duty and committing Sins, without bearing Witness against them
for both?

4. Another Maxim is, That every Member, after solemn devoting or giving up of
himself to God, his Church, and it is Rulers, to walk in Church Fellowship with
them, and to be ruled by them according to God's Word, is still Judge in his
own Case, how long and how often he will attend upon or absent from the public
Administrations of his chosen stated Pastor, without being accountable to his
Pastor or Fellow Members for his Neglect herein: For if the Member pleads
Inclination or Opinion of being better edified elsewhere, is not he at Liberty
according to Mr. T.'s Rule? Who then is Judge in the Case? What then is become
of the Right of Societies in their Members? May not Wantonness, vain Curiosity,
Love of Novelties, Disgust, Want of Love to Truth and Gospel Order, vain
Admiration of glaring Errors and Disorders, when nicknamed Reformation, or
even the Having of Persons in Admiration, incline Men to desert their own
orderly Pastor, as well as better Principles? How then is it possible for
Gospel Rule to take Place, where such vain Notions prevail?

5. Another Maxim is, That secret Reasons or Surmises in a Man's own Breast, of
which he can make no apparent Proof, are sufficient Grounds to dissolve the
Relation between Pastor and Flock, at least to justify Men's Non-Attendance
upon the Administrations of their proper Pastors: For according to Mr. T.'s
Rule, if a Member is uncharitable enough to condemn his own Pastor for a carnal
Man, though he is orthodox and regular; (...) pretends he is not edified by him,
though his Doctrine is sound, and his Life exemplary, or is prejudiced against
him, so that though he once conscientiously judged him a gifted Man, who appears
to be so still to more judicious Persons, yet if upon a slender Trial he thinks
another more gifted than him, or if he has fallen out with him, though that may
be upon the Account of his Faithfulness, so that he is not inclined to hear
him, is not he at Liberty, at least if he has the Art of Dissembling so far as
to give his Minister a Judas Kiss at parting, may not he bid him Goodnight at
Noonday? Is it not a brave Thing that Church Members, at least dissatisfied
ones, have such an Advantage over their respective Pastors, so that if they
want to desert them upon any Difference whatsoever, is it not the easiest Thing
in the World to make a plausible Pretense of one of these surmised Excuses? and
then will he not be capped to all Intents and Purposes? For then has not he
got him upon the Hugg, yea, the Cornish Hugg, and down he goes? For if he is a
gifted Man, what Difficulty is it for ill Humor, to call him a carnal Man, a
Pharisee, and to fill the Bushel, an Ahitophel too? If he be a gracious mild
Man, is it not easy to call him a well-meaning ignorant Rustic? But if he be
both a gifted and gracious Man, what Difficulty is it to tell him that he
preaches too profound Divinity, and that Men are better edified elsewhere? If
he happens to demand an Account of the Person's Edification, viz. what new
Lessons he has learned, or Progress he has made in practical Godliness more
than before? may not he tell him, that this is begging the Question, he feels
it, he believes it, he knows it, he asserts, and he will stand to it, and that
Thousands think so as well as himself? and may not he add to all this, that it
is as plain as the Sun, and that he is blind that does not see it, yea, as
blind as a Mole, as dead as a Stone, a Dupe, a Dunce, without any spiritual
Taste or Relish? And if the Parish Minister be so obstinate as to call all this
no more than bold Say-soes; is not there a Remedy for that also? for may not
the Churchmember tell his Pastor, that it is his Inclination to leave him, and
to go elsewhere? And so may not we have Use for an old rusty Rhyme? I do not
love thee Dr. Fell, the Reason why I cannot tell;
But this is all that I can tell, I do not love thee Dr. Fell.
Is not this substantial Divinity? And when a Person rhymes it so pleasantly
too, has not he a Bushel full of the Spirit of Meekness? And if the Minister
be not carnal with a Witness, can he offer to say one Word more? But if he
does, will it not give the Member double Advantage over him, to call him a
carnal unconverted Pharisee, an Oppressor of tender Consciences, etc. and if he
says but little, but grieves at the hearing of such sorry Reasons, spoken with
such Confidence, if all that Mr. T. says be true, will not this be a Sign of
his Rottenness and Hypocrisy? Are not these great Proficients! For cannot they
def^^ the Devil to speak worse of Job, than what they ^peak of their Minister?
Well, well, Men may deceive themselves, and mock others like themselves with
such Stuff; but will God be mocked also, and count this Religion? If Men
conclude his Silence or their own Success, to be sure Proofs of his
Approbation, may not they either in good time, or when too late, have good
Reason to mourn over their woeful Mistake in the Matter? Psalm. l. 21.

6. In order to fortify Men's Plea of their getting more Edification over the
Parish Line, than within it, we think we see another Maxim half forged out, but
either for Want of soddering or a welding-Heat, or because of the stubborn
Temper of the Metal, it seems so full of Flaws, that it wants the second Heat
or Purification, before it be fit to be handled but very gingerly, which is
this, viz. That the Benefit of Hearers or the Success of a Minister's
Performances, depends sometimes upon the Minister's superior Gifts, sometimes
Grace carries the Day, sometimes the Judgment or Inclination of the People will
do Wonders, whatever the Minister be, for aught appears; but low to reconcile
these jarring Elements with themselves or Scripture, which teaches, that the
Efficacy of divine Ordinances depends upon God's Blessing and Cooperation,
must be left to further Enquiry.

7. That private Members may know when their Ministers are Graceless, albeit
they cannot prove any Charges against their Doctrine or Deportment; for if they
can do the latter, why are Men so much in Love with graceless Men, when they
exclaim so loudly against them, as not to prosecute them? Can it be for Want of
Good Will? Or if they are willing, how are Men so unskilful as to pitch upon
secret Surmises, which they cannot prove true, when at the same Time it is in
their Power to produce apparent Proofs, which would deserve Hearing? For does
not the using of the former Shifts, prove the Dearth of the latter?

8. Another Maxim is, That a dissatisfied Member, that has taken some Disgust
at, or is at Variance with his Minister, right or wrong, is in a Capacity to
make a truer Judgment of the Gifts and Graces of his Minister, as well as of
his own Edification by his Ministry, than he himself could make when he
respected him, or than the whole Congregation and Presbytery could make at his
Ordination, at least, than what his present Well-wishers do make of these
Matters. How else can such secret Surmises be pleaded to be just Causes of
Separation from him?

9. Another Maxim is, That all the Conceits Men entertain, and all the vain
boasting Men make of their Benefit and Edification out of the Parish-line, are
not only all true, but also such evident Truths, as should sway Ministers and
Sessions to give up their Right in such Members. How else can this be pleaded
to be a sufficient Ground to desert the Administrations of one's proper Pastor,
for all in general that make it? For is it not easy to prove by apparent
Fruits, that many pretend to much Benefit, who are sensibly hurt, in the
Judgment of others more judicious in such Matters? And is it not well known,
that the Account that some of them give of the Matter is very lame?

10. Another Maxim is, That deserting, censuring and abusing their own orderly
Pastors, and falling in with their Side, according to Mr. T's Rule, is a sure
Sign of Grace and Conversion; but adhering to their own Ministers, is a true
Sign of carnal Men. How else are the uneasy and dissatisfied, throughout this
Sermon, proclaimed pious, godly Souls, and the Adherents to their own Pastors
are nicknamed Dupes and Dunces, etc. without any spiritual Taste or Relish? We
grant, that such private Members as make groundless Exclamations against their
own Ministers, upon mere Surmises, are fit Followers to such Preachers as do
the like; but yet, we would ask, whether those that admire glaring Errors and
Disorders or those that oppose them, are the greatest Dupes and Dunces, or give
the best Proofs of their Grace?

11. There seems to be another Maxim designed out of all, which, if it could be
proved, would be worth all the Rest, viz. To make People believe, that Mr. T.
and his Party are the only spiritual Men and gracious Ministers, and all his
Opposers Hypocrites; the only wise Men, and others but ignorant Rusticks; at
least the only edifying Preachers, and all the rest being but lame Men, and
unfit for the Work; for if they have Grace, they want Gifts, or if they have
Gifts, they want Grace, or if they have a little of both, they preach against
the Errors and Disorders of the Times, and therefore their Sermon are
unedifying to such as are projecting how to build a Babel. Now, as this last
seems to be the Design of the whole Performance, may it not be worth our while
to consider, what are the Proofs offered to support it? This will appear then,

1. If we consider the professed Scope of the whole Sermon, viz. To exclaim
against carnal, unconverted Ministers, judging them severely, and, according to
Mr. T. Rule, Hypocrites are against all judging of others, in order to hide
their own Filthiness; and therefore to be sure public Exclaimers against
Hypocrites are all honest Men, for is not this built on another sure Maxim,
viz. A Whore was never heard to call her Companion a Whore in the wide World,
lest she should retort and call her a filthy Strumpet?

2. Another Proof is, The Crowds follow them, and does not Mr. T. give us
Scripture Proof for this, wherever the Carcass is, there Eagles will be
gathered, and may not we add another as much to the Purpose every whit, Rev.
xiii. 3. and all the World wondered after the Beast? But before we can apply
Mr. T's Text to the Matter in Hand, must not we have some Rule, such as, As the
Wheel-barrow rumbles over the Pebbles, so a Thumb-Rope of Sand will make an
excellent Cable for the Fishers Folly: If it were not a distinct Application
here might be thought too homely, Is it not easy for a carnal Man to be
distinct? We shall then only ask, who are the Eagles; what is the present
Carcass; and what draws the Eagles to the Carcass? If Mr. T. will be accounted
a spiritual Man, according to his own Rule, must not he be distinct in applying
his own Comparisons? Who was he that assigned Universality for a Mark of the
true Church? But if ever we saw the Picture of the Horse in the Mill, may not
we see it here? The Ministers are good Men, because the Crowds follow them; and
the Crowds that follow them are Converts, because they are gracious Ministers,
and the Multitude's Attachment to them proves it?

3. Another Proof is, Because others do not put Men into such deep Convictions
and under such deep Horror, as makes them cry, roar, faint and roll on the
Ground, or so as to run into Halters; or as to cast them into Fits and
Convulsions, as some do. What would a carnal Man be judged worthy of some
Months ago, if he should say as much as Mr. W. does of these bodily
Convulsions, viz. That he believes they come from the Devil, Journal, vol. 3.
p. 63? We own that we do not find, that these were plenty among Protestants, by
any Account we can get, but in the first breaking out of Quakerism; but if some
Travelers are to be credited, are not they much more plenty in the Popish
Dominions? For, when the Priests kindle the Flames of Purgatory into a terrible
Bonfire, when the Pope's Bulls make an hideous roaring, when the Noise of the
Wheels of the Inquisition Coach rattle, how can the poor People, that are kept
in such profound Ignorance, poisoned with Superstition, and brokenhearted with
slavish Fear, bear such Thunderclaps, without being put into a Consternation?
But then the Query is, whether such Shocks are the Fruit of Guilt or of Grace,
of Ignorance or of Knowledge, of Faith or Unbelief, of Hope or Despair?

Before we come to make closer Remarks upon particular Arguments here, it may
be, it will not be amiss to transcribe a Paragraph out of Mr. Burrough's
Irenicum, page 84.85. " The sixth dividing Principle, says he, is, What is
best in itself must be chosen and done, not weighing Circumstances or
References. --

It is, says he, in itself a better Thing to enjoy a Ministry of the most
eminent Gift and Graces, than one of lower, but if this should be made a Rule,
that a Man who is under a Pastor, who is faithful and in some good Measure
gifted, upon another Man's coming into the Country, that is more eminent, he
should forsake his Pastor and join to the other; and if after this still a more
eminent Man comes, he should leave the former and join to him; and by the same
Law, a Pastor, who has a good People, yet if others be more likely to receive
more Good, he may leave his own People, and go to them; what Confusion and
Disorder would there be continually in the Church? Men must consider not only
what the Thing is in it is own Nature, but what it is to them, how it stands in
Reference to their Relations. If you be joined to a Pastor, so as you believe
he is set over you by Christ, to be a Pastor to you, though this Man has
meaner Gifts than others, and it would he more comfortable for you to have
another Pastor; yet this is not enough to cause you to desert him whom Christ
has set over you; and if People may not leave their Pastors, because others
have more eminent Gifts, then surely Pastors must not leave their People,
because others have more eminent Livings.

Mr. T. here points out three or four Causes, which he asserts to be sufficient
Grounds to justify Men in deserting their own Minister's Administrations, and
to go for ordinary to hear another, viz.

1. Mr. T. seems to assert, That People's Notion of their own Minister's having
lesser Gifts than a Stranger, will justify the Deserting of the former, and
going to the latter frequently. page 19.20.

Qu. I. Is not such an idolizing Preference of Men upon the Account of superior
Gifts, a Reflection upon the Wisdom of the Author of all Gifts, for his using
Variety in the Distribution of Gifts, who gives to one five, to another two, to
another one Talent? Must he that has one Talent be left idle, if he lives nigh
one that has two, and he that has two be left idle if he lives nigh one that
has five Talents? If so, what could he do that had but one Talent, but hide it
in a Napkin, if he lived among such People as Mr. T. would have all to be? How
could he make Use of it? And would not such a Method excuse him that had two in
doing in the same manner? Besides, when a whole Congregation and the
Presbytery, after solemn calling upon God, and upon fair Trial, may be supposed
to be liable to mistake, who no doubt judge a Man to have at least a Competency
of Gifts, when they give him a Call; and it may be still on good Grounds judge
that the despised Minister has five Talents, and the admired Stranger but two
or one; why may not the Dissatisfied under Disgust take the one or two for the
five Talents? Is not there more Safety in the Multitude of Counselors now as
well as in Solomon's Time? Further, how without equal Trial of both Ministers,
can any Man form an adequate Judgment of Men's Gifts? Is it not common for Men
to admire a Stranger for once or twice wonderfully, whom after a While they
think less of than their own Ministers? And may not Men of good Judgment easily
mistake a Person's Gifts or real Worth upon a transient Trial? For is it not
known, that one may excel in Judgment, the other in Delivery; the one has
better Matter, the other more flourishing Language; the one in Solidity, the
other in making a fair Appearance; the one is more zealous, the other is more
steadfast; every one having his peculiar Gifts; and is it not well known, that
empty Barrels and shallow Waters make always the loudest Sound?

Qu. II. Besides, if Men could form a right Judgment in the Matter, by giving
him that has the five Talents the Preference; yet would not such a Practice
upon such Grounds be idolizing of Instruments, by suspending the Success or
Benefit of Sermons upon the Gifts of the Preacher, and not on the Blessing of
God, and the Cooperation of his Spirit? May not he that has less or no Grace
excel in Gifts? and must a gifted Hypocrite be a fitter Instrument for God to
work by, than a pious Minister of less Gifts, and therefore encouraged when the
other is deserted? Has not God often owned a Man of lesser Gifts, that is
pious, to make him more successful than others more gifted? And is not this a
very usual Thing, if not God's most common Way, that he may learn us to cease
from Man, and that no Flesh should glory before Him, but that He alone might be
exalted? Besides, though we allow, that when a Congregation is vacant, that it is
their Duty and Interest to endeavor by all means, to get a Pastor of the best
Gifts they can; but yet is it not one Thing to be wise and wary in choosing a
Minister and contracting a Pastoral Relation, but another Thing to break and
cut the Bond of that Relation, after it is voluntarily entered into and
contracted? May not there be room for many Considerations to take Place, to
sway the Choice in making a Match, which would appear both ridiculous and
sinful when pleaded to be just Causes of Divorce, after the Marriage-Knot is
tied? But yet does not Mr. T. justify this Latitude or License by putting the
married and unmarried upon a Par, as to a second Choice, from p. 18 -- 22, even
supposing a Person's Pastor be gracious? We grant, his Reasonings may hold in
making a Choice before such a Relation be contracted; but how can it
afterward, when the Choice is made and the Match is concluded, not for a Day
or during Pleasure only, but as long as by God's good Providence the said
Relation continues, or until it be dissolved in an orderly Way? And does not
this appear to be Mr. T.'s Mind, if we consider the Topics he argues from,
viz. The Birds of the Air, the Fishes of the Sea, and the wild Beasts of the
Field? If there comes out an Act against Metaphors, should not there be a
Clause in it, viz. That a Rhetorician should never use an Argument, for fear he
may come too near to the Heels of Truth? For might not the tame Ass that
knows his Owner, and the Ox that waits at his Masier's Crib, learn Mr. T. a
better Lesson to the Purpose in Hard, than wild Fowls Fishes or Beasts, who
have no certain Owner, Place or Crib Pastor or Ruler, Law or Rule of
Government, nor capable of having any, but are lest to wander as their natural
Instinct leads them? And yet do not these observe some Order in keeping to
their own Flock, and some of them to their own Mates, notwithstanding their
Wanderings and Want of Reason? Where then is the Similitude between such
Creatures and Church Members, who are rational Creatures, under a Law, proper
Pastor, divided into stated Companies, and under Vows and solemn Ties to
continue in Church Fellowship, and under the Pastoral Rod and Care of a fixed
Pastor, who is invested with the Authority of a Steward, both to feed and to
rule his particular Flock, as a distinct Body or Household? And are not all the
orderly Relations of rational Creatures, whether natural, civil or religious,
fixed and stated by particular Bounds and Limits, within which Men should keep
at least for ordinary? And what is good Order in Church or State, but the due
Observation of our proper Limits, by performing the Duties of our Relations in
proper Place and Time, without Neglect, as well as without Encroachment or
disturbing of others in their proper Places and Relations? Will Mr. T. tell us,
what is that ordinary Calling or Relation in Church or State of God's
Appointment, whereby Men are called to become Wanderers or Vagabonds, as the
Fowls of the Air, Fishes, or wild Beasts? Does not the Christian Religion in
its very Nature, according to the stated Dispensation we are now under, exclude
and forbid such Wanderings any further than Necessity or Convenience requires
them? And are not all Wanderings out of mere Choice, our Wantonness and Sin? As
therefore Mr. T. well observes, that a Work may be a Duty in the Matter of it,
when it is a Sin in the Manner, if not performed according to the Rule; we
would ask, whether or no the Duty of Preaching may not be abused this Way, as
much as any other Duty, by Men deserting their own Flocks, and intruding in a
disorderly Manner into the Labors of other pious Ministers, to withdraw their
Flocks from them? And as great Dupes and Dunces as Mr. T. counts is, we
challenge him, or any of his Party to reconcile such Practices to
Scripture-Rule, the Presbyterian-Plan, or even to right Reason and Charity? But
to return to the Matter in Hand; who doubts, but that in choosing Pastors as
well as Wives, Men should seek the best Gifts; but yet must we be choosing every
Day for ever, without any Regard to the Choice already made, and the Relation
already contracted? Is it not our Duty, when bound to a Minister, as well as to
a Wife, to stand to the Choice made, and to fulfill the respective Duties of
that Relation? May not those Gifts be best and fittest for me, which God in his
Providence carves out for me, though they be not best in themselves, or in my
Esteem and Conceit; and when Men stand related upon a solemn Choice, should not
all that are bound to an orderly Minister in an orderly Way, believe this,
notwithstanding corrupt Reason or Inclination suggest the contrary? For when
Ministers are but Instruments, what has a more direct Tendency to answer or
reach the designed End, than a careful and close Observation of God's
Institutions in using Means and Instruments, without consulting with Flesh and
Blood? That there is a Difference or variety of Gifts, and that Men should be
duly respected upon the Account of superior Gifts, we own, but will it follow
thence, that we are to contemn our own Minister, if he has a Competency of
Gifts, by withdrawing our Attendance upon his Ministry, any more than that a
Man should despise his own virtuous Wife, because some fine Lady in the Town is
more beautiful than she? For is it not well known, that plain Preaching may be
more edifying to the Vulgar than profound Doctrine, which may be more edifying
to Men of greater Capacities? For is not a wooden Key that opens the Lock,
better than a golden one that makes a fidling Din in the Wards, and yet
confounds them? Is not sound Scripture Doctrine the true Food of Souls, and
what is truly edifying? And is not Truth, in her sober homely Garb, more
edifying than gaudy Error, spruced up with all the Fineries of the Scene or
Stage, or bug-beared with all the Horns that can stick upon its hydratick
Heads? And if Mr. T's Sermons be stripped of the Padlock of Pen and Inkhorn
Terms, what Sermons are there preached among us, but what will more than
equalize this Sermon of his, as well as Mr. W's Sermons, for old Truth? And
does not sound Matter edify better than ear-pleasing empty Sounds? But how
great soever Men's Gifts be, must not God carry on a Series of Miracles as long
as there is a Series of true Conversion Work carried on in the World: why then
should Mr. T. count this unnecessary, or the supposing this unreasonable? How
alien to the Matter in Hand is the Example of John the Baptist's Hearers, and
those of the Pharisees, coming to hear Christ, not only upon Weekdays, but
upon Sabbath Days, whom Christ reproved not? For may not a mean Capacity
distinguish between the Master and the Servant, and between ordinary and
extraordinary Times or Matters? For where was that Parish Church among the
Pharisees, wherein the same Gospel Doctrine which Christ preached, was preached
in Purity? In what Part of the World was John the Baptist's Parish? When has
Mr. T. or his Adherents, given as good Proofs of their being as much greater
than their Brethren as Christ did to John? Might not John worship Christ
without being guilty of Idolatry, as well as give him the Preference? But what
sort of Creatures are those who put themselves upon a Par with Christ in
extraordinary Matters? And is not Christ's particular Respect to John, and his
taking him, with Peter and James, to Mount Tabor and Gethsamene, as little to
the Purpose? For who was that stated Pastor, unto whom these Disciples were
related, whose sacred Administrations were deserted, by their accompanying
Christ?

2. Another Thing that is pleaded to be sufficient Grounds to justify People to
forsake their own Minister, and to go to hear others for ordinary, is, the
Judgment and Inclination of People ballancing that Way.

Before we come to lay down Queries, we shall premise a few Words: As to the
Noise here made about binding Men against their Judgment and Inclination, to a
particular Minister; if levelled against our Synod, it is entirely a false
Charge, as we hinted already; for none are bound with us but by their own free
and voluntary Choice and Consent; all the Binding that can be pretended to be,
is that we plead, that it is the Duty of the Members of a particular
Congregation, who have a fixed Pastor, to attend for ordinary upon his
Ministry, while he is their orderly Minister.

Qu. I. When it is Christ's Appointment, that every Congregation should have
their own Pastor, and every Pastor his own Flock; how can Mr. T. have the Face
to outface the Truth so far, as to say, that obliging Church Members to wait
upon the Gospel Administrations of their own Pastor, is an unscriptural
Infringement on Christian Liberty, unless he can prove that the Relation of
Pastor and People is an human Invention? Can Mr. T. say, that this is any more
than Christ's easy Yoke? How terribly then does Mr. T. misrepresent the Matter,
when he says, that it is a worse Yoke than that of Rome itself? to prove which
he quotes Dr. Voetius, who asserts, That even among Papists, as to hearing of
Sermons, the People are not deprived of the Liberty of Choice. If the Account
be true, whether or no one orthodox Protestant Minister, be not worth a
Thousand popish begging Friars with all their Trumpery? Suppose then, that the
Pope allows the People a free Election or Choice of their own Pastors, if this
were true, are not Protestant Dissenters fully as orthodox as he is in this
Point? For has not he Missionaries, but none of our Ministers will cope with
him, except Mr. T. will? For what else can we call Mr. F. who resides with us
this Winter? If the Pope allows People to choose a Pastor today, and to reject
him to morrow, upon the bare Plea of their own Judgment and Inclination, is it
any Wonder that Protestants dissent from Papists in this Point, when they
differ in as material Ones besides? For is it not the Pope's old Rule to
People, Come you over to me in Ceremonials, and I will come over to you in
Morals? And without we would go all the Way to the Delphic Oracle, we cannot
expect a Scheme that will suit the Inclinations of the Generality better than
his: Well, but will not we have as good Company, if we have the Vogue of all
sound Protestant Reformers on our Side, albeit Mr. T. should be so happy as to
have the Pope on his? What sort of an Aspect is it when some of the Stars of
the first Magnitude in this lower Orb, are in something like a Conjunction with
the Dragon's Tail, in the Points they dissent from their Brethren? Has not
Rome been much abused, and Protestant Writers much mistaken, if the News be
true that the Protestant Yoke, even among Conformists, is worse than the Romish
Yoke? And may not Non-conformists speak one Word more than they -- in the
Matter? All that we can say is, that we cannot wish any of our Fellow Subjects
as great an Evil, as to have the Trial of both; for was not it an unhappy Day
when King Lucius bartered a Crown of Gold for a Crown of Thorns, by laying down
his Scepter at the Feet of him that bore a Reed? But more Fury still; for Mr.
T. adds, It is a Yoke like that of Egypt, which cruel Pharaoh formed for the
Necks of the oppressed Israelites, when he obliged them to make up their stated
Task of Brick, but allowed them no Straw; so we must now grow in Grace and
Knowledge, but in the mean Time, according to the Notion of some, we are
confined from using the likeliest Means to attain the End. Is not this an hard
Case? But the Query is, whether the People's Task, or Mr. T.'s Task is the
greatest, who was obliged to travel all the Way to Egypt, to find an equal
Yoke to the Gospel-Yoke, but is it not son Comfort that he must not go further?
for has not he found one like it now? We never till now heard the Question
resolved whether the Pope's or Pharaoh's Yoke was the Heaviest, but it would
seem that Catholics reckon Pharaoh's Yoke much worse; Why so? Is it because
they seel a Burden upon the Body more than double the Weight upon the
Conscience, because the latter is tender? But when Mr. T. allows, that the same
Word is preached in the Parish, that is preached out of the Parish Line; is it
any Loss that People are bereaved of Straw in their spiritual Food? If this be
the Case, will not Mr. Whitefield's and Wesley's Books, and this Sermon of Mr.
T. supply all our Parishes with more than enough of Straw, Hay and Stubble too,
so that we have no Need to go out of the Parish Line to fetch more? And when
the same Word is preached by an orthodox stated Pastor without Straw, how are
Men confined from the likeliest Means, to attain Growth in Grace? But what if
through Want or Weakness of Judgment, wavering Instability, Double-mindedness,
Wantonness, Pride, Love of Novelties, itching Ears, Curiosity or delusive
Fancies, People are inclined not to hear sound Doctrine, being like Israel of
old, loving to wander, without refraining her Feet, Jer. 14.10. and to go after
her Lovers, that gave her her Bread and her Water, her Wool and her Flax, her
Oil and her Drink, Hos. 2.5. yea, to scatter her Ways unto Strangers under
every green Tree, Jer. 3.13. Will it be the Part of the good Shepherd to suffer
the Sheep to go astray, as often and as long and as far as such an Inclination
leads them, or has not God entrusted his Servants with a Rod to revenge all
Disobedience? 1 Cor. 4.21. 2 Cor. 10.6. Are not Sheep to follow their own
Shepherds in what they follow Christ, and to obey their own Rulers in the Lord,
striving in the Strength of his Grace, to bring every Judgment, Thought and
Inclination into Captivity, to the Obedience of Christ, praying that he may
incline their Hearts to perform his Statutes always even unto the End, as
knowing it to be both the Sin and the Punishment of the Back-slider to be
filled with his own Ways? To conclude this, we would ask, Whether bringing
Religion to truckle to the Humors of the People, be not the ready Way to
destroy Religion and the People? As for Instance, Cambyses demanding of his
Counselors, Whether he might marry his Sister by the Law of the Land? They
answered, That they found no Law, that allowed a Brother to marry a Sister; but
one, that allowed the Kings of the Persians to do as they list. What a poor
Government would it have been, if all the Persians had such an Allowance?

3. Another Thing, which is supposed to afford Grounds for a Church Member to
withdraw from his own proper Pastor, is the Conceit or Hope Men may conceive of
getting as good if not better Edification elsewhere. Here we are like to have
some warm Work, if not a Battle. Page 21. Mr. T. says, If the great Ends of
Hearing may be attained as well, and better, by Hearing of another Minister
than our own; then I see not, why we should be under a fatal Necessity of
hearing him, I mean our Parish-Minister, perpetually, or generally. Is not this
Argument as long as it is broad? For may not we say, If the great Ends of
Hearing may be attained as well, if not better, by hearing our own Minister
than another; then we see not, where is the Prudence, Piety, or Order, in
forsaking our own Pastor to go to hear another? Whether the commanded Duty, or
the Neglect or Counter-acting of it, is fatal? Is the sacred Relation between
Minister and People such an Atom, that Mr. T. cannot see it without a
Microscope? Is Men's solemn Choice, and the wise Disposal of Providence, in
bringing Men into such a particular Relation to their Minister, a Nullity? Are
Men's solemn Vows of attending upon their own Minister's Administrations,
Nothing? Is Christ's Institution, which is the Foundation of particular
Churches, and of the particular Relation between Pastor and People, a mere
Trifle? May not a purblind Man see, that this is some Reason, why Men should
ordinarily attend upon the Administrations of their stated Pastor? Is it not
some Affront to say, in the open Parlour, that Doll is as good as my Lady; but
must she be better too? How then will Mr. T. prove, that stolen Bread is
sweeter than common, and that Men will thrive better by it? Mr. T. adds, What
are, or ought to be the Ends of Hearing, but getting of Grace, and growing in
it? Romans 10.14. 1 Pet. 2.2. Ans. Yea, and why may not glorifying God by our
Obedience, as well as getting Communion with God, be as direct Ends as the
former? Has not Mr. T. lately contended warmly with Mr. Gowell for asserting,
that our own Good or Happiness is our main End? What is the Reason that he now
seems to change Sides, as if he had forgot his own Part of that Controversy?
Was Mr. T. aware, that it was an hard Matter to prove, that we glorify God by
forsaking our own Assemblies? But will he tell us, whether he has any of the
Oil of Grace to sell to or to bestow upon his Hearers, any more than the Parish
Minister? If not, what is this to the Purpose? But Mr. T. adds, Poor Babes like
not dry Breasts, and living Men like not dead Pools. But are not the Breasts,
if not of the Fathers, yet of the Mothers that begat them, as natural for
Babes, as those of a Stranger? Can Mr. T. tell us in what Parish one may meet
with more, or half as much of the Coloquintida of false Doctrine, than in Mr. W
-- d's Books and this Sermon of his? When he does this, may it not be time for
such Parishioners to cry out with the Sons of the Prophets, Death is in the
Pot? Mr. T. adds, Well then, may not these Ends be obtained out of our Parish
Line? So say we, may not these Ends be obtained within our Parish Line? Mr. T.
proceeds, saying, Faith comes by hearing, Romans 10. But the Apostle does not add
your Parish Minister. So say we, the Apostle does not add an Itinerant, nor a
begging Friar, nor a wandering Jew. What then? Is not the Parish Minister in
Possession, and if another enters into his Labors, should not he show his
Patent or Call? Mr. T. adds, Is not the same Word preached out of the Parish?
So say we, Is not the same Word preached in the Parish, and that to some better
Purpose? Else, how could we correct Mr. T's and W's Divinity, who are but
common Hearers, even though it were supposed, that we had some Help from the
Parish Minister? Besides, is not there some Odds between an orderly Pastor and
a vagabond Intruder, to dispense Ordinances, if we have any Regard at all to
our Bibles? Mr. T. adds, Is there any Restriction in the Promises of Blessing
the Word to those only, who keep within the Parish-Line ordinarily? We reply,
Is there any Restriction of the Promises of Blessing the Word to those only,
who ordinarily go over the Parish-Line to hear? If there is, is not the
Condition of the Sheep much better when they want, than when they have a
Pastor, if they have but a neighboring Minister? To what Purpose then shall
Mr. T.'s Parish keep him any longer? Mr. T. adds, If there be such a
Restriction, I have not yet met with it. Say you so; but can Mr. T. say, that
he has met with such a Restriction on the other Side? But will Mr. T. tell us
where did he look for it, was it in the Promise only? If so, might not the
Restriction be in the Precept added to the Promises? For is not the Blessing
and Promise God's Part, and what Need was there that God should put
Restrictions on himself? For might not he put Restrictions enough upon us, in
Point of Duty, without putting the least Restraint upon himself, in Point of
Grace? Are our Choice of, our Vows and Relation to our own Pastor, our
Obligation to the relative Duties of this Relation, and Christ's Institution of
particular Churches, under the Care, Watch and Oversight of particular Pastors,
no Restriction upon the Pastor's proper Flock, at least ordinarily, to attend
upon his sacred Administrations? Here must not Mr. T. either own this to be
God's Way, or say it is not? If he says it is not, how did he come under such a
Relation to his own Flock, and bring them under the Ties of such a Relation to
him? And if he had any Light since, to the contrary, how does he continue in
such a Relation still, as well as join in fixing others in the same? If he owns
this to be God's Way, is not the Promise of Blessing to those that keep God's
Way in waiting upon him? Psalm. xxxvii. 34. Besides, does not Mr. T. plainly
assert, with Respect to the promised Blessing to encourage us to Duty, that we
have no more that a Peradventure or Probability of obtaining it? If so, how
clear must the Matter be, that the Promises of Blessing cannot be our Rule? For
is not our Rule of Duty sure and certain, if we do but hearken to it, without
any Peradventure at all, so that, he that runs may read; yea, so plain, that
wayfaring Men, though Fools, shall not err therein? Isai. 34.8. Must it not
follow then, that how far soever the Promise is a Rule to us to direct our
Course by it, so far it must needs be sure and certain, not only in it self,
but also to us? How else can we observe it? Will Mr. T. therefore encourage
People to desert their proper Pastors upon something less than a Probability of
benefiting elsewhere? For if we have but a Probability in the Way of Duty, must
not we have less than that itself when we go out of it? But Mr. T. adds, Yea, I
can affirm, that so far as Knowledge can be had in such Cases, I have known
Persons get saving Good to their Souls, by their hearing over the Parish Line;
and this makes me earnest in the Defense of it. Might not we easily affirm as
much on the other Side, and have Numbers to join with us? But what signify Mr.
T.'s Affirmations or our Affirmations in religious Matters, when God's Word is
the sole Rule? Should not then Messrs. You say and I say, and Messrs.
Experience and Feelings, instead of being pragmatical, in Silence hearken what
says the Lord, whose Word alone is authoritative and decisive in the Point? If
therefore Mr. T. stands up in the Defense of the Practice of Crossing the
Parish Line, upon the sandy Bottom of his own or others Affirmations and
Experiences; have not we much more Reason to be earnest in the Defense of Men's
continuing in Church Fellowship, without forsaking their own Assemblies
disorderly, upon the Foundation of God's Institution? Heb. x. 25. For is it not
vain and frivolous to the last Degree, in those that own Scripture to be their
sole and perfect Rule, to plead such Experiences for a Rule, which plainly
thwart Scripture-Rule? But surely Mr. T.'s Heart strangely failed him here, in
that he pretends not to affirm the Matter positively, as to People's getting
saving Good in his contested-for Way, but only with this Limitation, as far as
Knowledge can be had in such Cases: Would not it look little enough in such
Ministers as pretend not to know certainly, whether Christ be formed in the
Hearts of their Hearers, to come off as lame as this? For how can Mr. T. take
Comfort in what he knows not now? as he says in page 12. How then can Mr. T.
encourage People to desert their own Ministers upon such a precarious Footing,
in order to try a Remedy called Experimental Nostrum, which Mr. T. recommends
upon the bare Authority of his own Experience? For aught we know, hundreds have
made Experiments of it in a Day; and yet, does not Mr. T. heartily own, that
though he guessed it did good to many, yet he is not able to produce one
uncontestable Proof of its having done real good to one Soul? Who must answer
for it, if it prove a Kill-Cure? Is not Scripture Rule, which is tried seven
Times, stamped with the divine Seal, recommended by a Cloud of incontestable
Witnesses, a far safer Rule, than any Rules framed out of the Experiences of as
many Millions of fallible Men as there have Days elapsed since the Creation of
Man upon Earth? Who then act more fillily or foolishly than those, who take the
bold Affirmations of a single Person, upon the sandy Footing of his probable
Experiences, for their Rule in religious Matters, when it is evident, that the
Practice encouraged by such Experience, is directly opposite to what is
required by divine Institutions? What poor Arguings are those, wherein there is
neither proving nor handsome begging, nor yet yielding up the Case, but silly
crowing over the Argument with half begging, and then summoning Mr. Experience,
who is a purblind or half-eyed Gentleman, to fill the Room of a double
Evidence, to witness a bold Peradventure, contradictory to Scripture Rule? O
rare! What a Clock now? Is not it Two and Two, if not something more? For if we
get the least Justice, have not we saved our Bail fairly, as well as entered a
Demur in the Case, standing fairly at the Mouth of the Demi-Cannon for all the
Warmness of the Battle, Shootings and Huzza's? Can Mr. T. think, but that we
have some Roundheads still, who are bold Fellows, who will stand up for
Liberty and Property, according to the old Charter of Divine Institution, for
all the Noise, Puffings and Vapors of the hotspur Chevaliers, for Supremacy
and Prerogative, Diotrephes like, by calling their Neighbors Dupes, Dunces,
and silly Fools, etc? Further we grant, that Men should have a due Regard to
their Souls Edification, and that they should not, by any means, choose any
Minister, but one that is apt to teach, having a Competency of Gifts, sound in
the Faith, and exemplary in his Life; and if afterward he is found any way
faulty, should not they appear against him in the Way of regular Discipline,
and get rid of him? If the Wife plays the Harlot, is it not better to give her
a Bill of Divorce, than to keep her and pay her in her own Coin? For will not
that make a Man as much a Rogue as she is a Whore: And will one Sin mend
another? If People have an orthodox, regular Minister, ought not they to attend
upon his sacred Administrations ordinarily, looking unto God for his Blessing
upon his own Institutions, waiting in Faith and Hope of it? If the Food be
wholesome, and others are edified thereby, may not Men have greater Reason to
look to their own Hearts and Ways, lest the Fault be in themselves and not in
their Ministers, which loudly calls for Humiliation and Amendment? For is it
not evident, that the Reason of Men's not Profiting, is not always the
Unsuitableness of the Minister's Gifts, nor his Want of Grace, nor the Want of
his Exercise of them? For who can believe, but that Lot was earnest with his
Sons-in-Law; and yet, did not he seem to them as one that mocked? Was not
Christ earnest with Jerusalem; and yet, had not he Reason to complain, that
Israel would not come to him, nor be gathered? What Sort of a Way of convincing
Men of Sin is this; For is it not a plain Teaching Men to hide and palliate
their Sins, like Adam, who said, the Woman whom thou gave to be with me, she
gave me of the Tree, and I did eat? Will it do, that Men blame and exclaim
against their Minister, when they themselves are in the Fault? For may not
Men's not Profiting, proceed from the Hearer's Want of Grace, or the Want of
the due Exercise of it, or from his Neglect of Prayer for himself and his
Minister, or from their coming to hear with Prejudice and Ill Will, or from
Want of due Attendance upon the Word preached or Meditation upon it afterward,
or from Want of due Love and Regard to it, as it is the Word of God and not of
Man, or from Love to Novelties and wanton Curiosity, or from vain Admiration of
Men's Persons and vain Fanglings, or from Want of Judgment, manifested in an
undue Regard unto the Dress and Manner of Delivery, more than the Matter
delivered? Or may not Hearers, many other such like Ways, stand in the Way of
their own Edification? And if it be so, that others, who are more
conscientious, reap real Benefit, by the divine Blessing, under the same
Ministry; must not the Fault, in all likelihood, be their own, and not their
Minister's? Besides, is it not easy for Men to entertain high Conceits of their
reaping much Benefit, when in Reality, they lose Ground instead of gaining it,
by encompassing themselves about with Sparks of their own Kindling? Isa. l. 11.
Did not the Church of Lacdicea both think and say, that she was rich, and
increased in Goods, and had need of Nothing? Can any of our Boasters match her,
with all their Skill, if her Declaration of her Experiences be Sterling, or
even Currency? If any will say no, will they tell us, why not? And then may not
we with Ease tell them, why the Declarations should pass only by Weights too?
Do not many think they are bravely edified, when they are pleased and
flattered, when in Reality it proves a Curse unto them? Prove. xxvii. 14. Do not
many think that they are edified, when they are encouraged in their Disorders,
or in their vain presumptuous Hopes, by their being proclaimed Saints for their
anarchical Practices? Isa. xxx. 10, 11, Or may not Men think that they are
edified, when they are confirmed in their fond but false Opinions, when they
are displeased at Truth? 1 Kings xxii. 6, 7, 8. And may not others be edified
in Reality, who are not sensible of it for the present, because their Humors
are crossed? For does not God often cross his Hands to our Views, in giving the
Success, as well as Jacob did his, in blessing the two Sons of Joseph? Was not
young Hagar, in all Appearance, more likely to be fruitful than old Sarah with
her dead Womb? But yet, what was got by crossing the Parish-Line, but only a
big mocking Ishmael, who must be cast out, to the creating of Grief of Heart
instead of Comfort to Abraham? And was not Abraham obliged to return within the
Parish-Line, before he could get the promised Seed, for all their Haste and
Combination to try the most as likely in Appearance, but improper Means? Was
not Rachel as likely in Appearance to be fruitful as blear-eyed Leah, and had
not the former the Love of her Husband to boot? And yet was not the latter more
fruitful, as well as proved the Mother of the promised Seed?

4. Another Thing, that is pleaded for a lawful Ground for People to desert
their own Minister, is, Their Opinion or Guess that their proper Pastor is a
natural Man: And this seems to be magnified above the rest, by his asserting,
that in this Case, it is both lawful and expedient to forsake the proper
Pastor. p. 22.

Qu. I. Is it not notorious, that Enthusiasts have, in all Ages, branded the
Orthodox, that opposed their enthusiastic Notions, with the opprobrious Names
of carnal Men, Literalists, Scribes and Pharisees, in order to amuse the
Vulgar, and to incense their blind Admirers against them? Was not this the Way
the Pharisees took to blacken Christ's Character, by pretending to know, that
he was a Sinner, a Glutton, a Drunkard, a Deceiver, a Traitor, a Conjurer, and
what not? Was not this the Way their Brood, the false Apostles, took to blacken
Paul's Character, as may be seen in many Places, particularly in 2 Cor. x. 2.?
But I beseech you, that I may not be bold when I am present, with that
Confidence wherewith I think to be bold against some which think of us, as if
we walked according to the Flesh. ver. 3. For though we walk in the Flesh, we do
not war after the Flesh? Was not carnal Paul better than the glorious
vain-boasting false Apostles, who highly commended themselves and one another,
making fair shows in the Flesh, in order to rent Congregations, and to draw the
Members of them to their deluded Party? And did not such Deceits prove very
bewitching to the Galatians? Gal. iii. 1. But how did they prove this Charge
against Paul? Does it not seem that one Proof was his asserting his ministerial
Authority, whence he was concluded to be masterly, because he commanded People
to obey their own Rulers in the Lord, and warned Men not to forsake their own
Assemblies, and opposed disorderly Intruders, together with their corrupt
Doctrines and Practices, therefore he was carnal? What but this makes the
Apostle to reply, in the 2 Cor. x. 8. But though I should boast somewhat more of
my Authority (which the Lord has given us for Edification and not for
Destruction) I should not be ashamed: q. d. Will this prove me a carnal Man?
But what had the false Apostles to say more, to prove that Paul was carnal? May
we not see in Verse the 10th, For his Letters (say they) are weighty and
powerful? Will this do him any Service? How can it, for is not the Answer
ready? Unconverted Ministers are crafty Foxes, there is still Enmity in their
Hearts to the Seed of the Woman, though it is better polished in others with Wit
and Rhetoric, and gilded over with the specious Names of Zeal, Fidelity,
Peace, good Order and Unity? page 5 -- 9. What more to prove Paul carnal, But
his bodily Presence is weak? Was not this a home Thrust? For how could he
preach with Authority, who had no Brass in his Countenance to make him
Foolhardy? Well, but what more, His Speech is contemptible? What can be said
more? For may not this big Word in the Indictment serve for a Category to place
a whole Train of bad Epithets, viz. For if there was Room to call Paul's
Preaching contemptible, might not they call it soft, selfish, cowardly, dry,
sapless, freezing, dead as a Stone, yea, and prating too? And who but Dupes and
Dunces would wait to hear him? But for all this, will not Truth be Truth still,
and Error, Error? Will calling honest Men Knaves, prove them to be so, or the
contrary? But is it not too soon yet to judge positively, who, among orderly
Professors, are carnal, or who converted?

Qu. II. Do not all Mr. T's Reasonings here suppose, That a graceless Minister
may be known by his Hearers, although both in Doctrine and Discipline he be
blameless, excepting human Infirmities, which are consistent with true Grace?
For if he be blemished in Doctrine or Character, should not he be prosecuted
according to Merit, that so the Evil might be taken away from among them? But
if he be not blemished either in Doctrine or Conversation, is it not impossible
for Men to know his Gracelessness? Yea, is it not rash judging, to pronounce
him Graceless? How then can his Gracelessness, which cannot be proved, be a
sufficient Reason to forsake his Ministry? Would not such Actings be a plain
casting off Scripture from being a Rule? Is it safe for Men to dissolve a
sacred Relation, or to neglect its respective Duties, upon an uncertain Guess
or groundless Surmise, which, for aught they know, may be a foul Mistake and
the Fruit of mere Prejudice? Is it not bold Work to kick in the Dark against
the Pricks? If any will say, he is confident he judges right, in judging his
Minister carnal; was not Paul as confident, when in Zeal he persecuted the
Church, as any such can be? Acts xxvi. 9. Besides, we would ask such a one,
whether or no he was not once as confident, that his Minister was a gracious
Man? how else could he give him a Call? And do not many as judicious and
conscientious Christians as he, judge him to be so still? Is it not a
fundamental Error in Discipline, to make mere Guesses about Men's secret State
toward God, the Foundation of Judgment, in passing any Church Censures upon
them? And can any be deprived of a Place or Privilege in the Church, without
just Grounds for a Censure? And if the Relation between Pastor and Flock is to
be dissolved, upon every private Surmise or Guess in a Man's own Breast, is not
every Member to be sole Judge in his own Cause? And so, is not the Church a
Society that is wholly without any Bands? How then can our Jerusalem be said,
to be builded as a City that is compact together? Psalm. cxxii. 3. We appeal to
all Church Members, how will they like it, if, upon such Encouragements, they
break off from their present, and join with such Ministers as call themselves
Spiritual Men, if afterward they are debarred of their religious Privileges,
without any Charge proven against their Principles or Practices, upon mere
Guesses of their being carnal Men, as they are taught to serve their present
Ministers? Will it not be full Time then, to think of some new Community again?
Yea, we would ask, how would Congregations like it, if the present Ministers
would forsake and leave them, for no other Reason but a blind Guess of their
being carnal Men; or saying, that they judge they would be more edifying
elsewhere; or upon pleading their own Inclination to remove from them, which
they may easily do, upon a better Encouragement offered elsewhere, if all other
Shifts fail? Can the Minister be tied faster to the Flock, than the Flock are
to him? Conscience, speak! When therefore it is God's Appointment, that every
Congregation should have their own Pastor, and every Pastor his own Flock? When
the Relation is mutual, ought not their Love, Respect and Assistance to each
other, to be mutual? And ought not they to be studious, wary and careful how to
behave to each other in that Relation, in all Respects, in such a Manner as may
be conducive to make and continue them mutual Blessings and Comforts to each
other; and to watch against all glaring Temptations, that Satan or his
Instruments, whether by transforming himself into an Angel of Light or
otherwise, may cast in their Way, to alienate their Affections from each other,
or to neglect their respective Duties to each other, as they are severally
called to act a proper Part, in teaching and being taught, in ruling and
obeying, in administering Gospel Ordinances and in waiting upon God in the Use
of Ordinances administered, in Obedience to Christ, in Faith and Hope of his
Blessing upon his own Institutions? For how can we in Faith expect, that those
who watch over our Souls, can give an Account with Joy and not with Grief, if
their Flocks do not obey them in the Lord? And if we grieve them, by walking
disorderly, by absenting ourselves from sacred Administrations, when purely and
regularly administered by them, can we expect, that this will be profitable to
us, when God's Word plainly tells us the contrary? Heb. xiii. 17. Will any tell
us, how we may be said to esteem them highly for their Works Sake, who labor
among us, and are over us in the Lord, as we are commanded in 1 Thessalonians. v. 12,
13. if we reject their Admonitions, which are agreeable to Scripture Rule, and
hearken to such Instructions which are contrary to it, and therefore cause us
to err; or if we neglect their Administrations, though gracious Ministers, upon a
mere Conceit that others are more gifted than them, when it plainly appears,
upon a Review of the Writings of the admired Strangers, that they are not sound
in their Doctrine, besides their anarchical Practices? Do we esteem them highly
for their Works Sake, when we either reproach them ourselves, or else take up
the Reproaches of others, who slander orthodox and orderly Ministers with the
black Characters of carnal Men and Hypocrites, when neither they nor we can
prove the Charge, nor make regular Attempts that Way? Ought we not to be very
tender of their Reputations, whose Faithfulness for God will provoke Satan and
his Instruments, to make their Characters the Butt of their malicious,
poisonous Arrows of Reproaches and false Reports? Do we show our high Esteem of
them, by studying to be at Peace among ourselves, when we cry them down and
others up, without being able to give any solid Reason for either, and by
running away from them in a disorderly Way, like wandering Sheep after
Straglers; or when we encourage and incense others against them, and to forsake
them too, merely because they bear a faithful Witness against the Errors and
Disorders of the Times? Where is the high Esteem of them in Love, when we
entertain a vain Conceit, that a more unsound Doctrine, preached by disorderly
Straglers, will edify us better, than more sound and wholesome Doctrine,
preached by our own Pastors? Where is the high Esteem of them in Love, if we
not only give Way to our perverse Inclinations to lead us into Disorders and
Contempt of Gospel Order, but also plead such Inclinations for sufficient
Reasons to justify our forsaking their regular Administrations, and our
flocking to and after others, who walk disorderly? Is it not our plain Duty to
withdraw from every Brother that walks disorderly, as we are taught in 1 Thessalonians. iii. 6? And can that Assembly be orderly, whose Teacher is an Intruder,
or observes not the Gospel Rules established in our Communities, absolutely
requisite to preserve Purity, Peace and Gospel Order? And are not they
disorderly, whether gracious or carnal?

1. Who forsake their own Charges, in order to make disorderly Intrusions into
the Labors of others; was not this the Trick of the false Apostles, and does
not Paul reflect upon such Practices as unbecoming and rude? 2 Cor. 10.15, 16.

2. Who make general Exclamations, and write and publish general Libels, to
blacken the Characters of their Brethren by blind Pushes, contrary to all the
Rules of regular Discipline, which require us to be particular in all the Steps
of Discipline, and to confront the Accusers and Accused. Mat. 18.15, 16, 17.

3. Who encourage Defamations, by taking up Reproaches and private Whisperings
against their Brethren, spreading them by the Flying-Post of Report, like those
in Jer. 20.10. contrary to Psa. 15.3. 1 Timothy 5.19.

4. Who intrude into the Vacancies belonging unto other Presbyteries, and into
the dissatisfied Corners of Congregations where there is a stated Minister,
without the Invitation, or seeking the Concurrence of the respective
Presbyteries or Ministers, to foment Feuds, Factions and Disorders; and is not
such a Practice a Lording it over their Brethren, subversive of our
Constitution, to the Confounding of all Order among us? Mat. 20.25.

5. Who creep into Houses, by Preaching and Lecturing in private Houses, to
lead captive silly Women, and Men that are too like Women, out of the
Congregations of other Ministers, 2 Timothy 3.6. Is not this Practice disorderly
now in a Time of public Liberty, especially when it has a Tendency to make
Rents in other Congregations? And should not Non-Conformists of all others
observe Gospel Order, or else do not they give up the Cause, which to their
Forefathers was dearer than their Estates, Lives and Liberties.

6. Who instead of strengthening the Hands of their Brethren, do every where
strive to set up Threshold against Threshold, and Altar against Altar,
exclaiming against and condemning all that will not come as Volunteers at the
Beating of their Drums; witness the present Sermon; as if tarrying with David
after once hearing Absalom's Drums, was Rebellion against Heaven which made
David King.

7. Who defend and palliate Errors and false Doctrine, and exclaim against the
Opposers of it; witness the Outcries made against our first Queries at
White-clay-Creek, and Mr. C. T. and S. F.'s Letters, and Mr. Bl -- r's.

8. Who encourage others industriously to break through good Rules and Order;
witness this Epistle and Sermon of Mr. T.

9. Who encourage People to forsake their stated orderly Ministers in a
disorderly factious Way, in order to increase their Party; witness the present
Sermon. Jer. 23.1.

10. Who strengthen the Hands of the Wicked, by declaring or insinuating, that
all their Partisans, though never so disorderly, are Godly Men and Converts; and
by wounding the Characters of other orderly Ministers by dark Insinuations, and
uttering Surmises of their being Pharisees, carnal Men and Hypocrites, albeit
they cannot prove any Charges against them: Is not this the whole Strain of
this Sermon?

11. Who though they libel their Brethren in a general Way, yet deny them a fair
Trial in their proper Judicatories, refusing to clear them, when it would seem
they cannot prove any Thing to their Disadvantage; witness Mr. T. and Mr.
Blair's refusing to comply with the just and reasonable Request of our
Presbytery, viz. When the Presbytery desired them to declare, whether any of
their Number was levelled at in the Scrowls of general Complaints tabled
against disorderly Ministers at our last Synod, yea or no? Did not the
Presbytery offer to enter upon a fair Trial of any of their Members, in Case
they would nominate any of them, and did not they urge them earnestly with many
Reasons to be plain in the Case? Did not they also offer to drop their Enquiry
upon the Head, upon their declaring that none of their Number was intended? and
yet did not they obstinately refuse to comply with either of these Demands! Is
this Justice, Charity or Order?

12. Who incense the Members of Congregations against their proper Pastors, by
their Intrusions, uttering their groundless Surmises, and making loud
Exclamations against them, without offering to bring the Matter to a fair Proof
or Trial: Is this Religion?

13. Who make their own groundless Guesses or uncharitable rash Judgments of
the secret States of their Brethren's Souls, the Rule of their Deportment
toward them, by refusing one While to assist their Brethren at their public
Communion, another While refusing to partake of the Sacrament when present, for
no other Reason, as far as has appeared, but only their secret Surmises about
their Brethren's secret State, when sound in Doctrine and blameless in
Conversation: Is not this casting off Scripture entirely from being their Rule,
and making the Commandments of God void by their own Surmises?

14. Who beat their Fellow Servants with the Dog-Whip, by branding them with
the opprobrious Names of Pharisees. Ahitophels, hypocritical Varlets and carnal
Men, etc. in order to warm the Mobs against them; and yet does it not seem,
that the Design is to blacken Men's Characters, and to raise groundless
Jealousies in others about them, in order to strengthen a Party and increase
Divisions, more than any real Belief that we have such Ministers among us, as
are loudly exclaimed against? Else will any tell us, why Men are so sparing of
their Proofs, when they seem to be in such a Rage against the Persons exclaimed
against? For if any of our Ministers were as grossly wicked as the Ministers
exclaimed against are represented, when their Credit is brought low by
Surmises, Mis-representations and Lies, would it not be the easiest Thing in
the World to cast them upon a fair Trial? We readily grant, that such Ministers
as can be proven to be careless of their own Souls, unskilful, unfaithful,
blind, Enemies to God, having a Form of Godliness, but denyin^ it is Power, or
tainted with the Leaven of the corrupt Doctrine and Hypocrisy of the Pharisees,
ought to be discarded and forsaken as Mr. Jenner says; but will standing up for
Truth and Orde^ and appearing against Mr. W -- d's and T.'s Errors and
D^^orders, prove the above Charge against such Ministers as do so?

Qu. III. Seeing then Mr. T. quotes Jer. 23.22. to prove, that the Ministry of
faithful Men does blossom and bear Fruit, as the Rod of Aaron: If he means that
Successfulness and good Fruit is a proper Characteristick of a faithful
Minister, how will he reconcile that Text in the Sense of it with Jer. 7.27.
Ezekiel. 3.7. or with Isai. 6.9, 10, 11. and chapter 53.1. or with Joh. 12.37, -- 41.
or with the Account he gives of Micah's mourning in page 12 of his Sermon? Mic.
7.1. For though we do not desire in the least to plead for an unconverted
Ministry, and we cannot be so uncharitable as to think that any of our
Congregations, or the Members thereof, ever knowingly chose an unconverted
Minister, or thought the better of any Man for being unconverted; yet we would
have Mr. T. to consider, whether or no condemning orthodox and exemplary
Ministers for carnal, merely for Want of Success, be not such a crooked Rule as
may lead Men to speak Evil of Dignities? as we have it in Jude 8. Yea, to speak
Evil of those Things that they know not, as verse. 10. For will not such a Rule
bear full hard upon the Ministry of the Holy One of Israel? For though we will
own it, to the Glory of God's abounding Grace and rich Power, that the Gospel
has had its Success at Seasons; yet will Mr. T. tell us, whether the least
Part of the Glory or Praise of the real Success of it, is due unto the
Instrument? Was not Christ incomparably more excellent than all his Apostles,
both for Gifts and Grace; and yet was not their Ministry more successful than
his? For where do we read that Christ at one Sermon converted his three
Thousand Souls, as we do of Peter's Sermon in Acts 2.41.? But who of the Sons
of Wisdom would venture to draw the monstrous Conclusion, which would natively
flow here-from by Mr. T.'s crooked Rule? It Is true, if Cries, Roarings,
Convulsions, Fits, and Grovelings on the Ground, etc. pass for Blossoms, and if
blind Zeal for a Party, vain Boastings, vain Admiration of Men's Persons, and
uncharitable Censoriousness, crusted over with smooth Hypocrisy, as well as
foul Language and black-mouthed Barking pass for Piety; it must be owned, that
the late Preaching, or something that goes along with it, has been sufficiently
successful; but if Attachment to Truth and Gospel Order, and the solid
Exercises of Piety, be the proper Criterions of Piety; do not these seem to
lose Ground in Proportion to the Industry in roving and walking willingly after
the new Commandments, which are contrary to Gospel Order? But what did Ephraim
gain by mixing himself with the Crowd, but Strangers to devour his Strength
when he knew it not, and gray Hairs here and there, when he knew it not? Hos.
7.8, 9. Can any think, that it was an easy Matter to make Ephraim believe, that
he was upon the decaying Hand, when he was big with the thumping Notion, that
the Hotch-potch Catholicism did Stall-feed him bravely?

Qu. IV. When therefore the Relation of Pastor and People is such a solemn Tie,
founded upon a Divine Institution, confirmed by mutual solemn and public Vows,
made before God and many Witnesses; how inconsistent is it with Reason and
Religion to assert, that it is in the Power of Pastor or Flock, to dissolve the
Obligations of said Relation upon mere Conceits, Surmises or Inclinations in
the Breasts of either Party? How can Jesuits trifle worse with solemn
Contracts, than Mr. T. seems to do here? For must not we have something like
the old Distinction for an Oil-salvo, if this Scheme takes place, I have sworn
with the Tongue, but with the Heart I have sworn nothing at all? We think we
durst appeal to Mr. T.'s own Conscience, if he were thus deserted by his own
People (and as high as his Tide is, may not an Ebb follow?) whether he would
not in his Heart disapprove the Practice, whether he would speak of it or no?
Yea, would not all Mr. T.'s Arguments then lose their present Force, and would
it not be Hackelon's Cow, or another Man's matter? For does not this mutual
Relation of Pastor and Flock imply a mutual Contract or Covenant? and to allow
People the above unbounded Latitude, what is it but to encourage the Breach of
that sacred Contract or Covenant which this Relation implies? Yea, is not it
encouraging Men after Vows to make Enquiry, contrary to Prove. 20.25.? Yea, we
appeal to all Men of Thought, whether such a Latitude be not inconsistent with
all solid Comfort, which may flow from the Thoughts of their being fixed in
such a Relation? From page 24 -- 29. Mr. T. endeavors to answer some
Objections against his Doctrine concerning the unbounded Liberty of People's
leaving their own Ministers upon the Grounds aforesaid. As for the first, it
may pass, for let Moses's Chair be what it will, we shall not plead one Word
for a corrupt Ministry, such as that of the Pharisees was, for we are taught
that all new Gospels are null, though they were introduced by the Ministry of
Angels, or by Men pretending to the immediate Guidance of a Divine Inspiration;
and what but this makes us to oppose Mr. T. and Wd.'s new Scheme? But as for
the other Objections, viz. 1. That such a disorderly deserting of Men's stated
Pastors, will cause Heats and Contentions among People. 2. That such a Practice
is condemned as carnal in 1 Cor. 1.12.3. That this Practice will grieve the
Parish Minister. 4. That it is again condemned by Paul, who asserts, that Paul
and Apollos are Nothing. 5. That by such Practice People go out of God's Way,
etc. Before we come to speak particularly to each Objection, we shall propose
one or two general Queries.

Qu. I. Do not all Mr. T.'s Answers to these Objections plainly suppose, that
the Members of particular Congregations stand in as great an Indifferency, and
that justly, to hear their own chosen and stated Pastor, to whom they stand
related, as any other Minister, whom they please to apply to? But if the Matter
were really so, what serves the pastoral Relation for? Is it not contracted in
vain, at least to no good Purpose? For if the Members of a particular
Congregation are no more obliged to attend upon their own Pastor's ministerial
Administrations, than those of a Stranger, who comes any how in their Way; will
it not follow, that the Minister is no more obliged to serve his own People
than any others? And if so, will it not be Time to sound a Retreat, Return ye
every Man to his Tent, wander ye Shepherds, scatter ye Sheep, and let every Man
shift for himself? And can the Devil desire better Advocates, than such as say,
that no Man is in Brother's Keeper? And so instead of Woe to him that is alone,
must not he be pronounced the happy Man? For he breaks no Bonds, and if he
falls, shall not he lie down as long as he pleases? For who will give him
the unwelcome Disturbance of helping him up? And so was it not a brave Time,
when there was no King in Israel? For had not Men then full Liberty, to do what
seem^d good in their own Eyes, as their Inclinations prompted them? And so,
instead of calling the Sheep that were without a Shepherd, to lament, might not
Mr. T. agreeably to the Strain of his Application here, raise an Use of
Consolation, and pronounce them an happy People, both upon the Account of the
Bereavement, and also upon the Account of their Opportunity of getting a
non-such Pastor, who upon hearing their Declarations, would presently read
their Hearts, and tell them Dreams as fast as they could tell him Falsehoods?

Qu. II. To put the Matter in a fair Light; we will suppose two Congregations
in a City, both vacant at the same Time, one of which in some Time obtains a
Minister settled and fixed among them as their Pastor, to the good Liking of
the whole Congregation; we will again suppose, that the other Congregation some
Time after, also gets a Minister to settle among them to be their Pastor, which
last Minister is visibly to all Appearance superior to the first in Gifts and
Accomplishments; now we would ask, Whether the Superiority of the Gifts in the
second Minister, would be a just Reason for the other Congregation to leave
their own Minister, that is, merely because the other Minister excells him in
Gifts, or their imbibing a Conceit that they shall be better edified elsewhere,
while in the mean Time they cannot charge their own Minister with any Blemishes
in Doctrine or Conversation, and his Gifts are what they were satisfied with,
and gladly took up with at first? If so, would not this be to censure, yea in
Effect to depose a faithful sufficient Minister of the Gospel, yea to cashier
him, because the sovereign God has thought fit to give a greater Measure of
Gifts to another? And if People act thus, may not we bid farewell to all good
Order, Relations, Obligations and Duties between Pastor and People in the
Church of God? And so, though the Scripture says, that God is a God of Order in
all the Churches of his Saints; is not the Church of Christ by such deforming
Principles, represented more bandless, confused, and liker a Babel than any
Society in the World? For if Matters be thus, will it not follow, that when a
Minister is invited or called to fix as a Pastor among a People, the true
Meaning and English of the People calling that Minister, is no more than this,
viz. We are willing and contract to receive you as our Pastor now, but with
this Reservation, that as soon as we or any of us can get an Opportunity of a
better, we will be no longer bound to you, although we should have no Fault to
lay to your Charge? Is all the rest Irish? And if this be rational, orderly,
discreet and becoming the Piety of the Church, or the Dignity of the
ministerial Character, let Reason judge. And finally, we would ask, whether the
Minister has not as great a Liberty to leave his Congregation, or any part of
them? If so, where is there any Obligation or pastoral Relation between them?
And is not the fixing of a Pastor in a Place a mere Notion? If not, will it not
follow, that relative Obligations are not reciprocal and mutual? And is not
this repugnant to the common Sense of Mankind?

But to come to Obj. 1. viz. That such a Practice will cause Heats and
Contentions, or rather to Mr. T.^s Answer thereto, where we shall also consider
the 4th Objection, viz. That such a Practice will grieve the Parish Minister.

Qu. I. We entirely agree with Mr. T. that the Gospel is only the Occasion, but
not the true Cause of Contentions; but yet may not Men strangely abuse the
Gospel by preaching it out of Contention, in a disorderly intruding Manner, to
make Parties and Factions, and thereby become culpable Causers of Division? And
is not the Abuse of good Things for sinister Ends, the worst Abuse Men can be
guilty of? Phil. 1.16.

Qu. II. Though we allow Men should seek the greater Good; yet we would ask,
Whether this greater Good be most likely to be obtained in the Way of God's
Appointment, and in the Use of regular and not irregular Means? Or whether the
Notion that stolen Bread is sweet, be a true or a false Notion? Or to use Mr.
T.'s own Phrase, Does not he act like a Fool, who forsakes his own chaste Wife.
in Hopes of getting more Pleasure in the Embraces of a Strumpet?

Qu III. Does not Mr. T. teach Church Members the Knack of treating their own
Pastors, as Potiphar's Wife served Joseph, by asserting that the Plea of their
not profiting under their Ministry, is a just Cause to forsake them; whereas
when the Minister is pious, orthodox and regular, so that others profit by his
Ministry, is not there a great Probability, if not something more, that the
Fault may be at their own Door, and not at their Minister's?

Qu. IV. Who can those Prae-Adamites be among Protestants, That confine
Opposition and Division, as following upon living Godliness and successful
Preaching, if thereby is meant the Preaching of Truth and the Exercises of true
Piety, to the first Ages of Christianity? For have not all the Oppositions and
Divisions between Protestants and Papists, as well as many others, arisen
since? And if there be no such Men in the Protestant World, is not there good
Reason to fear, that such neither know themselves nor the Gospel? If there be
such Men, let Mr. T. point them out; for may not a small Part of the History of
latter Ages soon confound such a brainless Opinion, before it has Time to
hatch, even though it were placed so high as the Eagle's Eggs in Jupiter's royal
Lap, to breed Fables to fill the Pulpit?

Qu. V. That there is a Mixture of sincere Christians and masked Hypocrites in
the visible Church, is readily granted: But yet we would ask Mr. T. whether he
has found out a specific Preservative to ward off this Mixture? Or has he
found a Mould to cast a true Touchstone, to point out the close Hypocrite,
while he keeps on his religious Mask? Or is there any Body wiser than him, that
said, Let both grow together until the Harvest, lest while ye gather up the
Tares, ye root up also the Wheat with them? Matthew. xiii. 29, 30. If Christ has
given a new Commission since, to the contrary, will our great Men show us where
to find it? Besides, who will be judge to decide this Matter, viz. Who are and
who are not Hypocrites? For may not the Hypocrite think as highly and speak as
vauntingly of himself and his Seize and Comforts, so that the true
Christian, though as eminent as Paul, dare not compare with him in such Matters,
if his Words pass for Sterling, being quite dash* with his swelling, proud,
supercilious, loud Boastings? Witness the Church of Laodicea and the proud
false Apostles, Rev. iii. 17. 2 Cor. x. 12. Yea, may not the Hypocrite fairly
outdo the true Christian, or many such, in an outside Show and
Censoriousness, particularly in justifying himself and despising others? Luke
xviii, 9. Can Mr. T. think it safe for honest Men, to set any of this Cut upon
the Bench? Or can he suppose, that these will give up their Claim to Men of
better Temper, as long as they have a Vote in the Case, when Men of this Cut
judge, that they have full Commission already, to draw their uncharitable
Censures through the very Hearts of other Christians, who in all Appearance are
far better than themselves? Witness Rome's Claim to be the only true Church,
and the loud Cry of erroneous Enthusiasts, that they are the only spiritual Men
in all Ages.

Qu. VI. Whereas Mr. T. queries, Have not these, viz. the Hypocrites, a fixed
Enmity against the other, viz. the Sincere? Yes: For Nothing but Grace can
effectually root out the Enmity. Yet, as Mr. T. tells us before, May it not
have its Edge much blunted by other Means? But Who, is Who still. Mr. T.
further asks, How is it then possible, that a Harmony should subsist between
such, till their Nature be changed? Answer. By purging Men of enthusiastic
Notions; by setting up Christ's Rule and Standard in Faith and Practice, and
keeping to it; by obliging every one to keep his proper Post; and by reproving
the unruly, and turning out the scandalous and obstinate Offender, there may at
least be a good Degree of Harmony. But can it be expected, that a perfect
Harmony is attainable in the visible Church, where their is not only a Mixture
of Tares and Wheat, but where the Wheat has Straw and Chaff, so that no Member
is at a perfect Harmony with itself? Further, may not true Grace, particularly
Charity, do Wonders, in bearing what is sufferable; as well as peevish
Ill Nature will, in its Way, do Wonders too, by making Mountains of Mole-Hills
and Beams of Straws or Sunbeams? But Mr. T. asks, Can Light dwell with
Darkness? We reply in another Query, Is it not good Advice to him that doubts
the Possiblity of that, to feel his own Forehead well? And if that does not
resolve him, should not he knock and call loudly, Who is within there, till
Somebody answers? If that will not do, may not he make some further Trial in
the Matter, by getting a proven Pair of Spectacles, to read Mr. W.'s Books, and
this Sermon of Mr. T.'s? For when every Member of the visible Church has Light
and Darkness in himself, is it any Wonder, that an House or a Field can hold
its Full of such Creatures, that have both Light and Darkness in them? For what
will hinder this, unless some smoky, fiery, conceity Zealots get among the
Crowd, to sound a stinking Trumpet, like that in Isa. lxv. 5. Stand by thyself,
come not near me, for I am holier than thou? If it comes to this once, must not
the honest Man make Room and give Place to the towering Hypocrite; or be in
Danger of either being choked with the Smoke, or burnt with the Fire of
blazing Sparks?

Qu. VII. Whereas Mr. T. frankly owns, That undoubtedly it is a great Duty, to
avoid just Cause of Offense to any Right well; we would then ask Mr. T. Is the
Parish-Minister Somebody, or is he only Mr. Nobody? For, is it not just Cause
of Offense to such, to hear his own Hearers censuring and condemning him for a
carnal Man, when orthodox and orderly, excepting only human Infirmities, which
must be excepted in the best here? Is it not a just Offense to a pious faithful
Minister, to be slighted and forsaken by his own Flock, upon the Account of
their imbibing a Notion, true or false, upon a slender Trial, that some
disorderly Stragler is more gifted than he; when, to more judicious Hearers,
the latter is no more than a tinkling Cymbal, that gives an uncertain Sound;
and, for aught that can be proven, may be a mere Cheat for all the Crack? Is it
not just Cause of Offense to an orthodox Minister, to hear his People say and
plead, that they are better edified elsewhere, than by his Ministry? when it
can be proven, that his Doctrine is sound Speech that cannot be condemned;
when, at the same Time, the Writings of the much admired Preachers are a mere
Hotch-Potch of Truth and Error; yea, and even Void of Common Sense in many
Places? Or else, let us be put to the Proof. Is it not a just Cause of Offense
to a faithful Minister, who has for a long Season preached the Gospel in
Purity to his Flock, to see his Hearers running after Errors and Errorists, and
forsaking better Food; yea, so far from loving the Truth, that they cannot
endure sound Doctrine, without spurning at it? Is it not just Cause of Offense
to the Parish Minister, to hear his own Flock pleading for Liberty to desert
him, upon the bare Proposal of their Inclinations, right or wrong, to do so; or
it may be deserting him without so much as acquainting him therewith? Is it not
just Cause of Offense to the Parish Minister, when requiring no Obedience but
Conformity to God's Commands, to have his wholesome Exhortations neglected and
despised, instead of being obeyed; when the Encouragers of Disorders are
hearkened to with Readiness? May not such and the like Appearances of the Want
of Love to Truth and Order, as well as of Disregard to Christ's Authority, and
their own real Good, justly grieve a pious Pastor, who weighs the Matter right,
when he sees a likely Congregation once, in a likely Way to scatter and to
break to Pieces, after all his Pains to gather and keep them together, merely
for Want of Men's Studying to be quiet, and to do their own Business, as we are
taught in 1 Thessalonians. iv. 11? And if what Mr. T, says, page 27. that it is but
few that have got any spiritual Relish; may it not be justly feared, by his own
Rule, that the Doctrine, which is admired and flocked to by the Crowds of all
Sorts, is none of the best? And can Mr. T. tell us, why may not the Want of
this spiritual Relish, incline People to forsake the wholesome Doctrine of the
Parish Minister? How then can it be a safe Rule, to give Way to Inclinations to
sway us in such Matters, contrary to our own Vows and Scripture?

Qu. VIII. Whereas Mr. T. adds, That it is highly necessary, that pious Souls
should maintain Union and Harmony among themselves, notwithstanding of their
different Opinions in lesser Things. And, no doubt, this is the Drift of the
many Exhortations we have to Peace and Unity in Scripture. Well then, should
not pious Ministers write good Patterns, in being studious to maintain Union
and Harmony among themselves too? For what but the Want of this among the
Ministers, is the Cause of all the Confusion among the People? And are not the
Things wherein Mr. T. and his Party differ from the Rest of the Ministers of
our Synod, as far as has yet openly appeared in their Debates, Things of a
lesser Nature, whatever this new Confusion may breed? How then does Mr. T.
follow his own Prescriptions here? For can he think, that his divisive
anarchical Methods of striving to make Rents and Factions, are the proper
Methods to maintain Union and Harmony? Can any serious Christian think, that
Mr. T. and his Party would like it well, if their Brethren, who are at some
Difference with them, should be as industrious in their Bounds, as they have
been elsewhere, to withdraw their Hearers from them, and to disturb their Peace
and Order? Or if they should approve of such Methods, would it not argue, that
they had not any great Regard for the Souls of their Flock? If the Meaning of
this be, that this Union and Harmony is only to be maintained with their own
Partisans; as it seems to be, if we observe the Conduct, toward others, of a
Knot of Gentlemen, who set up their own Party for the only true Catholics or
spiritual Men: If this be the Intent, is not the Law of the right Pharisee, a
Popish Cut? For did not the former teach Men, thou shall love thy Neighbor and
hate thine Enemy? Matthew. v. 43. And did not the latter teach Men, that no Faith
is to be kept with Heretics? But does not Scripture teach us, that there is a
Peace and Unity that we are to cultivate with all Men as much as possible, much
more with all Protestants of different Denominations, and much more with those
in our own Dominions than those in Moravia? And why may not there be Peace and
Unity, in some Respects, singular, which we are to cultivate with those of our
Denomination or Society, without being Guilty of Bigotry? And seeing Mr. T. on
this Head, mentions the Unity of the Legion of Devils in one Man, and of Ahab's
false Prophets, which were four Hundred Daubers, etc. in order to cast Contempt
on the Parish-Ministers; we would ask, what Sort of an Union and Harmony there
is between him, and Mr. Whitefield and Wesley, when the Writings of the former
of the two last, is a motley Mixture of Truth and Error, Popery and
Protestantism, Antinomianism, Arminianism, Calvinism and Enthusiasm, and those
of the latter pure Arminianism, as far as has, as yet, appeared? Who then are
the Daubers and moderate Men, as to fundamental Truths and Gospel Order? Or are
any Daubers better, because of their Harping upon different Strings to confound
Truth and Order? Or will the Majority's being of a Side now hallow all any more
than formerly?

As to the second and fourth Objection, because they seem to coincide, we place
them together, viz. That such a Practice here pressed to, is like that of the
factious Corinthians, who said, I am of Paul, and I am of Apollos, which the
Apostle condemns as carnal, because Paul and Apollos were Nothing.

Qu. I. Let it be granted, That Ministers and private Christians too, should be
esteemed according to their Gifts, if their Deportment be as regular as their
Gifts are bright, but not otherwise: But yet, is there not a particular Esteem,
which we owe to our own Ministers, as well as Wives, upon the Account of their
Relation to us, and for their Works Sake, as we are taught 1 Thessalonians. v. 13? And
if they are faithful, can we give away to another their just Due? And is not
this done, if we neglect to attend upon their Ministry ordinarily? For whether
we confess it or no, does not the Practice prove a Slight and Undervalue in the
Matter? Yea, let it be granted, that Members of Congregations may, without
Offense, take their Liberty to go to hear other neighboring, orderly
Ministers, or a Stranger that comes in an orderly Manner, occasionally, and at
Seasons: Yet, does not the Case alter, when Men come in a disorderly, intruding
Manner, to make Parties, setting up Threshold against Threshold, and Altar
against Altar, pressing People to forsake their own stated orderly Pastors,
upon trivial Excuses and Surmises; and abusing such as cleave to their own
Pastors with opprobrious Names of Dupes and Dunces, etc. when Men send their
Missionaries, industriously to foment and keep up Factions and Divisions, and
when Men labor to cast Contempt and Disdain upon other Ministers, by
Carnalizing and Pharisizing them merely for opposing Errors and Disorders? Does
not Mr. T. plainly yield up the Contest here, when he says, That the Apostle,
in the aforesaid Places, reproves an excessive Love to, or Admiration of
particular Ministers, accompanied with a sinful Contention, Slighting and
Disdaining of others, who are truly godly, and with Sect-making? If this then
be not the Case now, we appeal to all uprejudiced Persons, that know any Thing
of the Matter?

Qu. II. When Paul and Apollos preached the same Gospel equally pure, was it
not a sinful Idolizing of the Instrument, to say, that the one preaches
edifyingly, and that the other did not? And if the Case were the same now, as
to the Pastor and Itinerant, would it not deserve the same Censure? But in Case
that it can be proven, that many of our stated Pastors, who are despised,
preach the Gospel more orthodoxly than some Itinerants, whose Doctrine is
heterodox in many weighty Points of Doctrine; who can believe, but that the
Notion some entertain, of their getting greater Good by a false Doctrine than
they might get by a true one, if the Fault be not their own, can be any thing
else but a mere Fiction and Delusion?

As to the fifth and last Objection, viz. That what has been said about
People's getting of Good or greater Good over their Parish-Line, is a mere
Fiction, for they are out of God's Way. To which Mr. T. answers, That there are
three monstrous Ingredients in the Objection, viz. A Begging of the Question in
Debate, rash Judging, and Limiting of God.

Qu. I. Whether or no the Monstrousness of the Objection be not a full Proof,
that some wicked Hugonot invented it, for does not it bear his false Image? Or
did it get its Monstrousness by its Unhappine^s in getting a false juggling
Godfather, who called it Nick, when he should have called it John; or did the
Tailor spoil it, by losing his Memory or Measure, and so ma^e it a Pair of
Trowsers for a Cap? However, let it be agreed, that every Man shall father his
own Child, and let the biggest Beggar wear a proper Crown, by being obliged to
wear a b^gger ^ed Letter than common, as long as he keeps any thing in
Possession, got by the begging Trade, and no longer.

Qu. II. Can Mr. T. have the Courage to outface the Truth so far, as to say,
that it is begging the Question, to say, that the Relation of particular
Pastors and particular Flocks is God's Appointment, as well as that of Husband
and Wife, and accordingly, that as the one Couple should dwell together, so the
other Couple should, at least, ordinarily walk in Gospel-Fellowship with one
another, without forsaking their own Assemblies or stated Meetings? Will Mr. T.
call any Dupes and Dunces, for asserting, that this is God's Way? Can Mr. T.
think, that all the Ciceronian Eloquence he is Master of, or all the frightful
and abusive Language he can turn his Tongue to, can so far amuse or scare any
of his intelligent Readers, that are well grounded in the Principles of the
Christian Religion, as to ^^lieve, that the Relation of Pastor and Flock, and
the Obligations to perform and observe the relative Duties of this Relation,
are not sacred; or that it is an indifferent Matter to any, that would
discharge a good Conscience, whether they will keep and observe those solemn
Vows, which they have made of attending upon the sacred orderly Administrations
of their orderly Pastors, on not? Can any Man, upon Scripture Grounds, think,
that a disorderly breaking off from an orderly Pastor, upon the Grounds Mr. T.
here lays down, in order to join elsewhere, is such a Sign of Grace or
Conversion, as will afford Comfort upon a Sick or Death Bed? For how can the
Recoilings of the wilful Breach of solemn Vows and Contracts, be such easy
Burdens to the Conscience in a serious Hour, as Men seem now to esteem them?
But whether Mr. T. aims at the Imitation of any celebrated Orator, we will not
determine: However, would not he do well to consider, whether or no his
Language, in this, be not more fellifluous than mellifluous? For are not
uncharitable Insinuations, rash Censures, satirical Expressions and opprobrious
Names, to cast Contempt upon his Brethren and their Adherents* a great Part of
this Discourse? Besides, are not some Scripture Texts herein, strangely wrested
to no good Purpose, as far as we can see? And does not Mr. T. deal with his
Brethren, as Potiphar's Wife with Joseph, by insinuating somewhat, as if some
of the other Side did use some frightful Expressions to scare Men out of their
Wits? Does not Mr. T. here spoil his own Side? For are not frightful
Expressions part of the ornamental Peculiarities of his own Party? For why
should others be counted cowardly, if they, in their Turn, thrust the Nail of
Terror, to put Men in Fits, Shocks and Despair, as well as others?

Qu. III. When Men pretend, that they get Good, and greater Good, by running
over the Parish Line, than within it, when their own Pastor preaches the same
Word within it, and that probably more purely and therefore more powerfully,
excepting only what Power the Strength of a Man's Voice or Motion gives it, or
else let Mr. Wd.'s Sermons, and this Sermon of Mr. T. be compared with our
common Notes; Now when the Matter is known to be thus, for Mr. T. himself
grants a great Part, and we are willing upon Citation to appear to prove the
rest, if any be so incredulous as to deny that we have done it already in our
late Writing; is it any begging of the Question to say, that it is a mere
groundless Fancy, for Men to think that they are better edified by a less pure
Doctrine, than they might be by a purer One? or to say, that Men may easily
deceive themselves in such Matters, by thinking that they embrace Juno, when
it is no more but a Cloud; like Laodicea, who thought not only that they were
rich, and that they were increased in Goods, and more, that they wanted
nothing; when in Reality it was no more than a big, noisy, empty Nothing, after
all the Cry, vaporous Brag and Puff? Who can doubt but that a Bladder may look
big, when it contains nothing in it but Wind? And may it not make a rattling
Noise, when there is nothing in it but a few Pebbles? And if we look in Isa.
26.18. may not Men be with Child and in Pain and bring forth Wind, now as well
as formerly? For though it must be owned, that some of the crying or roaring
Women among us have brought forth since something that may be both seen and
felt, and others, if Reports be true, are in a likely Way to do the like, in
due Time; and by the After-fruits, have not we had Reason to think that some
others were sick of a spiritual Cholick? and when these have been once
proclaimed Converts among the rest, is it not wholesome Advice to him that
stands upon such sandy Bottoms, as sudden Fits and humane Testimony, to take
Heed left he fall? For may not Men now as well as formerly, kindle a Fire, and
compass themselves about with the Sparks, walk in the Light of their Fire and
in the Sparks which they have kindled, when the End will be lying down in
Sorrow? Isa. 50.11. For, as Mr. T. says, Is not the Nature of Men and Devils
still the same? Besides, when Men plead, that their great Edification abroad,
is a sufficient Reason for them to dissolve the sacred Bond of their Relation
to their stated Pastor, or to excuse their Non-attendance upon his pastoral
Administrations; ought not they to make Proof of this, or else how can others
admit of it as a Reason? Is their asserting or say-so, that they know it and
feel it, a sufficient Proof that the Matter is so, to others? Or will Mr. T.'s
Guesses and Say-soes pass for Proof for them? Is it not their Part to prove
what they assert, as a Reason of their suing for a Dismission, or else must not
such Assertions drop, and be cashiered as Non-relievant? Who then begs the
Question, according to Mr. T.'s own Rule, viz. That begging the Question is to
suppose a Thing which should be proved, and to reason from it: And as great
Dupes and Dunces as Mr. T. may count us, can he think that it is such a
Midnight with us, that we do not see, that all his Arguings on this Head, are
all poor begging of the Question, joined with gigantick Confidence? For
Instance, 1. It is said, sor^e are carnal; and is it not argued thence, as if
it was proven the Parish Minister was carnal, but where is the Proof of it? 2.
It is asserted, that some Men are more gifted than others, but is it not argued
as if it was proven, that Mr. T.'s Party are thus gifted, but where is the
Proof? 3. It is said, some are carnal and some are converted, but is it not
argued thence as if the People know which is which, but where is the Proof? 4.
It is owned Men may have good Inclinations; but will that prove that all Men's
Inclinations to desert their own Ministers are good; where is the Proof? 5. It
is insinuated, that some Preachers are more edifying than others; but yet is it
not argued, as if it was proven, that all itinerant Preachers are more edifying
than the Parish Ministers, and that therefore Men are better edified by going
out of the Parish Line, than by waiting upon God in their own Parish, where his
Ordinances are administered in Purity; but how is this proved? Is it any Proof
of this, that when Men before made an orthodox Profession of Truth, and that
with seeming Love to it and Zeal for it, that they now assert Errors as fast
wi^h greater Appearance of Zeal? Will Men's turning unruly and disorderly, who
before observed Gospel Order, prove that they are more edified? Who can believe
that Men are better edified, when those that appeared Sons of Peace, turn
factious and contentious; when those that seemed meek and humble, do now
delight in proud, austere Censoriousness, and black-mouthed Barking; when those
that before spoke well, do now speak evil of Dignities; when those that before
waited duly at the Posts of God's Gates, are seldom seen to wait there, but
when their Idol is there; when those that before seemingly took Delight in
hearing a Gospel-Sermon, do now in some Places mutter because their Minister
quotes too many Scripture-Proofs in his Sermon, counting that a Quotation or
two in a Sermon is full enough; and therefore how can Gospel Ministers expect
to be respected, when the Gospel itself is despised? When such and the like
Fruits appear, is it any rash Judging to judge that such deceive themselves,
who think they increase in Grace, who are visibly turned from the solid
Exercises of Religion, to crooked Ways and vain Janglings?

Qu. IV. Whereas Mr. T. says, That to oblige Church Members to wait for
ordinary upon the ministerial Administrations of their own Pastor, is limiting
the Holy One of Israel: What strange Strides are these for a wise Man? Cannot
Man be limited to wait upon God in a Way of Duty, according to God's
Appointments, but this must limit God? Does God's limiting the Ocean, imply
that he is thereby limited? Did God's bringing Man under a Law or Covenant,
which limited Man in Point of Duty, any Way limit God in Point of Grace? If so,
how should there be any Room for God to enter into a second Covenant with
fallen Sinners, in and through a Mediator? Was God limited by his limiting his
public Worship in a peculiar Manner at Jerusalem; or by his limiting the
Priesthood to the House of Aaron and the Tribe of Levi, even though all the
Congregation of Israel was holy? And yet did not Korah, though a Levite, suffer
Vengeance for attempting to cross and confound the Limits God put between the
House of Aaron and the Levites, and those between the Levites and the rest of
the Tribes of Israel? And is not this written for our Instruction? Is God
limited by his confining the public Administration of his public
Church-Ordinances to public Officers regularly called; or by his fixing a
stated Relation between a particular Pastor and a particular Flock, any more
than he is limited as to the Continuation of Mankind, by fixing a particular
Relation between an Husband and Wife? But who among us limit God more in this
Matter; than those who suspend the Success of sacred Administrations upon the
Gifts or Grace of the Minister or Inclination of the People, yea than those
that pronounce the same Word, preached by the Parish Minister unedifying, that
is pronounced edifying when preached out of the Parish Lines, as if Disorder
itself would secure the Success; or than those who assert that Men must have
such and such high Degrees of Law-Terrors, in order to Conversion and must be
kept for a considerable Time under them, in order to bring them to the Birth,
pronouncing all unconverted, who are not brought home in such an observable
Manner, as to be able to account for the Manner of their Conversion by
Feelings; as if God's Cords of Grace and Love had lost their Strength and
Force? Is it not very strange, that Men who count the Fixing the Bounds of
Man's Duty the Limiting of God, do unawares on the other Hand really stint and
prescribe the Manner that God shall carry on Conversion Work? How alien to the
Purpose in Hand is Mr. T.'s quoting several Scriptures to prove God's
Unsearchableness, in order as it would seem to prove, that People may or ought
to forsake their own Minister for ordinary, and go to hear others, upon the
Grounds aforesaid? May not a Man with half an Eye see, that to draw such an
Inference from the Doctrine of God's Unsearchableness, is a palpable
inconsequential Consequence, which cannot be forced from it with any Color of
Reason? For does not this prove, that he is a God nigh at Hand as well as a God
afar off, or within as well as without the Parish Line? Though God be
unsearchable and his Ways past finding out; yet has not he declared his
Statutes to Israel, and showed Man what is good, so that he that reads may run
in the Way of Duty? Though his Spirit like the Wind blows where it lists, as
being a free Agent in all his gracious Operations; yet has not he made it our
Duty to watch daily at his Gates, and to wait at the Posts of his Doors; and
has not he commanded the Blessing, even Life, upon the Mountains of Zion?
Prove. 8.34. Ps. 133.3. Though Jehovah rides upon the gloomy Cloud; yet has not
he made it our Duty to walk in the Way of his Commandments? Though he makes
Darkness his Pavilion, does not he require, that we should walk in the Light?
Though his Paths are in the great Waters, yet has not he made it our Duty to
keep upon a sure Foundation, and not to venture into the deep Waters, lest we
sink too soon? But what is this to the Matter in Hand? For when we know that
God is unsearchable, is it Wisdom for us to take the Wings of the Morning to
try to search him out, by climbing up to Heaven, or going into the Deep, or by
riding upon the Clouds of Enthusiasm, or by dwelling in the Darkness of
Ignorance, Errors and Disorders, and be sure to dwell the appointed Time in the
deep Waters of Discomfort and Despair, according to the new forged Canon, till
some petty Pope signs an Absolution; and in order to find such unhappy Paths,
desert our own Pastors, who are not like to lead poor Souls into them, because
they fear God, love his Word, pity Souls, considering themselves? Is not this a
rare Piece of mystical Divinity? It is a great Truth, that God is every where,
and works where, when and as he lists; yet is this any Rule for Men to go
over the Parish Line, rather than into the Parish-Kirk, when God's essential
Presence is in both alike, without the least Difference? For may not he that
tarries at home, and goes to neither of the two, make as good a Plea for
himself as either of the two, that he limits not God; for may not he say, that
God may as well meet him upon his Bed or his Fireside as in the Church or
Field? For who can say, but that God may as well wo^k without and contrary to
Means as with them? For how else was the Spirit of Prophesy poured down on Mr.
Wd. when reading a Play-Book? Is not this a fine Droll to wound Religion under
the fifth Rib, when we pretend to stand up for it? For by Parity of Reason, may
not Men without any great Stretch further, tell us, that we should not confine
ourselves to read our Bibles or other Scriptural Books, in order to our
Christian Improvement, left we limit God? Shall we once more see the Time, when
it will be told that a Play-Book, Pack of Cards, and the Book of Sports, must
have their Turns, that Satan may be let loose under the Pretense of Gospel
Liberty? For may not the Pretense of not limiting of God, with little more
Courage, serve to cloak all as well as some Disorders? But yet, is not God's
Word a surer Rule by far, which teaches that every particular Congregation are
to have their particular Pastor? When therefore God has by his Providence
brought us to a particular Relation to a Godly Minister, Have not we better
Grounds in the Word of Truth, to expect God's Blessing upon the Labors of an
orderly Minister, whom we in Obedience to Christ, have solemnly chosen
according to Divine Institution, to take the Oversight of us in the Lord, than
upon the Administrations of a disorderly Intruder? Is it not evident, that
neither Minister nor People can fulfill the Duties of that Relation to each
other, without walking in Fellowship with each other in attending upon
Gospel Ordinances according to God's Word, without forsaking their own
Assemblies? Without such an Attendance, what is the Pastoral Relation but an
empty Sound and mere Mockery? If then the Ties or Bonds of this Relation, which
is God's Institution, obliges the Flock to attend upon the pastoral
Administrations of their own Pastor, as well as their own solemn Vows made at
their contracting such a Relation; can any in Faith expect, that the King who
is held in the Galleries, will be more likely to meet them, by their starting
out of their assigned Post and Place, than by keeping in it? Will any tell us,
what is that Cause which the Scripture assigns as sufficient to justify the
ordinary Forsaking, or Non-Attendance of a stated Member of a Congregation upon
the regular sacred Administrations of an orderly Pastor, while the said
Relation subsists, and no providential Let stands in the Way? For is it not a
great Truth, that no act of Religion, how glaring and specious soever, has a
real Tendency to advance the Glory of God, or to promote the real Good of
Souls, than when due Regard is had in the Performance of it to the Rule of
God's Word, both as to the Matter and Manner? And can we think, that those
Acts, which though for the Matter may be good or middling, yet as to their Manner
are downright irregular, and dishonorable to God and Religion, shall be
blessed for our greater Good, than those which both for the Matter and Manner
are scriptural? Or may not we rather expect, that if we lead our selves into
Temptation, by going to ramble out of the Way of Duty, by deserting our proper
Guides and Station, that this may provoke God to desert us, to remove our
Candlesticks, and encourage Satan to tempt us with such delusive Notions as may
make Truth and Duty hateful to us, because contrary to our wandering
Inclinations, and vain Admiration of Persons, and Love to vain Janglings?

When therefore Mr. T. has cleared the former Objections, and our Reasoning
thereupon, we desire him to answer us, Whether the Practice of deserting the
sacred Administrations of Men's stated godly and orthodox Pastors, upon mere
Conceits, Surmisings and groundless Jealousies, about their secret States, or
other secret Reasons, which admit of no solid Proof, be not

1. A plain Violation of Scripture Precepts, Heb. 10.25. 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. 2.
A plain Violation of Men's own solemn Vows and Contracts. 3. A practical Denial
of the stated Relation between Pastor and People. 4. A Practice that is
subversive of all Gospel Church Order. 5. A Practice that is subversive of all
stated religious Societies and Assemblies. 6. A Practice that has a native
Tendency to lead Men to perpetual Backslidings. 7. A Practice that has a
native Tendency to strengthen Men's Temptations who have taken Offense, though
never so causelessly or unjustly. 8. A Practice that has a native Tendency to
weaken the Hands of Pastor and People, and to alienate their Affections from
each other. 9. A Practice that tends to keep back the Disengaged from lifting
themselves under Christ's Banner. 10. A Practice that reflects upon the
Stedfastness or Constancy of its Practisers. 11. A Practice that is divisive
and factious in itself. 12. A Practice that tends to destroy Men's own Labors
in the Gospel. 13. A practical Denial of all the ministerial Authority of
Pastors over their own Flock. 14. A Practice that has a native Tendency to
drive away the Gospel and the orderly Administrations of it is Ordinances. 15. A
Practice that is altogether irreconcilable with the Presbyterian Constitution,
and all other Protestant Plans of Church Order, which the World has been
acquainted with.
5. As to Mr. T.'s pathetick Exhortation, to a speedy and sincere Improvement
of a faithful Ministry, we heartily approve of it; but yet we would ask,

Qu. I. How will Mr. T. reconcile his Exhortation with the main Drift of this
whole Sermon, which appears to be, to cast Contempt upon the Body of the Clergy
of this Generation as Crowds of Pharisees, etc.? How then can this adulterous
Generation show their Regaad to faithful Ministers, unless they go to build the
Tombs of the Prophets? Experience tells us, that a fawning Absalom in the Gate
may so far steal the Hearts of the People, under so good a Government as that
of David was, as to raise a Rebellion against God and the King; and yet though
Things were brought to that mournful Pass, that the Crowd was after Absalom,
when David had but his Handful left, who but a black-mouthed barking Shimei
would curse his lawful Sovereign in the Day of his Straits and Disgrace, or
call him a Son of Belial? Can Mr. T. think that it will be to his Honor or
Comfort, that he has given too much of a Handle to Gospel-Hearers in many
Places by the present Sermon, to treat their faithful Pastors much after the
same Manner Shimei did David, instead of improving their Ministry, as Mr. T.
here owns, they should have done? How can Mr. T. reconcile Men's forsaking
their own orderly and even gracious Pastors, upon a mere Notion, Men may imbibe
upon a slender Trial, that another is more gifted than them, or upon a bare
Inclination or Judgment, or upon a Notion of their being better edified
elsewhere, where, with his warm Exhortation to a speedy and sincere Improvement
of a faithful Ministry? What strange Inconsistencies will Bigotry to a
favorite Opinion or Party, drive or drag a Person into? Can any think that
public Exclamations against orthodox Ministers, and rash censuring of them for
carnal Men, Hypocrites and Pharisees, etc. are proper Means to incite People to
make a due Improvement of the ministerial Labors of their Pastors? Can any
think that it is a light Matter for Men to attempt to mar the Usefulness and
Success of an orthodox Ministry, by their uttering groundless Surmises, false
Reports and dark Insinuations, to raise unjust Prejudices against orderly
Ministers? Do they act a wise Part even for themselves, who strive to raise
their own Characters by such sinistrous Methods as the blackening of the
Characters, and marring the Usefulness of such who labor in Quietness to act a
faithful Part in their Day and Station? For may not such easily do more Hurt
than Good in their Generation, for all their seeming Pains and Industry
otherwise?

Qu. II. Whereas Mr. T. in the Close of his Exhortation, insinuates something,
as if he was apprehensive, that the Life of Godliness should be consulted and
warred against, and Christ's Kingdom and Apostles should be opposed by the
modern Pharisees; we would ask, can Mr. T. acquaint the World, who of our
Ministers have opposed any of the regular Exercises of Piety, or Christ's
Kingdom; or even the regular Exercises of the ministerial Authority of any of
his Party? If any in our Day pretend to be Apostles, or act as such, ought not
they to produce a sealed Commission, or else will not God's Word call them,
will they nill they, deceitful Workers? Is opposing Mr. W.'s and Mr. T.'s
Errors, and their and their Party's anarchical Disorders, the opposing of God's
Work, Christ's Kingdom, or the Life of Piety? Seeing Men therefore seem to
glory in the Opposition they meet with, as if all were suffering Persecution
for Christ; ought not they to consider, that it is not Sufferings, but the
Cause of Sufferings makes the Martyr? For has not Christ forbid his Followers,
to bring themselves into Sufferings for being Evildoers and Busy-Bodies in
other Men's Matters, by going out of their Places and Callings, to disturb
others in their proper Stations? 1 Pet. iv. 15. Was not Opposition for being a
wild, unruly Man, the true Character, not of an Isaac, but of an Ishmael, who
had his Hand against every Man, and every Man's Hand against him? Genesis xvi. 12
Does not Mr. T. make himself something like this, when he stands up to make
such a furious Assault upon the Characters of the Body of the Clergy of this
Generation, when it is most certain, without all Peradventure, that a vast
Number of them never gave him the least Provocation, nor could they, because
they never knew his Name nor Face, nor he theirs? Did not the Church of old
complain, that she was made the Keeper of other Vineyards, to the Hindrance of
her keeping her own proper Vineyard? When therefore our true Solomon has let
out his Vineyard at Baalhamon to proper Keepers, What Sort of Sons of the true
Church are they, who neither keep their own Vineyards, nor suffer others to
keep their allotted Parts of the Vineyard, without disturbing them; yea, who
cry out Persecution, when their Brethren only desire them to keep their own
Vineyards, and to forbear disturbing of others, in keeping their proper Parts,
with their Errors, Intrusions, Disorders and false Alarms? May not the faithful
Keepers of the Vineyard, make their silent Moan in this or the like Manner,
"But if we must be still misrepresented by our sometimes Brethren, but now
Disturbers and Reproachers, we are sorry for it, but cannot help it; and must
place their opprobrious Aspersions and Defamations in the Number of those
Burdens, which, by frequent Use, grow familiar and less pinching; and such, as
seeing they are not to be avoided, does not Wisdom dictate, that they ought to
be contemned?" For if Satan himself is transformed into on Angel of Light; What
Marvel is it, that those whose Office it is to be Lights of the World, do, by
imbibing enthusiastic Notions, become Darkness; and that the Professors of
Christianity, by being inspired with blind Party-Zeal, are become Disturbers of
the regular Exercises of Piety, and the Practisers of them, as well as of
religious Order? For was not the Church persecuted in Zeal before now? Seeing
therefore there is a Knot of Gentlemen of various Colors, who call themselves
spiritual Men, are risen among us, who do so loudly defy the Armies of the
living God, by Carnalizing and Pharisizing the stated orderly Ministers of this
Generation in general; and by duping and duncing all the Church Members, that
are so daring as to be orderly, by cleaving to their own orderly Pastors, and
to stand up for Truth and Order; as long as we believe, that God is the God of
both, and that the Church is a Fountain sealed, a Garden enclosed, a Vineyard
delivered to Keepers by Parcels, and a City that is compact together; yea, that
Christ is still at the Helm, and that his Church is built upon the Rock, and
that the Gates of Hell shall, neither by Force nor fraud, ever prevail against
it, for all their Rage and Roarings; we are resolved, in the Strength of God's
Grace, not to fear the Reproach and Revilings of Men, as we are taught in Isa.
li. 7. And therefore, to show that we are only chastened, but not killed, we
enter our Demur in the Cause, on the Behalf of the divine Institution of the
Relation of particular Pastors and People, and of the Duty of Church Members,
to walk for ordinary in Church Fellowship with their own stated Pastors, until
the Bands be orderly dissolved, or just Reasons for it; and on the Behalf of
the Christianity of a great Number of the Clergy of this Generation, who are
blackened by their Mothers angry Children, in order either to put some Stop to
the Jehu Careers of false Reproaches, or else to bring the Matter to a fair
Trial; and may the Drunken, but not with Wine, give Ear. And seeing it may be
probable, that when others sing their Sonnets so much and so loudly, we may
have further Use for David's Psalter. Come War, come Peace, we shall conclude
this Discourse with the first Verse of it. Ps. 1.1.

Blessed is the Man that walks not in the Counsel of the Ungodly, nor
stands in the Way of Sinners, nor sits in the Seat of the Scornful.


