To Robert Jordan, and others the Friends of the Yearly Meeting for Business,
now convened in Philadelphia.
My FRIENDS,
IT is with no small Uneasiness that I find myself concerned to apply thus to
this Meeting: But as I have been longer and more deeply engaged in Affairs of
Government, and I believe I may safely say, have considered the Nature of it
more closely than any Man besides in this Province; as I have also from my
Infancy been educated in the Way that I have ever since walked in, and I hope
without Blemish to the Profession; I conceive and hope you will think I have a
Right to lay before you, the heavy Pressure of Mind that some late Transactions
in this small Government of ours have given me, through an Apprehension, that
not only the Reputation of Friends, as a People, but our Liberties and
Privileges in general may be deeply affected by them.

But on this Head I think fit to mention, in the first Place, That when, above
Forty-two Years since, our late Proprietor proposed to me at Bristol, to come
over with him as his Secretary; after I had, agreeably to his Advice, taken
Time to consider of it, which I did very closely before I engaged, I had no
Scruple to accept of that, or of any other Post I have since held: Being
sensible, that as Government is absolutely necessary amongst Mankind, so, though
all Government, as I had clearly seen long before, is founded on Force, there
must be some proper Persons to administer it; I was therefore the more
surprised, when I found my Master, on a particular Occasion in our Voyage
hither, though coming over to exercise the Powers of it here in his own Person,
showed his Sentiments were otherwise. But as I have ever endeavored to think
and act consistently myself, observing Friends had laid it down as their
Principle, That Bearing of Arms, even for Self-Defence, is unlawful; being of a
different Opinion in this Respect, though I ever condemned offensive War, I
therefore, in a great Measure, declined that due Attendance on their Meetings
of Business, which I might otherwise have given. I must here nevertheless add
further, that I propose not, in offering this, to advance Arguments in Support
of the Lawfulness of Self-Defence; which, amongst those, who, for Conscience
Sake, continue in a Condition to put strictly in Practice the Precepts of our
Savior, would be altogether needless; but wherever there is private
Property, and Measures taken to increase it, by amassing Wealth, according to
our Practice, to a Degree that may tempt others to invade it, it has always
appeared to me, to be full as justifiable to use Means to defend it when got,
as to acquire it. Notwithstanding which, I am sensible our (...) have so openly
and repeatedly professed their Principles on that Head to the Government, and
they have thereupon been so much distinguished by its Favors, (...) peaceable
People, from whom no Plots or Machinations of any Kind are to be (...) that I
shall consider this, as I have said, to be their standing and avowed Principle,
and only offer to your Consideration, what I conceive to be a clear
Demonstration, that all Civil Government, as well as Military, is founded on
Force; and therefore, that Friends, as such, in the Strictness of their
Principles, ought in no manner to engage in it: As also that as we are a
subordinate Government, and therefore accountable to a superior One for our
Conduct, it is expected by that Superior, that this Province, as well as all
the other British Colonies, shall make the best Defense, against a foreign
Enemy, in its Power, as it was strictly required to do by the late Queen, in
the last French War, upon which the then Governor raised a Militia of three
Companies of Volunteers, but for Want of a Law for its Support, it dropped in
about two Years after; and the like Orders may undoubtedly (...) again, when
another War with France breaks out, which is said now to unavoidable: That it
is of the greater Importance to Britain, as it is, for (...) sons, most
assuredly to ourselves, that the Country should be defended, as it (...) the
Heart of the other British Colonies on the Main: And that it is well (...)
Europe, that from the vast Conflux of People yearly into it, from Germ(...)
Ireland, Numbers, who can bear Arms, are not wanting for a Defense, were (...)
Law for it, as there is in all the other British Colonies, I think, without
Exception.

That all Government is founded on Force, and ours as well as others, will be
indisputably evident from this: King Charles II. in his Grant of this Province
to our Proprietor, directed, that the Laws of England, for the Descent of
Lands, and for the Preservation of the Peace, should continue the same till
altered by the Legislative Authority; and our Government continues still on the
same Plan, with Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Coroners, Clerks, Juries, etc. all
of whom, who act by Commissions, have them from the Governor in the English
Form; the English Law is pleaded in all our Courts, and our Practitioners copy,
as near as they can, after the Practice of Westminster Hall. By that Law, when
the Peace is commanded, even by a Constable, all Obedience to that Command
manifestly arises from a Sense in the Person or Persons commanded, that his
Resistance would be punished, and therefore they choose to avoid it: But in
Civil Cases of more Importance, the Sheriff, who is the principal executive
Officer, executes the Judgments of the Courts upon those they were given
against, which they are obliged to comply with, how much soever against their
Will; for here also they know Resistance would be in vain; or if they attempt
any, the Sheriff is obliged by the Law, without any Manner of Excuse, to find a
sufficient Force, if to be had in his County, to compel to a Compliance. And in
the Pleas of the Crown, besides that he is obliged to put to Death such
Criminals as by the Law have been condemned to it, he, as general Conservator
of the Peace, is likewise invested, by the same Law, with proper Powers for
suppressing all Tumults, Riots, Insurrections and Rebellions, on whatsoever
Occasion they may arise, as far as the whole Posse or Force of his County will
enable him; and for this End he receives, together with his Commission, the
King's Writ of Assistance, requiring all Persons within his District to be
aiding to him, in these and all other Cases; by which, if Need be, they may
freely use Firearms, and all Manner of destructive Weapons; and are not at all
accountable, by the Law, for any Lives they may take of those in the
Opposition, any more than a Man is, on the High-Road, for killing another who
attempts to rob him; and such as refuse to assist the Sheriff, are, by the same
Law, liable to Fine and Imprisonment: From whence it is evident, there is no
Difference, in the last Resort, between Civil and Military Government; and that
the Distinction that some affect to make, between the Lawfulness of the one and
of the other, is altogether groundless. As no Man is killed in the Field, so
none are punished, with their Good Will; a superior Force is employed in the
one Case as well as in the other; and the only Difference that I (...) ever
able to discover in their Essentials, is, that the Sheriff being but one (...)
his County, cannot possibly assemble any very great Number together, in (...)
Method or Order, as in Case of any Insurrection in the City of Philadelpia
(...) soon appear; but on the contrary, in a regular Militia, every Person
(...) Commanding Officer, and whither to repair on a proper Call. And (...)
Premises it certainly follows, that whoever can find Freedom in himself, (...)
Assembly in making Laws, as particularly for holding of Courts, is so far
concerned in Self-Defence; and makes himself essentially as obnoxious to
Censure, as those who directly vote for it.

But further it is alleged, that King Charles II. very well knew our
Proprietor's Principles when he granted him these Powers of Government,
contained in the Charter: To which it is answered, that amongst the other Powers
granted to the Proprietor and his Deputies, He is created by the Charter a
Captain General, with Power to levy War on any People not in Amity with the
Crown of England; which in case he was not free to do by himself, he might by
his Deputies; and if he were invested with Powers to make an invasive War, much
more it was to be expected that he should defend his Country against all
Invaders. And I am a Witness, that in those two Years, or somewhat less, that
the Proprietor took the Administration on himself, when last here, He found
himself so embarassed between the indispensable Duties of Government on the one
Hand, and his Profession on the other, that he was determined, if he had staid,
to act by a Deputy. It is further alleged, by our Friends, that no other was
expected than that this should be a Colony of Quakers, and it is so reputed to
this Day; that they are willing themselves to rely on the sole Protection of of
divine Providence, and others who would not do the same should have kept out of
it, for nobody called or invited them. But it is answered to this, That the
King's Charter gives free Leave to all his Subjects, without Distinction, to
repair to the Country and settle in it, and more particularly, the Proprietor's
own Invitation was general and without Exception; and by the Laws he had passed
himself, no Country, no Profession whatever, provided they owned a God, were to
be excluded. That it is true our Friends at first made a large Majority in the
Province; yet they are said now to make, on a moderate Computation, not above
one Third of the Inhabitants. That although they allege they cannot for
Conscience Sake bear Arms, as being contrary to the peaceable Doctrine of JESUS
(whose own Disciples nevertheless are known to have carried Weapons) yet,
without Regard to others of CHRIST's Precepts, full as express, against laying
up Treasure in this World, and not caring for tomorrow, they are as intent as
any others whatever in amassing Riches, the great Bait and Temptation to our
Enemies to come and plunder the Place; in which Friends would be far from being
the only Sufferers, for their Neighbors must equally partake with them who
therefore, by all means desire a Law for a Militia, in a regular Manner to
defend themselves and the Country, as they have in the other Colonies. That in
the last French War, Pensilvania was but an inconsiderable Colony; but now, by
its extended Commerce, it has acquired a very great Reputation; and
particularly that Philadelphia has the Name of a rich City, is known to have no
manner of Fortification, and is, as has been said, a tempting Bait by Water
from the Sea; and by Land, the whole Country lies exposed to the French, with
whom a War is daily expected: That in their last War with England, the French
in Europe were so greatly distressed, by a Current of yearly Losses, that they
were glad to sit quiet where they might; but now it is much otherwise, as they
appear rather in a Condition to give Laws to all their Neighbors: That our own
Indians unhappily retiring Westward, have opened a ready R^^^ and Communication
between this Province and Canada, by their settling (...) of that great (...)
Mississipi; which Branch extending a thousand (...) from its Mouth, where it
enter^ (...) said River, reaches even into this Province, and between its
Waters and the western Branches of Sasquchannah there is but a small
Land-Carriage: That the French exceedingly want such a Country as this to
supply their Islands with Provisions, and our Rivers for an easier Inlet to
that vast Country of Louisiana, which they possess on Mississipi, than they now
have by the barred Mouth of it, which empties itself a great Way within the
Shoal-Bay of Mexico; and they have many large Nations of Indians in Alliance
with them to facilitate their Conquests. For the which Reasons, our numerous
back Inhabitants, as well as others, ought to be obliged to furnish themselves
with Arms, and to be disciplined as in other Colonies for their own proper
Defense, which would be no manner of Charge to the Public, and but (...).

These, I think, are the principal Arguments adduced by those who plead for a
Law for Self-Defence: To which I shall add these other weighty Considerations,
that may more particularly affect Friends as a People; The Government at Home,
and particularly the Parliament, appear to have this present War very much at
Heart, in which they spare no Charge in fitting out large Fleets, with
Landforces, and expect that all their Colonies will in the same Manner exert
themselves, as the Assemblies of all the others have in some Measure done, ours
excepted, not only in their Contributions, but they have also generally a
regular Militia for their Defense.

Our Friends have recommended themselves to the Government in Britain, not only
by their peaceable Deportment, as has been already observed, but by complying
with its Demands, in cheerfully contributing by the Payment of their Taxes
toward every War; yet they are admitted into no Offices of the Government
above those of the respective Parishes where they live, except that some have
undertaken to receive the Public Money; and though tolerated in their Opinions,
as they interfere not with the Administration, yet these Opinions are so far
from being approved by the Government, that when they shall be urged as a
Negative to putting so valuable a Country as this, and situate, as has been
mentioned, in a proper Posture of Defense, those who plead their Privileges for
such a Negative, may undoubtedly expect to be divested of them, either by Act
of Parliament, or a Quo Warranto from the King against their Charters; for it
will be accounted equal to betraying it. And this, besides the irreparable Loss
to ourselves, must prove a Reproach, and vast Disadvantage to the Profession
every where.

It Is alleged, the Governor made a false Step last Year in Encouraging or
Suffering our Servants to inlist; for which he has been abridged by the
Assembly of the Salary, for a Year and a half, that has for many Years before
been allowed to our Governors. But as this is interpreted by the Ministry in
Britain, as a Proof of an extraordinary Zeal for the King's Service, his
Conduct herein, as also his Letter to the Board of Trade, however displeasing
to us, will undoubtedly recommend him the more to the Regard of our Superiors,
in whose Power we are; and accordingly we may expect to hear of it.

Our Province is now rent into Parties, and in a most unchristian Manner (...)
Love and Charity, the great Characteristicks of the Christian Religion, are in
a great Measure banished from amongst the People, and Contention too generally
prevails. But, for the weighty Reasons that have been mentioned in this Paper,
it is not to be doubted but that those who are for a Law for Defense, if the
War continues, and the Country be not ruined by an Enemy before, must in Time
obtain it: It is therefore proposed to the serious and most weighty
Consideration of this Meeting, Whether it may not, at this Time, be advisable,
that all such who for Conscience Sake cannot join in any Law for Self-Defence,
should not only decline standing Candidates at the ensuing Election for
Representatives themselves, but also advise all others who are equally
scrupulous, to do the same; and as Animosities and Faction have greatly
prevailed amongst us of late, and at all Times there prevails with too many an
illjudged, parsimonious Disposition, who (...) Reason than to save (...) Money,
but probably on some other Pretense, (...) Opposition to the Governor, may most
(...) should give out publicly before hand, when they find they are named,
that they will by no means serve though chosen; and accordingly that the Meeting
recommend this to the Deputies from the several Monthly or Quarterly Meetings
in this Province. All which, from the sincerest Zeal for the Public Good,
Peace of the Country, and not only the Reputation, but the most solid Interest
of Friends as a People, is (I say again) most seriously recommended to your
Consideration, by

Your true Friend and Well-wisher, J. L.
Stenton, Sept. 22. 1741.

