THE TRUE SCRIPTURE-DOCTRINE Concerning Some Important Points OF Christian
Faith, Particularly ETERNAL ELECTION, ORIGINAL SIN, GRACE in CONVERSION,
Justification by FAITH, And the SAINTS PERSEVERANCE.

Represented and Applied In five DISCOURSES.

By Jonathan Dickinson, A.M.

Minister of the Gospel at Elisabeth-Town, N. Jersey.

With a PREFACE by Mr. FOXCROFT.

BOSTON, Printed by G. ROGERS, for S. ELIOT in Cornhill. 1741.

To the READER.
OUR Savior upbraided the Pharisees, Men that boasted high of their Knowledge
and Practice in Religion, and who lived in a Time of great Expectations, with
their Stupidity in not perceiving the then-present Aspects of Divine
Providence, and moral Prognostics of the Day. Ye Hypocrites, ye can discern
the Face of the Sky: but can ye not discern the Signs of the Times? From which
it has been an Observation, "That it is an important Duty lying upon the People
of GOD, to labor after a Skill in discerning the Signs of the Times, which we
live in." -- Now if I may be allowed to have in any Measure Understanding of
the Times, it seems that although a righteous GOD has been testifying against his
(...) Israel, in a Variety of frowning Providence, yet he is at this Day
showing them a Token for Good, is speaking Peace to his People and to his
Saints, in a very remarkable Dispensation of Grace.

The blessed GOD has by surprising Ways began among us, in almost all Parts of
this Land (as well as in other Places abroad) a most signal Reviving of his
Work; and is renewing our Days as of old. Herein we see a mavelous fulfilling
of that Scripture, When the Enemy comes in like a Flood, the Spirit of the
LORD shall lift up a Standard. Ah! what a melancholy Prospect had we not long
since, in regard to the general State of Religion, and what dark Symptoms on
the rising Age! But how has the cloudy Face of Things, even on a sudden, very
much changed; and a more smiling Scene opened before us! When the LORD turned
again the Captivity of Zion, we were like them that dream: or like Peter, when
miraculously delivered out of Prison, he wist not that it was true, which was
done by the Angel; but thought he saw a Vision. -- Yet once, it is a little
while, and I will shake the Heavens and the Earth, and the Desire of all
Nations shall come, and I will fill this House with Glory; seems to be the
Language of the LORD of Hosts, in his present Dispensation, wherein he is
marching through the Land, not in Indignation, nor for Correction, but in
Mercy. May all the dear Children of GOD be stirring up themselves to take Hold
of his Strength, and labor by Prayers of Faith to retain the Presence of his
Grace; that He who has begun a good Work among us, may perform it to the Day of
CHRIST, may perfect what concerns us, and not forsake the Work of his own
Hands. So will Salvation be nigh to us, and Glory dwell in our Land.

I know not what Constructions may be put upon it; but I cannot forbear, on this
Occasion, transcribing some remarkable Passages, of a prophetic Aspect, from a
printed Sermon of that Man of GOD, the late Dr. COTTON MATHER. ( On Rev. 21.
21.)

There are many Arguments (says he) to persuade us, that our glorious LORD will
have a holy City in AMERICA; a City, the Street whereof will be pure Gold. --
Yea, the DAY IS AT HAND, when that Voice will be heard, Put on thy beautiful
Garments, O America, the holy City! -- We are sorry, we are troubled, that the
good Seed of the Word, falling on the other three Soils has bro't forth so
little good Fruit, and for so little a while. But our glorious LORD will order
that good Seed ere long to be cast upon the fertile Regions of America, and it
shall here find a good Ground, where it shall bring forth Fruit, unto
Astonishment, and unto Perpetuity! When our LORD uttered the Parable, to which
I have now alluded, we read, He went into a SHIP, and from thence instructed
the Multitude that stood on the SHORE. I will believe, that in this very
Action, there was a Parable and a Prophesy. By NAVIGATION there will be brought
the Word of a glorious CHRIST, unto a Multitude afar off: and as the Ships
cover the Sea, the Earth (and thou AMERICA too) shall be filled with the
Knowledge of the glorious LORD. The Fall of old Pagan Babylon was brought about
by the Diversion of her Euphrates from her: the Fall of the new Popish^ Babylon
will be accompanied with the Loss of her American Interest; but when it is
diverted from her, certainly it will then serve the City of GOD. -- It will be
impossible, that the Effect of the Essays, used by Men filled with the Spirit
of CHRIST, and able to do more than all that was done in the primitive Times
(For, when He gives the Word, great will be the Army of them that publish it)
should not be a Conquest of America, etc.

Will the LORD of Glory be pleased to hasten these expected Times of
Reformation! Who knows but the Day of the LORD is beginning to dawn upon us!
Has not "the Word of a glorious CHRIST, brought by Navigation to a Multitude
afar off" (however some may have wittily, as they thought, named it "your
imported Divinity") been very manifestly as "good Seed sown in good Ground, and
bringing forth Fruit, unto Astonishment!" -- And who knows but that by the
Smiles of Providence on the British Arms, Way may very speedily be made for a
triumphant Progress of the Gospel of Peace, in its Purity and Power, into the
Spanish AMERICA! May the GOD of Armies everrule the present War and its
Consequences, to bring on such a glorious Event!

In the mean Time, may the true Protestant Cause, pure Religion, be
established, and flourish among ourselves, with an Increase of Prosperity and
Glory!

Among all the Signs of the Times, I can think of none that looks more
favorably, and promises better to us, than the restoring of a Zeal for
Protestant Principles in Religion, for those Divine and ancient Truths which
are the peculiar Glories of the Gospel, and Things which accompany Salvation.
-- This is the Faith once delivered to the Saints: This the Doctrine, which is
according to Godliness. -- Was it not by this Scripture-Doctrine, these
Evangelical Principles, as the moral Means, under the Power of the Spirit of
GOD, that the Apostles and their Fellow Laborers in the Word, subdued the
Kingdom of Darkness, set up the Kingdom of CHRIST, and bro't forth Fruit in all
the World? So mightily grew the Word of GOD, and prevailed. -- Was it not by
the same Doctrine, that the Reformers began and carried on those happy
Revolutions in the Church, which gave such a Shock to the Papal Empire? -- Was
it not by the same Doctrine, that the Puritans were so useful in their
Preaching, to support the true Protestant Interest, and to promote the
Conversion and Edification of Souls? -- Was not this Doctrine laid in the
Foundation of the first Churches of New England? And have they not hitherto by
the Favor of Heaven, stood on this Pillar and Ground of Truth, the Truth as it
is in JESUS? -- Has not this very obviously been the reigning Doctrine,
wherever the Word preached has had any conspicuous Success among us, from Time
to Time, in the general Awakning and Converting of Sinners? -- In fine, Was it
not by an uncommon Hand of GOD with such Preaching, that the illustrious Work
of the present Day, through all these Provinces, was first set on Foot, and
happily advanced? -- Thus, with uncontrollable Evidence, has the Fountain of
Grace and Truth put a Distinction upon these sacred Principles, the Doctrines
of Grace, by gloriously owning and crowning them with a Divine Blessing from
Age to Age.

I would not be understood to pretend, that these Doctrines are every where and
at all Times attended with equal Power and the same Effects. No; for they had
not always an invariable Success, even under the Dispensation of inspired
Preachers. "Who is Paul, or who is Apollo, but Ministers, by whom ye believed,
even as the LORD gave to every Man? So then, neither is he that planteth, any
Thing; neither he that waters: but GOD, that gives the Increase." And with
adorable Liberty, a sovereign GOD either suspends or commands the Blessing,
when and where He pleases; and sends by the Hand of whom He will. -- Nor
would I be understood absolutely to confine real Christianity, or a valid
Ministry, to Those fully in this Scheme of P^rinciples; Exclusively of all that
dissent from any Article of it, and in (...) that most controverted one,
Predestination. No, far from this. For, among other Grounds of Charity (as One
speaks) "We hope, that their inward Experience and the secret Transactions
between GOD and their own Souls, are otherwise than their professed Opinions:"
though by an unaccountable Inattention, they may not so sensibly feel the unhappy
Jar. Therefore we can say, after the Example of the ingenuous and
catholick-spirited Dr. WATTS, who "to conclude his Sermon on that awful Subject
with the Language of sincere Charity," declares himself thus; "I am persuaded,
there will be found many holy Souls, whose Voices shall join in the triumphant
Song of Glory to ELECTING Love, who had not learnt this Doctrine 'till they
came to Heaven." So the late Dr. EDWARDS, as rigid and four a Bigot to
Orthodoxy as some deem him, yet has left a like solemn Attestation to his own
Candor and extensive Charity. "I bear no III-will (says he) to the Persons I
dissent from; yea, I pay an entire Respect to all those of them, that are Men
of Learning and Piety. I desire to entertain favorable Thoughts; and to
remember, that holy Men do sometimes build Hay and Stubble on the Foundation. I
charitable believe, that there are many good Men of the (...) Persuasion, though
it is their Unhappiness to be led away with the Error of the Age." -- Admirable
Instances of Christian Temper! Worthy of Imitation and Remembrance.

However, this I say, by the best Accounts, and by an impartial Observation,
I Am persuaded, that few (or none) have to report any remarkable Fruits of their
Ministry, in a prevailing Work of Conviction, and numerous effectual
Conversions, where there has been either an open Opposition to the Doctrines of
Grace, or a total Absence of them, or but a cold and infrequent Glancing at
them. -- When there is an eminently successful Ministry, and when living
practical Religion is restored to a flourishing State among a professing People
in any Place, I believe it will very commonly (if not ever) he found, there is a
proportionable Recovery of these Gospel-Principles to their primitive Use and
Esteem, Power and Influence.

I frankly confess it a pleasing Reflection to me (for I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of CHRIST) and in my Eye it appears a comfortable Presage of some good
Days to these Churches, That this kind of Divinity, although run down by some
as obsolete, jejune and insipid to the refined Taste of the present free and
thinking Age, yet has of late in a happy Measure retrieved its Reputation, and
established its Value and Improvement with Multitudes among us. It has highly
delighted me, to observe, with what a singular Gust this old-fashioned mystical
Divinity (so called) has been entertained by our awakened Congregations: -- To
observe, how some distinguished Preachers of it, when visiting their Brethren
to see how we do, have been flocked after: -- To observe, what Multitud^s,
stirred up by their occasional Labors among us, remain swift to hear, and seem
to have had their Feet shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace: And to
observe, how it has pleased GOD by this Foolishness of Preaching to save them
that believe; even some that came to the Word, instigated by Curiosity, but
loaded with Prejudices and Disaffection to these tastless antiquated
Principles, and to the empty Preachers of them, yet by finding a sovereign GOD
giving Testimony to the Word of his Grace, and feeling their own Hearts under
serious Impressions (such as they never experienced before) about their
everlasting Concerns, have been drawn on impartially to consider and finally to
embrace these formerly nauseated Truths, as DIVINE, and worthy of all
Acceptance. Which, I persuade my self, will be the usual Effect, where any are
brought under the like deep Distress of Conscience, by a convincing Work of the
SPIRIT. -- And as for those who have indeed tasted that the LORD is gracious,
they most certainly desire the sincere Milk of the Word, with a View to their
Growth in Grace: and what can be expected from Them, but that they conceive a
high Relish for these peculiarly Evangelick Principles^! Which have such a
transcendent Suitableness to all the genuine Appetites of their new Nature, and
such a moral Fitness to humble that spiritual Pride which they so often feel
and mourn in themselves, to exalt the Redeemer and the Sanctifier, and to
display the Riches of Divine Grace in the Salvation of apostate Man! Every one
that is of the Truth (says our Savior) hears my Voice; and he shall go in
and out, and find Pasture. But "They are worthy to fast, that are weary of the
Bread of Angels."

I freely confess, it looks to me a hopeful Symptom of "the spreading Power of
Godliness," that so many among us, particularly of the Sons of the Prophets,
and other our promising Youth, have lost in such a Degree their Taste for some
Books, that have been wont to consume many of their precious Hours; I mean
Books of Amusement and Curiosity, and I mean too some Authors in Divinity, of
looser Principles, at best exhibiting little of the "Religion of a regenerate
Mind," or the true Genius of the Gospel: -- And that they have learnt to relish
Others of a more spiritual and experimental Strain; in special, the plain
pungent scriptural Works of the Reformers, and their Successors, which wrote in
their incomparable Spirit and Manner, on various Accounts far excelling the
Generality of Moderns, and the most nearly approaching to that divine Pattern
in the inspired Leaders of the christian Profession. For as Dr. WATTS (in his
Preface to Mr. JENNINGS'S two Discourses) judiciously observes, Though it must
be confessed without Controversy, that there are some Things, wherein several
of the Preachers of the present Time have the Advantage of our learned and
pious Fathers; yet there are other Excellencies in the Sermons of the
Puritanick Age, which I should rejoice to find more studiously revived and
cultivated in our Day. Among them I know none of more eminent Necessity, Glory
and Usefulness, than those two, -- the Evangelical Turn of Thought that should
run through our Ministry, and the Experimental Way of Discourse on practical
Subjects.

It appears to me a good Indication of the Life of Christianity in themselves,
and bodes well as to the maintaining and propagating it among their Hearers,
when they that labor in the Word, are careful to fill their Sermons with the
most vital Truths of the Gospel, and have a happy Vein of spiritual Experience
running through their Ministrations.

Here give me Leave to cite again the forementioned Sermon of our late
venerable Father and Friend, Dr. MATHER. -- Let me speak it (says he) for your
Comfort and Honor: There is not a Street of more pure Gold upon the Face of
the Earth at this Day [ Anno 1710.] for the Gospel generally preached in the
true Purity of it, than the Churches of New England. Be awakened, O ye Churches
of the LORD! Be inquisitive, Whether in this Day of common Degeneracies, there
be no Vergencies to another Gospel: Whether the Doctrines of Grace, delivered
in our CONFESSION OF FAITH, are not in any Hazard of not being duly adhered
unto. If any Persons gnash their Teeth with Indignation at the Watchmen, who
advise you to be sollicitous for the Preservation of this great Interest; I
must faithfully tell you, Those Persons will give you great Cause to be jealous
of them.

And allow me to repeat some Lines of another important Admonition from the
same excellent Hand, in his Sermon entitled, The MINISTER, preached to the
Anniversary Convention of Ministers at Boston, 1722. While we are examining,
what Subjects we have to be handled in our Ministry, I must become an humble
Petitioner, -- and I will blush to say so! -- on the behalf of some TRUTHS,
which all real and vital PIETY for ever lives upon; and which yet, alas, are
threatened with a Sentence, at least, of Banishment from the Ministry in some
Churches, which once they have been a Beauty and a Safety to. [Then follows an
Enumeration of Gospel-Doctrines, too large to be here inserted; as was
designed.] My Friends (says he upon it) what have these Truths done, to deserve
an Excommunication from the House of GOD? Or are we fond of seeing an (...)
upon our Ministry? Verily, if we let these Truths go, the glorious GOD himself
will be gone; yea, be gone far from a forsaken Sanctuary! -- What particular
Grounds the good Doctor had for his Complaints and Fears at that Day, or what
Rule he might go by in judging on the State of Things, I list not at present to
reflect or inquire.

I know not whether the Sermons that pass the Press, be a sufficient Standard,
(...) which to estimate the general Tenor of Preaching, among the Body of
Ministers in a Place. Those published among us, are mostly occasional
Performances, or such as some of the Audience are pleased to ask a Copy of, and
happen many Times to be such as the Auth^rs, left to their own free Judgment,
would not prefer, for the public Light. So it comes to pass, that (...) the
Multiplicity of valuable useful Sermons printed among us, yet there seems to be
some Room for the Complaint, which judicious Observers have sometimes made,
That the grand Principles of the Everlasting Gospel, though frequently touched
on, are generally not allowed their due Consideration, are not so distinctly
stated and so fully inculcated, as their Importance, the peculiar Profession of
these Churches, and the Ends of Instruction and Edification in the Faith
conspire justly to demand.

And it is observable, that among all our American Writings (except Mr.
NORTON'S "Orthodox Evangelist," and Mr. WILLARD'S large "Body of Divinity,"
both excellent Works, but out of Print) we have not a single Volume, that I
remember, upon these great Points of Gospel Truth, setting them together in one
View.

I Am of Opinion, a Book of this Nature has long been wanting among us: and I
give unfeigned Thanks to GOD, which put this same earnest Care for us into the
Heart of our Brother; whose Praise is in the Gospel throughout the Churches,
particularly by Means of his elaborate Writings in Vindication both of the
Faith and Order of the Gospel, and other more practical Publications. -- I look
upon his present Work the Supply of a real Deficiency; and more especially
seasonable at this Juncture, when Multitudes (learned and unlearned) are
awakened to attend to the most serious Truths, with a listening Ear, and a Mind
open to Conviction: When the Weak in Knowledge need further Light, and a Helper
of their Faith, to fortify them against the Attacks of profane Wits, that turn
the Mystery of Godliness into Banter: And when even the Strong and zealously
affected, many of 'em, need an Interpreter, one of a Thousand, to guard them
against the Extremes of censorious Rigor, Antinomian Jangling, and
Enthusiastic Delusion; to temper the Heat of their Spirit with the Principles
of christian Prudence, and direct their Zeal to its practical and most valuable
Purposes; not only to feed the Flock in green Pastures, but also to lead them
beside the still Waters, according to the sweet Example of the supreme
Shepherd. -- Now as Paul said of Timothy, "I have no Man like-minded," so I
will presume to speak it, without any Design of Flattery or Offense, I know no
Man better accomplished (in my^ Opinion) for a Work of this Kind, than Mr.
Dickinson: and without entering into Recommendation of his Performance, I doubt
not, the superior and established Character of the Rev. Author, with the
Importance of the Divine Subjects, is enough to invite a general Reading, and
solicit the Attention of every serious and impartial Inquirer.

All I shall add, is my sincere and servent Wish, that the GOD of all Grace and
Comfort, who is in this extraordinary Season eminently visiting the World, to
take out of it a People for his Name, and who of his own Will begets them
with the Word of Truth, would so accompany his faithful Word with the effectual
Influences of his sovereign almighty SPIRIT, unto the Readers of this Book,
that as many as are ordained to eternal Life may believe, and glorify the Word
of the LORD; and that it may serve to confirm the Souls of the Disciples, by
helping them to know their Election of GOD. -- And for our dear BROTHER, who is
thus set for the Defense of the Gospel, and contending earnestly for the Faith
of GOD'S Elect, my Wish is, that his Bow may be like that of Jonathan, which
turned not back, nor failed of Success and Victory. Yea, Though the Archers
should sorely grieve him, and shoot at him, and hate him, may his Bow still
abide in Strength, and the Arms of his Hands be made strong, and the Pleasure
of the LORD prosper in them! May he see of the Travel of the REDEEMER'S Soul in
the abundant Success of his whole Ministry, and late be translated from his
Life of Services and Sufferings on Earth, to receive the Rewards of a faithful
and wise Servant, in the upper World, unto the Praise of the Glory of Grace in
CHRIST JESUS; of whom, and through whom, and to whom are all Things: To whom be
Glory for ever. Amen.

Sit Anima mea cum Puritanis!

T. F.
BOSTON, N. E. Nov. 21. 1741.
A vacant Page here it is though it proper to fill and adorn, with the following
Lines from Bp. Davenant, one of the most celebrated Lights of the Reformation.

"THIS Doctrine of Predestination and Reprobation is no more to be concealed or
relinquished because some do way wardly abuse it, than the Doctrine of the
Trinity is because the Jews and Mahometans deride and reject it. -- This
Doctrine ought to be preached, (I.) Because CHRIST and his Apostles taught it
publicly, notwithstanding the Wickedness of carnal Men: And it is far safer,
from their Example to learn what is profitable to be taught, and what not, than
from humane Reasonings. (2.) Because Election is a singular Benefit of GOD, and
the Foundation of all other Gifts which tend to Salvation: and it is the Part
of unthankful Men, to desire to conceal such an especial Favor, because
ungodly Men are troubled to hear it. Lastly, Because this very Doctrine does
exceedingly encourage the Faithful and Godl^ to proceed in their Course of
Faith and Godliness; of whom more Regard ought to be had, than of profane
Wretches who are wont to pervert all Things to their own Destruction." Answ. to
Hoard, P. (...)

A DISCOURSE ON THE DECREE of ELECTION.
EPHESIANS I. 4, 5. According as he has chosen us in him, before the
Foundation of the World; that we should be holy and without Blame before him in
Love: having predestined us unto the Adoption of Children by JESUS CHRIST to
himself, according to the good Pleasure of his Will.


THAT there is a supreme and eternal Being, and that he is possessed of all
infinite Perfections, are Truths so visible by the Light of Nature, that to
call these into Question, is not only Weaknes^ and Ignorance; but the Height of
Stupidi^y and Madness. The invisible Things of him from the Creation of the
World are clearly seen, being understood by the Things that are made, even his
eternal Power and Godhead. But then we are soon covered with thick Darkness,
when we begin to enquire into the Manner of his Existence and Operations. We
have clear Light to discover that he is, and that he is infinite; yet none but
his own infinite Mind can fully understand what he is, or how ^he exists. Here
the enquiries of the most exalted Creatures are ^nonplus'd and the Angels are
charged with Folly. -- What haughty Arrogance is it therefore, for poor Worms
to pretend to soar to these boundless Heights, to bring the glorious Properties
of the divine Nature to a Trial at the Bar of their own Reason; and
confidently to contradict what they cannot fully understand. -- Such bold
Attempts, through the successive Ages of Christianity, have brought greatest
Dishonor to God, and Confusion to the Church of CHRIST; and perhaps in nothing
more than in the unsearchable Mysteries of the Decrees of God. -- I have been
ever astonished at the daring Boldness and Presumption of the Disputants on
this tremendous Subject; and at their confident Assurance, that the Counsels of
the great God must be according as they imagine it is fit they should be. --
Here the Schoolmen and Metaphysicians bring in their curious Learning as a
Test of this Doctrine; as though the Nature of God himself was to be tried by
their vain Philosophy, and Opposition of Science falsely so called. -- Here some
Assertors of absolute Decrees have too boldly arraigned the Sovereignty of God,
as though he could not have an absolute Dominion over his Creatures, if they
mistake in some of their nice and abstracted Speculations. -- Here the Opposers
of this Doctrine have presumptuously ventured to put the Justice, Goodness, and
Truth of God upon a Level with their Schemes; and to assert, that he cannot be
just and (...) good, nor his Promises true, in a contrariety to their
Sentiments. Thus vain Man would be wise, though he be born like the wild Asse's
Colt.

These Considerations should awaken in us a most solemn Caution, not to look
too boldly into this Ark, nor venture too curiously to enquire into, nor too
confidently to define, what is infinitely above our Reach. -- We should not
(it is true) be contentedly ignorant of what God has revealed of himself, in his
Word and Works, because his Nature is incomprehensible. We are bound firmly to
believe, frequently to meditate, and humbly to adore so much of his Nature and
Counsels, as he has manifested to us; though the greatest Modesty, Humility,
and Reverence become us, in our Consideration of these deep Things of God. -- I
shall accordingly endeavor to treat upon the arduo^ Theme, which my Text leads
me to contemplate, with a humble Sense, that God is in Heaven, and I upon
Earth; and to avoid plunging into this Ocean beyond my Depth. I shall purposely
overlook all the curious Questions and scholastic Distinctions, so commonly
found in Authors upon this Subject, as Things too wonderful for me, which I
know not; and with all the Plainness and Perspicuity I am capable of, consider
the Doctrine as it is set before us in the Words of the Text. In which is
worthy our Notice --

1. The Eternity of God's electing Love. Before the Foundation of the World.
This Expression does not, I confess, necessarily imply a strict Eternity,
Millions of Ages before the Foundation of the World, fall infinitely short of
that. But the Nature of the Thing makes it necessary, that the Words should be
thus understood in this Text. All Time and even Eternity it self being always
present in the infinite Mind of GOD, whatever Counsels were at any Time
entertained, must have been at all Times, and even before all Time, entertained
by him. But of this more hereafter.

2. Here is set in View the Object of the Decree of Election. According as he
has chosen US. -- Having predestined US to the Adoption of Children. By
which cannot be understood these Ephesians only, to whom this Epistle was
immediately directed: but all that then were, or ever shall be true Believers
in CHRIST, and adopted into the Number of his Children; and none but such. Or
in other Words, all and only those who ever have been, or ever shall be Heirs
of eternal Salvation. The Text plainly shows us, that Election and Adoption are
of equal Extent. For if these Ephesians were, all others likewise were
predestined to the Adoption of Children, who are privileged with so near a
Relation to GOD. And as all the Children of GOD, and none but they, shall
inherit eternal Life, so all that shall inherit eternal Life, and none but
they, were predestined to the Adoption of Children.

3. These Words also set before us what are the predestined and
fore-determined Price and Terms of Salvation to all the Elect. They are chosen
in him; and predestined to the Adoption of Children by JESUS CHRIST. The
Means and the End were united in the divine Decree. GOD never designed
Salvation to any Unbeliever: but eternally determined to give his own Son a
Ransom for the Elect; and to give an Interest in him by Faith, and thereby a
Title to eternal Life, unto all those that are chosen to it.

4. We have here likewise the pre-determined Qualifications of all the Elect,
by which they shall be made meet to partake of the Salvation appointed for
them. That we should be holy, and without Blame before him in Love. Those who
are chosen to Salvation, are chosen also to Holiness of Life, as a necessary
Preparation for it. It is by GOD's Decree as well as by his revealed Will an
established Truth, that without Holiness no Man shall see the LORD. -- And it
is further remarkable in the Words, that none are chosen to Salvation, because
GOD foresaw they would be holy: but we are chosen that we should be holy. --
The Holiness of the Elect is not the Cause, but the Consequence of the Decree.
This brings me to the last Thing I would take Notice of in the Words, which is,

5. The only Motive (if I may so speak) by which GOD was acted in the Decree of
Election. According to the good Pleasure of his Will. He was himself his own
Motive and End. As there was nothing eternally existing but GOD, so there could
be nothing out of himself to influence his eternal Counsels. But of this I
shall afterward have Occasion to speak more particularly. -- Thus I have given
a brief and general View of the Words before us; and shall now endeavor a more
distinct Consideration of them under these Propositions.

1. That GOD has according to the good Pleasure of his Will, from all Eternity,
elected some to everlasting Life.

2. All that GOD has elected, are chosen to Salvation by and through the LORD
JESUS CHRIST.

3. All who are thus chosen to Salvation, shall be sanctified and made meet to
partake of it.

PROP. I. GOD has according to the good Pleasure of his Will, from all
Eternity, elected some of Mankind to everlasting Life. -- The main Business
before me is to clear up this Proposition; I shall therefore be something
particular, in considering what we are to understand by the Decree of Election;
in confirming this Truth; and in answering some Objections that ly in our Way.

1. I shall attempt a Description of this Decree. And by the Decree of Election
I understand God's eternal Purpose, according to the good Pleasure of his Will,
to give Grace and Glory to a certain Number of the Children of Men. -- I shall
here only consider the Decree of God, as my Text does, with Relation to Men,
and not to Angels, as the Objects of it. For though the eternal Counsels of God
must have considered and determined the State of all his Creatures, whether of
a superior or inferior Nature; yet it don't so much concern us, what were his
Dispensations toward the Angels, as toward our selves; nor is this so
particularly revealed to us in his Word. -- That I may give a clearer View of
what I intend by this Description, I shall consider the several Parts of it
something distinctly, with some Evidences of the Justice and Propriety of each
of them. -- This is not the Place to prove the Truth of the Proposition; and to
offer the Evidences of such a Decree of God: But upon the Supposal of such a
Decree, to consider what it is necessary from the Nature and Word of God to
understand by it.

I describe God's Decree to be his eternal Counsel. For though we have no
adequate Idea of Eternity, nor of him who inhabits Eternity^ yet we must
suppose, either that all God's Determinations with Respect to us were eternal,
or that they had a Beginning in Time. If the latter, there must have been a
Time wherein God did not know, or did not conclude, what the future State of
his Creatures should be; which I think none dare suppose. We may not imagine
the Counsels of an infinite Mind like our own, gradual and successive,
temporary and mutable. This were to attribute to the glorious God a State of
Forgetfulness and Inactivity, or Doubtfulness and Uncertainty, before he came
to a Result in his Mind how he would be glorified in his Works; which is
infinitely unworthy of him. -- Besides, we must consider of the Decrees of God
as of God himself decreeing; and consequently if he himself be eternal, his
Decrees must likewise be eternal. To conceive of God's Knowledge and Will to be
something distinct from his Nature, is to suppose him a Composition of Parts
and Powers, which is altogether inconsistent with his being infinite; and if we
consider these as the necessary Result of his Nature, they must be (as his
Nature is) eternal. -- The special Acts of God's Purpose or Counsel cannot
indeed be considered as essential to God. His ^husing Peter (for Instance) to
Salvation, does not appear so necessarily to flow from his Essence. He might
have been the same God, if Peter had not been elected. But that Will of God, by
which Peter was chosen to Salvation, does belong to his Being; and must
necessarily act from Eternity, in that Way which is most agreeable to all the
Perfections of his Nature. -- Thus, in whatever View we consider this Case, the
Decree of God must be his eternal Counsel: He has from the Beginning (i. e.
from Eternity) chosen us to Salvation, 2 These. ii. 13.

I consider the Decree of Election as an Act of Sovereignty, according to the
good Pleasure of his Will; and so it is considered in the Text, as I observed
before. Every rational Agent must, in all he does, be always acted and
^^^^^enced by the highest Motive and Inducement before him. But to suppose any
higher Motive to the eternal GOD than himself is to suppose something higher
than the highest, which is absurd. To imagine any Cause of GOD'S Will or Decree
out of himself, is to suppose something in GOD which is an Effect; and so to
assign a Cause of the first Cause, which is equally absurd. -- We cannot indeed
in Propriety of Speech attribute any Motive or End to GOD after the Manner that
they are found in us; but only in a Way of analogy. We must nevertheless speak
of GOD after the Manner of Men, or we cannot speak of him at all. But then, when
we do speak after this Manner, we must remember, that Nothing below GOD himself
can be his End. He could not from Eternity have any Motive, but his mere good
Pleasure, to give Existence to any future Beings; and therefore could have no
other Inducement to determine their Kind of Existence, or what Circumstances he
would state them in. -- All Beings in the World, but GOD himself, were before
the Creation Nothing, their future Existence and Manner of Existence were
Nothing, but the good Pleasure of GOD concerning them; and therefore there
could be Nothing but his good Pleasure as a Motive to the Decree. -- I may add
to this, that GOD must be considered as being from Eternity the absolute
Proprietor, as well as the Rector and Governor of the future World with all
its Inhabitants. As he has in Time made all Things for himself, so he must from
Eternity have designed to make all Things for himself; and therefore to be
governed, guided, and ordered by himself, according to his own Pleasure. --
Moreover the Judge of all the Earth must have determined to act right with
Respect to his Creatures; but there could be no other Rule of Rectitude, but
his own good Pleasure. If he had any other Motive besides his own Will, it must
have been a finite Motive; and therefore not only unworthy of an infinite Mind;
but such as could not be infinitely good, and consequently might be in some
Instance wrong and irregular. But we must by no Means attribute any possibility
of Mistake either to the Purposes or Operations of God. From all which it is
apparent, that the eternal Counsels of God must be wholly resolved into this,
-- Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy Sight. Mat. xi. 26. -- Being
predestined according to the Purpose of him, who works all Things after the
Counsel of his own Will. Ephesians. i. 11.

It may possibly be objected to this, that the Decree of Election was the
acting of Grace and Love to the Objects of it; and not merely an Act of
Sovereignty. God is accordingly said to love his People with an everlasting
Love, Jer. xxxi. 3. And they are called with an holy Calling, according to his
own Purpose and Grace, which was given them in CHRIST JESUS, before the World
began, 2 Timothy i. 9. -- It Is sufficient Answer to this Objection, to observe,
that this eternal Grace and Love of God was arbitrary and sovereign; and could
be excited by Nothing but his own Will. It Is true, God had eternal Designs of
Mercy and Compassion to the Elect: But it is equally true, that his own Will and
Pleasure were both the Fountain and End of these gracious Designs; there could
be Nothing else. And the Apostle accordingly resolves it into this, Romans ix.
15. I will have Mercy on whom I will have Mercy; and I will have Compassion on
whom I will have Compassion.

I have described the Decree of Election, to be God's Purpose to give Grace and
Glory to the Elect. And it is for Want of a due Attention to this, that so many
Objections have arisen in Men's Minds, against the Doctrine now before us. --
Should we conceive of the Decree of God, as his unalterable Determination to
give eternal Life to any particular Persons, without giving them previous
Qualifications for it, this would plunge us into Difficulties that we could not
get out of. -- If he absolutely determined the eternal Salvation of any,
whether they were prepared for it or not, where were his Holiness? If he
designed to save some, and leave others that would be equally meet Subjects of
his saving Mercy, where were the Rectitude of his moral Government? If he
purposed Salvation to any, upon other Terms or Conditions than those proposed
in the Gospel, where were the Truth of his Word? But if we consider him as
having no Design to save any but gracious and sanctified ^ersons; if we
consider him as determining to give Grace to the Elect, and thereby to make
them meet for Glory, all these Difficulties vanish at once. And thus the
Scripture, thus the Nature of the Thing represents the Case to us. Whom he did
foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son.
Romans viii. 29. -- God has from the Beginning chosen you to Salvation, through
Sanctification of the Spirit and Belief of the Truth, 2 These. ii. 13. We have
repeated Assurance from the whole Tenor of the Gospel, that Repentance, Faith
and new Obedience, are necessary Qualifications for eternal Life; and if God
has made these necessary to Salvation, he eternally decreed that they should be
so. He has not decreed one Way of Salvation in Time, and another from Eternity.
-- And how can any Man obtain these gracious Qualifications, unless God be
pleased to give them? Or how can God be supposed to give them, if he had not
eternally designed it; unless we suppose him to be acted by different, and even
repagnant Views, which were Blasphemy to imagine? It is therefore most evident,
that God did decree to sanctify the Elect, in Order to their Glorification; to
give 'em new Hearts, that they might be fitted for future Happiness; and to
give 'em Faith in CHRIST and thereby an Interest in his Righteousness, that
they might be entitled to it. -- There is not (it is true) in God any first and
last, any Succession of Purposes or Contrivances: these are incompatible to an
infinite Mind, to whom all Things are present at one View. But yet, though God
did not first determine to give Grace to the Elect; and by a successive Act of
his Will, decree to glorify them; He did by that one eternal Act of his Will
decree to sanctify them, that they might thereby be made meet for an
Inheritance with the Saints in Light. And we must conceive of the Decrees of
God in this Order, if we would have any right Apprehensions of 'em.

I have considered the Objects of the Decree to be a certain Number of the
Children of Men. The whole World of Mankind could not equally be the Objects of
electing Love; for then there could be no Choice. For all to be chosen, is a
Contradiction in Terms; a Choice necessarily implying a Preference of one to
another. The Number of the Elect could not be indefinite and undetermined,
unless we attribute Doubtfulness and uncertainty to God, which were to suppose
him altogether such an one as ourselves^ The Decree of Election must have
respected every individual Person that shall ever be saved; or else there will
some obtain Salvation, whom God did not eternally purpose to save; which must
ar^ue want of Foresight or Change of Purpose in God, both of which are unworthy
of him.

I know of but one considerable Objection against this Doctrine, which is, that
the Decree might be conditional; They who are chosen to Salvation, might be
chosen upon Condition of their Fa^^h and Repentance: And their Number could not
therefore be certain, since it depended upon Conditions that were in themselves
uncertain.

To which I answer, that if this Doctrine be true, there could be no Election
of any at all to eternal Salvation. For God knows, and did eternally know, that
none of us can ever obtain either Faith or Repentance, or other Condition of
Salvation, unless he gives them. And a Decree founded upon such Conditions as
can never be fulfilled, leaves the Case hopeless and Remediless forever. To
suppose any chosen to Salvation upon impossible Conditions, is to suppose those
designed for Salvation in God's eternal Counsel, whose Perdition is absolutely
necessary from that very Decree; which is the Height of Absurdity. -- If any
should answer to this, that God might decree to give Men Ability to comply with
these Conditions, this Supposal obviates the Objection at once; and shows that
the Decree could not be conditional. For if God has absolutely decreed to
sanctify the Elect, he has absolutely decreed to save them; Sanctification and
eternal Salvation being necessarily connected in the Nature of Things. If he
has not absolutely decreed to sanctify them, he has not decreed to give them
Ability to be saved; for he knows they have no Power to sanctify themselves;
nor is there any Possibility of Salvation without Sanctification. -- If it
should be yet further urged in this Case, that God decreed to save those, that
should duly improve t^ose Powers which they have in common with the Rest of
the World, and none but those, this would not help the Case. For our grand
Impotency lies in our Wills; and God knew from Eternity, that none of us should
ever have a Will to comply with even these Terms of Salvation, unless he should
work in us both to will and to do, of his own good Pleasure. -- From these
Premises it appears to me necessary, that the Objects of the Decree of Election
must have been a certain Number; and that there could have been no uncertain
precarious Conditions in God's eternal Counsel. But since conditional Decrees
have been so warmly espoused, even by some Men of Figure in the learned World,
it may be proper to consider this Case yet more particularly.

If the Decrees of God are conditional, the Foundation of those Conditions must
be either in God, or in Man, or in both. But if it be made evident that it can
be in neither God nor Man, I think the Consequence must necessarily follow,
that there are no Conditions in the divine Decrees: But that the Objects of the
Decrees are a definite certain Number.

That the Foundation of these Conditions cannot be in GOD, appears to me most
certain, from the following Considerations. -- It is, I think, allowed by all
that have any just Idea of the divine Perfections, that the Will of God is his
Essence, or an essential Principle of Operation in him. God cannot be a
Composition of Parts, Powers, or Properties; and therefore his Will cannot be
any Thing distinct from his Essence, consistently with his infinite Nature, as
I have observed before. From whence it follows, that to suppose any Conditions
of the Will of God, or of the Decree of God, (which is his Will with Respect to
us) is to suppose Conditions of the divine Nature and Essence: That is, that
God may be or may not be what he is, upon certain Conditions; which is too
shocking to a serious Mind, to need any Animadversions. -- Besides, if the
eternal Counsel of God was infinitely right, just and good, it could admit of
no Conditions: For infinite Rectitude must always be invariably the same,
whatever Conditions can be supposed. There can be nothing better, and the
Counsels of God cannot be worse, than infinite Rectitude. His Counsel must
therefore, without any Conditions, be always the same; and the Elect must be a
certain and definite Number. -- I add to this, The absolute Will of God is both
the first Cause, and the ultimate End of the Salvation of the Elect, as has
been already considered. It must be the first Cause; because their very Being,
their Qualifications for Salvation, and their Salvation it self wholly depend
upon his Will; and had neither of them ever been, if he had not willed them. It
must be his last End; because there was Nothing eternally existing but himself;
and a Nonentity could not be an higher End and Motive than his own Will. There
could be no future End and Motive in his Creatures superior to his Will, since
they all depended upon his good Pleasure for their Existence and all their
valuable Qualifications, as has been observed. -- Now for the first Cause of
our Salvation^ to be the absolute Will of God; and yet that first Cause to be
conditional, is a Contradiction in Terms. To imagine any previous Conditions to
the Will of God, is to suppose something prior to the first Cause, which is
likewise a Contradiction. To suppose any subsequent Conditions to the Will of
God, is to suppose the first Cause to be precarious and uncertain, mutable and
liable to the Control of some other Cause; or in a Word, to be the first
Cause, and yet no certain Cause at all, which is equally absurd. -- And if we
consider the Will of God as the last End of our Salvation, the same Absurdity
will follow from the Supposal of any Conditionality therein. For if God's Will
be the last End, there can be no other End superior to it, that can control
or change it; that is, it can have no Conditions. If God's ultimate End be
conditional, it is because there may be some other Motive greater than that,
which may prompt him to change his Mind; which supposes that there may be in
God an End or Motive higher than the highest, which is too gross an Absurdity
to meet with any Entertainment. -- Thus, I think, I have shown that if we have
any reverent Conceptions of the divine Nature, we can find there no Foundation
for a conditional Decree.

I proceed to consider whether there be any Foundation for such Conditionality
in the Decrees of God from the Nature of Man. -- If there be any Thing in Man,
that could occasion any Conditions in God's electing Love, it must be some good
Qualifications foreseen in him, upon the Condition whereof he is chosen to
Salvation. This, I think, is what the Advocates for conditional Decrees do
always suppose. They imagine, that God chooses Men to Salvation upon Condition
of their Faith, Repentance and Holiness of Life; that he foresees who will
believe in CHRIST, repent of their Sins and live to God; and upon such
Foresight, determines their eternal Happiness. -- But could GOD foresee any
good in Man before he willed to them their first Good; or any Power to be or do
good, before he willed to give them such Power? Could he foresee their
Improvement of such Powers as he determined, before he determined them that
Assistance by which alone they should be able to improve them? It is impossible
to imagine greater Absurdities than these are. -- If there were any Conditions
from the Nature of Man, in the Will and Counsel of God, these Conditions must
exist, or at least the Foresight of them must be supposed, before God's eternal
Counsel; and so there must be something older than Eternity; and something
existing before the Will and Counsel of God, which Supposals need no
Refutation. -- If GOD foresaw these Conditions in us before he willed them, he
foresaw them before they had any Foundation; and consequently before they were
future. For I think that there is Nothing more certain, than that the only
eternal Foundation and Cause of the Futurity of any good in us was the Will of
God to give us that good; and to enable us to improve it. -- Besides, if God
foresaw these Conditions in us before he willed them, his Foreknowledge must
be prior in Time to his Will, and consequently his Will must not be eternal;
there must be successive Properties and Faculties in God; which are utterly
inconsistent with his eternal uncompounded Nature.

From what has been said, I think I may now safely come to a Conclusion, that
the Decree of Election necessarily implies, that God has without any Conditions
in his Will and Counsel, chosen a certain Number to Grace here and Glory
hereafter. Thus the Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, The Lord
knows them that are his. 2 Timothy ii. 19.

After all it must be acknowledged, although there can be no Conditions in
God's Decrees, yet he has decreed, that the Salvation even of the Elect
themselves shall be conditional; that they shall be saved upon the only
Conditions of their Faith in Christ, and other corresponding Graces: Which
Conditions he has decreed to give them, that they may be meet for the Salvation
to which they are designed. -- There is Nothing more certain than that God has
proposed these Conditions of Salvation in his Word to all that shall ever be
saved; and it is from thence certain that he decreed so to do; for his Will is
always the same. There are therefore Conditions of the^ Event, though there be
no Conditions of the Decree: Nor is the Event the less certain because of the
Conditions, since God has immutably decreed to give them also; to enable all
the Elect to believe to the Salvation of their Souls. -- It may be perhaps for
Want of a due Attention to this, that many are prejudiced against the Doctrine
of absolute Decrees. Because they don't consider, that though the ^^ll of God
in itself have no Conditions; yet the Effects of his Will have Conditions.
There are even in the Counsel of God Conditions of our Salvation, though none
of our Election. God has decreed to the Elect necessary Qualifications for
Salvation, without which they shall never obtain it. And so the secret and the
revealed Will of God are always and in all Things the same.

Thus I have briefly shown what we are to understand by the Decree of Election,
upon the Supposal of such a Decree? And I have endeavored to explain and
confirm each Part of my Description.

2. I am next to consider what EVIDENCE we have that this Doctrine is true,
which I have hitherto taken for granted. -- I have indeed be'n already ^ed to
take occasional Notice of some of those Arguments, that are now to be offered
in Confirmation of the Proposition. It is however necessary to endeavor to set
those Arguments in a closer View and stronger Light, that we may more clearly
see the Truth and Importance of the Doctrine I am pleading for. Repetitions are
preferable to Obscurity; and I had rather be censured for repeating the same
Things, than for falling short in Point of Evidence, and for leaving the Cause
doubtful and uncertain.

1. It Is necessary from the very first Idea we have of an infinite God, that he
is Omniscient. -- The supposal of the least Degree of Ignorance in an infinite
Mind, is an Affront to common Sense. An infinite Being, with but a finite
Knowledge, is the greatest Contradiction. So that we must necessarily allow an
omniscient God, or no God at all. This appears evident at the first View, and
admits of no Debate. -- It must therefore be allowed, that all Things future
were eternally open to the View of this omniscient Mind. He could not have been
omniscient, if any Thing present or future was from Eternity unknown to him. --
I shall not here concern myself with the Debate among the Schoolmen, how or in
what Manner all Futurities were eternally present with God. That is a Subject
vastly above the Enquiry of such short-sighted Creatures as we are; for God is
higher than Heaven, what can we know! We may safely, and must necessarily
conclude, that the Knowledge of God is equal to his infinite Nature; and that
he must consequently foreknow whatsoever shall come to pass, though we know not
how. Thus far we go upon firm Ground; a Step further plunges us into (...)
unfathomable Depth.

To apply this to the present Purpose: God's Foreknowledge of the
Sanctification and eternal Salvation of all that shall ever be saved, renders
those Events certain and necessary; that they will not, they cannot be
otherwise than he foreknew they would be. -- If God's Foreknowledge were not
certain, it would not have be'n Knowledge, but Conjecture. If God's
Foreknowledge was certain, the Event must be likewise certain and necessary;
how could he otherwise certainly foreknow it? If God did not eternally foreknow
these Events in all their Circumstances, just as they would come to pass, it
would not have be'n Knowledge, but Mistake; and if he did foreknow these
Events, just as they would come to pass, they must necessarily come to pass,
just as he foreknew they would. -- A Necessity of Infallibility must therefore
be unavoidably connected to the Foreknowledge of God. And whether we can form
any just Notion, how the several Perfections of the divine Nature did eternally
cooperate with Respect to our future Salvation, or not, it must follow from
these Considerations, that there was with God from all Eternity, an infallible
Certainty and Necessity of the whole Progress of the Salvation, both in Grace
and Glory, of every individual Person that will ever be saved. It is absolutely
impossible, that the Salvation of any one of them can fail (the Certainty of
their Salvation being founded upon the Nature of God) unless we dare suppose
even God himself to be fallible.

I presume that even the Opposers of absolute Decrees will themselves generally
allow the Foreknowledge of God, with those undoubted Consequences of it. How
unreasonable is it therefore, to quarrel with the Doctrine of absolute Decrees,
when they must allow the absolute Certainty of the Event, or deny the
Foreknowledge of God; and whatever Objection can be imagined against an
absolute Decree, the same can with the same Force and upon the same Grounds, be
urged against a certain and absolute Foreknowledge? For it is the same Thing,
and the same Consequences in all possible Instances will follow, if the
Certainty and Infallibility of the Event do flow from the Knowledge, or the
Will of God. Those Objections can therefore be no just Reason with such Men
against God's Predetermination, that equally militate against his Prescience,
which is what they dare not deny.

It has indeed been objected against this Doctrine, That the Salvation of
particular Persons is in it self a Contingency; what may be, or what may not
be, according to their Compliance or Noncompliance with the Terms and
Conditions of Salvation proposed in the Gospel; and therefore that it must
necessarily have been foreknown of God to be a contingent and uncertain Event;
for such it certainly is, and God foreknew it to be as it is.

To which I answer, that although the Event be contingent with Respect to us,
while we do not certainly know whether we shall comply with these Terms of
Salvation, or not; it could not be contingent with Respect to God, who from
Eternity did certainly know whether we should comply with these Conditions, or
not; and therefore did certainly know what the Issue and Consequence of our
Compliance or Noncompliance would be. -- God could not have be'n omniscient,
if he did not eternally foreknow all the minutest Circumstances of our whole
Conduct with their Consequences, all our Dispositions, Affections, and
Conversations here in this World, as well as our eternal State in the World to
come. He must have fore-known these Events, as they would be in themselves,
when they come to pass; and not as they would be to such short sighted
Creatures as we are, before they come to pass. -- These Events will be no
longer contingent or uncertain to us, when they are fully accomplished; and
therefore could never be contingent or uncertain to God, who did from Eternity
as well foresee their full Accomplishment, as the Conditions on which they
depended.

To conclude this Head, If God did not eternally foreknow all Events, and the
Accomplishment of all Circumstances and Conditions of Events, with Respect to
all his Creatures, it must be either from Defect of Knowledge in God, or from
some Obstruction or Obstacle in the Creature, that hid the Event from the View
of an omniscient Eye. Not the former; Let no such Arrogance come out of your
Mouth; for the Lord is a God of Knowledge, and by him Actions are weighed. 1 Samuel ii. 3. -- Not the latter; a finite Being cannot control an infinite
Nature; nor cast any Obscurity in the Way of infinite Knowledge. It is in vain
to seek deep to hide our Counsel from the Lord. If we say, the Darkness shall
cover us, even the Night shall be light about him; yea, the Darkness hides not
from him: but the Night shines as the Day, the Darkness and the Light are both
alike to him, Psalm. cxxxix. 11, 12. -- Neither is there any Creature that is
not manifest in his Sight (...) but all Things are naked and opened unto the
Eyes of (...) whom we have to do. Heb. iv. 13.

And now, I think, I am got safely thus far, and there can no Objection ly in
the Way of this Truth, that God did eternally and certainly foresee the
Salvation of all that will ever be saved; and that this Foresight of his
renders their Salvation necessary and infallible. -- I therefore proceed a Step
further.

2. It is also necessary that the eternal God be a perfect Being; and that all
the Perfections of his Nature should always concur in all his Operations. --
The Holiness (for Instance) and the Goodness, the Truth, the Mercy, the
Justice, so likewise the Knowledge and the Will of God, do most necessarily
agree together, in all his Dispensations. -- Some of God's Attributes are
indeed very different, and even contrary in their Exercise upon the Creatures.
It is a vastly different Thing to us, to be the Objects of God's Favor, or of
his Justice, Wrath, and Displeasure: That we must consider of some of the
Operations of God toward us, as the Actings of one and not of another of his
glorious Attributes. Thus his bestowing Salvation upon any, is an Act of his
Grace, and not of his Justice; and punishing any with eternal Destruction, is
an Act of his Justice, and not of his Grace: Yet all his Attributes must always
unite and agree in his own infinite Mind. His Grace is not, in the Instance
mentioned, inconsistent with his Justice, nor his Justice inconsistent with his
Grace. There can be no Contrariety, no Opposition or Repugnancy in the divine
Nature. This must not be supposed of an infinitely perfect Being. -- To suppose
that God ever ceased in any one Act to be holy, to be just, to be good and
merciful, or to have every one of his essential Properties in Exercise, is to
suppose that he ceased to be God. For he must be an Omniscient God, a holy God,
^ merciful God, a just God etc. at all Times, -- and in all Instances, or be no
God at all. -- Whatever Attributes or Properties necessarily belong to the
Divine Nature, are either essential to him, or else God may cease to be what he
is, or be at one Time what he is not at another. But this is what no Man dare
suppose. And if all the Attributes or Properties which necessarily belong to
the divine Nature, are essential to him, no one of them can ever be removed,
not so much as in one Instance, or one Moment, without the Destruction of his
Being. -- To apply this to the Case before us. The Decree of Election is not to
be supposed an Act of God's Knowledge se^^rate and distinct from his other
essential Perfections: but an eternal Act of his Mind, wherein they all
unitedly concur. If God did eternally foreknow the Salvation of the Elect, he
(...) foreknow it in a Manner agreeable to all his essential Properties; and
consequently in a Manner agreeable to his Will, which is one of them. --
Whatever Difficulties there may be in our Minds with Respect to the eternal
Concurrence of God's Will with his Knowledge, relating to some Things that
either have or will come to pass, and were consequently the Objects of his
Prescience; it is certain, that in some Way or other, their Futurity was
agreeable to his Will, or else his Knowledge and Will would have be'n at
Disagreement, which may by no Means be imagined. What is God's Knowledge but
God himself knowing? And what is God's Will but God himself willing? To suppose
these at Disagreement, is therefore to suppose God at Disagreement with
himself, which is the highest Blasphemy.

It is also impossible from the very Nature of God, that he could eternally
foreknow our future Salvation in a Way repugnant to his Will, not only because
all his Perfections and consequently his Knowledge and Will must always agree;
but also because it is impossible that our Salvation should have be'n future,
contrary to his Will. It was certainly in his Power to have hindered it, if he
had not willed it; and then it never would have be'n, and consequently could
not have be'n fore-known. Nay, it is certain that the Salvation of all that
shall ever be saved, did eternally depend upon the Will of God, as the first
Cause of it; as I have observed before. There could be nothing else from
Eternity to make our Salvation possible; and therefore it could not have be'n
the Object of God's Knowledge, if it had not be'n the Object of his Will. --
This, I think, is clearly evident, that the future Salvation of every
individual Person that shall ever obtain it, did eternally depend either upon
God, or the Creature, as the Cause of it; for an Effect, without a Cause, is a
flat Contradiction. It could not depend upon the Creature, who had no
Existence; nor could have Power to give either Grace or Glory when existing. It
must therefore have necessarily depended upon God, as the only possible Cause.
And if so, it must either have depended upon his Will, or upon some other of
his divine Perfections without his Will, and disagreable to it; upon something
in himself, that should necessarily constrain him to bestow Salvation upon the
Elect, whether he would or not. But this none dare imagine. It must therefore
have depended upon the Will of God, or upon Nothing at all, for its Futurity
and Possibility. From which it necessarily follows, that if the future
Salvation of the Elect could not possibly have be'n, God could not have
eternally foreknown that it would have be'n, except he had willed it. -- This
is also evident from the very Nature of the Decree of Election; if God has
eternally chosen any to Salvation (as is asserted in our Text) he has eternally
willed their Salvation; willing and choosing being the same Thing. To choose
any Thing, and not to will the Object of such Choice, is a Contradiction in
Terms.

From all these Considerations it is (I think) manifestly true, that God has
eternally known and eternally willed the whole future Salvation of each
individual Heir of everlasting Life and Glory; and that their Salvation, being
founded upon the Foreknowledge and Will of God, is like his glorious Nature
necessary and infallible; which is the Thing to be proved. -- The Salvation of
the Elect is the Mystery of his WILL, according to his good Pleasure which he
has purposed in himself. Ephesians. i. 9.

3. It is also necessary, that an infinite God must be an immutable Being; and
that there cannot be in any of his Perfections the least Variation or
Possibility of Change. All the Counsels and Purposes of God must have been from
Eternity infinitely wise, infinitely holy, and infinitely good; there can
therefore be no possible Reason why they should change, since there can be no
Change for the better; and we cannot suppose that infinite Wisdom should change
his Purposes without any Reason for it. -- Nor indeed is it possible that they
should change or alter in the least Instance or Degree; such Change necessarily
implying that God would cease to be infinite. How can God be infinite, if he be
in any Respect what he was not before? unless we allow a different Kind or
different Degree of infinite Being, which is absurd. He is the Lord, he changes
not. Mal. iii. 6. He is the same Yesterday, to Day and for ever. Heb. xiii. 8.
With him is no Variableness, neither Shadow of turning. James i. 17.

Where the Scriptures speak of God's changing his Purposes or Counsels, they
speak after the Manner of Men; and represent to us that God acts in those
Cases, as we do when we change our Purposes. As a Change of Purpose in us
procures a Change of Conduct, so a Change of Conduct toward us is represented
as a Change of Purpose in God, by Way of Condescension to our weak Capacities.
The Change in Reality is in us, and not in God; this occasions an Alteration in
his Providence toward us, though there can be none in his Nature or Will. The
Strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent; for he is not a Man that he should
repent. 1 Samuel xv. 29. -- The Gifts and Calling of God are without Repentance.
Romans xi. 29.

And now what hinders our coming to a safe and certain Conclusion, that God has
decreed in his eternal Purpose, according to the good Pleasure of his Will, to
give Grace and Glory to a certain Number of the Children of Men? I have proved
from the very Nature of God, that he must eternally, certainly, and infallibly
foreknow the State of each individual Heir of Salvation; and be fully
acquainted from Eternity with the whole Progress of their Grace here, and their
Glory hereafter. -- I have proved that this Foreknowledge of God was according
to his eternal Will and Pleasure. It could not be disagreable to, but in the
Order of our Conceptions must be founded upon his Will, since it would not have
been, and consequently would not have been the Object of his Knowledge and
Foresight, if he had not willed it. -- I have proved that God's Foreknowledge
and Will are, like all other Perfections of his Nature, immutable; and that
they are the same now, and will be the same for ever, that they were from all
Eternity. And when these Premises are put together, don't the Conclusion
necessarily follow? Admitting these Premises to be true (and I think I have
proved that they are true) we must of Consequence admit the Truth of the
Proposition which was to be proved.

Having thus considered the Evidence of this Proposition, as being founded upon
the Nature of God, I proceed in the next Place,

To consider whether it ben't also a Truth clearly manifest from plain
Declarations of the Word of God.

I begin with the Consideration of that Text in Romans viii. 29, 30. For whom he
did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of his Son.
-- Moreover whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also justifieds; and whom he justified, them he also glorified. In
which Words we find the Foreknowledge of God, his Predetermination, the
Sanctification, Justification, and eternal Salvation of the Elect, as so many
Links in an inseparable Chain, necessarily connected together. And of necessary
Consequence, we here find the Truth of the Proposition before us made most
certain and evident. -- If God did foreknow and predestinate the future State
of every Heir of Salvation, if he does actually call, justify, and glorify
every one that was foreknown and predestined in his eternal Counsel, then God
has from all Eternity elected a certain Number to everlasting Life, which is
the Thing to be proved. But the former is asserted in the Text; and therefore
the latter true. -- I can here sec no Room for any plausible Evasion. The Words
are plain, full, and pertinent to the Purpose. To question the Truth of the
Doctrine I am pleading for, is to question the Truth of this sacred Text.

The like Evidence of this Truth is also found in Acts viii. 48. As many as
were ordained to eternal Life, believed. Here the Decree, and the Consequences
of it, are both asserted; and shown to be of equal Extent. For, if all that
were ordained to eternal Life believed, all that were ordained to eternal Life,
shall be certainly saved: Faith being Salvation begun; and Salvation being
every where in the Gospel promised to true Believers.

Nothing can be clearer to the same Purpose, than that in Romans ix. 23. That he
might make known the Riches of his Glory, on the Vessels of Mercy, which he had
before prepared unto Glory. -- That this fore-Preparation unto Glory, here
spoken of, was in God's eternal Counsel, appears manifest from the Instance of
God's Decree with Respect to Jacob and Esau, from which the Apostle draws the
Consequence here before us. It was before they had done either good or evil,
that the Purpose of God according to Election might stand. Verse 11. -- That
this Preparation unto Glory was an Act of God's sovereign Counsel, is strongly
asserted in Verse 15. He will have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy. -- That it
is an Act of his eternal and unchangeable Purpose, is asserted in the cited
Text. He actually makes known the Riches of his Glory, on all these Vessels of
Mercy which he had, in his eternal Purpose, before prepared unto Glory. -- Were
it even granted to the Opposers of this Doctrine, that the Decree of God with
Respect to Jacob and Esau, from whence the Apostle argues throughout this
Chapter, referred only to their temporal Circumstances, it would Nothing affect
the Cause. For if the Apostle thought it to be just arguing from thence, to
God's Decree of making known the Riches of his Glory on the Vessels of Mercy,
we should think so too.

This Truth is likewise confirmed from Romans xi. 5,7. Even so then at this
present Time also, there is a Remnant according to the Election of Grace. --
The Election has obtained; and the Rest were blinded. If it was true then, it
is true now and at all Times, that the Remnant of God's Children are according
to the Election of Grace; and consequently that he has eternally chosen all
that shall ever be his Children. -- If it be true, that the Election obtain,
and the Rest are blinded, it thence follows, that all the Objects of his
electing Love shall obtain Salvation, and none but they.

But the Time would sail me, to consider particularly all the Texts of
Scripture, where this Doctrine is clearly revealed. I shall therefore but just
hint at some few of the many other scriptural Evidences of this Truth. -- If it
be true, that the Elect are predestined according to the Purpose of him, who
works all Things after the Counsel of his own Will; as is asserted in Ephesians. i.
11. -- If it be true, that God has appointed them to obtain Salvation, by our
Lord Jesus Christ, according to that in 1 Thessalonians. v. 9. -- If it be true, that
God has from the Beginning chosen them to Salvation, according to 2 Thessalonians. ii.
13. -- If God has saved them and called them with an holy Calling, not
according to their Works; but according to his own Purpose and Grace, which was
given them in Christ Jesus before the World began, as in 2 Timothy i. 9. -- If
they are elect according to the Foreknowledge of God the Father, as in 1 Pet.
i. 2. -- It must then necessarily be true, that God has according to the good
Pleasure of his (...), from all (...), elected a certain Number to everlasting
Life; which is the Thing to be proved.

I have not hitherto been considering, nor attempting to remove the
Difficulties that ly in the Way of this Doctrine. But have only endeavored to
explain it; and to enquire into it is Truth and Certainty. It is soon enough to
consider and solve the Scruples that arise in our Minds upon the Supposal of
any Fact, when the Fact it self is established and received. There is no
Occasion to exercise our Minds with Difficulties, about that which we have no
Reason to believe. -- It is not therefore the Question now before us, How can
these Things be? But whether this Doctrine be the Truth of God, or not? If it
be evidently true, we must receive it for Truth, whatever Objections arise in
our Minds; and not reject it because we don't fully understand it. -- If we
suspend our Assent unto every Truth until all the Difficulties concerning them
are removed, we must remain Skeptics as long as we live; and never fully
consent to the Being of God; nor even to our own Being; for there will always
remain insuperable Difficulties with Respect to both. -- Here then we should
make a Pause; and review without Prejudice the Arguments which have been
offered; and consider their Force; and let our Assent to this Doctrine be as
strong as the Evidence of its Truth. If it be founded upon the Nature and Word
of God, there is no Room to dispute it. If it be founded upon neither of these,
there is no Reason to believe it.

I don't speak this to discourage all proper and modest Endeavors, to obviate
the Difficulties, that may arise in our Minds from the Contemplation before us.
For though we cannot expect to search out and comprehend the Perfections of
God, so as to have a full and clear View of the eternal Operations of his
infinite Mind: Yet we may find sufficient Answers to all the Objections that
can be thrown in the Way, to satisfy a sober and humble Enquirer after Truth.

(3.) I shall now accordingly endeavor to refute some of the chief of those
OBJECTIONS, that ly in our Way; and I hope I shall at least be able to make it
appear that there are no Absurdities in the Doctrine of absolute Decrees.

One of the chief Objections against this Doctrine is, that it takes away the
Liberty of the Creature; is inconsistent with that Freedom that must
necessarily be supposed of a rational and accountable Being. -- If God has
absolutely decreed the Event; and the Salvation of the Elect is by Virtue of
that Decree absolutely necessary, that it cannot fail of Accomplishment, it is
in it self unavoidable; and the Elect must be saved whether they will or not.
And what Liberty or Freedom can there be then left them in the Affair of their
Salvation?

This being a principal Objection, upon which the most of the Difficulties that
are raised against this Doctrine do very much depend, I shall be something
particular in answering it.

And I would first ask of the Objector, whether he does not find himself at
full Liberty in all his Actions? Let him look into the Operations of his own
Mind; and inquire whether he has any Force or Constraint put upon his
Affections Appetites or Inclinations, in any Case whatsoever; and whether he
does not act voluntarily and spontaneously in all his moral Conduct? I think
every one will in this Case answer in the Affirmative. And what Room can there
then be for this Objection? -- He cannot perhaps see how this is consistent with
an absolute Decree. What then! Must we dispute against it plain^ manifest Fact,
because we don't know how a can be? We cannot see how it is consistant with an
immaterial Spirit to have any Relation to Space; or to act upon Matter. Must we
therefore dispute the Union of our Soul and Body, and the Subjection of our
bodily Members to the Dictates of our Minds, because we cannot see the
Consistency of it? Are there not a thousand undoubted Realities in the material
World, wherein there are such apparent Inconsistencies, as we cannot see through?
Must we therefore reject the greatest Certainties, because we are but
short-sighted Creatures? -- I think I have proved, from the infinite Nature and
Perfections of God, that the Decrees are certainly absolute, and without any
possible Conditions; and that the Futurity of the decreed Event must be certain
and infallible. And yet we find by Experience, that we are at full Liberty and
Freedom, that we act in all our moral Behavior according to our own Wills. And
don't this Consideration make it necessary, that the Liberty of the Creature is
consistent with the Decree of God, whether we can see through it or not?

It is a great deal too bold and assuming, for any Man to say, that it cannot
be: for how does he know that it cannot be? Is it a necessary Consequence that
because God is infinite, because his Knowledge and his Will are infinite, and
must always agree together; and because the Objects of both are consequently
certain and infallible, that therefore He cannot make a Creature in a State of
Freedom and Liberty? If this be possible, if God can make a Creature at full
Liberty, notwithstanding his predetermining what he would make him for, how he
would be glorified in him, and what his State should be, there is then no
Inconsistency between an absolute Decree and the Liberty of the Creature. And
who dare venture to say, that God cannot make a Creature in a State of Freedom,
and be not withstanding possessed of these infinite Perfection^ of his Nature?
-- Nay, these infinite Perfection^ of his Nature do make it necessary, that God
can make a Creature in a State of perfect Liberty. (...) Knowledge and Will are
infinite, his Power must be also infinite. He cannot be infinite in one, and
not in all his essential Properties: and it cannot be impossible to
Omnipot^n^e, to make a Creature at full Liberty, if he pleases. -- What then
becomes (...) Objection^

If it be replied to this, that it is a (...) to suppose, that such a Decree as
makes Men's Salvation unavoidable and necessary, whether they will or no, is
consi^^ent with Liberty and Freedom; that this therefore cannot be ^rgued over
from the Omnipotence of God; for God (...) (...)

I answer, who ever dreamed of such a Decree as would make Men's Salvation thus
(...), or that will save them (...) thy will (...) no? I have shown already,
that God as well decreed to give Grace, as to give Glory to all the Elect; and
that their Interest in Christ, with all the blessed Consequences of it, was
decreed to be the Object of their own free Choice, and earnest Pursuit; what
they should freely choose, and diligently labor after, in all the Methods of
God's Appointment: and in that Way, and that only, obtain it. And this is so
far from contradicting the Freedom of the Elect, that it fully establishes it.
It is necessary even from the Decree of God, that they shall act freely and at
full Liberty, in choosing their own Salvation, and working it out with Fear and
Trembling. -- Where then is the Contradiction? Is it a Contradiction, for any
Event to be infallibly necessary with Respect to a rational Being; and that
Being to be notwithstanding in a State of Freedom? Is it not infallibly
necessary for the Saints in Heaven to be everlastingly glorious and happy; and
don't they nevertheless enjoy the Perfection of Freedom? Is it not infallibly
necessary, that the glorious God shall be eternally infinite; and dare any Man
imagine, that God himself is not at full Freedom and Liberty, to act according
to his own good Pleasure?

If it be yet further urged, That according to this Doctrine of the Decrees,
there is a Necessity that the Elect shall will the Means of their Salvation,
since God has decreed to give them such a Will; and the same necessary
Certainty, that those who are not elected shall not will the Means of
Salvation. And is it not a Contradiction, that either the one or the other
should be in a State of Freedom, since they cannot will the Contrary to what
they do?

In Answer to this I must observe, that a Power to will, or not to will, any
particular Object of Choice, or a Power to choose indifferently either the one
or the other of two contrary Objects, is so far from Freedom, that it is
utterly inconsistent with it; and is what cannot be predicated of any Being
that is perfectly free. -- We could not be free Agents, if we had not a Power
to will what appears to us from our present View of Things most fit to be
chosen; or if we had a Power to will what appears to us from our present View
of Things unfit to be chosen. For either of these supposes the Will it self to
be the Effect of some Constraint from something without us; and not to be the
Result of our own Understandings, Affections, and Appetites, as it always is in
every free Agent. This is equally true, whether our Wills are always excited
and acted by some apparent Good, as has been generally supposed; or whether
they are commonly acted by some present Uneasiness, as has also been supposed;
or whether by both of these. -- Freedom therefore cannot be opposed to
Necessity. Every free Agent must necessarily will what his Understanding,
Appetites and Affections, represent to him the most fit Object of Choice; he
cannot do otherwise. To suppose a Power to do otherwise, is to suppose a Power
that is extrin^ec^l to him, that must move his Will as a Clock or Watch is
moved; and is therefore utterly inconsistent with Freedom. -- If Freedom
consists in a Power to will or not to will what appears to the Mind in its
present View of Things the fittest Object of Choice, then the holy Angels and
glorified Saints are not free: For they cannot help but will the Glory of God,
and their own Holiness and Happiness. Nay, the blessed God himself, upon this
Supposal, cannot be free: For he cannot do otherwise than eternally will the
glorious Perfections of his own excellent Nature; he cannot will any Event, the
Futuri^^ of which is not some how agreeable to them. -- Freedom therefore is
only opposed to Coaction or Constraint. He that can act according to his own
Will, and do what he does -- of Choice, without any Constraint, is therein
free; though perhaps he may not be capable to do every Thing that he would do,
if it were in his Power. Thus the Merchant acts freely, who by his Trade
advances his Estate but a Hundred a Year, because he acts of Choice, and is
under no Constraint, though he may probably desire to double the Increase. And
thus the Believer acts freely, in his Acceptance of Christ, and living to him;
for that is according to his own Will and Choice, without any Constraint;
though he is not capable of all those gracious Seize, which he desires.
Thus likewise impenitent Sinners act freely, because they act voluntarily, in
all their sinful Indulgences; though they may be incapable to obtain some
particular sinful Gratifications, which their Lusts prompt them to. In a Word,
he that acts voluntarily and without any Compulsion or Constraint, acts freely;
and he that has a Power so to do, is in a State of Freedom and Liberty: for
Freedom consists in Nothing else. The Freedom of a Creature does not consist in
a Power to do every Thing which he might choose to do (that seems to be the
peculiar Prerogative of God himself, and implies Omnipotence) but in a Power to
act of Choice in all that he does do. From which it necessarily follows, that
the Infallibility of the Decree of God can no Ways obstruct the Liberty of the
Creature; in that every rational Agent does nevertheless always act voluntarily
in all his moral Conduct: and is therefore always in a State of Freedom and
Liberty.

I know that it has been the common Doctrine of Divines, that the Will of Man
has full Freedom with Respect to Things natural; yet not in Things spiritual;
but that in these Things it requires supernatural Grace to move and influence
it. -- However, I cannot but think (with Mr. Lock) that it is a very inaccurate
and obscure Way of speaking, to attribute Freedom, or Want of Freedom, to the
Will. (...) Will being but a Property or Faculty of the Mind, can no more than
any other of our intellectual Powers, be the Subject of other Properties or
Faculties. -- Free Agency implies Personality, which I think no Man applies to
the Will. On the contrary, every one will allow, that there is a great
Difference between an Act, and an intelligent Agent; and that it is the latter
only, that can properly be the Subject of Freedom, or want of Freedom. And
therefore to attribute either of these to the Will, is to make that the Agent,
or Person, when it is indeed no more than a personal Act, or the Person acting
in a Way of Choice: -- the Confusion of which is obvious, and has been too
manifest by the multiplied impertinent Debates upon this Subject. I
nevertheless fully agree with the Meaning of these Divines, if I understand
them. I agree, that no Man has a Power to will the Exercise of saving Grace,
and a Life of Holiness and Piety, until the Spirit of God, by his supernatural
Influences, represents these to him as most fit to be chosen, and makes such a
powerful Impression upon his Mind, as conquers his natural Aversion, and
excites him to will them. -- It is evident, in every Man's Experience, that our
natural Propensity is to Evil, only to Evil, and that continually. But these
Things that are evil, appear in a false Light to our carnal Minds, especially
to our Appetites and Affections, as Things most fit to be chosen; and while
they thus appear to us good and eligible, we could not be free, if we did not
will them. While we act as rational and free Agents, we must will and choose
what appears to us from our present View of Things most worthy our Choice. And
it is therefore because we are in a State of Freedom, with Respect to the
Affairs of a spiritual and moral Nature, that we cannot habitually choose a
gracious spiritual and heavenly Life, until by the powerful Agency of divine
Grace we have such an habitual Impression upon our Minds, that overcomes our
contrary Inclinations, and represents such a Life most worthy of our
Approbation and Pursuit. Though we may sometimes want Freedom and Liberty in
Things natural (A Man in a Dungeon cannot be said to be in a State of Freedom)
yet a rational Creature, while such, can never want Freedom in Things spiritual
and moral; since whatever he acts in those Concerns, he acts voluntarily, and
therefore freely. -- It is true indeed, that Sinners may in some Sense be said
to be in Bondage to their Lusts: that is, they freely and willingly perform
their base and sordid Drudgery, and cannot will to do otherwise while in an
unsanctified State. Nothing but the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus,
can make us free from a chosen Subjection to the Law of Sin and Death. -- The
Man is notwithstanding in a State of Freedom, even in this Vassalage of his
Affections. For, though a Life of Sin and Sensuality is in it self of the
Nature of Thraldom and Bondage, the Sinner does not esteem it so: But freely
puts and keeps the Yoke on his own Neck. He does but what he wills to do, in
his Subjection to his Lusts; and the Believer does what he wills to do, in his
Subjection to the Lord Jesus Christ; both act freely, though both are voluntary
Servants. -- It is impossible, that a rational Creature should act otherwise
than freely, while he acts by Counsel; whatever the Decrees of God are
concerning him.

A right Apprehension of the Decrees of God will make them appear to be so far
from taking away the Freedom and Liberty of the Creature, that they must make
it absolutely necessary, that every rational Agent shall act freely in his
whole moral Behavior. -- If God in his eternal Counsel did join the Means and
the End together (as I have already proved that he did) then he did decree,
that the Elect should be saved by Faith in Christ and other concomitant Graces,
which are in themselves free and voluntary Acts of the renewed Mind and that
they should voluntarily and of Choice comply with the Terms of Salvation. He
did also decree, that those who are NOT elected, shall be finally punished for
Sin freely and voluntarily committed. And consequently the Freedom and Liberty
both of one and the other, are infallibly necessary even from the Decrees of
God. Which Consideration alone might have been sufficient Answer to this
Objection.

It may be further objected against this Doctrine, that if God has infallibly
decreed to give Grace and Glory to a certain Number of Mankind, and to none but
them, he is then a Respecter of Persons; which is directly contrary to his
Word, Acts x. 34.

To which I answer: To be a Respecter of Persons implies an unequal
Distribution of Justice, from Favor and Affection; and not an unequal
Distribution of Benefits, by a Benefactor and absolute Proprietor. -- When a
Judge is chargeable with Partiality or Injustice, because biassed by something
in the Person or Circumstances of the Party before him, such as Greatness,
Riches, Relation, or Flattery etc. he is a Respecter of Persons. But when an
absolute Proprietor, and sovereign Disposer of his own Benefits, bestows an
undeserved Kindness upon one, and not upon another, he is no Respecter of
Persons. -- Thus, if God should forgive and save one penitent Believer, and not
another, out of a partial Respect to the one or the other, because they were or
were not Jew, or Gentile, of high or low Circumstances in the World, or the
like (notwithstanding they both stand on a Level in the Gospel Covenant, and
have equal Rights belonging to them in the Court of governing Grace) he might
in this Case be denominated a Respecter of Persons. But inasmuch as he will
equally and indifferently adopt, justify, and finally glorify all penitent
Believers, whatever their external Circumstances may be, he cannot be charged
with Respect of Persons, how differently soever he distributes, among a World
of Rebels, such unmerited Favors and Benefits, as no Man can have a Right to
by any Law, Covenant, or Rule of Justice.

Thus in the quoted Text, He is said to be no Respecter of Persons, because in
every Nation he that fears God and works Righteousness, is accepted of him.
As he is the Ruler and Judge of the World, he is equal and impartial in
bestowing his Rewards, according to his Law and Covenants of Promise, which he
has made the Rule of his Dispensations toward us. As he is a sovereign
Proprictor and Benefactor, he bestows his Benefits how and where he pleases,
without being a Respecter of Persons: for he is absolute Master of his own
Favors.

It is plainly visible, to every Man's Observation and Experience, that God
does not bestow his Benefits equally upon all that are of equal Demerit. -- He
has not made every Man an Angel; nor every Angel an Archangel. He has not made
every Stone a Beast; nor every Beast a Man. He has not given to every Man equal
Powers or Faculties of Mind; nor equal Advantage to get Riches, or Honor,
Health or Comfort in the World. And dare any Man call him to an Account for
these Acts of his Sovereignty, as a Respecter of Persons?

If we apply this to the Case before us, there will be found no Room at all for
this Objection. -- In the Decree of Election God acted as a sovereign
Benefactor; and had he not Right as such, to have Mercy upon whom he would have
Mercy, when he was under no Obligation by any Law, Covenant, or Promise, or by
any Thing else but his own sovereign Pleasure? -- Could he not determine who
should be the Objects of his special Grace and Favor, without Respect of
Persons? Though many are called, and but few chosen, is our Eye therefore evil
because he is good? Is it not lawful for him to do what he will with his own?
As our Lord argues in this very Case, Mat. xx. 15, 16.

It has been objected also against this Doctrine, That it cuts the Sinews of
all Endeavors to obtain Salvation; and brings Presumption into the World. For
if we are elected, we shall be sure to obtain Salvation, do what we will; and
if not, we shall be sure not to obtain it, do what we can. It is therefore to
no Purpose to strive.

In Answer to which I would observe, that if this Objection be just from the
Infallibility of God's eternal Counsel and Purpose, it is equally just from the
Infallibility of God's eternal Foreknowledge. For the Foreknowledge of God
renders the Event as certain and necessary, as his eternal Counsel can do. What
God did foreknow should come to pass, must certainly and infallibly come to
pass; or else he could not have foreknown it, as has been considered before. --
And now let the Objector consider whether he dare deny the Omniscience of God,
upon such Kind of Reasoning as this in the Objection: Whether he dare venture
to say, that God cannot be omniscient, that he could not foreknow all future
Events; for if he did foreknow our Salvation, we shall be saved, do what we
will; or if he foreknew that we shall not be saved, we shall not be saved, do
what we can. -- I presume, there are but few will venture so far as to deny the
Knowledge of God, from such vain Imaginations of their own. How then dare they
venture to deny the Decrees of God, from such Reasonings as prove a great deal
too much, if they prove any Thing at all, and which must be wholly impertinent,
if they don't prove that God cannot be infinite? -- This therefore shows, that
the Objection cannot be well grounded, how plausible soever it may appear,
since it militates against the Perfections of God, and even against his very
Being: for a God without Omniscience, is no God.

I must further observe, that this whole Objection is founded upon a mistaken
Apprehension of the Decrees of God. God has not decreed to save any but
persevering Saints; and he has decreed to save all such: Hence there can be no
Room for the Supposal, that any shall be saved, do what they will; or that
others shall perish, do what they can. -- If God has chosen any Man to
Salvation, he has chosen him also to Sanctification; he has decreed that by
Faith in Christ, by a Life of Holiness, and by Perseverance in both, and in no
other Way, he shall obtain eternal Life; as I have particularly shown above. --
And what Grounds can there then be for these Consequences? What Grounds for
Presumption, in this Doctrine of the Decrees? When it is certain, not only from
the Word, but from the Decrees of God, that no finally impenitent Unbeliever
shall ever get to Heaven; and that no persevering Saint shall ever fall short
of it. The latter make their Election, and the former their Reprobation, sure^
-- They who are chosen to Sal^^tion, are chosen to it in a Way of Faith and
Holiness; and therefore they who have these Qualifications, are certainly
elected, and shall be eternally saved. But they who want these Qualifications,
who finally continue to reject an offered Savior, and to live slothful and
irreligious Lives, have no Decree in their Favor. They Will never obtain
Salvation by Virtue of God's Decree, that don't obtain it upon the Terms
proposed in the Gospel: for God has never decreed Salvation to any Man upon
other Terms.

These Things being considered, it will appear, the absolute Decrees of God are
so far from encouraging Presumption, that they are in themselves a powerful
Argument to the utmost Diligence and Activity in the Concerns of our Souls and
their eternal Safety. -- If God has never decreed Salvation to any Man in any
other Way but this, may I hope to be saved in the Neglect of this only
appointed Means to obtain it? Don't it concern me to be in earnest in this
Matter, since I am certain from the Nature and Counsels, as well as from the
Word of God, that I must inevitably perish, unless I give up my self to Christ,
and live to God in all holy Conversation and Godliness? In this Way, I may make
sure to my self that I was eternally chosen to Salvation: But in the contrary
Way, my eternal Perdition will be most certain and unavoidable. Does not
therefore my Eternity depend upon most active Diligence to make my Calling and
Election Sure?

If we should consider this Objection with a Reference to the common Affairs of
(...), it may perhaps set the Unreasonableness and Injustice of it in a fuller
and clearer Light. -- We read, Job xiv. 5. That our Days are determined, the
Number of our Mouths is with God, he has appointed our Bounds that we cannot
pass. -- Now will any Man argue from hence, that there is no Occasion to eat or
drink, or use any Means for the Support or Preservation of his Life: for if the
Continuance of his Life be decreed, he shall live, do what he will; and if not,
he shall die, do what he can? Don't every one see, that their Lives are
preserved, and consequently that God decreed they should be preserved, by Meat,
Drink, Medicine, and other Methods of Support and Sustentation; and that
there is no Decree will preserve them in the Neglect of these? And don't they
act accordingly? -- Our secular Affairs were certainly the Objects of God's
Decrees, as well as the more important Concerns of our Souls eternal Interest.
Even the Hairs of our Head are all numbered, in the Counsel of God. And will
any Man argue from hence, that there is no Need to plow, or sow; that if God has
decreed him a Harvest, he shall have it, do what he will; if not, he shall have
none, do what he can? Don't every one see, that the Decree of God will not till
the Ground, sow the Seed, nor bring them a Crop, while they loiter away their
Time, and neglect their Business? Don't all Men see, that if God has decreed
them a Harvest, he has decreed that they shall obtain it in the Use of the
appointed Means, and no otherwise; that if they don't sow, they cannot hope to
reap? And don't they behave accordingly? How unreasonable then is this
Objection! How unreasonable a Presumption would it be, for any to venture their
Eternity upon such an Issue, as they dare not venture their Lives or their
Estates upon!

Having thus obviated the common Objections, that have been thrown in our Way,
I must proceed now to the Consideration of the other Propositions before
mentioned. But inasmuch as these have been occasionally anticipated in the
foregoing Discourse, I shall be very brief in their Discussion.

PROP. II. All that God has elected to eternal Life, he has chosen to Salvation
by and through the Lord Jesus Christ.

We do see, in Fact, that the whole Race of Mankind are fallen Creatures; and
that if any of 'em do obtain eternal Life, they must be saved from a lost
perishing Condition. And it is consequently evident, that Man was considered as
a sallen Creature, in God's eternal Counsel; and that the Elect were chosen to
be saved from this lost undone State, which the Fall has brought us all into.
-- Now, if fallen Man was the Object of God's electing Love, he must be chosen
to Salvation in a Way agreeable to all the Perfections of the divine Nature.
Since therefore we find from the Word of God, that our Salvation by the Merits
and Mediation of Christ is the Method, whereby God has provided to have Mercy
and Truth meet together, and Righteousness and Peace kiss each other; we may
safely conclude, that this is the Way in which God eternally determined the
Salvation of the Elect. In this Way he has in Time provided, and therefore
eternally determined, to declare his Righteousness, that he might be just, and
the Justifier of him which believes in Jesus; according to Romans iii. 26. -- We
are accordingly told, that the Crucifixion of Christ was by the determinate
Counsel and Foreknowledge of God (Acts ii. 23.) What his Hand and Counsel
determined before to be done (Acts iv. 28.) That the Elect had their Names
written in the Book of Life, of the Lamb slain, from the Foundation of the
World (Rev. xiii. 8.) and that their Salvation is according to God's own
Purpose and Grace, which was given them in Christ Jesus before the World began.
2 Timothy i. 9.

This then is the Way of Salvation, which God has decreed: This the only
Foundation of our Hope. Both the Decrees of God, and the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ, secure Salvation to the Believer in this Way; and in no other. --
Whoever are chosen to eternal Salvation, will be brought to see their undone
State and Inability to help themselves, to despair of Salvation by any Thing
they can do, to receive the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith; and to depend upon him
as their Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. Until they thus
lead the Life that they live here in the Flesh, by the Faith of the Son of God,
they can have no Evidence at all of their Election. -- But I pass to the other
and last Head.

PROP. III. All who are chosen to eternal Salvation in and by the Lord Jesus
Christ, shall be sanctified; and thereby made meet to partake of it.

The Marks and Evidences of their Election must, in ordinary, be found with all
the Elect; even in this Life. They are chosen in Christ, that they should be
holy, and without Blame before him in Love. -- I am not now considering the
Case of elect Infants, who die in Infancy. He who has told us, of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven, knows how to give them a Title to it; and does doubtless
qualify them for Salvation, by the sanctifying Influences of his Spirit. Nor
shall I venture to limit the holy One of Israel, by determining (as some have
done) that none can be converted in the last Hours of their Lives; and never
have Opportunity to evidence their Election^ to themselves or others, by a Life
of Holiness. But as may safely conclude, that this is not God's ordinary Method
of dealing with us, and that such Conversions are always to us suspicious and
doubtful; so we may certainly conclude, that in adult Persons a holy Life is
the natural and (in ordinary Cases) the necessary Fruit and Consequence of
God's electing Love. -- He tht has not been brought to submit to God, and walk
humbly with the Lord, and to mourn for his Sins, to hate and forsake 'em; He
that does not cut off his right Hand or Foot, and pluck out his right Eye, if
it offend him; He that does not habitually watch over his Heart and Life, and
hate every false Way; that does not seriously and diligently attend all the
Ordinances of religious Worship, and live in the Exercise of every Grace, and
the Practice of every Duty, toward God and Man; tht does not after all lament
the Imperfections, which necessarily accompany his highest Seize in this
imperfect State, and look for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to eternal
Life; such an one (I say) has not the Marks and Characters of God's electiing
Love upon his Soul; nor sufficient Grounds to conclude upon his Interest in it.
-- He has no Grounds indeed to conclude the contrary, because he is yet in his
State of Probation; and though he has not obtained, he may yet obtain the
sanctifying Influences of the Spirit of Grace, that will both incline and
enable him to live a Life of Holiness, and thereby evidence his Election of
God. -- This however is to be received for an undoubted Truth, that the Will of
God is always invariable the same; and that what he has revealed to be (...)
Will in his Word, was his Will from all Eternity; and consequently, since God's
Word requires Holiness, as the Way to Happiness, they who are a chosen
Generation, are also an holy Nation, a peculiar People, that they should show
forth the Praises of him that has called them out of Darkness into his
mavelous Light. 1 Pet. ii. 9.

There is so little Reason to fear, the Decrees of God (when rightly
considered) will prompt to a Life of Carelessness and Security, Wickedness and
Impiety, that they evidently have every Way the strongest Tendency to the
contrary. They who from Sanctification have no Evidences of their Election, had
need use earnest Diligence to obtain them: For (as I have already shown) they
can be obtained no other Way; and they can have no grounded Comfort, or Reason
to conclude either their Election or Salvation, while they live in a Habit of
wilful Negligence or Impiety. -- They who have good Evidences of their
Election, do not only live a Life of Holiness, in Course, without which they
cannot possibly have any such Evidences: But they must necessarily from the
Principles of their renewed Nature, take Pleasure and Delight in a Conformity
to the whole Will of God. -- In a truly sanctified Soul, old Things are passed
away; and all Things are become new. The Understanding, the Will, Affections
and Dispositions of the renewed Mind are all spiritual; whence he cannot but
approve, choose, and delight in a new and spiritual Life and Conversation. He is
God's Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has
before ordained that he should walk in them. Ephesians. ii. 10. -- Satisfying
Evidences of God's eternal Love will fill the Mind with admiring adoring
Thoughts of such distinguishing Kindness; and be a continued Source of Love,
Thankfulness, and Obedience, in the Soul that lives under the Light of God's
Countenance. They who know the Love of Christ, which passes Knowledge, are
thereby filled with all the Fullness of God. Ephesians. iii. 19. -- The Love of Christ
constrains us. 1 Cor. v. 14.

I shall now proceed to make some Reflections upon what has been said, by Way
of IMPROVEMENT.

USE. I. It is, I think, a natural Inference from what has been said and
proved, That there is a certain Number of Mankind, who are not elected to
eternal Life, and who will of Consequence certainly fall short of it. -- I
shall not here undertake the Dispute, whether all that perish, are by a
positive and absolute Decree of God predetermin'd to a Life of Sin, and to
eternal Destruction for their Sin. There has been such bold disputing, on both
Sides of this Question, and such bold Consequences drawn from the Idea's, which
both Parties have entertained of the Nature of God, that I cannot read those
Controversies without Horror. -- And what Occasion is there for these
overcurious Enquiries? Cannot such poor Dust, as we, be contented to
acknowledge our Ignorance of these unsearchable Mysteries of the divine Nature?
Methinks, the Apostle's solemn Reprimand might be sufficient to stop our
Mouths, and silence our confident metaphysical Disputes about the Operations of
the Mind of God, and the Manner how his infinite Perfections concur in the
Decree of Reprobation. Romans ix. 20. Nay, but (O Man) who art thou that reply
against God? Shall the Thing formed say to him that formed it, Why ^ast thou
made me thus? -- As there is Nothing more clearly revealed in the Scriptures,
Nothing a more necessary Deduction from the (...) Perfections of God (as I have
shown above) than God's absolute Choice of a certain Number to Grace and Glory,
it is from hence certain, that the Number of the Elect can neither be increased
nor diminished. Their Number is no more capable of Change, than the eternal
Counsel by which they are chosen. Thus the Foundation of God, with Respect to
each Individual of that chosen Number, stands sure. -- So likewise, on the
contrary, God's electing a certain Number does necessarily imply his not
electing of the rest, whose Number must be equally certain to God; and
therefore equally incapable of Increase or Diminution. As those will certainly
be saved, so these will certainly fall short of Salvation. -- The Certainty of
the Salvation of the Elect depends upon God's Decree to give them eternal Life,
and by Grace to qualify them for it. Is there not then an equal Certainty, that
they will not obtain Salvation, to whom God has not determined to give these
gracious Qualifications? Whoever obtains eternal Salvation, must be made meet
for it by Faith in Christ, and Holiness of Heart and Life. But fallen Creatures
can have neither of these, neither the Will nor the Deed, unless God change
their Hearts; and renew them in the Spirit of their Minds. And can we suppose
that God will do this for them, if he has not predetermin'd to do it? This were
to suppose a Change of Purpose in God, which is inconsistent with all his
Perfections.

I am sensible, that very great Difficulties may arise in our Minds from the
Contemplation of this awful Subject; which perhaps may never be fully and
clearly removed, until we come where we shall know even as also we are known. A
Reconciliation of all the Mysteries of God's eternal Counsel, with his revealed
Will, seems to be reserved for one of the Employments and Enjoyments of the
heavenly World. -- In the mean Time, it becomes us with humble Adoration to
fall down at the Footstool of God's Sovereignty, with such Language as that,
(Romans xi. 33, 34.) O the Depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge
of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments; and his Ways past finding out! For
who has known the Mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor?

I think however, that God has not left us without sufficient Light to clear it
up to every humble Mind, that God's Ways are equal; and our Ways are unequal.

If it be here objected, That this seems inconsistent with the Goodness and
Justice of God, to make our Sin and Guilt necessary; and punish us eternally
for what we cannot help.

I answer, if God's Decrees were the Cause of our Sin and Guilt, there might
then perhaps be some Foundation for this Objection. But inasmuch as the Decrees
of God have no Causality at all either of the Sin or Perdition of Wicked Men,
the Objection is groundless. -- Though we cannot fully understand the Order and
Manner of the Divine Counsels, with Respect to the Perdition of those that are
not chosen to Salvation by Christ, but this (like the Appearance in Ezekiel's
Vision) is high and dreadful: Yet we may certainly know, that God never decreed
the Destruction and Perdition of any Man, but for final Continuance in Sin. And
we are likewise certain, that he cannot by his Decree, or any other Ways, be
the Cause and Author of that Sin which he will finally punish. The former of
these is certain from the Word of God, where we are assured, that the Soul that
sins shall die; that God has no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked; and that
he will eternally punish none but those, who after their Hardness and
impenitent Heart treasure up Wrath against the Day of Wrath; and consequently
that he decreed to punish none but such. The latter of these is certain from
the Nature of God, who is of purer Eyes than to behold Iniquity; and
consequently cannot be the Author of what his Soul hates. -- The Sins of the
Reprobate are from Satan and their own Hearts; their future Punishment will be
for the Sins which they have voluntarily committed and impenitently continued
in. The Decrees of God have no Hand in procuring either the one or the other.
How then can we say, that the Way of the Lord is not equal? Certainly it will
appear in the Conclusion, that the Judge of all the Earth has done right. He
will be justified when he speaks, and clear when he judges.

The Certainty and Infallibility of the Event does indeed follow from the
Decrees of God; consider them in what Sense we will. If we allow no more than
God's Foreknowledge of the Sin and Punishment of the Reprobate, that makes the
Futurity of both most certain; as I have fully proved already. But by what
Consequence will it follow, that God cannot be good and just, because he is
Omniscient? Is it not on the contrary most certain, that he must be good and
just, because he is Omniscient? For if he be infinite in one, he must be
infinite in every one of his Perfections. -- This makes it evident, that there
may be from the Decrees of God an infallible Certainty of the Sinner's
Perdition, consistent with the Divine Justice and Goodness^ And we must not
venture to suppose such a Decree, as is necessarily inconsistent with either.

The common Occasion of the Confusion of Men's Minds upon this Subject is this.
They don't distinguish between the Necessity or infallible Certainty of the
Event from the Decree of God, and God's causing, compelling, or some Way or
other bringing to pass that Event by his Decree. But in the present Case there
is an infinite Difference between these two Idea's The former implies no more
than the eternal Operation of God's Mind within himself (if I may so speak)
without any Influence upon the Creature, and utterly unknown to him. The latter
supposes God's Agency upon the Mind of the Creature, inclining him to Sin; and
thereby constraining him to perish. The former is a necessary Deduction from
God's infinite Nature, as I have shown: the latter is horrendous Blasphemy, to
be rejected with Abhorrence. -- There is no Necessity to be supposed in this
Case from the Decrees of God; but a Necessity of Infallibility: that is, that
the Event will be certain and cannot fail. But how does that imply any
Compulsion upon the Creature, whereby the Event is brought about; and he
constrained to Sin and perish? There is no Connection between such Necessity
and Constraint, as I have proved already. Men may act in this Sense
necessarily; and yet act most freely and voluntarily, without any Compulsion.
-- They cannot be compelled by the eternal Counsel of God, which could not act
upon them infinite Ages before they had any Being. They cannot be compelled by
God's influencing them to sin: for God cannot be tempted of Evil; neither
tempts be any Man. Jam. i. 13. And why is not this sufficient to satisfy our
Minds? What Occasion can there be for our perplexing our selves with
unnecessary Difficulties, about the hidden and unsearchable Counsel of God?

It may perhaps be further objected; That this does not appear consistent with
the general Calls and Offers of Salvation in the Gospel. How can these be
sincere, when God knows that a great Part of the World of Mankind can never
accept them?^ He has not determined to give them Grace; and it is therefore
necessary that they must live and die in a graceless State. And is it not a
Mockery, to propose such Conditions to them, which they cannot comply with; and
yet punish them for their Noncompliance with these impossible Conditions?

To this I answer: How comes it to pass, that they cannot comply with these
Proposals of the Gospel? The Decree of God is no Cause of their Impotency, any
more than it is the Cause of their Sin. -- God made Man upright, capable of
Obedience to his whole Will concerning him; and his not decreeing to give him
Grace, is no Cause of his wanting this primitive Perfection. If God's not
decreeing to give Adam persevering Grace, was the Cause of his Apostasy, then
the Cause of his Apostasy was in God himself; and God was the Author of his
Sin: Which is Blasphemy to suppose. -- The Cause therefore of our first
Apostasy, and of all the Impotency flowing from it, is from Man himself. And
must God change his Law, or retract his Demands of Obedience from us, because
by our own Fault we are become incapable of Obedience? If a Master in a Morning
command his Servant his Work till Night, is the Servant guiltless and unworthy
of Punishment, if he wilfully break his Ax or Spade, and thereby render himself
incapable of Obedience? -- If God had left all the sinful Progeny of Adam to
perish in a graceless State, we should have had no Cause to find Fault: For he
owed no Grace to any of us. If he gives Grace to some and not to others, he
acts as a sovereign Benefactor, that may do what he will with his own. If he
require perfect Obedience from an impotent Creature, he requires no more than
what is due to him by the Law of Nature; and the Impotence of the Creature
being his Fault, deserves Punishment; and not the Reward of sanctifying Grace
from God. -- The Sum of the Matter then is, that God makes Proposals of
Salvation indifferently to all. They that comply with them shall reap the
Benefit; and as for other, swhether they are considered as impotent, that they
cannot, or obstinate, that they will not comply, the Fault is their own; and
God and his Throne are guiltless. -- I, have here, it is true, considered all
Mankind under the Guilt of Adam's Sin, which is a Fact so clearly revealed in
Scripture, that it ought not to be called in Question. See Romans v. 12. forward.
Psalm li. 5. with many other Places. And though it would be an impertinent
Digression, to endeavor an Illustration of that Point at present^ I hope
hereafter to attempt that also, if God shall give me Ability and Opportunity.

I add to this: God has decreed to give even to the Reprobate more Power and
Ability, than they will ever improve. God does in Fact give, and therefore has
decreed to give, even to them, a natural Power to consider of their sinful and
dangerous Estate and Condition, to endeavor to mourn for their Sins, to watch
against them and reform them, to pray to him in some Manner with Diligence and
Constancy for the sanctifying Influences of his blessed Spirit, to attend upon
all the appointed Means of Grace in Order to obtain both Grace and Glory; and
to endeavor to be sincere in all this. And none of 'em will be able to plead
in the Day of Christ, that they went as far as they could by their natural
Power in a Compliance with the Will of God, and in seeking his gracious
Influences; and yet after all he denied them special Grace. -- It is true, that
God knew from Eternity that they would not improve these natural Powers: But he
also knew that it would be their own Fault, that they do not improve them. Must
not he offer them Terms of Salvation worthy of a rational Creature, endued with
such Powers and Faculties, because he knew that they would not embrace them?
Don't they deserve Perdition, that will not so much as endeavor to perform what
Obedience they are capable of? And is not this the Case of every impenitent
Sinner?

Let us further consider where is the Seat of this Impotency, in those that are
not chosen to Salvation; that it is in their Wills. They will not come unto
Christ, that they might have Life. John v. 40. -- It cannot be said of any Man,
that he is truly willing to comply with the Terms of Salvation, to accept of
Christ as offered in the Gospel, to depend upon him only as the Fountain of
Grace and Life, and to live to him in the Exercise of Godliness and Honesty;
and yet that he wanted Ability to live conformable to his Will. For what is
Faith in Christ, but the proper Exercise of our Wills? He that indeed chooses
the Lord Jesus Christ for his Savior, his Portion and Confidence, has
unfeigned Faith in him. It Is true, an unregenerate Man cannot believe in
Christ; that is, he cannot be willing to accept of him upon Gospel-Terms. Were
he sincerely willing to comply with the Proposals of the Gospel, he would have
actual Faith in Christ. -- What is Repentance, but the Exercise of our Wills?
He that rejects and renounceth all his Lusts and Idols, and chooses a Life
of Holiness, is a true Penitent. The Inability of a natural Man to repent of
his Sins, consists especially in this, that he cannot be sincerely willing to
forsake all his Sins, and to live a Life of holy Obedience to God. The like may
be said of all the Graces of the Spirit. -- Every rational Creature is (while
such)a free Agent, in his whole moral Conduct; and every free Agent act^
according to his own Will. Let the Sinner's Impotency therefore be rightly
denominated; and it must be called Obstinacy. Let this Objection be fairly
represented; and it must stand thus: How can God be sincere in the general
Offers of Salvation in the Gospel, when he foresaw from Eternity an obstinate
Part of Mankind, that would not by any Means be persuaded to comply with them?
This is a just stating the Case; and a bare stating it in this Form is
sufficient.

Once more. There is no man living knows that he is not chosen to eternal Life;
nor can know it, but by an obstinate final Perseverance in Sin and Impenitence.
-- As the Offers of Salvation in the Gospel are made indifferently to all, so
all have a like natural Capacity to be moved and influenced by them. And no Man
whatsoever has any more Grounds of Discouragement before him upon the Account
of God's Decrees, than every Man in the World has. -- Our Business therefore is
not to stand disputing about the unsearchable Mysteries of God's eternal
Counsel: but to be most active and earnest and constant in seeking an Interest
in Christ and his Salvation. In this Way we may hope for the saving Efficacy of
his Grace, and in no other. If we are found in this Way, there is no Decree
that will compel us to sin and perish. If we are never found in this Way, there
can be no Decree to save us.

USE II. This Doctrine administers Matter of unspeakable Comfort to true
Believers, to all that have Experience of a Work of Grace in their Souls; in
that their Security of persevering in Grace unto eternal Salvation, is thereby
proportionable to the Evidences of their Sanctification. -- It is certain, that
if God has begun a Work of Grace in their Souls, he has done this agreeable to
his eternal Counsel. He has had no new Purpose or Design, no new Motive to act
with Respect to them. And if he eternally purposed to sanctify them, he also
eternally purposed to glorify them. He never designed their Sanctification to
any lower End. They may therefore be ascertained, that as he has begun, he will
also carry on this Work of Grace in their Souls, unto the Day of Christ. -- Who
shall lay any Thing to the Charge of God's Elect? since it is God that
justifies them. Who is he that condemns those who have thus evidenced their
Election of God? It is Christ who died (...) rather that is risen again, who is
even at the (...) Hand of God, who also makes Intercession for them. Who shall
separate them from the Love of Christ? Shall Tribulation, or Distress, or
Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? No surely! They may
be persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any
other Creature, shall be able to separate them from the Love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans viii. 33, -- 39.

What a distressing Consideration must it be to such who have once experienced
the Joy and Peace of believing, if they had greater Reason to fear a total
Apostasy from this happy State, than to hope for Perseverance in it? And such
must be their Case, if their Hope were not built upon this sure Foundation. For
if their Stability depended upon any Thing in themselves, upon their good
Purposes, Promises, or Designs of a religious Life, how many thousand Dangers
would there be in the Way? What a dreadful Hazard would there be, that by the
Strength of their own Corruptions, the subtle and powerful Temptations of
Satan, the Vanities of the World, the Allurements of wicked Men, or a gradual
Decay of their Graces, they should draw back unto Perdition?

But on the contrary, what inexpressible Comfort must it be to them, to
consider, that the present Influences of the Spirit of Grace which they
experience in their own Souls, are the Pledge and Earnest of their Perseverance
in Grace, and of their eternal Reward! And this is the necessary Consequence of
the Doctrine I have been insisting upon. For he that, has manifested his Love
to any of us by giving us sanctifying Grace, has loved us with an everlasting
Love; and will certainly love us to the End. -- Could such therefore but keep a
just View of this comfortable Doctrine before them, how would it fill their
Souls with even Raptures of Admiration and Praise of the eternal distinguishing
Love of God! How would it quicken and invigorate them in their spiritual Race,
when they have such a clear Prospect of the glorious Prize before them? How
would it strengthen them in all the rough Encounters they may meet with, when
they consider what a glorious Captain they fight under, and what Assurance they
have of Victory in the Conclusion? How would it endear the Lord Jesus Christ to
'em, in whom they are chosen to eternal Life! How would it fill them with Love
to God and his Service, when they consider him as a kind indulgent Father; and
themselves (though most unworthy) as adopted Heirs of the eternal Inheritance!
How would it fill them with a perpetual Abhorrence of every Sin, as vile
Ingratitude to such a bountiful Benefactor! How would it sweeten even Death
itself, when they consider it as an Entrance into the Joy of their Lord! And
how would it prove a constant Source of Peace and Contentment in all their
Trials; be their Song in the House of their Pilgrimage; and make the Ways of
Wisdom appear indeed Ways of Pleasantness; and all her Paths Peace!

USE III. This Doctrine may be improved by Way of most earnest Exhortation to
every one, to give all Diligence to make his Calling and Election sure;
according to that 2 Pet. i. 10. -- It is certainly attainable in this Life, to
make sure to ourselves, that we were chosen in Christ before the Foundations of
the World: Otherwise it would not be urged upon us by the Apostle, as our Duty
and Interest. And if attainable, how justly does it challenge our utmost Care,
Concern, and Application! -- We are careful to secure a good Title to our
Houses and Lands; and are uneasy while we think our Title precarious. But it is
of infinitely greater Importance to see to it, that our Foundation for Eternity
is well laid. And I venture to say, I Am persuaded that there is no individual
Person among Us but may (if he ben't really wanting to himself) make it certain
to him, that his Name was from Eternity enrolled in the Book of Life. Though it
be true, that this is not in Fact the Case of every one, as I have proved
before: Yet it is also true, that it in Reality is the Case of all such who
with the utmost Care, Watchfulness and Diligence, and with a humbling Sense of
their own Unworthiness, are constantly sound at the Footstool of Divine Grace,
seeking for an Interest in Christ and the gracious Influences of the blessed
Spirit; and that earnestly and constantly, with a humble Dependence on the
Grace of God, endeavor after all holy Conversation and Godliness. They who
neglect this, have dark Symptoms upon 'em; and have no Grounds to conclude
their Election of God. -- Though we cannot claim either Grace or Glory on Account
of what we do or can do: Yet if we persevere in the Way described, God has
encouraged us to expect that he will, and therefore we may hope that he
certainly will for his own Sake (not for ours) glorify his free Grace in our
Sanctification and Salvation. He has not said to the House of Jacob, Seek ye me
in vain. If we are steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the Work of the
Lord, our Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. -- They who are not elected
will not indeed ever come to do this, and so will certainly perish. But then
the immediate Cause and moral Reason of this is wholly in themselves: They
neglect the great Salvation; they resist and quench the Holy Spirit; they will
not frame their Doings to turn to the Lord: Thus they are wanting to
themselves; and they will perish through their own Fault.

There is something therefore before us of much greater Importance than
overcurious Enquiries, abstract Speculations and distracting Debate^ about the
Decrees of God. It is a vastly greater Concern, to get some solid evidence of
our own Interest in God's electing Love. O why are we not then in earnest in an
Affair of such everlasting Consequence? Why don't this exercise our Thoughts
and Care more than every Thing else? Why don't it ly down and rise with us, and
accompany us in the whole Conduct of our Lives? Can we rest contented in a
dreadful Uncertainty, whether we are like to be saved or damned to all
Eternity? Can we be contented while we have no Grounds to conclude, that we
must not spend a doleful Eternity in Weeping and Wailing and Gnashing of Teeth,
under the intolerable Agonies of infinite Vengeance? -- Let us then up and be
doing, and we may hope the Lord will be with us. There is no need to search
into the Archives of Eternity to know our State. There is no need to say in our
Hearts, Who shall ascend into Heaven to bring us an Account from thence, or Who
shall descend into the Deep to bring up one from thence? The Evidence is nigh
us, even in our own Hearts and Lives, conformed to the Word of Christ. And if
we do but follow these two DIRECTIONS, we cannot fail of obtaining it.

1. Let us make our Calling sure; and that will make our Election sure. Whom he
predestined, them he also called. If we are effectually called, it is an
Evidence for us that we are also predestined. If we make this sure, the other
will be equally certain.

Let us then strive to make sure to ourselves the Sincerity of our Repentance
toward God. That we have seen the Evil of Sin, have seen our Sinfulness by
Nature and Practice, and abhorred ourselves in our own Eyes; have heartily
mourned for, hated and forsaken our Sins without Reserve; and turned from them
to God; that we indulge no sinful Way, either of Heart or Conversation, either
of Omission or Commission: but watch and pray against them all; and are
burdened with, and long for Deliverance from all our remaining Imperfections.
-- Let this be sure, and our Election is also sure. For God has promised; and
therefore he has decreed, that he who repents and is converted, shall have his
Sins blotted out, against the Times of Refreshing shall come from the Presence
of the Lord.

Let us make sure of a lively Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; and we may be
sure of our Election. As many as were ordained to eternal Life, believed. (Acts
xiii. 48) -- Let us then get good Evidences that we have renounced all
Confidence in the Flesh; that we have come, wretched and miserable and poor and
blind and naked, to Christ; that we have heartily received him upon his own
Terms; that we are (...) unto Jesus, as our Righteousness, and Strength; that
we depend upon him only as the Author of our eternal Salvation; and we shall
thereby have good Evidence, that we were ordained to eternal Life.

Let us make sure of a true Love to God, and we shall thereby make sure to
ourselves that he has eternally loved us. For we love him because he first
loved us. 1 John iv. 19. -- If we can make it evident to ourselves, that we
have chosen an Interest in God's Favor above all the World, that we delight in
a Conformity to his imitable Perfections, that we delight in his Ordinances;
prize Communion with him; and love his People; this makes our Calling, and so
our Election sure.

2. Let us make sure to our selves, that we maintain an habitual Course of
Holiness in Heart and Life; and this also will be a good Evidence for us, that
we were eternally chosen of God to be Heirs of everlasting Salvation. If we are
chosen to Salvation, it is through Sanctification of the Spirit, as I have
particularly shown already. -- It concerns us therefore to make it sure to
ourselves, that we maintain a strict Watch over our Hearts and Lives,
exercising ourselves unto Godliness, striving against Sin, and laboring to
perfect Holiness in the Fear God; that we are conscienciously careful to be
found walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless;
that our Affections are placed upon Things above; that we have our Conversation
in Heaven; and that we are diligently endeavoring to maintain a Life of Piety
toward God, and Righteousness toward Men. -- And in this Way, though many
disallowed Imperfections will accompany our highest Seize, we may be
assured, that He who has given us his own Son, and (...) him given us Grace to
love and serve him, will with him also freely give us Things. -- For of Him,
and through Him, and to Him are all Things; To whom be Glory for ever. Amen.

A DISCOURSE ON ORIGINAL SIN.
Romans V. 12. Wherefore, as by one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by
Sin: and so Death passed upon all Men; for that all have sinned.


IT has been an ancient Observation with Respect to Original Sin, that there is
nothing more familiarly known, nothing harder to be fully understood. The Being
of it with its dreadful Consequences, is but too evident to all the World. The
Manner how we came under the Pollution and Guilt of it, is more difficult to
(...) rightly conceived. Many strong Prejudices have therefore arisen in Men's
Minds against it. Our natural Pride and Haughtiness is hardly brought to stoop
to such a humbling and abasing Consideration. And there are some apparent
Difficulties in the Doctrine, which make some Men imagine it inconsistent with
the divine Perfections; and therefore unworthy to be received or taught. -- But
whatever Opposition this may meet with, from these or other like Reasons, it is
clearly and fully revealed in the Scriptures; and it is therefore certain, that
the Objections against it cannot be just, how plausible soever they may appear.
As the whole Tenor of the Bible every where considers, directs, and treats us
as apostate sinful Creatures, so the Nature, Manner, and Consequences of our
Apostasy, are particularly described in sundry Passages both of the Old and
NewTestament: But perhaps in none more fully, than in the Words before us, with
the following Context. In these Words we may note,

1. The Apostle's Design in introducing them in this Place, represented by the
illative Word, Wherefore. -- That we may have a clearer View of this, we must
recur to the foregoing Verses of the Chapter, where our being justified by
Christ's Blood, our being reconciled to God by the Death of his Son, and our
receiving the Atonement by him, are particularly celebrated. -- That this
Doctrine of our Justification by the Merits of Christ's Death might not be
Matter of Prejudice, it is here illustrated and explained by another Doctrine
more wonderful, which was notwithstanding always received for an undoubted
Truth. -- Wherefore as it is on all Hands allowed, that by the Imputation of
Adam's Sin we are all become sinful and guilty before God, it cannot be though it
strange, that by the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, we should be
justified in his Sight. If it be allowed to be just in God, to impute the Guilt
of our first Parents Sin to us, it may much more easily be supposed, that God
may from the Riches of his Grace impute the Merits of Christ's Death to
Believers, without any Appearance of Injustice. For if through the Offense of
one, many be dead; much more the Grace of God and the Gift by Grace, which is
by one Man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto Many. -- This is plainly the Scope
of the Apostle's Argument in this Context. From whence it appears, that the
Words of our Text are not only to be allowed for a Truth not controverted; but
for a Truth generally received in the Apostolic Times, in that they were here
improved by the Apostle, as a Medium to illustrate and evince another Doctrine
by. -- As it cannot be just arguing, to bring any Thing for a Medium to prove
another by, unless it be more clear in itself, or at least more known and
generally received; it is therefore necessary, that the Doctrine of the
Imputation of Adam's Sin to his Posterity was known and generally received by
those to^ whom the Apostle wrote; for it is not more clear in it self than the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to Believers: But more difficult to
conceive of. That being a Display of Justice, this of Goodness and Mercy; that
an Imputation of Sin and Guilt, this of Merits and Benefits. In that God acts
as a Judge^ whose Conduct must be equal and right according to the Rules of
Justice; in this as a gracious Benefactor, who may be as good as he pleases. --
It being therefore necessary, that this was a known and received Truth, it also
appears, that we are not mistaken in supposing this Doctrine taught in the
OldTestament; for from thence they must have learned it, unless they were
particularly instructed in it by the inspired Teachers of those Times: And if
this was the Case, it must have been an ancient Doctrine, though now more clearly
revealed.

2. We may note in the Words, a plain and full Declaration of the Sin and Guilt
brought upon the World of Mankind. Sin entered into the World -- All have
sinned. No Words can possibly be used, more fully to express the Universality
of the Contagion and Pollution of Original Sin. Sin has not only entered into
the World: But ALL, universally without Exception, have sinned; and are
consequently under the Guilt of that Sin, which they are ALL chargeable with.
-- If it be objected, that the Particle ALL is not here to be accepted in its
largest Extent, as implying every individual Person, inasmuch as the same
Particle is used by the Apostle in this Discourse, where it cannot be so
understood. Thus in Verse 18 th he tells us, that by the Righteousness of one,
the free Gift came upon ALL Men to Justification of Life. -- I answer, that if
the Scope and Design of the Apostle's Reasoning be considered, it will be found
that this Particle must be understood as carrying in it the Idea of
Universality in both these Verses. The Apostle is there comparing Adam with
Christ; and running the Parallel between them, as they were both public
Persons, and Representatives of their Posterity. He shows us, that as all
Adam's natural Progeny whom he represented, were without Exception chargeable
with his Sin and Guilt; so all Christ's spiritual Posterity whom he
represented, are also without Exception, Partakers of Righteousness unto
Justification of Life. -- The Term ALL must therefore be understood in our Text
to be of universal Extent, as including every individual Person, that proceeds
from Adam by ordinary Generation. Our Lord Jesus Christ indeed, though truly
and really Man, is not included in this Number; Because he was not a Descendant
from Adam, in a Way of Nature: though none of Adam's natural Descendants are
exempted. -- It is further Observable, that Sin and Death are here represented,
as being by the same Means of equal Extent, by the same universal Particle.
Death passed upon ALL Men, for that ALL have sinned. As natural Death therefore
is, without Distinction, the common Lot of all Mankind, it being appointed for
all Men once to die, so the Sin and Guilt of Adam's natural Posterity are as
universal as their Mortality. -- I might add, that it would be no Ways
favorable to the Cause of our Adversaries. if this Particle ALL were taken in
a more limited and restrained Sense. For if it be just and equal in God, to
impute Adam's Sin with its Consequences to any of his Posterity, it is for the
same Reason just and equal to impute his Sin to ALL, without Distinction. He
was as much the general Head and Representative of one, as another. -- And what
serves further to illustrate this Matter is, that the Words of the Text now
under Consideration should not be rendered as in our Translation, for that all
have sinned: but in him (...) all have sinned; and so are they accordingly
rendered in several Latin Versions; and so are they corrected in the Margin of
our English (...) From whence it is apparently manifest, that if all sinned in
him; all that were in him as their original Stock, and all that naturally
descended from him, have this Sin imputed to them.

There is indeed another Sense put upon the Words under Consideration, by a
modern Author Chubb.
, who being loath to leave so clear a Text in its full Force against his
Opinion, has contrived this Evasion; That by Sin is here to be understood
Mortality, the Cause being put for the Effect: And that the Apostle must intend
no more by the Words before us, than that all Men are become mortal, by Adam's
Apostasy. -- But this Construction not only appears inconsistent with the whole
Scope of the Apostle's Argument in this Context: But it represents him as
speaking incongruously, and impertinently. If this be the Meaning of our Text,
it should be thus understood. By one Man Mortality entered into the World, and
Death by Mortality; and so Death passed upon all Men; for in him all are become
mortal Vid. Dr. Wigglesworth on the Imputation of Adam's Sin.
. And if by Sin is to be understood Mortality, it must be supposed to have the
same Meaning in the subsequent Verses; for there can be no Reason, why the
Apostle should annex new Ideas to the same Term, in the same continued
Discourse, without giving his Readers any Notice of it. And consequently he
must in them also, be chargeable with the greatest Impropriety. Upon that
Supposal, we should understand the following Context in this Manner.

Until the Law, Mortality was in the World: but Mortality was not imputed, when
there were no Law. Verse 13. Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them
that had not been mortal, after the Similitude of Adam's Mortality. Verse 14.
But not as the Mortality, so is the free Gift; for if through the Mortality of
one, many be dead etc. Verse 15. -- The like Impertinency would be found
throughout the Chapter: the mere Representation whereof, is a sufficient
Refutation of this trifling Construction.

The Words are in themselves most plain and familiar; and fully represent us
ALL as being under the Imputation of Original Sin. There is no other Difficulty
to understand 'em, but Men's Unwillingness to believe 'em.

3. The Words represents to us the deadly Consequences of our Apostate sinful
State. And Death by Sin; and so Death passed upon all Men. -- Death, we see,
has the same universal Extent with Original Sin, and has passed upon all the
natural Offspring of Adam. And if we understand these Words to refer only to
natural Death, the Experience of all the World has put the Truth of 'em out of
Doubt. -- But it appears manifest, that the Apostle used the Word Death in its
largest Extent, to imply spiritual, as well as natural Death. For it is
considered as the Fruit, Consequence and Wages of Sin. It Is that Death which
came by Sin. It has passed upon all: For in him all have sinned. And I think,
every one will allow, that the Law of God has annexed a greater Penalty upon
(...) merely a natural Death; and consequently, that there is more implied in
the Death under Consideration. -- Besides, Death is here considered as being
all the miserable Fruit of Sin from which Christ came to redeem us; and must
therefore imply a greater Evil than Mortality. Our Lord Jesus Christ is
represented throughout this Chapter, as delivering us from the sad Effects of
our first Parents Apostasy. And if we would know what they are, we may recur to
the first Covenant between God and Adam, where we find nothing worse threatened
upon the Violation of that Covenant, and consequently nothing worse has been
inflicted, than Death. That Death therefore, with which Adam was threatened in
the first Covenant, was all the Misery consequent upon his Fall; and all the
Occasion of Christ's undertaking our Redemption; and must consequently imply
more in it than natural Death. And whatever was included in the Threatening,
from which Adam was redeemed by the promised Seed of the Woman, is included in
the Word Death in the Text; for it is of that the Apostle speaks. It is that
Death which has passed upon all Men: For in him all have sinned. The Apostle
accordingly represents the Grace of God, and the Gift by Grace, by one Man
Jesus Christ, and the Grace which reigns through Righteousness unto eternal
Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord, as our Redemption and Recovery from this Death,
which is through the Offense of one and is the Consequence of his Sin reigning
in the World. (In the 15, 17, and 21 Verses in this Chapter.) -- This Death
must therefore imply, that our sinful Nature and sinful Actions which flow from
it, our State of Condemnation, and Exposedness to eternal Misery, are the
Fruits of Adam's Sin, as well as natural Death; for from all these Christ came
to redeem us. -- I might also add, that this Death implies in it our
Condemnation, as the Apostle himself assures us, in the 16th and 18th Verses of
this Chapter; and consequently must signify spiritual, as well as natural
Death. I think it is a clear Case, that if by the Offense of one, Judgment is
come upon all Men unto Condemnation, as the Apostle asserts, there have worse
Effects of that Offense come upon all Men, than merely a State of Mortality. We
cannot be in a State of Condemnation, unless we are spiritually dead.

4. Our Text sets before us the Occasion of the Universal Sin, Guilt, and
Misery, of the World of Mankind. By one Man, Sin entered into the World. It is
allowed by every Body, that Adam is the one Man here intended; and that it was
by him, that Sin entered into the World; and Death by Sin. If it be enquired,
how Eve comes to be excepted from having a Hand in propagating this Contagion
to her miserable Posterity, when she was first in the Transgression: I answer,
that it is probable that she may not be excepted, but included, in these Words
of the Apostle. She may be considered as belonging to Adam; and being as it
were a Part of him. The Term Man may be a collective Term, including both Male
and Female, according to that, Genesis i. 26. Let us make Man in our Image, after
our Likeness; and let them have Dominion, etc. The like Phraseology is
frequently found in Scripture. -- But if otherwise, we must suppose, that as
the Covenant was made with Adam personally, though Eve was included in the
Prohibition; yet, she was not, as Adam was, considered in that Covenant, to be
the Head and Representative of a future Posterity.

The greatest Difficulty in these Words before us, is to understand in what
Sense Sin and Death entered into the World, by this one Man. In answer to which,
it has been the Common received Doctrine of the Church of Christ, that as Adam
was the natural, he was likewise constituted the moral Head and Representative
of all Mankind; and that the first Covenant with it is Sanctions, was made with
him in that Capacity and Relation. He was therefore to stand or fall, not only
for himself, but for all his Posterity. Had he obeyed that single and easy
Pre^ept given for his Probation, he and all his Progeny had been established in
a State of Life and Happiness. But his Disobedience to such an easy and
reasonable Command incurred the Penalty threatened, both to himself and to all
whom he represented. -- That Adam is thus considered by the Apostle in such a
public Capacity, as representing and acting for all his Posterity, appears
manifest from the whole Scope of this Context, in which he is every where
compared to Christ; and the Parallel run between them; And in which Sin and
Death are represented, as brought upon the World by Adam, in the same Manner as
the free Gift of Justification and Life, are procured for us by the Lord Jesus
Christ. For as by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners, so by the
Obedience of One shall many be made righteous, Verse 19. To the like Purpose
also are the 15th, 18th, and 21st Verses. Now as it is confessed on all Hands,
that the Lord Jesus Christ represented us and acted for us in his Work of
Redemption, so it seems necessary to allow, in Order to make the Apostle's
Discourse pertinent and intelligible, that Adam is here considered, as
representing us and acting for us in his first, Transgression. In what else can
the Parity between his Offense and Christ's Righteousness consist; but in their
being both public Persons and Representatives of others? Agreeable to this,
the Apostle in 1 Cor. xv. 47. speaks of Adam as the first Man, and Christ as
the second; as if there never had been more than those two Men in the World.
But in what Respect can we possibly imagine these two to include and comprehend
the rest of Mankind, unless they be considered as public Heads and
Representatives of them?

It is certainly most clearly evident from this Text, that we are some Way or
other become Sinners by Adam's Disobedience. And can this possibly be, but
either merely by our Desc^nt from him in a Way of Generation; or by our being
in him as our public Head and Representative. It cannot be true, that in the
former Sense we any more sinned in Adam, than in our immediate Parents and in
each individual Person of our Progenitors; and therefore in that Sense it
cannot be true, that by one Man Sin entered into the World; and Death by Sin.
For if Sin and Death are derived to us merely in a Way of natural Generation,
they entered into the World not by one Man only, but by more than ten thousand
Men. It must therefore necessarily follow, that Sin entered into the World by
this one Man, as the legal Head and Representative of his whole Race; and that
what he did in that Character was done for them all, as well as for himself.

Having thus taken a general View of these Words, and explained their Meaning,
I shall now endeavor a more distinct Consideration of 'em under the following
Propositions; which by the foregoing Explication appear manifestly contained in
them.

1. That the whole World of Mankind are by Nature in a State of Sin and Guilt.

2. That this State of Sin and Guilt, which we are naturally in, is the Fruit
of Adam's Apostasy.

3. That we are by Virtue of this Sin and Guilt justly liable to Death,
temporal, spiritual, and eternal.

PROP. I. The whole World of Mankind are by Nature in a State of Sin and Guilt.

That I may something illustrate this Proposition, I shall endeavor to
consider distinctly, What is the formal Nature of this Original Sin; and show
by the Way, how we come to be guilty by it. Then I shall proceed to show, how
this appears to be the Case of all the World of Mankind.

(1.) I am to consider what is the formal Nature of this Original Sin; and show
by the Way, how We come to be guilty by it. -- In Order to which, I shall
briefly observe, that this Sin consists in a Privation of our Original
Righteousness; and in the Corruption and Pollution of our whole Nature, whereby
we have a native Enmity to God and that which is good; and a strong and
powerful Propensity to the Ways of Wickedness and Impiety.

In the first Place, I Am to consider this Sin as being a Privation of Original
Righteousness. -- We were, in our first Parents, created in the Image of God,
Genesis i. 26. But alas! the Crown is fallen from our Heads. We have sinned, and
come short of the Glory of God. Romans iii. 23. -- Our first Parents were endued
with superior Degrees of Knowledge, whereby they were capable of understanding
so much of God, of themselves, and of the Creation, as could contribute to
their Happiness in their (...)-State. But how are the nob^^ Powers of our Souls
weakened and darkened by our Apostasy! How are we alienated from the Life of
God, through the Ignorance that is in us, because of the Blindness of our
H^a^ts! -- Our first Parents were created in a State of Righteousness and true
Holiness. All their Powers and Faculties, all their Affections and
Dispositions, had a natural Promptitude to the Love, Service, and Enjoyment of
God; and to a Life of Benevolence and Beneficence to one another. They had no
sinful Affections, no turbulent Passions or sensual Desires, naturally hurrying
them away from God and: Godliness: But their whole Souls and Bodies were
adapted to a ready Obedience to the whole Will of God. These were not (it is
true) immutable in their Nature; nor incapable of wrong Impressions from the
Craft of a subtle Tempter: For sad Experience has taught us, that though^ God
made Man upright, he is fallen from his Integrity; and how great is his Fall!
How lamentable is the State of his wretched Progeny, who have lost this
Rectitude, who have all the Faculties both of their Souls and Bodies depraved
and vitiated; and who naturally have every Imagination of the Thoughts of their
Hearts only Evil; and that (...) -- Our first Parents were created with a Power
of persevering in this (...) of Righteousness and Holiness. They were capable
of a continued Dependence upon the Fountain of their Being and of their
Stability, who would never have deserted them, while they had continued to
trust him. They were therefore capable of withstanding the strongest
Temptations; and of triumphing over the strongest Efforts of Hell itself; and
consequently of continuing in a perpetual State of Holiness and Happiness.
Their yielding to the Temptation, was not from a defect of Power to resist: But
from Want of Dependence upon him, in whom was their Strength and Sufficiency:
And from an inadvertent harkening to the crafty Seducer. But how is the Scene
now changed! How impotent are we now become! How does every good Thought even
die in thinking; and every good Disposition naturally languish and decay! How
are we an easy Prey to every Temptation; and continually betrayed by our own
Lusts to the Enemy, that lies in Wait to destroy us! That even a sanctified
Person could not persevere in Holiness, unless he were kept by the Power of God
through Faith unto Salvation. -- Thus we are all gone aside, we are together
become filthy, there is none that does good; no, not one. We have all like
Sheep gone astray, we have turned every one to his own Way. Such is our
Pravity, such our Impotency by the Fall, that we cannot so much as accept of
the Remedy, that is in infinite Mercy provided, without supernatural Influ^^^^s
inclining and enabling us to do it. No Man can come unto the Son, except the
Father draw him. John vi. 44.

This Loss of the Image of God in which we were created, this Privation of our
original Rectitude, and Depravation of all the Powers of our Souls and Bodies,
is not only our Misery, but our Guilt. For, if there be Guilt in defacing, and
in a great Measure destroying, the best Piece of God's Workmanship in the whole
lower Creation; if there be Guilt in subverting the great Ends of our Being,
and in rendering ourselves incapable to answer them; if there he Guilt in
debasing ourselves from our original Dignity, from the immediate Service of God
and Fellowship with him, to a State more low and vile than the Beasts that
perish, this privative Part of original Sin ^enders us all guilty in the Sight
of God.

I am further to consider that this Original Sin consists in a general
Corruption and Pollution of our Natures whereby we have a natural Enmity to God
and to that which is good; and a strong and powerful Propensity to the Ways of
Wickedness and Impiety. That this is now the Condition of all Men by Nature, is
most evident both from Scripture and Experience; and that this is derived to us
from Adam^ I shall endeavor to make evident.

No Man that will view the Circumstances of an apostate World, and consider the
State of his own Soul, can find Room to doubt the universal Influence of this
Contagion. -- If we look into our Understandings, what Darkness covers them!
What Ignorance of God and the Things of God is seen, not only in the Heathen
World, where Stocks and Stones and inanimate Things are worshipped as the
Author of their Being and Happiness: but even in the most enlightened Part of
the World, where the natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God!
but they are Foolishness unto him; What Error and Mistake are we (...) to,
while many perish by believing strong Delusions, many grope in the Dark, not
knowing in what Way to walk; and all are liable to Error, while clothed with
Mortality! What Folly and Madness are in the Hearts of Men, that they will by
no Means be persuaded to consider the Things of their Peace, and to consult and
pursue their best Interest: until their Understandings are enlightened by the
powerful Influences of divine Grace! -- If we look into our Wills, what
Opposition do we find there, to the Love, Fear and Service of God! How do all
Men naturally choose the Service of Sin and Satan, and the Vanities of Time and
Sense, before the Favor of God, and eternal Happiness! How obstinate, how
refractory are they in their sinful Gratifications; notwithstanding all the
Terrors and Dangers of which they have such a dreadful Prospect! -- If we
consider our Affections and Appetites, how irregular, how vile do they appear
to be! How little is God in the Thoughts of carnal Men! How far is he from
being the Object of their Desire or Delight! How disagreeable are all the
Perfections of his Nature to their Minds! How are the Ways of Godliness their
Aversation, that they cannot by any Motives be prevailed with, to walk in them!
How are their Hearts glew'd to these perishing Shadows! What base and sordid
Lusts do they gratify at all Adventures! How impetuously do their Appetites
hurry them on in those Pursuits, which they cannot but know to be repugnant to
all their most valuable Interests, both in this World and that to come! -- If
we consider our Passions, how violent, inordinate, and ungovernable will they
appear; how hard to be tamed, regulated, and kept under proper Restraint! How
do they often drive us like a Hurricane, against all the Dictates of Reason;
and indeed against ail our Powers of Opposition! -- Again, if we consider our
Imaginations, how vain are their Objects! How restless are they in their
Operations! How frisking, roving, and wandering from one Vanity to another! How
impertinently and unseasonably do they interrupt and hinder us, from any
serious Application to our more important Concerns! How ready are they to run
astray, after forbidden Objects! How ready to receive sinful Impressions; and
even to set the whole Soul on Fire with their wicked Suggestions! -- In a Word,
whatever Faculty of the Soul comes into View, it appears to be altogether
Pollution and Defilement. The carnal Mind is Enmity against God; for it is not
subject to the Law of God; nor indeed can be. They that are in the Flesh,
cannot please God. Romans viii. 7. 8. -- The Heart is deceitful above all Things,
and desperately Wicked; who can know it? Jer. xvii. 9.

And this Pollution does not only extend to our Minds: But the Members of our
Bodies too are all become Instruments of Unrighteousness unto Sin. The Body is
not only many Ways a Clogg and Hindrance to the Soul, from making any Progress
in its spiritual Concerns: But the bodily Senses are the Inlets to Multitudes
of those sinful Disorders, with which the Soul is defiled. So that the whole
Man is corrupted, and we want to be sanctified wholly, in our whole Spirit, and
Soul, and Body. For we are all as an unclean Thing; and our Iniquities, as the
Wind, have taken us away, Isai. lxiv. 6.

Now, that this State of Pollution is a State of Guilt, is m^^ifest; because it
is a constant Violation of the Law of Nature. God made Man upright; and had
therefore a just Claim upon him, of a sincere entire and universal Obedience.
God had a just Demand of his Heart and Affections, of his Fear, Love,
Complacency, and Delight; as well as of an external Conformity to the Duties of
natural Religion. If therefore instead of loving God, our Hearts are full of
Enmity against him; and Opposition to his Holiness and other Perfections of his
Nature: If instead of choosing God for our Portion, we prefer the World and our
Lusts before him: If instead of spiritual and heavenly Affections, our Hearts
are full of Vanity and Sensuality: If instead of the religious Exercises which
Nature itself teaches, these Things are such a Burden, as to be either wholly
neglected, or hypocritically performed: If instead of that Obedience, which is
due from a Creature to his Creator, we are serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures:
It is from hence most evident, that we are all become Guilty before God. And
that in all these Instances I have been drawing the Character of every
unsanctified Person, appears evident from what has been said above. -- It is an
impertinent Plea, to say, That this Depravity of our Nature is what we cannot
help; and therefore what cannot be our Fault. For certainly there is a Fault
somewhere, that we are thus estranged from God and Godliness, and thus in love
with Sin and Vanity. None dare be so hardy as to impute this Fault to a just
and holy God; it must therefore lie at their own Door; and we must be guilty,
whatever are Men's Imaginations about it.

But this I shall have Occasion to consider more particularly, under another
Head,

(2.) I Am to consider the EVIDENCE of this Proposition; and to show how it
appears, that all Mankind are naturally in a State of Sin and Guilt.

And here,

1. I think this is most evident from the Experience of all the World. -- We
see in Fact, that this certainly is our Case; and to debate it, is even to
dispute against our Senses, and against the clearest Observations that we are
capable of in any Case whatsoever. -- Don't every Body see, that in our first
Actions there is no Appearance at all of Love to God or Holiness; no spiritual
Affection, no Promptitude or Towardliness to any Thing that is morally good;
nor any Thing of this Nature to be introduced, but by great Care, Pains, and
Culture, all which meets with strongest Opposition from a contrary Bias. What
then is become of the Image of God, in which we were at first created? Is it
not most evident, that this is not only defaced; but utterly lost in our Souls?
-- If we still extend our Views further, that Pollution of all our Powers and
Faculties, which I have described, is a Fact every where experienced and
observed. What is the first Propensity of our Children, if they are suffered to
follow their own Inclinations without Restraint? What Courses do undisciplined
Youth choose and pursue? How does their Enmity to God, and their Delight in Sin
and Sens^ality appear with a Witness, if the Reins are thrown on their Necks,
and they are set loose in the World, without Education and Government? By this
we see their natural Disposition; for that they follow. And there is no Room to
dispute what the Fountain is, from whence (...) Streams so naturally slow. --
The deep Root that these (...) Dispositions have taken in our Souls, is
obvious, from the Impossibility of eradicating them, without the omnipotent
Agency of divine Grace. We every Day see Men go on in sinful Courses, against
all their valuable Interests temporal and eternal, against the Light of their
own Consciences; and even against frequent Apprehensions of external Damnation.
We frequently see them wearing off all Convictions, breaking through all
Purposes and Promises of Reformation, and venturing upon the thick Bosses of
God's Buckler; though they cannot but know when they at all consider, that it is
for their Lives. And how strong and impetuous must those Lusts be, that the
Fear of eternal Damnation will not mortify and restrain! -- If it be objected,
that I am here only describing the Case of the most profligate and abandoned
Part of Mankind: I may demand, How came they to be thus profligate and
abandoned, how came they by these corrupt and sinful Inclinations, if their
Natures are not polluted and defiled? But I may even appeal to the Experience
of the most virtuous and religious of the Children of Men, whether they don't
find a continued Struggle with the same sinful Affections and Appetites, that
are so visible in the Lives of the more careless and secure: Whether they are
not forced to maintain a continual Warfare with their Lusts, if they would live
a religious Life. And whence is it that the Flesh lusts against the Spirit;
and the Spirit against the Flesh; but from the Remainders of those Corruptions,
that reign in the unsanctified? From thence it was, that the Apostle himself
found Cause to groan under this Burden; and to exclaim, as in Romans vii. 24. O
wretched Man that I am! who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death!

I might further argue from our constant Experience of the dreadful Effects of
Original Sin, upon the whole World of Mankind. What a vast Variety of Miseries
and Calamities do we see every where obtain in the World! And what means the
Heat of this Anger; and what is the Source of this Affliction and Woe? Whence is
it, that we are thus born to Trouble, as the Sparks fly upward? Surely God
would not delight to punish an innocent Creature; and to make him thus
miserable. -- If it be pretended, that this is the Fruit of our actual Sin: I
enquire, how Infants that have never been guilty of actual Sin, came by their
Share in the common Calamity? We see that Sickness and Death, invades them as
well as others. And if Death be the Wages of Sin, as the Scriptures assure us
it is, they would not be liable to Punishment, if free from Sin and Guilt.
Hence, if we had no other Evidence than our own Experience, we might plainly
discover, that we are naturally dead in Trespasses and Sins, according to Ephesians.
ii. 1.

But,

2. This also appears evident from the Redemption of Christ. What can make the
Misery of our natural State more evident, than the infinite Price expended for
our Recovery out of it? Did the glorious God contrive this wonderful Method of
Salvation for us, when there was no Necessity for it? Did the Lord Jesus Christ
shed his own Blood for a Ransom of innocent Creatures? Or was it not because
that we were without Strength, that Christ died for the Ungodly? May we not
thus judge, that if Christ died for all then are all dead? As in 2 Cor. v. 14.
Was not Christ's precious Blood shed as a Ransom for Sin; and were not, they
therefore Sinners, for whom the Ransom was paid? Was not the Lord Jesus Christ
made a Curse for us; and don't that Evidence, that we are all under the Curse
of the broken Law? Was not the End of his Death as a Propitiation and
Atonement, to free us from Condemnation; and don't it therefore follow, as he
himself has told us, that we are condemned already, while we do not believe on
the only Begotten Son of God; and that we are by Nature the Children of Wrath?
In a Word, Christ gave himself a Ransom for all, either as innocent or guilty
Creatures. The former can hardly be supposed: there was no Need to purchase
Pardon at so dear a Rate, for those that did not want it. Whence it follows,
that we are fallen guilty Creatures, in that we are redeemed by the Blood of
God.

If it be pretended (as some have pretended) That Christ came not into the
World to redeem us from a fallen State: But to give us a new Edition of the Law
of Nature, very much effaced and worn out of the Minds of Men; to propose
easier Terms of Salvation to Mankind, than perfect Obedience; and to confirm
the Truth of his Doctrine, by sealing it with his Blood: --

I answer, This Pretense is as directly contrary to the Scripture-Account of
this Matter, as can possibly be conceived. We are there taught, that he was set
forth to be a Propitiation for Sin, that he was delivered for our Offenses,
that he dyed for the Ungodly, that he gave himself for our Sins, that he was
made Sin for us, who kn^w no Sin, that he appeared to put away Sin by the
Sacrifice of himself, that he also once suffered for Sins, the Just for the
Unjust; and the like. Now can any Man read such Texts as these, and deny that
we are in a State of Sin and Guilt; and that Christ came to redeem us from that
State with his own Blood? If this may be justly denied, it is impossible to
understand any thing by the strongest and plainest Expressions that can be
used. -- But suppose this Imagination were not contradicted by the Scriptures,
might we not enquire of such Objectors, what Need there can be of a new Edition
of the Law of Nature, if we are not fallen Creatures? If we had retained our
original Integrity, we should certainly have Light enough to know our Duty. It
cannot be supposed, that God made us at first ignorant of, and incapable to
answer the End of our Being. And if we had this Capacity at our first Creation,
we still retain it, unless we are fallen from our original Rectitude, and have
lost those Powers with which we were created. Neither Time nor Custom could
obliterate such Powers of Nature; and make the World ignorant, without special
Revelation, of the very first principles of Faith and Practice. -- But it is
pretended, that we wanted easier Terms of Acceptance with God; and that the
great Redeemer came into the World and shed his precious Blood to procure them.
I would here again reply, What need can there be of easier Terms of Acceptance?
God was not a hard Master, to require impossible or unreasonable Terms of his
Favor. He certainly at first gave us Powers, equal to the Obedience he
required of us. And we must still retain the same Capacity, unless we have lost
it by our Apostasy from God. If Obedience to the Law of Nature was our
reasonable Service at first, it is so still. If it was at first easy to be
performed, it yet remains so, if we have the same natural Powers with which we
were created. And why is it not as equal in God, to require of us the
Improvement of these natural Capacities now, as at the first? -- Nothing
therefore can be more repugnant to the whole Tenor of the Gospel, Nothing more
unreasonable, than this Supposal. We must acknowledge ourselves to be apostate
guilty Creatures, or we can give no good Reason for the infinite Price of our
Redemption, the Blood of Christ.

3. That we are all by Nature in a State of Sin and Guilt, is most frequently,
clearly and expressly revealed to us in Scripture. -- It cannot indeed be
declared in more strong plain and intelligible Expressions, than what are found
in our Text and Context. We have there an express Dissertation upon the
Subject. The Doctrine is there strongly asserted, and clearly illustrated. --
But this is not the only Evidence to be found in Scripture, of the sad Truth
under Consideration. The whole Word of God considers us as fallen Creatures, as
being in a State of Sin, Pollution, and Condemnation. And there is no Way to
avoid the Force of the many full and plain Texts to this Purpose; but by
strained and unnatural Glosses and Interpretations, upon Words in themselves
most familiar and easy to be understood. What can be plainer, than such Texts
as these? I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me. Psalm.
li. 5. The Wicked are estranged from the Womb, they go astray as soon as they
are born. Psalm. lviii. 3. There is not a just Man upon Earth, that does good
and sins not. Eccles. vii. 20. -- The Heart is deceitful above all Things,
and desperately Wicked. Jer. xvii. 9. -- We have before proved both Jews and
Gentiles, that they are all under Sin. There is none righteous, us not one.
Romans iii. 9, 10. -- For all have sinned; and come short of the Glory of God,
Romans iii. 23. -- For I know that in me, that is, in my Flesh, dwells no good
Thing. Romans vii. 18. -- The carnal Mind is Enmity against God; for it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Romans viii. 7. -- The natural
Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God, they are Foolishness unto
him, neither can be know them, because they are spiritually discerned. 1 Cor.
ii. 14. -- And were by Nature Children of Wrath, even as others. -- Even when
we were dead in Sins, he has qnicken'd us together with Christ. Ephesians. ii. 3, 5.
-- We thus judge, that if one died for all, then are all dead. 2 Cor. v. 14^ --
We know that the whole World lies in Wickedness. 1 John v. 19. -- Many more
Testimonies from the Spirit of God might be produced, to evince the Truth of
this Proposition. But these are sufficient to satisfy every one, that is not
prejudiced against the Doctrine and resolved not to believe it: And it is in
vain to endeavor the Conviction of such as these. I shall therefore proceed to
the next general Head.

PROP. II. This State of Sin and Guilt, which we are all naturally in, is the
Fruit of Adam's Apostasy.

I think I have proved, that we are by Nature in a State of Sin and Guilt; and
there must be some Cause of these corrupt Affections, Appetites and Passions,
of this universal Depravity of our Natures; and Corruption of all our Powers
and Faculties. We must either have come thus imperfect and impure out of the
Hands of God at our first Creation; or we must some Way or other have lost our
original Righteousness. If the latter, no other Supposal can carry equal
Probability in it, with this in our Text, That by one Man Sin entered into the
World, and Death by Sin.

To make Way for a more distinct View of this Case, it may be proper to
consider, whether we could be at first created in the same State, in which we
now find ourselves. And I think, this upon Enquiry will be found most
inconsistent with all the Perfections of the Divine Nature. -- How could it be
consistent with the Holiness of God, to make a Creature with prevalent Enmity
to himself, and Love to Sin and Sensuality? Could a pure and holy God take
Delight in such Ignorance and Darkness, as naturally clouds our Understandings;
and alienates us from the Life of God? Could he take Pleasure in having all the
Powers of our Souls most contrary to his own excellent Nature; and in having us
under the Government and Guidance of sinful Dispositions, irregular Affections,
and turbulent Passions? The great God must certainly be of purer Eyes than to
behold Iniquity; or to look upon Sin with Approbation. And consequently could
not create us with such depraved Souls, under the Influence of such vile Lusts
and sinful Appetites, as naturally reign in our Hearts and lead us away from
God. -- How could it consist with the Goodness of God, to make a Creature in a
State of Misery and Calamity? Can it be supposed agreeable to infinite
Goodness, Kindness, and Compassion, to see us agonizing from our Births to our
Graves, under the Disorders of a vitiated Soul and the Infirmities of a
distempered Body, to see us prompted by Pride and Ambition, Lust and Avarice,
to destroy and devour one another; and to keep the World in Convulsions and
Confusions, as it has always been? Could it be agreeable to him, to see so
noble a Being as Man, the necessary Subject of continual Affliction in this
World, that he might be thereby prepared for eternal Torments in the World to
come? This certainly cannot be supposed; and therefore it must not be imagined,
that a good and gracious God did at first create us in this State of Sin and
Misery. -- Could it be agreeable to the Justice of God, to make us under a
natural Necessity of sinning against him; and yet punish us for those sinful
Affections which he himself had given us; or for such sinful Practices as are
the necessary Result of them? No surely, the Judge of all the Earth will do
right. He could not make us on Purpose to delight himself in our Misery. --
From these Considerations it must necessarily follow, that God made Man
upright; that our Defection proceeds from some other Cause; and what that is, I
shall apply my self more distinctly to consider, by endeavoring to show, --

1. How or in what Way we became sinful and guilty, by the Sin of Adam.

2. By clearing up the Justice and Equity of God, in imputing the Sin and Guilt
of Adam to his Posterity.

I. I am first then to show how, or in what Way we become sinful and guilty, by
the Sin of Adam. -- In Order to which I shall Observe,

That God entered into a Covenant with Adam, as the Head and Representative of
all Mankind, to bestow Life upon him and all his Posterity, if he did not eat
of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, or to inflict Death both upon him
and them, if he did eat of that forbidden Fruit. The Sum of this Covenant is
set before us in Genesis ii. 7. But of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil,
thou shall not eat of it; for in the Day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall
surely die. -- This Covenant-Transaction is indeed here (as all God's
Dispensations in the Mosaic History are) but very briefly and generally
represented. Here is no express Mention, that Adam should be confirmed in a
State of Life and Peace, upon his Obedience to this particular Precept; nor is
there express Mention, that Adam was in this Transaction considered as the Head
and Representative of his Posterity. It may (I think) nevertheless be made most
evident, that both of these are implied in this short Account of that Matter.

That a Promise of Life is implied in this Covenant upon Condition of Adam's
Obedience, appears from the Threatni^^ of Death in Case of Disobedience. The
Threatening must necessarily imply some Evil consequent upon his Violation of
that Precept, that would not have otherwise happened. God's threatening Death
upon this single Condition, does plainly suppose, that it was the only
Condition upon which it was to be feared and expected. For how could it be
consistent with the Justice, Goodness, or even Sincerity of God, to threaten
Adam with Death in Case of Disobedience, which would have been his Lot, had he
been ever so perfect in his Obedience? -- This Threatening was certainly
designed as a Motive to Obedience: which it could not be, if Adam had no Good
in Expectation by continuing in his Duty. And it was certainly unworthy of God,
to raise his Expectation of a Benefit, which he should never partake of, had he
complied with the Terms on which he expected it. -- This therefore appears
plainly to be the Case. Adam was by the Law of his Nature under a perpetual
Obligation to a Conformity unto the known Will of God, upon the Penalty of
receiving from him the just Demerit of his Disobedience against him. The
Demerit of such Disobedience in any Instance would have been Death; for that,
the Apostle assures us, is the Wages of Sin, Romans vi. 23. But God was
graciously pleased to put Adam upon a more limited and easy Trial, in Order to
his Establishment in a State of Life and Happiness. Had he continued obedient,
and withstood this Temptation, had he retained his Integrity and overcome the
Attack of the Seducer in this Instance, he would have been no more in Danger of
Apostasy from God; nor any more exposed to Death or Misery. In the Day that he
eat of the forbidden Fruit, he was to die; and does not this necessarily imply
a Promise of Life, if he had not eat of it at all?

If it be here enquired, Whether our first Parents would not have died, if they
had been guilty of any other Act of Disobedience, while under this Trial, though
they had re^rain'd from eating of the Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge? I offer
the following Considerations in Answer to it.

1. Though they were undoubtedly under the Law of Nature, during the Time of
their Trial for Confirmation, as much as they were before; and therefore
equally liable to its Penalties in Case of Disobedience: Yet, I don't know how
the Law of Nature was in any Respect a Covenant of Life, between God and them.
-- I don't know how their Obedience to it would have entitled them and their
Posterity to the continued Favor of God, at this Time of their Trial, any more
than at any other Time, either before or after it; or how their Disobedience to
it at this Time would have involved their Posterity in their Guilt, without
some special Transaction between God and them to that Purpose. They were, as
Creatures, under penal Obligations to their Creator and Benefactor: But I cannot
see how they were, as such, the legal Head and Representative of their
Offspring; nor how they had had, as such, a Claim to perpetual Life and
Happiness from their Creator, had their Obedience been ever so perfect. -- I
cannot therefore but suppose a real Difference, between the Law of Nature, and
the Covenant made with our f^^st Parents in Paradise.

2. By all the Account we have of this Matter in Scripture, the Death or Life
of our first Parents and their Offspring, was wholly put upon their eating, or
forbearing to eat of the forbidden Fruit. -- The Law of Nature is not, that I
know of, any where mentioned as a Part of this Covenant-Transaction. The Tenor
of this Covenant in its f^^st Exhibition is, In the Day then ^atest thereof
then shall surely die. And accordingly, after the Fall, God only demands of
Adam, Who told thee that (...) wast naked? Have then eaten of the Tree, whereof
I commanded thee that thou should not eat? Agreeable to this, we find the
Sentence was inflicted upon Adam for this Cause, without Mention of any other.
Because thou have eaten of the Tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou
shall not eat of it, cursed is the Ground for thy Sake etc. -- We have no
Knowledge of this Transaction, but from the Scriptures; no other Representation
of it, that I know of, in Scripture. And what Consequence must therefore
follow? Here are two Trees placed in the Garden: Of the o^e he is forbidden to
eat, upon Pain of Death; of the other he might freely eat, and live for ever.
By eating of the one he exposed both himself and Posterity to Perdition; by
eating of the other he might have confirmed both himself and them in a State of
Life and Peace. Did not therefore his Happiness depend upon his Conduct with
Relation to the Fruit of these Trees?

3. It is certain in Fact, that God did not, and thence we know his foregoing
Determination that he would not, leave our first Parents, during the Time of
their Trial, to any other prevalent Temptation, but what related to the
forbidden Fruit. -- I think it just arguing, from what God has done, to what he
foredetermined to do. It is certain from the infinite Perfections of his
Nature, that his Conduct is always agreeable to his Counsel; and consequently,
that God did determine to put them upon no other Trial for their Establishment,
but in this single Instance. A^^ accordingly infinite Goodness and
Condescension is displayed in this Covenant-Transaction, as far as we have any
Account of it in Scrip^^^e. -- It must indeed be granted, that our first
Parents seem to have violated the Law of Nature, before their actual eating the
forbidden Fruit; by their (...) to the Serpent's Temptation, by their Unbelief
of God's Truth and Faithfulness, by their (...) to be as gods, knowing Good and
Evil^ (...) there (...) Appetites to the forbidden Fruit: But these all had an
immediate Reference to this Inhibition, and were directly introductory to it is
Violation. By these the Sin was committed in their Hearts, and the Lust
conceived, that bro't forth the actual Sin, which ended in their Death^ And its
remarkable, that God does not challenge them for these Things, as Violations of
the Law of Nature; but as Infractions of this particular Covenant, by which
they were to stand or fall. -- In a Word, God expressly made this the Instance
of their Trial; the Scripture mentions nothing more, and I know of no Authority
we have, to be wise in this Case beyond what is written. The Integrity of their
Nature would keep them from falling, where there was no strong Temptation to
overcome it. God did not permit, and therefore we are sure that he determined
not to permit, any other prevalent Temptation to assault them. They were not
therefore exposed to fall, in any other Instance. He threatened Death upon
Condition of this Disobedience: there was no other Condition expressed in the
Threatening. They were challenged for this Disobedience and no other, after
their Fall. Life was consequently promised upon Condition of Obedience in this
Instance; for this was the only Condition of their Establishment, that I find
any where mentioned in the Bible. -- Adam was put upon no other Trial, that I
know of, but this only; and this might have been as short as he pleased. For
it is remarkable, that he had full Liberty to eat of the Tree of Life; and it
seems plainly hinted in Genesis iii. 22. that if he had done so any Time before
his Fall, immortal Life would have been secured to him; that it seems left to
his own Choice, how long his Probation should continue. It is therefore
evident, that there was a Promise of Life in this Covenant, inasmuch as there
was a Pledge and Seal of his Confirmation appointed, ready for him at any Time
before his Apostasy: Though guarded and kept by Cherubim and a f^ming Sword
afterward. It is evident, that as according to this Dispensation of astonishing
Grace and Condescension, he was to expect Death upon no other Condition but the
Violation of this Precept, so he was on the contrary to expect Life upon the
actual Observance of it. This, though not directly, is however implicitly
promised in this Covenant recorded by Moses.

If after all any will suppose, as some have supposed (though, I confess, I
don't know upon what Foundation) that the Observance of the Law of Nature was
implicitly enjoined by this Prohibition, both upon Adam and his Posterity, as
the Condition of their escaping the Death threatened; and that this Prohibition
of the Tree of Knowledge was but an additional Injunction for the Trial of
their Obedience: It must nevertheless be allowed, that God intended, and Adam
understood, a conditional Promise of Life, in the Threatening of Death. If Death
was threatened only upon his Disobedience, it certainly implies that it would
not have been inflicted, if he had not disobeyed. By this Threatening, Death was
made the Wages of his Sin; and neither the Justice nor Goodness of God can
allow the Righteous to receive the Wages of the Wicked.

But it is Time that I should return to take Notice, how Adam was in this
Transaction considered as the Head and Representative of his natural Posterity.

It must be confessed, that the Mosaic Account of this Covenant between God and
our first Father, does not so evidently represent his Posterity to be
immediately concerned in it. But this also may be fully evinced from the
following Considerations.

It is manifestly true in Fact, that Adam's Posterity do partake of the bitter
Fruits of his Apostasy. The Experience of all the World carries this beyond
Debate. We all see that Sin and Death, with all their Terrors, have invaded all
the natural Progeny of Adam; that all the Calamities of Life and even Death it
self reign over those, that have not sinned after the Similitude of Adam's
Transgression. And how comes the Curse annexed to the Covenant made with Adam,
to fall upon the Heads of his Posterity, if they were not included in that
Covenant? This Punishment must be the Effect of Sin. Far be it from God, that
the Righteous should be as the Wicked. The Soul that sins, shall die. And
yet it is inflicted upon such as are not capable of actual and personal Sin;
who consequently must have sinned in Adam; or we cannot conceive how the Judge
of all the Earth does right, in bringing the Penalty threatened to him, upon his
otherwise innocent Posterity. -- The Sentence pronounced upon Adam after his
Fall, is in every Article of it executed upon his Posterity, in the same Extent
as upon himself: From whence it is evident that they as well as he were
Partakers of the Guilt of that Apostasy, in the same Degree that they bear the
Punishment of it. And consequently, he must be considered as their Head and
Representative in that first Covenant.

The same Thing is abundantly confirmed to us, by various plain and clear
Passages in Scriptures. Our Textassures us, that by this one Man Sin entered
into the World; and that in him all have sinned. We are told (1 Cor. xv. 22.)
that in Adam all die. Now, as I before observed, Sin and Death must descend
from Adam merely in a Way of natural Generation; or else we must have fallen in
him as our legal Head and Representative. The former cannot be the Case; these
did not descend to us in a Way of natural Generation from one Man only; for if
that be the Means of their Derivation, they descended to us from all our
Progenitors; and we no more died in Adam than in our immediate Parents. He must
therefore have sustained a public Character; and was considered as our
Representative in that Covenant-Transaction. -- But of this I found Occasion to
speak something particularly before; and need not therefore insist upon it in
this Place.

II. I Am to endeavor to clear up the Justice and Equity of GOD, in imputing
Adam's Sin and Guilt to his Posterity. -- The Adversaries of this Doctrine
under Consideration, do principally found their Opposition upon its
Inconsistency with the Perfections of God. They pretend, that God would not be
just in appointing Adam our Surety and Representative, when he knew he would
fall, and involve his Posterity with him in his Guilt and Misery. -- That it
were rep^gnant to the divine Goodness, to contrive such a Covenant, as would
bring unavoidable Misery upon Millions of Souls, who would be personally
innocent of that Transgression. -- And consequently that there could be no such
Constitution made by him, who is infinite Justice and Goodness. I shall
therefore be something particular in my Endeavors to obviate this Difficulty;
and to show how this Doctrine is consistent with the Perfections of God. --
This will appear by considering,

1. That such a Covenant with Adam would have been in it self more likely to
subserve the Interests of Mankind, than for him and his Posterity to have been
left under the Law of Nature; and consequently what all Mankind would have
chosen for themselves, had they been then existing.

2. That we were all seminally in Adam; and in that Respect Parties in this
Covenant.

3. That the Good promised by this Covenant, was more than proportionable to
the Evil threatened by it. And

4. That God has in infinite Mercy made a glorious Provision for our Recovery
from the sad Effects of Adam's Apostasy.

We are then to consider,

1. That such a Covenant with Adam would have been in it self more likely to
subserve the Interest and Advantage of Mankind, than for him and his Posterity
to have been left under the Law of Nature; and consequently what all Mankind
would have chosen for themselves, had they been then existing. -- The Condition
of Adam's Establishment in a State of Life and Happiness, was certainly much
easier to be complied with, than the Demands of the Law of Nature. It was much
easier for him to refrain from eating a particular Fruit in a Garden, where
there was so great a Plenty and such a grateful Variety of whatever could
contribute to his Support or Delight, than for him to stand engaged in
perpetual Obligations, under a Penalty, to perform an exact and perfect
Obedience to the Law of Nature. So that with Respect to Adam himself, the
Goodness of God was gloriously displayed, in bringing the Terms of his Life and
Stability so low. -- And if we consider the Case with Respect to his
Descendants, it will appear every Way their Interest also, to have their Safety
put upon this Issue. -- There would have be'n the same Manifestation of
Goodness to us, as to our first Parents, if each Individual of the human Race
could have had perpetual Life and perfect Happiness personally proposed to
them, 'upon the same Terms as they were to Adam; and consequently the Goodness
of God must be equally acknowledged, in joining their Interest with his in that
Covenant-Transaction.

This will appear, if we consider, that every one of Adam's Posterity would
have been perpetually under the strictest Obligations of the Law of Nature, if
they had not been included in this Covenant. They must therefore every one of
them be much more likely to fall, than Adam himself was; in that their Safety
would have depended upon a much more extensive Obedience. -- Their Obligations
to the Law, and their Danger of violating it in some Instance or other, would
have been perpetual; and their Stability would therefore have been for ever
precarious and uncertain. Now, was it not better for them, that their
Confirmation in a State of continual Life and Peace, should depend only upon
one such easy Instance of Obedience; than that each Individual of them, left to
act for himself, should be always exposed to the Loss of God's Favor, upon
their violating any Part of the Law of God, and always uncertain of their
future Happiness?

It will add further Weight to this Reflection, if we consider, that Adam (in
Case he stood in a public Capacity) was much more concerned to obey this
Precept, and to obtain the blessed Consequences of his Obedience, than any one
of his Posterity could have been, had they personally been put upon the same
Trial. -- His own eternal Interest was at Stake: he had therefore all the
Inducements from Hope or Fear, from a Desire of Happiness, or a Prospect of
Misery, that any of his Progeny could have had, were they in his Place. But
what an additional Concern would it naturally excite in him, to consider, that
the Welfare of all his Posterity was embarked upon the same Bottom; and that
they as well as he must be everlastingly and incomparably happy or miserable,
according to his Conduct in this most important Affair? -- Let it then be
considered, whether we have any Reason to find Fault, when the Terms of our
Safety was made so very easy; when our Interests were put into the Hands of our
natural Parent, who was not only as much concerned to secure his own Happiness
as Ours, but also under the powerful Influence of parental Love and Affection
to the numerous Offspring of his own Bowels; and therefore in all these
Respects much more likely to procure our Establishment in a continued happy
Life, than we could have been ourselves, if we had not been interested in this
Covenant, but left to stand or fall by the Law of Nature.

It may be also further considered, that Adam being God's immediate
Workmanship, and having immediately received the Law from the Mouth of God
himself, must have had more lively Impressions of his Interest and Duty,' than
any of his natural Posterity: And was in that Respect also more likely, than
they could be, to have kept this Covenant; and thereby to have secured the
Benefits of it to himself and them.

I may also add to this, that it seems absolutely necessary to the Comfort and
Happiness of Mankind, that there should have been some Terms of Confirmation
and Establishment proposed to them. How much would it have lessened and
abridg'd the Comforts and Delights even of Paradise it self, to have considered
that happy State as being always mutable, and liable to be forfeited and lost?
How could Adam, or his Posterity, have been any of 'em truly and completely
happy, even in a State of Integrity, under the stinging Reflection, that they
should be forever exposed through the Prevalence of Temptation, to fall from
their Innocence and from the Favor of God? -- All the Innocence, Purity, and
Perfection of our Nature in its Original Rectitude, could have been no Security
against this melancholy Apprehension. For some of the Angels themselves are
become Devils: And dreadful Experience has taught us, how not only Adam
himself, but all his Posterity, would have been always liable to the dreadful
Consequences of Apostasy from God. What therefore, but some Terms of
Confirmation in their State of Life and Integrity, could have banished this
uneasy Apprehension from their Breasts; and have put them into a Capacity for
complete Satisfaction and Happiness? And what easier Terms could have been
thought of, than what were proposed? Had it been left to Adam himself, to state
his own Terms, he could have devised Nothing more easy and practicable.

From what has been said, it appears to have been in the Nature of the Thing
much safer for us, and more to our Advantage, to be represented in this
Covenant by our first Parent, than for each one of us to have been left to act
separately for ourselves. In short, some Terms of Confirmation were wanted. --
Those proposed were as easy as could be desired. -- Adam was in all Respects
more likely to have come up to these Terms, than we could have been; and had he
continued in his Obedience (as there was the greatest reasonable Prospect that
he would have done) we should have perpetually acknowledged and adored the
Wisdom, Equity and Goodness of God, in this Contrivance to secure the Holiness
and Happiness of Mankind for ever. -- Since therefore this Transaction was in
it self good, just, and reasonable, most worthy of God, and most likely to
subserve our best Interests, the Event that has happened gives no Cause of
Complaint. God is just; and we are justly miserable.

To urge God's Foresight of the Event, as an Argument against the Justice and
Equity of this Dispensation, is impertinent and unreasonable. The great God
makes the Perfections of his own Nature, and not the Conduct of his Creatures,
the Rule and Reason of his Dispensations. -- Since this Method was from the
Nature of Things needful for us, and most likely to secure our Happiness, God
was good and just in proposing it; whatever the Event would be. -- Besides, we
have Reason to suppose, God knew that the Event would have been very much worse
for us, than it now is, if we had each of us (...) le^t to stand or fall by the
Law of Nature. God certainly knew how it would have been: And we have Reason to
conclude from all Appearances, that it would have turned out to our still
greater Disadvantage. -- We should have had no Terms of Confirmation; and
therefore at the best should none of us have ever been removed beyond Fear and
Danger. -- The Conditions of our enjoying God's Favor would have been much
more difficult; but the Inducements to take heed to ourselves, nothing equal to
what Adam was under. -- Our Exposedness to Temptations would not have been, as
his was, short and temporary: But of a perpetual Continuance. -- It Is therefore
the strongest Probability, that God knew how in that Case we should every one
fall; and how much worse our State would then have been, than it now is, since
in that Way there could have been no Room for the glorious Remedy now provided.

2. It should also be considered, that we were all seminally in Adam; and in
that Respect were all Parties to this Covenant. -- I shall not here insist upon
the philosophical Speculations of some very great and learned Men, who suppose
that every Individual of the human Race were actually included in the Loins of
our Parent, and were actually existing in Miniature, as a Part of him; and as
such, Partakers with him in his first Transgression. Though these think, that
they have carried their Hypothesis higher than mere Conjecture, and made it at
least appear probable to be true; and if true, to be a Solution of the greatest
Difficulties relating to the Propagation of original Sin: Yet, I think, we
ought to have a more sure Foundation, to build our Faith of this important
Article upon. It may therefore be considered, whether the Words of our Text
don't directly lead us to a View of the Propagation, as well as Imputation of
Adam's Sin to his Posterity. We are there informed, that in him (so in the
Greek) all have sinned. And the same Thing seems to be likewise illustrated
from 1 Cor. xv. 22. In Adam all died. We were in him, it is true, as he was our
moral or legal Head and Representative: And if we were only thus in him, we
must with him be jointly concerned, and accountable for his Conduct. But it is
certain we were, if not personally, yet virtually in him, as our natural (as
well as our legal) Head; and this may probably be referred to in the Texts now
cited. We were in him, as the Fruit is in the Seed; as the Sprouts are in the
Root; as Eve was in him, when one of his Ribs; and were really derived from his
Essence. -- Adam was guilty, totally and universally so: No Part of him was
innocent; but every Part chargeable with the same Guilt. And if we were then a
Part of him, as it is certain we were, we must have been so far guilty of his
Apostasy. -- Let it therefore be supposed, that when the Covenant was made with
Adam (whereby he was to stand or fall, according to his eating or forbearing to
eat of the forbidden Fruit) we were all of us at that Time a Part of him; will
it not hence follow, that the Covenant was made with us, as well as with him;
that it was made with every Part of him; and that every Part of him must
partake of the Consequences of his Conduct while in that State of Trial? This
being supposed, it will not follow that his Sin and Guilt descends to us merely
by natural Generation, or that the Sin of our immediate Parents, as well as of
our first Parents, is imputable to us, as being a Part of them. For, as Adam
was but once, and none of his Descendants were at all, in a State of Trial for
Confirmation and Establishment in original Righteousness and Happiness; so that
Covenant could be but once broken, either by himself or his Posterity. We could
not be guilty of original Sin in Adam, but only when he himself was guilty of
it by eating the forbidden Fruit. We are guilty, not merely as Descendants from
Adam; but as being naturally, as well as legally, in him when he violated the
first Covenant. -- We were (it is true) in the Loins of our immediate Parents,
during all their Transgressions of God's Law, as well as in the Loins of Adam
when he broke this Covenant: But we could not be in them, as we were in him,
guilty of violating any Terms of Establishment in Life and Peace; for there
were no such Terms made with them. And therefore we could not in them forfeit a
Confirmation in a State of Life and Happiness, which was never proposed to
them, either for themselves or us; nor could we in them bring upon ourselves
the dreadful Consequences of such Forfeiture, in our Death and Ruin. The Terms
of Life proposed in the Covenant of Grace are in and by a Mediator; and our
Interest in the Benefits of that Covenant, is only in the Way of our personal
Faith in him and Acceptance of him and his offered Salvation; and therefore by
the Tenor of the new Covenant, neither the Holiness nor Impiety of our
Progenitors can descend to us, or so far affect us, as that we should stand or
fall by it. But in the present Case, all Adam's Interests were concerned in
that CovenantTransaction, and His whole Self was to stand or fall on the Terms
proposed.

If it be objected, that our Souls were not so much as seminally in Adam at
all; and consequently not in this Respect chargeable with his Sin and Guilt: --
I answer, it would be proper for us to know something more about the Time and
Manner of the Union of our Souls and Bodies, before we decree too positively in
this Matter. -- Whether our Souls were all created in the Beginning; whether
the organized Bodies of the whole human Species were included in Miniature in
Adam's Loins, and all their Souls^ then united to 'em; whether the Soul of each
Foetus is immediately created and infused at the Time of Conception; or else
united to the Embrio in the Mother's Womb; or whether in some other unknown
Time and Manner; These are Things, which for my Part I profess to know nothing
about. And it is possible, that they who talk most boldly and confidently upon
this Subject, are really as ignorant of it as I am. And why should we grope in
the Dark, to remove Difficulties out of our Way, that we are not certain were
ever in it?.... Thus much appears evident to me, That we were in the same Sense
in Adam's Loins, and a Part of him, when he violated the first Covenant, as we
now are his natural Posterity. And as truly as we are his Seed, descended from
him, so truly did we in the same Respect sin in him, when he fell. The Apostle
tells us, Heb. vii. 10. That Levi was in the Loins of his Father Abraham, when
Melchizedeck met him. And it is as true, that we were all in the Loins of our
Father Adam, when he broke the first Covenant..... But in how lax a Sense
soever this be allowed to be true, it serves to clear up the Justice and Equity
of God in making us Parties in that Covenant, when we were Branches in him,
with whom the Covenant was personally made. If it was equitable, for God to
covenant with him on his own Behalf, it was equitable to covenant with him on
ours also, who were a Part of him, and so nearly concerned with him in that
Transaction..... Doubtless we should have thought it equal in God, to make us
joint Partakers with Adam in the glorious Consequences of his Obedience, if he
had stood. We should perhaps have thought it hard, if we who were so nearly
united to him, both by Nature and Interest, should have been secluded the
blessed Privilege; and put upon harder Terms of Happiness, than he was..... And
the Equity of God's Dispensation is the same, however the Event turned out.....
In a Word, It was from the Nature of the Thing most agreeable, that we should
be in Adam as our Covenant-Head, since we were in him as our natural Head; that
the Streams should partake of the Quality of the Fountain, and the Branches be
of the same Kind with the Stock, from whence they sprung.

3. It may be further considered, that the Good promised by this Covenant, was
more than proportionable to the Evil threatened by it..... By what I have
already said upon this Subject, the Justice of God is (I think) cleared from
all Imputation, in including Adam's Posterity with himself in the first
Covenant made with him. And what is now proposed, may serve to display the
Goodness of God, in the gracious Terms and Tenor of that Covenant..... Had the
Threatening and Promise annexed to that Covenant, been but proportionable to one
another, the Terms must have been allowed to be equal and right. Hence
therefore so much of the Goodness of God was manifested in that Dispensation,
as the promised Good was in Proportion greater than the threatened Evil.

Let the Case then be considered, and it will appear, that the Obedience which
God claimed of Adam in this Instance of his Trial, was vastly l^ss, than what
was due by the Law of Nature; and that the Penalty annexed to his Disobedience,
was no more than would have been, by the strictest Rules of Justice, the
Demerit of his violating the Law of Nature in any Instance whatsoever; and
would therefore have been eminently due to his sinning against so much
Goodness, as appeared in bringing the Terms of his Establishment to low as they
were brought. But then on the other Hand, he could have had no Claim to eternal
Life, but from the mere Grace and Favor of God, if he had not only obeyed this
Precept, but been perfect in his Obedience to the whole Law. For, though a
happy Existence may be reasonably expected by an innocent Creature, so long as
God sees Cause to prolong his Being: Yet as God cannot be in Debt to any of his
Creatures, he cannot owe them so much as the Benefit of any Existence at all;
and therefore cannot owe them an eternal Continuance of Life and Happiness. As
God could not owe us our Being, before we had it; neither can he be brought in
Debt to us by any Thing we can do, to continue our Being when we have it. Our
Obedience cannot lay him under any Obligation to us. If we be righteous, what
give we him? or what receives be at our Hands?

This then is the true State of the Case; A complete and perpetual Obedience to
the whole Law of Nature was due to God by our first Parents, as he was their
Creator, and the Author of their Being and Powers. -- Death was the just and
natural Penalty of their Disobedience in any Instance..... So far therefore as
God lessened the Obligation, he relaxed the Penalty of their Disobedience....
While on the other Hand, eternal Life was infinitely more than could be claimed
as a Debt for the most perfect Obedience; and therefore there was certainly
astonishing Grace and Goodness in making it the Reward of their refraining from
the forbidden Fruit. Thus we see how vast the Disproportion appears, between
the Threatening and the Promise annexed to this Covenant..... The former was a
Debt by the Laws of strictest Justice; the latter an Act of mere Grace and
Goodness.... The former would have been the just Wages of Sin, if there had
been no Threatening annexed to the Command of God; the latter is what Adam could
never have deserved for himself; and much less for his Posterity.... In the
former, God did as it were depart from his own Right, and give up Part of his
just Claim; he might have demanded perfect, universal and eternal Obedience, as
the only Condition of his Favor: and yet he promised perpetual Life and
Happiness upon a single, temporary, and easy Observance of his Will. In the
latter, God secured to Adam more than his Right, infinitely more than he could
have claimed by the Laws of natural Justice. -- How then can we complain of the
Inequality of this Dispensation, in which there is such a Manifestation of
condescending Grace and Goodness, as deserves our perpetual Acknowledgment and
Admiration!

To all this may be added,

4. That God has in infinite Mercy made a glorious Provision for our Recovery,
from the sad Effects of Adam's Apostasy. -- Our Adversaries imagine it
inconsistent with the Goodness of God, that we should all perish on Account of
Adam's Sin. But how could it be inconsistent with his Goodness, to reward us
according to our Desert? I think, I have made it appear, that the Terms of that
Covenant with Respect both to Adam and his Posterity, were equal and right;
that there was no Appearance of Severity: but special Manifestations of
gracious Condescension in that admirable Dispensation. And what have we now to
say for ourselves, why Sentence should not be executed upon us, according to
the Tenor of the broken Law? Cannot God be good in the Display of his Justice?
Was it inconsistent with God's Goodness, to take the Forfeiture at the Hands of
the fallen Angels? Or would it have been any more contrary to his Goodness, to
have reserved us, as he did them in Chains of Darkness, unto the Judgment of
the great Day? -- But besure all Murmuring and Complaint should be silenced for
ever, when we consider what a Reprieve was granted to such poor Criminals at
the Bar of Justice; and when we consider, at what an infinite Price our
Redemption from Death and Ruin was provided and purchased. Shall we complain,
who are thus distinguished from the Angels that fell, by the glad Tidings of a
Savior; while the Fruit of their first Disobedience was hopeless and
remediless Perdition? Shall we complain, when God has had such Compassion on
our perishing Circumstances, as to purchase our Deliverance with the Blood of
his own Son? Shall we complain, who have Opportunity to be restored with so
much greater Advantage; and to be Partakers of so much greater Blessedness,
than could have been hoped for from the Law of Nature? Here is Grace, worthy of
our highest Gratitude; Grace, that shall be admited, adored, and praised both
by Angels and Men to all Eternity.

Upon the whole then it appears; That some Terms of Confirmation in our
original State of Happiness were necessary for us; That the Terms proposed were
most equal, easy, and good; That it was from the Nature of the Thing best for
us, and what we should have chosen for our selves if we had been then existing,
that Adam should represent us; and stand or fall for us, as well as for
himself; That we were in Adam, and a Part of him, when he represented us in
that Covenant Relation: And it was therefore to be expected from the Reason of
the Thing as well as from the Tenor of the Covenant, that the Branches should
partake of the Quality of the Stock, from whence they sprung; and that the good
contained in the Promise of this Covenant was vastly more than proportional to
the Evil threatened. -- Is not all this sufficient to quiet our Minds; and make
us silently and humbly acqui^sce in this Dispensation as most just and equal?
It will certainly appear to be so, when we further consider the infinite
Compassion that has looked upon us in our Blood; said unto us, live; and
redeemed us from the Demerit of our Apostasy by the Blood of God manifest in
the Flesh.

God omniscient knew indeed, that we should fall and violate this Covenant; and
that all the Posterity of Adam would become guilty and miserable by his eating
the forbidden Fruit. This may perhaps at first View appear a hard Dispensation,
that God should without our Consent, join our Lot with our first Parents, when
he knew that they would fall; and we in them. But then if we not only consider
what has already been said in Answer to this; but remember, that he who knew we
should fall, did also design us a glorious Recovery from our fallen State, that
he designed to display his Grace and Love in the Redemption of fallen perishing
Creatures with such an infinite Price; and to bring them into so much better
Circumstances, than they were in by the Law of Nature; surely every hard
Thought of God must vanish before this Reflection; and we must rather adore and
praise, than complain of this glorious Contrivance. Did God foreknow, that Adam
would break through the most just Terms of Life and Happiness, that were
proposed to him in this first Covenant; and involve himself and his Posterity
in Guilt and Ruin? But did not God also foreknow, that he would contrive a
Method of Redemption, that should distinguish Adam and his Descendants as
peculiar Subjects of his Grace and Favor, above the rest of the rational
World, purchase their Happiness with an infinite Price, make the Terms of their
Salvation most easy and honorable, bring them near to himself, and put them
under the best Advantages to be happy here, and happy for ever? Where is
Murmuring then? It is excluded. By what Law? -- Of Works? Nay, but by the Law
of Faith. -- If all this will not satisfy us, in the Equity of this Dispensation
of God toward us, it must be because we are unwilling to see the lost and
undone State that we are naturally in; or else because we are willing to shift
off the Blame of it somewhere else. -- But it is Time I should proceed to the
Consideration of the other Part of my Subject.

PROP. III. We are all, by Virtue of our Original Sin and Guilt, justly liable
to Death, temporal, spiritual, and eternal.

I have already in a great Measure anticipated what would naturally occur under
this Preposition; and shall therefore be very brief upon the Illustration of
it, in two or three Particulars; and then proceed to obviate some Objections
that lie in our Way.

1. Then, as I have already shown, it is a plain Fact which cannot be reasonably
disputed, that the temporal and spiritual Penalty annexed to the first
Covenant, are inflicted upon all Adam's natural Posterity, -- It Is open to
every one's Observation, that the Ground is cursed for Man's Sake, that in
Sorrow we eat of it all the Days of our Lives, that in the Sweat of our Face we
eat our Bread, until we return unto the Ground. And it is indisputably evident
too, that we are naturally dead in Trespasses and Sins; and that we have hard
Hearts, corrupt Affections, irregular Appetites and Passions, and a dreadful
Promptitude to the Ways of Sin and Death. We can be no more certain of our
Being, than of this Corruption of our Natures, and this Depravity of all the
Powers and Faculties of our Souls and Bodies. That all this is the Fruit and
Consequence of our original Apostasy, I have largely shown already. -- If any
should object, and say, How can these Things be? I answer, they are so by the
divine Designation and Appointment; and they are therefore certainly most equal
and just. If all that has been said already, will not quiet the Minds of
Objectors, this one Consideration is sufficient to do it; That God, whose Ways
are all Judgment, who is a God of Truth and without Iniquity, just and right,
has annexed these Penalties to our first Transgression; and he has inflicted
them upon us; and therefore we are sure, that it is equal and right that he
should do so..... Let it be further considered,

2. That while we continue in this State, which we are naturally in, we are
utterly unqualified for eternal Life. -- It cannot be supposed that a God of
infinite Purity and Holiness will admit polluted and sinful Creatures into his
immediate Presence; and reward their sinful Natures and Practices, with the
Glories of the heavenly World. No! He is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil; and
cannot look upon Iniquity. Hab. i. 13. If the Heavens are not clean in his
Sight: But he charge the Angels with Folly, how much more abominable and
filthy is Man, who drinks in Iniquity like Water! Job xv. 15, 16. -- But were
it even supposed, that we could be admitted to this heavenly State with our
natural Corruptions and sinful Affections, with that Enmity to God and
Godliness, which we all experience in our unrenewed Natures? What Comfort could
we find there? What Comfort could the Sensualist find, where there would be no
Objects to gratify the perpetual Cravings of his sensual Appetite? What Comfort
could be found in the Enjoyments and Employments of Heaven, by those, to whom
these spiritual Exercises would be Matter of eternal Aversation? What Comfort
would be found in being eternally confined to such Company, as is our Burden
here; and would be for ever opposite and disagreable to our natural
Dispositions and Inclinations? To such as these, Heaven itself would be a Sort
of Hell; and even the glorious Presence of God, an everlasting Torment....
Whence it is apparent, that unless we are renewed in the Spirit of our Minds,
and have our corrupt Nature sanctified, we cannot be meet for the Inheritance
of the Saints in Light; for no unclean Thing shall enter there..... We are
naturally impure and defiled; and none but the pure in Heart shall see God.
Matthew. v. 8. This brings me to observe,

3. That all who live and die in that State of moral Defilement, which we are
brought into by our original Apostasy, must necessarily perish eternally..... I
have already observed, that such as these are not meet for the Kingdom of
Glory. No! when they leave ^ this World, he that is unjust, must be unjust
still. None but they that do God's Commandments, will have Right to enter
through the Gates into the City of Heaven. Where then must they go? There is no
middle State to be expected in the future World. Either Heaven or Hell, eternal
Happiness or eternal Misery, must be the Portion of all the Children of Men,
when they have done with Time. Whence it is evident, that our original Sin
exposes us to eternal Death. We are accordingly represented in Scripture, as
being by Nature the Children of Wrath. (Ephesians. ii.3.) as being condemned already,
and having the Wrath of God abiding on us, whilst without an Interest in Christ
by Faith, John iii. 18, 36..... We are plainly and positively informed by our
blessed Lord himself, that except we are born again, except we be converted and
brought out of that State of Sin and Death, which we are naturally in, we shall
in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God. (John iii. 3. Matthew. xviii. 3.) There
is no Salvation to be hoped for, unless our old Things pass away, and all
Things become new in our Souls, unless we are created anew in Christ Jesus unto
good Works, which God has foreordained that we should walk in them..... This
then is the Sum of the Matter. The Sin of Adam has reigned unto Death; for the
Judgment was by this one Man unto Condemnation; and by the Offense of one,
Judgment is come upon all Men to Condemnation! as in the 16 th, 18 th, and 21
st Verses of our Context. It is therefore a sad and dreadful Truth; and will
certainly be found so in the Conclusion, whatever Imaginations Men may
entertain to the contrary, that our original Sin is in it self sufficient to
render us eternally miserable, if it be not washed away in the Blood of Christ.

It may be here objected, That God himself has cleared up the Equality of his
Dispensations toward the Children of Men by assuring us that the Soul which
sins shall die, and that he will not charge Sin upon any but them who commit
it. How then can it be equal with God to charge the Sin of Adam, any more than
the Sin of others, upon those that never committed it, nor consented to it?

To this I answer: Who art thou, O Man, that reply against God! -- I think,
I have already made it evident, that this is an undoubted Fact, and plainly
true, that Adam's Sin is imputed to us, And shall we dare to arraign God's
Justice and Equity, because we cannot fully see through the Methods or his
Dispensations? Let the Potsherds strive with the Potsherds of the Earth: But
let not proud Worms contend with their Maker..... We see, that we are corrupted
and defiled: We feel, that we are sinful; and therefore guilty and obnoxious to
God's Wrath: and we know, from the infinite Perfections of the divine Nature,
that the righteous God has done righteously, whether we see through it, or not.

I further add, to what has been said to clear up the Equity of God's
Dispensation toward us, That we do all of us naturally consent to Adam's Sin;
and in that^ Way also make it our own. There is none of Adam's Progeny but what
are by Nature prompted to, and thereby manifest their Approbation of the like
Sins with those that our first Parents committed. Did they call in Question the
Truth of God's Word? And don't every unsanctified Person daily do the same
Thing? Did they yield to the Temptation of Satan? And don't every Man in a
natural State likewise do so continually? -- Were they acted by Pride and
Ambition to seek a more exalted Station than God had placed them in? And are
not the same aspiring Views in the Hearts of all Men by Nature? Are not we (as
they were) influenced by irregular sensual Appetites? And do not we continually
violate God's Commands and Prohibitions?.... Thus we manifest our Approbation
of our first Parents Sin; and as it were act it over again. We are by Nature of
the same Temper and Disposition that they showed in the Commission of this Sin.
By a just Construction, we may be said to be inwardly pleased with their
Disobedience: And are thereby Partakers with them in their Iniquity..... As our
blessed Savior threatened the Scribes and Pharise^s and other Leaders of the
Jews, that upon them should come all the righteous Blood shed upon the Earth,
from the Blood of righteous Abel, unto the Blood of Zecharias Son of Barachias.
(Matthew. xxiv. 35.) Because they were influenced by the same cruel and bloody
Dispositions, and went on in the same Methods of persecuting the Saints of God
with their Wicked and malignant Ancestors; and by approving and imitating their
Sin, brought their Guilt on their own Heads. In the same Manner are we all
guilty of Adam's Sin; and liable to the Penalty of it. We are upon the same
Account as much chargeable with his Apostasy, as these Jews were with all the
Blood shed from Abel to Zecharias..... If we did not personally commit that
Sin, we are naturally disposed to the same Kind of Disobedience; and are daily
imitating, and thereby approving and making ourselves guilty of that first
Transgression.

I might yet further observe, that this Objection proves too much, if any Thing
at all. I think that not only the Arminians, but all that acknowledge the
divine Authority of the Scriptures, must own, that temporal Calamities are some
Way or other the Consequences of Adam's Fall. And it is equally unjust to
inflict a greater, as a lesser Penalty, without Demerit..... We are certain,
that God does actually, and by Consequence, that he does justly inflict
temporal Punishments upon us for Adam's Sin: And it therefore cannot be unequal
with God, to punish us for a Sin that we have not personally committed.....
Besides, if we are on Account of Adam's Apostasy justly liable to temporal
Calamities, we are justly liable to eternal Misery also. We have not merited
the former, unless we are thereby become Sinners; and if we are Sinners we as
well deserve the latter. For eternal Death is the just Wages of Sin. This
Objection is therefore ungrounded and unreasonable.

It may be further objected, That God has expressly declared in Ezekiel. xviii.
20. That the Son shall not bear the Iniquity of the Father; nor the Father bear
the Iniquity of the Son. The Righteousness of the Righteous shall be upon him;
and the Wickedness of the Wicked shall be upon him. How then can it be true and
consistent with this Declaration from God's own Mouth, that our first Parents
Sin should be imputed to us?

To this I answer, that this Passage refers only to those Children that do not
imitate or walk in the sinful Practices of their Parents; but hate and forsake
them: And thus God himself expounds his Meaning in the Context. If the Son
sees all his Father's Sins, and considers and does not such like, he shall
not die for the Iniquity of his Father; he shall surely live. But then on the
contrary, God has threatened those Children which imitate their Parents Sins,
that He will visit the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, unto the
third and fourth Generation of them that hate him. (Exodus xx. v.) -- And the
Reason of the Thing is obvious. The Sin of their Parents should have been a
Warning and Admonition to them, to have watched against and avoided their
sinful Courses. These should have been as a Beacon to caution them against the
Rocks upon which their Fathers have struck and perished. They should have
detered them from going on in the same Way of Destruction..... Had any of our
Parents fallen a Sacrifice to human Justice for Treason and Rebellion against
their Prince, or had they brought any remarkable Calamity upon themselves by
their Irregularities and Misdemeanors; should we not improve it as a Warning
against imitating their Example, lest we bring the same Misery and Ruin upon
ourselves, as we have seen to fall upon our Parents Heads? And is there not
much greater Reason to avoid the Paths of Sin, in which any of us have seen our
Parents walk, to their eternal Ruin in another World?..... But if instead of
taking Warning by their Wicked Life, we imitate and approve it; if we go on in
the same Courses of Impiety which they lived in, and thereby justify their
sinful Conduct; we make ourselves Partakers of their Crimes; and upon that
Account deserve also to be Partakers of their Punishment..... It is accordingly
offered as a Reason of Belshazzar's Ruin, that he saw his Father's Obstinacy,
Pride, and Fall, and yet he his Son had not humbled his Heart, though he know
all this. (Dan. v. 22,).... And if we apply this to the present Case, I have
shown already, that we all naturally imitate and approve the Sin of our first
Parents; and are therefore all justly liable to the Penalty. We are Partakers
of their Guilt, and therefore deserve to share in the Punishment of it.

I may also observe, that if this and other such Texts of Scripture were taken
in the most unlimited Sense possible; if it were since the Fall, in all Cases
and all Instances true, that the Son shall not bear the Iniquity of his Father,
it would nothing affect the Case before us. For no Parents are considered now
as the legal Representers of their Children, as transacting in a moral Capacity
for them, and standing or falling in their Place and Stead; in the same Sense
as I have proved to be the Case with Respect to our first Parents..... As Adam
was set in a public Capacity, he sinned as the Covenant-Head and
Representative of all his Posterity; and for that Reason his first
Transgression is imputed to us. But the following Sins of his Life were not
imputed to us: The Reason of this, is (as I showed above) because the original
Dispensation or probationary State Adam was put under, came to a Period on his
first Sin and Fall, so that he no longer acted in the Capacity of a public
Person, our federal Head and Surety: Therefore none of his consequent Sins were
imputed to his Posterity, any more than the Sins of our immediate Progenitors.
-- It will not therefore follow, that God does not impute the Guilt of our
first Parents Apostasy to their Posterity, because he does not punish us for
the Sins of our immediate Parents; since the former acted in a public
Relation, but the latter act only in a private and personal Capacity.

It may be further urged against this Proposition, That it dooms Multitudes of
poor Infants to Hell, who never committed any actual Sin; and is therefore a
Doctrine so cruel and unmerciful, as to be unworthy of God.

To this I answer, that greatest Modesty becomes us in drawing any Conclusions,
on this Subject. We have indeed the highest Encouragement to dedicate our
Children to Christ, since he has told us, Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; and
the strongest Reason for Hope as to the Happiness of those deceased Infants,
who have been thus dedicated to him. But God has not been pleased to reveal to
us, how far he will extend his uncovenanted Mercy, to others that die in
Infancy..... As, on the one Hand, I don't know that the Scripture any where
assures us, that they shall all be saved: So, on the other Hand, we have not
(that I know of) any Evidence, from Scripture or the Nature of Things, that any
of these will eternally perish. -- All those that die in Infancy, may (for
ought we know) belong to the Election of Grace; and be predestined to the
Adoption of Children. They may, in Methods to us unknown, have the Benefits of
Christ's Redemption applied to them; and thereby be made Heirs of eternal
Glory. They are (it is true) naturally under the Guilt and Pollution of original
Sin: But they may notwithstanding this, for any Thing that appears to the
contrary, be renewed by the gracious Influences of the Spirit of God; and
thereby be made meet for eternal Life. It therefore concerns us, without any
bold and presumptuous Conclusions, to leave them in the Hands of that God,
whose tender Mercies are over all his Works.

Having thus briefly stated and explained the Doctrine of original Sin, and
endeavored to obviate the Difficulties that lie in the Way: I shall now
proceed to make some practical Reflections upon what has been said, by Way of
IMPROVEMENT.

USE I. This shows us the miserable perishing Circumstances of all unconverted
Sinners; of all that continue in the State of Pollution and Guilt, that they
are naturally in. -- It is a dreadful Thing to be Enemies to the living God, A
fearful Thing to fall into his Hands. If the Wrath of a King be as the Roaring
of a Lion, how terrible is the Wrath of the omnipotent God! How terrible will
his eternal Indignation be, to all those who are the miserable Subjects of it!
This is a Thought that might justly surprise the securest Sinner living. For
who can stand before his Indignation, when his Fury is poured out like Fire;
and the Rocks are thrown down by him! What Heart can endure, or Hands be
strong, when the Lord shall deal with them! -- How shocking a Thought must it
therefore be, to consider the far greatest Part of the World of Mankind as
obnoxious eventually to suffer the eternal Displeasure of a just and almighty
God! -- All that live and die in a State of Nature, are inevitably miserable
forever. Their original Sin (as I have shown) is sufficient to condemn them.
They can never be admitted to Heaven with that Corruption and Defilement, with
that Hardness of Heart, and Enmity to God, which they have derived from our
first Parents. And while they remain unsanctified, they are continually adding
to this original Weight dreadful Loads of Guilt, by their innumerable actual
Sins; and thereby increasing their Misery, and exposing themselves to more
amazing Condemnation. -- And is this a State to be continued in? Can Men sleep
secure, while the Flames of infinite Wrath surround them? Can they be content
to dwell with devouring Fire; and to inhabit everlasting Burnings? Does it not
infinitely concern every one, to meditate a Deliverance from that undone
Condition, which they are naturally in; and to ^^ee for Refuge, to lay Hold
upon the Hope that is s^t before them? Is it not of infinite Importance, that
our Hearts be changed, our Natures renewed and sanctified; and we made meet for
an Inheritance with the Saints in Light?

Let Men now dispute as artfully as they please, against the Doctrine of
original Sin, let them flatter themselves with the Goodness of their Hearts,
and the Goodness of their State, till they lull their Consciences asleep, and
quiet their Minds with the vain Dream of Safety and Happiness: It will
nevertheless appear in the Conclusion, that our carnal Minds are Enmity against
God; and can never, without a renewing sanctifying Change, be admitted into his
Presence. -- Of what vast Consequence is it therefore, for every one to see and
consider his State really as it is; and not cry Peace to his Soul, when God
says, There is no Peace to the Wicked! How dangerous is it to live ignorant of
our original Sin and Guilt! How dangerous to remain quiet and secure in a State
of Death; and not to be undeceived, until it is too late! -- The Doctrine I
have been treating of, is not to be considered as a Matter of mere Speculation,
that may without Prejudice to our Souls be indfferently either believed or
rejected. The Disease is too dangerous, to be carelessly neglected; and will
certainly prove mortal to all that don't discover their Misery and Hazard, and
repair to the great Physician of Souls for a Recovery from it. It wont do to
dispute the Malady, when the Symptoms of Death are upon our Souls. -- I cannot
see how any Man can be in the Way of Salvation, while insensible of his natural
Misery and Sinfulness, while ignorant of the Corruption of his Mind and
Conscience, Hardness of his Heart, the Obstinacy of his Will, the Vileness of
his Affections and Appetites, the Depravity of his Passions, and the Pollution
of his whole Soul. For how can he mourn after a Pardon of the Sin, that he
neither sees nor feels? How can he in earnest seek a Recovery from such a
Condition, as appears good enough already? To what Purpose would it be, to
endeavor to purify the Streams, when the Fountain is corrupt and polluted; to
seek a Reformation from particular Sins, when the whole Nature is Sin and
Defilement, the whole Head sick, and the whole Heart faint? Verily the whole
need not the Physician; but they that are sick. Matthew. ix. 12. -- It is
therefore of the last Necessity, for Sinners to see the Sinfulness and Misery
of their State by Nature, to see that they are undone and perishing in their
present Condition, to have a lively Impression of their dreadful Danger, while
Enemies to God, and Heirs of Perdition; that this awakening Prospect may make
them in earnest repair to the Fountain of Grace and Life. -- If ever Sinners
are brought to a sincere Repentance, they will be deeply humbled under a Sense
of their original Sin and the Corruption of their Natures, as well as
Transgressions of their Life. They will groan out David's Complaint, Behold, I
was shapen in Iniquity; and in Sin did my Mother conceive me: and will, with
the Apostle, mourn after Deliverance from the Body of this Death. -- As for
others that are sleeping secure in this perishing Condition, they must quickly
awake out of Sleep; or be terribly convinced, that God is most just in imputing
and punishing the Sin of our first Parents, when every Mouth will be stopped, and
the whole World be judged in Righteousness.

USE II. Let this Subject be improved by Way of earnest Exhortation to every
one, to make it the special Care and Business of their Lives, to get out of
that State of Sin and Guilt, which they are naturally in. -- Methinks, the
Consideration of what has been already said, might be Argument enough to
prevail with every one, seriously and earnestly to endeavor an Escape from
their Misery and Danger. -- Are you dead in Trespasses and Sins? Are you under
the Condemnation and Curse of the Law? Is the eternal God, as a righteous
Judge, your Enemy? Are you exposed to everlasting Ruin and Perdition! Is this
your Estate by Nature? Are you thus exposed to God's Wrath, by the Sin of our
first Parents? What a far more exceeding Weight of Wrath must you then be
under, by the vast Addition you have made to your original Guilt? How dreadful
will your final Condemnation be, when not only your original, but all your
numerous actual Sins, attended with such mighty Aggravations, are hereafter
punished according to their Demerit. -- Let the Appeal be therefore made to
your own Consciences, whether it be not of greatest Concernment to get into a
better and safer State, than this is; to get your Nature sanctified and
renewed; to secure the Favor of God; and to be fitted to appear before your
Judge with Comfort, when he shall appear, and his Reward shall be with him! --
Have you any Desire of the Comforts of a religious Life? Have you any Desire of
the Favor of God, now in this World, or hereafter in your eternal State? You
must then make it your present and active Care, to obtain a saving Conversion
unto God...... In Order to which, let me propose the following DIRECTIONS.

1. Meditate much upon your present Misery, in all it is Aggravations. I hope,
what has been said may give you a rational Conviction of the sad Truth I have
been treating of: But this is not sufficient to awaken your Care and Diligence.
Multitudes that acknowledge this Doctrine, do notwithstanding sleep on, in a
fatal Security, and perish forever. -- And this is like to be your Case also,
if you are not brought to such an awakening lively Impression of your guilty
perishing Circumstances, as makes you cry out with Distress of Soul, What shall
I do to be saved? -- Labor therefore for a realizing affecting Apprehension of
your extreme Misery, and dwell in a continued View of it. View your
Circumstances as they appear by the Law of God, which thunders forth
Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish against you. View them as they
will appear when you come to die; and have nothing in Prospect, but the
dreadful Effects of your Sin and Guilt; when nothing remains but a fearful
looking for of fiery Indignation, ready to consume you, except you repent and
be converted. View them as they will appear, if you are found in your present
State, at the last Day, before the Tribunal of your Judge, when with Horror and
Amazement you must hear the terrible Sentence, Depart, ye cursed, into
everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. View them as the^ will
appear to condemned Sinners in the Place of Torment, when weltring in the
Flames of intolerable Vengeance, without Hope or Help to all Eternity. And let
the dreadful View excite in you all possible Endeavors to flee from the Wrath
to come, and secure the Salvation of your Souls.

2. Labor after a humbling Sense of your utter Inability to relieve and save
your selves. -- Don't attempt this Change of your Heart and State in your own
Strength. Alas, you are dead in Trespasses and Sins, (as you have heard before)
and a naturally dead Man is as capable to revive himself and to reassume vital
Power and Action, as you are to create your selves a new unto good Works. -- As
you are not indeed naturally dead, you are therefore capable to attend upon the
Means of Grace and Life, in Order to have the good Pleasure of God's Goodness
wrought in you, and the Work of Faith with Power. But then as you are
spiritually dead, you cannot by any Skill or Strength of your own change your
Hearts; nor do any Thing that will give you a Claim to have it done for you.

You must become new Creatures: You must be born again: You must be turned from
Darkness to Light; and from the Power of Satan unto God: The Heart of Stone
must be taken out of your Flesh; and a Heart of Flesh given you; and in a Word
(as I observed before) Old Things must pass away; and all Things must become
new in you. And can it be in your own Power to produce this wonderful Change?
-- You must live in the Exercise of Faith in the Son of God, without which it
is impossible to please him: You must live in the Love of God: Your Affections
must be placed upon the Things that are above: You must be spiritually minded;
and have your Conversations in Heaven. But is it possible to exercise these
Graces before you have them? Is it possible for you to beget them in your own
Souls, when all your Powers, Faculties and Affections are directly opposite to
'em? Or is it possible to deserve the Blessing of this renewed Nature from God;
when your whole Conduct is one Course of Enmity against him and Indignity to
him? No! Consider your Case as it is. You are dead, and cannot help your selves:
You are guilty, and cannot deserve that God should help you. If you perish for
ever, God is just; and you have no Cause of Complaint. And if God have Mercy
upon your Soul, he will bring you to his Footstool, with a most humble abasing
Sense of this your impotent and miserable, guilty and exposed State. He will
bring you to be thus poor in Spirit, if ever he gives you a Title to the
Kingdom of Heaven.

3. Resolve to cast your perishing Souls upon the Riches of the sovereign free
Grace of God in Christ. You deserve to perish, and cannot help your selves.
Destruction and Death are before you; and there is no Remedy in your own Power.
What will you do? What Course can you take? If you rest in your present
Condition, you are undone for ever. If you betake your selves to any
Sufficiency of your own, it will not help the Case. -- But here is your Relief and
Encouragement: With God there is Forgiveness, that he may be feared; and with
Him is plenteous Redemption. It is a faithful Saying, and worthy of all
Acceptance, that Christ Jesus came to save, even the chief of Sinners. If you
are sensible of your lost Estate, If you are burdened with the Weight of your
Sin and Guilt, If you are solicitously enquiring after a Deliverance from the
Misery you feel and fear, the Lord Jesus Christ is inviting you to come unto
him; and so doing he will give you Rest. -- Resolve therefore to commit your
Souls to the Righteousness of Christ for Justification, to the Influences of
the blessed Spirit for Conversion and Sanctification; and rely only upon the
Riches of the free Mercy of God in Christ, that the Work of Grace may be
carried on in your Souls with Power, that you may be translated into the
Kingdom of God's dear Son, and obtain the Salvation which is in Christ Jesus,
with eternal Glory.

4. Persevere in a constant and diligent Attendance upon all the Means of
Grace, in Order to have this Change wrought in you. -- Though your Deliverance
from your miserable Condition entirely depends upon the sovereign Grace of God
in Christ, which you can neither merit, nor have any Claim to, by any Thing you
do, or can do: Yet you must seek it, if you would find it. You must knock at
the Door of Mercy, if you would have it opened unto you. -- It is God that must
sprinkle you with clean Water, and make you clean; from all your Filthiness and
from all your Idols he must cleanse you: He must take away the Heart of Stone;
and give you a Heart of Flesh: He must cause you to remember your own evil
Ways, and your Doings that are not good; and to l^ath yourselves in your own
Sight, for all your Iniquities and for all your Abominations. Not for your
Sakes will he do this for you, be it known unto you: But for his holy Name's
Sake. But yet he will be enquired of by you, to do this for you. Ezekiel. xxxvi.
25, 37. -- Be therefore found watching at his Gates; and waiting at the Posts
of his Doors. Be found seeking God in all the Ways of his Appointment, with
utmost Earnestness and Diligence. Whatever Discouragements you meet with,
resolve to persevere in your unwearied Application to the infinite Mercy of God
through Jesus Christ. Resolve that if he slay you, yet you will trust in him;
that if you perish, you will perish at his Foot. Strive to enter in at the
strait Gate. Be not slothful in this Business: but servent in Spirit, seeking
the Lord. Thus commit your Ways to the Lord, trust also in him; and you may
hope that he will bring it to pass.

To conclude, Let such of you as have already experienced a converting Change,
give all the Glory to the free Grace of God in Christ; mourn the Remains of
indwelling Sin; pray for more and more of the Sanctification of the Spirit, and
diligently attend all the Means of Edification.

My beloved Brethren, Be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work
of the Lord: Forasmuch as ye know that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord.
-- Now the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. AMEN.

A DISCOURSE ON CONVERSION.
EPHESIANS. ii. 4, 5. But God, who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he
loved us, even when we were dead in Sins, has quickened us together with
Christ. By Grace ye are saved.


HAVING in the foregoing Discourse, something distinctly considered the sad
Effects of our original Apostasy, I am now led by the Words before us, to take
Notice of the Methods of our Recovery from the Misery, Death and Ruin, which
the Fall has brought upon us. -- In the Text we have,

1. A Representation of our State by Nature, in those Words, When we were dead
in Sins. We are by our Apostasy from God, dead as to all the Powers and
Faculties of our Souls in their moral Consideration: They are wholly Pollution
and Sin; and naturally incapable of any Thing that is spiritually good. -- We
are dead by a just Sentence of the Law of God. We are condemned already; and
the Wrath of God abides on us. And we are not only spiritually; but eternally
dead, by the Execution of that terrible Sentence upon our Souls, if infinite
Mercy does not step in to our Rescue and Deliverance; as I have observed in a
former Discourse.

2. Here is set before us the great Change, which by Conversion is wrought on
the Soul? In that Expression, Has quickened us; or (as it is elsewhere
expressed) has made us alive from the Dead. The blessed Spirit of God, when he
pleases, renews our Nature, sanctifies our Affections, and fulfils in us the
whole good Pleasure of his Goodness. By his gracious Operations upon our Souls,
he mortifies our Corruptions, brings our sinful Appetites and Passions-into
Subjection; and creates us anew in Christ Jesus (...) good Works, that we may
walk in them. This makes a great Change in the Soul, such as may very aptly be
compared to a Quickening, or Resurrection from the Dead.

3. Here is intimated the powerful Efficiency, by which this Change is wrought;
in those Words, Together with Christ. As the almighty Power of God was
gloriously exerted and displayed, in the Resurr^ction of our Lord Jesus Christ
from the Dead, so is the same almighty Power manifested and magnified, in the
Resurrection of Sinners from their spiritual Death. Thus they are quickened
together with Christ; as truly quickened as he was, and by the same Divine
Efficiency.

4. We have the Motive unto, or the impulsive Cause of this Change, suggested
in those Words, God who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love, wherewith he
loved us: By Grace ye are saved. -- There could be no Motive out of himself,
Nothing but his own infinite Mercy Love, and Grace, to excite his kind Regards
to such poor guilty Hell-deserving Rebels as we are. Should he leave us all
under the Guilt of our Sins and the damning Power of our Lusts, unto inevitable
and remediless Perdition, he would be most just; and we most justly miserable.
We should have no Cause of Complaint, if he should bestow no Mercy upon any of
us; for he owes us none, we have nothing to claim but his just Displeasure.
What then but sovereign distinguishing Grace, looks upon any of the fallen Race
of Mankind while in their Blood, and says unto them, Live? Why is one, more
than another, Partaker of these quickening Influences; but from the mere good
Pleasure of God's Goodness?

But that I may more distinctly explain the Words before us, I shall endeavor
to consider,

First, In what Manner the Spirit of God powerfully quickens dead Sinners, and
brings them into a State of spiritual Life.

Secondly, In what Respect we are thus saved by the rich Mercy and Grace of God.

I Am then to consider,

I. In what Manner the Spirit of God quickens dead Sinners, and brings them
into a State of spiritual Life.

To this I shall in general observe, that the principal Method, by which this
great Change is wrought in the Heart of a Sinner by the Spirit of God, is his
giving him a realizing View of the great Truths revealed in the Word of God,
and enabling him to see Things as they are. -- It may be some Prejudice against
the Doctrine of our Sanctification by the special Influences of the Spirit of
God upon our Hearts, that Men may imagine, there is hereby intended the
Infusion of some new Faculty into the Soul, which it had not before; and that
the new Creation implies our becoming a new Sort of Being, with Respect to the
natural Powers and Properties of the Soul, which we were not before. But let it
be considered, that the Spirit of God does no more in the Conversion of a
Sinner, than bring him to the right Exercise of those rational Powers, with
which he was born; give him a just View of his greatest Concerns; and enable
him to act worthy of a reasonable Being. Observe this, and all the Prejudices
against the Doctrine before us are obviated, and vanish away. Now that this is
the Case, I shall endeavor to show, by taking some particular Notice of the
usual progressive Steps by which a Sinner is brought out of a State of carnal
Security, to the Possession and Exercise of the divine Life; Though I have on
another Occasion formerly endeavored to represent the Methods of the blessed
Spirit's Operations in the Conversion and Sanctification of a Sinner (in a
Discourse published on that Subject) the Reader will see the Necessity of
considering these Things over again in another View, in Order to clear up the
Case before me.
And I think it will appear that the whole Change is wrought in him by
spiritual Illumination, by impressing a right View of Things upon his Mind, or
by enabling him to act reasonably.

1. Then, if we consider the first Change wrought in a Sinner by the Spirit of
God, it will appear to be no more than his bringing him to realize his own
miserable Condition, and see it as it is. -- It is awfully certain from the
Word of God, that every impenitent Sinner is an Enemy to God, under a Sentence
of Condemnation, and an Heir of Hell and eternal Misery. And it is equally
certain, that the most of the World are easy and quiet, careless and secure in
this dreadful State. No Means that can possibly be used, will put the most of
Mankind upon a proper Solicitude about their eternal Welfare. The most
awakening Addresses, that can be made them in the Name of the Lord, the most
surprising Alarms of God's Providence, the most pathetick and compassionate
Entreaties of their godly Friends, have no Effect upon them, to stop their
Carreer for Hell and Damnation. They will yet sleep upon the Brink of the Pit.
They will yet run upon the thick Boss^s of God's Bucklers. They will yet
indulge their Lusts, though they perish forever. -- And what is the Source of
this Indolence, Thoughtlesness, and Security; but their want of a just View of
their State and Danger? Could they but realize these Things, and see them as
they are, they would sooner rush upon a drawn Sword, or leap into a burning
Furnace, than farther incense the eternal Majesty against their Souls, and
venture upon everlasting Damnation. But their Misery is, that they have no
feeling Apprehension of these Things. They consider them but as the Rumbling of
remote Thunder; and as Affairs of no special Consequence to them: and thus they
will consider them, unless the Spirit of God sets home the important Concern
upon their Mind; and gives them a lively Sense of what they are doing, and
whither they are going. -- But if once the blessed Spirit undertakes the Work,
he will make the long neglected and slighted Means of Grace effectual to open
their Eyes, that they may see their State as it is. Though they could before sit
under the most powerful Ministry from Year to Year, without Care, Fear, or
sensible Apprehension of their Danger: Yet now an ordinary Sermon, or a
particular Passage in a Sermon, which perhaps they had heard hundreds of Times
before without Concern, shall awaken their sleepy Consciences, and make them
with Trembling and Astonishment cry out, What shall I do to be saved? -- Why,
what is the Matter now? Whence is this wonderful Change? Why cannot the poor
Sinner do now as he was wont to do? Why cannot he go on in his Mirth and
Jollity, in his worldly Pursuits and sensual Gratifications? What means this
Darkness and Distress, this melancholy Countenance and solemn Concern? Is this
the Man, that lately laughed at Preciseness; that banter'd serious Godliness,
and ridiculed vital Piety, as Enthusiasm, or a heated Imagination? Whence is he
now as much an Enthusiast, as any of those whom he lately derided and scoffed
at? Whence is be now so afraid of Hell and Damnation, that could lately mock at
Fear; and laugh at the shaking of God's Spear? -- This wonderful Alteration is
wholly wrought by the almighty Spirit's impressing a lively View of what the
secure Sinner could have no feeling Sense of before. Now he sees his Sins, in
their Number, Nature and Aggravations. Now he sees his Danger; and thence feels
that it is a fearful Thing to fall into the Hands of the living God. He sees it
in such a View, that he can be no longer quiet and easy, in such a State of
Guilt and Misery. But this (though open to every one's Observation, and plainly
visible from the Word of God, and the Nature of Things) is what he never would
have seen to Purpose, unless the Consorter had be'n sent to convince him of
Sin. And the Reason is assigned, 2. Cor. iv. 4. The God of this World has
blinded the Minds of them which believe not. And Isai. 1. 3. Israel does not
know; my People does not consider.

2. If we consider the Case with Respect to a Sinner's Humiliation, the Spirit
of God works this also in the Soul, by showing him his State as it is; and by
giving him a realizing Sight of his Unworthiness of Divine Mercy, of his
spiritual Impotency, and utter Inability to help himself. -- These are indeed
Truths plainly revealed in Scripture, as well as necessary Deductions from the
Light of Nature. By both these it is clearly manifest, that we are guilty
Creatures, and thereby obnoxious to the Wrath God; that we are imperfect
Creatures, and therefore cannot fulfill the Demands of the Law of Nature; much
less can we make Satisfaction for our past Offenses. But, though these Things
are in themselves evident as the Light, they have no Impression upon the Minds
of the Generality of Mankind. -- Though deserving Nothing but Destruction and
Death, they are as easy and secure, as though they had a Title to God's Favor,
and a Claim to eternal Happiness. Though utterly incapable to change their own
Hearts, or to deserve that God should do it for them, they are yet attempting
their Salvation in their own Strength, if they attempt it at all; and being
ignorant of God's Righteousness, they go about to establish their own
Righteousness, not submitting themselves to the Righteousness of God. Even
those who are convinced of their Guilt and Danger, are usually struggling after
Deliverance in their own Strength; and betaking themselves to some
Self-righteous Refuge or other. And thus in their highest Seize, will
they continue to compass themselves about with Sparks of their own Kindling,
till the Spirit of Grace by his powerful Influences humble them at God's Foot;
and shew'em that they are poor, and miserable, and wretched, and blind, and
naked. And how is this done, but by giving them a Sight of their Case as it is?
-- They had a doctrinal Knowledge before, that they were sinful, guilty,
helpless, and hopeless in themselves: But this had no special Influence upon
their Affections, or their Conduct. But when they have a feeling Sense of this,
it must bring them low. They now see their Sin and Guilt, that there is no
resting in their present Condition. They see the Defects of their Duties, that
these cannot recommend 'em to God's Favor. They see their own Impotency, that
they cannot take away the Heart of Stone out of their Flesh; and give
themselves a Heart of Flesh. They see the strict Demands of God's Law, that
it is impossible to come up to 'em. They see the Purity and Holiness of God's
Nature, that He cannot look upon Sin and Sinners with Approbation. They see
that they have no Capacity to help themselves, though they are utterly undone
in their present Condition. And what is the necessary Result of a realizing
Sight of such a lost, helpless, perishing Condition, but that ( Psalm cxxx. 3.)
If thou, Lord, should mark Iniquity, O Lord, who should stand? Or that ( Neb.
ix. 15.) Behold, we are before thee in our Trespasses; for we cannot stand
before thee, because of this! What should be the Result of this Prospect, but
that they lie at God's Footstool, as condemned Malefactors, having nothing to
plead, save unmerited and forfeited Mercy, why Sentence should not be executed
upon them, to their eternal Confusion!

3. In the same Manner, is a convinced Sinner brought to a sollicitous Inquiry
after an Interest in Christ. This also is wrought in him, by a lively View of
his Case as it is. -- We are all indeed from our earliest Age, indoctrinated in
this essential Article of the Christian Faith, That there is not Salvation in
any other but Christ, and that there is no other Name under Heaven and among
Men, whereby we must be saved. And yet the most of the World are whole, and
need not the Physician. They are more concerned about any Thing else, than
about an Interest in Christ. It is beyond human Art and Means, to make them at
all sollicitous about this great Salvation, though they know that their eternal
Welfare depends upon it. -- And what can be the Reason, that this Madness is in
the Hearts of Men? Can condemned perishing Sinners be unconcerned, about the
only Method of Escape from eternal Damnation? Can they set more Value by their
Lusts and Pleasures, by the World and it is Vanities, and even by the me^^est
Trifles imaginable, than by Christ and his saving Benefits? Can they rather
choose to perish eternally, and to lose all the Glories of the heavenly World,
than to come to Christ, that they might have Life? How astonishing soever this
Conduct appears, it is visibly the Case of the World of Mankind in general. And
what Reason can possibly be imagined of such unparalled Stupidity, but this,
that they have not (they cannot have, while under the Power of a blind and
carnal Mind) any realizing View of this great Concern? Could they but see their
Case as it is, a condemned Malefactor could as easily set Light by a Pardon, or
a drowning Man by Deliverance, as these perishing Sinners by an offered
Savior. -- We accordingly find, that when the Spirit of God comes upon them
with his Illuminations, and opens their Eyes to see their Misery and Impotency,
they can be no longer careless about an Interest in Christ. They can no longer
make Excuses: and go their Way, one to his Farm; and another to his
Merchandise. They can no longer amuse themselves with diverse Lusts and
Pleasures; and forget their necessity of Christ and his Salvation. No! they
have now Nothing so much at Heart, as the securing an Interest in this blessed
Savior. Now this Thought lies down and rises with them, What must I do to be
saved? How shall I obtain an Interest in Christ? Now their distressed Souls are
groaning out these pathetick Desires, O for an Interest in Christ! Let me have
Christ, whatever I want! The World now with all it is Blandishments, all its
Riches and Glory, dwindles to Nothing in the Eyes of such a humbled Sinner,
when compared with this excellent and needed Savior. I may appeal to every one
that have been truly converted to God, at an Age of Observation, whether they have not experienced these Things in their own Hearts. And indeed these Operations
of the Mind are so rational, that it would be in the Nature of Things
impossible we should neglect a most active Concern about an Interest in Christ,
if the Eyes of our Understanding were enlightened. But alas! The Light shines
in Darkness; and the Darkness comprehends it not. We see by Experience, that
Men never do (never will) show themselves thoroughly in earnest about this
everlasting Concern, till the Spirit of God open their Eyes, and turn them from
Darkness to Light; and that when they are thus illuminated, they cannot do
otherwise. This wonderful Change in Men's Desires and Pursuits, is a necessary
Consequence of Divine Illumination, and of a just and reasonable View of
Things. Without this, they cannot attain it: With this, they cannot fail of it.
To this therefore the Apostle ascribes it. 2 Cor. iv.6. For God who commanded
the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined in our Hearts, to give the
Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ.

4. In the same Manner also is the actual Conversion of a Sinner accomplished.
In Order to this, the Spirit of God gives him a realizing Sight of the Fullness
and Sufficiency that there is in Christ; and of his Willingness and Readiness
to save him. The Seize before described, do not necessarily imply a
saving Conversion to God. Though these are the Influences of the blessed Spirit,
they are not his special and saving Operations. The Sinner is not brought into
a State of Favor with God, till he accepts a tendered Savior upon his own
Terms. It Is by receiving him, that we have Power to become the Sons of God. The
first Act of saving Faith is that Conversion, by which the Sinner affectually
turns from Sin to God, passes from Death to Life, and becomes interested in
Christ and all his saving Benefits. -- Now, which Way is the Sinner bro't to
this, but by an impressed lively Discovery of Things as they are? -- By a
lively Sight of his Sin and Danger, powerfully applied to his Mind and
Conscience, and appearing as it is, he is awakened to an earnest Inquiry after
the Way of Salvation. By a clear Discovery of his Unworthiness and Impotence,
he is bro't to the Footstool of God's Sovereignty, and to an earnest Desire of
an Interest in Christ; as I observed before. But here the Soul is often plunged
into greatest Darkness and Distress: His Guilt stares him in the Face; He sees
he has no Claim to Mercy, Nothing that can entitle him to it; He has been
struggling in vain, to mortify his Corruptions, to enliven his Affections, and
to do something to recommend himself to God's Favor; and is now perhaps ready
to give up the Case, as helpless and hopeless; He cannot see how God can have
Mercy upon such a guilty, polluted, hard-hearted, hellish Sinner, as he is. --
Propose to him the only Remedy for such lost Sinners; and how many Objections
will ^e in the Way! How many Arguments will he bring against believing in
Christ; from his own Unworthiness and want of Qualifications to come to him;
from the Decrees of God; from his having sinned away the Day of Grace, and the
like; even till he runs into Despair, unless the Spirit of God disperse the
dark Cloud, and give him a right view of redeeming Mercy! -- But when once such
a distressed Soul fees this as it is, when once he has an impressed Sense of
Gospel Grace, and is brought to see indeed, that he is invited to come to
Christ, notwithstanding all his Guilt and Unworthiness; and that this precious
Savior is able and willing to bestow all that Salvation upon him, which he
stands in Need of, then his Objections are silenced; and he cannot refrain from
heartily complying with the Offer. -- Then he can commit his Soul to him; for
he sees that there is utmost Safety in doing it. Then he can depend upon him as
the Author of his eternal Salvation; for he sees that he has no whither else to
go, and that Christ has the Words of eternal Life.

It is remarkable, that the Scriptures every where annex Salvation to Faith,
and to the Belief of the Truth; and we are told, 1 John v. 1. Whosoever
believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God. But what are we to
understand by this Belief? Will a cold and unactive Assent to this Truth
interest us in Christ and his Salvation? No! Faith is the Substance of Things
hoped for, and the Evidence of Things not seen. Heb. xi. 1. In which is more
than a bare Assent implied. It implies such a realizing View as makes all the
Offers of Salvation by Christ certain, and his purchased Benefits present to
the Believer. And when a weary and heavy-laden Soul has such a Sight of the
Fullness and Sufficiency, of the Kindness and Compassion of Christ; and of his
willingness to save him upon his coming to him, as makes this comfortable Truth
as it were personally present to his Mind; when he has such a View that this
(...) is offered freely to him, without Money and without Price; it is
impossible for him to do otherwise than consent to such reasonable Terms of
Salvation. How can he refuse his Consent to these Terms, when his Distress of
Soul had before prepared him for a Compliance with any Terms of obtaining God's
Favor? It Is impossible for him to do otherwise than set the highest Value by
such a Savior, when he has this Sight, that Grace here, and Glory hereafter is
implied in his Interest in Christ. It Is impossible for him to do otherwise than
have his Dependence upon Christ only, when he has this Sight, that in him all
Fullness dwells, and that there is no Safety any where else. -- But I hope (if
God will) more particularly to describe a true saving Faith. I Am now only
endeavoring to show, that the Spirit of God works this Grace in us by
illuminating our Minds; and giving us a right Exercise of our Understandings.

5. The Spirit of God does likewise carry on the Work of Grace in a Believer's
Sanctification, by continued Views of spiritual Things as they are. -- By
Faith, the Soul is united to the Lord Jesus Christ; and becomes one Spirit with
him. By Faith, Believers have an Interest in all the Benefits of Christ's
Redemption. They have thereby a Claim to all the Promises of the Covenant of
Grace, and may safely and confidently depend upon the Faithfulness of God, that
he will give them Grace and Glory; that they shall be kept by his Power,
through Faith, (...) Salvation; that he who has begun a good Work in them,
will perform it unto the Day of Jesus Christ; that he who spared not his own
Son, but delivered him up for them all, will with him also freely give them all
things; and that upon their believing in Christ, out of their Bellies shall
flow Rivers of living Water. And what Way is this glorious Work of Grace
carried on in the Soul, but by the continued Assistances of the blessed Spirit
to act reasonably; and to maintain a lively Apprehension and Impression of
invisible Realities? How comes the Believer to hate every false Way; but by a
lively View of the Vileness and Unreasonableness of sinning against God? What
excites him to live in the Love of God; but a realizing Impression of the
Excellency of his Nature, the infinite Value of his Favor, and the endearing
Attractives of his Goodness, Kindness and Compassion? What makes him in Love
with Holiness; but a sensible Discovery of it is internal Beauty and
agreeableness to a reasonable Being? How comes he weaned from the World; but by
a true Sight of it is Vanity, and utter Insufficiency to satisfy the Desires of
an immortal Nature? How come his Affections placed upon the Things above; but
from a like Discovery of the Value and Importance of Things unseen and eternal?
What is Communion with God; but a just Impression of what pertains to God and
Godliness? And what the Evidences of God's Favor; but a realizing Sight of the
Actings of Grace in our Souls, and of the Truth of the Invitations and Promises
of the Gospel? The extraordinary Influences of the Spirit in his immediate
Communications of Light and Joy to the Believer, are but still a brighter
Discovery of Things as they are. -- In a Word, in whatever Aspect this Case is
considered, what I am pleading for will (I think) appear to be Truth. The whole
Work of Sanctification is carried on by Illumination, and by the Soul's being
brought, through the Influences of God's Spirit, to the Exercise of Knowledge
and Understanding; and to this the Apostle ascribes it. Ephesians. i. 17, 18. That
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Mercy, may give unto you the
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, in the Knowledge of him: The Eyes of your
Understanding being enlightened, that you may know what is the Hope of his
Calling; and what the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in the Saints.

Upon the whole, I cannot see that the Spirit of God does in any other manner
work this wonderful Change in the Hearts of Sinners, than by giving them a just
View of Things as they are, by bringing them to act reasonably, worthy the
Dignity of their rational Nature, and the intellectual Powers they are endued
with. By this he conquers the Enmity to God there is in their Hearts; and
brings them from the Power of their Lusts, of Satan, and the World, into the
Fear and Favor of God. By opening their Eyes, he turns them from Darkness to
Light, and from the Powof Satan unto God, that they may have an Inheritance
among those that are sanctified.

If it be objected, That the Will must be changed and renewed, as well as the
Understanding enlightened, in the Conversion of a Sinner; That the Spirit of God
works in us both to will and to do of his good Pleasure; and Christ's People
must be made willing in the Day of his Power: This is readily granted. -- But
the Question is, In what Manner is the Will changed; and how does the Lord
Jesus Christ bring the stubborn obdurate Will of the Sinner into Subjection to
himself? To this I answer as before; By giving them a realizing affecting Sight
of Things as they are. -- It Is impossible for a reasonable Being to do
otherwise than will what appears to be, in all Circumstances, best for him and
most agreeable and desirable to him. Did therefore carnally secure Sinners see
Things as they are; did they realize to themselves the Folly and Danger of
their Lusts, the Misery of an unconverted State, their Need of a Savior, the
Excellency of Christ, the Advantage of an Interest in him, the Benefits of a
Life of Religion with Respect both to this World and that to come; I say, did
they see these Things in a just and powerful Light, their Wills would
necessarily be changed. They would no longer choose the Way of Destruction and
Death, before the Path of Life and Peace. They would no longer venture eternal
Damnation, rather than accept of Happiness here and for ever. -- We are not
therefore to suppose, that the Spirit of God properly puts any Force upon Men's
Inclinations, when he changes their Wills. The Will admits no Violence. He does
but give them a true Discovery, a realizing View and powerful Impression of
what is best for them; and that necessarily determines their Choice. -- Let
Sinners, if they can, be willing to rush upon the Pikes of God's Displeasure,
when the Spirit by strong Convictions and Illuminations gives them a full and
clear Sight of their Sins, and of the flaming Vengeance, that hangs over their
guilty Heads. Let them, if they can, refuse a tendered Savior, when they are
brought to see their extreme Necessity of him, with his Fullness, Sufficiency,
and Readiness to save them. Or let them, if they can, choose the Service of Sin
and Satan before the Service of God, when they have a feeling Sense of the
Danger and Misery of the one; and the Excellency, Desireableness, and Safety of
the other. -- In a Word, Though Men may have the greatest Degree of doctrinal
Knowledge, in the Things now treated of, understand them well, discourse of 'em
rationally and distinctly; and receive 'em for Truth, without any Change of
their Wills and Affections: yet if through the Spirit they had any lively and
affecting Apprehensions of these unseen and eternal Concerns, they must of
Necessity have an Influence upon their Hearts and Lives, proportionable to the
Kind and Degree of the Light impressed on their Minds. Though a notional
Knowledge of these Things will serve no other Purpose, but to leave the Sinner
the more inexcusable: yet when the Spirit of God sets them home with Power upon
the Soul, in their own proper Light and Evidence, this Prospect cannot fail of
a blessed Effect. -- But it is Time I should proceed to consider,

II. In what Respect this quickening and sanctifying Change is to be attributed
to the rich Mercy and Grace of God. --

And here let it be observed,

1. This is to be ascribed to the Riches of divine Grace, with Respect to the
Sovereignty of God, in distinguishing some from the rest of the World of
Mankind, in the Application of the Benefits of Christ's Redemption to their
Souls. -- There is Nothing more visible to every Observer, than the dreadful
Security and Stupidity, Neglect of Christ and Salvation, chargeable upon the
far greatest Part of those, who enjoy the best Advantages for their eternal
Welfare. How sad and melancholy is the Reflection, that such Multitudes of
those who are lifted up to Heaven by their Privileges, must yet be cast down to
Hell; and Nothing that is or can be done for 'em in the Use of the best Means
whatsoever, will prevent their final and eternal Ruin! And whence is it, that
all the World, without Difference, are not boldly going on in the same Paths of
Destruction and Death? Whence is it, that there are any of the Race of Adam
brought to see their Danger, to enquire the Way of Salvation; and to betake
themselves to Christ for Refuge? -- Is it from any superior natural Powers,
that they thus become wise to Salvation? Constant Experience shows us that God
has chosen the foolish Things of the World, to confound the wise; and the weak
Things of the World, to confound the Things that are mighty. -- Is it from the
Enjoyment of better Means and external Advantages for their Souls eternal
Interest? Don't we daily see, that under the very same Ordinances and
Providence of God one is taken and another left? -- Is it from their more
innocent and regular Lives and Conversations? How often do we see scandalous
and flagitious Sinners savingly converted to God, when others that are free
from such gross Pollutions, remain in Unbelief, and live on in the Neglect of
Christ and his offered Salvation? Publicans and Harlots enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, when Scribes and Pharisees are shut out. -- Is it from better
Education? Whence then is this Difference in the Children of the same Family?
-- Is it from a better natural Disposition? Alas, every unsanctified carnal
Mind is Enmity against God, it is not subject to the Law of God; neither indeed
can be. -- What Cause then can this possibly be ascribed to, but that which is
assigned by our blessed Lord? Matthew. xi. 25, 26? I thank thee, O Father, Lord
of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these Things from the wise and
prudent; and revealed them unto Babes. Even so, Father, for so it seemed good
in thy Sight. -- God is absolutely Sovereign in the Disposal of his own
Benefits. He bestows them when, where, and how he pleases. He will have Mercy
on whom he will have Mercy. -- He makes known the Mystery of his Will,
according to his good Pleasure, which he has purposed in himself. Ephesians. i. 9.
-- What Reason therefore have those that are effectually called, to admire and
adore the infinite Riches of the sovereign free Grace of God to them, in
Distinction from so many others, that continue in their Sin and Guilt, in a
State of Death and Perdition! Who has made them to differ? What have they, that
they did not receive? What was there in them more than in others, that could
excite the divine Compassion? Had they not the same corrupt Nature, the same
Enmity to God, the same Hardness of Heart, the same (if not greater) Degrees of
Sin and Guilt, that are found in the unsanctified World? And has God passed by
them when in their Blood, and said unto them, Live; while such Multitudes of
others, as good by Nature as they, are like to perish eternally? O the Riches
of the free distinguishing Grace of God! What manner of Love has the Father
bestowed upon them, that they should be called the Children of God! What Cause
have they now to begin the eternal Anthem, To him that has loved us and washed
us from our Sins in his own Blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto God and
his Father, to him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever, Amen!

2. The Conversion of a Sinner is a Display of the rich Mercy and free Grace of
God, on Account of the strong Opposition there is in the Hearts of Sinners to
this Change. -- This Opposition to vital Piety is every where visible, in the
Unsuccessfulness of the Means of Grace, and in all the fruitless Endeavors,
that are used to persuade Men to turn and live. All that can be done by the
faithful Ministers of Christ, will not prevail with a great Part of Mankind, so
much as seriously to consider those Concerns that are of infinite Importance to
their Souls. And what but the Enmity of their Natures to God and Godliness, can
be the Cause of this Stupidity and Insensibility? They have the same natural
Powers to consider their eternal Interest, which the Believer exercises to his
everlasting Advantage; and yet they cannot receive the Things of the Spirit of
God; but they are Foolishness to 'em. And whence is this Impotency but from a
Fountain of Enmity and Opposition in their Hearts? -- They are strongly
attached to their Lusts and sensual Gratifications; and therefore will not
realize to themselves, that these will in the Conclusion sting like a Serpent;
and bite like an Adder. Their Affections are glowed to the World and its
Vanities; they therefore will not allow themselves any suitable and solemn
Reflections upon the Shortness, the Emptiness and Vexation of these ensnaring
Amusements. They have a natural Aversation to a spiritual and heavenly Life;
and therefore cannot dwell in the Views of those Things that are unseen and
eternal; nor at the utmost proceed further, than to a Form of Godliness,
without the Power. The Way of Salvation by Christ is so contrary to the proud
and self-righteous Disposition of their Souls, that they cannot see any
Comeliness in him, that they should desire him. They are so immersed in the
Affairs of Time and Sense, that they will not allow themselves Leisure for any
deliberate Thought and Concern about an eternal World. -- Though they may be
reasoned into an Acknowledgement, that this their Way is their Folly, how
quickly does the Consideration vanish; and the sensual Appetite reccover its
Dominion? Though they may be awakened to some temporary Concern about their
State, by the Ordinances or Providence of God; such are the rooted Prejudices
in their Hearts against a religious Life, that the Dog soon returns to his
Vomit; and the Sow that is washed, to her wallowing in the Mire.

In a Word, they are under the Dominion of Sin, and the Empire of Satan; and as
long as the Strength of their own Corruptions, in concert with all the Powers
of Hell, can keep the Palace, they will enjoy their Lusts in Peace. There must
be one stronger than the strong Man armed, to take from him the Armor wherein
he tru^teth; and divide the Spoil. -- This is manifestly the Case of every
unregenerate Man. What a powerful Work of divine Grace (...) it therefore be,
to bear down this Opposition, to bring these mad Men to their Reason; and how
their Souls into Subjection to the Lord Jesus Christ! How wonderful is this
Grace of God, to exercise such Compassion to their Souls, while they are
Enemies both to him and themselves! The Mercy of God does herein shine with
peculiar Glory, that it not only enlightens the Eyes of the Blind; but of those
that are voluntarily and obstinately so, that do and will refuse a Recovery,
until he anoints them with his Eye Salve, that they may see! This will be the
Subject of the eternal Admiration of the Redeemed, that when they were Enemies,
they were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son. Romans v. 10.

3. The Riches of God's free Grace appear in a Sinner's Conversion, in that
none can have any Claim to the sanctifying Influences of the blessed Spirit, by
any Thing they can do. -- If we consider the whole Race of Mankind, in our
apostate Circumstances, what was there in us more than in the Angels that fell,
to excite the divine Compassion? What was there in us, that could incline the
blessed Redeemer to take upon him, not the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of
Abraham? Could Guilt and Pollution, could Enmity to God, and vile sensual
Affections and Appetites, entitle us to the Favor of God, and the infinite
Love of the glorious Redeemer? -- If we consider the Gospelized World, as
distinguished from those that sit in Darkness and see no Light, but are
perishing for lack of Vision, whence is this Difference? Were they not all the
Offspring of the same ungrateful Rebel, all under the Power of the same
original Corruption, and all in the same Manner guilty before God? What
therefore, but infinite free Grace, has distinguished us from the darkest
Corners of the Earth? -- If we consider this with Respect to the Elect of God,
what out of God himself could be eternal Motive to choose them from the rest of
(...) World, to be the Heirs of eternal Glory? What Qualification has he seen
in them, who were Nothing but Sin and Defilement, to recommend them to his
sanctifying and saving Mercy? What have they done, or what can they do in their
unsanctified State, that can give any Title to the Grace of God? Without Faith
it is impossible to please God. Can Unbelievers entitle themselves to God's
Favor, while it is impossible they should please him?

If any should pretend, that God has promised to bestow sanctifying Grace upon
those that diligently seek it; that he has promised to those which seek, that
they shall find; and to those, which knock, that the Door of Mercy shall be
opened unto them: -- I shall not dispute, whether these should be considered as
Promises made to unsanctified Persons; or Directions to be found in the Way of
Life, and gracious Encouragements to Diligence in Duty. For at present I cannot
but think, that in which soever of these Views such Texts of Scripture are
considered, the Consequence will be the same; and that if these are considered
as Promises, no unconverted Sinner can so far comply with the Condition, as to
have a Title to the Benefit of such Promises. -- None can (I think) pretend,
that these Promises are made to an idle, slothful, and intermittent Performance
of Duty. And will the mere Powers of Nature ever carry any Man so far, as to be
constant, fervent, and persevering in all the Ways of known Duty? -- None can
pretend, that these Promises are made to an hypocritical Performance of Duty;
to those that flatter God with their Lips, and lie to him with their Tongues,
while their Hearts are far from him. And can any unsanctify'd Person be hearty
and sincere, in all his religious Performances? -- None can pretend, that these
Promises are made to such who bring their Lusts with them to God, in all their
Approaches before him. No surely! If they regard Iniquity in their Hearts, the
Lord will not hear them. And is any unsanctified Person capable to keep his
Lusts always in Subjection; and to approach the Presence of God with a hatred
to every false Way, when it is always true, of them all, that their Heart is
deceitful above all Things, and desperately Wicked? -- If it be here urged,
that God has given a Promise of Grace to those who seek it as well as they can;
and that they therefore have a Claim to it, upon the Terms of using their best
Endeavors to obtain it: I must yet observe, that no unsanctified Person ever
came up, even to these low Terms. Can any of them pretend, that they have
always gone as far as they could, in watching over their Hearts, in keeping out
of the Way of Temptation, in bridling their Lusts, in attending upon all known
Duties, and in being serious and affectionate in their Performance of them? If
not, how have they a Title to Mercy, for doing as well as they can? -- If it be
further urged, that God has promised to overlook our Imperfections; and to
bestow Grace upon us in the Way of seeking it, notwithstanding the great
Defects of our Duties: I enquire, Where is the Promise to be found, that God
will overlook the Imperfections of christless Sinners? They are under the Law,
which curses every one, that continues not in all Things to do them. Gal. iii.
10. Christ has indeed purchased for Believers, that their imperfect
Performances shall be accepted, through the Merit of his Atonement and
Intercession. But how does that affect the Case of unconverted Sinners, who
have no Interest in Christ, nor in the Benefits of his Redemption; and can
therefore have no Claim to Mercy upon his Account? -- Upon the whole then, it is
most evident, that the Conversion of a Sinner is of sovereign free Grace; what
God without Injustice can deny to any Man in the World; and what none have any
Right to by any possible Qualification of their own. And every Partaker of this
unspeakable Gift has Cause with highest Admiration to say as the Apostle, The
Grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant, with Faith and Love which is in
Christ Jesus.

If it be objected, that if this Doctrine be true, it is in vain for
unconverted Sinners to seek for Grace, since they have no Claim to it when they
have done all they can; and it is impertinent, to press the Duties of Religion
upon them, when their utmost Endeavors will give them no Title to Salvation.

I answer, the Apostle improves this Argument the quite contrary Way. Phil. ii.
12, 13. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling: FOR it is God that
works in you both to will and to do, of his good Pleasure. If God only can
bestow Grace upon us, we should be the more in earnest to obtain it from him.
If we have no Claim to Mercy, we should the more humbly prostrate our Souls at
God's Footstool, pleading for Acceptance through the Merits of the great
Redeemer. -- Would it be just Reasoning in a condemned Malefactor, because none
but his offended Sovereign can pardon his Offense, reprieve him from Execution,
and restore him to his forfeited Favor, that therefore he will not petition
him for it? Would it be just Reasoning in a miserable Beggar, because he must
die and perish with Hunger, if the rich Man at whose Door he lies, will not extend
his undeserved Charity to him, that therefore he will not ask an Alms of him to
save his Life? -- We are condemned Malefactors, what Need have we therefore to
seek a Reprieve at the Footstool of divine Grace, where it can only be hoped
for! We are (...) with Hunger, what Need have we therefore to repair to our
Father's House, where there is Bread enough and to spare! Were there but a mere
Possibility of Mercy, it were sufficient Incentive to the most active
Endeavors, since there is no Hope of it in any other Way. -- God can bestow
Grace upon us, if he pleases. A Word from him is sufficient to change our
Hearts, sanctify our Affections, and qualify us for eternal Salvation: and this
is what all the Angels in Heaven, and Men upon Earth cannot do for us. To whom
then shall we go, but to him who has the Words of eternal Life? Sinners don't
know indeed that he will do this for them: but they do know that must perish,
if he does not bestow his Salvation upon them; and they know nothing to the
contrary, but that they may obtain, if they seek it. They have now all the
Encouragement to seek, that any others have ever had, who have sought and
obtained. And will they sit still and perish, because God is a sovereign
Benefactor, that may do what he will with his own Benefits?

I add to this, that God has given gracious Invitations unto Sinners, to seek
the renewing and sanctifying Influences of his Blessed Spirit. He has not said
to the Seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain. How many Offers of Mercy are made in
the Gospel, to every one without Difference, that are found watching at
Christ's Gates, and waiting at the Posts of his Doors? If their own Seize
will not give them a Claim and Title to sanctifying Grace, they will yet put them
in that Way in which alone it is to be had, and in which they are encouraged to
hope, that their Labor will not be in vain. -- They cannot indeed deserve it,
do what they can: but is it not as well to receive it of sovereign Mercy, as of
Merit? They cannot claim it on Account of their own Performances: but is it not
as well to receive it on Account of the Merits of the great Redeemer? They may
be (and it is best they should be) afraid, left they fail of the Grace of God:
But if they have a Heart to seek it in Earnest, to seek it upon the Terms
proposed in^ the Gospel, and to persevere in thus seeking it, they may hope
that God will for his own Name's Sake, though not for their Sake or for their
Duties and Deservings, make good to them all the gracious Words of
Encouragement given them in the Gospel. What then stands in the Way of their
most active Industry; but the Pride and Naughtiness of their Hearts? -- Should
condemned Rebels stand upon Terms with their Prince, in Order to their
Acceptance of his Pardon? Is it not enough that Pardon is to be hoped for upon
their Petition, though they neither do nor can deserve it? If they will refuse to
seek it upon the gracious Offer, because they cannot claim it as due to 'em, let
Justice be done: They must receive the deserved Reward of their Rebellion and
foolish Contumacy. So if Sinners will rather make their Damnation sure, than
seek and hope for Mercy at the Hand of God, upon such blessed Encouragement as
is given them in the Gospel, they must even be left to their unhappy Choice;
they must be left to repent their Madness when it is too late.

It may be further objected against this Doctrine, That it takes from Man all
Freedom of Will, and renders him a mere Machine, incapable of all moral Good,
even as if he were a Tr^e or a Beast.

I have said something to this Objection in a former Discourse; and endeavored
to show the Impropriety of all the Debates, with which the Church has been
harassed, about the Freedom or want of Freedom in the Will of Man. The Question
ought not to be, Whether the Will be free? But whether the Man be free; and
whether the present Doctrine does necessarily deny, even to unregenerate Men,
full Freedom, in all their moral Conduct? -- Having spoken so particularly to
this Case before, I need not enlarge upon it now. I shall therefore only
propose a few Queries to the Objector, which will (I think) be sufficient to
illustrate the Case. And,

1. I inquire, whether an irreligious Life don't appear most desirable to an
unsanctified Person; and whether he can refrain choosing such a Life, while it
does appear so? -- If it does not appear most desirable, why does he choose it?
If it does appear most desirable, how can he decline choosing it, until he has
another and better View of Things? To choose what does not appear most
desirable, or not to choose what does appear most desirable, is a Contradiction
in Terms; and implies to will and not to will, at the same Time, and in the
same Respect.

2. I inquire, whether Freedom consists in acting contrary to our Inclinations;
or in acting agreeable to 'em? -- If Freedom consists in acting contrary to our
Inclinations, then Freedom and Constraint are the same Thing: For no Man acts
contrary to his Inclinations but by Constraint. If Freedom consists in acting
agreeable to our Inclinations, then unconverted Sinners are in a State of
Freedom; for they always act in their moral Conduct as they incline to act. If
they have some transient Inclinations to a better Conduct: yet the most
powerful and prevailing Inclinations of their Minds are to do as they do.

3. I inquire, whether it is possible that an unconverted Sinner, while such,
can comply with the Terms of Salvation, and yet remain in a State of Freedom?
-- Every unconverted Sinner is an Unbeliever; or in other Words, he is
unwilling to accept of the Lord Jesus Christ upon Gospel-Terms. To be willing
to accept of the Lord Jesus Christ upon his own Terms, is a true saving Faith:
and can be affirmed of none but those who are savingly converted to God. If
therefore an unsanctified Person does comply with the Terms of Salvation, he
does it against his Will: and where then is his Freedom? To act freely and
unwillingly, at the same Time and in the same Respect, is the most glaring
Contradiction; as was hinted before.

4. I inquire, whether it is not consistent with the most absolute Freedom, to
have such new Views of of Things, as change our Wills and Affections? -- It Is
most evident, that a rational and free Agent must act according to his present
View of Things. He must choose what appears most desirable to him; and his
Freedom consists in Nothing else, but in acting voluntarily, or according to
his Inclinations. Whence it follows, that impenitent Sinners, while such, must
necessarily pursue the Gratification of their Lusts: For these appear most
desirable; and are therefore the Objects of their Choice. -- But then on the
contrary, when the Spirit of God gives them a new Prospect and a just
Apprehension of Things, the same sinful and sensual Pursuits, that before
appeared most pleasant and delightful, do now appear most hateful and
burdensome; the same Ways of Piety and Holiness, that were before their
Aversation, are now become infinitely more desirable in their Eyes, than all
the Pleasures of Sense. These therefore must necessarily become the Objects of
their Choice. And is there not in both Cases the greatest Freedom? -- The
Sinner acts most freely, in choosing what his darkened Understanding and
vitiated Appepetites represent to him most worthy of his Choice. The Convert
acts most freely, when his enlightened Understanding gives him a contrary View
of Things; and represents the Objects of his former Detestation and Abhorrence,
to be most worthy of his Desire and Delight. While on the other Hand, neither
the one nor the other would exercise any Freedom at all, if they did not
choose, as they do, what upon their present View of Things appears most
desirable. -- How vain therefore and frivolous is that Pretense, that the
Sovereignty of God's efficacious Grace infringes the Liberty of the Creature!
How is it inconsistent with human Liberty, for a Man to be convinced of a
former Mistake, and induced by such a Conviction to a different Temper and
Conduct! To have his Understanding enlightened to see Things, which he did not
see before; to have new Views and Impressions of Objects; and to be assisted
and enabled to act conformably thereto; that is, to act reasonably, and to show
himself a Man! It might be as justly pretended, that a liberal Education is
inconsistent with Freedom, in that it gives new Prospects to the enlightened
Understanding; and consequently new Desires, Inclinations, and Delights.

But I hasten to make some IMPROVEMENT of what has been said. -- And here,

USE 1. This teaches us the dreadful Danger of placing any Confidence or
Dependence upon any Seize of our own, for Salvation. -- By Grace are ye
saved, through Faith; and that not of your selves, it is the Gift of God. What
then will become of all those in the Day of Christ, who sew together the
Fig Leaves of their own Righteousness, to cover their Nakedness; who instead of
repairing to, and depending upon the Riches of God's free Grace in Christ, are
placing their Confidence upon something of their own, for Justification and
Salvation? These will all be found with the Hypocrites Hope, when it comes to
the decisive Trial. -- If they can now quiet their Consciences, or raise their
Hopes of Happiness, from any Qualifications in themselves; if they can now put
such Glosses upon the plain Doctrines of Grace in the Gospel, as will gratify
their proud self-righteous Dispositions: yet the Time approaches, when they
will find (if they have not founded their Hope upon God's free sovereign Mercy and
Love in the great Redeemer) that they have built upon the Sand; and therefore
that their Hopes must fall in the stormy Hour; and great will be the Fall
thereof. -- Certain it is, that there is not, there cannot be, any Danger at
all in placing all our Hope and Confidence in the free unmerited Mercy of God
in Christ. But on the contrary, the Appeal may be made to the most resolute
Opposers of this Doctrine, whether they ben't capable of a Mistake, in their
Opinions and Conclusions on this most impotant Concern. Can they pretend to
Infallibility? Are they certain that they cannot be deceived, when so many, as
great and as good Men as themselves, do (at least) imagine the greatest
Certainty, that they both see and feel their fatal Delusion? And what will be
the Consequence, if they are too late ashamed of their Hope? Is it not much
safer to venture our Eternity upon a Foundation that cannot disappoint us, than
to run the dreadful Hazard of having a deceived Heart turn us aside, and of
perishing with a Lie in our right Hand? -- If I have any Knowledge of the
Gospel of Christ, or any Acquaintance with the Method of divine Grace in the
Conversion and Sanctification of Sinners, they who raise their Expectations of
Happiness from any other Grounds than the Sovereignty of God's free Grace, as
it has been described above, will find in the Conclusion, that they have
compassed themselves about with Sparks of their own Kindling; and what they
must receive at the Hands of God, will be, to lie down in Sorrow. -- But with
what inexpressible. Horror and Confusion will these Hypocrites be filled, when
they too late discover the Disappointment! How dreadful will the Mistake
appear, when they find it remediless, when there will be no rectifying the
fatal Error, no recovering the lost Soul, no more Seasons or Means of Grace
left them, for the reforming their deluded Conduct! How terrible will their
Amazement prove, when they find that their false Confidences are rejected, and
have undone them to all Eternity! -- To have our Hopes vanish and our
Expectations cut off, in Things temporal (though many Times accompanied with
Circumstances dismal enough) is but light and trivial, compared to an eternal
Disappointment. Who can imagine the Dreadfulness of being miserable for EVER
and EVER! -- Can the awful Thought be entertained without Horror and
Astonishment!

How dangerous therefore is the Case of those, who depend upon their
in^ff^nsive Practice and moral Virtue, as the only Foundation of their eternal
Hope? And yet this, I fear, is the Case of too many, who live under
Gospel Light. -- They either flatter themselves with their negative Holiness,
that they are not Drunkards, not Swearers, Couzeners, openly profane, or the
like; and thence boast with the Pharisee, Luk xviii. 11.) God, I thank thee
that I am not as other Men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers; or even as
this Publican. -- Or else, they raise their Expectations of Happiness upon
their outward positive Conformity to the moral Law; vaunting with the young Man
in the Gospel (Mat. xix. 20.) All these Things have I kept from my Youth up: Or
satisfying themselves with Saul (before his Conversion) that they are touching
the Righteousness which is in the Law, blameless. Phil. 3. 6. -- But is this
all our Plea for eternal Safety? How then is our Case better than that of the
moral Heathen? What do we more than They? and are we not then without Hope as
much as they? If Righteousness come by the Law, then is Christ dead in vain.
Christ is become of none Effect unto us, whosoever of us are justified by the
Law. We frustrate the Grace of God, by going about to establish our own
Righteousness. What Occasion was there for the dear Purchase of our Redemption
by the Blood of Christ, what Occasion for the Gospel of Salvation, if our
Morality will entitle us to the heavenly Inheritance? Will our imperfect
Obedience to the Law atone for our original Guilt, and our multiplied actual
Sins? Will it pacify God's Displeasure;s free us from the Curse of the broken
Law; and purchase eternal Salvation for us? No surely. By the Deeds of the Law
shall no Flesh be justified in his Sight, Romans iii. 23. But as many as are of
the Works of the Law, are under the Curse. Gal. iii. 10. Though good Works are
what God requires; and are on that Account pleasing in his Sight: yet they are
not the Price of our Salvation, "The Opinion of Merit changes their Nature; and
turns Gold into Dross." Our Dependence is upon Divine Grace; and therefore not
at all upon our moral Seize. For if it be by Grace, it is no more of
Works; otherwise Grace is no more Grace. Romans xi. 6. Though it be true, that no
Man can be saved without Morality; that being a necessary Qualification of a
real Christian, and a necessary Fruit of justifying Faith; it is also true,
that no Man can be saved by his Morality: for our imperfect Obedience must not
be placed in Christ's Stead; nor rob him of the Honor of his redeeming Mercy.
We must not expect to purchase the eternal Inheritance, with a Price that is
less than Nothing; nor hope for Heaven on Account of our Obedience, when it has
Sin enough cleaving to it, to condemn both that and us. Whoever are so mad as
to venture their Souls upon this treacherous Bottom, will certainly sink into
the Ocean of eternal Misery.

How dangerous also is the Case of those, who depend upon their external
Performances in Religion and Devotion, as what will give them a Claim to
eternal Life? I have spoken something particularly to this before; and shall
only add, That although Duty is indeed the prescribed Way of entering into Life;
and if ever we obtain Salvation, we must seek it diligently in this Way: yet
our best Performances will not bring God in Debt to us; nor lay him under any
Obligation to show us Favor. -- They who attend Duty, do well: but they who
depend upon what they do, are among the Proud in in heart, whom God abhors, and
dooms to Destruction. If we don't bring our Persons and Services to the
Footstool of divine Grace for Acceptance, through the Merits of the Mediator's
Atonement, they will both be found as an unclean Thing, in the Day of Christ's
Appearance. -- Then we may plead, that we have eat and drank in Christ's
Presence; and that he has taught in our Streets; that we have prayed in our
Families and Closets, read and meditated in his Word, attended public
Ordinances, and the like; and yet be the Subjects of that terrible Sentence, I
tell you, I know you not whence you are, depart from me, all ye Workers of
Iniquity. Luke xiii. 26, 27.

In a Word, How dangerous is the Case of those who depend for Salvation upon
transient Affections, Convictions, or other inward Experiences, consistent with
reigning Hypocrisy and Unbelief. -- Alas! we may have a Sense of the infinite
Defect of all our moral Seize, and of all our religious Duties; and yet
sacrifice to our own Net, and burn incense to our own Drag: So consequently
have all our Hopes end in Disappointment and Confusion. -- Such will be our
Case, if we depend upon our Convictions and Apprehensions of our Guilt and
Danger. The greatest Degrees of Terror for our Sins won^ secure the awakened
(...) from an eternal (...) with Cain and Judas, if he rests short of a saving
Conversion to God; and fails of becoming such a new Creature, that old Things
are passed away; and every Thing is become n^w in his Soul. -- Such likewise
will be our Case, if we build our Hope upon our legal Repentance. Salvation is
indeed promised to a sincere Repentance: but every one that mourns for Sin, or
rather because there is a Hell to punish Sin, has not a Claim to that Promise.
The greatest Degrees of Grief under a Sense of our Sin and Guilt, will prove
but the Earnests and Foretastes of eternal Horror; unless it brings the Soul to
the Blood of Christ for Pardon, and ends in a Renovation of our Nature, a
Change both of Heart and Life.

The Case will also be the same, if we depend upon a historical Faith, for
Salvation. Many are ready to ^latt^r themselves with vain Expectations of
Happiness, upon such Grounds as these; they believe the Truths of the Gospel,
they believe that Jesus Christ came to save Sinners, and that there is no
Salvation in any other: and therefore apply to themselves the Promises made to
Believers, and delude their Imaginations with a Dream of future Salvation. But
alas poor Souls! such a Faith as this is not only common to Reprobates; but
even to Devils themselves; for the Devils believe and tremble. Their Persons
and Hopes must therefore perish together, unless they have a Faith that
receives the Lord Jesus Christ upon his own Terms, depends upon him only for
Salvation, purifies the Heart, works by Love, and is accompanied with all the
Graces and Fruits of the blessed Spirit. -- The same may be said of those who
depend upon their Enlargements, Affections, and good Frames in religious
Duties, upon their sudden Joy and Comfort in their Approaches to God, upon
their imaginary Zeal for God and Godliness, and the like, without the quickening
Influences of the Spirit of God, enabling them to receive Christ Jesus the
Lord, and to walk in him.

USE, 2. This gives Direction and Encouragement to poor distressed Sinners, to
repair to the Fountain of sovereign Grace, to have God fulfill in them all the
good Pleasure of his Goodness, and the Work of Faith with Power. -- Were we to
depend upon our own Performances for Salvation; the Imperfections of our
Duties, the Prevalence of our Corruptions, the Hardness of our Hearts, the
Irregularity and Sensuality of ou^ Affections, and the infinite Defects of our
best Attempts in God's Service, might justly discourage us. But the rich and
free Grace of God is sufficient for the greatest Sinner, for the oldest
Sinners, for the most hard-hearted Sinner, for the Sinner that has longest
enjoyed and (...) ^rofanely abused the Treaty of Salvation in the Gospel. -- It
is not the Number and Aggravation of their Sins; but their Impenitence in them,
and their wilful Rejection of Offered Salvation, that shuts so many miserable
Souls out of Heaven. If the Mercy of God was not superior to the Sins of the
greatest Transgressor, and the Blood of Christ sufficient to cleanse from all
Sin, the Case would indeed be desperate. But, blessed be God, we are assured,
that where Sin has abounded, Grace has much more abounded. Though none may take
Encouragement from thence, to turn the Grace of God into Wantonness; and
continue in Sin, that Grace may abound: yet all may take Encouragement from
hence, to cast their perishing Souls upon the free Grace and Mercy of God,
hoping for the Justification of their Persons, through the Merits of the
Redeemer; and the Sanctification of their Nature, by the Influences of the
blessed Spirit. Let none therefore be discouraged: for God receives Sinners,
that are poor and contrite, and who tremble at his Word. He invites to Mercy
the chief of Sinners; and offers them, that although their Sins be as Scarlet,
they shall be white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as
Wool. Isai. i. 18.

Are you burdened with a Sense of your Guilt and want of Pardon? Plead the
free Grace of God, and the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, for Justification and
for a Freedom from Wrath and Condemnation. You may be justified freely by his
Grace, through the Redemption there is in Christ Jesus. Romans iii. 23. Come to
Christ, for there is no Condemnation to him that is in Christ Jesus. Romans viii.
1

Do you want converting and sanctifying Grace? Here is a full Supply. From
Christ's Fullness you may all receive; and even Grace for Grace. John i. 16. Go
to him for Faith, whereof he is the Author and finisher. Heb xii. 2. Go to him
for Repentance: we are told, He is exalted with God's right Hand, to give
Repentance and Forgiveness of Sins. Acts. v. 31. Go to him for Love to God; for
if you are brought to love him, it must be because he has first loved you. 1
John iv. 19. Go to him for every Grace you want; for he works in us both to
will and to do, of his good Pleasure. Phil. ii. 13.

Do you want strengthening Grace? Here you may repair for that also. His Grace
is sufficient for you; and his Strength is made perfect in Weakness. 2 Cor.
xii. 9 By him you shall be more than Conquerors over all Temptation and
Opposition^ Romans viii. 37.

Do you want persevering Grace? You may be kept by his Power, through Faith, unto
Salvation, 1 Pet. i. 5. And in a Dependence upon him, you may have a supporting
Confidence, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any
other Creature, shall be able to separate you from the Love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. Romans viii. 38, 39.

Are you humbly sensible, that you have no Qualifications to recommend you to
the Favor of God? Come to this Fountain of Grace, in your lost and abject
Condition, as you are. Come poor, wretched, miserable, blind and naked; though
you have Nothing but Guilt and Pollution to bring with you. Here is Mercy, rich
Mercy, freely offered. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters; and
he that has no Money, come ye, buy and eat; yea, come and buy Wine and Milk,
without Money, and without Price. Isai. lv. 1. What then stands in the Way of
the Sinner's Salvation; but his ungrateful Neglect or Rejection of offered
Mercy!

Finally, let every one see to it, that they have the Experience of this rich
Mercy and free Grace of God in their Conversion and Sanctification. To what
Purpose, as to You, will be the glad Tidings of Mercy and Grace, if you should
fail of an Interest in it? -- O take Heed therefore, that you receive not the
Grace of God in vain! Be not high-minded, but fear. Fear, l^st a Promise being
left us of entering into his Rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.
-- It will be dreadful indeed, to perish from under the Gospel, to have these
Displays of God's infinite Grace and Love rise up in Judgment against you in
the Day of Christ. -- You have now the Offers of Grace: But a little while
hence, all Hope of Mercy, all Possibility of Salvation will be past and gone
for ever, if you turn a deaf Ear to the present Treaty. Therefore to Day if you
will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts, lost the Judgment threatened be
executed upon you, that because when Christ called ye refused, when he
stretched out his Hands ye did not regard, he also will laugh at your Calamity,
and mock when your Fear comes: When your Fear comes as Desolation, and your
Destruction comes as a Whirlwind; when Distress and Anguish comes upon you,
then shall you call upon him; but he will not answer: you shall seek him early,
but shall not find him.

Let such of you as are in a State of carnal Security, take Heed lest you sleep
the Sleep of Death, from whence there is no awaking. Take Heed, that you don't
quiet yourselves with delusive Hopes, and live contented without such a Sense
of your Sin and Danger, as may make you restless in your Desires and Endeavors
to flee from the Wrath to come. O awake, thou that sleep, and arise from the
Dead. Labor to see your Misery; Meditate upon it; and cry to God to show you
your State as it is: That you may no longer be such a Stranger to Distress of
Conscience for Sin, and to Fear of the Wrath of God.

Let such of you as are under an awakning Sense of your Guilt and Hazard, take
Heed, that you rest not short of a hearty Compliance with the Terms of
Salvation, proposed in the Gospel. Take Heed, that you neither rest in your own
Seize; nor grow discouraged in your Pursuit of an Interest in Christ,
Labor to see thoroughly your own Emptiness, your undone and helpless State, and
the infinite Sufficiency there is in Christ to supply all your Wants.
Resolutely, readily and constantly commit your Souls to him; and steadfastly
rely upon him, and him only, for Justification and Life.

To conclude, Let such of you as entertain Hopes of an Interest in Christ by
Faith, take Heed that you don't content yourselves with a dead Faith; nor rest
short of the renewing, sanctifying, and quickening Influences of the Spirit of
God. -- Take up with no Evidence of your converted State, until you have
obtained a Victory over your Lusts, and got the Dominion of Sin subdued, until
you are brought habitually to maintain a Life of true and universal Holiness,
of Piety toward God, and of Righteousness and Charity toward Men. Labor to
bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, and by this prove your selves. Show
your Faith by your Works: and by a patient Continuance in well-doing, seek for
Glory, Honor, and Immortality, that in the End you may inherit eternal Life.
-- Blessed are the pure in Heart; for they shall see God: But without Holiness
no Man shall see the Lord. -- Every Man that has this Hope in him, purisieth
himself, even as he is pure. -- And hereby do we know that we know him, if we
keep his Commandments. -- In this the Children of God are manifest, and the
Children of the Devil: Whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God, neither
he that loves not his Brother. He that faith, I know Christ, and keeps not
his Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him: But whosoever keeps his
Word, in him verily is the Love of God perfected; hereby know we, that we are
in Him. And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
Understanding that we may know Him that is true: even in his Son Jesus Christ.
This is the true God, and eternal Life. -- And we are in Him that is true. And
they that know his Name, will put their Trust in Him. -- Now Grace and Peace be
multiplied unto you, through the Knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord. Amen.

A DISCOURSE Upon Justification by FAITH.
ROMANS iii. 25. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation, through Faith in his
Blood, to declare his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins, that are past,
through the Forbearance of God.


THE glorious Transaction of our Redemption by Jesus Christ, is the just
Surprise and Wonder of the reasonable Creation. The Angels desire to look into
these Things; and Man who is immediately interested herein, has especial Reason
to adore the amazing Love, that shines with such Luster in his Deliverance from
Death and Hell. -- And what brightens the Glory of this stupendous Work, and
gives us Occasion of the highest Exercise of Gratitude, is the infinite Price,
by which our Salvation is purchased. For thus faith the Scripture, We are
redeemed, not by corruptible Things, as Silver and Gold; but with the precious
Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without Blemish and without Spot. And God has
purchased his Church with his own Blood. Thus the Price of our Deliverance
bears Proportion to the Degree of our Misery and Guilt. When these were so
aggravated, that all the Angels in Heaven were insufficient for our Rescue;
when no created Wisdom could invent an effectual Expedient, when no created
Power was equal to the vast Design; God our Savior looked, and there was none
to help; and wondered, that there was none to uphold; He therefore himself
interposed, and his own Arm brought Salvation. According to the Appointment of
God the Father, our Lord-Redeemer has undertaken to be a Propitiation for us,
that through Faith in the Merits of his Blood, we may be interested in his
Righteousness, and obtain the Remission of our Sins; as we are instructed in
the Words of our Text.

In which we may note the following Particulars.

1. Observe the Person here spoken of, represented by the Relative, Whom; which
leads us to the last Words of the foregoing Verse; Jesus Christ, WHOM God has
set forth to be a Propitiation.

2. We may observe the Character here attributed to this Person, that is, a
Propitiation or Atonement. The greek Word here rendered Propitiation, is very
emphatical; and signifies one Person's being substituted in the Room and Place
of another, to bear his Guilt, or to discharge his Debt; and thereby to make
Atonement or Satisfaction on his Account. By which is exhibited to us, how the
Lord Jesus Christ undertook to become a Curse for us, to bear our Sins in his
own Body on the Tree, that he might thereby expiate our Guilt, pacify offended
Justice, and reconcile us to God.

3. We are here shown the Divine Appointment of this glorious Person to be a
Propitiation for us. Whom GOD has set forth, proposed or ordained. This
merciful Provision of God for our Recovery from Ruin by the Atonement of
Christ, is the Fruit and Consequence of the eternal Covenant of Redemption, or
Counsel of Peace between them both. -- God the Father, as the first in Order in
the blessed Trinity, is represented as proposing or appointing; and God the Son
as undertaking this glorious Work. Whereby is not only shown, how the
Operations of this blessed Three in One, do follow the Order of their
Personality, but also how God the Father, as sustaining the Character of
Supreme in the Economy of Redemption, demands Satisfaction to offended
Justice, and has allotted this Way of obtaining it, by Christ's being a
Propitiation for us, that in this Way he might be just, and yet the Justifier
of him which believes in Jesus.

4. Here is pointed out to us the Means or Method of our getting actually
interested in this Propitiation: Through Faith in his Blood. It is through a
believing Acceptance of, and Dependence upon the Death and Sacrifice of the
Redeemer, that we are to partake of the Benefits of his Atonement. -- His
Satisfaction is sufficient for all; but actually applied and effectual to none
but the Believer.

5. We may note the blessed Fruit and Consequence of an Interest in this
Propitiation of Christ: The Remission of Sins, that are past, through the
Forbearance of God. All the Sins committed before Justification, while God so
patiently exercised his forbearing Goodness to the guilty Sinner, are fully
remitted and for ever done away, through the Merits of this Atonement, upon the
first Exercise of a true Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, insomuch that the
Sinner is at once reconciled to God, and instated in his Favor.

But there are three Things here, that more especially demand our Attention,
and which I shall endeavor more distinctly to consider.

First, What Is implied in our Lord Jesus Christ's being a Propitiation for us.

Secondly, What we are to understand by that Faith in him, by Means of which we
are interested in this Propitiation.

Thirdly, How Faith in Christ operates or influences to bring about our
Remission and Justification in the Sight of God. -- As to the Nature of
Justification, I shall have Occasion to consider that in my next Discourse; and
therefore pass it at present.

Here,

I. Then I Am to show what is implied in Christ's being a Propitiation for us. --
And that I may illustrate this in the most familiar and perspicuous Manner I am
capable of, I shall endeavor to be something particular and progressive in my
Attempts to explain it.

Now,

1. This implies or rather presupposes the guilty condemned State of apostate
Man; and our utter Inability to recover ourselves. -- The Apostasy of Adam, I
mean the Guilt thereby contracted, was by a just Imputation transmitted to all
his natural Posterity; So that we are all become guilty before God. And the
Contagion or Pollution, contracted by the Apostasy, being also propagated to
the miserable Progeny of a condemned Rebel, hence all our Affections and
Passions are corrupted and defiled; and our Conversations being Streams from
this polluted Fountain, are become irregular and sinful; whereby we have lost
the Favor of God, and are the Objects of his righteous Displeasure. -- This is
plainly the Case of the whole World of Mankind, while in a State of Nature. --
This fatal Fruit of the Fall does indeed seem one of the darkest Dispensations
of Providence; and is what carnal Reason is exceeding apt to cavil at. But, I
think, I have given such Answers to the chief Objections made against it, in my
Discourse on this Subject, as may justly quiet our Minds, and silence all our
Opposition.

This then being our distressed Case, whither could we flee for Help? It Is
evident to every one's Observation, that we cannot come up to that unspotted
Obedience, which God has the justest Claim to from a rational Creature; that
our best Duties and most careful Observances of the Law of Nature, are sadly
defiled with Sin; that we have vicious Habits and Inclinations, which we cannot
conquer; and that our carnal Minds are Enmity against God, are not subject to
the Law of God; nor indeed can be. Whence it is certain, we are so far from
being capable of atoning for our Apostasy, that we are utterly incapable to
live up to the Law of Nature, had that Breach been made up.

If any will suppose, that our Repentance would have been sufficient to have
appeased the divine Displeasure, without any other Satisfaction: I would ask
them, how they can be certain of this? I would desire them to show, what
necessary Connection there is between the Sorrow of guilty Rebels for their
Sins, and the Favor of an offended God, without a Satisfaction or Atonement?
-- And I would inquire, whether they have this good News for the fallen Angels?
It would be such glad Tidings, that I dare say, they have never heard since
their first Apostasy. -- But were even this supposed, still I enquire, How that
would afford any Relief in our Case? For We are naturally incapable of a true
Repentance, by any Power of our own, as much as of making a strict and adequate
Atonement. We are too much in love with Sin, to loath and abhor it, as of our
selves. The Habits of Sin too intimately adhere to our Souls, to be wholly
subdued and forsaken, by any Attempts or Resolutions of ours. And can we please
God with a partial and unsincere Repentance, which is all we can pretend to?
Can God he deceived; or will he be mocked? No surely! We can neither discharge
the Debt already contracted; nor avoid running further into Debt every Day.

2. This also implies or presupposes, that divine Justice demanded Satisfaction
for our Offenses, in Order to our Reconciliation unto God. -- I shall not
undertake to determine, whether the Punishment of Sin be indispensably
necessary from the Nature of God; and naturally results from his essential
Righteousness and Purity, absolutely considered. It is indeed certain, that
Holiness and Justice are essential Perfections in God; that he is of purer
Eyes, than to behold Iniquity; and that "his Justice being infinite, it must be
inflexible." But, Mankind not. having adequate Ideas of these Divine
Perfections, we may err in our Reasonings and Deductions from them. -- However,
I think we may safely affirm, that God's requiring Satisfaction for Sin, is
agreeable to his rectoral Holiness and governing Justice; and that as he is the
supreme Judge and Governor of the World, he justly requires Sin should be
punished; That by this he may illustrate and vindicate his own Holiness, and
convince the World, that the righteous Lord loves Righteousness; and that the
Wicked his Soul hates. (Psalm. xi. 5, 7.) That by this he may testify his
Adherence to his own Laws; and let the World see, that Heaven and Earth shall
sooner pass away, than one Jot or Tittle shall pass from them. (Mat. v. 18.)
That by this he may discover the Value he puts upon the Obedience of his
Creatures; and show that their Observance of his Law is not a vain Thing for
them, because it is their Life. (Deuteronomy. xxxii. 47.) And that by this he may
assert his own Sovereignty; and the World may see, that verily he is a God that
judges in the Earth. (Psalm. lviii. 11.) I might add, by this he also
brandishes a flaming Sword against the Impiety of future Transgressors; and
discovers, that to him belongs Vengeance and Recompense. (Deuteronomy. xxxii. 35.)
-- The Truth of God does certainly make Satisfaction for Sin necessary. He
threatened Death as the Consequence of the Fall. ( Genesis ii. 17.) And his Word is
immutable like his infinite Nature. Has he said it, and will he not do it?
What he has spoken, he is able also to perform; and being the God of Truth,
will he not bring it to pass? -- In a Word, God's actually requiring
Satisfaction for Sin, is a Fact abundantly confirmed in the Scriptures; and
therefore cannot but be owned a Reality. Among the Multitudes of Scriptures,
that might be cited in this Case, you may consider these that follow. Exodus
xxxiv. 7. That will by no Means clear the guilty. Josh. xxvi. 19. He is an holy
God, he is a jealous God; he will not forgive your Transgressions nor your
Sins. Romans iii. 5, 6. Is God unrighteous, who takes Vengeance? (I speak ^s a
Man) Far be it: For how then shall God judge the World? Which shows, that as
God is Judge of the World, it is a righteous Thing for him to take Vengeance.
Romans iii. 26. To declare at this Time his Righteousness, that he might be just,
and the Justifier of him which believes in Jesus. Which shows, that the
Satisfaction of Christ was requisite, in Order to God's being just, in the
Justifying of Sinners; and that it would not have been agreeable to his
Justice, to have saved them without Satisfaction. Romans vi. 23. The Wages of Sin
is Death. This is so, both from the Justice and Law of God.

3. This implies, that the blessed Redeemer undertook to represent poor guilty
Criminals; and to give himself a Ransom for them. This is a Doctrine
discoverable only by Revelation; and I can no Ways explain it, but by showing
in what Light the Scriptures set this before us. And in those blessed Oracles,
God the Father is exhibited as admitting (by Virtue of his Supremacy in the
Dispensation of Man's Redemption) the transferring our Sin and Punishment to
the Mediator; and accordingly as sending him to undertake our Salvation. Thus,
Joh. iii. 16, 17. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish; but have everlasting
Life. For God sent not his Son into the World, to condemn the World: but that
the World through him might be saved. Romans 8. 3. For what the Law could not do in
that it was weak through the Flesh, God (sending his own Son in the Likeness of
sinful Flesh and for SIN.) condemned Sin in the Flesh; that the Righteousness
of the Law might be fulfilled in us. 2 Cor. v. 21. For he has made him to be
SIN for us, who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in
him. 1 John iv. 9, 10. In this was manifested the Love of God toward us;
because that God sent his only begotten, Son into the World, that we might live
through him. Herein is Love, not that we loved God: but that he loved us; and
sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our Sins. -- The Scriptures also
represent the Lord Jesus Christ, as freely and voluntarily consenting to
undertake this great Work; unto which he could be liable to no Constraint. Mark
x. 45. For even the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto: but to minister;
and to give his Life a Ransom for many. Joh. x. 17, 18. I lay down my Life,
that I might take it again. No Man takes it from me; but I lay it down of my
self: I have Power to lay it down; and I have Power to take it again. Tit. ii.
14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity. Heb. x.
7. Then said I, Lo I come (in the Volume of the Book it is written of me) to do
thy Will, O God. -- The Scriptures do moreover set forth the Redeemer, in the
Quality of our Surety and Representative, in this wonderful Transaction. Heb.
vii. 22. By so much, was Jesus made a Surety of a better Testament. 1 Pet. ii.
24. Who his own self bore our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, that we being
dead to Sin, might live unto Righteousness; by whose Stripes ye were healed. 1
Pet. iii. 18. For Christ also has once suffered for Sins, the Just for the
Unjust (that he might bring us to God) being put to Death in the Flesh; but
quickened in the Spirit. In which Texts, the Substitution of the Lord Jesus
Christ in our Room and Stead, is clearly and strongly expressed, in his bearing
our Sins; and suffering for us; and the like Expressions are very numerous
throughout the New Testament. -- I will only add, that the Scriptures represent
the Sufferings of Christ, and his Obedience unto the Death, as a proper
Sacrifice and Atonement for us, and as the Purchase of our Redemption. Isai.
liii. 10. When thou shall make his Soul an Offering for Sin, he shall see his
Seed. Ephesians. v. 2. And walk in Love, as Christ also has loved us; and given
himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling
Savor. Heb. iii. 17. That he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, in
Things pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation for the Sins of the People.
See also 1 Cor. vi. 20. Tit. ii. 14. with many other Passages to the same
Purpose, which frequently occur in the sacred Pages. -- Let Men therefore
strain their Wits as much as they can, to put false Glosses upon these and such
like Texts of Scripture, there is nothing more certain, than that the proper
Satisfaction and Atonement of our Lord Jesus Christ for the Sins of the World,
is in the strongest, most plain and familiar Terms, repeatedly asserted in the
Word of God. If we have any Regard at all to the Way of Salvation proposed in
the Gospel, we must expect Redemption through the alone Merits of his Life and
Death; and depend upon him as our Ransom, as the Propitiation for our Sins, and
the Lord our Righteousness.

I Am aware, that there are some Difficulties in the Way of this Doctrine, which
the carnal Mind is ready to stumble at. -- It is an Objection against this;
That it is not just, to accept of and punish the Innocent instead of the
Guilty. -- To which I answer,

It must be granted, that in human Judicatures this would be most unjust, thus
to transfer capital Punishishment; because no Man has Power to dispose of his
own Life at pleasure, nor Power to give his Life for another, be sure, not the
Just for the Unjust: Neither has the civil Magistrate Power thus to sacrifice
a good Man for a bad, though even with his own Consent; because it would be
highly injurious to the Community, to cut off the innocent and valuable Member,
and to spare the guilty ^^^minal, as a Pest and Nuisance to Society. -- But
these Reasons don't affect the Case now before us. Our Redeemer had Power to
lay down his Life; and Power to take it up again. -- As he was the Lord from
Heaven, he had the absolute Property and Disposal of his own Life. And he has
declared himself the Son of God with Power, by his Resurrection from the Dead.
And instead of this being injurious to the Community, it has bro't most
glorious Advantages to us, both with Respect to the present and the future
World. -- I may add to this, that our blessed Savior did not finally perish;
as a Substitute must do, in capital Punishments among Men. No; he underwent but
a short temporary Death, and received his Life again, with greatest Advantage.
From whence it appears, that those Objections, which would be just in other
Cases, can have no Place here. The Character and Quality of the Substitute, and
the absolute Sovereignty of the sup^^am Judge, render the Case exempt from all
the Rules of human Judicatures, -- It is true indeed, that the Justice of God
could not have demanded Satisfaction from the Redeemer, if he had not
voluntarily made himself responsible for us: but Christ having a more absolute
and sovereign Disposal of his own Life, than any Man can have of his Estate, he
might as freely offer it, and God the Father as justly accept it, in
Satisfaction for our Sins, as any Man can be accepted as Surety for another
Man's Debt.

It may also be objected; That this seems derogatory to the Goodness of God, to
have penal Satisfaction lead the Way to the Exercise of Mercy; and that this
represents the divine Being too like to the most merciless of human Creatures,
who have such an Appetite to Revenge, as cannot be satisfied without Blood:
Whereas it would seem more agreeable to infinite Goodness, to pardon freely.

I answer, The Mistake lies in the Objector; and he only (I think) has Unworthy
Notions of God. To imagine the Death of Christ flowed from an irregular
Appetite to Vengeance, is indeed to measure the divine Perfections by our
depraved Lusts and Passions. But to suppose, that God's Demand of Satisfaction
arises from (or at least is consonant to) the infinite Purity of his Nature,
whereby he cannot look upon Sin with Approbation; but testifies his Abhorrence
of it to all the rational World: To suppose, that the righteous Governor of
the World should inflict Punishments, as well as bestow Rewards, according to
the Rectitude and Equity of his own glorious Nature: To suppose, that this
glorious Lawgiver should insist upon maintaining the Honor of his own Laws,
whereby he has determined to govern the World; This is not to entertain Tho'ts
in any Respect unworthy of infinite Grace and Goodness. The Goodness of God
does hereby shine in its brightest Luster, that he is willing to save poor
guilty Rebels at such an infinite Expense; and that in such an admirable
Method, Mercy and Truth meet together, Righteousness and Peace kiss each other.

4. Christ's being a Propitiation for us does also imply, that God did accept
of the passive Obedience of Christ (together with his active) as sufficient
Satisfaction to the Demands of Justice. Jesus Christ has made Reconciliation
for the Sins of the People. Heb. ii. 17. And he has reconciled the World to
God, that their Trespasses are not imputed. 2 Cor. v. 18, 19. Thus Peace is
made with God, and we reconciled to him by his Cross, the Enmity being slain.
Ephesians. ii. 15, 16. So that the Imputation of the Obedience of Christ, does fully
and perfectly acquit the Believer from the Guilt of Sin, the Empire of Satan,
the Curses of the Law, and the Damnation of Hell. God has received Satisfaction
from the Surety; and therefore will demand no more from the principal Debtor.

Thus I have briefly considered what is implied in Christ's being a
Propitiation for us; and have endeavored to confirm each particular, by full
and clear Testimonies from the Word of God. From this View of the Case, it
appears to me as reasonable, to call the whole of divine Revelation into
Question, as to doubt of this great Article, Christ's having made a proper
Satisfaction and Atonement by his Blood, for the Sins of his People.

Now of the Things which I have spoken, this is the Sum. That by our first
Apostasy we have violated the fundamental Laws of Nature, have been Traitors
and Rebels to the Sovereign of the World, have plunged ourselves into Guilt,
debased and polluted all the noble Faculties of our Souls; and separated
between our God and us; whereby we are not only become guilty, but impotent and
helpless. -- That the supreme Governor of the World, willing to assert the
infinite Purity and Holiness of his Nature, and his eternal and immutable
Antipathy to Sin and Sinners, has testified the Value he puts upon his
righteous Laws, and upon the Observance of them; has vindicated his sovereign
Dominion, and the Truth of his Threatenings; and has set before the rational
World the dreadful Consequences of rebelling against him; by insisting upon a
Satisfaction to his offended Justice. -- That when we were utterly incapable to
make Atonement, by any Thing less than eternal Sufferings, the great God, as
supreme Judge and Arbiter of his own Laws and Affairs of Government, was
pleased of his infinite Goodness and Compassion, so far to relax the
Threatening, as in our Stead to accept of a Surety, in the Person of his dear
Son; who was with his own voluntary Consent appointed by the Father to work out
our Redemption, by taking upon him our Sin and Guilt, bearing our Punishment,
and fulfilling the Law for us, and thereby purchasing our Acquittance from
Death and Hell, and Recovery to Life and Happiness. The blessed Fruit of his
Mediation is, That there is no Condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus;
but whose has the Son, has Life, Life everlasting.

Thus I Am prepared to take Notice, in what Way we may hope for the Benefits of
this Redemption; which brings me to consider,

II. What we are to understand by that Faith in Christ, through which we have
an Interest in this Propitiation. And it may be proper to take Notice, that a
saving Faith is variously described in the holy Scriptures.

Particularly,

I. It is sometimes described, as an Assent of the Mind to the
Gospel-Rev^lation of Christ. Thus, Mark i. 15. Repent ye; and believe the
Gospel: So, 1 John v. 1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born
of God. And, Romans x. 9. If thou shall confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus;
and shall believe in thine Heart that God has raised him from the Dead, thou
shall be saved. In these and many other like Passages of Scripture, a saving
Faith is proposed as an Act of the Understanding; and as an Assent unto, or
Belief of the Truth of the Gospel.

2. Faith is sometimes described in Scripture, as a Consent of the Will to the
Gospel-Offer of Salvation by Christ. Thus, Joh. i. 12. To as many received him,
to them gave he Power to become the Sons of God; even to them that believe on
his Name. And, Joh. vi. 35. He that comes unto me, shall never hunger; and he
that believes in me, shall never thirst. So, Col. ii. 6. As ye have therefore
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him. -- In which Texts we find,
that receiving Christ, and believing on his Name, and coming to him, and
believing in him, are Terms of the same Significancy: and all of these
Expressions imply a Willingness to obtain the Salvation by Christ, upon his own
Terms.

3. Faith is also described in Scripture, as a considing in, and depending upon
the Lord Jesus Christ for Salvation. Thus, Ephesians. i. 12. That we should be to the
Praise of his Glory, who first trusted in Christ. Phil. iii. 9. And be found in
him, not having mine own Righteousness which is of the Law: but that which is
through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God by Faith. 2 Timothy
i. 12. For I know whom I have believed; and am persuaded, that he is able to
keep that which I have committed to him, against that Day. In which Texts,
Faith is considered as our trusting in Christ, hoping to be found in him,
relying upon his Righteousness, and committing our Souls to him.

By this it appears, that Faith is sometimes described by one of its essential
Properties, and sometimes by another: but we must always remember, that when it
is described by one of these Properties, the other two are not excluded, but
included; and that therefore each of these Descriptions, if duly considered,
will amount to the same Thing.

If we (for Example) consider Faith as an Assent to the Gospel-Revelation
concerning Christ (which by the Way, is the primary Signification of the Word
Faith) it will necessarily include in it a Consent to what we believe; and an
Affiance ^n him, on whom we believe. For this Assent, or Belief of the Truth,
must be supposed such a strong and through Persuasion as will have a proper and
effectual Influence upon our Minds. A (...) doctrinal Belief, or speculative
Opinion cannot be recommended in Scripture as a saving Faith. And this being
supposed, that we have a firm realizing Belief, and a lively Impression, that
Christ is the Savior of the World, that his Righteousness imputed to us is the
only Ground of our Justification, that without this we must inevitably perish,
and that he is both able and willing to save us; it will necessarily excite in
us earnest Desires after an Interest in him, after Union and Communion with
Him, and bring us to place our Hope and Confidence in Him only for Salvation.
-- We may have (as most of the professing World have) a disciplinary or
notional Belief of the Truth of the Gospel, that will produce no proper Effect
upon our Souls; but will leave us, against the Conviction of Conscience, to
neglect an offered Savior, indulge our Lusts, and perish in them. But though
such a dead Faith will profit us Nothing, yet we cannot but esteem the Lord
Jesus Christ to be precious, we cannot but choose him for our Portion, and
depend upon him to do all in us and for us, if we have lively and clear
Impressions of the Truth of what the Gospel reports concerning him. Though a
careless indifferent or unsteady Assent unto the Gospel-Revelation, will not
bring us off from our Lusts and sinful Pleasures, from our own Righteousness
and Self-Sufficiency, to receive Christ and depend upon him: Yet a full
realizing and hearty Assent to this, will bring us to consent to the Offers of
the Gospel, and to place our Confidence in the only Object of our Hope. Thus we
see, that this first Description of Faith includes the other two; and if we
distinctly consider them also, we shall find the same Conclusion.

A Consent (for Instance) to the Offers of Christ and his Salvation in the
Gospel, necessarily implies an Assent to the Truth of the Gospel. For it is
impossible that we should with our Wills concur to any Proposal, that our
Understandings are not convinced of the Truth of. It implies also a Dependence
upon Christ for Salvation. For it is impossible to consent to receive Christ
for our Savior; and not depend upon him as such.

The same Thing may be also observed, with Respect to Trusting in Christ, the
last Description of Faith. For we cannot depend upon Christ, and conside in him,
unless we assent to the Gospel-Revelation, and consent to accept him as our
Savior. -- Upon the whole, these several Descriptions of Faith do mutually
imply and involve each other; and all of them do always belong to the Essence
of a saving Faith. Which makes Way for this general Description: --

Faith in Christ is such an Assent to the christian Revelation, as brings us
heartily and fully to receive him as he is therein exhibited to us, and to
depend on him only for Salvation upon Gospel-Terms.

Here let it be distinctly observed,

1. Faith in Jesus Christ necessarily implies an Assent to the
Gospel-Revelation. -- I Am not now considering how far God may discover his
Salvation to the heathen World, who are Strangers to the Gospel. As on the one
Hand, I would not limit the holy One of Israel, who may (for ought I know)
reveal his Son, in an extraordinary Manner, to some that never heard of the
Gospel; so on the other Hand, I would leave secret Things to God, unto whom
they belong. The Business now before me is to consider a saving Faith, as it
relates to us, who dwell under Gospel Light, and are arrived to an Age of
Consideration and Observation. And in that View of the Case, a hearty Assent to
the Truths revealed in the Gospel, is certainly essential to a true Faith in
Christ.

Unto this Assent it is necessary, that we have a Knowledge of the Doctrines of
the Gospel; and of the Way of Salvation therein proposed. How shall they call
upon him, in whom they have not believed? And how shall they believe in him, of
whom they have not heard? Romans x. 14. Faith always follows the Understanding;
and cannot go before it. It Is impossible to believe, strictly and properly,
what we don't in some Respect understand. We may indeed, in the general,
believe That to be Truth, the special Nature of which we neither understand,
nor believe. We may (for Instance) believe the Doctrine of the Trinity to be an
undoubted Truth; though we can neither understand, nor believe the particular
Modus, or Manner how the divine Being is one in three, and three in one. In
such Cases, we can believe no more than what our Understanding represents to
us, from the Word of God, as reasonable and credible. -- This being applied to
the present Case, makes it evident, that they who remain grossly ignorant of the
Doctrine of Christ, and the Method of Salvation proposed in the Gospel, cannot
concur in it, nor comply with it. Ignorance here slays Men in the dark; and
makes them incapable of any Benefit by an offered Savior. We must therefore
first know all that is really necessary to be believed. Upon which Account
Knowledge is sometimes in Scripture put for Faith. Thus, Joh. xvii. 3. This is
Life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent. And 1 Cor. ii. 2. For I determined not to know any Thing
among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified. Though Men may be capable of
Faith in Christ, without Brightness of Parts, or eminent Degrees of Knowledge,
either in polemical or systematical Divinity, as it is called: Yet it is
needful, that they be acquainted with the principal Doctrines of Christianity,
(such as relate to the one only Mediator, Jesus Christ, his Person, Offices,
and Benefits, his Incarnation, Life, Sufferings and Death, his Resurrection,
Ascension, and Intercession; and such as relate to their own lost Estate, and
necessary Dependence upon his Righteousness and Grace for Justification and
Life) in Order to their believing in Christ.

Moreover it is also needful, that we heartily receive this Revelation for
divine Truth, when we do understand it. It is necessary, that we receive it not
as the Word of Man; but (as it is in Truth) the Word of God, in Order that it
should effectually work in us, as in them that believe. 1 Thessalonians. ii. 13. -- It
is not sufficient to believe this from the Bias of Education, or because we
have been early and all along taught these Doctrines. Alas, We should have been
likely to have had the same Faith in Mahomet, if we had been as early and
constantly instructed in the Alcoran -- It is not sufficient to have an
implicit Belief of these Truths, to take them upon Trust from any Man or
Society of Men whatsoever; this is to depend upon other Men's Faith, and have
none of our own. -- It is not sufficient inconsiderately to take these Things
for granted, without making particular and due Inquiry; this may possibly
amount to Opinion, but not to Faith. -- Nor is it sufficient to give a cold and
unactive Assent to the Gospel, though founded upon the best Evidence, and most
rational Argumentation: For this will not effectually convince us of our absolute
Necessity of Christ, nor of his Sufficiency to supply all our Wants. -- But we
must receive the Testimony of God concerning his Son; and assent to the
Gospel-Report as the Truth of God, as that upon which our eternal Welfare
depends, and as that which we are above all Things in the World concerned
about. -- If it be objected, That this will yet fall short of true Faith; that
the Devils themselves give as firm an Assent to the Truth of the Gospel as we
can do, They believe and tremble: I grant, that a bare Assent to the Gospel,
separately considered, if never so steady and strong and rational, is not a
saving Faith; but yet it is always an essential Part of it: though Faith (as I
before observed) has more implied in it. Which brings me to consider,

2. That a saving Faith does also imply a Receiving the Lord Jesus Christ, as
offered in the Gospel. This (as I showed before) is given as a Description of
Faith, Joh. i. 12. By which we are to understand, a hearty Desire of an
Interest in Christ; and a sincere Willingness to comply with the Offers, he
makes of himself and his saving Benefits, upon Gospel-Terms.

This necessarily supposes, that we have an impressed Sense of our Necessity of
an Interest in Christ. Sinners are but hardly brought to embrace an offered
Savior. The most of the World are quiet and secure in a State of Guilt,
without any just Apprehension of their Danger; and without any serious Concern
about the Welfare of their immortal Souls. These go their Way to their Farms
and Merchandise; and excuse themselves from coming to Christ: They have
something else to do. -- And as to others, that are under same Conviction of
their Sin and Danger, they are ready to fly to any other Refuge, than the
Savior Christ, and to quiet their Consciences with their good Purposes or
Performances: Until they are brought to see, that in vain is Salvation hoped
for, from the Hills and from the Multitude of Mountains; that they have no
where to go for Salvation, but to Christ alone, for he and he only has the
Words of eternal Life. These two Things are essentially necessary to a true
Faith in Christ; a lively Sense of our own Emptiness, and Inability to help our
selves, and a like Sense of the Sufficiency of Christ to relieve us. By the
former, we discover the last Necessity of some Remedy, beyond what we can
possibly provide for our distressed Souls: By the latter, the only Door of Hope
is set open to us: and by both, we are made willing to comply with the blessed
Proposals of Life and Peace in the Gospel, and submit to the Terms whereon they
are offered. -- While Sinners can think themselves rich and increased in Goods,
and that they have Need of Nothing, they will set no special Value by an
offered Savior. They must see themselves wretched and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked, before they will repair to him, for Gold tried in the Fire,
that they may be rich; for white Raiment, that they may be clothed; and for
Eye Salve, that they may see. And this is the great Reason of the
Unsuccesfulness of Gospel Ordinances, and of the Unpersuadableness of the
greatest Part of the World to come unto Christ, that they might have Life. They
are insensible of their undone miserable State while at a Distance from him:
The Whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick. They can rest quiet
in their present Seize; and will therefore look no further. They Will never
come to Christ, till they are first brought to utterly despair of all Help in
themselves. -- And when they are even brought to this, it will have no better
Effect, than to fill them with Horror and Amazement, unless they have also a
Discovery that there is Help to be had: that there is Hope for their Souls,
from the Sufficiency of redeeming Love. -- But when they have both these
Discoveries, they cannot but see their Necessity of Christ; and whatever else
they want, they cannot but be willing to receive him upon any Terms.

Moreover, this receiving of Christ does also suppose our (...) with him as our
King, as well as our Savior. It is true, that Sinners under a Sense of their
Misery and Danger, do in the first Place desire Salvation from the Wrath to
come, of which they have awful Apprehensions; and therefore repair to Christ
for Deliverance. But this is only a legal Work: If they rest here, they will
never be interested in Christ and his saving Benefits. A true evangelical Faith
excites an earnest Desire of Salvation from the Power and Pollution of Sin, as
well as from Guilt and Danger. The Believer desires Christ to save him from his
Sins, and not in them; he desires that Christ may reign in his Heart, and that
his whole Man, in all its Powers, may be subjected to him. -- There is no Man
willing to perish; Destruction from God would be a Terror to the worst of Men,
it realized: and since they know that there is no Way of Salvation but by
Christ, they desire by him a Salvation from Hell; yet however, it is with a
Reservation of their Lasts and sinful Pleasures, which they cannot part with.
-- But this is very far short of a genuine saving Faith, which receives a whole
Christ, with our whole Heart; Christ in all his Offices, as well as with all
his Benefits; the Grace of Christ for our Sanctification, as well as his
Righteousness for our Justification. As a true Penitent looks upon his Sins as
his greatest Burden, and groans after Deliverance from the Pollution and
Dominion of them: So the true Believer values an Interest in Christ upon this
Account, that (...) break the Yoke, and destroy the Empire of his Lusts; that
the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, may make him free from the (...)
of Sin and (...). -- Thus Faith receives Christ as our Prince and Savior. And
this is the constant Language of a true Faith, Isai. xxxiii. 22. The Lord is
our Judge, the Lord is our Law giver, the Lord is our King; he will save us.

I add to this, that it is also necessary unto a receiving of Christ, that we
most earnestly endeavor in the Use of all appointed Means, to obtain an
Interest in him upon his own Terms. If ever we receive Christ at all, it must
be in that Way. We are not to wait in an idle Unconcernedness, for the
Operations of the Holy Spirit to compel us to come to Christ: No, but with a
humble Sense of our own Impotency, and with a Dependence on the Spirit of
Grace, we must seek and strive, and lay ourselves out with unwearied
Difference, in the Methods of Duty, prescribed in the Gospel, to obtain an
Interest in Christ and his Salvation. Receiving of Christ is indeed a
metaphorical Expression, that connotes an active Acceptance; and it would be
an Abuse of it, to imagine from it that we are (...), without Care or Pains,
until this glorious (...) be thrust into our Hence: But we must put our selves
into the Way where it is refered, if we ever hope to receive it. And it may be
depended upon, that Christ will never bestow himself upon any, but those who
are first brought to think an interest in him worth seeking after. He is said
to to walk in the Midst of his (...) (Rev. i. 13.) thereby intimating, that he
is to be found in the Way of his own Ordinances. And we are directed, if we
would find him, to go our Way forth, by the Footsteps of the Fleck, (Capt. i.
8.) that is, in the Way in which all (...) Believers have fought, and in which
they have found Communion with him. In this Way we must seek an Interest in
Christ. In this Way we must seek Grace to receive the Lord Jesus Christ; and in
this Way we must exercise that Grace, when we have obtained it. If we be
Partakers of Christ at all, it must be by an active Reception; by a Faith
accompanied with earnest diligent seeking him in the Ways of God's Appointment:
for the Neglect of Duty is not a Receiving, but a Rejecting of Christ; and a
practical Declaration, that we will none of him, that we will not have this Man
to rule over us. -- The Act of Faith by which we receive the Lord Jesus Christ,
is indeed distinct from the Duties of religious Worship; but as Faith must be
obtained in a Way of Duty, so it is necessarily productive of a Life of Duty,
in all that have it. The Faith therefore, which I am describing, though in its
Nature distinct from Diligence in Duty, yet implies this as Necessary, both to
it is Being and Operations. -- And thus I Am prepared to take Notice of the other
Thing contained in the Description of this Grace.

3. That Faith in Jesus Christ does also imply a Depending upon him, and him
only, for Salvation. That is, it implies a Believing in him, as the Author of
our eternal Salvation, as the Lord our Righteousness, as the Fountain of Life,
and of all our Grace. It implies, that we look to him, to do all in us, and all
for us, and that we bring both our Persons and Services to God in his Name,
pleading the Merits of his Cross, and his perfect Righteousness, as our only
Title to the divine Favor.

But that we may have a just View of what is signified by our depending upon
Christ, it must be premised; That it is necessary in Order to this, that we
heartily renounce all Dependence on ourselves, upon what we have done, are
doing, or can do, as to justifying us in the Sight of God, and procuring our
Acceptance with him. We must indeed be diligent in Duty: We must endeavor to
be found walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord, blameless:
It Is in vain to hope for Salvation in any other Way, than that of diligent
seeking and (...) it. But then, when we have done all, (...) only see ourselves
to be unprofitable (...) (...) have fallen infinitely short of the (...) and
therefore to have no Claim to the (...) from the Hands of God. -- We must be
(...) all our own Righteousness are but (...) (...) there is so much sinful
imperfection (...) best Duties, as might jutly condemn both (...) them; that
the Iniquity of our holy Things (...) separate between God and us; and that our
(...) of Repentance want washing in the Blood (...) -- Thus, while engaged in a
most diligent (...) to Duty, and in a must strict Life (...) we must at the
same Time cast our best Person (...) at the Foot of Christ; and account all
(...) we are, have and can do, but Dung, that we may win Christ. (Phil. iii.
7.) We shall otherwise build upon the Sand; and our Hopes will full in the Day
of Trial.

Our Depending upon the Lord Jesus Christ does also suppose, that we actually
and sincerely place all our Hopes of Acceptance with God, upon what He has
done and suffered for us. We are by our Sins become guilty before God, and
under a Sentence of Condemnation; and the Blood of Christ is the only
Atonement, to expiate this Guilt, and to free us from the damning Power of the
Law. -- We have forfeited all Title to future Happiness; and Christ's Obedience
unto the Death is the only Purchase of our eternal Salvation, by which we may
hope for it, or lay Claim to it. -- Now a saving Faith is such an effectual
Apprehension of this, as causes us to disclaim all other Pretensions to God's
Favor, to make Mention of Christ's Righteousness and that only, as the Price
of our Pardon and Happiness; and to expect, that being justified by his Blood,
we shall be saved from Wrath through him. -- The Sum of the Matter is, All our
Hope of Pardon and Justification is from the Merits of the Cross and Obedience
of Christ; all our Hope of Salvation is from Christ's having fulfilled all
Righteousness for us; and it is through receiving him by Faith, that we are
interested in this Righteousness; and in the Way of depending upon this
Righteousness, that we claim the Favor of God. Faith looks upon Christ as our
Redeemer; and expects Justification from God freely by his Grace, through the
Redemption that there is in Christ. By Faith we consider him as our only Hope,
our only Help, and our only Salvation; and rely upon him accordingly. As Faith
empties us of our selves, and shows us that we are lost and undone,
notwithstanding any Thing we do or can do; so it discovers an abundant Fullness
and Sufficiency in Christ, upon which we may safely trust, and venture our
eternal Interests. It shows us, that although we can do nothing ourselves, which
will procure the Favor of God or entitle us to it, yet Christ has done enough
for us, to reconcile us to God, and to answer all the Demands of Justice. Thus
by Faith we rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no Confidence in the Flesh; We go
forth unto Him without the Camp, bearing his Reproach; and go up from the
Wilderness, leaning upon our Beloved.

If any should now inquire, What Place is there for good Works, if we are to
have all our Dependence upon what Christ has done and suffered for us? I
answer, we must depend upon Him in the Way of a Carefulness to maintain good
Works. (Tit. 3. 8.) And we can safely depend upon him in no other Way. All
other Dependence, exclusive of this Care of exemplary living, is not Faith, but
Presumption. For Faith without Works is dead. Though we are justified by Faith,
without the Deeds of the Law, (Romans 3. 28.) yet the Faith, by which we are
justified, is never (in Case of Opportunity) without the Deeds of the Law,
though in Truth animated by GospelMotives, and springing from evangelical
Principles. They that have Faith unfeigned dwelling in them, will live godly in
Christ Jesus. -- Faith alone justifies, by receiving and depending upon the
Righteousness of Christ for Justification: But the Faith which justifies, is
never alone. For being thereby united to Christ, as a Branch to the Vine, we
shall bring forth Fruit, much Fruit, whereby our heavenly Father it glorified.
It is a sanctifying Faith, as well as justifying

Thus I have endeavored briefly to set in View the Nature and Properties of a
true saving Faith. have shown, that the Essence of a true Faith consist in an
hearty Assent to the Gospel-Revelation concerning Christ, in an hearty Consent
to the GospelOffer of Christ, his Offices and Benefits; and in an hearty
Dependence upon what Christ has done and suffered for us, as the Ground of our
Pardon and Justification, and the Price of eternal Salvation. -- I have shown,
that our Assent to the Gospel-Revelation supposes a sufficient Knowledge of the
Way of Salvation therein revealed; for Faith must follow the Understanding, and
cannot go before it; and that it supposes a Reception of this Revelation for
divine Truth, when we do understand it; for our Faith should not stand in the
Wisdom of Men, but in the Power of God. -- I have shown, that our Consent to
the Gospel-Offer, or our receiving of Christ upon Gospel-Terms, supposes such a
Sense of our Necessity of an Interest in Christ, as makes us earnestly desire,
and cheerfully comply with any Terms of obtaining it; for we shall never accept
an offered Savior upon his own Terms, as long as we can do without him; that
it supposes we accept him as our King, as well as our Savior; for he must save
us from our Sins, and not in them; and it supposes that we receive him in the
Use of Means, and not in the Neglect of them; for the Neglect of Duty is a
practical Rejection of Christ. -- I have shown, that our Dependence upon Christ
supposes, that we renounce all Confidence in our selves, in any Thing we do or
can do; for he will be a complete Savior, and the alone Savior, or none at
all; and that it supposes, we place all our Confidence in his active and
passive Obedience; for he is the Lord our Righteousness; and in him shall all
the Seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory.

And now I Am prepared to consider

III. How Faith in Christ is concerned in bringing about our Remission and
Justification in the Sight of God. -- And I shall endeavor to explain this, by
observing,

1. Negatively, That Faith does not reconcile us to God, considered
subjectively, or as it is our own Act. The Act of believing is no more a
Condition of our Justification, than the Act of repenting, or the Exercise of
any other Grace or Duty. -- There are no Works of Righteousness, which we have
done, or can do, that will save us, whether they be considered as our legal, or
evangelical Righteousness. -- Our legal Righteousness, or Deeds of the Law,
cannot save us; because they cannot atone for our past Offenses; nor can they in
any Instance come up to the Demands of the Law; but in every Thing fall short
of the Perfection thereby required. -- Nor may we imagine, that our evangelical
Righteousness, or Obedience to the Gospel, can save us; because that would be
to place Merit in our repenting and believing; and to set our Faith in the Room
of Christ's Obedience, which is the only Price of our Justification. -- Though
we are said to be justified by Faith, we are no where said to be justified for
it. This Act of our's (as well as all others) is very imperfect; and
accompanied with much sinful Unbelief at the best; therefore stands in Need of
Pardon itself, and so cannot possibly merit our Salvation.

But now, I would say affirmatively,

2. Faith justifies us, as it is the instituted Means of our obtaining an
Interest in what Christ has done and suffered for us, For with the Heart Man
believes unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth Confession is made unto
Salvation, Romans 10. 10. We are espoused to Christ by Faith, and in this Way his
Benefits are dispensed to us. -- The Lord Jesus Christ has performed a perfect
Obedience for us (as I have particularly shown above) and has purchased
Salvation for all that are interested in that Obedience. He has done and
suffered all that the Law required of us. -- He has fully answered its penal
Demands. He has been made Sin for us, who knew no Sin. He has born our Sins in
his own Body upon the Cross. He has undergone the Wrath of God (as well as of
Men and Devils) for our sakes, that he might propitiate an offended God; and
pay the Debt, which our Sins had contracted. -- He has obeyed the whole
preceptive Part of the Law; been perfect in his Compliance with all its
Commands, and fulfilled all Righteousness; that he might entitle us to the
eternal Inheritance, and purchase Salvation for us. -- And all this he has done
in the Capacity of our Surety. It is in our Name, Place and Stead that he has
wrought out this perfect Righteousness. An Interest in him does therefore
invest us with this Righteousness, and make it as much Ours, and pleadable by
us, as if it had been in Fact personally performed by our selves.

Now it is by Faith that we obtain an actual Interest in him, and so are
clothed upon with his Righteousness; and in that Respect we are justified by
Faith. -- The Gospel proclaims the happy Tidings of Christ, and Redemption;
Faith assents to, and entertains this blessed Proclamation. The Gospel makes a
free Tender of purchased Salvation, to Sinners sensible of their Need of it,
and willing to accept it; Faith complies with the Offer, and readily embraces a
tendered Savior. -- The Gospel proposes Christ's Righteousness, and that only,
for our Justification; Faith makes us esteem all Things but Loss and Dung, that
we may win Christ, and be found in him. -- The Gospel requires a Life of holy
Obedience unto God, as a proper Fruit and Evidence of Faith, as a Testimony of
our Acceptance of this offered Savior, and our Gratitude to him. Unfeigned
Faith produces the happy Effect, wherever it is. Faith purifies the Heart, and
works by Love. So that Faith is in every Thing a Compliance with what the
Gospel requires to the constituting and determining us justified Persons. --
Christ is the End of the Law, for Righteousness, to every one that believes.
He that is once brought to live by the Faith of the Son of God, is no longer
under the Law, but under Grace: no longer considered as in Adam, by whose
Disobedience he was made a Sinner; but as in Christ, by whose Obedience he is
made righteous. And thus Faith brings us Pardon and Salvation, as it unites us
to Christ, interests us in his perfect Obedience, and makes his Righteousness
ours. Whence the Righteousness of God is said to be revealed from Faith to
Faith, Romans i. 17. And we are told, that the Righteousness of God is by Faith
of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe. Romans iii. 22.

3. Faith has the Promise of Christ's continual Intercession for us. -- Our
highest Seize in Faith and Holiness, are accompanied with many
Imperfections. In many Things we all offend. And as we are daily chargeable
with new Sins, we stand in daily Need of renewed Pardon and Justification; upon
which Account Jesus Christ, the Righteous, is represented as our Advocate with
the Father, to procure this for us; and to bestow it upon us. 1 John ii. 1. The
Apostle puts an Emphasis on Christ's Intercession, Romans viii. 34. Who is he
that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is
even at the right Hand of God, who also makes Intercession for us. Now being
interested in Christ by Faith, we have an Interest in his Intercession: and by
the Efficacy of his Intercession, the Believer obtains a renewed Pardon of his
daily Transgressions, and a confirmed Pardon of all his Trespasses. We have,
through Faith renewedly exercised, a Claim to have all our new Sins pardoned,
and blotted out, by a fresh Application of Christ's Blood, and Imputation of
his Righteousness. The Believer is made accepted in the Beloved: and by Virtue
of his Advocacy, the Prayer of Faith receives an Answer of Peace. -- Wherefore
he is able to save them to the uttermost, that come to God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make Intercession for them. Heb. vii. 25.

I shall now proceed to make some practical IMPROVEMENT of what has been said.

USE I. This administers Matter of Conviction and Awakening, to all that rest
in an Estate of Unbelief. -- If we are interested in the Propitiation of Christ
by Faith in his Blood, what must be the Case of those who are destitute of a
saving Faith? We are told (Joh. iii. 18, 36.) that they are condemned already,
that they shall not see Life: but the Wrath of God abides on them. Which awful
Consideration might justly startle and surprise the securest Sinners; and put
them upon the most solicitous Inquiry after Christ and an Interest in him by
Faith. -- Can you esteem it a trifling Concern, whether you are saved or
damned; whether you are by Faith Partakers of the Salvation Christ has
purchased, or whether you are by your Unbelief shut out of the Glories of the
heavenly World, and left to lament your Misery and Loss with most amazing
Horror, to all Eternity? Remember, that if you continue and die in Unbelief,
your Misery must bear Proportion to the Mercy you have abused and forfeited;
and it would have been better for you never to have heard of a Savior, than to
perish in your Sins, from under Gospel Light and Grace. This will be your
Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and you have chosen Darkness
rather than Light; because your Deeds are Evil. (Joh. iii. 19.) You have the
Revelation of this Salvation; and the continued Offers of it, upon most easy
and honorable Terms. You have it pressed upon you, by repeated Inculcation, in
the Ordinances of the Gospel: and how aggravated will your Guilt be, if you set
light by this precious Savior, and reject his Salvation! O that neglectful
Sinners might therefore be awakened out of their Security, to see their Misery
and Danger, before it be too late; before the Things of their Peace are hidden
from their Eyes; and before the Offers of Salvation through Faith in Jesus
Christ, be for ever over! O foolish Unbelievers, who has bewitched you, that
you should not obey the Truth, before whose Eyes Jesus Christ has been
evidently set forth, crucified among you! O the astonishing Folly of
Christ-Despisers and GospelNeglecters, who notwithstanding you are brought in
View of the heavenly Canaan, will after all perish in the Wilderness; and have
your final Lot assigned you among Hypocrites and Unbelievers! O how can you
rest thus contented in an Estate of Unbelief, until you provoke God to swear in
his Wrath, that you shall never enter into his Rest! Had you not better accept
the Savior now, than to have him your angry Judge at last, and reject you with
a Verily I know you not! Had you not better hearken to the Offers of Mercy now,
than to have the Gospel it self, and all the Ordinances of Salvation you have
ever enjoyed, rise up in Judgment against you, to aggravate your Condemnation!
But alas! till your Eyes are opened, to see your Sin and Danger, you will not
come unto Christ, that you might have Life: You will rather run the Venture of
eternal Perdition, than accept of this precious Savior and his great
Salvation, though so freely offered. -- This seems to be the Case of the greatest
Part of the gospelized World. And they must be left to the Consequences of
their unhappy Choice. They must find, by sad Experience, the dreadful Effects
of neglecting so great Salvation, before they will receive Conviction.

USE II. Let all be exhorted to make it their Concern to obtain a true Faith in
Jesus Christ, by which alone they can be justified in the Sight of God. -- What
has been said already, gives full Evidence, that this is an Affair of
everlasting Importance, a Concern that your Eternity depends upon; and that you
may expect to rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, or mourn
bitterly, with the sharpest Accents of Horror and Agony, according to your
Compliance with, or Rejection of this Gospel-Exhortation. It is founded on
Scripture-Calls and Precepts, enforced with the most solemn and affecting
Sanctions, both of Promises and Threatenings. -- You have many Examples, both to
encourage, and to warn you. -- You are invited to be Followers of them, who
through Faith and Patience do inherit the Promises. And to a Care of obtaining
like precious Faith with them, you are strongly excited, by the endearing
Attractives of Christ's infinite Love, in his giving himself for and to his
People. I therefore beseech you, Brethren, by the Mercies of God our Savior;
that you come unto Christ as to a living Stone, disallowed indeed of Men, but
chosen of God, and precious. -- To this you are also most awfully warned by the
awakening Alarms of your Guilt and Danger. Take heed therefore, Brethren, lest
there be in any of you an evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing from the living
God. It is high Time to fly from the impending Storm, to this Hope set before
you. Be prevailed with to take Hold of this Instruction, and not let it go, but
to keep it; for it is your Life.

Labor after an effectual Sense of the infinite Importance of a saving Faith
in Christ. Get it impressed upon your Mind, that you must believe in Christ, or
perish without Remedy. Don't put off this eternal Concern; but think of it now,
and think of it solemnly, as you must think of it, when you come to your final
Trial. Let this Consideration lie down and rise with you: He that believes and
is baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not, shall he damned.

Labor after a lively Impression of your Incapacity to produce this important
Grace in yourselves. Keep up a constant Remembrance, that Flesh and Blood
cannot reveal this to you: but our Father which is in Heaven. Let the humbling
Thought bring you to God's Foot; and make you deeply sensible, that you lie at
his Mercy, unable to help your selves, and unworthy of Divine Relief.

Let a Discovery of this your distressed Case quicken you to greater Diligence
in seeking the Influence of the blessed Spirit, to work this Faith in you. Be
importunate in Prayer, and in all Ways of Duty, to have the good Pleasure of
God's Goodness, and the Work of Faith with Power wrought in your Souls.

And labor to exercise Faith in Christ. Though you cannot work this Grace in
your selves, yet if ever you obtain it, you yourselves must use and exercise
it. The Principle is from God: but the Act must be your own. If God bring you
to exercise this Grace, you must be made willing in the Day of his Power, and
act with your free Consent. This is his Commandment, the great Command of the
Gospel, That you should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ. It is
therefore your Duty to believe, and by Consequence to labor to believe in
Christ: And if God gives you the Grace to do so, it will be by quickening and
strengthening you in the Way of your Prayers and your Endeavors. Labor
therefore to comply with the gracious Offer and Call of the Gospel, to see your
perishing Condition without Christ, and to realize his Ability and Readiness to
help and save you. Contemplate his infinite Excellencies and complete
Sufficiency for you; and endeavor (looking to God for his gracious Assistance)
to choose Christ for your Savior and Portion, to prefer an Interest in him
above all the World, to rely upon him as the Author of your eternal Salvation,
and to plead his Righteousness before God as your only Claim to Mercy. In a
Word, endeavor to accept him upon his own Terms: And be earnest with God in
your continual Supplications, for Grace to help you, that you may indeed
receive Christ Jesus the Lord, and walk in him. Though you are without
Strength, yet through Christ strengthening you, you can do all Things: And you
should attempt, in his Strength, to do what otherwise you are utterly
insufficient for.

USE, III. Let all be exhorted to utmost Care and Caution, that they be not
deceived in this momentous Affair; and that they don't take up with a false and
counterfeit Faith, which will Issue in a fatal and eternal Disappointment of
all their Expectations. -- Multitudes have been, and we may be deceived; and
it is impossible to imagine the Confusion that will cover us, if we are too late
convinced of our Mistake, and ashamed of our Hope.

See that you evidence to your selves the Sincerity of your Faith, by an
earnest Desire after Christ for your Portion, and by the highest Esteem for
him. If you have a true Faith, you will have the Lord Jesus Christ represented
to you as the chief of ten Thousand, altogether lovely; and will certainly
value him accordingly. Hence it is said, Unto You that believe, Christ is
precious. 1 Pet. ii. 7.

Evidence the Sincerity of your Faith, by an universal Hatred of Sin; and by an
earnest, constant Endeavor after the Victory over all your Lusts, without any
Reserve. We are told, that Faith purifies the Heart. (Acts xv. 9.) And that
whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin; for his Seed remains in him:
and he cannot sin; because he is born of God. (1 John iii. 9.)

Evidence the Truth of your Faith, by a Life of universal Holiness; by a
careful constant Endeavor after Conformity to the whole revealed Will of God;
by Purity of Heart and Hands. Walk in all the Ways of God and Godliness, in all
the Duties of Religion, and in all the Duties of each Relation which God has
placed you in; and endeavor to approve your selves to a pure and holy God, in
the Discharge of them all. You may depend upon it, that no other Evidence of
Sincerity without this, can stand you in stead. Resolve then as he (Jam. ii.
18.) I will show my Faith by my Works.

Evidence the Truth of your Faith, by having your Affections weaned from the
World; and by seeking the Things which are above, where Christ Jesus sits at
the right Hand of God. If you are true Believers, you look not at the Things
that are seen and temporal: but at those which are unseen and eternal. You are
looking upon all the Affairs of Time, but as trifling and vain, compared to the
Concerns of a future and everlasting World. For this is the Victory that
overcomes the World, even our Faith. 1 John v. 4. -- Faith works by Love;
not to the World, or the Things of it; but to God, and the Things of God. Love
not the World therefore, or the Things of the World: For if ye love the World,
the Love of the Father is not in you.

Finally, Evidence the Sincerity of your Faith, by an habitual Subjection of
Soul to the Lord Jesus Christ, and fervent Applications unto Him, to work in
and for you the good Pleasure of his Will. Commit the whole Concern of your
Salvation to him. Look to him in a Way of constant earnest Prayer and active
Diligence, for all Supplies of Grace. Whatever Darkness, whatever Deadness,
whatever Afflictions, or Temptations you may meet with, still repair to him,
that you may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in a Time of Need, that of
his Fullness you may receive even Grace for Grace. You cannot trust too little
your selves; nor too much to him, in the Way of Duty. Resolve therefore
constantly to come, empty and self-insufficient, to him; and open your Mouth
wide, that he may fill it. If you thus believe in him, you shall never be
confounded. I conclude with those Words of the Apostle. 1 John iii. 21, -- 24.
Beloved, if our Heart condemn us not, then have we Confidence toward God. And
whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because (...) his Commandments, and do
those Things that are pleasing in his Sight. And this is his Commandment, that
we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as
he gave us Commandment. And he that keeps his Commandments, dwells in him,
and he in him: and hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he
has given us.

A DISCOURSE ON PERSEVERANCE.
ROMANS VIII. 30. -- Whom he justified, them he also glorified.


THIS brief Clause is the last Link of that golden Chain, which extends from
Everlasting to Everlasting, and connects a past and future Eternity. It takes
its Rise in God's Foreknowledge and eter Purpose of Grace to the Elect; and
reaches through their Vocation and Justification on Earth, unto their eternal
Glorification in Heaven. It shows us the inviolable Connection between the
Decree of God, and the progressive Execution of it, in our present Preparation
for, and final Admittance to everlasting Glory. And as we are here assured,
that the Counsel of the Lord shall stand, firm as his own Being, and without
any Variation or Shadow of turning; so we are equally assured, that where God's
eternal Counsel is manifested in our effectual Calling and Justification, by
Consequence our eternal Salvation is also manifest and certain. The
Perseverance of the Saints through Faith unto Salvation, is here founded upon
the same immutable Certainty with the Purpose and Decree of God. As all whom he
did predestinate, shall be certainly called; not only by the outward
Invitations of the Gospel, but by the inward powerful Influences of the blessed
Spirit, whereby they shall he brought to a hearty Compliance with
Gospel-Offers: so they whom he thus calls, he as certainly justifies,
through Christ's Righteousness imputed to them, and received by Faith: And
being thus justified, they shall with the same Certainty be also glorified.

But that I may set the Text in a more clear and distinct View, I shall
consider,

First, What we are here to understand by our being justified.

Secondly, How it appears, that all who are justified, shall be also glorified.

Finally, Make some practical Improvement.

1. I shall premise some Hints on the Article of Justification. -- And I would
here observe, that having already in a former Discourse particularly considered
both the Price and the Means of our Reconciliation to God and Acceptance with
him, I am now only to set in View the Nature of this precious Benefit, as
personally received: And it may be summarily represented in the following
Description.

Justification is the gracious Sentence of God, whereby a Sinner is on Account
of Christ's Satisfaction, at or upon his believing, actually acquitted from
Guilt and Condemnation, accepted as righteous in the Sight of God, and thereby
entitled to eternal Life.

I consider Justification as a gracious Sentence of God: And so the Apostle
considers it in the 33d Verse of our Context, Who shall lay any Thing to the
Charge of God's Elect? It is God that justifies. -- Justification is a
forensic Term; and signifies the Sentence of a Judge, whereby an accused or
condemned Person is discharged from the Imputation of Guilt or the Infliction
of Punishment, and whereby he is pronounced just, and accepted as such. -- Thus
in the present Case, the Person justified has a gracious Sentence passed upon
him in a judiciary Way. The great Lawgiver and Judge of the World pronounces
his Absolution, and acknowledges him to be in his Favor and Friendship,
accepted as righteous in the Court of Heaven. -- Sanctification and
Justification are carefully to be distinguished. That is a qualitative, This a
relative Change: That is a Change of our moral State, Nature and Disposition,
but this a Change of our Covenant-State, Law-Condition and Character, in
Reference to God: That is an incomplete Change, defective as to the Degree at
present, but this a full and perfect one: That is a Change by the Operation of
the Holy Spirit, within us; This by the Declaration of the sovereigh Judge,
without us. -- Justification is also to be distinguished from the approving
proving Sentence of our own Conscience. For Conscience misguided, may acquit,
when God condemns: The Man may vote himself rich and increased with Goods, and
in Need of nothing, whom yet this supreme Judge pronounces wretched and
miserable and poor and blind and naked. So on the other Hand, Conscience may
condemn, when God acquits. The Man may walk in Darkness and see no Light, whom
yet this supreme Judge invites to trust in the Name of the Lord, and to stay
himself upon his God. The justifying Sentence then is that of God, and not of
Conscience. It is God, that justifies: Herein following his own revealed Will,
the external Rule of Justification, and not always accompanying it with the
internal Testimony of his Spirit in our Conscience. The divine Sentence may be
actually pronounced, and yet not sensibly perceived by the Soul, on which it is
passed.

I give the Subject of this gracious Benefit the Denomination of a Sinner;
because I would keep it in Mind, that Justification is an Act of God's free
sovereign Grace toward lapsed guilty unworthy Creatures; that not according to
Works of Righteousness, which we have done, but according to his Mercy he
saves us; that although we are justified in the Way of believing, yet even our
Faith is not so much as in Part our Justifying Righteousness; that although the
Sentence of Justification does in Order of Nature follow our Union to Christ by
Faith, yet it is an instantaneous Benefit, and no Internal of Time passes
between the one and the other. -- When the Spirit of Grace comes to work in us
Faith, the Means of our receiving Christ's Righteousness to justify us, he
finds us in our Sins, dead in Trespasses, as well as dead in Law. Hence though in
one Place God is described as the Justifier of him which believes in Jesus
(Romans 3. 26.) Yet in another he is spoken of in that Language, Him that
justifies the Ungodly. (Romans iv. 5.) Not that he leaves us ungodly, although he
find us so. For God purifies our Hearts by Faith, at the same Time that he
justifies us through Faith. And indeed Faith is in its Nature a sanctifying
Principle: it is it self a Branch of the New Creature, and is influential into
progressive Sanctification. However, in the first Act of Faith we consider our
selves as condemned Sinners, and flee for Refuge, to lay hold upon the Hope set
before us; looking unto Jesus, we receive the Atonement, for our Pardon and
Justification: Whence it is called Faith in his Blood, Romans iii. 25. And then
Faith operates as a Principle of Sanctification, works by Love, and excites a
Care to purify our Souls in obeying the Truth through the Spirit. -- But
further, in a large Sense, even the renewed Believer may be called a Sinner; he
is so in the Eye of the Law, as coming infinitely short of its just Demands, in
his personal Qualifications and Performances: but although in himself a Sinner,
yet at the Instant of Conversion being vitally united to Christ, and absolved
from the Curse and Penalty of the Law, there is thenceforward no Condemnation
unto him. -- And then I characterize him a Sinner, because the very Idea of
Pardon, and of the Justification we are upon, speaks the Propriety of so
describing him. For although a Believer may in some Sense be said to be justified
by Works, as they are Evidences for him, and plead in his Vindication, against
the Charge of Hypocrisy, upon his Trial as a Gospel-Professor: yet in the Case
before us, as standing at the Bar of the Law, he is not justified by Works, but
by Grace: although a Criminal in the View of Justice, he has by an Act of
sovereign Grace his Sins covered, and Righteousness without Works imputed to
him.

By our being justified on Account of Christ's Satisfaction, at or upon our
believing, is to be understood, that we are pardoned and accepted with God
through the Righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and reckoned ours in the
Construction of Redeeming Mercy, upon our receiving Christ by Faith; and not
before. Hence it is said in our Context, Whom he called, them he also justified.
And hence the Righteousness of God is said to be revealed from Faith to Faith.
(Romans 1. 17.) Our first actual Participation in the Righteousness of Christ, is
upon the Spirit's first working Faith in us, and thereby uniting us to Christ
in our effectual Calling: The continued Application of it, and renewed Benefit
by it, is upon the continued Existence and renewed Exercise of the same Faith.
And thus the Just shall live by Faith: that is, They are in a State of Life and
Peace with God, from their Union to Christ by Faith. He that has the Son, has
Life. The Justification of Life commences with their being made Partakers of
Christ: and Christ dwells in their Heart by Faith. It is through Faith, that
they are interested in the Benefits of his Redemption: and they are kept by the
Power of God through Faith unto Salvation. -- All Pretenses therefore to
eternal Justification are superseded, as unscriptural and unreasonable. -- The
Believers Justification, it is true, was determined in God's eternal Counsel,
and in the Covenant of Redemption: and so likewise was his Sanctification and
his future Glory. But will any pretend, that we were sanctified or glorified
from all Eternity? Neither can they with any better Show of Reason, pretend to
an eternal Justification. These all stand on the same Foot, as to the Decree of
God, and the Promise in Christ; and may be said in their Causes to be eternal,
though neither of them so in themselves: but are Events that fall within the
Compass of Time, as to their actual Accomplishment. That Justification imports
a real Event in Time, coming to pass at or upon believing, and not before, is
evident from those Scriptures, which speak of it as a future Consequence: By
his Knowledge SHALL my righteous Servant justify many. -- By the Obedience of
one SHALL many be made righteous. -- That Righteousness MIGHT BE imputed unto
them also. -- All that hold Mankind to be Children of Wrath by Nature, do
confess such an Imputation of Sin in Time, as is utterly inconsistent with
Justification from Eternity. If the Curse of the Law be a real Thing, and not
imaginary, then the Justification that reverses and removes it, must be what
takes Place in Time, and must be acknowledged a Transaction in Time as real as
the Condemnation, it stands in Opposition to. In short, the Elect, as well as
others, before their vital Union to Christ by Faith, are in a State of actual
Condemnation; and therefore, while so, most certainly cannot be in a State of
actual Justification. It is without any Distinction of Persons always true,
that He who believes not, is condemned already; because he has not believed
in the Name of the only begotten Son of God. John iii. 18. -- But in believing
the Soul passes from Death to Life, by Virtue of a perfect Righteousness
revealed and applied to him, which he actually had not before his believing.
Man believes unto Righteousness (Romans x. 10.) unto the obtaining and
possessing of it. Faith is the Means of receiving the Gift of Righteousness. No
Unbeliever is in the Possession and Enjoyment of it. A Man is personally
justified no otherwise than by Christ and his Righteousness applied.

Our Justification is considered as an Acquittance from Guilt and Condemnation.
-- Not that the justified Person is free from remaining Sin and Imperfection.
For, in many Things we all offend. And if we say that we have no Sin, we
deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us. But though the Believer has
contracted Guilt enough, to separate him from the Favor of God for ever, yet
the Atonement that Christ has made for him, is a sufficient Satisfaction to the
Demands of Justice. Though in his highest Seize, he is chargeable with
renewed and repeated Offenses against God, he will yet be saved to the
uttermost, seeing Christ ever lives to make Intercession for him. This
therefore is his comfortable and happy State, Being justified by Faith, he has
Peace with God. (Romans v. 1.) Christ's Righteousness being imputed to the
Believer, hence his Sins how great and aggravated soever, will no more be
imputed to him unto Condemnation. Justice is satisfied, and the Law fulfilled
by the Redeemer. The Believer's Guilt is therefore finally taken away; and he
freed from all Obligation to Punishment for ever. Nor is it a mere conditional
Absolution, but an actual Discharge; putting him not merely into a State of
Salvability, but of present and everlasting Safety. This is the Case of them,
whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose Sins are covered: unto whom the Lord
WILL NOT impute Sin. Romans iv. 7, 8.

Our Justification does likewise imply an Acceptance of our Persons, as
perfectly righteous in the Sight of God. Though God knows, that numberless Spots
and Blemishes cleave to the brightest Performances, that the best of the
Children of Men are capable of in this Life; and that their very Tears want
washing in the Blood of Christ: yet the Believer's Faith interests him in all
that Christ has done and suffered for him; and clothes him in that white
Raiment, which covers all his Sins, that the Shame of his Nakedness does not
appear. -- His inherent personal Righteousness is full of Flaws and
Imperfections; but his Surety's Righteousness, which he has received by Faith,
is absolutely perfect and complete. This being imputed to him, he is accepted
by God on this Account; and in this his justifying Righteousness, the pure Eyes
of divine Justice can see no Defect. For Christ is the End of the Law for
Righteousness, to every one that believes. Romans x. 4. -- Hence such are said
be made accepted in the Beloved. Ephesians. i. 6.

Justification must be also considered as including a Title to everlasting
Life, a full Right to the whole of Salvation, with eternal Glory. -- Being now
justified by his Blood, much more shall we be saved from Wrath through him. Romans
v. 9. -- and Ver. 21. That as Sin has reigned unto Death, even so might Grace
reign through Righteousness unto eternal Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. This
is most undoubted, that these must either be Heirs of eternal Life, or Heirs of
eternal Destruction. But how can the latter be supposed of those, who are
interested in Christ, reconciled to God, and Favorites of Heaven? Can it be
supposed, that those whom Christ has purchased with his Blood, those to whom he
has applied the Merits of his Cross and Benefits of his Redemption, shall fall
short of the purchased Possession? Are they drawn to Christ by the powerful
Influences of the divine Grace? Are they united to him by a lively Faith? Are
they accepted of God, as his Children and Friends? Are they dear to him; and
does he tender them as the Apple of his Eye? Are they renewed in the Spirit of
their Minds; and made meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light? And
shall any such, after all, spend a dreadful Eternity in amazing Anguish and
Horror, among Devils and damned Spirits? How monstrously inconsistent is the
Supposition, and how contradictory to the whole Tenor of the Gospel! Joh. v.
24. Verily, verily I say unto you, He that hears my Word, and believes on
him that sent me, has everlasting Life, and shall not come into Condemnation;
but is passed from Death unto Life. -- Justification is a final and perfect
Absolution from Sin and the Curse; and invests us with an actual and complete
Right to positive Happiness for ever. Hence the pardoned Man is pronounced the
blessed Man. Romans iv. 6. Even as David also describes the Blessedness of the
Man unto whom God imputes Righteousness without Works. -- Whosoever is wise, will
observe and understand these Things.

Now if any should surmise and object, That true Believers may fall away from
Grace, dissolve their Union to Christ, lose their near Relation to God, and
provoke him to cast them off for their Apostasy; Our Text assures us of the
contrary. For whom he justified, them he also glorified. -- This brings me to
the other Thing proposed to Consideration.

II. How it appears, that all who are justified, shall be also glorified.

And here let it be remarked,

1. This appears from the Immutability of God's eternal Counsel. -- We read,
The Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, The Lord knows them
that are his. (2 Timothy 2. 19.) If God has chosen them to eternal Life, his
Counsel shall stand; and he will do all his Pleasure. If he has not chosen them
to eternal Life, how came they by the Qualifications for it? Are not these the
Fruits and Consequences of electing Love? Whom he did predestinate, them he
also called; and whom he called, them he also justified. -- He has chosen us
in Christ, that we should be holy. -- He has chosen us to Salvation, through
Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth. Now if he has
predetermin'd these Qualifications as the Means of Salvation, if he has
connected the Means and the End together in his eternal Purpose, as the
Scripture assures us that he has, it then follows, that all those whom he has
justified, them he will also glorify: there must otherwise be a Change of
Purpose in God, which were Blasphemy to suppose.

If any Man apostatise and fall out of a justified State, it must be either
because some do in Time come to Christ, whom the Father had not given him in
his eternal Counsel; or because he had eternally given some to Christ and
determined that they should come to him, who shall nevertheless be left to fall
away and finally miscarry.

Not the former. For all that the Father has given unto Christ, shall come to
him, and none but they. ( Joh. 6. 37.) The Election obtain this Grace, and the
Rest are blinded. (Romans 11. 7.) How can any Man come unto the Son, unless it be
given him of the Father? And how can this be given him in Time, if God did not
eternally determine to give it him, without a Change of Purpose and Counsel in
God?

Not the latter. For him that comes unto Christ, he will in no wise cast out.
(Joh. 6. 37.) He that believes in him, shall not perish; but have everlasting
Life. (Joh. 3. 16.) This is the Father's Will, that of all which he has given
to Christ, he should lose Nothing; but should raise it up again at the last
Day. Joh. 6. 39.

Let us consider this Argument in one View; and see whether it can admit of any
Answer, without a flat Contradiction both to the Scriptures, and to the Nature
of Things. If no Man can come to Christ, unless he were given to him in God's
eternal Counsel; if all that were given to Christ in God's eternal Counsel,
shall come to him; if none that do come, shall be cast out or lost, but all be
raised up to Salvation at the last Day; then surely all that are justified,
shall be glorified, which was the Thing to be proved.

I might add to this, that we are exhorted (2 Pet. 1. 10.) to make our Election
sure. Which must intend, that we make it sure to our selves, or make our selves
sure of it: for as to the Decree of God, or the final Event, these are in
themselves as sure already, as they can be made. We can contribute Nothing to
the Immutability of the divine Counsel, or Certainty of the future Issue. --
This Exhortation does therefore suppose, that an inward Consciousness and
Assurance of our Election is attainable in this Life: it would otherwise be
unreasonable and impertinent to press it upon us. And if there be a Certainty
of our Election attainable, it must necessarily follow, that all true Believers
shall certainly persevere to the End. For how can I be sure of my Election by
any possible Qualification, if my Salvation be not with the same Certainty
connected to such Qualification, as it is to the eternal Decree of God? -- I
may be sure, that I am now interested in Christ by a lively Faith; but I cannot
be sure, that I am chosen to eternal Salvation, or shall ever obtain it, but
from a Certainty of my Perseverance in my present State of Safety. -- This
Argument may be thus summed up. All that are elected, shall certainly be saved;
and all that have a true Faith in Jesus Christ, are certainly elected: for by
this only we can make our Election sure. From hence the Conclusion is
necessary, that all who have a true Faith in Jesus Christ, shall be kept by the
Power of God, to Salvation. Or in other Words, that the Saints shall persevere
in Grace; and all whom God has justified, he will also finally glorify.

2. This appears also from the Sufficiency of Christ's Redemption, for the
Recovery and Happiness of all to whom it is applied.

Our blessed Redeemer has not only procured for Believer's the Pardon of their
Sins, and a Reconciliation unto God: but he has also purchased for 'em a Title
to God's Favor here, and to eternal Happiness hereafter. Whence Heaven is
called the Believers Inheritance, and his purchased Possession. Ephesians. i. 14. --
Now if Christ has purchased this Inheritance for the Believer, and made over
the Title to him in his Justification, who shall deprive him of his own Estate,
procured for him at such an infinite Price?

Can it consist with the Justice of God, to accept of a vicarious Satisfaction
for all our Sins, and in Consequence of that to give us a Discharge from Sin
and Guilt in our Justification; and yet to require personal Satisfaction from
us, in our everlasting Punishment? Will he accept of the full Price of our
eternal Inheritance from our Surety, and yet refuse us the Possession? Will he
give us a Right to eternal Life upon Christ's Account; and yet finally exclude
us from it? Our Lord assures us, it cannot be. My Sheep hear my Voice: and I
give unto them eternal Life; and they shall never perish: neither shall any
pluck them out of my Hand. Joh. x. 27, 28.

Can it consist with the Goodness of God, to bestow an Interest in Christ upon
the Believer; and yet to withhold from him the glorious Benefits of his
Redemption? The Apostle assures us, it cannot be He that spared not his own
Son; but freely delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also
freely give us all Things? Romans viii. 32.

It should be here remembered, that our Lord Jesus Christ has purchased the
Means, as well as the End, for all that believe in him: not only eternal Life,
but also continued Supplies of renewing Grace, whereby they shall be made meet
for it. This is certainly purchased for some Believers. Whence do they else
obtain persevering Grace, if not from this Fountain? And if for some Believers,
why not for all? Unless the Faith of some gives 'em but a partial Interest in
Christ's Redemption. -- It cannot be doubted, but that some Believers do in Fact
persevere, through Grace and Strength received from the Lord Jesus Christ. Nor
can it be doubted, but that Christ has purchased that Grace and Strength for
'em, which he bestows upon them. Now every justified Person is either
interested in all the Redemption purchased by Christ; or only in Part of it. --
If any are interested but in Part of it, they are but partly justified, which
is too great an Absurdity to be supposed. -- If they are interested in all the
Redemption of Christ, upon their believing in him, they partake of all the
spiritual Blessings, that any others are entitled to; and consequently
persevere to eternal Salvation.

And thus the Case is accordingly represented in the Scriptures. Ephesians. v. 25,
26, 27. Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might
sanctify and cleanse it, that he might present it to himself a glorious Church,
not having Spot or Wrinkle or any such Thing; but that it should be holy and
without Blemish. -- Tit. ii. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem
us from all Iniquity; and purify to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good
Works. -- Heb. x. 14. For by one Offering he has perfected for ever, them that
are sanctified. By which Texts and many others that might be cited, it appears,
that Christ has purchased sanctifying and persevering Grace for Believers. From
whence they may confidently draw this comfortable Conclusion, that they are
begotten again to a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the
Dead, to an Inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away,
reserved in Heaven for them: Who are kept (...) the Power of God, through Faith
unto salvation. 1 Pet. i. 3, 4, 5.

3. This is likewise evident from the Tenor of the Gospel Covenant.

As the Lord Jesus Christ has purchased persevering Grace for Believers; so God
has, in a Way of Covenant, obliged himself to bestow it upon all such. 2 Samuel
xxiii. 5. Although my House be not so with God; yet he has made with me an
everlasting Covenant, ordered in all Things and sure. -- Isai. lv. 3. I will
make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies of David. -- Isai.
lxi. 8. I will direct their Work in Truth; and I will make an everlasting
Covenant with them. -- Jer. xxxii. 40. And I will make an everlasting Covenant
with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good: but I will put
my Fear into their Hearts, that they shall not depart from me. -- Ezekiel. xxxvii.
26, 27. Moreover, I will make a Covenant of Peace with them, it shall be an
everlasting Covenant -- Yea, I will be their God; and they shall be my People.
-- Heb. viii. 10. For this is the Covenant that I will make with the House of
Israel, after those Days, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their Minds,
and write them in their Hearts; and I will be unto them a God, and they shall
be to me a People. -- By these cited Scriptures, we see the Tenor of the
Covenant of Grace. It is a Covenant everlasting and sure; a Covenant, that he
will not turn away from them to do them Good, that he will put his Fear in
their Hearts, that he will put his Laws in their Minds, and write them in their
Hearts; and (what is full to the Purpose) a Covenant, that they shall not
depart from him.

And agreeable to the Tenor of this Covenant, we have repeated Assurances in
Scripture, that Believers actually shall be preserved through all Difficulties,
Dangers, and Temptations, to the heavenly Kingdom. Thus, Psalm. xxxvii. 28. For
the Lord loves Judgment; and forsakes not his Saints; they are preserved for
ever. -- Joh. iv. 14. Whosoever drinks of the Water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst; but the Water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well
of Water, springing up into everlasting Life. -- Mat. xviii. 14. Even so it is
not the Will of your Father which is in Heaven, that one of these (...) Ones
should perish. -- Romans viii. 35, 38, 39. Who shall separate us from the Love of
Christ? shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or
Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? -- I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life,
nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to
come, nor Height nor Depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate
us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. -- Romans xi. 29. For
the Gifts and Calling of God are without Repentance. -- 1 Cor. i. 8, 9. Who
shall confirm you to the End, that ye may be blameless in the Day of the Lord
Jesus Christ. God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto the Fellowship of
his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. -- 2 Thessalonians. iii. 3. But the Lord is faithful,
who shall s^ablish you, and keep you from Evil. -- 2 John 2. For the Truth's
Sake which dwells in us, and shall be with us for ever. -- From these, and
Multitudes of such like Scriptures, it is most apparent, that God has by
Covenant, by his immutable Promise, and the gracious Encouragements of his
Word, secured the Confirmation, Establishment, and final Perseverance of true
Believers.

And is he not faithful that has promised? Will he not guide them by his
Counsel; and afterward bring them to Glory? Will he not strengthen them? Will
he not help them? Yea, he will uphold them by the right Hand of his
Righteousness. -- Believers may certainly and safely depend upon the
Faithfulness of God: for his Promises are all yea, and all Amen in Christ. They
may depend upon it, that their whose Spirit, and Soul, and Body shall be
preserved blameless, unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: for faithful is
he that calls them, who also will do it. (1 Thessalonians. v. 23, 24.) Verily if his
Covenant be not with Day and Night, if he has not appointed the Ordinances of
Heaven, then will he alter the Word that is gone out of his Mouth, and suffer
his Faithfulness to fail, in regard to the Covenant of Grace and Promise of
eternal Salvation to Believers.

4. The Perseverance of the Saints is likewise evident and certain from the
Intercession of Christ.

We are told, Heb. vii. 25. that Christ is able to save to the uttermost, all
them that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for
them. And, 1 John iii. 1. If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous. And may we not from this comforting Consideration,
make the same Challenge as the Apostle does? Romans viii. 34. Who is he that
condemns? It is Christ that died; yea, rather that is risen again, who is
even at the right Hand of God, who also makes Intercession for us.

By the Intercession of Christ for Believers (I think) is unitedly and
universally understood, his pleading the Merits of his Blood, and applying the
Benefits of his Redemption, for the increasing or renewing their Graces, for
the renewing their Pardon and Justification, and for their final Confirmation
and Establishment. It is his appearing in the Presence of God for them, his
pleading the Causes of their Souls in the Court of Heaven, representing their
Persons before the supreme Judge and Governor of the World, making
Reconciliation for their Sins by a new Application of his Sacrifice, and
perfuming their Persons and Services by the Incense of his Merits. It is his
praying the Father, and thereby procuring for them, that they receive of his
Fullness, even Grace for Grace, and be carried from Strength to Strength,
through all the Opposition they meet with from their own Hearts, from Satan, or
from the World, until they are presented without Spot, faultless and
unrebukable, before the Throne of their Judge, with exceeding Joy.

Now this Intercession of Christ, is either promised to every justified Person,
as such; or but to some true Believers, in Distinction from others. -- If the
latter, then some justified Persons must have Qualifications of their own to
recommend them to the Intercession of Christ, which others want. There must be
something that distinguishes their Case; and makes this infinite Difference
between them and others. An Interest in the Benefits of Christ's Redemption, it
cannot be: for these every justified Person equally partake of. It must
therefore be something of their own; and consequently they must be Partners
with Christ in the Merit of their Salvation; and they must have something to
^^ast of, which others have not. But this is opposite to the whole Scheme of
our Salvation by Christ; and therefore absurd. -- If on the contrary, the
Intercession of Christ is promised to every justified Person, then every one
that is justified, shall be also glorified: for Christ's Intercession is always
effectual. -- If we are interested in Christ by Faith, we are interested in a
whole Christ, and all his Benefits. If we are interested in all the Benefits of
Christ's Redemption, we are interested in his Intercession, which is one of
them; and if so, we may safely conclude, that he will "save to the uttermost,
seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for us."

5. This is also evident from the State of Peace and Safety, which the
Scriptures every where declare Believers to be in.

Thus we read, Therefore being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ. By whom also we have Access into this Grace, wherein we
stand; and rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God. For if when we were Enemies, we
were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we
shall be saved by his Life. And not only so; but we joy in God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the Atonement. Romans v. 1, 2, 10, 11. --
Now the God of Peace fill you with all Joy and Peace in believing. Romans xv. 13.
-- Our Consolation also abounds by Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. i. 5. -- And the
Peace of God which passes all Understanding, shall keep your Hearts and Minds,
through Christ Jesus. Phil. iv. 7.

Now let it be considered: What Joy and Peace can the Believer possibly obtain,
or entertain, from the clearest Evidences of his Justification, if he has no
Promise to rest upon, that he shall continue in his present happy State; and
has consequently before him a dark and distressing Prospect of final Apostasy,
and eternal Perdition, as possible to happen to him, and as certain in Case a
merciful God do not uphold him by his free Spirit! -- If it be answered, that
he may find Peace and Comfort from the supporting Hope, that in a Way of
diligent Duty he shall from Time to Time obtain new Supplies of Grace; and be
finally established in the Possession of his Inheritance: I would inquire, what
Foundation he has for such a supporting Hope, as will afford him Joy and Peace
in believing?

Can he found it upon his own good Frames, and present Purposes, or
Resolutions? This were to set his Foot upon a Quicksand. He that trusts in
his own Heart, is a Fool. Alas, he knows by Experience, that his Heart is
deceitful above all Things, and desperately wicked. He knows, that he has an
alluring World, a tempting Devil, and the contagious Examples and Enticements
of wicked Men to deal with: and if that be all his Encouragement, the
Probability is every Way against him; there is a much greater Prospect of his
final Apostasy, than of his Perseverance. This therefore can afford him no
Peace. He cannot rejoice in this gloomy and dismaying View of his Case. -- Where
then can he found his Hope?

Can he found it upon the Grace of God,as being sufficient for him? This would
indeed afford him Peace and Comfort, if he had any Promise to build upon. But
alas, according to the Opinion I am opposing, his present Faith gives him no
Security of future Grace. God has not promised (and therefore the Believer
cannot conclude) that he shall not yet be left to a hard Heart and a reprobate
Mind, to final Security and Impenitence. All his Expectations of future
Supplies of Grace may (for ought he knows) be vain Presumption. And what Joy or
Consolation can flow from thence? What Peace can he find in believing, when he
has no Encouragement, but what belongs to the Unbeliever, as much as to him?

Perhaps it will be pretended, That this Hope, from which he should derive his
Comfort, may be founded upon his sincere Endeavors to live to God, to exercise
the Graces, and to discharge the Duties of the christian Life. -- But I must
yet inquire, what he has to depend upon for maintaining the Exercise of this
pretended Sincerity? He may imagine himself sincere to Day; and yet under the
(...) of Temptations or Corruptions, prove a Hypocrite to Morrow; and in that
Case what would become of his Hope and Peace? Or what would become of 'em for
ever, if he should die in such a State?

Should it be even supposed, that the common Grace, which is generally
communicated to such as live under Gospel Light and Advantages, were sufficient
to support this Hope; yet this Concession would Nothing affect the present
Argument. For how does that Hope flow from Faith in Christ, which is common to
the Unbeliever? How is that Peace the Consequence of our Justification, which
is common to the Christless Sinner, as well as to them that are in Christ?

In fine, how can the Believer have the Peace of God which passes all
Understanding, to keep his Mind and Heart, without a well-grounded Hope of
eternal Salvation? How can he have such a Hope, without any Security of his
Continuance in a State of Safety, either from his own Qualifications, or from a
divine Promise? Indeed how can he possibly have any such Security, while
actually always liable to a final Apostasy? -- It therefore appears to me, that
by this Opinion, the Believer must be left comfortless; and the Scriptures I
have cited, with a great many others of the like kind, must be wholly
unintelligible. -- But blessed be God, there be many, who from happy Experience
can set to their Seal, that God is true, from a lively Hope, a Hope that makes
not ashamed; because the Love of God is shed abroad in their Hearts, by the
Holy Ghost which is given unto them.

It may be objected against the Doctrine of Perseverance, That it is contrary
to Fact and Experience. -- Noah, David, Solomon, and Peter did fall from Grace.
And that we find by our own Observation, some of the most flourishing
Professors, who for a Time appeared very eminent Christians, have finally
apostatised.

In Answer to this, it must be remembered, That it is not the present Inquiry,
what Kind or Degree of Declension from a Life of vital Piety, is consistent
with a justified State: But whether any justified Person will finally
apostatise. Let it therefore be considered, whether any of the Instances
mentioned in the Objection, or any other that can be mentioned, will
necessarily produce this Conclusion, That a Man may fall finally away from a
true lively Faith in Jesus Christ, and from a State of Favor with God, and so
perish eternally. This must be proved; or the Objection is nothing to the
Purpose. -- But I think there is no Instance in the Bible, will support that
Conclusion. The Instances commonly brought by our Adversaries, are the Falls of
such Believers, who are now glorified Saints in Heaven: and they are therefore
exceedingly impertinent to the present Purpose. How does it appear, that true
Believers may finally apostatise, because some true Believers have fallen into
Sin, who did not finally apostatize? -- That the righteous may fall seven
Times, and rise again, is what I make no Doubt of. But that the true Believer
may finally miscarry, is what: I could never see proved from any Instance on
Scripture-Record.

And as for the Plea from our own Observation, it proves nothing but the
Shortness of our Sight, and our Incapacity to search Men's Hearts. Among the
Apostles there was a Judas; who (though a Devil) was not discerned by his
Fellow-Disciples, till his open Treason proclaimed his Hypocrisy. And there
will always be foolish Virgins (among the Wise) who will never be distinguished
by their Companions, 'till that Midnight Cry is heard, Behold, the Bridegroom
comes.

It may be likewise objected against this Doctrine of Perseverance, That it is
contrary to Scripture: That there are many Texts of Scripture, which speak of
the Righteous turning away from their Righteousness? and their finally falling
from eminent Seize in Religion.

In answer to this, my designed Brevity will not allow a distinct Consideration
of the several Texts quoted by our Adversaries to this Purpose. I shall only in
general observe, that I know of no Text in the Bible, which supposes a total
and final Apostasy from a saving Faith in Christ, or from a justified State.

That Men may fall from great. Seize in moral Righteousness, is
frequently supposed; and that such might have apostatised from the Profession
of Christianity, who had obtained the miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, seems
to be insinuated, Heb. vi. 4, 6. But as in this Text there is no mention made
of Repentance toward God, or of a saving Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; so, I
think, upon Trial it will be found, there is no Text in the Bible, that gives
the least Hint of any Man's totally and finally falling away from such
Seize.

I have already shown, that the contrary is asserted in the plainest and
strongest Terms; not meetly in some few and doubtful, but in Multitudes of
clear, plain and express Texts of Scripture. And as for any other Passages of a
more dubious Aspect, they ought to be so interpreted, as that one Place of
Scripture should not be made to militate against another. And in this Case, the
Appeal may be made even to our Adversaries themselves, whether the Advantage is
not every Way on our Side of the Question.

Could they prove, that Christians may finally apostatise from every Attainment
short of justifying Faith it does nothing affect the Case before us. Could they
prove, That Persons of distinguishing Eminence in Morality, as touching the
Righteousness which is in the Law, blameless; That such who boldly profess the
Truths of the Gospel, and conscientiously attend all the external Ordinances of
the Christian Dispensation; That such who have found great Comfort and Joy in
their Christian Profession, and have been zealous in the Cause of Religion;
That such who could give all their Goods to feed the Poor, and could even have
given their Bodies to be burned, from their firm Belief of the Favor of God to
them: And that such who with Balaam, Judas, and perhaps Demas, had the
prophetic and miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost; That Persons of this
Character may totally apostatise to a Life of Wickedness, Heresy, and even
Atheism, it would make Nothing against the Perseverance of sound Believers: for
all these Seize may be supposed without the least Degree of true
justifying Faith. -- And more than this amounts to, I don't find so much as
attempted by our Adversaries.

If any should urge in this Case the Apostle's Care, lest when he had preached
to others, he himself should be a Castaway: I answer, No more can be fairly
argued from it, than that they who actually persevere to eternal Life, do
obtain the End of their Faith, the Salvation of their Souls, in the Way of
Watchfulness and holy Diligence. -- It does not prove, that the Apostle was
anxiously afraid, he should eventually be cust away: but that he knew, he (as
well as others) must use the appointed Means in order to prevent it, among
which a Fear of Caution and Circumspection is one, and of the first Importance.
-- Nor does it prove, that any true Believer is liable to finally miscarry: but
that they who do obtain eternal Life, must and shall persevere in the Way and
Means, by which alone it is to be obtained and hoped for. And this is the
Character of every true Believer, that he does persevere to eternal Life, in
the Way of holy Vigilance, keeping his Body in Subjection, lest he should be a
Castaway.

But farther it is objected against this Doctrine, That it opens a Door to
Licentiousness. For (say they) if once Persons can imagine themselves in a
justified State, they may give the Reins to their Lusts, and a Loose to their
sensual Appetites; and yet notwithstanding entertain Hopes of Salvation.

I answer, the Objection is founded upon an Ignorance of the Nature and
Properties of a true justifying Faith. A true Faith purifies the Heart, works
by Love, and overcomes the World. No Man therefore can upon good Grounds take
the Comforts of a justified State; but from a Consciousness of these Fruits of
Faith, the Purity of his Heart, and Sanctity of his Life. So that this Doctrine
(whatever abusive Application may be made of it) has no direct Tentency to
Licentiousness. But it is so far from this, that Nothing is, or can be, such a
constant Source of real vigorous Christianity and vital Piety, as the
Manifestations of the Love of God to our Souls, and the Evidences of his
Favor. And it may be certainly determined, that such Persons cannot be in a
justified State, upon whom the imaginary Evidences of God's Favor have a
contrary Effect.

All that now remains, is to make some brief IMPROVEMENT of what has been said.

USE I. This teaches us, that we have no grounded Hope of eternal Salvation,
but what flows from the Evidences of our Justification. -- Multitudes indeed
presume upon Acceptance with Christ at his coming, that have no such Foundation
to build upon. But alas! these are like to meet with a dreadful Disappointment,
when it comes to the Trial.

Do they hope, that they may possibly be in God's Favor, though they want the
Evidences of it? Alas, what can this mean, but that they hope though they don't
know why; and that they hope, when they have no Reason to conclude, that they
shall not be eternally miserable?

Do they hope, from Designs and Expectations of future Repentance and Faith in
Christ? At this Kate, why may not every impenitent Sinner in the World,
entertain the same Hope, upon the same Grounds? But what Reason can any Man
have, to expect an Interest in Christ hereafter, that neglects him now? Such
cannot expect it, from a Prospect of better Dispositions in themselves. For a
Continuance in a Christless State will make their Hearts worse, certainly not
better; 'twill harden, rather than soften them. -- They cannot expect it, from
the Grace of God. For he has no where suspended the Offer of his Grace to 'em,
upon Condition of their future Acceptance of it. Surely the Neglecting,
Abusing, and Affronting his Grace, is not the Way to obtain it.

Do they entertain Hope, from the infinite Mercy and Goodness of God? But they
ought to remember, that he is just, as well as merciful; and that it belongs to
his Name, that he will by no Means clear the guilty.

Do they hope in the Merits of the Redeemer? These are a sufficient Foundation
of Hope, if they have an Interest in them; but not else. Their Hopes therefore
cannot justly be more than proportionable to their Evidences of this. All
further Hope is Presumption. All further Expectations of Happiness, are like to
end in Amazement and Confusion at last.

With what Compassion should we therefore look upon a poor stupid presumptuous
Generation of Men, who are crying Peace and Safety to themselves, while walking
in the Imaginations of their own Hearts; and quieting their Consciences with
Hopes of Heaven, without Experience of a Work of Grace in their Souls. -- Alas,
how vast is the Number of such selfdeceiving Hypocrites! How great a Part of
our People every where, are thus weaving the Spider's Web; and are like to
perish with a Lie in their right Hand! How very few, that have a rational
well-grounded Hope of appearing at the right Hand of Christ, when he comes! And
where will all the Rest appear, at the great and terrible Day of the Lord! --

How much does it therefore concern us to (...) it, That we are emptied of our
(...), and brought to the Foot of God's (...). That we have chosen the Lord
Jesus Christ for our Portion, received him upon his own Terms, and do depend
upon him only, as the Author of our eternal Salvation; That our Faith in him is
accompanied with the concomitant Graces and Fruits of the blessed Spirit, in
our Hatred of every sinful Way, in our Love to God and Christ, and our Love to
Men, especially the Children of God; and that we show forth our Faith by our
Works, by living to God, in an habitual Course of spiritual Thoughts, Tempers
and Behaviors. -- How much does it concern us, not to entertain Hopes of
Salvation; but upon these or such like Evidences of our Justification! A Hope
thus founded, will stand us in Stead. A Hope built upon any other Foundation,
will end in astonishing Disappointment and Confusion.

USE II. This administers solid substantial Comfort to the true Believer,
notwithstanding all the Darkness, Desertions, Troubles, and Temptations, that
he may meet with in this militant State. -- Though there be no Encouragement to
any, to be careless and secure (This, as I have observed, would be an Evidence
against their Sincerity and Hope) there is nevertheles, glorious Encouragement
to the Mourners in Zion. Blessed are they that mourn: For they shall be
comforted.

Such Christians, as have had special Manifestations of the Love of God to
their Souls, are liable to peculiar Darkness and Distress, when they have lost
those sensible Views of God's gracious Presence. -- The Time was, when they
could clearly discover some lively Exercise of the Graces of the Holy Spirit:
but now their Souls are covered with Darkness and Deadness. They cannot find
those vigorous Actings of Faith and Love, which heretofore have warmed and
comforted their Hearts. The sacred Flame now seems almost extinguished. -- The
Time was, when they were greatly refreshed by their Intercourse with Heaven, in
the Duties of religious Worship. Then they could say, Truly our Fellowship is
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ: but now their Beloved has
withdrawn himself, and is gone; Their Souls cleave to the Dust; and they cannot
quicken them. -- The Time was, when they could have such lively Impressions of
the Things unseen and eternal, as carried them above the World and its
Vanities, sweetened their Expectations of Death, and made them rejoice in Hope
of the Glory of God: but now their Prospect is dark, their Faith weak, and
their Hope almost cut off. This is ready to plunge them into the Psalmist's
Discouragements and Complaints. Will the Lord cast off for ever? And will he be
favorable no more? Is his Mercy clean gone for ever? Has God forgotten to be
gracious? Has he in Anger shut up his tender Mercies?

But remember, poor Soul, that those whom Christ loves, he loves to the End.
Though you cannot and ought not to fit down contented in such a State; yet you
may be supported with this comforting Conclusion: There is no Condemnation to
those that are in Christ Jesus. -- Who is he that condemns those for whom
Christ has died; or who shall separate them from the Love of Christ? Your
Father which gave you to Christ, is greater than all; and none shall pluck you
out of your Father's Hands. He has promised, that he will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee (Heb. xiii. 5.) And he will be as good as his Word. Trust in him
therefore, with humble Courage and Confidence. Resolve with holy Job, If he
slay me, yet will I trust in him. Be content to follow him in the Dark. If you
can find Comfort no where else, do as the Psalmist did in your Case: Call to
Remembrance the Song you have had in the Night. Say of your Doubtings and
Darkness, This is my Infirmity; but I will remember the Years of the right Hand
of the most High. I will support my Soul with the Manifestations of the Love of
Christ, that I have heretofore experienced: and I will renew my Pursuit of
these blessed Manifestations, I will still follow hard after him, 'till I find
him. -- In this Way you will first or last know by happy Experience, that Light
is sown for the Righteous, and Gladness for the upright in Heart.

But perhaps you are afraid, that you may meet with such shocking Trials, as
will be too hard for you. You may be afraid, that you may meet with Persecution
for the Cause of Christ, and like saint-hearted Soldiers you shall quit the
Field. Or you may be afraid, that you shall be terrified and dismayed with the
Approach of Death; and dishonor your Profession by your Terrors and
Despondings. -- If this be your Case, check your Unbelief, and say with the
Psalmist, Why art thou cast down, O Soul! Why art thou disquieted within me!
Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise him, who is the Health of my
Countenance and my God. Though you have no Strength nor Sufficiency of your own
to depend upon, is not the Power, the Goodness and the Faithfulness of God, a
sufficient Refuge for your distressed Soul? Trust him. The eternal God is thy
Refuge; and underneath are the everlasting Arms. As thy Days, so shall thy
Strength be. When thou passest through the Waters, he will be with thee; and
through the the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee. When thou walk through
the Fire, thou shall not be burnt; neither shall the Flame kindle upon thee:
for he is the Lord thy God, the holy One of Israel, thy Savior. He has been
often tried in such Distresses; and never yet failed those that uprightly
believed and trusted in him. This therefore may be your constant Support, that
he is faithful who has promised, that "All Things shall work together for Good,
to them which love God, to them which are called according to his Purpose.

USE III. Let this be improved by Way of solemn Admonition to every one, to
look to it that you evidence the Truth and Reality of your Justification, by
your Perseverance in Faith and Holiness.

Instead of encouraging your selves in a Life of Carelessness, Sensuality, and
Security, from the Doctrine before us, the Improvement of it should be the
quite contrary Way. -- If Perseverance be the certain Consequence of a
justified State, then Apostasy in any from the Profession and Practice of
Godliness is a sad Evidence, that such have never indeed attained to that safe
and happy State. Every Degree of Declension should therefore awaken you to the
greatest Watchfulness over your Hearts and Lives, to the greatest Diligence in
Duty, and to the most earnest and importunate Applications to the Throne of
Grace, for the Incomes and Influences of the blessed Spirit, to excite, quicken
and invigorate you in the Ways of God.

What though some of the Children of God, have been recovered from great and
remarkable Falls into Sin? How much greater is the Number of those, that have
securely flattered themselves with Dreams of their good Estate, but were not of
them which believe to the saving of the Soul, and finally have drawn back unto
Perdition? -- When you think of the Falls of Noah, Lot, David, Peter, and other
Servants of God; think also of Judas, Demas, Hymeneus, and Alexander, Phyletus,
Phygellus, Hermugenes, with other Hypocrites and Apostates: And think that it is
impossible for you to know, that you are not of the latter Sort, while in a
backsliding Way, under the Power of your Corruptions.

Instances of the Imperfections of the Children of God, are left on sacred
Record, to comfort those whose Hearts are right with God, and are following
hard after Him, notwithstanding their Darkness and Infirmity: but not designed
to encourage the careless and secure in their Declensions and Apostasies. Thou
stand by Faith; be not therefore highminded, but fear. Work out your own
Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Press on with earnest and constant
Diligence, toward the Mark for the Prize of the high Calling of God in Christ
Jesus: always considering, that those, all those, and none but those who endure
to the End, shall be saved.

Now unto Him, that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
saultless before the presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy, to the only wise
God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion, and Power, both now and ever.
Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 30. lin. 1. read, which was. P. 32. l. 2. for it r. a. And l. 3. for a r.
it. P. 160. l. 13. r. they must. P. 169. l. 23. r. Defects. P. 173. l. 23. put
USE 3. P. 176. l. 4. between true and even, put the Clause that is in l. 6. And
we, and c. P. 217. l. 13. r. to your. P. 218. r. eternal. P. 221. l. 30. r.
Interval.

Lesser Escapes are left to the Reader's Correction and Candor.


