A LETTER To the Merchant in LONDON, To whom is Directed A Printed LETTER
relating to the Manufactory Undertaking, Dated New England, Boston February 21
st 1740, 1.

Printed for the Public Good. 1741.

A LETTER, etc.
Unknown Sir,
IT appearing by the Author's Confession, that by yours of 1st of December,
plain Matters of Fact were the only thing you enjoined him, forbidding any
thing of his own, I may reasonably conclude you are desirous without
Prepossession or Prejudice, to form a Judgment on those Facts (truly related)
according to Truth. That it may be so, and that you, Sir, and others, into
whose Hands the said Letter may fall, may not be imposed upon, I take the
Freedom to send you and them the following Remarks on that Author's
Performance, whereby it will appear how far he has answered your honest
Intentions, and how industrious some among us, and in particular this Author
(already discovered) is to represent the said Manufactory Scheme, in odious
Colors, and thereby excite to Resentment against it, which they could never
do, if they treated it with Truth, and related the Facts as they really are.

As to the Public Currency, the Truth of the Facts with respect to the
Province Bills on which he treats, lies thus: The Province being formerly
deeply engaged in War, their public Charge was too great for their Ability to
make prompt Payment. Not that they wanted Silver, but that they could not pay
it into the public Treasury. This Necessity produced the Emission Bills of
Credit, to be redeemed in some short Time. These finding Credit, not so much by
the Goodness of Merchants, as he says, as that of the Officers and Servants of
the Government, who were the Creditors, and first honored their Bills; and the
War being assisted thereby, more was emitted, and their Redemption carried
forward, and the others redeemed in their Turn, and not postpon'd more than in
one or two Instances. Those Bills went for some Time Hand in Hand with Silver,
until the Goodness of the Merchants of that Day, taking the Advantage of those
Paper Emissions, which the Government by their aforesaid Necessity had made,
shipped off all the Silver and Gold out of the Province, to make Remittances to
other Markets, having carried their Trade to a Pitch so much above the Produce
of the Country, as to require it. Importation increasing, and too many Hands
being employed at Sea, the Land was neglected, or had not due Encouragement.
Hence the Merchant would give any Price for Silver to answer his Demands
abroad, which the Produce of the Country could not do; by this Means they sunk
the Credit of Paper Bills, and yet increased the Necessity of them; no Money
being left to pay contingent Public Charges, (though the War being ended the
People might otherwise have done it) nor none to carry on our Trade, now near
double to our Ability. This put the Merchants on repeated Solicitations for
more Emissions, and many they obtained, some on Loans, some on Funds, all which
by the aforesaid Means, they constantly depreciated, to their own Advantage.
Thus, first by bringing up the Price of all their Goods to what the Silver
cost, although they paid for much of them at a vastly lower Price in the Produce
of the Province. Secondly, by defrauding their Creditors abroad, just so much
as they sunk the Bills in the Time they had Credit.

Next he tells you, Sir, that there is an unaccountable Confusion of Paper
Currency here, and to prove it, mentions sundry Denominations of Bills passing
at different Value: But he must be an unaccountable Man to assert it, for this
makes no Confusion here, each one knowing the respective Value at which they
pass; and the Argument lies as strong against different Coins of Silver, that
without Confusion pass current in most Parts of the World.

Then he proceeds to inform you of two Silver Schemes emitting Bills by the
Merchants; the first of One Hundred and ten Thousand Pounds in 1733, to prevent
a large Emission of Rhode Island Bills from depreciating the Currency, which
are punctually paid in Silver and Gold, and are 33 per Cent better than
Province Bills. But impartial as he is (not suiting his Design) tells you
nothing of his being the principal Promoter of them both. Notwithstanding his
private Opinion is against any, as he tells you afterward; don't inform you,
that he and some others, have turned great Part of the common Currency into
Bonds, payable in those Notes, or Silver at nineteen Shillings an Ounce, says
nothing of their obliging their Debtors to give Bonds in the abovesaid Money
for their Book Debts, while large Sums of that Emission never yet saw the
Light, and that which did, was in a few Months boarded up, and great Numbers by
that Means already are, or in a likely Way to be ruined, while the Notes are in
the Hands of the Hoarders; and Silver is not to be had; neither does he inform
you that when this Scheme was complete, notwithstanding their giving under
their Hands, not to give Credit to the said Rhode Island Bills, (which they
used as an Argument with the Government not to stop their Proceedings) their
Bills disappeared, and have not been seen since; and they run to taking those
Bills of Rhode Island by an universal Consent, while their own made to prevent
them, are locked up in their Escrutores.

As to their second Emission of One Hundred and Twenty Thousand Pounds, we have
as little Experience of it yet (being but partly emitted) as we have hope it
will ever be advantageous to any but themselves. However, from its
Constitution, one of these Events must ensue, either first their Redemption
depending on Silver etc. at the End of fifteen Years, and their growing 46 per
Cent. better in that Time in their Principal, they will soon all be boarded up,
and so produce the same Mischiefs, as their former Notes, saving that
Multitudes being supplied by the Manufactory Bills at a reasonable Rate, the
Merchants don't find it so easy now, as formerly, to persuade People to hire
theirs; or secondly, if they redeem them by Bills of the common Currency, as
the Directors have lately promised (no Crime in our Author to alter) then the
necessary Consequence is, that no Silver will be lodged in their Treasury to
redeem them, common Currency answering that End. Nor no increase of a Medium by
these Notes, because the Currency must be lessened in proportion, and so the
two professed Ends proposed for their Emission, viz the bringing in Silver, and
the increase of the present Currency, entirely frustrate and defeated. So this
Mountain may bring forth a Mouse, as the other did a Viper.

As to what this Author has before said, in his second Reason under his first
general Head, and often afterward repeats as his Opinion, about private Notes
invading the Prerogative: The following Distinction may set that right, and
quite spoil his mischievous Design in so often asserting it. I distinguish
thus, (while no Law in force forbids) I have a natural Right to propose my Note
of Credit, either Singly or in Conjunction with others, to any Man; if he will
give it Credit; it is his own free Act, and if it is not adequate to what I
received of him, he has no Reason to complain, he being under no Force to
receive it: And this Principle corresponds with the Nature and Manner of all
Proceedings in Trade and Commerce; and not only so, but if I may rely on the
best Accounts both in this and the neighboring Province of New Hampshire, I
have the Authority of his most Sacred Majesty and His most Honorable Privy
Council, on my Side, in the Case of the New Hampshire private Notes. This
Government, at the persuasion of the Merchants, who are now against all
Currencys but that of their own, and that not to circulate, having passed a Law
against those Notes passing here, that Law came under Consideration at Home,
when His Majesty in Council in Consideration that all His Subjects were free to
Propose, Receive, or Reject each others Credit at Pleasure, Abrogated that Law,
and pronounced it Null and Void. Which Instance I hope, Sir, will settle you in
that Point, although you have not the Concurrence of this wonderful Author.

By the foregoing Definition, it may evidently appear, that however it may rest
in the Prerogative to ascertain the Value of Money, when it is made a tender in
Law, which seems the chief Ground of Complaint with respect to our Currency at
Home, yet no Invasion is made thereon by a Currency only proposed, and no Body
obliged to give it Credit, which is the present Case.

Next he comes to the Manufactory Scheme, the main Subject of his Letter, as he
says. And here, I doubt not, Sir, but the hard Names, scurrilous Epithets,
extravagant Glosses, and Ungentlemanly Language, with many plain and obvious
Contradictions, (Things never needed in a good Cause) which this Author in his
unconnected Ramble over this Scheme, and it is Undertakers, has used, will
induce you to give little Credit to his Performance; yet give me Leave Sir, for
the more full discovery of this Hard-mouthed Author, and for clearing the
Scheme, and it is Promoters, from his scandalous Reflections, (though I confess
one can hardly come so near him without Defilement) to examine his Assertion in
Point of Fact, and his Conclusions with respect to the Event of this Affair.

And first he begins with the Subjects of this Undertaking; which he calls a
vast Multitude of Necessitous, Idle, and Extravagant People, combining to have
Money at an easy Rate, of no determinate Value, which the Possessor cannot
oblige them to accept, until after twenty Years, and with this to pay their
Debts, which will depreciate the other Currencies, prejudice private Property,
and damage the Merchants of Great Britain trading to New England.

To which I Answer, that as to the Numbers being Great that are actually
concerned in it, it is true, but not the tenth Part of those that are in Heart
in favor of the Scheme, and think it the best calculated Method for the
Province's Good, that has yet been though it of, but that said Partners are a
Combination of such as he represents, is as far from Truth as his Epithets are
from the Rules of Decency and good Manners, or which is all one, as the East
from the West. Can it be supposed, Sir, that the great Number of Officers Civil
and Military selected out of the People by a wise Governor and Council, and
performing so well, as that no Complaints were ever brought against one of them
for Maladministration, besides numbers of Gospel Ministers now concerned in
this Scheme, could deserve such a Character? Would such Numbers of Officers
(not Partners) as of late have resigned their Commissions (that they might be
free to give those Bills a Credit) have done so to take Part with a Combination
of such despicable Mortals in a Design to cheat Mankind, and in which they must
share equally with others? But this (instead of Reason,) has been their
Treatment all along.

As to the easy Rate by which the Partners have there Money, there is no Argument
in that, nor Truth in his Assertion, that they are not obliged to receive it
till twenty Years, or that the Bill is of no determinate Value, that it bears
no Interest; all this is notoriously false.

First, the Partners pay 3 per Cent. for their Bills, two of which he says,
will be swallowed up, in the yearly Charges, to this add the Charge of
Instruments, apprizing of Lands, and Time spent about it, and their clear
Profit will be small compared with their Risque and Trouble; for which in such
Cases, something may be reasonable. And who would grudge them some Profit for
this public Service, since none are the Loosers? Secondly, The Value of the
Bill is as express as Words can make it, being by Promise to be received not
only after twenty Years on Demand, but at all Times in all Payments, Trade and
Business, and for Stock in the Treasury, as lawful Money at six Shillings and
eight Pence per Ounce. This Promise though made by the Signers, yet it is for
themselves and Partners, and if the Partners refuse it, the Possessor has a
plain Action against the Signer or Indorser; but to oblige the Partner to
receive (as before,) he executes a Covenant to the Directors for that Purpose,
whereby they can, and (from Interest) will oblige him to fulfill his Promise.
The Possessor (as by the Scheme now on public Record) is entitled to the Stock
in the Treasury at one per Cent. lower than the Market Price, which Price he is
equally entitled to set with the Directors, and this gives him one per Cent.
Interest. As to these Bills depreciating others, not on a Silver Foundation,
there will be none of them to suffer at the End of one Year, for that compleats
the Term of their Redemption; his Consequence therefore that they will hurt
private Property and the British Merchants, fails and comes to nothing.

And here I would propose to them, Which will hurt them most, whether to have
Money circulating to pay for their Goods in Ships built, and Cargoes bought, in
about six Months, as has been the Case when the Manufactory Bills are taken? Or
whether to wait twice that Time, as some Refusers, I am informed, have done,
and the Keel not yet laid, or Cargoes bought, for want of Money, and perhaps
will not till their Debtor breaks, or by some other Accident they are defeated
of their Debt? But then, our Author lays Stress on the length of the Period,
and the largeness of the Sum. As to that of the Period, the Partners Obligation
to take the Bills at any Time, as before related, is an Answer. And as to the
largeness of the Sum, had there been the same Provision in the Province Bills,
the Rise of Silver had never affected them as it did. To clear this, pray
observe, that when A gave B an advance Price for Silver, that sunk the Province
Bills so much, as A advanced in his Purchase. B, who thought he had got by the
Bargain, soon found his Mistake; for none alive was obliged to receive the
Bills of him in Trade, at a higher Value than he received them of A, and so the
Bills sunk in Value in Trade, just as they did in their Purchase of Silver. But
here the Case is vastly different, for suppose Necessity should oblige A as
before, to give B Eight and eight Pence of the Manufactory Bills for an Ounce
of Silver, when Six and eight Pence is their declared Value; would this of
necessity sink their Value as before? No, by no Means. For this obvious Reason,
because there is that vast Number of Partners before spoken of, who are obliged
to receive them of B at the Rate at first mentioned, besides a vast Stock in
the Treasury of Forty six Thousand Pounds the first Year, and so on, where the
Bills must be received as before expressed, at one per Cent. Interest to the
Possessor. And its against Reason to suppose B will loose his Advantage, or
that the Bill will depreciate by this Means, as the others did. Moreover, this
Scheme being founded on the most demandable Manufactories of the Province, it
is highly probable that it will in a short Time so increase our Produce as to
enable our Merchants to satisfy our Demands for European Goods, (which is one
great Design of the Undertaking) and thereby take away that Demand for Silver
that has always been the visible Cause of sinking Bills, an Effect never to be
expected from their boasted Silver Schemes, which on the contrary increase it is
Demand, and raise its Value in proportion, and so leaves us worse than they
found us; whereas Silver being the Rule of the Value of the Manufactory Bills,
(while none is required) has all its Advantages without the aforesaid
Inconvenience. But if all this is too little to secure against the largeness of
the Sum (and which notwithstanding our Author's Assurance is difficult to
determine before Hand) yet the following must do it. If I mistake not, it is
allowed by almost all Statesmen, that while Money will Rent at six per Cent it
is not too plenty. Well, if this be a safe Rule, then we are secure; for at the
End of one Year of the Money's being out, Forty six Thousand Pounds, Old Tenor,
must be paid in to the Treasury by the Partners, either in the Bills, or in
Manufactorys, to be immediately Sold, to draw them in; and so on, till the
whole is paid in; and there it must lie, till it will Let for six per Cent. and
cannot be Let out for less: which I think wards off the Evil so often surmised
to result from the Greatness of the Sum.

But our cavilling Author will say, What Is all this without sufficient Security
for the Performance, and accordingly tells you, that the Bills are very Ill, or
not at all secured. For Answer to which, I shall inform you, Sir, what the
security is, and leave you to judge for your self, what Reason there is for
this Objection. Every Partner Mortgages a Real Estate (saving a very few who
gave Personal Security in Boston) exclusive of Buildings, Timber, Wood, and
wooden Fences, which are prized at nothing, to the Value of one and a half of
the Money he takes out, done by five Men on Oath: The Deeds Conditioned for the
yearly Payment of a twentieth Part of the Principal, and three per Cent.
Interest. To enforce these Payments, each Partner gives a Covenant, obliging
himself to make them, according to the Tenor of his Mortgage; as also to pay
his Rateable Proportion of all manner of Losses that may any Ways happen;
besides many other Things contained therein for the better Security of the
Possessor; to which Purpose all the Instruments are made. Now Sir, if he pays
not, Action of Covenant broken may be brought, and on Judgment obtained,
Execution may be Levied on his other Estate from Year to Year, and Payment to
Payment, and his whole Mortgage lies to secure the last Payment only: Hence if
all they are worth will make good their Engagements, it is liable. The
Directors Security as such, besides Instruments executed to each other,
obliging to the faithful Discharge of their Trusts, is a Covenant they give to
each of the Partners, expressing the Particulars of their Duty; on failure of
which each Partner has his Action against each Director, by Virtue of said
Covenant, which secures against all Suggestions of Corruption in the Directors.

With respect to the Surmise he pretends you make of the Merchants jesuitically
promoting the Scheme in order to get all Paper Currencies suppressed, whether
this is Genuine or not, I cannot tell. But this is certain, that the Term is
well adapted; for at that Game, it is notorious, he is never exceeded, and but
seldom equalled. Then again (as though hurried by some Evil Spirit) he repeats
his Abuses of the Contrivers, says the Scheme was contrived for their Use, and
in the same Breath says, it is only contrived for the Directors Use, who to be
sure were mostly other Persons; for the first Projector of the Scheme is no
Officer. This appears, says he, from the Constitution, as first, because their
Choice is perpetual. Suppose so; yet if their Labor is worth the Hire, as
indeed it is, and their Business before, was as good or better, as indeed it
was, as to most or all of them, it proves nothing to his Purpose. But he is
here (as almost every where else) out in Fact. For although if they behave well,
and Answer the public Good, and End proposed, they may continue, and it will
be for the Credit of the whole they should: yet on the least Corruption, which
his Objection supposes, any four Directors concurring with the major Part of
the Partners, may displace the other five, or any one of them; and if that
cannot be obtained, every Partner has his Action against the delinquent
Director, on failure of his Duty, as before. Which is an effectual Security
against any Inconvenience on that Account. His second is, that they have a
Negative on all Resolves at a General Meeting; this is also false. It Is true
they have in some, and as true that the Partners in Case of need, have their
Remedy as before. In his Third, he gives you a fresh Instance of his
Ill Nature, and grumbles at the Charge, and sumptuous Living on free Cost, as
he calls it, and that it will amount to two per Cent. all which is also false;
and were it true, till he shows some needless Expense and Waste, he proves
nothing by it, but his own Rancour and peevish Disposition. And it is a poor
Proof of his Assertion, that the South Sea Company allowed Eight Thousand
Pounds only for Management, which is more than four Times as much as the
Allowance and other annual Charge of this new and difficult Undertaking, which
takes up all the Time and Powers of the Directors; and for which they have One
Hundred and fifty Pounds per Annum each (finding themselves,) and no more.

Then he wrangles and finds Fault with their Trade, and calls them Ludicrous,
because they Import that which others will not sell us, and that which we cannot do
without; whereas the Bank of England, and all other Banks well constituted (he
must mean established by Law) are prohibited Trade. And these desire the same
Thing, when alike circumstanced (their Trade not being a chosen Circumstance)
but are loath to starve in the mean Time. But then they don't understand Trade.
This ought to move his Compassion, rather than his Anger. That he and his
Brethren force them to Business of which they are not capable. His diminitive
Appellation of the Gentlemen of the Bay, is very ungenerous and ungrateful,
they having contributed vastly to the Assistance of out Trade, and to the
Wealth of this very Author in particular.

His next Freak is about the Alteration of the Scheme, which he thinks none
have a Right to do but himself, he having altered as before mentioned; and what
then, if it be for the better, (which he don't deny) and completed before any
Obligation was made, why should he be angry? Why, for this very good Reason,
that he and his Party will thereby be convict of a grand Imposition on the
Government at Home, as well as Injustice to the Directors) by laying Mr.
Colman's Scheme, so called, before them, as that on which the Bills were
uttered; whereas in Truth it will appear, that the true Scheme is a very
different Thing, and agreed to by the Directors long after that went off from
New England.

Then he mistakes the Place, where to look for the Directors Securitys, and the
Truth with respect to their being given. All that being done before they
proceeded, as in other well ordered honest Schemes. And as to the Securities
for their own Quota's or Shares as Partners, some Months before taken up, as he
falsely affirms, if he will search again, he will find most of them on Record,
which proves that it was Hurry that prevented it before, and not an evil
Design, as he would have you think.

In his Answer to your Desire to know the Nature of our landed Interest, he
ought to have told you, "that it is almost ruined by our Trade; as our
Merchants manage it. It Is true, Sir, Our Forefathers spent their Blood and
Treasure, many of them, in subduing this Wilderness, and its savage
Inhabitants; and the Land being cultivated is generally exceeding Good, for so
cold a Climate; the People orderly, virtuous, and industrious, but the want of
Money and Hands to labor (too great a Proportion going to Sea) has brought
them to the Pass our Author speaks of. Though he has his own Ends in casting his
Veil over their Nakedness; otherwise he might have discovered the Means which
made them so, which would be little to his Credit. The Truth is this, that the
Import too much encouraged, or Export too much neglected and discouraged, has
built up a few on the Ruins of many; the natural Effect of such a State.

His next, being without Consequence, remains without an Answer.

His Mistake about the Stock answered before, and the rest of his Paragraph but
a Bubble not worth Notice.

His double Mistake again repeated about Interest, and Acceptance, already
answered.

That of the Assortment and Value of the Goods in which the Bills are to be
paid, I answer thus; All the Goods in the Treasury are the Property of the
Possessor (so far as his Bills will reach) and consequently he will take which
he pleases. And the Case vastly differs from a Bond, where two Species are
mentioned, as discharging Conditions; there the Creditor is entitled to but
one, but here to all, therefore has his Choice. As to the Value, it being at
the Market Price, the Debtor has no more Right to decide that than the
Creditor; but of this also before.

His third, that the Bills will supply the Treasury, and no Manufactures paid:
I Answer, that is impossible, because the Sum to be paid in is bigger than what
is emitted, and consequently Manufactures must supply the Deficiency. And as to
what Bills are paid in, they must be procured of the Possessor, and by them who
must receive the Bills at the declared Value, and then who is hurt? Though all
possible Means will be used, that Manufactures be produced for a Reason herein
mentioned.

His fourth, viz. That the Directors (the Company not being a Body Politic)
may emit what Bills they please, so none must be had, least too much be
emitted. However, a Law easily prevents this. But if the Argument proves any
Thing, it proves too much, as by the Consequence aforesaid, and so must be
rejected.

The same answers his fifth.

His sixth describing who may set up a Bank, as well suits the Land Bank
Partners, after all his Scurrility and soul Language, as it does the Silver
Schemers. And I dare (were it convenient) put the Issue of the Case upon it. As
to others following the Example, it is vertually answered in his fourth.

His seventh, that the Security being among themselves, may be shifted at
Pleasure. I Answer, Can they blot out the Face of the Bill in the Possessor's
Hand? If so, there may be Danger, otherwise it is irrational to suppose the
Directors will suffer, much less agree to cancel or (...) the Securitys, while
the Bill stands out against them, and must prove their Ruin. What can be more
invidious?

No wonder the Government rejected the Scheme in (...) as he next relates, when
the Signers of the Bills, the only Persons the Possessors could come at, were
to have no Security given to them, as appears, to enable them to redeem the
Bills. But no doubt this Author when it suits his Design, will conclude that
whatever once were the Sentiments of the Government, must always be right (let
Circumstances alter as they will) and it is a wonder we are not charged with
Rebellion, for our proceeding contrary to what was their Mind twenty six Years
ago. But though we escape here, he now draws up a heavy Charge indeed, viz. of
debauching People's Minds, instilling Principles into them destructive of the
Government; and so he goes on with a long Detail of Particulars, equally
ridiculous, and equally false, calculated purely to influence the Power at Home
against this People, to procure a Dissolution of our Constitution, doubting of
his half Vote for the future. When in Fact (saving some Opposition made to the
Merchants (by Abuse extorted) and that in a very small Degree, to what they
have given) there is not the least Foundation in Truth for all these
Assertions. But this Instrument of Cruelty, with just the same Reason, takes
the same Methods which his Predecessors the old Pharisees did, when they wanted
Argument to hunt down the Christian Religion and it is Promoters, they thought
to effect it by representing them as Seditious and Disturbers of Government;
and what was the Effect of their own Opposition, as now, was unjustly charged
on them that peaceably suffered under it.

I shall select and Answer his most material Points, as that in his first, That
for the People strenuously to assert the emitting and passing any Thing as a
Currency, in defiance of the King's Prerogative is a high Crime, is answered
before. Middletown he says, have Voted to receive those Bills as Cash for Town
Rates; intimating -- that by the Words ( as Cash) they invaded the King's
Prerogative: But this is a false Recital of their Words, and (I fear) wilful,
and discovers a consciousness in this Author that a bare offering or receiving
of the said Bills in lieu of Money or any thing else, which was their Case, was
no Invasion on the Prerogative; therefore he perverts the Words on Purpose to
serve his Design, at which he has an excellent Faculty. The Words are, "that
they would receive the Bills in Town Rates," which no more infringes the
Prerogative, than to have said, they would pay in Corn, or any other Commodity,
which some Towns have done before them, and were never taxed with invading the
Prerogative.

As to his second, why Landed Men have not a Right to make Money as well as
they that have none, or why they will relinquish their Country, sooner to an
Invader, or why they must necessarily be supposed eo be in Debt, or why their
making Money (he means Bills) is from a destructive and wicked Principle, as he
asserts, being beyond me to discover, I pass it by.

His Glosses in his third, are entirely groundless. No Sir, we value our Selves
on a just and honest Trade, equal to our Ability. It Is the Excess only we are
against: should be glad to enlarge our Ability, and hope by this Scheme to
effect it, (our Produce being thereby improved) in an honest and thristy way,
and not by a Bankrupt Trade as at present, make our selves a Bankrupt People,
the necessary and natural Effects of such a Trade.

The Substance of his fourth is this, that the People in the Charter
Governments, being greatly in Favor of this Undertaking, will, it is like,
exercise their Charter Liberty in choosing such to Rule them, as they think will
promote it; and so, says he, our Dependence on Great Britain would vanish,
Neglects of Resolves of Parliament, and King's Instructiors will ensue, (he
seems to have changed his Mind since Governor B -- t's Day) he had better have
spoken plain, and said, it is best to take away the Charters, least the People
by Virtue of them, should make Choice of such as would promote, what they
judged for the public Good, instead of others who may deserve the contrary
Character, which is the grand Reason of a Charter: or in other Words, least the
People by their Charter Privilege, should give check to any arbitrary
Proceedings that have or may happen, and so he is for absolute Monarchy, and
destroying the Constitution, not only here but of the Nation also.

As to his fifth, that the People are by the Managers of the Scheme excited to
Mutiny etc That they tell them, that the Lords at Whitehall, nor Acts of
Parliament can stop their Proceedings; that if the Merchants will not take the
Bills they must blame themselves for any Outrages that may happen; that we had
as good perish by the Sword as by Famine; that on a French Invasion, if we
submit, it cannot be worse, as appears, he says, by the printed Papers sent
home. I Answer, It is hard to determine what Property of the Devil discovers
itself most in this Relation, Malice or Falsehood both being carried to the
Height. But I leave it to the Papers he refers to (abating some Strokes on the
Merchant by their hard and cruel Usage extorted) and let them be searched for
the Test of this Author's Veracity in this Affair; and will be answerable for
it, that scarce one in five Thousand of the Landed Men of these. Provinces
would quit their Allegiance to his present Majesty, and His Royal House, while
the Blood in their Veins would keep them in Life; and none later than the
Managers he refers to, and so monstrously abuses.

In his Answer to your Question, as to what has been done by the Government;
had he regarded the Truth, he would have told you, that in the Year 1739, the
first Draught of the Manufactory Scheme was by Order of the Government (I mean
the whole Court) laid before a Committee of both Houses chosen for that
Purpose. This being done at their Order, it was supposed, if they acted not
against, their Allowance for it is Proceeding, was necessarily implied; the
Scheme being then in the Rough and undigested, that Committee (if I mistake
not) Reported against it. However, if they did, their Report was rejected, and
it was referred to next May Session for further Consideration, and all
Proceedings thereon forbidden in the mean Time: This by the way shows, that the
Government (properly so called) had a Value for the Scheme in Substance, though
they might not like it in it is then unpolished Dress: well, strict Obedience
was paid to this Order, saving that some Amendments were made to obviate the
Objections the Committee made against it. In the May Sessions 1740, it was
Resumed, the Committee for the Partners heard by the House; after which, the
Question being put, Whether it should be stopped? It (...) the Negative. About
this Time, a Committee of both Houses was chosen to consider again of the
Affair, but they Reported nothing against it. Then the Merchants petitioned the
Court it should be stopped; and great Numbers of Anti-Petitions, with many
Hundred Hands from different Parts of the Province were preferred, praying it
might not; however, in the forenoon it was ordered that the Affair of the
Merchants Petition should come on in the afternoon of the same Day. This sudden
Appointment was a surprise to the said Committee, and the more so, because the
Gentleman of the Law, who usually argued for them not expecting another
Hearing, was gone out of the Province, and those on the Spot not knowing of it
till one a Clock; whereas the Petitioners had by their Council learned in the
Law, and a popular Speaker, prepared in Writing the Substance of their
Objections; however both Parties at Three a Clock appeared before the
honorable House, spent the whole Afternoon in Argument for and against the
Scheme, and then withdrew. The House after a long Consultation and Debate, and
sundry Alterations being made in the Scheme the mean while, came to a Vote in
manner as before, and it passed in the Negative by two to one. After which
farther Amendments being made, sundry principal Members of the House that voted
against it, became in Favor of it, and their Number increased so fast, that on
a Motion made to the House to Resume the Consideration of it, some Months after
(on the Question put) but about twelve Hands in that large Assembly were in the
Affirmative, and so they (to wit, the Partners) proceeded, having no Reason
(they apprehended) to expect the Resentment of the Court (which indeed they
have never had) nor of the Governor and Council till several Months after
their Officers were chosen, and many Hundred legal Instruments duly executed on
all Hands, and large Quantities of the Bills emitted, by which it became
impossible for them to Retract; this shows how they proceeded, and how far they
are chargeable with Contempt of Government.

It is true, the Governor and Council by way of Caution, did issue a
Proclamation against taking those Bills, something earlier than before
mentioned: But that being on Supposition they were not for the public Good,
all that though it otherwise, notwithstanding took them, as they thought, without
Contempt, the Government not being against it, or any Order to the contrary.
When the Proclamations for divesting of Officers came out, Numbers that had
proceeded as before related, Men of established Characters, and known
Usefulness, both of the Civil and Military Order, conscious of the Justice of
the Cause, as well as the cautiousness of their Proceedings (before related)
resigned their Commissions, and others not their Inferiors were turned out and
discarded for proceeding in this Affair, but according to their legal
Obligations, in a Thing they might not have entered into, had not they been
encouraged as before.

On this, whole Troops, nay almost whole Regiments of as good veteran Officers
as any in the Province, no ways concerned, or ever intending to be, but from a
Persuasion of the public Necessity and Usefulness of this Work, either
actually Resigned, or informed their Colonels, when by them examined by Order
of the Governor, whether they took the Bills, that they would Resign, rather
than not encourage that Affair. But most of this not suiting your Author, he
leaves it out, as though aware, that such a Conduct, in so many Men of Note, must
strongly suggest to an impartial Mind, that this Work is another Thing than
what it has been represented to be.

In his next, he proposes a Hearing, this would be happy for the Partners,
could it be had with Convenience, who have suffered only where they have not
been heard, always justified where they have; and whatever they may loose by
the Trial, they would undoubtedly regain their injured good Name, and
Reputation, so strenuously endeavored to be taken from them.

To his nonsensical second Paragraph, viz that the Partners receive no valuable
Consideration for their Deeds; I only Note, that he tells you before, that all
that the Directors are worth, would not redeem two per Cent of the Bills, which
now, he says, are no valuable Consideration to them that receive them.

His third, about Compassion in the Government, being only a Reflection on the
Government, I leave him to answer for it.

Then he says, the Government will deal as natural Parents do with Children
committing some Follies after repeated Admonitions; To which I say, They may
expect it, as they are always ready to submit to the Government they are under,
and would rejoice and think themselves happy to be fairly heard before them.

In his next (the Bubbles being still in his Mouth, not having fully vented his
Corruption) In Combinations etc. (says he) the Guilt of the Projectors and
Managers is always from a corrupt Principle, but the Errors in their Followers
(the Multitude) is from a Mistake in Judgment.

I Answer, Here by a plain Contradiction of himself, he would now seem to
acquit the Partners from the Charge of Iniquity, who before he calls a vast
Multitude of Idle, Necessitous, and Extravagant Persons, as in Page 6. Sect. 3.
A Multitude contriving to indemnify themselves against Acts of Government, Pa.
7. Par. 2. Contriving to baulk their Creditors. Pa. 9. Par. 1. Desperate Men,
Fraudulent. Pa. 10. Sect. 5, 6. Wickedness of Combination, Pa. 12 Sect. 4. and
so on. But now this is no wicked Principle, but all an Error in Judgment in his
Account, because they were not the Contrivers, or Managers of the Contrivance
(he must mean) for a Manager after the Constitution is settled, is no more
chargeable with the wicked Principle, on which it is founded, than any other
Partner; but so he will miss the Aim that hurried him thus to contradict
himself, viz. the Condemnation of the Directors: For by this they will get
clear too; for they were not the Contrivers of the Scheme, being in Substance
projected and draughted long before they were chosen, or most of them had ever
heard of it, and all they did was to Reform it, and strike out what was Ill.
And the Drafts Man (then and now a private Person) told me, that when he had
projected and completed his Work, this Author, before he entered on his second
Scheme, declared it was the best Thing for the Country's Good, that he had
seen, and admired the Ingenuity of the Performance.

He now tells you he has given you his Thoughts etc. (although he was only to
relate Facts) in the most impartial Manner he was able; though there is scarce
one Paragraph or Sentence in his whole Performance respecting the Affair, but
what is false in the Fact or in the manner of relating it; however they are his
Thot's, and no doubt injected by some Evil Spirit. Humane Nature (corrupt as it
is) of it self, not being able to equal his Performance.

In his fifth Page he informs you that Shop Notes expose the Tradesmen,
Artificers, and other poor Laborers, to the Shopkeeper's Mercy, for their Pay
in Goods, at any Rate: And now, in his Postscript he calls their Agreement, to
take no more Shop Notes (which is all they combine to do) an iniquitous
Combination. And for this Reason, by those Notes, such great Advantage arises
to some Traders on the Ruins of others, as from common Broom Peddling, in a
short time to acquire such vast Wealth as to embolden them to treat almost this
whole Province, and its Neighbors too, with all the Contempt and Scurrility
contained in this Author's Performance. However, here is a Hint from his own
Mouth, how deeply miserable this People are, through want of a Medium.

Thus Sir, have I given you some Remarks on his Work, passing over much of his
Fallacy, which Pity to him would not allow me to expose. I have also given you
a summary Account of the Manufactory Undertaking, with the Manner of
Proceeding, and the Necessity thereof. I should have been more particular had
Leisure admitted. I hope, Sir, by what is said, you will be convinced that it
is another Thing, than it has been represented to be, by those that are it is
Enemies.

I am, SIR, Your Unknown Humble Servant.
Boston, Febr. 27 th. 1740, 1.
POSTSCRIPT.
NUmbers of the People called Quakers or Friends, noted for their Honesty,
Industry and good Order, are Partners in this Scheme, and many others (not
Partners) in Heart and Practice favor it. Also many Towns take and pass these
Notes in Trade and Business, scarce one Man dissenting, besides paying their
Town and Ministerial Rates with it; at least in Part. Great Numbers of
Families, especially in Boston, must either have suffered, or been a public
Charge, as good Authors relate, had it not been for those Bills. Some Thousands
of Pounds by a moderate Computation are saved in Law Suits for Debt, by Means
of these Bills. Twenty Pounds in one Instance, preventing ten Actions; and
indeed their Currency is so general now, notwithstanding the vast Opposition
they have had, that it may be affirmed with Truth, as well as good Reason,
(these Bills being better founded than any heretofore emitted) that no other
whatever, with a like Opposition, could have gained the Credit they have done:
And the Misery, Grief and Calamity of this People, if this Affair is broken up
will be unspeakable. I would therefore humbly propose, whether in this Case, if
any Amendments are wanting the better to render this a Public Good, it would
not be best it should be done by a Law, to which all Men would heartily agree.
rather than by absolute Authority to suppress this Undertaking now carried to
such a Length as that many Thousands of innocent well disposed Persons must be
thrown into the greatest Confusion, besides (which is much worse) the whole
Province falling again into those melancholy Circumstances, which by the
Scarcity of Money, they have been of late laboring under.


