THE Nature and Necessity Of that Humiliation, Which the Spirit of GOD works in
the Souls of those that are brought savingly to close with the LORD JESUS
CHRIST, as offered in the Gospel.

By James Nalton, Late Minister of the Gospel in LONDON.

John xvi. 8. And when he is come, he will reprove the World of Sin, and of
Righteousness, and of Judgment.

Romans vii. 9. For I was alive without the Law once: but when the Commandment
came, Sin revived, and I died.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queenstreet over
against the Prison. 1741.

THE Nature and Necessity O^ HUMILIATION.
ACTS xvi. 29, 30. Then he called for a Light, and sprang in, and came
trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas; And brought them out, and said,
Sirs, what must I do to be saved?


THE Lord knows them that are is, says the Apostle, (2 Timothy 2.19.) Namely,
they whom he has chosen to Life eternal; and when once God has set his
Pri^y-Seal upon them, he will call them, and bring them home to himself, in
what Place soever they be, though scattered amongst the Heathen; in what
Condition soever they be, whether high, or low, rich or poor, learned or
unlearned; nay though they be l^^k^ up under a Calling that may seem to be a
bar from coming home to God: You shall sometimes hear a Man say, my Calling
hinders me from God and Goodness; but I would say to such a one, if thou
belongest to Christ, though thy Calling be never so base and unsuitable to God,
and the Ways of God, yet thou shall be fetched home, and brought home to Jesus
Christ at one Time or other; Witness the Jaylo^ here the Text speaks of, that
had a Calling bad enough, for instead of professing Christ and his Gospel, he
was a Persecutor of Christ and his People, a rough he wen Fellow, that dealt
hardly with these precious Servants of Christ, beating them, and putting them
in the inward Prison, and made fast their Feet in the Stocks, as you may read
in the 24 Verse; but Paul and Silas sang in the Prison, Verse. 25. And take
notice by the Way, that God can sometimes make a Prison a Palace to those that
fear him. And as they were praying, and singing Praises to God, the Lord shook
the Prison where they were, and with his shaking the Prison, he did shake the
Jaylor's Heart, he had an Earthquake within him, as well as without him;
whereupon being greatly perplexed and amazed, the Text tells your here, He
calls for a Light, and sprang in, and came trembling, and fell down before Paul
and Silas, and brought them out, and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? So
that this Text tells and describes to you, the Jaylor's Carriage when God first
struck his Heart, and gave him a Sight of himself, and of his Sins; and in this
Carriage of the Jailer, there are these three Things very observable;

His Perplexity, his Courtesy, his Question; his Perplexity, in Verse. 29. His
Courtesy and Question, in Verse. 30.

First, His Perplexity, He called for a Light and sprang in, and came
trembling, and fel^ down before Paul and Silas.

Secondly, His Courtesy, the Text says, he brought them out.

Thirdly, His Question; Sirs, what must I do to be saved?

It is the first of these I principally aim at, namely, the Jaylor's
Perplexity, Than he called for a Light; Darkness now was a Terror to him,
because he was a Terror to himself, He was a Magor-Missa^ib, a Terror round
about, Jer. 20 3. And he sprang in, that is, he rusht hastily into the Prison,
and like a Man distracted, knew not what to do, nor which way to turn himself;
he came trembling, being stricken with inward Horror and Terror of Conscience;
and pray observe it well; there is not the stoutest Man breathing upon Earth,
but if God set his Conscience against him, like a Dog to fly in his Face, it
will pull him down, and lay him flat, and fill him with that inward Horror and
Terror, and Perplexity, that he will be more afraid of himself, than of all the
World besides. Thus it was with the Jailer here, when God came nigh him, and
awakened his Conscience, he fell down before Paul and Silas. God had given him
a Sight of his Sins, and of the invisible Majesty of Christ, that was in those
his precious Servants, Paul and Silas, whom before he looked upon as a couple of
Rogues, and that the Whip and the Stocks, were good enough for them, but now he
reverenceth them, and respects them, and falls down at their Feet. Thus you see
what his Perplexity was.

My Purpose is not to insist upon every Particular, but to pitch upon that
which is principally held forth in the Words; Observe therefore, when God was
about to Work the great Work of saving Faith, and sound Conversion in the Heart
of this Jailer, and by Faith in Jesus Christ, to bring him to Salvation, what
is the first Thing that he does? First he humbles him, and strikes him down,
and lays him flat, he does awaken and shake his Conscience; this unbroken
Sinner is now amazed, and perplexed, and astonished, and he knows not which way
to turn himself. So then the Observation I would commend to you from the Words,
is this:

DOCTRINE.
Sound Humiliation is a necessary Antecedent or forerunner to Faith and
Salvation.

Would you have it plainer? then take it thus,

Those whom God intends to make true Believers and Heirs of his everlasting
Kingdom, they are first soundly humbled, and made sensible of their own
dangerous and damnable Condition.

Look as a Timber-Tree, that a Man intends for Building, first he hews it down,
and then he fits it, and squares it for the Building; so that Sinner whom God
intends to frame for himself, and build up by Faith to Salvation, God first
casts down to the Ground, and lays him flat, and makes him sensible of his own
lost and dangerous, and damnable Estate: Look into the Scripture, and you shall
find that is God's Method, and Jesus Christ's Method, and the Holy Ghost's.

First, This is God's Method, and this Course he took with our first Parents,
he arraigned them, and past a Sentence upon them, and pronounced a Curse
against them, before ever he brings them to the Knowledge of a Savior, before
ever he made that Promise, that The Seed of the Woman should break the Serpents
Head. Remarkable is that Scripture, Job. 33.21, 22. it describes the Manner of
God's converting a Sinner, Ver 14 God speaks once, ye twice, yet Man
perceives it not. God calls, and cries, and knocks, and tries this Way, and
that Way, and the other Way, to bring the Sinner in, to bring him home by
Conversion, but all will not do; what does he then? Read Verse. 21, 22. God
humb^e^h the Sinner to the very Dust, His Flesh is consumed away that it cannot
be seen and his Bones that were not seen stick out, his Soul draws near unto
the Grave, and his Life to the Destroyers. His meaning is this, he is made a
very Anatomy, and God brings him to the very Gates of Hell, and what follows,
Then he is gracious unto him, and says, deliver him from going down to the
P^^, I have found a Ransom.

So this was the Method of Jesus Christ, this Course he took with St. Paul,
before he was Converted, he unhorst him, and humbled him, and struck him blind,
and all this while St. Paul must steep in Sorrow, before Ananias comes to him,
and speak Words of Comfort, Acts 9 Christ would have us weary and heavy Laden.
Matthew. 1^ weary with the Work of Sin, and heavy laden with the Weight of Sin,
before he will give us Ease; he will have the Soul thirsty, before he gives it
the Water of Life. Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that Thirsts, came ye to the
Waters; that is, to be sensible of the want of Christ, and the worth of Christ,
before he gives the Soul to taste of the Waters of Life; and he will have the
Soul sick of Sin, before the Physician comes to it, The whole have no need of a
Physician, but they that are sick, Math. 9.12. He will have the Sinner sick of
his Sin, before he will cure him.

And this is the Holy Ghost's Method too; for you shall read the Spirit of God,
First convinces of Sin, before he convinces of Righteousness, John 16 8.
First, The Spirit of God convinces of Sin for Humiliation, before he
convinces of Righteousness for Justification.

And this has been the Method of all Master Builders. John Baptist he comes
levelling of Mountains, and casting down proud Sinners before they come to
Christ; and St. Peter, he pricked his Hearers to the Heart, before he gave them
any Hope or Comfort by a Savior, Acts 2. He let them Blood at the Heart before
he directed them how to be saved. But now, because this is a weighty Truth, and
it may please God to do good to some of you all the Days of your Lives, to know
the Method and Manner of bringing Jesus Christ and the Soul together, (for this
is all the Work we Ministers have to do,) let me speak to it by way of
Explication, and show you three Things.

First, What this Humiliation is?

Secondly, Whether the like Measure of Humiliation be wrought in all that are
brought home to Jesus Christ, or no?

Thirdly, Why God is pleased to take this Course to fit Men for Faith and
Salvation, thus first to humble them?

First, What this Humiliation is? Divines describe a two fold Humiliation?

1. A Passive Humiliation. 2. An Active Humiliation.
The passive Humiliation, is that whereby God humbles the Sinner, in the first
Work of his Conversion; and it is called a passive Humiliation, because the
Sinner is wholly passive, and does nothing at all conducing to his Conversion;
and of this the Text speaks of.

Secondly, There is an active Humiliation; and this is that whereby a Sinner
humbles himself before God; of this you read 2 Chro. 12.7 They have humbled
themselves, therefore I will not destroy them. Now it is not this latter I am
to speak of; this, to speak properly, is nothing but the Act of renewed
Repentance; but I am to speak of the first, namely, that whereby God in the
first Work of Conversion lets a Man see the need that he has of Jesus Christ,
and it may be thus described, Passive Humiliation is a Work of the Spirit of
God, whereby a poor Sinner being stricken with a Sense of his Sin, and fear of
Wrath, does fly out of himself and closes with Jesus Christ; I say, It is a
Work of the Spirit of God, because it is the Spirit that convinces of Sin, and
by convincing of Sin, he humbles the Soul; and hence it is the Spirit of God in
the first Work of Conversion, is called the Spirit of Bondage, Romans 8.15. For
ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear, but ye have received
the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. Why is it called the Spirit
of Bondage? Not because the Spirit of God brings the Soul into Bondage, for the
Spirit of God is a free Spirit, Psalm. 51 12. Uphold me with thy free Spirit;
and where the Spirit of God is, there is Liberty. But he is called a Spirit of
Bondage, because he discovers to us our Bondage, and lets the Sinner see the
Bondage and Slavery wherein he is miserably captivated under Sin and Satan. A
Man, before the Work of Conversion is wrought, thinks himself a Freeman; We
are Abraham's Seed, and were never in Bondage to any, how say thou we shall
be made free? John 8 33. But now the Spirit of God comes, and lets a Man see
himself in the Glass of God's Law, whereby he discovers Sin to be out of
Measure sinful; and it lets him see himself in the Glass of Conscience, and so
comes to the Sinner, and says to him, just as Nathan did to David, Thou art the
Man, thou art he that lies under the Guilt of Sin, and under the Wrath of God,
and under the Condemnation of the second Death; therefore look to it. When the
Spirit of God lets a Man see himself, and his Bondage, and that State of Woe
and Misery in which he is, now he confesses he is in the Gall of Bitterness,
and in the Bond of Iniquity. Again, I say in the Description of it, that the
poor Sinner is stricken with the sense of his Sin, and with the fear of Wrath.
Before a Man is humbled, he is just like a Man in a dead Sleep, in a drunken
Sleep, he hears not, he fears not, he feels not; like the Drunkard that Solomon
speaks of, Prove. 23.34, 35 Yea, thou shall be as he that lies down in the
midst of the Sea, or as he that lies upon the top of a Mast; they have
stricken me, shall thou say, and I was not sick, they have beaten me, and I
felt it not; when I shall awake, I will seek it yet again. But when once the
Spirit of God comes to strike the Sinner to the Purpose, now Sin is revived,
and Conscience awakened and convicted, as the Apostle St. Paul says, I was
alive once without the Law, alive in my own Apprehension, alive without the
spiritual Knowledge of the Law; but Sin revived, and I died, Romans 7.9. Then the
Law showed me I was but a dead Man; O, Conscience now began to be awaked, and
convicted. Sense of Sin brings with it a fear of Wrath, and hence it is, that
the Spirit of Bondage is called a Spirit of Fear. 2 Timothy 1.7. For, God has not
given us the Spirit of Fear, but of Power, of Love, and of a sound Mind And
this Fear does awaken a Man, and leave some kind of Impression upon the Spirit
of a Man, so that he is awakened, and looks out for Help out of himself Again.
I say A Sinner thus stricken with the Sense of his Sin, flies out of himself,
and flies to Jesus Christ; That is, he despairs of all Hope, and Help in
himself: I dare say, he was never a true believing Sinner, that was not a
despairing Sinner; understand me thus, there is a religious-desperation, as
well as a damning-desperation; I say, a Sinner that is stricken with the Sense
of his Sins, despairs of Help in himself; this is an holy Despair, whereby a
Man renounceth all Hope of Help in himself, and flies to Jesus Christ. This is
a certain Rule, the less a Man trusts in himself, the more he trusts in a
Savior. That Is the first Thing, What this Humiliation is?

A second Question to be satisfied is this, Whether the like Measure of
Humiliation be wrought in all those that are brought home to Jesus Christ?

I answer, No, some have more, and some have less, according to the different
Tempers of Men's Spirits: some Men are more froward, and some are more
ingenious; those that are openly profane, stout, stubborn Sinners, they
usually have a great Measure of Humiliation, but now those that are more
flexible, have a less Measure of Humiliation; to the first, God comes like a
mighty rushing Wind, to the second Sort, he comes like a still Wind, in a more
mild and melting Way; sometimes God breaks in upon the Sinner's Heart with open
violence, as he did upon St. Paul, when he was smitten down to the Ground, Acts
9. Sometimes again God opens the Heart without any Noise, as he did the Heart
of Lydia, Acts 16 Sometimes God suffers a Sinner to lie long under the Spirit
of Bondage, those especially that he has appointed for some special Use and
Service to himself; as the Timber that is appointed for some special Service,
lies long a soaking, before it be made Use of. Sometimes again Sinners are set
free from legal Terrors suddenly; now this is the least Measure of Humiliation,
wrought in those that are brought home to Jesus Christ, to make Sin odious, and
loathsome to a Man, and to make a Man fly out of himself to Jesus Christ There
is a twofold passive Humiliation.

1. A Legal Humiliation. 2. An Evangelical Humiliation.
The legal Humiliation is that which consists in legal Terror, and fear of
Wrath, and the Sense of God's Wrath, and Horror of Conscience, and Fear of
Hellfire.

Secondly, There is an evangelical Humiliation, and that consists in the
Operation of God's blessed Spirit, convincing a Man of Sin; thus the Spirit of
God convinces the Sinner, and by convincing him, empties him of himself, and
by emptying him fits him for a Savior. Legal Humiliation, (pray mark) though
it makes a greater Noise, yet it is not always absolutely needful for all
Persons, which I prove thus It is not a Grace, because a Man can never have too
much Grace, and a Man may have too much legal Humiliation. Again, some
Reprobates have had a great Measure of legal Humiliation, and yet have
perished; and some that have been converted have had but a little Measure of
legal Humiliation, and yet have been saved. I say, legal Humiliation, though it
makes a great Noise, is not absolutely needful: But evangelical Humiliation,
though it makes a less Noise, this is absolutely needful to every Person,
because this drives a Sinner out of himself, and causes him to fly to Jesus
Christ, in a mild and melting Way, making him, to look on him whom he has
pierced, and to mourn for his Sin, as he that mourns for the loss of his only
Son that serves him.

The third Thing to be opened, is this, But why does God take this Course, in
bringing Men to Faith and Salvation? The Reasons are these three.

First, It is equal. Secondly, It is fitting^ Thirdly, It is necessary.

First, It is equal, because it is God's Way; and there is all the Reason in
the World, that God should bring us to Heaven in his own Way; that it is God's
Way, appears, Isa. 61.1, 2. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, (says Jesus
Christ) because the Lord has anointed me to preach good Tidings to the Meek;
he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim Liberty to the
Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them that are Bound, to proclaim the
acceptable Year of the Lord, and the Day of Vengeance of our God, to comfort
all that mourn. So you see they are to be comforted that mourn, and they are to
be bound up that are brokenhearted; so that, till a Man be Meek and Humble,
and have a broken Heart, he is out of Christ's Commission to Comfort, Christ
will say to such, I have nothing to do with thee, I am sent to those that are
Meek and Humble, and Brokenhearted, Luke 19 10. In Mat^. 18.11. The Son of Man
came to seek, and to save that which was lost -- Then (may some say) he came to
seek and to save all, for all were lost in Adam; but that is not the meaning,
but the meaning is, all that feel themselves lost; a Man may be in a lost
Condition, and yet never feel himself in a lost Condition; but when a Man sees
himself to be in a lost Estate, and in a damned and undone Condition without
Christ, Christ came to seek and to save such.

Secondly, It is fitting that God should bring us to Faith and Salvation this
Way; fitting, you will say, but how?

In reference to God. In reference to Ourselves. In reference to Others
First, In reference to God, because by this Humiliation, the Justice of God is
acknowledged, and the Mercy of God is magnified; these are the two great
Attributes that God will have magnified in the Conversion of a Sinner. The
Justice of God is acknowledged, when the Sinner falls down at the Feet of God,
and says, Lord, against thee, against thee have I sinned, and done this Evil
in thy Sight, that thou might be justified when thou speak, and clear
when that judge Psalm. 51.4 And the Mercy of God is wonderfully magnified,
when he hangs out a white Flag of Pardon, after all the Sinner's Rebellions and
Provocations, O now, Mercy is Mercy indeed! As a King, when he is about to
Pardon a Traitor, he suffers him to be brought to the Place of Execution, and
to have the Rope about his Neck, and the Hankerchief drawn over his Face; O how
welcome is a Pardon then to that Traitor! So a humbled Sinner will say, Mercy
is Mercy indeed, when he is convinced of his desperate, and undone Estate and
Condition.

Secondly, It is fitting in respect of ourselves, that we know ourselves. Know
the Plague of our Heart, 1 Kings 8.38. God will have us to see and to feel,
that it is an evil, and bitter Thing, that we have sinned against him. Jer. 2
19. Thine own Wickedness shall correct thee, and thy Backslidings shall reprove
thee; know therefore, and see that it is an evil Thing, and bitter, that thou
have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord
God of Hosts. God would have the Sinner see his Polution, and cry out with the
Lepe^ under the Law, I am unclean, I am unclean, Levit. 13.45 As Miriam for her
Miscarriage toward Moses, was smitten with a Leprosy, Moses, cried to the Lord
to heal her; no, stay, says God, If her Father had but spit in her Face,
should she not be ashamed seven Days? She must know herself before she be
healed, Numb. 12.10, 13, 14.

Thirdly, It is fitting in respecT of others, that they may not speak
reproachfully of God, and the Ways of God. If so be a Sinner could instantly
step out of an Alehouse to Christ, or out of a Whore-House to Christ; if there
were no more required to get to Christ, than the putting of Meat out of one
Dish into another, carnal Men would be ready to have very low Thoughts of God,
that he is such a one as themselves, that he does patronize and approve their
wicked Courses; but God will have the Mouth of Iniquity stopped, and carnal Men
themselves acknowledge, that the Ways of God are equal.

Thirdly, It is necessary that the Soul be humbled. I shall give you these five
Reasons of the necessity of it.

First Because without this Humiliation, the Sinner can never highly prize God.
To an unhumbled Sinner, Christ is no more esteemed (with reverence be is
spoken) than the Dirt under his Feet, Acts 4 11. This is the Stone which was
set at naught by you Builders; they made no reckoning of Christ at all. Tell an
unhumbled Sinner of Justification, of Sanctification, of Adoption, of the Hope
of Glory, and the like, he makes no more reckoning of them, than the Children
of Israel did of the Manna, who loathed it; but now when a Sinner is smitten
with a sense of Sin, and fear of Wrath, and feels the Burden of Guilt upon his
Conscience, now Christ is Christ indeed, and he looks upon him with an admiring
Eye, and cries out, O the Dignity of his Person! The Preciousness of his Blood!
The Value of his Merits! The Efficacy of his Intercession! The Comfort of his
Spirit! O the Comforts and Excellencies that are in this sweet and precious
Savior! My Beloved (says such a Soul) is the choicest of ten thousand. The
Poor (says our Savior) receive the Gospel; that is, those that are poor in
Spirit, they like the wise Merchant will be contented to sell all to buy him
who is the Pearl of invaluable Price; an humbled Sinner will say, Give me
Christ though I have a Cross with him, though I have a Prison with him, nay,
though I die with him, though I die for him.

Secondly, Without Humiliation the Sinner can never duly and diligently seek
Christ You know The Law is a Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ Gal, 3.24
The Truth is, the Soul will never run to Christ to the Purpose, until it be
whipped by this Schoolmaster. You know the Story of the City of Refuge, the Man
slayer never fled thither, until the Avenger of Blood pursued him. The City of
Refuge is Jesus Christ, and the Sinner never flies to Jesus Christ to Purpose,
until the Vengeance of a Sin-revenging God, and the Curse of a condemning Law,
and the Horror of a self-accusing Conscience, pursue the Soul like a chased
Deer; now it flies to Jesus Christ to Purpose.

Thirdly, Without Humiliation the Sinner will never obey Christ; an unbroken
Sinner is like an unbroken Colt, that is not tamed, or like an unbroken Heiser
that will not submit to the Yoke; Jesus Christ may command what he will, but he
will do what he lists. But when a Sinner comes to be humbled and unho^s'd, as
St.- Paul was, then he says Lord, what will thou have me to do? Though it be
never so cross to my carnal and corrupt Nature, yet I will do it. Before the
Sinner is humbled, he is ever complaining of the unkindness of God's dealing
with him, but after he is humbled, he is ever complaining how unkindly he deals
with God. As all Disobedience springs from Pride, so all Obedience springs from
Humility

Fourthly, Without Humiliation the Sinner will never constantly cleave to Jesus
Christ. There are many that seemingly close with Christ for a while, just like
those that rejoiced in John Baptist's Doctrine for a while, John 5 35. He was a
burning and a shinging Light, and ye were willing to rejoice in his Light for a
season. And you read of some that followed Christ for a while, but they were
offended, and went back, and walked no more with him, Joh. 6 66. There are many
Professors just like the Corn cast into the second Ground in the Parable, I^
sprang up for a while, but in the Time of Temptation it withered; why? Because
it wanted Root; and why did it want Root? Because the Pl^ugh of Humiliation
went not deep enough: So there are many Professors that prove Apostates, and
disloyal to the Lord Jesus Christ; but what is the Reason? Because they were
never thoroughly humbled, they are weary of Christ's Yoke, because they never
felt the Burden of the Devil's Yoke, and of Sins Yoke; that Soul that has felt
the Burden of Satan's Y^ke, will say, that Christ's Yoke is a sweet and easy
Yoke; they that are truly humbled, will never forsake Christ, but will cling
and cleave to him, as a Ship-wreck'd Mariner does to a Rock, he will not part
with it, because he knows it is for his Life.

Fifthly, This Humilation is necessary, because without it we can never be
conformable to Christ; for Christ was first humbled, before he was exalted, He
drank of the Brook in the way, before he lift up his Head, Psalm 110.7. Thus you
have the Doctrine opened, now let us see what Application we can make of this
Point; and the Uses are but two, the one of Instruction, and the other of
Exhortation. I shall give you two Instructions, and two Exhortations.

The first Instruction or Lesson by way of Inference, is this, If sound
Humiliation be such a necessary Antecedent to Faith and Salvation, then it
justifies the Practice of those Ministers, that take this Course in convincing,
and humbling, and wounding, and awakening sleepy Sinners; you see what we
Ministers may do; nay, you see what we must do if with Care and Conscience we
would discharge our Duty, we must sometimes Thunder and Lighten, as St. Paul
did when he made Faelix to tremble, Acts 24.25. We must strike the Sinner's
Heart with an Arrow of Conviction, as the Arrow that was shot at Ahab entered in
at the Joints of his Armor, and pierced his Heart, 1 Kings 22.34 We must hedge
in the Sinner with inevitable Conviction, and meet him with a drawn Sword, as
the Angel did Balaam, Numb. 21.23. We must sometimes knock at the Door of their
Hearts, and say to them, O thou unregenerate Man, I have sad News to tell thee!
Thou can never, so long as thou art in this Condition, see the Face of God
with Comfort, or enter into this Kingdom; thou may see the Face of God
indeed, but it will be with Frowns in his Forehead, and Indignation in his
Countenance to thee, when he shall Sentence thee to that (...), that blackness
of Darkness for ever, Jude 13. O Drunkard, I have sad News to tell thee! Thou
must drink of the Cup of God's Wrath and Indignation, which will cause the to
spew and fall, and never rise again. O Swearer, I have sad News to tell thee!
That the Wrath of God is like a flying Roll, hangs over the House of every
Swearer, Zech. 5. O ignorant and disobedient Sinner, I have sad News to tell
thee, Jesus Christ will come in flames of Fire to take Vengeance on them that
know him not, and obey not the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8. In a Word, we must take
any Course to awaken Sinners out of their Sloth and Security.

Two Sorts of Persons there are that oppose this kind of Preaching, but most do
not love it, but dislike it.

First, The openly profane and scandalous Sinner, that would fain Sleep in
Sin, and go to Hell in a Slumber, and therefore he looks upon such awakning
Sermons, as tormenting Sermons, Rev. 11.10. The two Prophets tormented them
that dwelt upon the Earth. O this convincing, quckning, and awakening Doctrine,
this is but a Torment to many carnal Men, who cry our, What ado is there with
these Ministers? They will not let me be quiet, they Torment me before my Time.
Ah poor Wretch! Art thou afraid to be tormented before thy Time? And art thou
not afraid to be tormented Time without End? There are some Beasts so furious,
that there is nothing but the Fire will came them; so there are some Men so
brutish, that they are mad upon their evil Ways; as it is said of the
Chaldeans, They are mad upon their Idols, Jer. 50.38. So some are so mad upon
sinful Ways and Courses, that a Minister must spit Fire in their Faces to rouse
them out of their Security, and spiritual Lethargy: Art thou angry with a
Minister, who in tender Compassion to thy Soul, would pluck thy Soul as a
Firebrand out of the Fire, and save it from eternal Misery, and Burnings? If
one of you have a Leg broken, you will send for a Surgeon to set it, and you
will be contented that he shall put you to great Pain for the recovering of
your Limb, and restoring you to your former State again; and will you not allow
your Ministers to put you to some Pain, and Grief, and Trouble for the
recovering of your Souls from that Wound and Breach that Sin has made upon you?

A second ^ort that oppose convincing Preaching are Antinomians, that tell us
there is no (...) of the Law under the Gospel, and that M^^^^ters must Preach
nothing but Christ, and Grace, and Peace, and Comfort, and Mercy, and lead Men
to Heaven in a mild, and meek, and gentle Way.

To this I reply, What, would you have us apply a Plaster where there is no
Sore? Would you have us apply a Cordial where they are not sick? would you have
us pour in the Oil, where there is no Wound? God himself pours not in the Oil
of Mercy, but into a broken Vessel, Isa. 61.1 The Lord knows we delight not in
preaching any terrible Doctrines to you, if you were but fitted for Mercy; but
if you are not fitted for Mercy, then, as the pricking Needle makes way for the
sewing of the Cloth together, so this kind of Preaching, convincing, and
humbling the Sinner, makes way for the bringing of Christ and the Soul
together, and therefore you may well bear with it.

A second Instruction that we may learn from hence, is this, It serves to let
us see what the reason is, that there are so few Believers, so few convinced,
and converted; O Ministers cannot speak of this scarce without watery Eyes.
Truly heretofore three thousand were converted at one Sermon, but now there is
scarce one that is converted with three thousand Sermons. O whence is it that
the Work of Conversion is almost at an End in England, in London? It is rare to
hear of a Soul converted; we hear of many that are prev^^ted, that are led into
bypath of Error, and Heresy, and Blasphemy, and Schism, but it is a rare
Matter to hear of one converted; they are but few that see the need they have
of Christ, that prize him, that believe in him, that obey him, that constantly
cleave to him, but most Men are very well contented to be in a natural
Condition, they are secure and quiet without Christ; but what is the Reason?
Because they do not see the need they have of Christ, for if they did but see
the need they have of him, they would say, they may better want Light, than
want Jesus Christ, who is the Light, and by whom they may have the Light of
Life, John 8.12. They may better want Bread for their Bodies, than the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the Bread and spiritual Food of the Soul; I am the Bread
of Life, John 6. If they did but see the need they have of him, doubtless they
would close with him: But why do not they see the need that they have of him?
The Reason is, Because they are not humbled, they were never yet stricken with
the Sense of Sin, they never yet saw the inside of themselves, they never, with
the Jailer in the Text, were affrighted, amazed, stricken down in the Sense of
Sin. O th^s is the Misery of all Miseries, which Ministers have most cause to
complain of, that Men are not fitted enough for Jesus Christ, they are not l^st
enough in themselves for a Savior, Hos. 14 ^. With thee the Fatherless find
Mercy. Were we more hopeless, helpless, and fatherless, we should find more
Mercy from the Hand of Jesus Christ O that God would awaken, and shake some
Sin-sleeping Soul this Day. O that this Doctrine thus opened, might be as a
Thunderbolt to let some of you see the inside of yourselves. O poor Sinner,
thou have an insupportable Burden of Sin and Guilt lying on thy Soul, ready to
press thee down to Hell, and yet thou feel it not; thou have the Wrath of
God hanging over thy Head by the twined Thread of a short Life, which it may be
thou may not be free from one Year, nay perhaps not one Month, but thou
see it not; if thou did but see it, then thou would cry out as he did in
Bosworth Field, A Horse, a Horse, a Kingdom for a Horse; so thou would cry
out, None but Christ, nothing but Christ, ten thousand Worlds for Christ.

The second Use is of Exhortation; And I have but two Exhortations to tender to
you.

First, I Beseech you, and Exhort you in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ
(whose poor Messenger I am,) that you would labor to be convinced of the
Necessity of Humiliation; believe it, be persuaded of it, be convinced of it,
that thou must be broken, if ever thou would have Jesus Christ to bind thee up;
thou must be sick of Sin, if ever thou would have Jesus Christ to heal thee;
thou must be dejected and cast down, if ever thou would have Jesus Christ to
comfort thee; if God therefore do not open thine Eyes, and awaken thy
Conscience, and touch thy Heart, I do Pronounce against thee, that there is no
Christ, no Heaven, no Pardon, no Peace, no Comfort, no Salvation for thee. O
the miserable, deplorable Condition of all you that were never yet humbled, you
that were never yet convinced of Sin, you that never tasted the bitterness of
Sin, you that never felt the burden of Sin, that never yet complained with the
Apostle, Rom 7 24. O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body
of this Death! Some derive the Word from a Man that is troubled with the Stone
in the Bladder, O wretched Man that I am! O miserable is the Condition that you
are in, you that never yet felt Sin to be Sin, that have not felt the Burden of
it, nor tasted the Bitterness of it, you are not fit to come to Jesus Christ,
you are out of his Commission, for he if sent to the humble, and broken hearted
Sinner, Isai. 61.1. It may be thou know what Sin is, and Christ is, and
Grace it, notionally; but there is a great deal of difference between knowing
and inward feeling; wretched was thy Condition if thou did but feel it, but a
thousand times more wretched is it because thou feel it not.

My second Exhortation to you, is this, If so be sound Humiliation be a
necessary Antecedent to Faith and Salvation, then use the utmost of your
Endeavors that you may be humbled, broken and bruised Sinners, that you may be
put into a Capacity to close with a Savior. Now because I know this is but a
harst Exhortation, give me leave to sweeten it with these three Considerations,

First, Remember that the Promises of Grace and Mercy are made to all humbled
Sinners, Lev. 26.41 If then their uncircumcised Hearts shall be humbled, and
they accept of the punishment of their Sins, then will I remember my Covenant
with Jacob, and also my Covenant with Isaac, and also my Covenant with Abraham,
will I remember, and I will remember the Land

Secondly, Consider, God never looks with so much Mercy and Compassion on any,
as those that are most humbled, Jer. 31.18 20. When Ephraim be moaned himself
thus, Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to
the Yoke; I have been proud, and stout, and stubborn under all thy Rods, Turn
thou me, and I shall be turned. Surely after I was turned I repented, after I
was instructed I smote upon my Thigh. I was a shamed yea even confounded. Now
in the 20. Verse. you have God bemoaning Ephraim, Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he
a pleasant Child? For since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him
still; therefore my Bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have Mercy upon
him, says the Lord.

Thirdly, Do but consider, That this is the ordinary way that God leads Men to
Mercy by; God usually condemns before he justifies, he breaks before he binds
up, he pulls down before he builds. There is a Time to pull down, and a Time to
build up, Eccl. 3.3. That may be applied Purpose; this is, I say, God's
ordinary Way; and would you have him to go out of his usual Course and Way? If
one of you should say to your Neighbor, Let me come in at your Window, or
break down your Wall, and then I will come in and visit you; what Answer (think
you) would he make? If you do not come in at the Door, the ordinary Way, do not
come in to me.

But some may say. What will you have us to do? Are we able to humble
ourselves? True indeed, when God has first humbled us, then we are able to
humble ourselves; but you told us even now, in the first Work of Conversion, we
are merely passive, we can do nothing toward our Humiliation, it is the Work
of the Spirit of God; you have now preached free will to us.

To this I answer, True indeed, in a State of Nature, we can do nothing that
may please God, we cannot set one Foot forwards in the way to Heaven; but yet
let me tell you, There is never an unconverted Sinner but may do a great deal
more than he does, therefore I put you upon doing no more than you yourselves
can do, and that in these five Particulars, which I shall speak a little to,
and then have done.

First, Though you cannot humble yourselves in a State of Unregeneracy, yet you
may suffer another to do it for you, you may suffer it to be done. A Man for
Example, that is to be cut of the Stone, though he cannot cut himself, he may
suffer another to cut him; so a Man that is sick of this desperate stony
Disease, of the Stone in the Heart, though he cannot take it away himself, he
may suffer it to be done; when the Word of God ploughs up the fallow-Ground of
your Hearts, you may hold up the Plough, Heb. 13.22. You may suffer the Word of
Exhortation which is tendered to you; when God wounds you by the Word, you may
keep the Wound open: Carnal Men, when the Word has wounded them, they lick
themselves whole by carnal Counsels, and carnal Company, and carnal Reasonings;
O what a stir do Men make to shake out the Arrow of Conviction, resisting the
Spirit of God that is stirring in the Ministry of the Word upon their Hearts!
How many are there that come in Armor to Church, they come in their Coat of
Male! How many harden their Necks, that the Word cannot pierce them! Now this
you must not do, you must suffer the Word to riffle and ransack your Hearts,
let the Word smite you, as he said, Psalm. 141 5 Let the Righteous smite me. Let
the Word break my Head, or Heart, so it may but work upon my Soul. When God
rouzeth you, suppose in any Sickness or cutting Cross, you may join with God in
rouzing yourselves; when God smites you, may not you smite upon your Thighs,
as Ephraim did, and say, I am ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I di^ bear
the reproach of my Youth? Jer. 31.24. In a Word, what God humbles you may (...)
humble (...)? The (...), in the ^^^ar of the Lord (...) upon (...) reaching,
Soul^ (...) Ministry, (...) God for the Sermon (...) God for the Ministers that
(...) most to the (...) such a Minist^^ (...) pre^c^eth nothing (...)
Vengeance, and Damnation (...) Word that (...) I have (...) them by my (...) by
the Words of my (...), (...) have his Word a (...)

Secondly, There is (...) of you ^^ can ponder and weight Thing, in (...) can
(...) Ex^mp^e, (...) propounded to you, or (...) ^our Da^ghters, you can weight
(...) can consider which is (...) and which is the best Ma^ch; so he^ (...) and
offers you pressent (...) with the Peace of a goo^ (...) and comply and swim
with the (...) the inside of (...) that Office, this (...) but now save Jesus
Christ (...) do but keep a good Conscience, (...) Imprisonment, the o^^ of all
Things, (...) lose by it; for, temp^r (...) have everlasting Gain, the Kingdom
of (...) you can ponder and (...) the World for a while, to be free (...)
Troubles, so as to part with the Peace (...) I Conscience, and lose God for
ever; or whether it is best to endure Troubles, to enjoy God, and the Peace of
a good Conscience, and to enjoy an Eternity of Blessedness; it is better to
endure a thousand Prisons, than to lose the Peace of a good Conscience, and the
Favor of God; this upon your considering and pondering, you will Conclude; for
the Devil he offers the Pleasures of Sin that are but for a Season; but says
Jesus Christ, You shall have Pleasures at my right Hand for evermore; no Man in
his Wi^s but would say, it is better to have the Pleasures that are at God's
right Hand for ever, than the Pleasures of Sin, which it may be I may not enjoy
one Year, not one Month, not one Day: So likewise, there is none of you but can
consider where you will lie when you are Dead; O says one, I will lie in such a
Church, or in such a Church Yard; and cannot you consider, O but where shall my
Soul lie? shall the Angels carry it into Abraham's Bosom? Or shall the Devils
Carry it into Darkness, that Blackness and Darkness for (...)? Jude 13 And you
can meditate on the Things that concerns this Life; every one can ponder on the
Things that concern his own temporal Estate and Concernment; and certainly, you
may as well meditate upon the Things that concern a future Life, you may
meditate on the Joys of Heaven, and on the Sorrows and Torments of Hell, and
the precious Blood of Jesus Christ. There is a Story of a Man that read in a
Book every Day that had three Leaves, a white Leaf, a red Leaf, a black Leaf;
the white Leaf of the Book, that was the Joys of Heaven, the red Leaf, that was
the Blood of Jesus Christ, the black Leaf, that was the Torments of Hell; you
may look into Hell by Contemplation, and Meditation, that you may prevent Hell
to all Eternity; you may meditate upon the Blood of Christ, and sleep as it
were your Souls in it by Meditation, it may be it may soften them. It is said
of the Goats Blood, when nothing can soften an Adamant, the Blood of Goats can;
the Blood of Christ, that can soften your hard Hearts, when nothing else can.

Thirdly, A third Thing you can do, you can Sorrow more, and Mourn more than
you do: There is none of you but can Sorrow and Mourn for outward Losses; loss
of Friends, as Husband, and Wife, or Child, perhaps for the loss of a Horse;
what can thou Mourn for the loss of a Child, and can thou not mourn for the
loss of a Soul, when one Soul is worth all the Kingdoms in the World? If any of
you have lost a good Bargain, or mist a good Market, you can grieve for this; O
methinks you should mourn for this, how many Market-Days have I lost for my
Soul; I have burnt out many a precious Light, and spent out my precious Time;
and can you not Mourn for the loss of such a Bargain as this is? Suppose one of
you should be sent for before a mighty Monarch, and should be impeacht of high
Treason before him; how would you tremble to appear before so mighty a King,
that has Power in his Hands to cut you off Instantly! O you and I must appear
before the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, the King of Kings, that knows all
the Sins and Treasons that ever we have committed; and you should bless God if
you are cast into Fear, and thereby be brought to mourn, and grieve, and sorrow
for your Sins. Job 23.16 For God makes my Heart soft, and the Almighty
troubles me; that is, soft by troubling of me.

Fourthly, There is never a one of you, but may leave gross and scandalous
Sins, which I prove thus; You can do it for fear of Men, and you may do it much
more for fear of God A profane Swearer, if he be in the Company of a goldly
gra^e Minister, he can refrain his Mouth from vile Talk, he can forbear his
Oaths, and blasphemous Speeches, and obscene Expressions. An Adulterer, if a
Boy be but in the Room of seven years old, he will forbear to act his
Uncleanness, until the Boy be out of the Room. If you can forbear gross Sins
for fear of Men, much more can you do it for fear of God. If a Boy can say his
Lesson with a Rod, certainly he can do it without a Rod; if you can abstain
from gross Sins for fear, certainly you can do it without. You read of the
hypocritical Phar^see, he abstained from gross Sins, Luke 18.

Fifthly, Though it is true, a Man in a State of Nature is dead in Trespasses
and Sins, yet then, at that Time, he may do many g^od Works, Works morally
good, Works ma^^^i^^y good, he may Fast, and Pray, and give Alms; therefore it
is that Daniel p^^ks to Nebuchadnezzar. Break off thy Sins by Righteousness,
and thine I^^quities by showing mercy to the Poor, Dan 4.27. Certainly the
Prophet Daniel would never have spoken so to him, if it had not been in his
Power to do i^. The Apostle speaking of the Gentiles, though they wanted the
Knowledge of the Law, and had not the Law, (says he) yet they did (...) Nature
the things contained in the Law, they were a Law to themselves, which shows
that the Works of the Law are written in their Hearts, Romans 2.13, 14. They
(...) are in an unregenerate Estate, they may Pray, they may make Conscience of
praying in their Families; though they cannot pray as they should, yet they may
pray as they are able* they may fall down at the Feet of God, and say, Lord, I
am a poor sinful Wretch, I cannot please thee, praying, or not praying; thou
have promised to give the Spirit of Prayer to them that ask it, Luke 11.13. Say
Lord give me thy Spirit to break my hard Heart, take any way with me, so my
proud Heart may be humbled, and hard Heart broken, that I may welcome Jesus
Christ to my Soul, that I may believe in him, and cast my Soul upon him. So
that Beloved, I put you upon no more than you are able to do, you may suffer
the Word of Exhortation, you can ponder and weigh the Word in your own Hearts,
you may sorrow and mourn for Sin, you may abstain from gross Sins, and you may
do those Works that are morally good; do what you can do; Men are not damned
because they can do no better, but because they will do no better. Mat. 23.37.
If there were no Will, there would be no Hell, says St. Austin Do what you
can, set upon works of Holiness and Piety, ^ive and put forth your Strength to
the (...) endeavor of your Souls, ^o get your Hearts hambled, to see Sin, and
to sigh for it, to grieve and groan for it; lay your Condition to Heart, be
^eelingly apprehesisive of that Wrath that has ki^dled, of that Justice that
Sin has provoked of that Mercy that Sin has abused, of that Vengeance and
Anger that Sin has de^^rve^ to be inflicted. O were we but thus humbled, we
should have cause to bless God to all Eternity.

I shall close with one Word to, those, that have been under a Spirit of
Bondage, that have been convinced, awakened, as this Jailer was, that have had
their broken Bones, that have felt the burden of Sin, and it may be lie under
that Burden at this Day: O be you comforted; its better to be broken here than
hereafter, it is better to be convinced here, than convinced hereafter, it is
better to be humbled here, than for God to humble the Soul in Hell to all
Eternity; God will make thy Valley of (...), a Door of Hope, Hos. 2.15. Thou
that (...) humbled now, shall be (...), and thou that mournest now* shall be
(...).

FINIS.

