RIGHT TO THE Lord's Supper CONSIDERED in A LETTER TO A serious Enquirer after
Truth. BY A Lover of the same.

BOSTON: Printed by B. DRAPER, for D. HENCHMAN. in Cornhill. MDCCXLI.

A RIGHT TO THE LORD'S SUPPER CONSIDERED.
SIR,
MY Obligations to you have been too many and great, to allow me to decline to
gratify your Desire of giving you my Thoughts in Writing, concerning a Right to
the Sacrament of the LORD'S SUPPER I am too well acquainted with you, in the
least to question, either the Goodness of your End, in demanding this of me; or
your Prudence, in making a proper Use of my Freedom in opening my Mind to you,
relating to the Subject of your Enquiry. My own Insufficiency to give you due
Satisfaction, is what lies most in the Way of my attempting it. However,
whether I fail in it or not, I believe your Candor is such, That you will take
in good Part my sincere Endeavors to serve you; and shall therefore without
any further Proem or Delay, enter into the Service you require of me.

I shall then, Sir, show you my Opinion o^ the Point you write to me about, in
severa^ PROPOSITIONS, which with their Ill^stration will comprise the substance
of what I defig^ in this Letter to you.

My first PROPOSITION is, That no Person has a RIGHT to partake of the
Ordinance of the LORD'S SUPPER, but such only as are ALLOWED and COMMANDED of
GOD to partake o^ it.

Whether we consider the Participation (...) this Ordinance as a Duty or as a
Priviledg^ this will certainly hold a Truth. That nor may presume to part^^
(...) ^^^vited and commanded so (...) to be numbered amo^ (...) which may be
done or let alone as any M^ pleases. This Sacrament is one of the po^tive
Institutions of Jesus Christ, which ought be attended by all and only such, as
God ^^ders to attend it. If any Man or Wom presumes to partake of it without
his Le^ and Command so to do, God may say to su^^ yea he does say to them as in
Isai. 1 12. When ye come to appear before me, Who has required this at your
Hands? And on the other Hand, such as God allows and commands to partake of the
Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, may not presume to omit or neglect it: if they
do they are therein guilty of sinning against God. He that is qualified to
partake of the Lord's Supper, according to the Judgment of God expressed in his
Word, has a Right to it, and is bound to partake of it, though he may think the
contrary. If a Man be not qualified he sins if he receives it, whatever good
Opinion he has of himself Men's Op^nions concerning themselves or other do not
alter GOD'S Laws. A Man may be mistaken respecting his own State, and think ^e
has no Right to that which he has a Right to; Or otherwise, he may have a good
Right to that which he judges himself utterly unqualified for: But God's
Commands are uniform and steady; they change not a Men's Notions and Opinions
do, Every Man is either qualified according to the Word of God ^o partake of
the Lord's Supper, or unqualified for it: if he be qualified, he is bound to
partake; if unqualified, he may not presume to partake of this holy Ordinance,
The like may be said, with respect to the Judgment of any Church and Churches.
If a Man be qualified to partake of the Sacrament, no Judgment of any Church
can take away his Right: If he be really unqualified f^r it, no Church can give
him a Right to it. Indeed in Point of Order, no Person may partake, unless by
the Church he be permitted to do it; but then if the Church do admit a visibly
unqualified Person, they are guilty of Sin in it; and so they are also if they
debar a visibly qualified Person from it. I say visibly qualified, because the
Church is bound to admit such as are visibly qualified, whether they are really
qualified or not; but in this Case the Persons offering themselves are guilty
--. A Person ought to come to the Lord's Supper, who is according to Rule
qualified for it, whatever other Qualification, not required, he may be
without, and knows that he is so. Therefore, if the Grace of Regeneration be no
necessary Qualification to give a Man a Right; The judicious M^^ Sioddard erred
not, in saying, A Person (...) and ought to partake, though he knew hims^^ (...)
^onverted, having those Qualifications that are necessary.

From what has been said we may infer, That it is not probable, that it should
be very ^ifficult for a serious Enquirer to know whether ^e has a Right to the
Lord's Supper, or not. ^is not likely, that our merciful Redeemer ^ould make
the Terms of Church Communi^^n such, that it should be extremely difficult ^r
Persons to know whether (...) partake of this Sacrame^ (...) ^ave them under
unav^^ (...) with Respect to this important Case. Does ^od require us to
partake, or does he at our ^ril forbid us to eat of this Bread and drink of ^^s
Cup? I would have this remembered, it be^^g a Consideration that I shall have
Occasion make Use of. At present, I say I believe it not Jesus Christ that does
expose his professing People to such Difficulties; but the Mistake of some of
his Ministers, who misunderstand, and so do not rightly expound some of his
Commands, given to his Disciples. Thus much on my first Proposition.

PROPOSITION II.
GOD does not allow and command THE WICKED, while they continue such, to
partake of the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper. I say, while they continue such;
for otherwise they are invited and required to qualify themselves (...) ^^en to
come to it. By the Wicked (...) such as in Scripture do generally (...) this
Denomination.

When the Question is asked, Who have a Right to partake of the Lord's Supper?
It is supposed there are some that have a Right to it, and others that have
not; so that there are some that may come to it, and others that may not come.
Now when we have found who have not a Right, we shall be brought the nearer to
understand who have a Right to this holy (...) (...) that such as are usually,
in (...) be Wicked, have no Right hereunto. God does not allow them to partake
of it. The Sacraments, as well as the Sacrifices of such are an Abomination,
Prove. 21. 27

Who are in Scripture usually intended by the Wicked, and who I here therefore
intend, we may see in the following Particulars. (1) All Atheists, who believe
not the Being and Perfections of God: such a^ are described Psa* 14.1, -- 4.
The Fool has sai^ in his Heart, ther^ is no God: they are corrupt, they have
done abominable Works, there is none that does Good. The Lord looked down from
Heaven upon the Ch^laren of Men; to see if there were any that did understand
and seek God. They are all g^ne aside, they are altogether become filthy: There
is none that do^th Good, no not one. Have all the Workers of Iniquity no
Knowledge? who eat up my People as they eat Bread, and call not upon the Lord.
With this compare Psalm. 10 2, to 11. also Psalm. 4 3, to 7 and 30 16, to 21. (2)
All such Infidels as believe not that divine Revelation, which is contained in
the Scriptures of the old and new Testament: and so all who do not acknowledge
the Doctrines and Precepts ^f God in our Bible, as the Doctr^nes and
Commandments of the Lord especially the Record God has given of his Son in the
Gospel, and the Precepts of the moral Law, which are of perpetual Obligation to
all Mankind. See John 5 46 and Act. 28 24. also 2 Cor. 6 15. and 1 Timothy 5.8.
(3) All such a^ have no ^ear of God before their by ^, ( Psalm. 36.1 -- 4. and
Gen 20 11.) (4) All such as put no Trust or Confidence in God, nor have any
Hope in his Mercy: I join these together because of their near Relation one to
the other; and such Persons as these are certainly grosely wicked. It is
possible Persons unregenerate may put some Trust in God, and have some sort of
Hope in him, and of such a Trust and Hope I here speak, see Psalm. 78.34, 35,
36. If gross ^ypocrites may do so, much more may such as are morally sincere.
(5) All such as will not seek God, or call upon his Name, as those in Psalm.
10.4 and 14.4. also Isai. 43 22. and 64.7. (6) All such as do not repent of
their Sins, and will not be reformed, but go on obstinately in their
Iniquities, how many Prayers soever they may make, are yet to be reckoned among
the Wicked I am speaking of. Of such as these we read, Isai. 1.11, to 15. and
Chap. 58 1 to 4. also Jer. 7.8, 9, 10. (7) All gross Hypocrites: who though they
carry themselves well, so far as appears unto Men, yet do it only for a Show,
that they may get Credit and be in Esteem in the World, and not that by what
they do they may approve themselves unto God, by doing the Things that he
requires, Mat 6 5 and 23.14. (8) All such self-righteous Persons as think by
their own good Works, to merit and deserve God's Favor; or that aim at working
out a Righteousness that will entitle them to eternal Happiness; and so do not
seek to be found in Christ, and to be clothed with that perfect Righteousness,
which he has wrought out and brought in for such as do or shall believe in him,
Romans 10.3. Luke 18 ^, to 12.

All (...) whatsoever sorts of Persons (...) ^^^tioned in Scripture, un^er the
(...) of the Wicked, are not allowed, but form^ to partake of the Ordinance of
the Lord's Supper. Such may not declare God's Statutes, nor take his Covenant
into their Mouth, Psalm 50.16 The Sacrifices of such are an Abomination to the
Lord. Prove. 15.8. and 21.27. before mentioned.

PROPOSITION III.
ALL who are still IN AN UNREGENERATE State, are NOT, according to the Style
and Language of Scripture, WICKED PERSONS, and as such excluded from the Lord's
Supper.

They seem to me to be very much mistaken, who think, that all who are not born
again, born of the Spirit, in the Sense in which these Words are used, Joh 3.3,
5. are the same with those, who are in the Word of God commonly called, the
Wicked. It is true, that when Persons are born of the Spirit, they have a ve^^
glorious Change wrought in 'em, w^^ (...) other Persons do experience. They
(...) Hearts given to them, and (...) within them, are made Partakers of the
divine Nature* are endowed with the Image of God, which Man lost by his F^ll.
Indeed when this is done, they are glorified. They are made Partakers of some
Degree of the same Glory that all the Saints shall enjoy in Heaven for ever;
which I doubt not is the Meaning of their being glorified, who are effectually
called and justified, Rom 8.29. with which we may compare 2 Cor. 3.18. But we
all with open Face beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord are changed
into the same Image, from Glory to Glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord. God
glorifies us when he indues us with his Image. To sanctify us is to glorify us;
and we are then sanctified, when we are renewed in the Image of him that
created us, Col. 2.10.

But we ought to consider also, that there is ordinarily, a very considerable
Change wrought ^n the Souls of Men before they pass under that Change which we
call Regeneration; and that Change is a Work or Effect of God's Word and Spirit
on Men's Souls, as well as this. Now though that is a Work very inferior in the
Nature of it, to Regeneration, or saving Conversion; yet it is not to be
despised, as if it were of no Value and no ways beneficial. For to some it is
so, eventually; and it is so, respecting all, in the Nature and Tendency of it.
Nor is it true, that such as are the Subjects of such a Change, are, in
Scripture, spoken to, and of, in the same Manner and Language, as the Wicked
are, before described: And there is great Reason for this.

That you may not think, that in this I am altogether singular, I will here
transcribe some Words of that learned and judicious Man, Dr. OWEN, in his
Perseverance of the Saints, Page 10. Sect. 17. Of those who are said to believe
and to be holy REALLY, and in the Truth of the Thing itself; there are two
Sorts. FIRST such as having received sundry common Gifts and Graces of the
Spirit, (...) Mind, Change of Af^^^ (...) Amendment of Life, with (...), legal
Repentance, temporary Faith, and the like, which are all TRUE and REAL in their
Kind, do thereby become Vessels in the great House of God; being changed, as to
their Use, though not in their Nature continuing Stone and Wood still, though (...)
turned into the Serviceableness of (...) on that Account are frequently (...)
Saints and Believers. On such as these there is a lower (and in some a
subordinate) Work of the Spirit effectually producing ( in and on all the
Faculties of their Souls) somewhat true, good, and useful in itself, answering
in some Likeness and Suitableness of Operation unto the great Work of
Regeneration, which fails not. There is in them Light, Love, Joy, Faith,
Zeal, Obedience, etc. all TRUE in their Kind, which make many of them, in whom
they are, do worthily in their Generation; howbeit, they attain not to the
Faith of God's Elect, neither does Christ live in them, etc.

These described by the Doctor, are not the same with the Wicked, of whom I
have spoken. No, these are Believers, Saints, or holy, or righteous Persons:
and this not merely, because they profess themselves to be such, and are such,
in a Judgment of Charity; but as Dr. Owen affirms, are said to believe and to
be holy, REALLY, and in Respect of the TRUTH of the Thing itself, and the
common Gifts and Graces wrought in them by the Spirit of God, etc. as in the
Words recited. Such Persons are said to believe, Luke 8.13. and Acts 8.13. they
are also said to be sanctified or made holy, Heb. 10.29. and to have escaped
the Pollutions that (...) in the World, through the Knowledge of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet 2.20. Such are also said to have been enlightened,
and to have tasted the heavenly Gift, and to have been Partakers of the Holy
Ghost, etc. as in Heb. 6.4 5. Yea, such are called Righteous, Ezekiel. 18.24. But
when the Righteous turns away from his Righteousness, and commits
Iniquity, and does according to all the Abominations that the wicked Man oath,
shall he live? All his Righteousness which he has done shall not be mentioned:
In his Trespass that he has trespassed, and in his Sin that he has sinned, in
them shall be die. And this Righteousness was such, that they should have
lived, if they had not turned away from it; as is evident in the Place quoted,
and several others. Not that Person, in this Sense RIGHTEOUS, are already in a
State of Grace and Salvation, but, that in due Time they should be so, if they
would persevere; being at present in the Way in which Salvation is to be
obtained; see Matthew. 10.22, 23. And ye shall be hated of all Men for my Name's
sake: But he that endures to the End, shall be saved. But when they persecute
you in this City, flee ye into another: For verily I say unto you, ye shall not
have gone over the Cities of Israel, 'till the Son of Man be come* And Mat. 24
13. But he that shall endure unto the End* the same shall be saved. Hos. 6.3.
Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the Lord. Gal. 6.9. And let us not
be weary in well being. For in due Season we shall (...) not. As for the Re^
(...) is already secured (...) ^nal Life, Joh. 5.24. (...) depend on this
Condition, if they continue to believe; for this is included in the Promise
they are under of being eternaly av^d. By what has been said, it does, I think,
plainly appear, that though such as are, in Scripture, called the Wicked, have no
Right to the Lord's Sup^er, yet some unregenerate Persons may (...) a Right to
it.

PROPOSITION IV.
None but DISCIPLES of JESUS CHRIST have a Right to the Sacrament of the Lord^s
Supper.

I do not here affirm, That every Disciple of Jesus Christ, has an immediate
Right to partake of this Sacrament, or is in a present Capacity to receive it;
but, That for Persons to be Disciples of Christ, is so necessary, that without
this no Man has a Right to the Lord's Supper. When our Lord first instituted
this holy Sacrament, he gave it to his Disciples and none else; and he ordered
those to whom he then administered it, and their Successors, to do as he, in
their Presence, had done; and this even to his second Coming, Luk 22 10. 1 C^r.
11.23, 26. But we must not think, that because these were all of them Minister,
yea Apostles, to whom Christ first gave the Sacrament, it will from hence
follow, that none but Ministers have a Right to it. The Command of Administering
this Ordinance, was indeed only given to Ministers; but that of receiving of it
was not so, but belonged to Disciples, as such, whether they were Ministers, or
others. Accordingly the Church of Corinth was by the Apostle admonished and
instructed, with Relation to it. 1 Cor. 11.23, and onward. Others bendes
Ministers need it, to assist their Remembrance of Christ, and are required to
qualify themselves to partake of it.

Now a DISCIPLE is the same with a Learner or Scholar. And accordingly, they
are all Disciples of Jesus Christ, who are committed to his Care, in the Way of
the Gospel: And thus this Denomination comprehends, not only professing
Believer, but their infant Seed also, such as are, with their Parents,
comprehended in the Covenant. But here I intend, by Disciples* such only, as by
their own personal and voluntary Submission to Christ, as their Master and
Instru^t^r take upon them the Name and Denomination of Christian* or Disciples;
by which Name Believers on Christ were called, Act^ 11.26 Nor do I say, that
they who are ^^ly in many such have a Right to the Sacrament^* (...) gross
Hypocrites and other ^^cked Persons ^ould have a Right to thy Or^ (...) which
by me denied. I would not ^e mistaken: None, I say, but such as are Disciples
REALLY, have a Right to this Sacrament of the Supper. If Persons only seem to
be Disciples, then they only seem to have a Right: But then I affirm, that
Persons may be really Disciple of Christ, who are not in a regenerate State,
and will prove this in my next Proposition. At Present, I say, that a Disciple
of Jesus Christ, is one who submits himself to his Instruction, and endeavors
to learn of him, and be obedient to him. Thus such as were Fol^ (...) ^iples,
Mat. 9.11. (...) ^achers were their (...) ^hus CHRIST had many Di^ciples for a
Time, that on a Disgust ^orsook him, John 6.66. I deny not, that by Disciples
of CHRIST, Persons truly godly are ^m tim^s intended, as in Luke 14 33. But I
^ake not the Word in this strict Sense, when I say that none but Disciples of
CHRIST, have a Right ^o the Sacrament: Therefore, by real Disciples, I intend
not such as are, in Scripture, said to be converted or born again, but such as
are morally sincere, whether they are Disciples, in the strict Sense of the
Word, or not. And I esteem a Person morally sincere, when making a good
Profession, he does indeed believe, what he says he does believe, and does
intend, what he says he does intend, and when he practices, what he says he
does practice; which, that a Person may do, who is yet in an unregenerate
State, is what I am, in the next Place, to make manifest.

PROPOSITION V.
Some are DISCIPLES of JESUS CHRIST, who are NOT yet in a REGENERATE State.

I mean they are so really and in Truth, and not by a false and hypocritical
Profession. Some, I acknowledge, pass for Disciples among Men, by Means of
their Professing, and making a Show of being religion, when indeed they are
nothing less -- Such are they who notwithstanding their Profession of Religion,
do not intend what they profess, nor believe what they say; nor design to
practice what they promise, or at all endeavor it. All they do in Religion, is
but a mere Show, to dece^^ those among whom they live and do converse. In a
Word, I intend gross Hypocrites, and these I acknowledge have no Right to the
Lord's Supper. Such are intended in 2 Timothy 3.5, 6. Mat. 23.14. and Chap 5.6.
Ezekiel. 33.31. Gal. 2.4. But there are other Professors of Religion, who, though
they are not savingly converted, ye^ are they not to be numbered amongst such
^oss Hypocrites, as these but now mentioned; ^d I question whether they are any
where ^lled Hypocrites, in Scripture. Now it is ^f such as these that I affirm,
that they may be and are truly called Disciples of CHRIST, though ^hey have not
yet experienced the new Birth, and are not yet passed from Death to Life, as ^n
Joh 5.34.

To make this manifest, I shall here observe, That, whereas the Disciples of
JESUS CHRIST have in Scripture several Names or Titles given them, as,
Disciples, Believers, Christians, Saints, etc. These Names and Titles are all
or most of them, according to the Style and Language of the Scripture,
applicable to some that are not savingly converted. I shall briefly consider
those now mentioned; and (1) For the Word Disciple, we have already seen in
Part, that it is applied to some that are not in a regenerate State. A Person
professing the Religion of Jesus Christ, with a moral Sincerity, as above
explained, must be acknowledged to be a Disciple of his, though not yet in a
State of Grace. Persons may be (...) entered into Christ's (...) ^^^truction,
though they (...) ^ght of him, as to be (...) ^m, and the Things (...) to their
eternal Peace and Welfare, or to know the Truth as it is in Jesus, and live
according to it.

Nor does the Use of this Word in Scripture necessarily import such a Knowledge
and Practice of spiritual Things and Duties, a^ is peculiar to Persons in a
State of Grace, but it is most commonly used for such as were Followers of
JESUS CHRIST, and as have received his Doctrine, without any Design of
restraining the Sense of it, to such as were, in the strictest Sense, sincere
Converts, see Mark 8.14. and Acts 9.1. (2) So the Word, to believe, is
frequently used with Relation to such as believe the Doctrine of CHRIST,
without being restrained in the Application of it, to such as believe in a
saving Manner, see Acts 21.20, and 25. 1 Timothy 4.12. and John 2.23, 24, 25.
Persons may believe in the Sense of these Places, though they are not savingly
converted; they are not Infidels. (3) The Word Christian, is not, I think, ever
in Scripture used, in such a restrained Sense, as to signify such only a^ are
regenerate, but largely, for such as profess and visibly obey the Gospel of
CHRIST, whether they are truly converted or not: So I think it may be taken in
the three Places where it is used, viz. Acts 11.26. and 26.28 also 1 Pet. 4 16.
(4) People are also in Scripture, called Saints and Holy, not always on account
of real saving Holiness wherewith they are supposed to be endued: Nor yet on
the Account of a relative Holines^ only, as being devoted to God in his
Covenant; but partly also (...) a real Change wrought in (...) and Spirit of
God, though that (...) mount to a saving Conversion. This is plainly affirmed by
Dr. Owen, in the Place before quoted, in my third Proposition. What a great
Change such are sometimes the Subjects of, we may see in 2 Pet. 2.20, 21.22.
For if after they have escaped the Pollutions of the World through the
Knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein, and overcome; the latter End is worse with them than the Beginning.
For it had been better for them not to have known the Way of Righteousness,
than after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto
them. But it happened unto them according to the true Proverb, The Dog is
turned to his own Vomit again; and, The Sow that was washed, to her wallowing
in the Mire, with which compare Heb. 6.4. and Chap. 10.20. also Ezekiel. 18.24,
and 26. Which Places, and others li^e them, being duly considered, we have no
Reason to doubt, but that when Church Members are called Saints, and are said
to be Holy, who are not really new Creatures a real Change wrought in them may
be one Ground and Reason of it, see 2 Cor. 1.1. 1 These 5 27. They are not all
savingly holy who are spoken of in these Places, and many others, where Persons
are so denominated. When Persons are described in Scripture by such Words, as
are applicable only to the regenerate; then I say, that Persons who are not in
this Sense, Disciples and (...) admitted to the Lord's (...) ^ard on the
Catechism, (...)

(...) though none but Disciples have a Right to the Lord's Supper, yet Christ
may have many Disciples who are not in a regenerate State.

PROPOSITION VI.
Such as are DISCIPLES of JESUS CHRIST are NOT DEBARRED from coming to the
Lord's Supper, on the Account of their WANTING the Grace of REGENERATION, or
because they are not yet born again.

Though it be granted that none have a Right but such as are Disciples of JESUS
CHRIST, yet since I have proved, that Persons may be Disciples that are not
born again, I deny that it can be proved by Scripture, that these Disciples are
not allowed to partake of this Ordinance: For unto Disciples it was given in
the Institution of it, with a Command to receive it; and if some learned Men
are not mistaken, Judas himself was one of them. And who can show me from the
Word of God, that none of the Disciples of Christ may come to the Sacrament,
unless they have experienced the new Birth, whatever preparatory Dispositions
they may be under, and however nigh^ unto the Kingdom of God they may be as the
Scribe in Mark 12.34? Though such are not yet passed from Death to Life, yet they
are of that Number, who are pressing into (or toward) the Kingdom of God, Luke
16.1^ endeavoring to take it by Force, Mat. 11.12. Striving to enter in at the
strait Gate, Luk 13.24 being engaged in working out their own Salvation with
F^ar and Trembling Phil. 2.12. All whi^ (...) some a^akened Souls, w^^^ (...)
converted. Please to (...) such may be reformed in (...) Lives, 2 Pet. 2.20 and
what Experiences they may have, H (...) And yet such Seize as these are
no sufficient Foundation whereon we may assure any Person, that he is in a
State of Salvation. But then, how shall we prove that Persons so qualified have
no Right to the Lord's Supper, and cannot lawfully come to it? For my Part, I
think awakened Souls, under such a Work of common Grace, stand in great Need of
all the Helps God offers them, to excite and engage them to flee unto Christ,
and lay hold on him for the Salvation he offers to them: And I am persuaded,
that the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is one of those Helps: Yea there is
that in it, which has a plentiful Tendency to awaken such as are not
sufficiently pricked at the Heart, on the Account of their many great and
heinou^ Sins.

In this Sacrament there is a Discovery of the dread^^ S^n^^ness of Sin, and of
God's Hatred and Potestation of it: and that it would not stand with the
Justice of God to suffer it to go unpunished; insomuch that his Wrath, on the
Account of it, must needs ^e executed, either on the Persons of the Offenders
themselves, or on a Surety interposing to save them.

In this Sacrament God also shows, That such was his Love and Compassion
toward the perishing Children of Men, that rather than they should be damned
forever, he was willing to give his only begotten Son, to be a Propitiation for
their Sins, by dying a ^tter and shameful Death for them as (...) ^^^ared in
the Scriptures, see 1 John 4.^.10. 1 Cor. 11.26. And as the Love of THE FATHER
was manifested herein so the Love of THE SON was no less so in undertaking and
going through this Work, Rom 5 6, 7.

In this Ordinance there is also a m^st gracious Offer of this Savior (whose
Sufferings and Death are represented in it) made unto guilty and convinced
Sinner, who stand in need of such a Savior, and are invited by Faith to lay
hold on him. For my Part, I don't not but that the very same Offer of Christ is
made to Sinners in this Sacrament, as is made to them in the preached Gospel.
Consider Gal 3.1. O foolish Galatians, who has (...) you, that you should not
obey the Truth, (...) Eyes Jesus Christ has (...) crucified among you? Now
(...) to me, that poor unregenerate^ (...) of such a Help, as well as the
Regenerate.

And I know not why the (...) the Heart, in seeing the (...) as well as the
Ear, in hearing the (...) Christ fo^et (...) he should in life, (...) he wo^
(...) all M^n to him: Which lifting up of JESUS CHRIST, though it firstly and
principally intends his being lifted on the Cross, when he was crucified; yet
it may well be understood to include in it his being held forth in the Ministry
of the Word and Sacraments, and particularly in this Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, John 3.14, 15. And as M^ses lifted up the S^p^nt ^n the Wilderness,
even so must the Son of ^an (...) whosoever (...) have eternal (...) 22. Look
unto (...) of the Earth: For I am God, and there is none else How much might
awakened Sinners gain by it if they would improve this Help?

But it will be said, That Person must EXAMINE themselves before they came to
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, lest they eat and drink unworthily, and so
eat and drink Judgmen^ to themselves. To which I ANSWER, That the is readily
granted: but still the Question remains, That Qualifications Persons must
find themselves to have, before they are allowed to come to the Sacrament? If
it be said, They must find themselves to be in a regenerate State before they
offer themselves; this is to beg the Thing in Question. It does not yet appear,
that this is required to the End mentioned, but rather that this is not
required. If it be further said, That Persons must not come to the Lord's
Supper, unless they can DISCERN the Lord's Body in it; I acknowledge this to be
a Truth; because the Scripture is clear for it: But then I utterly deny, that
an Ability to discern the Lord's Body in the Lord's Supper is peculiar to the
regenerate He that believes the Doctrines of the Sufferings of the Son of God,
in our Nature, for the Sins of the World, and understands how these Sufferings
of his are signified and showed forth in the Sacrament, may be truly said to
discern the Lord's Body therein. It is true indeed, that the Regenerate do
discern the Lord's Body in a more excellent and affecting Manner, than
unregenerate Persons can do: But still it remains unproved, That such a
Discerning as this is absolutely necessary to a lawful Participation in the
Lord's Supper.

If it be again said, That as adult Persons may not be baptized, unless they
BELIEVE WITH ALL THEIR HEART, Acts 8.37 So, without such Faith, Persons may not
partake of the Lord's Supper; I readily acknowledge the Truth of this: But then
I say, That Men's believing with all their Heart, that Jesus Christ is the Son
of God, as in the Place referred to, does not necessarily imply their being in
a regenerate State. It may imply (...) ^ore than this, That they sincerely and
(...) what they profess, and are not (...) the Profession they make, as may
(...) comparing the Place quoted with Jer. (...) and ^et for all this, her
treacherous Sister (...) ^ath not turned unto me with her whole (...), but
feignedly, says the Lord. Where doing a Thing with the whole Heart is opposed
to the doing it feignedly: The Question concerning the Faith of the Eunuch was
not, whether he believed with that kind of Faith which is peculiar to a
regenerate Saint, which he might have, and there was good Reason to suppose
that he had, whether he did before this know that Jesus Christ was the promised
Messiah, or not, he being then a zealous Proselite, as sufficiently appears,
and as Cornelius, mentioned Acts 10.1, 2. also was: But the Thing then
necessary to be enquired after, was, whether he believed that Jesus now
affirmed to be the Christ, or the Messiah promised in the Scriptures of the old
Testament was indeed so; because (...) ^sary, in order to (...) Gospel Church
State (...) before.

I readily acknowledge also, That REPENTANCE is necessary in order to a
Participation in the Ordinance of the Lord's Supper: But then I conceive that
Persons may be in some Sense real Penitents who are not yet born again: And
this I think may be proved from Matthew. 11.20, 21. Jonah 3.5, to 10. compared
with ^at. 12.41. Repenting in Dust and Ashes, in ^e first of these Places, does
not imply the ^eat Work of Regeneration: For if that had ^en intended, the
mighty Works done in ^razin and Bethsaida had not been sufficient (...) have
produced it in Tire and Sidon, or any ^er Place. See also Heb. 6.4, and 6. It
is im^ssible for those who were once enlightened, etc. they shall fall away, to
renew them again to ^^pentance.

Being without a Wedding Garment at a Gos^ Feast, does, I think, doubtless
intend the ^ant of proper Qualifications for a visible ^urch State; and what
these be I have al^dy showed. In the Church visible, no such qualified Persons
are ever found.

Persons qualified, as has been expressed, do ^t, in partaking of the Lord's
Supper, put ^ir Seal to a Blank, as has by some been said, ^e they are not in a
converted State. The ^ing they set their Seal to, is not their own ^rsonal
Interest in the everlasting Mercies of (...) new Covenant; but what they SEAL,
is ^^eir assent to the Truth of the Gospel, which (...) Resolution (...) ^ST,
and his (...) all serious Professors of Religion design^ in the Profession they
make, to declare to the World, That they look upon themselves as in a
regenerate and justified State. If People though it this to be what a public
Profession signifies, few, I believe, would venture to make it; a good Degree
of Assurance being necessary in order to it.

PROPOSITION VII.
There are GREAT INCONVENIENCES attending on this Assertion, That none but the
Regenerate have a Right to partake of the Lord's Supper.

I shall briefly mention some of them.

1. Very few can, on this Supposition, satisfy themselves, whether they may
lawfully partake of the Lord's Supper, or not: And so many would, on this
Principle, be unavoidably exposed to very great Perplexities with Respect to
this Question, Whether they may and ought to desire an Admission to the Lord's
Table, or no? Such as are serious would fain act in this Matter as they ought
to do. They desire to approve themselves to God, with Respect to this important
Case, Have I a Right to the Lord's Supper, or not? Or, which is the same Thing,
Am I born again, or am I in a State of Nature? Many a one may here truly say, I
have often examined myself, and yet cannot determine this great Question. And
indeed we have Reason to think* (...) there are but few comparatively of the
(...) Children of God, that are able, satisfacto^ly to resolve themselves in
this (...) very do^ (...) in great (...) ^lecting it. And thus these poor
Creatures know not what to do on the Supposition I oppose. They know they
believe the Truth of God's Word, Law, and Gosp^^ (...) ^^d know they desire to
serve God and obt^ (...) ^y with him; but they do not know whe^^ they do these
Things with a gracious Sincerity or not. There is such a Resemblance betwixt
common and saving GRACE, that they know not whether they have the latter of
these two, or no; and so know not what to do. It is not very likely that God
should have made the Terms of Communion in his visible Church, such as
necessarily do involve serious Professors of Religion in such Difficulties as
these, as I have observed in my first Proposition.

2. The Principle which I argue against, seems to me to expose Ministers and
Churches to very great Difficulties, respecting those they should admit to the
Ordinance of the Lord's Supper: For if none have any Right to the Lord's
Supper, but such as are in a State of Grace, but will, if they partake of it,
eat and drink Judgment to themselves, it seems to me, that they have a very
difficult Task, who are obliged to judge whether such as offer themselves to
their Communion are qualified for it, or not; and a Mistake in this Point may
be of dangerous Consequence to the Persons admitted, or denied; especially
their Admission, if they are unfit, will be very dangerous.

If it be said (...) determine the Point (...) Charity; I answer, (...) ^ty
seems to be too uncertain and preca^ous a Thing to Judge by, in a Case of so
great Consequence, as wherein a Person's Soul is in great Danger. Grounds for
Charity will admit of a great many Degrees: And it may be enquired, Whether
those that are to judge of Men's spiritual State, according to this Rule, are
to give their Sentence according to the highest or lowest Grounds for the
Charity intended, or some of the intermediate ones; and if so, which of them?
And I desire to know, who made them Judges of what God only can judge of? Jer.
17.10. I should think they must needs be in great Danger, lest they should be
mistaken in this Affair, or have already been so, or lest they take upon them
that which indeed is none of their Business.

3. It is to be feared, that on the Hypothesis opposed, many may be hindered
from Communion in special Ordinances, who have a good Right to them; and others
admitted that have none. People being fixed in this Principle, That none but
the Regenerate have a Right to special Ordinances many, even of those, who are
very seriously concerned that they may approve themselves to God, being in
great Doubt of the Sincerity of their own Hearts, are in all Likelihood hereby
kept back from offering themselves to join in Church Communion. It is evident,
that the more serious Persons be, the greater Sense they have of the
Deceitfulness and desperate Wickedness of their own Hearts, by Nature; and such
as these are very apt to be proportionably doubtful of their own Sincerity.
These feel and observe so much Corruption working in them, that they cannot
easily persuade themselves of the Integrity of their own Souls, and so dare not
venture, in a long Time, if ever, to join themselves to the Church of Christ;
and so the Church is hindered from having many Members, who are indeed, fit
Matter for it, and such serious Souls, from the Advantages and Comforts, which
they ^^ght otherwise enjoy.

On the other Hand, Persons far less religious and comparatively but little
concerned for the Glory of God and the Salvation of their own Souls, and who
think the Difficulties of Religion are nothing so great as others think them to
be, can easily persuade themselves that they are true Christians, and are
passed from Death to Life; being, as they think, born again. Such as these can,
therefore, without any great Difficulty, offer themselves to the Communion of
the Church; and thus great Numbers probably do while, on their own Principles,
they are unqualified for it; and by this Means Churches are corrupted rather
than kept pure and holy.

4 I would ask this Question; Is there not some Danger, That, on the Principle
I oppose, Persons submitting themselves to Examination, with Respect to the
State of their Souls, in order to their Admission to the Sacrament, may be very
greatly hurt, either by having too favorable a Judgment passed on their
Condition: or otherwise too severe a Sentence or Censure, with Respect to it?
The Principle I argue against, supposes the Candidate, for Church-Priviledge
to offer (...) Trial, with Re^^^ (...) and the Principal (...) in this Trial,
is (...) under Examination b^, or he not in a converted Estate? And of this
Question, the Elders and Brethren are the Judges If they judge him converted
they admit him: It they think he offers no good Evidence of his Conversion they
refuse him. Now it seem to me, That a Mistake in Judgment, here, if such a
Mistake be committed, may greatly hurt the Person concerned in the Sentence,
about whose Estate it is given. A suppose the Church should judge him to be
converted, when indeed he is not; and thereupon admit him to their Communion;
Will not this tend greatly to confirm the Man in the unhappy Mistake he is
himself already under, who had not offered himself, if he had not hoped his
Estate to be good: He will be very likely now to say in his Heart, I have
Reason to believe that the Bitterness of Death is passed from me. I thought
indeed before, that I was in a regenerate State, but now I have the Judgment of
the Brethren and Elders of the Church in my Favor: Why then should I doubt of
this When yet the poor Man is still in the Gall of Bitterness and in the Bond
of Iniquity, as in Acts 8.23. And it is well if that be not his Case, in Isai.
44 20. He feeds on Ashes, and a deceived Heart has turned him aside, so that
he cannot deliver his Soul, nor say, Is there not a Lie in my right Hand?

On the other Hand, Suppose the Person should be a sincere Convert, and yet the
Elders and Church should (...) still to be in a (...) Communion (...) ^^^vously
to wound (...) weak Believer, and to break the brursed Reed, and quench the
smoking Flax, contrary to what our Savior does, and would have his Ministers
do, Matthew. 12.20.

I am afraid of such unhappy Consequences as I have now mentioned, and which
seem to attend the Principle I oppose. Whereas if we allow a moral Sincerity in
Men's Profession and Practice of Religion, to be sufficient to give them a
Right to the Privileges of a Church State, we may tell them, we are not
sufficient Judges of their spiritual Estate, so as to pass Sentence, whether
they are converted or not; and that, as to this they must look to themselves,
examine their own Hearts, and pray, as in Psalm. 139.23, 24. Search m^, O God,
etc. And that they must by no Means think, that we judge them to be already in
a regenerate State, from our admitting ^f them to Church Communion, for we
receive them, not as already in a State of Grace and Salvation, but as Persons,
with a moral Sincerity, endeavoring to get into such an Estate, and unto that
End, laying had on the Covenant: But whether they are converted or not, they
themselves are the most proper Judges, and ought daily to examine themselves,
and prove their own Hearts and Works, in order to their being able to determine
how it is with them.

This, Si^, is the Truth of my present Tho'ts on the Point which you were
pleased to ask my Opinion about; and which having, after my (...) Manner
offered to you, I rest

(...) ^^^ble and Obliged Servant.

Just Reprinted, and to be Sold, By D. Henchman, in CORNHILL.
AN ALARM to unconverted Sinners: In a serious Treatise. Showing, I What
Conversion is not, and correcting some Mistakes about it. II What Conversion
i^, and wherein it consiste^h. III. The Necessity of Conversion. IV. The Mark^
of the Unconverted. V. The Miseries of the Unconverted. VI Directions for
Conversion. VII. Motives to Conversion Whereunto is annexed, diverse practical
Cases of Conscience judiciously resolved By Joseph All^ine.

There is also speedily to be reprinted,

Two D^^^ (...) ^^^bent, or Arrow (...) King's Enemies. From Psalm 45 3.4.5.
Wherein the natural Enmity of secure Sinners against CHRIST; and the Manner of
their Reduction to his O^^dience, by a Work of Conv^^tion, (...) Preached at
New Bruns^^^ in New Jersey. By Gilbert Tinne^t, A. M. Minister of the Gospel.

It is also purposed in a short Time to reprint,

A Treatise entitled, A solemn Warning to the secure World, from the God of
terrible Majesty: Or, The presumptious Sinner detected, his Pleas considered,
and his Doom displayed. Being an Essay, in which the strong Proneness of
Mankind to entertain a false Confidence is proved; the Causes and Foundations
of this Delusion opened and considered, in a great Variety of Particulars; The
Folly, Sinfulness, and dangerous Consequences of a presumptuous Hope exposed,
and Directions proposed how to obtain that scriptural and rational Hope, which
makes not ashamed. By Gilbert Tennent, M A. Both to be sold by D. HENCHMAN, in
Cornhil.


