LETTER TO Merchant in London, Concerning a late Combination in the PROVINCE of
the Massachusetts Bay in New England, to Impose or Force A Private-Currency
called Land-Bank-Money.

Printed for the public GOOD. 1741.

A LETTER TO MERCHANT IN LONDON.
I Have the favor of yours of 1 st December per the Bladen, with Copies of the
Reports of the Board of Trade and Plantations, and of the Committee of Council
for Plantation Affairs; concerning our Land-Bank so called: I observe that
having examined into the Nature of the Scheme, and of the refusal of the House
of Representatives to pay any Regard to the Governor's Message concerning the
same; they approve of the Governor and Councils Proceedings, and do declare
that the said Scheme appears to them to be not only Illegal, but of dangerous
Tendency; and must create great Confusion, and Interruption in Business, as
well to the Traders in New England, as in Great Britain; and in Order that the
said Land-Bank may be as speedily and effectually suppressed as possible, they
are pursuing Methods to put a Stop to the same, until such Time as the
Legislature of Great Britain shall take the State of the Paper Currencies of
all the Plantations into Consideration.

You desire a particular Account of this monstrous (as you call it)
Combination, lately made, to evade Resolves of Parliament, and King's
Instructions; and to assume by Virtue of their Numbers, the establishing of
Currency, which is absolutely the Prerogative of the Crown; you engage me to
keep strictly to plain Facts, without Suggestions, and Surmises of my own, or
of others: Therefore to avoid all Suspicion of Partiality, instead of a private
Letter, I send it you published in the Place where is the Scene of Action.

I must premise a short Detail of our Plantations Paper-Effects. Upon some
Exigencys, there not being Cash in the Treasury sufficient, there was issued
Treasury Notes or Obligations, to be satisfied, or cancelled, in a short Time.
The Goodness of the Mer^hants, to strengthen the Hands of the Government, gave
these Notes Credit as Cash. Some Administrations took Advantage of this Credit
given to their Notes, and imposed upon the Merchant egregiously:

1 st, By Issuing out too large Quantities of these Notes with long Periods,
their public Bills of Credit suffered a growing Discount.

2 dly, That this growing Discount might not put a Stop to their Currency,
those dependent Colonies by Bylaws of their own, assumed the KING's
Prerogative in Currencies; and made their own Notes a common Tender in Law.

3 dly, By frequent postponing the Cancellings of those Bil^s they encouraged
Postponing of private Debts, which has occasioned a general Insensibility of
Discredit in all Trade, and Business.

4 thly, Shop-Notes were never used in Payments, until public Notes took
Place, being their genuine Offspring; thus Tradesmen, Artificers, and other
poor Laborers, are left to the Shop-keeper's Mercy, for their Pay in Goods, at
any Rate.

5 thly, This gave the Hint to Combinations for emitting private Bills of
Credit, which, if not speedily and effectually quashed, will inevitably produce
Mutiny, Sedition, and Riots.

In Massachusetts Bay, we have at present an unaccountable Confusion of Paper
Currency: Public Bills of Credit, viz. The old Bills of the four Provinces of
New England, at Twenty nine Shillings per Ounce, Silver: Massachusetts new
Tenor, at Six Shillings and Eight Pence, but current at Nine Shillings and
Eight Pence. Connecticut new Tenor, at Eight Shillings. Rhode Island new Tenor,
at Six Shillings and nine Pence.

Private Bills of Credit. 1 st, Silver Money Scheme or Merchants Notes, whereof
One hundred and ten thousand Pounds Value was emitted, Anno 1733, to prevent an
enormous Rhode Island public Emission, from depreciating our Currency: These
Bills continue to be punctually paid in Gold and Silver as they become due, and
are at present 33 per Cent. better than Province Bills.

2 dly, Another Sum of Merchants Notes, value One hundred and twenty thousand
Pounds, emitted, Anno 1740, on a Silver Bottom, projected to stifle that
pernicious grand Bubble called The Land Bank. Those Bills, considered
abstractedly, are advantageous to the Possessor; being payable upon Demand in a
legal Currency, they are equivalent to Cash; and carrying a growing Profit of 3
per Cent. per Annum, they are better than Province Bills, and (if other ways
regular) as good as the Stocks and Companies Bonds in London: The Signers
without further Recourse upon the Partnership, being our most eminent and
wealthy Traders, are capable, when required, to call in, and pay off, all their
Bills upon a short Sight.

Nevertheless, it was always my Opinion, That all private Emissions, designed
as a common Currency, without a Patent from the Prerogative, are irregular and
illegal: A private Person who strikes a Crown Piece, though equal, or better, in
Weight and Fineness, than a royal Crown Piece; is equally, in the Eye of our
Laws, though not in itself, culpable, as a Person who strikes a brass Crown
silvered.

3 dly, The Land-Bank, or Manufactory Scheme, (the designed Subject of this
Letter) being a late Combination of a vast Multitude of necessitous, idle, and
extravagant Persons; with all the Signs of a genuine Bubble; contrived to have
what they call Money, at an easy Rate; and to pay their Debts in a precarious
fallacious Kind of Bills, very ill, or not at all, secured; of no determined
Value; bearing no Interest; not payable (the Possessor cannot oblige to an
Acceptance) until after twenty Years, and being a very large Sum (equal to all
the then provincial Bills of New England) of Six hundred thousand Pounds, will,
if not remedied, depreciate all Paper Currencies, that are not determined by a
Silver Value, consequently prove a great Prejudice to private Property in the
Province, and great Loss and Damage to the Merchants of Great Britain, trading
to New England.

Your Surmise is groundless, That perhaps some of our Merchants, who have
suffered much by depreciating public Bills, have, jesuitically, and as it were
behind the Curtain, prompted the unthinking Multitude, to a Scheme, running
into unheard of Extremities of Sum, and Period; and at this critical Time, when
all Paper Money is under the Censure of the Boards and Parliament of
Great Britain, on purpose to bring the Parliament under the Necessity of
speedily and effectually suppressing Paper Money of all Kinds.

The Rise of this Scheme, was from a few evil-minded Men, contrived only for
their own Benefit, and have admitted a great Multitude of Subscribers, by their
Numbers to give it a Circulation, and to contribute toward indemnifying them
against all Acts of Government. Its being contrived only for the Benefit of the
Directors, appears by their Constitution.

1 st, They are to be Directors in Perpetuity.

2 dly, They are to have a Negative in all Resolves of general Meetings.

3 dly, Their Sallaries, other Charges of Management, and their living
sumptously, at Free-Cost, will amount to Two per Cent. per Annum, of the
original Stock; (the original South Sea Stock of Ten Millions was allowed only
Eight thousand Pounds for Management, which is scarce One 12 th per Cent. per
Annum) They design to convert Sixty thousand Pounds of the principal Stock into
Trade, that they may have a greater Latitude of imposing upon the Partnership.
The Bank of England, and all other well constituted Banks, are restricted from
trading, that their Stock may remain good at home, ready to answer all Demands.
Their ludicrous Pretense is, That since the Merchants will not sell them Goods
for this worthless Money, they will import all sorts of Merchandise, for the
Benefit of the Partnership: Their Directors cannot seriously pretend to
understand Trade, only one of their Number is called Merchant, or rather a
Factor for some Marooners or Logwood-Cutters, in the Bay of Honduras.

4 thly, They alter the Articles of Partnership at Pleasure, without Consent of
a general Meeting, pretending (contrary to all good Regulation) that private
Consent of the Members, without Deliberation or Debate, is sufficient; this is
the Reason of their Scheme being so often botched: Their Scheme now sent to
you, is their last, as it stands in the County Register; it was refused a
Record in the Secretary's Office: How soon it may be altered, we know not.

5 thly, The County Registers being lately searched by Order of the Governor
and Council, to find out the civil and military Officers, g^^^ty in this
Combination; It was discovered, That the principal Projectors, or Bubblers, the
Directors, etc. had given no Security to the Partnership for their good
Management, and for their Quota of this Money, taken up some Months since: The
sham Reason they give, of being very busy; is not only weak, but fully
discovers the Cheat and Imposition; because in all well ordered honest Schemes,
the Directors, or Managers, are the first who give Security.

You desire to know the Nature of our landed Interest, which by these
evil-designing Men, is set up in competition with the trading Interest. In
Great Britain, the Landed-Interest consists generally of Gentlemen very Rich,
with valuable Rent-Rolls; Our Freeholders generally are laboring Men, who earn
less, and fare worse, than many in Boston, and without any Rent-Rolls. Indulge
me here, to cast a Vail over the Nakedness of our Country: This Country seems
designed by Nature for Trade, not for Produce: We Import Provisions at much
easier Rates from the Southern Provinces, than we can afford to raise them
here. I am concerned in Lands, and therefore can have no sinister End in
disparaging of the^* On the other side, Our Trade is not Inferior to that of
any of his Majesty's Plantations; and Our Navigation much exceeds any of them.
The Truth is shortly this; The Debtor part of the Country (which is vastly the
most numerous) are contriving to baulk their Creditors by reducing the
Denominations of Money (by their huge and ill-secured Emissions) to a small or
no Value; that they who have laudably acquired Fortunes by Industry and
Frugality, may reap no Benefit thereof, but be upon a level with the Idle and
Extravagant: We all have learnt by Experience that large Emissions with distant
Periods, have sunk a great Part of Debts, without any Consideration.

The Projectors gave to this Bubble the specious Name of, A Bank: -- It has not
the least Affinity to Banking. Banking is issuing of Cash-Notes, payable upon
Demand: or Merchants having lodged their Cash, the Bank transfers Cash from one
Merchant's Folio, to that of another, when required.

1st This Sham-Bank has no Stock in their Treasury; and the Face of their Bills
promising to accept them for Stock in the Treasury is an arrant Bubble: It is
true, that for some short Time the Directors decoyed some Graziers and
Hog-Drivers, to part with their Provisions for this their Land-Bank Money, but
have shipped it off in Trade for the Profit of the D --, and perhaps to help to
indemnify themselves when obliged to make good the Bills by them signed.

2dly, These Bills, though carrying no Interest, cannot make an effectual Demand
of Acceptance till after Twenty Years, and then not payable in current Cash,
but in Goods of an Arbitrary Assortment and Value.

3dly, As Produce and Manufacture are more valuable than depretiating Bills;
all Payments of the Partnership of Interest, and Parts of Principal, will be in
these Bills; and consequently no Produce, or Manufacture, will be found in
their Treasury.

4thly, Being no Body-Corporate, they are under no Limitation: The Directors,
who are for this very Purpose the Signers, may and will emit Bills in
indefinitum, or until at length their Value become near equal to the Charge of
manufacturing them.

5thly, If we can suppose their Board of Bill-Makers to be honest-Men, and that
in Conscience (they having no other Check but Conscience) they emit no more
than according to their first Articles, as they have no exclusive Patent, any
other Number of desperate Men may follow the same Money-making Trade, and Bills
may multiply as in the former Case.

6thly, In other Countries, the Opulent, the Honest, the Men of Credit, become
Bankers; here the Indigent, the Debtors, the Frauduleut, set up for Bankers: A
Bank of a Numerous, but poor People, who pretend to circulate l. 600,000
without any Stock.

7thly, To complete the Farce, the Securities for circulating and paying off
these Bills, are within themselves, and may be stifled at Pleasure.

This Scheme is founded upon a Projection, disapproved of by the General
Assembly A. D. 1714; but is more Iniquitous; That of A. D. 1714, required the
Persons in Trust, particularly the Treasurer to be of good Interest, known
Integrity, and Reputation; and the Treasurer to give l. 10,000 Security; The
Directors to be distinct from the Trustees, and to be chosen Annually at a
General Meeting^ a Committee distinct from the Directors to perfect and (...)
Bills.

The Projectors and Managers of this Scheme have Debauched the Minds of the
People, by Instilling unto them some pernicious Principles, destructive of all
Society, and good Government;

1 st, That common Consent, or the Humor of the Multitude, ought to be the
Ratio Ultima in every Thing and particularly in Currencies; whereas not only
according to the Constitution of Great Britain, but of all polite Governments,
Money or Currencies are the Prerogative of the the SOVEREIGNS, and have
followed the universal Custom of Merchants, whereby Silver from its own natural
Qualifications, could not avoid becoming the universal Medium of Trade. If we
may suppose a Country entirely separated from the trading Part of the World,
common Consent may admit of any Thing for a Currency, according to the Humor,
or Profit of the Projectors; but this will fluctuate from one thing to another,
until at length the most proper Material obtain a permanent Consent: It is
doubtless a high Misdemeanour to assert strenously, the Privilege of the
People, to emit and pass any Thing as a Currency, in defiance, of the KING's
Prerogative of Currencys. -- Middleton, a neighboring Town, has lately
unanimously voted, that This Bank-Money shall be received as Cash for
Town-Rates.

2 dly, That every Landed Man, even to the mortgaging of his last Acre, has a
Right to make Money: This is a most destructive and wicked Principle, the
Security and Bulwark of a Country, are these People who have valuable
Possessions and Effects to loose; whereas they who are much in Debt, become
desperate, and bad Subjects, and have nothing to hinder them from relinquishing
their Country to the first Invader.

Thirdly, That the industrious Merchants, and frugal monied Men, are the Bane
of a Country; because they expect their Debts and Dues to be honestly paid:
Whereas a Country without Trade is of little Value, and would soon return to
its primitive Waste. People of Genius for Trade grow rich by the Labor of
Peasants, and the Peasants or Laborers happy by being employed: This Province
noted for Trade, would soon become a Habitation of rude Rusticks.

4 thly, To value themselves as being formidable by their Numbers, Two Thousand
Principals, as they publish, and many Thousand Abettors: This is Ruffian like,
by Superiority of Numbers, to endeavor to make honest People buy the Rabbit.
Such dangerous barefaced Combinations, are not to be connived at in
Government; they openly threaten, that in the next Assembly, no Body shall be a
Representative, or of the Council, but those who are Principals or Abettors in
this Scheme; and thus have formed an Imperium in imperio. If this Wickedness of
Combinations, under the Name of Banking, should spread into our neighboring
Charter Governments (in Providence of Rhode Island they have gone some Lengths
in it) where all the Negatives, or Branches of the Legislature are elective by
the People; they would become Masters in all Affairs of Legislature and
Government; their Dependence upon and Subjection to Great Britain, would soon
vanish. At this Time, in Neglect or Contempt of the Resolves of Parliament, and
subsequent King's Instructions, Connecticut have emitted One hundred and eight
thousand Pounds, and Rhode Island, Eighty thousand Pounds, Province Bills.

5 thly, By the enclosed Newspapers, printed in Boston, you may see, and we
here upon the Spott do daily hear, how the Managers spirit the People to
Mutiny, Sedition, and Riots: One gives it for Law, That no Orders from the
Boards at Whitehall, nor Acts of Parliament, can put a Stop to their
Proceedings; Others say, We shall humble the proud Merchants; That if the
Merchants will not receive these Bills in Pay, they must blame themselves for
any Outrages that may happen; That We had as good perish by the Sword as by
Famine, that is, by being Dragoon'd, as by Want of Money; That upon a French
Invasion, if we submit, We cannot be worse than at present; that is poor and in
Debt; because the Government or private Combinanations will not let us have
Paper Money, to the Ruin of the good People of the Province.

You desire to know what has been done by the Government of the Province
toward their Suppression: One of the Negatives, I mean the House of
Representatives, stand out; so that the Legislature can do nothing. The
Governor and Council have acted with much Prudence and Fortitude; and are
dismissing all Officers, Civil and Military, of their Appointment, who are
concerned in this Combination; only the Chairman of the Directors, and the
Indorser, their Commissions or Warrants being from Great Britain, cannot be
dismissed; but their Dismissions, by their Constituents at home, may be
expected.

You take the Liberty to surmise, a Liberty which you would not allow to me;

1 st, That for the present, the most summary Way of proceeding against this
Combination, would be, To send for the Treasurer, Directors, and Indorser, to
Great Britain, by a Messenger, with a Secretary of State's Warrant, to bring
them upon Examination, concerning this high Crime and Misdemeanour: But this
would ruin them in their small Fortunes, and render them less capable to
satisfy the Possessors of the Bills, when returned upon them.

2 dly, That the Mortgages of Lands in the Partnership cannot be sued out by
the Managers; because there was no valuable Consideration received. Thus the
Possessors having only the Estates of the Signers liable, would not receive
above Two Shillings in the Pound.

3 dly, That the Possessors having had sufficient Warring from the Government,
can claim none of their Compassion.

We hope that the Government, who are the Parents and Guardians of the People,
will act, as natural Parents do with their Children, guilty of some Follies,
after repeated Admonition.

In all Bubbles, Combinations, etc. the Guilt of the Projectors and Managers is
from a corrupt Principle; but the Error in their Followers, the Multitude, is
only from a Mistake in Judgment.

I have now given you my Tho'ts of this singular Piece of Iniquity, in the most
impartial Manner I am able, and hope it will be satisfactory to you, assuring
you I am, with all poffible Respect,

Your devoted humble Servant.
New England, Boston, Feb. 21st 1740, 1. P. S. We find by our last printed
News-Paper, that this grand Combination, amongst other mischievous Effects, is
become productive of smaller iniquitous Combinations of Tradesmen and
Artificers as to their Pay, etc.




