Youthful Pleasures must be accounted for in the Day of JUDGMENT. Mr. Haven's
SERMON ON ECCLESIASTES xi. 9.

Youthful Pleasures must be accounted for, at the Day of JUDGMENT.

A SERMON ON ECCLESIASTES xi. 9. Preached (in part) at the second Precinct in
Wrentham, May 27. 1741.

By Elias Haven, M. A. Pastor of the Church there.

Published at the earnest Desire of many of the Hearers.

Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter End!

Ephesians. 5.16. Redeeming the Time.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by J. DRAPER, at his Printing House in
Newbury-Street. 1742.

To the young People at whose Request the following Discourse was composed and
published.
My dear Friends,
THE following Sermon is inscribed to you as a Token of my unfeigned Affection
to you. I have found by happy Experience, that the great GOD can, and sometimes
does bless very weak Means for the good of Souls: Else I could not have been
willing to have appeared so publicly.

I trust, you will think yourselves under special Obligations to copy this
Sermon (so far as agreeable to the Divine Oracles) in your Heart and Life. I can
make no Apology for Printing. I hope you and others will furnish me with one,
by the Benefit you may evidently gain hereby. May every Reader receive so much
as to induce him to overlook the inaccuracy of the subsequent Discourse; and to
remind him to Pray frequently for the unworthy Author. I wish for you that your
Souls may prosper and be in Health, who am,

Your Souls Friend and Servant E. HAVEN

Youthful Pleasures must be accounted for AT THE Day of Judgment.
ECCL. xi. 9. Rejoice, O young Man, in thy Youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee
in the Days of thy Youth; and walk in the Ways of thy Heart, and in the sight
of thine Eyes; but know thou, that for all these Things God will bring thee
into Judgment.


I Desire with all my Heart and Soul, to bless the Name of the great GOD, who
has inclined the Heart of so many to attend upon him in his House this Day.

I thank, not only the dear People of my Charge, but those also of other
Places, and especially you, that are in your Youth, for assembling your selves
so readily into the House of the LORD, and coming to worship toward His holy
Temple, and sit under the Droppings of His Sanctuary on this Day, General
Election at Boston.
which you used to devote to Merriment, vain and too often sinful Diversion.
And while I see so large a Congregation, and especially such Numbers of young
People around me; how might it animate me (if Possible) to say something on
this Occasion to you, that might indeed profit your Souls.

Depending on divine Help, I shall endeavor to offer to your Consideration,
some plain and serious Truths from the Text now read, Rejoice, O young Man, etc.

In this excellent Sermon written by King SOLOMON, under divine Inspiration,
the Point to be demonstrated was, that all worldly Enjoyments, carnal Pleasure,
Wealth, Honor, and even humane Wisdom and Learning, are Vanity of Vanities;
unworthy of any Esteem or Regard, when compared with the Enjoyment of the
Favor of God, the true Pleasures of Religion; and that spiritual Wisdom, which
is expressed in the filial Fear of God, and Conformity to His Will.

This Assertion our divine Preacher has proved, by an Induction of Particulars;
and when he is come near to the close of his Sermon, he makes, what we should
call, in an humane Author, an handsome Address to the Youth, in our Text and
onward. And applys what he had said to them, to us who are in our Youth; as to
those that are most prone to be led astray by the Vanities of this World: And
for them to neglect the most solid and valuable Enjoyments, offered to the
faithful Servants of the most High.

Our Text begins this Address, and gives us a Rule by which to measure our
pursuit of this World's Enjoyments, and our indulgence of Pleasure, viz. The
weight that all our Actions shall respectively have at the Judgment Seat of
CHRIST.

Rejoice, O young Man, in thy Youth -- but know thou that for all these Things
GOD will bring thee into Judgment.

As if he has said, "O young Man, or Woman, who take most delight in the vain
Pleasures of this Life, go on to rejoice therein while in thy Youth, and let
thy Heart cheer thee in the Days of thy Youth; let nothing hinder, but every
thing conspire to promote this youthful rejoicing; let thy Fancy and brisk
Imagination cheer thee, with the most pleasant Representation of all Things
around you; thus adding to the rejoicing that even a Youth could otherwise
indulge. And walk in the way of thy Heart; whatever way for worldly Pleasure,
your youthful Heart and lively Imagination shall dictate to you, readily go in
that Path, never fail of following such a Tract. -- And in the sight of thine
Eyes. If your Eyes discover any Object that your Heart desires; pursue and
obtain it: Let your outward Senses, lively Fancy, youthful Briskness and merry
Indulgencies all increase the Pleasures of your early Years: But know it for a
certainty, that all these Things must be called over again, at the great Day of
Accounts. It may be, many of your early Pleasures are concealed from the view
of Men; but the great GOD will bring them into Judgment, will publish them all
in open Day, before all the Worlds of Men and Angels; and will sentence you
according to their strict Demerit." Know it, O young People, that hear me, that
all your youthful Pleasures, cheerful Amusements merry Days and Nights and
Hours, shall be remembered then, and have their just weight in the Sentence of
that Day.

This Text is therefore, a serious Exhortation to the Youth, to take the
Comfort of their Life, and the Pleasure proper to their Age; only to regulate
even their cheerful Seasons, by a due Remembrance of the Day, when they must
appear at the Bar of CHRIST, and render an Account of all these things among
others. And the wise Man then tells us, we may have much Pleasure in youth: But
that it must be such as will bear the Light of that awful Day.

Or, the Text is a cutting Sarcasm, wherein the meaning is directly opposite to
the literal Sense of the Words. And because King SOLOMON knew that young
Persons are exceeding fond of carnal and worldly Pleasure, he bids them rejoice
and cheer themselves in it, to the utmost that their Heart could wish. "Be
merry, O young People, as you please, as you can; but be so at your Peril: Know
that the great GOD sees you, will bring you to Judgment, and pass a Sentence
infinitely just upon you; for all these things. This Last, seems to me the true
Sense of the Text. But be it either; the Words naturally afford us this

OBSERVATION.
That young People should indulge themselves, in no more Cheerfulness and
Merriment, than they can give a good Account of, to the great JUDGE.

It is equally true, that no Persons of whatever Age, should indulge themselves
in any sort of Pleasure of which they cannot give a good Account at the great
DAY. But because the Text is, as I said, an Address to the Youth, and the
Occasion, and the Numbers of the Age in this Assembly, determine me to express
the Observation as above: For the Word of the LORD is unto you, O young People,
in special: For each of you: and therefore let me beg, and let me have, your
most serious Attention.

The general Proposition is directly proved by the Text: Rejoice -- but go no
further in your rejoicing than you can, when under the full and proper Sense,
that it must soon be accounted for. Here,

1. There is a Cheerfulness and Rejoicing that is allowable Eccl. 7.14. In the
Day of Prosperity be J^^ful. We should take notice of, and take pleasure in,
the Expressions of divine Bounty toward us. Our Spirits should be cheared when
we experience, or reflect on His Blessings: But then this Joy and Cheerfulness,
should always be a Joy of Thanksgiving. This Joy of Heart should be, in a sort,
an inward, habitual Thankfulness to the Author of our Comfort. Ps. 95.1, 2. O
come let us sing unto the LORD: Let us make a joyful noise, unto the rock of
our Salvation. Let us come before his Presence with Thanksgiving, and make a
joyful Noise unto him with Psalms, compared with 1 These. 5.^8. In every Thing
give Thanks, And, James 5.3. -- Is any merry, let him sing Psalms.

There is a rejoicing in the Lord, that the Saints should exercise both in
Prosperity and Adversity, Phil. 4.4. an holy, humble Joy in this, that the LORD
is infinite in all his Attributes, and that he is their Portion.

2. The Cheerfulness we speak of, should be of such a King and Degree, as the
Person indulging it, can give a good Account of, to the great Judge.

I shall only offer a few Reasons to confirm this Proposition, and pass to the
Application.

Reas. 1. Because it is absolutely certain, that there is a Judgment Day
approaching. This is an Article of the Christian Faith, plainly revealed and
absolutely asserted in our Bible. In the Text particularly, Know thou that for
all these Things God will bring thee into Judgment. Know Ye, is a Term an
humane Conveyance denoting absolute Certainty: And a like Phrase is used in our
Text, setting forth the Certainty of the Judgment Day; Know thou -- Rev. 20.11,
12, 13. And I saw a great white Throne, and him that sat on it, from whose Face
the Earth and the Heaven fled away, and there was found no Place for them. And
I saw the dead, small and great stand before GOD; and the Books were opened:
And another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life, and the Dead were
judged out of those Things which were written in the Books according to their
Works. And the Sea gave up the Dead which were in it; and Death and Hell
delivered up the Dead which were in them: and they were judged, every Man
according to their Works. After these Texts you do not deny the Certainty of
the Day of Judgment; you dare not deny it.

Reas. 2. Because all the Kinds and Degrees of Men's rejoicing and
cheerfulness, shall be brought into Judgment. They shall be reckoned for, Eccl.
12.14. For God shall bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret Thing,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil. And if every Work, with every secret
Thing, then certainly, every cheerful, every merry Day and Hour; yea, and
Minute; all the Circumstances, Kinds and Degrees thereof. O young People, You
think perhaps this Consideration is very serious. It is so: But not (...)
serious than true. Every Moment that you spend in any sort of Merriment, shall
be called over at the great Day of Accounts. Your Companions perhaps entice
you; "Come, say they, Let us go and spend this Day, or this Evening merrily;
let us go to such an House; there we may sing, dance, carouse, and be as jolly
as we please: we shall be out of the reach of our Parents; they will not hear us;
and the Folks there, with not check us." Go, I say, Go, O vain Youth, with
them; but maintain this Thought continually, That GOD's Eye is upon you, when
you go, while you are there, and when you return; and observes every Though It,
every Word and Action, and He will bring you into Judgment for All these
Things. Be cheerful as you please, under a proper, regulating, Heart-deep
Sense, that every Degree of this Cheerfulness shall be accounted for at the Bar
of CHRIST. Be profanely rude, or needlessly company with your vain Companions,
if they are profanely rude, at your Peril; since all the Circumstances of your
Merriment must be in full recounted by you before the great Judge, when Time
shall be no more. And this surely is a weighty Reason, why the King and Degree
of your Cheerfulness should be such, as you can then give a good Account of.

Reas. 3. Because the infinite GOD is engaged to bring Persons to Judgment for
these Things. If only the most powerful Men, or even the highest Angels in
Heaven, where engaged to bring Persons into Judgment for these Things, they
might imagine a possibility of escaping that Trial. For, it is possible the
highest created Wisdom or Power might fail. But, O young Man, O young Woman, an
infinite, omniscient Eye is engaged to find thee, wherever thou may be;
infinite Power, to bring thee to that BAR; infinite Justice requires it; and
infinite Truth has spoken it, Text, GOD will bring thee into Judgment. Chapter
12.14. Indeed, Angels may be improved as Instruments, to gather all Nations,
and every individual Person, to that great Assembly, Matthew. 13.41, 42. But they
are no more than Instruments; and if we might suppose them all to fail, yet all
Persons should be gathered before the Son of Man, when he shall come in his
Glory, Matthew. 25.32.

And I appeal to You; Do you not believe this, That GOD Almighty is engaged to
bring you to an Account at last, for every idle Word, for every idle Hour, for
every merry Meeting, etc? You do believe it: I suppose, not one Soul of you
pretends to deny it. Ponder this, and say, Is it not a weighty Reason, why you
in particular should have even your Cheerfulness, of such Kind and Degree, as
you can give a good Account of to this infinite Judge?

Reas. 4. The Fourth and last Reason is, Because the Judgment of that Day is
Final; the Sentence for Eternity. There lies no Appeal from that Tribunal. You,
you that hear me, Young and Old, can have no after Trial. When Sentence is
passed upon you by the GREAT JUDGE, it is decisive: It determines your Case for
Eternity, Matthew. 25. ult. And these shall go away into everlasting Punishment;
but the Righteous into Life eternal. Eternal! Everlasting! how extensive the
Term! Stretch your Thoughts forward into Eternity: Think what, think how long
it is. Oh! Eternity! Eternity! how amazing the Thought! It swallows up our
Soul, and Words are useless. But consider, that the Sentence to be passed, at
the last awful Day, shall determine your State for this endless Eternity. And
think, if this be not a sufficient Reason, why you should take Care to have
even your Cheerfulness, of such a Kind and Degree, as may, through Grace, have
a favorable Sentence pronounced upon it; and a joyful ETERNITY the Consequence.

APPLICATION.
Is it as we have heard, That our Cheerfulness should be of such a Kind and
Degree, as we can give a good Account of to the great JUDGE? Hence,

1. How strange, and inconsistent with this Rule, has been the Conduct of the
best Men among us! Who of us can say before the Heart-searching GOD, That, in
our Days and Hours of Amusement, we have kept the Temper of our Soul, and all
our Words and Behavior under such Regulation, and eyed so steadily the Glory
of GOD, and the valuable Ends of Diversion, as now to be able to give a good
Account of all those Things to the infinite Judge? Doubtless, not One. And is
it not strange, that good Men, who in some measure know the Importance of
eternal Things, should act so inconsistent with this Rule? They therein act
contrary to all the Rules of the Gospel. Good Men too, too often transgress the
Bounds of their Duty; so that their Conduct is not a Rule for the Profane and
Youthful.

2. How amazing is their Conduct, who go on freely indulging themselves in
carnal Pleasure; practicing according to the figurative Sense of the first part
of the Text: Some there are, that will indulge themselves in useless Pleasures,
to a very sinful Degree; and in Pleasures, in their own Nature highly Criminal;
going on in such Course from Day to Day, and from Year to Year, as are in
direct Opposition to the Apostle's Words, Romans 13.13. Let us walk honestly as
in the Day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness.
Doing the Works of the Flesh, -- Revellings, and such like, Gal. 5.19, 21. Are
there not many of you that have spent many an Hour, many a Night, in such
Behavior, as exactly answers the Description in some of these last Clauses?
And that desire still to practice the same: indulging no other, than carnal,
sensual Gratifications? Now, how amazing is it, that you can go on in such
Conduct, when you know that our Text, and these last quoted, shall look you
full in the Face at the last great Day, and you must be judged by them! Verily,
you go after your Pleasure, as an Ox goes to the Slaughter, or as a Fool to
the Correction of the Stocks; you are in extreme Danger, that a Dart will
strike through your Liver. How amazing is it to see rational Creatures, as your
are, hasting to your carnal, sinful Pleasures, as a Bird hastes to a Snare;
when indeed, it is for your Life, for the Life of your Soul. The House of such
Pleasure is the Way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death, Prove. 7.22,
23, 27. One would almost think, That although you have read it so often in your
Bibles, That the Dead are there; and that her Guests are in the Depths of Hell,
still you know it not. But you, O young People, do know it, but you do not
ponder it, while you go on to indulge sinful Pleasures, for which you must give
an Account; and yet can give no good Account of them. We are amazed at you, and
you may well be astonished at your selves.

3. Is it as we have heard under the Doctrine; hence what unspeakable need have
we all of an Interest in CHRIST! We heard, That the infinite GOD will bring
each of us into Judgment, and pass a decisive Sentence upon us, for even our
Cheerfulness and Merriment, as well as for all our other Conduct: Now, how much
of our Time have we spent in such rude Behavior, senseless Merriment and
lawless Carousing, as we cannot answer for; but we know is directly contrary to
the Will of GOD? How much have you formerly, who are now advanced in Years? How
much have you lately, who are now in your Youth! How many Evenings; how many
Nights and Days too, in such Gaming, and such Diversions (without any Word all
the Time, that was good to the Use of edifying) as, were it now put to your
Conscience, you dare not appear instantly at the most awful Tribunal, and
answer for? Nay, As to those Amusements that were lawful and seasonable, how
careless have we been of designing the Glory of GOD, or any valuable Ends. And
will not the infinite Judge be strict to call over all these Things, as well as
our innumerable Crimes of other sorts? He will be infinitely exact and just.
Not one Moment. O vain Youth, that ever you spent in a sinful manner, but you
shall be reminded of on the Day of Judgment* O then, how great is our Necessity
of an Interest in CHRIST! How vastly do we all need it! For there shall none be
able to stand at that Day, and give up their Account with Comfort, but those
who have washed their Robes, and made them White in the Blood of the Lamb.
Hence the Apostle's Desire to be found in Christ not having on his own
Righteousness which was of the Law, but that which is through the Faith of
CHRIST, the Righteousness which is of GOD by Faith. O young People, in
particular, consider how You need an Interest in CHRIST. And in his Blood, to
wash away even the guilt of your vain and careless Hours. Think seriously
whether you dare meet the Soul-Piercing-Eye of the GREAT JUDGE, with that guilt
on your Conscience: whether you do not find in your selves a real and
unspeakable need of CHRIST on this Account. Think each for himself, for you
must each stand or fall for himself. Some of you, I trust have been brought to
see, in a great Measure, the Sinfulness of your former Merry-meetings, and
unguarded, unchristian Rudeness: with what Resentment do you look back thereon!
and how do you see your need of CHRIST, even on that Account. O that every Soul
of you may be seasonably brought to a true Sight thereof!

4. Use, Of Exhortation, into two Branches, unto the whole Congregation.

1 Branch. Let us order our whole Conversation, and especially our Merriment
and Cheerfulness by this Rule, viz. So as we may be able to give a good Account
of it. Let us see to it, that it be always of such a Kind and Degree, as we may
indeed be able to hold up our Head with Comfort, on that most important Day,
and freely own what we have done; that we may then be willing to remember, that
thus we spent such an Evening, or such an Hour, when it was our Duty to amuse
our selves, and a little unbend the Mind.

Q. You will perhaps ask me, How shall we do this?

Answ. I answer in a Word, Conform your whole Conversation, particularly in
your more amusing Seasons, wholly to the Word of GOD. That should certainly be
the Rule whereby your whole Conduct should be squared. That should be a Light
to your Feet, and a Lamp unto your Path. For, it shall be the Rule by which you
shall be judged at the great Day, -- GOD shall judge the Secrets of Men by
JESUS CHRIST according to my Gospel, Romans 2.16. i. e. According to the holy
Word of GOD, of which Paul was a Preacher. Psalm. 119.9. Wherewith shall a young
Man cleanse his Way, from all Iniquity? by taking heed thereto, according to
GOD's Word. And is it not reasonable, that the Conduct of your most unguarded
Hours, should now be conformed to the Rule by which it must be tried and
sentenced at the last?

In particular, Your Diversions must be such, as in their Kind and Degree,
their Season, Length of Time and designed End are glorifying to GOD; or they
cannot answer that general Rule in his Word, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye
eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do All to the Glory of GOD. Yet by this Rule
shall your Diversions be tried.

Object. But young People especially will object, That to act with such a
continual Regard to the Day of Judgment, will take away all the Comfort of
their Life; and especially of their merry Days and Hours.

For Answer,

1. What if it does as the Objection says? Think seriously, O young People, on
a few Things. Is it not a Reality that there is such a Judgment Day coming? You
do not, nor dare you deny it. By going on careless and free in Sin, you might
perhaps keep the Tho'ts of that Day out of your Mind a little while: But is it
not better, much more prudent and safe, to act agreeable to the real Nature of
Things? Or had you rather go on in vain Courses, taking your fill of carnal
Pleasures, as in a Dream, fancying that there will be a Reckoning-Day, when all
these Things shall be brought into Judgment; but not realizing it, till you
shall be suddenly surprised by that Day? Would you choose this? Can you think
this safer, than to be deprived of your carnal, vain Delights? Or even of all
that you call Pleasure in this World?

Is not the Sentence to be passed on every One at that Day for Eternity? And is
it not reasonable then, that in your Diversions you should be so far impressed
with a Sense of that Day, and that Sentence, as to keep you from acting, what
you cannot then account well for; although it might at present deprive you of
your Comfort? Think closely upon this Question; and see if there is not great
weight in it. Is it not better to be deprived of Comfort a Minute, than to
suffer the Torments of Hell a Thousand Years, for the sinful Pleasures of a
Minute? You must grant, it is. And you know that if you so act here, as you
cannot give a good Account of, nor obtain a favorable Sentence at last, you
must suffer as many Millions of Ages in Hell, as you enjoyed single Minutes of
Pleasure on Earth: And then be no nearer the End of your Misery, than at the
first Moment it began. The Argument is very plain. Consider then whether this
Objection against the foregoing Arguments has any Weight in it, supposing the
Objection it self were true. But,

2. The Objection it self is false and groundless. For infinite Wisdom it self
assures us that the Ways of Wisdom are Ways of Pleasantness, and that All her
Paths are Peace. And Experience has ever witnessed to the Truth of this
Observation The penitential Person, as his Tears are the Joy of Angels, so they
are the Joy of his Heart, and the solace of his Soul; the salter his Tears, the
sweeter his Comforts; the deeper his Sighs, the fuller his Joy; the Beams of
Consolation always shine into this House of Mourning, so that his Soul is in
travel with a Barnabas. and his Labors bring forth the Fruits of Peace;
insomuch, that I may truly say, To mourn for Sin, is to weep for Joy. These
pure and pleasant Streams of Consolation, (which is the Worldlings Wonder) that
flow and run in those Crystal Rivers of eternal Pleasures, at GOD's Right
Hand, they come from a weeping Spring. Why then is the Mouth of Wickedness
opened against the Way of Holiness? As if Grace were the Calvary to entomb Joy,
and Impiety the very Womb to bring forth Felicity; but if Experience may be
heard, my Soul has felt both, and I find such Damps of Spirit in worldly
Pleasures, and such refreshing of Soul in the Depth of godly Sorrow, that I
shall esteem one Drop of spiritual Joy better than an Ocean of their carnal
Mirth." Divine Breathings.
. In deed you often see Persons convinced of, and deeply humbled for their
Sins;-their Souls are bowed down within them; but ask the Person that used to
be vain and careless, and took as much seeming Delight in Frolicking and
Merriment as any of you; and is now brought down even to the Dust for his Sins,
deeply repenting before GOD; and he will tell you, he has unspeakably more
Satisfaction in the Depth of Humiliation and Repentance, than ever he had in
his merriest Nights and Days. I believe there are many young People in this
Congregation that are ready to witness for this Preached at a Time of general
Awakening, especially among YOUNG PEOPLE.
. And if the Satisfaction of Soul, in the Depth of Humiliation and Sorrow for
Sin far exceeds in Pleasantness, all vain and sinful Gratifications and
Merriment, how far superior is the religious Delight in the Soul; when the
poor humbled Sinner is raised out of the Dust, bro't up out of the horrible
Pit, and the miry Clay, and his Feet are set upon a Rock? When the weary Soul
finds rest in CHRIST; and receives the Spirit of Adoption, breathes a
Child-like Temper toward his heavenly Father, and feels his Father and his
dearest Savior manifesting divine Perfection and divine Love unto him. And
when he tastes heavenly Joy in the sweet Incomes of divine Grace; even the Joy
of the HOLY GHOST, when his Soul is filled with the Love of GOD, Oh! how far
does this exceed all the Pleasures of Sin? How does it render them exceeding
bitter, in the Remembrance of them!

How unreasonable is the Objection when such Delights as these are offered to
you, in lieu of those Things, which may not be called Pleasures, without an
Epithet, to show that they are vain, hateful and dangerous! But more of this
afterward.

Perhaps some will grant the former Objection is answered, and they intend
hereafter to conduct themselves so as they may be able to give a good Account
even of their Hours of Diversion. But,

2. Object. That they cannot begin immediately so to do, and that it will be
Time enough when they have spent so many Days more, or have answered such and
such Agreements with some vain Companions, or the like.

Answ. I answer in general to this, That every one of us, from this Moment,
should so act at all Seasons, as we may able to give a good Account thereof to
the Great Judge.

For,

1. If you are resolved to go on in Sin, one Day, or one Hour more, you are
this Moment an unconverted Wretch. A true Convert may, through the Power of
Temptation, design to commit some one Sin, as David premeditated the Murder of
Uriah: but for any one deliberately to design a continuance in Sin, and to
delay turning from Sin to GOD, is an undeniable Token that he is in love with
Sin, and, by consequence still at Enmity with GOD. For the true Convert, who
loves the Lord JESUS CHRIST in sincerity, thinks the Time long already that he
has lived in Sin; and that it is high Time to cease Crucifying the LORD of LIFE.

2. Perhaps you may not have Time to repent, after the present Day, You know
you are uncertain, whether your Soul shall not be required of you this Night.
And if it should, will it be Time enough hereafter to repent and turn from all
Sin to GOD? You will indeed have an Eternity to repent in, but then your
Repentance will be in vain, there shall then remain no more Sacrifice for your
Sins, who have not repented till the Decree has brought forth against you.

3. Besides, thirdly, the infinite GOD says To Day (if you will hear his Voice)
harden not your Hearts. Ps. 95.7, 8. and, That it is time (this Day) to seek
the LORD. Hos. 10.12. And will you say, hereafter is Time enough to repent of
your Sins and effectually to seek the LORD? dare you impudently think or say,
it will be Time enough for you to turn and seek the LORD, when you have had one
Frolic more, when you have gone on in Sin a few Days, Months, or Years more?
Know thou, O vain Youth, better than the alwise GOD, when is the best Time
for you to repent and turn --? You say, No; but your Practice proves, you think
you do, if you go on any longer in Sin, pleading that hereafter is Time enough
for you to become strict and hearty in Gospel-Obedience: Or it plainly says,
with Pharaoh, who is the LORD that I should obey him, it is Time enough to obey
him hereafter, as much as I know of him, I will not yet obey him. This is the
Language of the last Objection. Who is there among you, that dare any longer
adhere to it?

But perhaps the young People that hear me, will think mine a thankless Office
to Day; while I endeavor to make them heart-sick of their sinful Pleasures,
unless I direct them to superior Delight. Therefore the

2d. Branch of the Exhortation is. Get an Interest in JESUS CHRIST, and then
may you rejoice on the best Foundation.

Now in order this, 1. You must be deeply convinced of your Original and Actual
Sins. Of indwelling Sin, and it is out-breakings. Of the Danger you are in of
eternal Death and Misery* Of your Vileness and Pollution in the sight of an
Holy GOD. On these Accounts you must be deeply humbled, weary and heavy-laden.
Mat. 11.28. You must find and feel that you have destroyed, but cannot help
yourselves. 2. You must hate and forsake every false Way. Every Sin; of
Thought, Word and Deed* A Sin as dear as a right Hand, or a right Eye, must be
hated and forsaken. Forsaking Sin and outward Reformation will never prove your
Title to divine Joy and Pleasure, unless you inwardly hate Sin. And we cannot
believe you hate it, unless you forsake it, unless you turn from it in
Affection and in your ordinary, allowed Course, and really grieve and mourn
when you fall into Sin, though it be in secret. Yea, and grieve for your inward,
natural Disposition to Sin. Romans 7.23, 24. Mat. 6.24. No Man can serve two
Masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other; or else he will
hold to the one and despise the other. Ye cannot serve GOD and Mammon. And, by
Consequence, ye cannot indulge the Pleasures of Sin and have the true Joys of
Religion. 3. You must really receive and rest upon CHRIST alone for Salvation,
by a true Faith. You must become really willing to take the LORD JESUS CHRIST,
to be your Prophet, to teach you by his WORD and SPIRIT: your great High Priest
to make Atonement for your Sins, to procue the acceptance of your Person and
Services with GOD, by His Merits and Intercession; your King, to subdue you to
Himself, to reign over, assist and defend you, to judge and reward you. And
when your Heart it melted into a true willingness, thus to take CHRIST on his
own Terms, and to devote yourself wholly to Him, (as is therein implied) the
Soul indeed chooses Him, and closes with Him: And when you have so done,
actually depend upon His Love, Righteousness and Strength daily; and more
evidently and explicitly in every religious Duty, in every Hour of uncommon
Service, and uncommon Temptation and Trial.


Thus do, O young Man, and thou may rejoice in thy Youth; thy Heart may cheer
thee, in the Days of thy Youth. Romans 5.1, 2. Therefore being justified by
Faith, we have Peace with GOD through our LORD JESUS CHRIST: By whom also we have
access by Faith into this Grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in the Hope of
the Glory of GOD. v 3, 4, 5. And not only so, but we glory in Tribulations
also, etc.

Come then, and lay your Heart to the great and leading Article of true
Religion, viz a closing with CHRIST as your beloved and all-sufficient Savior;
and take Him in very deed to be your LORD and SRVIOUR.

Ye careless and unawakened Sinners, let me call upon you, to awake and arise
from the Dead, that CHRIST may give you Light. You see the DAY is approaching
when you must give an Account of all your Conduct. Careless and merry as it is
now, it must, in the Light of that Day, be weighed in the Balance of the
Sanctuary; and it will then be found wanting. Consider, how terrible this would
be to You; and importunately Cry unto GOD, by his Holy Spirit thoroughly to
convince you of your Sin and Danger; and lead you to CHRIST for Relief. O give
not over seeking, until you have obtained both these Blessings. For obtain you
must, or perish Eternally, you that are careless in your Sins, and not others
for you.

Ye that are awakened and deeply Convinced. Be much in Prayer for the saving
Influences of the Holy SPIRIT, to melt your Hearts into a real Willingness to
receive CHRIST on Gospel-terms; and to guide you to an actual Closing with him;
and take Courage and come to Him at his Call Mat 11.28 Stir up yourselves, use
your best endeavors to obey the Gospel-Call, strive with all your Might to
enter the strait Gate of Conversion, and to be happily united unto CHRIST, that
you may find sweet and glorious Rest to your Souls in HIM.

Dear young People, You have had warning of the Danger of going on still in
your Trespasses; and now are invited to JESUS CHRIST, the infinite, the lovely
Savior: I hope, some of you at least, will come at this Call, and resign
yourselves wholly to GOD in CHRIST, and choose and acquiesce in HIM, as your
Portion for Time and Eternity. Be encouraged to come to CHRIST, for Life and
Salvation when you consider his Words, Prove 8 17. I love them that love me, and
they that seek me early shall find me. What can be more!

Little Children, Hear CHRIST inviting you to Him for safety, and assuring you,
that He is ready to bless such as you are, if you will forsake all your Sins,
believe in CHRIST, and always endeavor to be like the Holy Child JESUS. Mat.
19.14. But Jesus said, suffer little Children, and forbid them not to come unto
me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Know assuredly, whoever hears me, that, whatever Age your are of, whatever
Circumstances you are now in, (if ever you accept the Gospel Offer.) you will
have eternal Cause to look back on the Day of your Espousing unto CHRIST, with
unspeakable Gladness of Heart. Cant. 3. (...) and therefore the sooner you are
espoused unto (...) Husband, even unto CHRIST, the better; that you may while
here, taste and see that the LORD is good, and the Pleasures of true Religion
very sweet; and have eternal Joy in sure Reversion,

Pray and strive in the diligent and hearty Use of all appointed Means, that
such a Day may be hastened; yea, Reader, that this may be Day. Say, Come LORD
JESUS, take possession of my Soul by thy Grace, Come quickly! AMEN.

FINIS.

