Mr. Chauncy's SERMON ON A Tongue not bridled.

An UNBRIDLED TONGUE a sure Evidence, that our Religion is HYPOCRITICAL and
VAIN. A SERMON Preached at the BOSTON Thursday-Lecture, September 10th. 1741.
And published at the Desire of the Hearers.

By CHARLES CHAUNCY, A.M. Pastor of the first Church of CHRIST in BOSTON.

Psalm xv. 1. 3. Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle? Who shall dwell in
thy holy hill? He that backbiteth not with his tongue, -- nor takes up a
reproach against his neighbor. Prove. xviii. 21. Death and life are in the
power of the tongue. BOSTON, Printed and sold by Rogers and Foul over against
the South East Corner of the Townhouse. 1741.

Those, who bridle not their Tongue, are vain in their Pretenses to Religion.
James I. 26. If any man among you seem to be religious, and bridleth not his
tongue; -- this man's religion is vain.
THE due government of the tongue is a matter of much greater importance in
religion, than men are commonly apt to imagine. They are too ready to say, with
those, in old time, at least in their practice, Psalm xii. 4.
Our Lips are our own, who is Lord over us? But let men say what they will,
their tongues are under the Divine government; and much of their duty lies, in
keeping them within those restraints, it has pleased GOD to lay upon them: Nay,
so essential a branch of true christianity is this, that if they bridle not
their tongue, though they should seem to be religious, they are not so in
reality; yea, all their pretenses to religion are vain. So the inspired
apostle, with great peremptoriness, declares in the text. If any man among you
seem to be religious, and bridleth not his tongue; -- this man's religion is
vain: In which words, there are two things worthy our awakened attention; the
one supposed, the other expressed.

I. The thing supposed is, that persons may seem to be religious, while yet,
they have, in reality, no true religion. II. The thing expressed is, that
those, who bridle not their tongue, have no other than a mere seeming religion,
which will prove vain.
I. The first thing that offers to consideration from the text is, that persons
may seems to be religious, while yet, they have, in reality, no true religion.
So speaks the apostle, If any man among you seem to be religious. i. e. only
seems to be so; seems to be so, while yet, he is not really so. It Is
obviously supposed, there may be the show and appearance, without the reality
of religion: Nor is this supposeable only; it is too often the case in fact.

It was so in the times of CHRIST, and his apostles. The Scribes and Pharisees,
in that day, seemed to be religious; yea, so sanctified was their external
appearance, that they were held in veneration, as men of superior piety. They
were indeed universally esteemed as the best and holiest of men: insomuch, that
it became a common Saying among the Jews, if but two men went to heaven, a
Pharisee would be one of them. And yet, by the account, our SAVIOR himself
gives of them, Vid. Matthew. 23. cap.
they were evidently void of all real and substantial goodness. The show they
made of being so very religious, was nothing more than mere pretense. They were
base hypocrites; righteous in their outward appearance, but within full of
iniquity; beautiful without, like whited sepulchers, but within full of dead
men's bones, and all uncleanness.

And Judas, the traitor, no doubt, seemed to be, was in show and appearance, as
religious as any of the Twelve; his discourse as full of CHRIST; his zeal as
flaming against sin; his attendance on the sermons of our LORD, as frequent and
serious; his partaking of the holy sacrament, as reverent and devout, and with
as much outward love and affection. He was indeed as well though it of as any of
the apostles: To be sure, they themselves had as good an opinion of him, as of
any of their Number, and not the least suspicion of his being a bad man; while
yet, he was, all this time, a rotten-hearted, vile hypocrite. The sin of
Covetousness reigned in him; and at last, under the influence of the Devil,
increased to such a monstrous height, that he even betrayed and sold his MASTER
and SAVIOR, for the pitiful sum of thirty pieces of silver.

It is, by no means, to be imagined, as if all that seem to be religious,
really were so. There always have been, and there is no reason to think but
there always will be, base hypocrites, among the pretenders to serious
godliness; persons, who will appear in the guise of saints, talk as they do,
and behave as they do, as to what is outward and open to the view of others;
while yet, they are not the men they seem to be, and would make the world
believe them to be.

It may not indeed be thus said of particular persons. It would be to judge
rashly and censoriously, so much as to suspect them of hypocrisy, unless by one
way or other, they have made it evident, they are not in reality, what they are
in pretense. But this notwithstanding, it is a truth, and may, in consistence
with true charity, be pronounced, in the general, as such, that there are
hypocrites among christian professors; mere pretenders to real godliness, among
those who seem to be mighty religious. O how many, who have made a falls show in
the flesh, have been left of GOD to discover their hypocrisy, by living in
those sins, which are inconsistent with an honest heart! Thus it has been all
along from the days of CHRIST, and thus it is at present. -- Multitudes will be
condemned, at the great and last judgment, for their hypocrisy; for their
seeming to be religious, while they had really no religion at all. For that is
the language in which our SAVIOR himself has told us, he will bespeak many
great pretenders to religion, in the day of his appearing to judge the world in
righteousness, I never knew you; depart from me, ye that work iniquity.

If any should now enquire, into the reasons of this conduct, how it comes
about, that men should seem to be religious, when, at the same time, they have
no religion at all; The answer is as follows,

They may make this appearance in religion, to gain the commendation and
applause of others. This lay at the bottom, as the grand incentive to all that
external show of religion, which the Scribes and Pharisees, in our Savior's
time, were famous for; and by which they procured to themselves a glorious
reputation, as men of the most exalted sanctity. Every thing they did in
religion, whether it was keeping fasts, or putting up prayers to almighty GOD,
or giving alms to the people See Matthew. 6. the five first verses.
; Every thing, I say, was with a view to men, to have their praise and
commendation: So our SAVIOR has himself determined upon this matter, in those
express words, Matthew. 23. 5.
But all their works they do to be seen of men. And others, no doubt, are of
the same Spirit with these Scribes and Pharisees. They affect a reputation for
piety; and are very specious in their religious pretenses, hoping they shall
herefrom be applauded, as persons of higher seize than ordinary in
christianity.

They may also make this show of being religious, the better to compass their
worldly designs. This was another motive, to all the sanctimonious pretenses of
the Scribes and Pharisees; according to that of our SAVIOR, Matt. xxiii. 14,
where they are represented, as devouring widows houses; and for a pretense,
making long prayers. And thus, without question, it is with many at present.
They seem to be religious, and their view is, to serve themselves. They have no
inward regard to GOD, or holiness, but appear as if they had; and all, that
they may be the better trusted, the more readily employed, the more bountifully
relieved; or otherwise, that they may not be so soon suspected of any bad
design, and may be under an advantage to carry it on, beyond what they would
have been, if they had not made this show, but appeared outwardly as they were
inwardly. These are the views of too many in their pretenses to religion. With
these views they at first put on a cloak of godliness; and with the same views,
they have kept it on ever since. They make use of religion only to promote
their own interest; and for the same reason, whenever their interest calls for
it, they will lay it aside, as useless and insignificant.

In fine, natural conscience may put persons upon doing such things, as will
make them seem to be religious. Some, perhaps, have consciences that will not
suffer them to be without something, that looks like religion. They are forced,
it may be, for the ease of their minds, to abstain from the grosser acts of
sin, to pray to almighty GOD, to attend upon the external duties of religion,
and to live after such a manner, as that their appearance is like the
appearance of the righteous. A great many persons would not have been at the
pains of only seeming to be religious, if they could have helped it: But their
consciences have put them upon this; not allowing them to be in quiet, without
something of the form of godliness. -- But it is not my design to enlarge on
this first observation: Only before I proceed,

Let me caution you, not to be prejudiced against religion, because there are
those, who seem to be religious, but are not really so. There is danger, I am
sensible, least this should be a stone of stumbling: which, to prevent, our
blessed SAVIOR has been pleased particularly to forewarn us, that thus it
would be. He has not only told us of tares among the wheat; but solemnly
published it to be his intention thus to suffer it to be, till the time of the
harvest: Matt. 13. 30.
: Yea further, he has very expressly foretold the coming on of a state of
things, under the gospel dispensation, in which, there should be much seeming
religion, without any reality; yea, in which, under the mask of a goodly
profession, there should be that wickedness practiced, which would be a
reproach to the christian name. To this purpose are those words, spoken under
the inspiration of the SPIRIT of JESUS CHRIST, 2 Timothy 3. begin.
This know also, that, in the LAST DAYS, perilous times shall come. For men
shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, -- false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good, -- heady, high-minded, lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God. It Is observeable, all this wickedness is
here prophesied of, as what should be acted by persons, making a profession of
religion. For those are the words, which close this prophetic awful
description, HAVING A FORM OF GODLINESS, BUT DENYING THE POWER THEREOF. You
have no reason, then, to be stumbled at the hypocrisy of those, who make
pretenses to religion, when they really have none. This is no more than might
be looked for. -- It Is rather an argument for, than an exception against the
christian religion. --

Let me likewise, caution you against this religion, which is a seeming one
only, and not real. And here consider,

'Twill never recommend you to the favor of GOD. For he looks not to the
outward appearance, but the heart. And your very hearts are as open to his
view, as your faces are to the view of men. He sees into the inmost recesses of
your souls; and if iniquity is there, he will certainly spy it out. You may, by
your pretenses, impose upon men; but you cannot deceive the heart-searching GOD.
A mere seeming religion will not recommend you to him. If your hearts are leavened
with hypocrisy, though you are ever so beautiful outward, you will be odious in
his sight, as a sepulcher full of rottenness. --

Besides, this mere seeming religion will be insufficient to recommend you to
the good opinion of men. You may indeed, for a time, impose upon them; you may,
by a specious outside appearance, lead them into a thought of you, as persons
of distinguished piety: But you will not be able to maintain your character long.
It will be a wonder, if your hypocrisy don't, some way or other, discover
itself. Few have been able, for any considerable time, to wear the habit of
religion, with the character of being religious, while their hearts have been
full of iniquity and hypocrisy. You may have reason to fear, GOD will leave you
to your selves, to the power of your own hearts lusts; and then, you will soon
discover your selves, and let it be known, notwithstanding the pompous
appearance you have made, that you were sinners, and have all along acted a
part, making the world believe otherwise of you, than you really were. And when
this comes to be the case, what will be the good opinion, they will have of
you? If ever they thought well of you, they will now change their sentiments,
and look upon you as base hypocrites, than which a more odious character cannot
be given you. They will think worse of you, than if you had appeared without
disguise; and will not easily, after this, be brought to treat you any
otherwise than as deceivers and impostors. --

But if you are yet unmoved, O turn your thoughts to the bar of the coming
judgment, and reflect, seriously reflect, on what will then be the awful doom
of all those, who only seem to be religious. They shall be sent away to dwell
with devouring fire; yea, they shall dwell in the hottest place of that lake,
which burns with fire and brimstone. -- Woe unto you hypocrites, for ye shall
receive the greatest damnation! You are marked out for it, by name, in the
revelations of GOD! -- O consider of this in time; and go not on mocking GOD,
and deceiving the world, least he cut you asunder, and appoint you your
portion, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. --

I now go on to the other thing we observed from the text; viz.

II. That those, who bridle not their tongue, are persons, who have no other
than a mere seeming religion, which is vain.

Here it will be necessary (1.) To point out to you the persons aimed at by
that phrase, bridleth not his tongue. Which, when I have done, the way will be
clear, (2.) To make it plain to you, that the religion of this kind of persons
is a mere seeming one, which is vain.

1. I am to point out to you the persons aimed at by that phrase, in the text,
Bridleth not his tongue.

And, in general, they are all those, be they who they will, who don't keep
their tongue under due government; who allow themselves an unrestrained liberty
in their language; who speak as they list, not paying that regard, which is
proper, to the law of reason and religion.

And among this sort of persons, to be particular, may be rankt,

All who are profane in their speech; needlessly, and without due reverence,
taking the name of GOD into their mouths: or what is worse, dishonouring this
sacred name, by wicked oaths and horrid imprecations, either on themselves, or
others. Too many there are of this character: But be they as many, and as well
thought of, on other accounts, as you please, they bridle not their tongue.
Their tongue is under no tolerable restraint: To be sure, it is not under
restraint from religion. For this most solemnly prohibits the taking GOD's name
in vain; declaring, that GOD will not hold such guiltless. Nay, the profane
tongue is not under due restraint from so much as common reason. For there is
nothing, reason more clearly condemns, than this sin of cursing and swearing.
It Is indeed, in the judgment of true reason, one of the most barren, senseless
sins, in the whole world; affording to the sinner no manner of advantage,
either in respect of gain, or pleasure: And yet, one of the most daring sins; a
direct insult upon the Divine Majesty, an affronting him to his face.

In the same class may be placed those, who use the words of deceit and
flattery; of whom it may be said, as of them, in old time, There is no
faithfulness in their mouth, they flatter with their tongue Psalm 5. 6.
; they speak vanity every one with his neighbor, with flattering lips and a
double tongue do they speak 12. 2.
. And of this kind of persons, what multitudes are there! That integrity and
simplicity of language, which is the glory of christians, is indeed, almost,
grown out of fashion: And in the stead thereof, what has succeeded but disguise
and dissimulation? How much of the winding of the serpent is there in men's
words, as well as actions? How seldom do their tongues express, the real
sentiments of their hearts? And how much shall we often be deceived, if we
judge of their inward thoughts by their outward expressions? And as for that
respect and service, which men are so lavish of, in their professions to one
another, what is it commonly, but downright dissimulation? There is indeed such
a thing as civility: And it is proper to be in use between man and man; but to
express the highest esteem for all we converse with, the most distinguishing
value, when there is nothing in the heart to answer the just meaning of our
words, -- shall this be called civility? It deserves a much uglier name. --
Such who allow themselves in this, or any other deceitful way of speaking,
bridle not their tongue. They don't keep it under those reasonable restraints,
which GOD has laid upon it.

And the same may be said of those, who allow themselves in falsehood and
lying. It may, perhaps, be though it there is scarce any harm in this, at least in
some of those instances, wherein it is practiced: As, when persons lie to
promote mirth and jollity; or with an intention of good, to do a kindness for a
friend or neighbor: But even in these cases, a lying tongue is an unbridled
one; it is not kept under due government. For truth is too sacred a thing to be
played withal; nor ought we, by any means, to make merry, at the expense of
breaking in upon it. And though we should do good to our neighbor, be ready to
all the offices of kindness toward him; yet we may not sin, that we may do him
service. We are commanded, in all cases, to put away lying, and to speak the
truth every man to his neighbor: Nor is there a case, wherein a lying tongue
is not an abomination to the LORD. Nay, so great is the hatred, which the GOD
of truth bears to a lie, that it is not the most religious end, that will
reconcile him to it. Job 8. 13.
Will thou speak wickedly for GOD, and talk deceitfully for him? The question
carries with it its own answer. We ought not to make use of falsehood and
lying, though it were in the cause of GOD: Nay, should we lie, though in very
zeal for the Divine honor, we should be accounted no better than sinners for
so doing, in the sight of a holy GOD.

And if they who lie jocously, or officiously, or even with a design to serve
the interest of religion, don't keep their tongue within reasonable and
christian bounds, what shall we think of those, who make a practice of lying
upon other ends, which are still worse? Out of malice, to do an injury to their
neighbor; out of coveteousness, to defraud and cheat him; out of pride to take
that glory to themselves, which does not belong to them. Multitudes there are,
who (...) all these ways, make a business of lying: And, without controversy
they bridle not their tongue; no, but they give it a latitude, contrary to all
reason and conscience, as well as the express revelation of GOD.

The like charge may be fastened upon your filthy talkers. These are the
persons intended, when we read, in scripture, of the filthy conversation of the
wicked 2 Pet. 2. 7.
. And the apostle has, in his eye, the same sinners, when he exhorts in that
language, Ephesians. 5. 3, 4.
Fornication and all uncleanness; -- let it not be once named among you as
becomes Saints: neither foolish talking and jesting, which are not convenient.
Contrary to this caution, is that corrupt communication, which is become so
general. There is indeed scarce a subject, the wanton wit of man has been more
fruitful upon, than this of obscene talking and jesting. Innumerable are the
tropes and figures, the turns and idioms, adapted to this purpose: Insomuch,
that some filthy speech, or other, is ever at hand to make merry withal. But
the tongue of those, who thus deal in filthiness, is certainly got beyond the
restraints of modesty; is not at all governed by the gospel law of chastity. --

Another sort of persons aimed at in the phrase we are upon, are those who
speak evil of their neighbors. Not that we may never speak of that evil in
others, of which they have been really guilty. This, in some cases, may be a
duty: As when it is necessary, in order to guard our own character, for no man
is obliged to be more tender of another's good name, than his own; or, when our
neighbor's evil actions are such, as that the speaking of them is for the
public good: But though in these, and cases of like necessity, we may speak of
the evil, others have committed; yet, we may not take an unrestrained liberty
upon this head. No, the scripture is not more particular and express in
cautioning against any sin, than this of evil speaking. Says the apostle, speak
not evil one of another, brethren Jam. 4. 11.
.

And again, Gal. 3. 1. 3.
Put them in mind -- to speak evil of no man. The thing intended by these
cautions is, the restraining our tongues from that evil-speaking, which is so
common in the world, whereby men are wounded in their good name. And the
caution extends to all the ways, wherein men may hurt one another in their
reputation: Whether it be by reproaches to their face, or behind their back; by
open revilings, or secret whispeings; by direct slander, or oblique
insinuation; upon express design, or heedlesly and inadvertently. In what way
soever men blacken the character of their neighbor, they speak evil of him, in
a less or greater degree, in the sense, in which the scripture so solemnly
cautions against it: And in so doing, they bridle not their tongue, but give it
a liberty, which cannot but be condemned; yea, which they themselves condemn,
whenever it happens to be their own case. And indeed, this freedom which men
are so apt to take with one another's good name, is a very unreasonable, as
well as unchristian one. It Is a vile abuse of our neighbor, the doing him an
injury in a most tender part. For as the wise man speaks, Eccles. 7. 1.
a good name is better than precious ointment; yea, there are but few, but
esteem it as they do their life. And yet alas, how common is this sin of
defamation! Perhaps, there is no vice more universally practiced. Few can
wholly clear themselves from the guilt of it. And are there not multitudes, who
deal in calumny? Whose conversation is chiefly made up of slander? They can
scarce say any thing in company, but what shall reflect upon some person or
other. "The great business of their visits, after the necessary ceremonies and
compliments are over, is to sit down and back-bite all the world." As for this
kind of persons, we need not be at any loss about their character. They are
certainly in the number of those, who bridle not their tongue.

And so are the censorious, such as allow themselves in judging and condemning
their neighbors. This sort of persons, I might have mentioned with the former,
but I choose to speak of them by themselves distinctly; and the rather, because
censuring, as the pious Mr. Henry has it, See his notes on the text.
"is a pleasing sin, extremely compliant with nature"; and has ever been A
LEADING SIN WITH HYPOCRITES. The more ambitious they have been to seem well
themselves, the more free they have been in censuring and running down others;
that by lessening the wisdom and piety of those about them, they themselves may
seem the wiser and better. But however this be, there are, perhaps, no persons
more numerous than these censurers of others. They are indeed grown so common,
"that every house almost is become, as it were, a court of justice, where all
men promiscuously are arraigned, judged and condemned. No sacredness of
station, no integrity or innocence of life, no prudence or circumspection of
behavior, can exempt a man, but he shall be tax't under some scandalous name
or odious character": And this is often times done, not for any real fault
found in him, but because he is not just as some others are; don't, perhaps,
think, or speak, or act, in every punctilio as they do* Nay, so rash are many
in their censures, that they will judge those, of whom they have no Knowledge,
evilly surmising some thing amiss of them; or what is as bad, condemning them
upon some vagrant report, or vulgar hearsay; and this too, it may be, without
any inquiry into the matter: Nay, what is still worse, are there not those,
who, when there is nothing visible, upon which to ground a censure, will
presume proudly to take to themselves the sole prerogative of the omniscient
GOD, by looking into the hearts of their neighbors, and judging them carnal,
unregenerate men? yea, PHARISEES, i. e. the most accursed of all hypocrites.

How far good men, real christians, through weakness of judgment, rashness of
temper, undue prejudice, faulty ignorance, or any other such like cause, may
fall into this sin of censoriousness, I presume not to say; but this I must
say, and I should withold from you an important part of the counsel of GOD,
if I did not say it, that whoever the person be, whether preacher or hearer,
man or woman, high or low, that goes on in a course of rashly and uncharitably
judging his neighbor, and allows himself in it, that man has an unbridled
tongue: His tongue is under no tolerable restraint, neither from reason, nor
religion.

What more contrary to the law of reason, than this practice of censorious
judging? Are we not all equals, as being placed in common, under subjection to
GOD only, and those he has made his delegates, and clothed with his authority?
And is it not therefore an unrighteous invasion of our neighbor, to draw him
under our jurisdiction, and act as judges over him, while he is no ways subject
to our authority? We are all sensible enough how injurious this method of
conduct is, when it comes to be our own case When we, in our turn, are unjustly
condemned by others, how clear and full upon our minds is the conviction of
their wicked treatment of us? How ready, at hand have we that question, which
the Israelite once put to Moses, Exodus 2. 17.
Who made thee a prince and a judge? What have thou to judge those, over whom
thou have no authority? And if such a reproof from ourselves to others would be
reasonable, as (...) it certainly would, it is no less reasonable from them to
us, when we take upon us to judge and censure them.

And what is the source of those evil surmisings, those unrighteous jealousies,
those harsh censures, that are so visible in the world? Do they not evidently
proceed from pride, hatred, emulation, envy, inordinate affection? This is
certainly the voice of uncorrupted reason. A well ordered mind; a mind that is
freed from the influence of ungoverned passions, that is meek and humble, and
modest, is slow in thinking ill of any, moderate in estimating the faults of
others, reserved in expressing its sentiments, not easily transported into
extravagance, and will scarce suffer a man to break forth into harsh censure.

And if this censorious judging is condemned by the law of reason, it is much
more so by the law of GOD. For here our tongues are so restrained, that we
cannot judge our brother, but we shall, by the very act of doing so, oppose the
authority of the great and sovereign GOD. That is the statute of heaven, and it
has been solemnly promulged by no less a person than the SON of GOD himself,
the great JUDGE as well as SAVIOR of men; I say, that is the statute of
heaven, JUDGE NOT Mat. 7. 1.
. Conformable whereto, all censurers of others are challenged in those solemn
words, who art thou that judge another man's servant Romans 14. 4.
? And again, Thou art inexcusable, O, man, whoever thou art, that judge Romans
2. 1.
. To which let me add, that most moving expostulation of the inspired apostle
Paul, Why do thou judge thy brother Romans 14. 10.
? The argument follows, For we must all stand before the judgment seat of
CHRIST: Than which, nothing could have been offered, laying a greater restraint
upon our tongues, as to this matter of censorious and uncharitable judging. For
if CHRIST is our common judge, and we must all stand before his judgment seat,
why should any go about to take his work out of his hands? Why should any set
themselves up for judges, when GOD has ordained another, a wiser, and
infinitely more accomplished judge? Yea, a judge, before whom, they who presume
to judge others, must appear themselves, and be judged for that very judgment,
wherewith they judge others. We must all appear before the judgment seat of
CHRIST. It Is as if it had been said, why is there this rash judging, this
needless, impertinent, uncharitable condemning and censuring one another? Is
not CHRIST the judge? Has he not been appointed to this office, and solemnly
introduced into it? Or, is he not qualified for his place? Has he not ability
to judge men himself, and determine their character and state? Consider CHRIST
as judge, ye that judge your neighbors; O look to his judgment seat! Remember
you must one day stand before this awful bar: And let this put a check to the
practice you are in, of unrighteously judging your neighbor.

But besides, the persons I have mentioned, there are many others aimed at, in
that phrase of the text, bridleth not his tongue.

Such are all vain talkers; those who use themselves to a multitude of idle
words, a babbling loquacity, or unprofitableness of speech, tending to no good
purpose, either for soul or body, the affairs of this life or that which is to
come.

Such are those, who make a practice of jeering and deriding others, whether
for the infirmities of their bodies or minds; but especially those, who scorn
the reproofs of the righteous, and cast them back into their faces with profane
contempt and sneer.

Such in fine, are those, who droll upon the sacred scripture, making an
unsanctified use of it is idioms and phrases; clothing their ungodly jests in
the language of the HOLY GHOST, to promote mirth and laughter. -- But enough
has been said, descriptive of the persons intended by those, who bridle not
their tongue.

2. I now come, in the second place to make it plain to you, that this kind of
persons have no other than a mere seeming religion, which is vain. The apostle
is very peremptory, to this purpose, in the text: He could scarce have spoken
in language more express. If any man among you seem to be religious, and
bridleth not his tongue; -- this man's religion is vain. Here it may be
distinctly said,

1. The persons we are speaking of, have no other than a mere seeming religion.
If they pretend to be religious, if they make an appearance of being so, it is
all pretense, nothing more than mere show: They are not what they would seem to
be. And this is a clear case. For was a man's religion real, he would be
religious universally, in speech as well as behavior; he would govern his
words as well as actions.

Very observable is that remark of our SAVIOR, A good man out of the good
treasure of his heart, brings forth that which is good: And an evil man, out
of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth that which is evil: for out
of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks Luke 6. 45.
. The sense is, our mouths will speak according to what reigns in our hearts:
If therefore what we speak is unsavory, beyond the restraints of religion, it is
a sure evidence, that religion bears no sway in us. 'Twould be impossible, were
our hearts duly impressed with a sense of the things of GOD and another world,
we should give a boundless liberty to our tongues. Can it be said of those, who
allow themselves in a profane use of the name of GOD, that they are possessed of
a becoming awe and reverence of the Divine Majesty? By no means: This is the
language not of the pious, but of those, who have upon their minds, no serious
conviction of their bonds to almighty GOD. Can it be said of those, whose
communication is corrupt, that they are inwardly pure and chaste? By no means:
They are the wanton and the lustful, who allow themselves in this way of
speaking. Can it be said of those, who speak evil of others, take all occasions
to censure and judge them, that they love their neighbor as themselves? By no
means: True christian charity does not detract, is never harsh and bitter; no,
it neither thinks nor speaks evil, but believes all things, hops all
things, puts the best construction upon all things. It Is an indisputed
point; -- as our hearts are, so will our words be. And if our words are uttered
at random, without restraint from reason or religion, we may absolutely depend
on it, we are void of the reality of religion, whatever pretenses we may make
to it.

Besides all which, we might do well to remember those words of our SAVIOR,
Matthew, 12. 36. And the rather, because of the great solemnity with which they
are introduced. I say unto you; I, who am the SON of GOD; I, who am the true
and faithful witness; I, to whom the affairs of the great and last judgment are
committed; I say unto you, that every idle word, that men shall speak, they
shall give account thereof in the day of judgment. It follows immediately, by
thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned.
You see, that our words are of more consideration, than we are commonly aware
of. They are taken notice of by our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and marked down as with
a pen of iron, and the point of a diamond, in order to our accounting for them
at the judgment: And they will have no small influence upon our salvation or
damnation. And can we, after this, imagine, that we can be religious, while we
take no care to keep our tongues under government? It Is not a thing possible:
And if we say, we are religious, and bridle not our tongue, we deceive our
selves, impose on our own souls: Nor if we should seem to be religious, are we
so in reality; we have nothing of the truth of religion, but are certainly
hypocritical in the appearance we make, how specious and splendid soever the
appearance may be.

2. The religion of those, who bridle not their tongue, is not only a mere
seeming one, but altogether vain. If any man among you bridleth not his tongue,
-- this man's religion is vain. Not, that religion is a vain thing, considered
in itself: No, it is the greatest reality, and will bring the greatest advantage
to all, who are truly possessed of it: Nor can there be a greater wrong done
religion, than to represent it a vain thing to serve the LORD; or to say, there
is no profit in serving the Almighty. But this notwithstanding, the religion of
those, whose tongues are unbridled, is a vain thing, i.e. will stand them in no
stead, will bring them no profit, will be of no manner of advantage to them.
And the reason is evident, because their religion is nothing; it is not the
reality, but carcass of religion. And this being the case, if they expect any
thing from their religion, they will meet with disappointment: Yea, instead of
advantage, they shall reap misery and torment. For their words will condemn
them in the judgment; and expose them to that awful doom, depart from me, ye
speakers of iniquity.

The APPLICATION remains. And,

1. Let it affect us with grief, that there are so many who bridle not their
tongue. The number of this kind of persons it may be feared, is very great. Of
multitudes it may be said, they give their tongues an unconscionable liberty! O
the swarms of profane swearers! of filthy talkers! of liars! of evil speakers!
of censorious judgers! of idle bablers! And what makes the matter worse, are
there not to be found these sinners, among the professors of religion? Among
those, who make a most splended appearance, of being righteous? It should
greatly affect our hearts; and the rather, because these persons deceive
themselves, or at least others, with that which is worse than nothing and
vanity.

2. Let us look each one to his tongue, and examine, whether it be an unbridled
one. And this, whatever we may think of it, is a matter of no small importance.
We may imagine, religion has little or nothing to do with our tongues; but we
are mightily mistaken. It has so much to do with them, that if we don't bridle
them, there is not a more certain mark of our being destitute of the reality of
religion; that it is a mere seeming one; which will, in the end, prove vain,
let us pretend what we will. Let us then examine how it is with our tongues. Do
we keep them under government, or allow them to move at random? Do we restrain
them within christian bounds, or give them a universal latitude? Do we make
conscience of what we speak, or esteem it a matter of indifference? Do we set a
watch at the door of our lips, or speak without guard or caution? It Is worth
our enquiry, how we manage our tongues: Whether we keep them, as it were, with
bit and bridle, or suffer them to go as they please. We may know much of our
state GODWARD, by the conduct of our tongues, If we so govern them as not to
offend in any great or gross instances, we have made considerable seize
in religion: Whereas if we take no care to keep them within due limits, we may
lay it down for an indisputed truth, that we have no true religion, be our
professions as solemn as they will.

3. Let us all be exhorted to a care to bridle our tongues. And we have the
more need to make use of caution in this matter, because the tongue is so
unruly a member. The apostle James, treating upon this subject, represents it
as a very difficult thing to keep the tongue under a proper regimen. Says he,
in the third chapter of his epistle, 7th and 8th Verses, Every kind of beasts,
and of birds, and of serpents, and things in the sea, is tamed, and has been
tamed of mankind; but the tongue can no man tame: It is an unruly evil, full of
deadly poison. When the apostle speaks of the tongue, as what no man can tame,
he is to be understood, not according to the rigor of the letter, but in a
qualified sense; as exhibiting only the difficulty of the thing: For that it is
possible, at least so far as is necessary to our being good christians, this
same apostle plainly enough intimates, when he compares the government of the
tongue, to the putting bits in the horses mouths, that they may obey us; as
also, when he calls upon us to behold the ships, which, though they be so great,
and are driven of fierce winds, are yet turned about with a small helm,
whithersoever the governor lists.

The due government of the tongue is then possible, though a matter attended with
difficulty: But let us not discourage our selves from any difficulties we may
suppose in this regimen. If there are difficulties, they may be overcome; and
what is more, they must be overcome. And in a matter of necessity, there is no
room for dispute. Let us then, resolve upon bridling our tongues. And the
greater difficulty there may be in this, the greater pains let us take; always
remembering our own weakness, and suitably depending on GOD, for these aids of
his SPIRIT, which are needful for us. And here let me, for your help in the
government of your tongues, leave with you the following words of advice.

1. Look to your hearts, and see to it, that they be good. This I mention
first, because it is of the first importance. For if our hearts are bad, 'twill
be to little purpose to endeavor, to make our tongues good. We may, for a
while, put on the hypocrite, and speak as becomes saints; but 'twill be a
forced business, and not of any long continuance. It cannot, in nature, be
expected, but that our words should partake of the temper and bent of our
minds. If they are worldly, our discourse will be about the world; if they are
proud, we shall speak in high swelling words of vanity; if they are carnal, our
talk will be of the flesh. It Is natural it should be thus, and cannot be
otherwise. If therefore we would so manage the matter, as that our
communication may be to the use of edifying, we must begin with our hearts, and
take care that they be suitably impressed with a serious sense of things
spiritual and eternal. If we would speak of GOD with a becoming solemnity, we
must get possessed of an inward fear and dread of his infinite Majesty. If we
would speak suitably of the unseen things of the other world, we must look to
it, that we feel within ourselves the awful weight and importance of these
matters. In a word, a sanctified heart is the best preparative for a well
governed tongue. Get your hearts seasoned with grace, and you will then be
under one of the best advantages in order to restrain your tongues.

2. You would do well to be cautious and deliberate in what you say. You must
think before you speak, not suffering your tongues to run at random. Be not
rash with thy mouth, is proper advice at all times, as well as when you take
upon you to speak unto GOD. Hence that saying of the wise man, see thou a man
hasty in his words, there is more hope of a fool than of him Prove. 29. 20.
. It Is not to be expected there should be a just decorum in your language, if
you are rash to speak. -- The tongue is not to be governed, but where men take
time, and utter themselves, not heedlesly and at all adventures, but with
thought and deliberation.

3. It Is necessary you should govern your passions. These easily move the
tongue: And if your passions a'nt kept under due restraint, neither will your
tongues. Be upon your guard therefore, that your passions don't break loose;
and the rather, because most of the irregularities of the tongue take rise from
the passions. Where there is hatred, there will be clamor and evil speaking;
where there is wrath and anger, there will be hasty passionate language. -- If
you neglect your passions, 'twill be a vain thing to attempt to bridle your
tongues; whereas a due restraint upon the former will have a mighty tendency to
restrain the latter.

4. You must watch over your tongues. The resolution of holy David must be
yours Psalm 39. 1.
, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue. And you must ever
be in the use of this heedfulness, guarding the door of your lips: And your
watch should be so strict, that nothing, if possible, may slip from your
tongues that is amiss: Especially should you watch against those indecencies of
speech, you are most incident to. Some sins of the tongue are, as it were, our
own; they most easily beset us, we are most apt to fall into them. You should
study where your danger lies most, and there place the strictest guard. Are you
prone to talk idly? Watch over your words that they be to some valuable
purpose. Are you apt to make too free with truth? Take heed that you speak only
the words of soberness. And so whatever the fault be, you are most apt to run
into, in your language, here set up your resolution, and be particularly exact
in your watch.

5. It might be to good purpose, to be frequent in calling your selves to
account for your words. These, you should make the subject of your serious and
religious examination: Nor should it be an uncommon thing with you to bring
your tongues to the rule of GOD's word, and inquire how far they have been
governed by it. And the oftener you examine into your words, the better. If you
made it your daily practice to call over your conversation, and to judge and
condemn it, wherein it has been beyond the bounds of what is fit and right, it
might have a powerful tendency to keep your tongues under all christian
restraints.

6. You must not forget to be much in prayer to God. Daily commit the custody
of your tongues to him: And this you will find to be one of the best
expedients, in order to your keeping them under those restraints, which are
necessary. Be sensible of your own impotency, that you are not sufficient, as
of yourselves, to manage your tongues; but that your sufficiency is of GOD. And
being thoroughly convinced of this, O lift up your cry to the GOD who dwells on
high, to send you help from his holy habitation. O bow your knee to the God and
FATHER of our Lord Jesus Christ, beseeching him for his mercies sake, to
preserve you from those sins of speech which will spoil your religion, making
it a mere seeming one, which is vain.

Not that you may lay aside all care, as though you had nothing to do your
selves: No, but in the way of doing every thing that lies within your sphere,
you must trust in GOD, and make your prayer to him, that he would keep your
tongue from evil. The holy Psalmist has set you a noble example of prayer in
this kind. Let his prayer be yours, Psalm 141. 3.
Set a watch, O LORD, before my mouth: keep the door of my lips.

And now, as the conclusion of all, let us not satisfy our selves with so
governing our tongues, as not to suffer them to run into excess; but let us use
them to the purpose of christian conversation. Let our speech be with grace,
seasoned with salt. -- Let us converse together about the affairs of religion
and another world. We shall do so, if we are real christians: we shall be known
to be the disciples of JESUS, by our often speaking of the things of CHRIST,
and the kingdom of CHRIST. Only, let us remember, the best christians are the
most modest, the least ostentatious; and will rather refrain from religious
talk, than seem vainglorious. -- Let us therefore, while we mix religion with
our discourse, take care to do it with a becoming prudence and humility: And
under the habitual influence of this caution, the more we converse together
about the concerns of our souls and everlasting salvation, the better: Nor can
we too often bring religion into our common and ordinary conversation: Always
provided, our lives are holy in proportion to the holiness of our talk, for
nothing is more odious than religious discourse from a bad man.

May the words of our mouth, as well as the meditation of our heart, be
acceptable in thy sight, O LORD, our strength and our Redeemer. Amen.

FINIS.

