TAKE HEED HOW YE HEAR.

A SERMON Preached in the Parish Church of St. Philip Charlestown, in SOUTH
CAROLINA on Sunday the 13th of July, 1740.

WITH A PREFACE, containing some Remarks on Mr. Whitefield's Journals.

By Alexander Garden M.A. Rector of the said Parish.

SOUTH CAROLINA, Charlestown Printed by Peter Timothy, 174^

ERRATA.
OF the PREFACE. Page 4, Line 20. after the Words, so much as a single Word,
insert (that I am conscious of,) P. 8 L. 11, for Sentence read Sentence. P. 25,
dele L. 1 Of the SERMON. P. 7, L. 8. for broboque, read proboque. P. 13, L. 26,
for one, read once. P. 22, L. 18, for into, read unto. P. 32, L. 25. After the
Words, God would give him a Sign, insert ( viz. on their going to the next
Plantation, the first living Creature they should see there, should be such a
one, a Horse, suppose, or a Hog.) P. 37, L. 7. for acknowledged, read
acknowleg'd. And L. 21 of the same P. for Wickedcess, read Wickedness. P. 38,
L. 25. Before the Word, intervene, insert the Word must.

PREFACE.
THE following Discourse appears from the Press in its own Defense, against the
Character or Account given of it by Mr. Whitefield, (in his last Continuation
of his Iournal, commencing June 25th, 1740, p. 12.) in these Words, viz.

In the Morning ( Sunday July 13th) I went to Church, and heard the Commissary
preach. But had some INFERNAL SPIRIT been sent to draw my Picture, I think it
scarcely possible he could paint me in more horrid Colors. I think if ever,
then was the Time that all Manner of Evil was spoke against me falsely for
Christ's Sake. The Commissary seemed to ransack Church History for Instances of
Enthusiasm and abused Grace; HE DREW A PARALLEL between me, and all the
Oliverians, Ranters, Quakers, French Prophets, 'till he came down to a Family
of the Dutarts, who lived (not many Years ago) in South Carolina, and were
guilty of the most notorious Incests and Murders.

In these Words, I say, (and it is a Wonder not prefaced with, the Meekness and
Gentleness of CHRIST) Mr. Whitefield has censured the following Discourse; but
with what Truth or Justice I shall leave the Reader to judge, after assuring
him, that as it now appears from the Press, it is a full and faithful Copy of
what was delivered from the Pulpit. Some few Sentences indeed are here and
there interspersed by Way of Enlargement, under the second and third Heads, but
nothing omitted; but under the first Head, treated of in the last Place, and on
which the Censure falls, there is neither Addition, Omission, or Alteration of
so much as a single Word throughout the Whole; excepting only the Names of the
Dutartre's Family added, and the Date of their Trial.

The Reader will easily observe, that the plain and professed Scope of the
censured Part of the Discourse was, to call my Hearers to their Guard, against
that Bane of true Religion, Enthusiasm; by pointing out, and cautioning them
against the first Causes, Springs, and beginnings of it, and also by showing in
various Instances, the horrible Excesses, both in Theory and Practice, to which
such Beginnings may grow. And thus agreeably had Mr. Whitefi^ld represented it;
nay, and moreover added, that probably the Discourse was occasioned by, and
levelled against himself, as an upstart Enthusiast, just entered on the Race,
scattering about some wild and fanatic Notions, and run into some wicked and
immoral Practices, Disturbance of the Church's Peace, Disobedience to
Superiors, Slander and Abuse, thus levelled, I say, against himself, and
cautioning my Hearers against such Beginnings, as of no small Danger, to what
Excess of Error and Immorality they might grow: Such Representation I should
have taken no Exception to. But instead of this, to represent it as he has
done; as containing not only as horrid a Picture of him as the Devil himself
could have painted, but also a Parallel actually drawn 'twixt him and all the
Oliverians, etc. down to the Dutarts, who were guilty of the most notorious
Incest and Murders; I much rather choose to leave to the Censure of others, than
be tempted to return him his own Language. But after all, I must take leave to
let Mr. Whitefield know, that if the Discourse affords any Picture, or any
Features or Lines of any Picture, that he is conscious will fit him; or if it
affords any Parallel which he is conscious then subsisted, or which now
subsists, or may hereafter subsist 'twixt him and any of the Enthusiasts
therein mentioned, with Respect either to Principles or Practices, he is very
welcome to either or both of them, for I mean not to make him any the least
Apology.

By this time the World is pretty well acquainted with this Gentleman's Manner
of Iournalizing both Persons and Things, so as to answer the one Point in View.
If his Measure of Slander and Abuse is not yet full, it must soon be so: And
therefore a few Remarks will suffice (and which I shall take this Opportunity
to offer) on the several other Passages of his Iournals, in which I have the
Honor to be mentioned.

From Page 14th to the 22d of the aforesaid Continuation etc. he gives an
Account of what he calls the Commissary's Dealings with him, that is, the
Proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Court against him: But which is so stufft
with his own Impertinence he was indulged in, beneath remarking on; and so full
of Errors and Mistakes (notwithstanding he had a Copy of all Proceedings in his
Hands) as would take more space than can be well afforded to correct; and
therefore I shall content myself only to observe by way of Specimen.

1. Mr. Whitefield's Integrity of Behavior in this Affair. He assures me to my
Face ( Iournal continued from January 11, 1739, P. 16) that he would regard my
Suspension as much as a Pope's Bull. Well; he is se^^ed with a Cit^^^^, and
accordingly app^^^s and falls a Quibbling at the Jurisdiction of the Court; and
after having set down the several crude Things he said on that Head, the Words
of his Iournal are these -- I therefore upon the whole humbly desired as a
Favor from the Court, that I might have 'till Tomorrow 9 o'Clock, to inform
myself of the Extent of their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in this Province,
ASSURING THEM THAT UPON FINDING THEIR AUTHORITY VALID, I WOULD IMMEDIATELY
ANSWER TO ANY INTERROGATORIES, AND WOULD BE READY TO RECEIVE ANY SETENCE THEY
COULD WITH JUSTICE PASS UPON ME. -- Now on this Promise or Assurance his
Request was granted; but what was the Event? Did not Mr. Whitefield consult
some Gentlemen of the Law concerning the Validity of the Court's Jurisdiction?
And did not they satisfy him that it was valid? And did he not accordingly own
himself so satisfied in open Court? Though afterward, at the Check of his
Advocate, he shuffled and retracted it! And yet after all this, did he perform
his Promise which he made the Court? No, he did not; but instead of receiving
and answering to the Articles objected, or abiding any Sentence upon them, he
brings a Recusation of the Judge, founded chiefly on the following Discourse
which I had preached the Sunday next before, and which therefore it was
necessary to represent in such a Light as he has done. Alas; poor Youth, what
was he afraid of? A Pope's Bull! This Recusatio Iudicis (says he Page 19.) I
exhibited by the Advice of my Friends, not to quibble with, or evade the Force
or Rigor of any Law whatsoever, that I might justly fall under. A genuine
Piece of Methodism! If his Friends advised him to bring his Racusation of the
Judge, not to avoid the Force or Rigor of any Law, he mig^^ justly fall under;
then it must be, to avoid the Force or Rigor of some Law, which he might not
justly fall under; that is, an unjust Sentence: But if, by regarding my
Suspension as much as a Pope's Bull, he meant honestly (for the Words admit of
Ambiguity) that he would have no Regard to it at all; why then did he hearken
to any Advice of either Friends or Foes about it? And if he thereby really
meant me a Complement, of paying the greatest Regard to my Suspension; even in
such Case, had he stood the Trial, and illegal and an unjust Sentence had been
given against him, he had the same Remedy as in the Case of Repelling his
Recusation, viz. an Appeal; and consequently no Manner of Reason for his Breach
of Promise.

P. 21. His Words are these. He (the Commissary) desired me to deposite Ten
Pounds Sterling, and to swear, that I would lodge my Appeal within a
Twelvemonth. Let Mr. Whitefield see to it: The Oath he took was. That within
One Year next ensuing that Day, he would bona fide prosecute the Appeal then by
him interposed in that Cause, and cause the Prosecution the^eof to be
authentically certified into this Court.

P. 22. He mentions a private Conversation he had with me, after the Affair of
his Appeal was finished; and the following Particulars of it. That I charged
him with Blasphemy, for saying if it was in his Power, etc. That he charged me
with accusing the Methodists in general, etc. And that he asked why I ridiculed
him for making Grimaces in the Pulpit, etc. By all which and the Answers, the
Reader will be greatly instructed. As to my charging him with Blasphemy, his
Account is partial and unfair. I objected indeed, that his Behavior, ever
since he had been cited to appear before me, had been very base and insidious,
in haranguing the Populace every Day, to excite their Passions against me as a
Persecutor, (when he must know in his Conscience I was but doing my bounden
Duty) and at the same Time professing such Flights of Love for me, that were it
in his Power, he would place me at the Right Hand of GOD; Which Phrase, I
observed, being every where in holy Scripture appropriated to Christ, GOD-MAN,
when applied to any other in terminis and without Restriction, sounded but too
much as if the Meaning were to displace CHRIST, which would be Blasphemy.

But why did not Mr. Whitefield instead of these Dregs of the Conversation,
give the main Substance of it; which turned on this Question, which I very
seriously asked him, viz. Whether he was in Jest or Earnest in the Scene he was
carrying on in the World? In Answer, he affirmed that he was in Earnest, and
that it was the Work of God he was carrying on; and for the Truth of which, he
appealed (1st) to his inward Feelings; and (2dly) to the ou^ward visible
Effects of his Preaching, viz the Crowds that attended it, and the Numbers
proselyted to his Doctrine, and wondered how I could doubt of these being God's
Seals to his Ministry, or sure and certain Evidence of his Approbation of it,
by the Aids, Influences, and Operations of his holy Spirit attending it. On
which Answer I easily observed; (1st) That as to his inward Feelings, whatever
they were, or what Evidence soever they might be to him, they could be none to
me, nor to any other Person breathing but himself only. (2dly) As to the
outward visible Effects of his P^eaching, viz. the Crowds attending it, and the
Numbers proselyted to his Doctrines I o^served, that the same Effects, and in
still greater D^grees, attended the Ministry of Mahomet, Muncer, Fox, Nailor,
and Muggleton, and therefore that such Effects can be no better Evidence of the
Divine Approbation of his Ministry, than they were of theirs, who carried on,
not the Work of God, but of the Devil plainly. And (3dly) that it must be
either mere Artifice or strong Delusion, in him, to ascribe those Effect, to
the Power or Influences of the holy Spirit of God, w^^ch are very plainly owing
to a natural Cause, viz. his Talent of Delivery, or Voice and Vehemence in
Speaking, adapted to take the Ear and excite the Passions of his Hearers. I bid
him only to put the same Words, which from his Mouth produced the boast^d
Effects, into the Mouth of an ordinary Speaker, and see whether the same
Effects would be the Consequence. To the 1st and 2d Particulars he made no
Reply, To the latter Part of the 3d, he answered in these precise Words, that
the Words of God would not have the same Effect from the Mouth of a fal^e
Prophet, as of a true. On which I desired him to say, what he meant by a true
Prophet in Contradistinction to a false one? He said, he meant a Person not
only regularly called to the Ministry of the Gospel, by the outward Call or
Order of the Church, but who was truly regenerate by the holy Spirit, in his
Sense of Regeneration, and had the same Feelings of the Spirit's inward Call to
that Office, and Influences and Operations in it, as he himself had; and that
without these no one's Ministry would be attended with such Eff^cts as his was,
even supposing he preached the same true Doctrines of the Gospel. -- In Answer
to this, I bid him to cease his Arrogance, and consult the 26th Article of the
Church of England: Moreover adding, that if the boasted Effects of his
Preaching depended on his Regeneration and Feelings of the Spirit, how came it
to pass, that the same Effects did not follow the Preachings of the Two
Wesleys, of Seagrave, Ingham, Kinchin, etc. whom he allowed to be equally
regenerate Men, and equally to have the same Feelings of the Spirit, as he
himself claimed or pretended to?

This is the main Substance of what passed in that Conversation, which
continued not exceeding Half an Hour; and in the Close of which, it is very
true, he told me (in Answer to every Thing, and especially the last mentioned)
that he believed me to be an unregenerate Man, an Enemy to God, and of a like
Spirit with the Persecutor Saul. And thus, by calling me hard Names to my Face
(whom in a former Iournal he h^d styled a good Soldier of Jesus Christ) the
Gentleman delivered his Soul in this Conversation with the Commissary.

P. 8. Sunday July 6. Went to Church Morning and Evening, and heard the
Commissary preach as virulent and unorthodox, inconsistent a Discourse, as ever
I heard in my Life, etc. That Discourse is contained Word for Word in the Third
of the Six Letters to him, which are now before the World.

P. 23. Sunday July 20th. Preached this Morning as usual, and went afterward
to Church to hear the Commissary. His Text was, Take heed how ye hear. I have
been often told by Mr. Whitefield's Hearers, that however he shifted his Texts,
yet generally his Discourses were still much the same, and that many of them
would equally have suited any other Texts in the Bible as those from which they
were preached. But whatever his own Practice may be, as to regarding or not
regarding his Texts, yet sure when he pretends to journalize an Account of any
other Preacher's Discourse, he ought not to blunder in asserting the Text, as
he has here done. For the Text here mentioned was not my Text of the 20th July,
but of the 13th, even of the Discourse in which he alleges I drew so lovely a
Picture of him, and which I now publish; and my Discourse on the 20th, which he
here speaks of, was on these Words of St Paul, COL. 4th, 17th. And say to
Archippus, take heed to the Ministry which thou have received of the Lord, that
thou fulfill it. This shows how careful our Iournalist is, and what Credit is to
be given to his Iournals.

P. 25th. I endeavored to stop their (the People) Resentment against the
Commissary as much as possible, and recommended Peace and Moderation to them in
most of my Discourses. Just as Mark Anthony behaved toward the Conspirators,
in the Case of Julius Caesar

The Account he has given (in his next preceding Continuation of his Iournal,
P. 15 and 16.) of the first Conference 'twixt us after he commenced. Apostle,
and at which I turned him and his Disciples out of my House, is partly
defective, partly false, warped and mangled throughout. He has omitted to say,
that the Bells were chiming for Morning Prayer when he came to my House, and
that I therefore desired to postpone our Conference 'till the Afternoon: --
That he gave no Ear to this, but imme^iately said, he supposed I had heard of
his Charges against the Clergy; and that it was very true he charged them with
three Things, which he distinctly mentioned Word for Word as I now set them
down. 1st, That they preach false Doctrines, contrary to the Gospel, and the
Articles of the Church. 2dly, that they are guilty of Hypocrisy, in subscribing
to the Articles of the Church, while yet they do not believe them. And 3dly,
that they are idle and negligent of their Duty. He has omitted what passed on
the Subject of Justification by Faith aloue; but which is contained more at
large in my printed Letters. He has omitted the Reason he gave for not using
the Liturgy of the Church, when he officiated in F^^las or Meeting Houses, viz
That the Can^n meant only public Prayers in Churches. He has mentioned Balls
and Assemblies in Charlestown as of dangerous Consequence to Religion, without
giving any Account or Description of them; which therefore I must take leave to
supply. The Balls in Charlestown were the usual Breakings up of the
Dancing-School twice a Year, when Parents and Relations generally went to see
the Children's Improvement. The Government also on the Anniversary, either of
his Majesty's Accession or Birthday, usually made an Entertainment of a Dinner
for the Gentlemen, and of a Supper and Ball for the Lad^es in the Evening.
Accidentally also transient Gentlemen have given such Entertainments, on their
leaving the Place; but very rarely. So that the whole Number of Balls in
Charlestown, never exceeded 5 or 6 in a Year, and but seldom 3 or 4, and some
Years there have been none at all. -- And as to the Assemblies, there never was
any such Thing in the Place, 'till about 2 or 3 Years ago some 10 or 12
Gentlemen and their Ladies, of the first Figure and Character in the Place,
agreed to meet during the Winter Season only, and one Evening in a Week, to
pass 2 or 3 Hours in Conversation, or any other innocent Diversion or
Amusement. Nor did ever this fiery Creature, nor any of his begetting here,
dare to charge that Assembly with any the least Excess either of Drinking or
Gaming, or with the least Suspicion of any sort of Vice or Immorality
whatsoever. So that it is very true, it never entered my Thoughts to preach
against it, no more than against Friends, Neighbors, or Acquaintance Meeting
together to pass a Winter's Evening in their own private Houses. And I very
freely declare, that had there appeared to me but half the Danger to Religion,
or the Peace and Happiness of Society, from such Balls and Assemblies, which
has but too plainly appeared from his Mobb-Preachings, and the Assemblies of
his Institution, of Men and Women, Boys and Girls, building up one another in
Conceit of their being righteous, and not only despising but damning all others
round about them, I should have preached against them with all my Might. -- He
has fa^^^fi^d in asserting me in a Rage and again in a very great Rage, in this
Conference; but without which his whole Narrative of it had lost its Spirit and
main Aim. It Is very true I rebuked him sharply on his three Articles of
Accutation against the Body of the Clergy, and his saucy Letter to the Bishop
of Gl^ucester: It Is also true, and known to all that know me, that when I talk
on any serious and important Matter, I naturally do it with some Emotion and
Earnestness: But as I must know what passes in my own Breast, I can solemnly
assure the World, that I was in no Rage on this Occasion, but really on my
guard against it, as knowing the Man and his Communication; and that as to my
bidding him to depart my House, it is no more than I would have done, in the
calmest Mood of Life, either before or since, to any one breathing, not my
Superior, who had behaved in so extravagant and assuming a Manner.

And thus I have finished my Remarks, at present, on the Passages of his
Iournals relating to me; but farther to show the Trim of the Man, I shall take
Leave to add, how much the same sort of defective, mangled and falsified
Account he has published, of his Conference with the Commissa^y and some others
of the Clergy at Boston; though he owned they treated him with more Civility.

He has omitted to say, how he fumbled in that Conference, on the Doctrine of
Justification. He has omitted the Reply made to his demanding the Signs of the
baptized Infant's Regeneration, and desiring the Commissary to watch if the
Child brought forth the Fruits of the Spirit; viz. that Baptism itself was the
Sign; that as to other Signs there appeared as many of its Regeneration as of
its Reason; and that as the Infant growing up might abuse, and depart from the
due Use and Improvement of its Reason, so it might of its Regeneration, which
only secured its Salvation during its infant State, and before it came to undo
itself by actual Sins and Transgressions. -- But this instantaneous
Regeneration of Infants in Baptism (I take Leave to add) is not the
Regeneration which he preaches; which is a Regeneration from actual Habits of
Sin in adult Persons afterward and which ought rather to be called
Reformation, Repentance, or Conversion. And so St. Augustine distinguishes. --
Renovatio (says he) quae fit ad Imaginem Dei, non momento uno fit, sicut
momento uno fit i^la in Baptismo Renovatio, Remissione omnium Peccatorum. AUG
de T^in. L. 14. C. 17. He has omitted to say, that he was ignorant of the
Rubric asserting the undoubted Salvation of baptized Infants, and obliged the
Clergy to rea^, before he would allow it; and that afterward calling for a
Text of Scripture to prove it, he was answered, what need to prove it to him,
who had suscribed it? Or to that Effect. But above all, his Account of what
passed on the 16th Article of the Church, is most surprising. He asserted (he
says) that a true Child of God, though he might fall foully, yet could never fall
finally. Dr. Cutler objected the 16th Article, which says, -- after we have
received the Holy Ghost, we may depart from Grace given, and fall into Sin. To
which he answered, but observed what ^ollows, and by the Grace of God we MAT
arise again. -- Now if he had thus fairly cited the Article, how in the World
could it have served his Purpose, or answered to support his Assertion, that a
true Child of God could never fall finally? For, what only MAY be, MAY not be;
and as the Article only says, we MAY arise again, it implies, that we MAY not
arise again. But he knows what Trick he would have put upon the Doctor. For in
citing this Part of the Article, he omitted the Word [MAY] and clapped the Word
[SHALL.] into the Room of it; -- we SHALL arise again. Which obliged that truly
learned and worthy Divine to correct him, by laying a strong Emphasis on the
Word [MAY] we MAY arise again.

And here that this 16th Article comes in my Way, puts me in Mird, how widely
the old-Calvinists differed from the modern Ones, in their Judgment about our
Articles. The old-Calvinists were far from judging our Articles to be
Calvinistical, or that they were drawn up according to that Scheme. They
plainly saw the Doctrines of universal Redemption, and falling from Grace,
contained in them, (Art. 31, and 16) which blow up that Scheme, and break its
fine Chain of Doctrines all to Pieces: And therefore they complained and called
for a Reformation of the Articles, both before, and at the Hampton Court
Conference, (See Coll. Eccles. Hist.) and again after the Restoration. (See
Bishop Pearson's no Necessity of reforming the Doctrines of the Church of
England.) And Dr Waterland, I think, fairly proves ( Supplement to Arian
Subscrip.) that the Articles were not formed by Calvin's Scheme, but according
to Scripture and Antiquity. -- How differently our modern Calvinists judge of
them, I need not say. -- But to return,

He has owned that he said, he saw regenerate Souls among the Baptists, etc.
But has supressed, his asserting his peculiar Gift of Discernment. And I take
Leave to instance in his Two Fellow Laborers, Rowland and Cross in the Ierseys.

If the Bounds of this Preface would permit, I might remark a Number of the low
Artifices of this Gentleman, both in collecting Materials for his Iournals, and
(...) journalizing them -- If an old-Wo^an begins to make a W^y face at any of
(...); Oh -- he has his Eye up^^^ her directly; -- waxes strong in the (...)
upon it -- works himself into a Flus^^^ and cri^s out, -- Conversion-Work (...)
you! See, see, how the Lord has to^^hed her Heart, and w^ought Contri^^^ in
this poor Sinner! And so runs on (...) Two or Three Handkerchie^s begin to
(...) toward the Eyes, the Example cat^^s to and again in the Congregation,
and then there is great Power and Success! And down it goes in the Iournal
accordingly. Again, if he perceives his Audience to keep their Countenanc^s,
and that none of them will commence this Scene of Contrition; -- then he is full
of Trouble for them; -- Cries out, Whe^e's your Contrition! Where your Tears!
No Body weep! No Meltings amongst you! Come, my Friends, I will weep with you
and for you; -- And so falls a howling himself, 'till the Handkerchiefs begin
to move, and then there is Conversion-Work, Power, and Success* and all as it
should be fitted for the Iournal. Another of his Artifices, is, to fish for
some Expression or other from particular Persons in his Favor or Applause, and
then, with a little more favorable Turn, down with it in the Iournal. A
remarkable Instance, P. 28. of his last Iournal. His Trial no sooner over, but
away he hastes back to Georgia. In his Way visi^s the Reverend Mr. Jones of
Port Royal, and tells him one of the most dismal Stories that ever was heard
of, with what Malice, Rage, and Fury I had persecuted him, so as just with the
Skin of his Teeth he had escaped my Hands. And his Disciples standing by
assented, that these Things were so. On which Mr. Jones (unwarily enough) said,
that he could not approve of such violent Proceedings. This was enough, and
down is goes in the Iournal, in these Words, DISSAPPROVED ENTIRELY OF THE
COMMISSARY'S TREATMENT OF ME; -- And had Mr. Whitefield added [AS I AND MY
TOOLS FALSELY REPRESENTED IT TO HIM] he had then set down the whole Truth, as
Mr. Jones assures me.

Once more, and I have done. viz. His applying to himself such Passages of
Scripture, as he thinks suitable to any his particular Cases or Purposes, and
claiming or at least insinuating the Direction of God's holy Spirit for such
Application. A curious Instance in the same P. of his Iournal. -- In the
Evening I expounded, and undesignedly thinking it was the Lesson for the Night,
read the last Chapter of St. Paul's (...) Ep. to Tim. In which were these
encouraging Words. Watch thou in all Things, endure Afflictions* -- Alexander
the Copper-smith did me much Evil, etc. Whoever knows that my Name is
Alexander, will be at no Loss to judge, how probably either this Chapter was
then read, or the Passages of it journalized, without Design, or whether any
good Genius directed in the Affair.

Where this Methodist Race will terminate I will not take upon me say: But as
to Mr. Whitefield* I dare say he was in his full Meridian when at Boston in
New England. There was a People for the Generality, after his own Heart, and he
a Man after theirs. There was his ne plus (...) on this Side the Water; and in
old ^^^gland the Show was pretty well over. (...) Church of Scotland is on its
Guard agai^^ him, and it is greatly doubted whether (...) the Ereskins there
will receive him. (...) Wesleys themselves who begat him, (...) now cast him
out, and turned him (...) Satan to be buffetted; and Reasons enough they had
for it. He became much too popular, and thence headstrong and ungovernable. He
was but just initiated into Methodism, not admitted to its highest Mysteries,
and yet must pretend to bell the Cat with his Masters. This could never be
suffered, as s^bversive of their Rule and Authority, and endangering the whole
Scheme; and therefore he must be dropped, or some how got clear of, at all
Events. They and he had hitherto run the same enthusiastic Race, and therefore
they saw plainly there was no dropping him, without altering the Course. This
they resolve to do. And accordingly they who had long boasted of their being
enlightened with the true Faith, regenerate, justified, and in the alone true
State of Salvation, and had run about in the World, with much Diligence and no
less Assurance, to enlighten others; began to doubt a little of Matters, and
whether their Faith was in reality what they had boasted it to be. Their Doubts
continued rather increasing 'till God was pleased to send them a Man ( Peter
Boh^er, a Moravian Brother, or Saint of Hernbuth) who quickly convinced them,
that all this while, they had been without the least Degree of true Faith, and
wandering in Egyptian Darkness. He taught them, that true Faith excludes all
Doubting, and that two inseparable Fruits of it are; (1st) a Sense or full
Assurance of the Pardon of all past Sins; and (2dly) a Dominion over, or
Freedom from all present Sins. This they boggled at a little; but their Eyes
were soon opened, and they were established in this new and true Faith. And now
poor Whitefield is dropped effectually, and left in the Lurch with that old
Trumpery FAITH, REGENERATION, etc. they had begat him to. He may come over to
their new Faith if he pleases; but if either his Pride or Honesty will not
suffer him to do it, then he must mountebank along by himself, and get to
Heaven if he can, with such a Sense of his Vi^eness upon his Soul, as wondering
the People do not stone him; (above cited Iournal P. 57.) while they boast
themselves in the much better Way, of Freedom from Sin, and Dominion over it,
or sinning no more. See, Extract of Mr. John Wesley's Journal, to his Return
from Germany.

I shall conclude this Preface, with Mr* Addison's Account of the P^etists in
Switzerland, and his curious Remark of the Method by which the enthusiastic
Spirit, Temper, or Constitution is managed, so as to keep all quiet in the
Church of Rome See ADDIS. Works, Vol. 2. P. 166, 167.

There is a new Sect sprung up in Switzerland, which spreads very much in the
Protestant Cantons. The Professors of it call themselves Pietists, and as
Enthusiasm carries Men generally to the like Extravagancies, they differ but
little from several Sectaries in other Countries. They pretend in general to
great Refinements, as to what regards the Practice of Christianity, and to
observe the following Rules. To retire much from the Conversation of the World.
To sink themselves into an entire Repo^e and Tranquillity of Mind. In this State
of Silence to attend the secret Illapse and Flowings in of the Holy Spirit,
that may fill their Minds with Peace and Consolation, Ioys or Raptures* To
favor all his secret Intimations, and give themselves up entirely to his
Conduct and Direction, so as neither to speak, move, or act, but as they find
his Imp^lse on their Souls. To retrench themselve* within the Conveniences and
Necessities of Life, To make a Covenant with all their (...) so far as to s^un
the Smell of a Rose or Violet, and to turn away their Eyes from a beautiful
Prospect. To avoid, as much as is possible, what the World calls innocent
Pleasures, lest they should have their Affections tainted by any Sensuality,
and diverted from the Love of him who is to be the only Comfort, Hope, and
Delight, of their whole Beings. This Sect prevails very much among the
Protestants of Germany, as well as those of Switzerland, and has occasioned
several Edicts against it in the Duchy of Saxony. The Professors of it are
accused of all the ill Practices which may seem to be the Consequences of their
Principles, as that they ascribe the worst of Actions, which their own vicious
Tempers throw them upon, to the Dictates of the Holy Spirit; that both Sexes
under Pretense of devout Conversation visit one another at all Hours, and in
all Places, without any Regard to common Decency, often making their Religion a
cover for their Immoralities; and that the very best of them ^^e possessed with
spiritual pride, and a contempt for all such as are not of their own sect. The
Roman Catholics, who reproach the Protestants for their breaking into such a
multitude of religions, have certainly taken the most effectual way in the
world for the keeping their fl^cks together; I do not mean the punishments they
in flict on Men's persons, which are commonly looked upon as the chief methods
by which they deter them from breaking through the pale of the Church, though
certainly these ^ay a very great Restraint on those of the Roman Catholic
Persu^sion. But I take one great Cause why there are so few sects in the Church
of Rome, to be the Maltitude of Convents with which they every where abound,
that serve as Receptacles for all those fiery Zealots who would set the Church
in a Flame, were not they got together in these Houses of Devotion* All Men of
dark Tempers, according to their Degree of Melancholy or Enthusiasm, may find
Convents fitted to their Humors, and meet with Companions as gloomy as
themselves. So that what the Protestants would call a Fanatic, is in the Roman
Church a Religious of such or such an Order; as I have been told of an English
Merchant at Lisbon, who after some great Disappointments in the World was
resolved to turn Quaker or Capuchin; for, in the Change of Religion, Men of
ordinary Understandings do not so much consider the Principles, as the Practice
of those to whom they go over.

LUKE VIII. 18. Take heed therefore how ye hear.
THE Words are connected with the several next preceding Verses of this
Chapter, which contain our blessed Savior's Parable of the Sower, and his
Exposition of it to his Disciples.

THE Parable sets forth certain Cases, in which ever so good Seed cast into the
Ground will perish, or bring no Fruit to Perfection; viz. when either cast on
the Way-side, or on stony Ground, or among Thorns; representing, in the
Mythology or Exposition, certain parallel Cases, in which the Word (or Gospel)
preached will not profit the Hearers, i.e, will not bring forth in them the
Fruits of Faith, Repentance, and good Works, or be of any Advantage toward
their Salvation: To which is subjoined this Caveat or Admonition of the Text,
Take heed therefore how ye hear.

THUS the Parable and Exposition; and which naturally direct our Discourse on
the Words before us, to a particular Consideration of the several Things,
pursuant to the Tenor of the Parable, which we are to take heed or beware of in
Hearing, so as the Word preached may profit us; i.e. influence or prevail upon
us, to be Doers of the Word, and not the Hearers only, deceiving our ownselves.

BUT first it will be of Importance, to premise, and carry along with us these
Two Observations.

First. THAT the true Scope and Intent of the whole Parable is, to charge the
Unfruitfulness of the Word to the bad Dispositions of the Hearts of Men. For
though various other Causes there are of the Unfruitfulness of Seed sown,
besides the bad Dispositions of the Ground, as Floods, or Drought, the
Caterpillar, or Canker-worm, Blasts, or Mildews, etc. yet none other we find
mentioned in the Parable, but the bad Dispositions of the Ground only: And
correspondently in the Application, though various divine Aids and Graces are
as necessary to the Fruitfulness of the Word, as the good Dispositions of the
Hearts of Men, yet is not its Unfruitfulness charged to any Want of the former,
but of the latter of these only; Nay, such divine Aids and Graces are not so
much as mentioned, lest Men should charge God foolishly, by charging their
Unprofitableness in Hearing to his either total withholding, or partial and too
sparing Communications of these.

Secondly. IT is obvious also on the Face of the Parable and Exposition, that
the bad Dispositions of Men's Hearts, which obstruct their profitable Hearing
of the Word, are wholly owing to themselves, to their own bad Husbandry and
Neglect. -- And thence agreeably the Caveat of the Text, Take heed therefore
how ye hear; that is, take heed that you sue all good Husbandry and Diligence
to amend those bad Dispositions of your Hearts, which through Slothfulness, or
Want of due Care and Cultivation, are grown up in them, and obstruct your
profitable Hearing of the Word; and which we now proceed to consider, with one
Variation only of the order in which they are set down in the Parable. And,

I. THE first bad Disposition of Heart, in the Order of the Parable, which we
are to take heed of and be sure that we amend, in order to our profitable
Hearing of the Word, is that represented or resembled by, the Way side. But as
this Disposition obstructs the Fruitfulness of the Word various Ways, and which
we purpose more fully to observe, we therefore take Leave to postpone it to the
last Place, and proceed,

II. To the second, viz. That which is represented by the stony Ground. And by
stony Ground is well represented a Heart incumbered with stubborn, corrupt
Habits, Lusts and Passions. What Rooks or Stones are in a Corn-field, the same
are inveterate corrupt Habits, Lusts, and Passions, in the Hearts of Men; and
what Obstruction those will be of to the Fruitfulness of Corn-seed sowed in the
one, the same will these be of to the Fruitfulness of Gospel-seed sowed in the
other. The Seed (says the Parable) which fell in stony Places, sprang up, but
lacking sufficient Moisture, a little Stress of the Sunbeams upon it, scorched
it up, and it withered away. And in like Manner, the Seed of the Gospel falling
into the Hearts of Men incumbered with corrupt Habits, Lusts and Passions, may
spring and grow up for a Time; but alas! such Soil must fail of sufficient
Moisture to nourish it, through various Stresses, up to Perfection. Such Men may
gladly hear and receive the Word preached; it may spring up in their Hearts
into Faith, and even formed Resolutions of Obedience; but alas! when they come
to Practice! when they come to add to their Faith, Virtue; and to Virtue,
Knowledge; and to Knowledge, Temperance; and to Temperance, Patience; and to
Patience, Godliness; and to Godliness, Brotherly-kindness; and to
Brotherly-kindness, Charity; when they come to enter on the Christian Warfare,
the Persecution of their darling Habits, Lusts Passions, to cut off a right
Hand, or pluck out a right Eye; how quickly will they be offended! How quickly
will the Heat of the Contest scorch up the tender Blade of the Word, and wither
it away! So evidently is the Gospel a great Salvation to the human World, that
when fairly offered to the most dege^erate Minds, they cannot but see it,
approve of, and rejoice in it. They cannot but see it a great Salvation to the
whole Posterity of Apostate Adam, as containing a full and plain Discovery, not
only of their Bondage of Corruption; that the whole Creation groaneth and
travaileth in Pain together, and how or whence this Misery arose; but also of a
full and adequate Remedy; the proper and adequate Means for delivering them
from this Body of Death, and restoring them to the glorious Liberty of the Sons
of God, the Happiness of Life and Immortality. The Heathens, by the Light of
Nature, saw plainly this universal Bondage of the human World: They plainly saw
themselves under it. They saw and felt Sin reigning in their mortal Bodies; --
a Law in their Members, warring against the Law of their Minds, and bringing
them into Captivity to the Law of Sin; and even to a plain Confession, that
when they would do Good, Evil was present with them; -- and the Good which they
would they did not, but the Evil which they hated, they were led captive to do.
Video meliora, broboque; deteriora sequor.

THIS common sore Evil or Misery of Mankind, the Heathens saw, felt, and
confessed; but whence it originated they were wholly ignorant; and as to any
adequate Remedy, the Discoveries of their wisest Men were next to Darkness, and
agreeably of little or no Effect or Service at all. All their Philosophy indeed
pretended such adequate Remedy for its Object; But alas! It was defective of
the main Principles and Motives for compassing this End. Their greatest and
wisest Men had no Knowledge of the original State or Dignity of Human Nature;
nor how it came into its present corrupt State or Condition; nor of the manner
of the Divine Interposition necessary for Men's Recovery; nor of the glorious
End to which God intends finally to conduct them: In a Word, few or none of
them had a right Knowledge of God, much less how he was to be worshipped, and
least of all how to be appeased for Offenses committed against him, so as to
pardon them, and be reconciled to the Offenders. And as to the Immortality of
the Soul, the Certainty of a future State, and the Rewards and Punishments to
be distributed in the Life to come, their Notions were various, doubtful, and
confused. -- And agreeably* they plainly saw and confessed, that after all
their Researches after such Remedy, they were still surrounded with Darkness;
that all their Attempts for the Recovery of Mankind from Error and Corruption,
were vain and fruitless, and that it never could be effected without a Divine
Instructor, or some extraordinary Assistance from God.

NOW midst all this Distress of Bondage and Darkness, how strongly must the
Light of the Gospel strike on, and affect the most degenerate Minds! So
evident, so plain a Discovery of the alone certain and adequate Means of their
Relief and Deliverance from their Misery, and for advancing them to a State of
glorious Liberty and Happiness! How strongly, I say, must this Discovery of so
great a Salvation strike the most degenerate Minds of Men, and how necessarily
must they approve of, and rejoice in it! Let the Sceptick pretend his no
Certa^^ty of a God or an Hereafter, and the Deist boast of his Religion of
Nature; let Men pretend to amuse themselves or others as they please; yet not
more certain is the Light of the Sun at Noonday to the natural Eye, than that
of the Gospel is to the rational Mind. And agreeably, either let the practical
Precepts of the Gospel, which cross on the corrupt Lusts and Passions, and
confirmed Habits thence grown up in Men, be struck out, and Christianity
reduced (as by the Antinomians it is) to a mere Theory of Faith or Belief; or
let Men have no such Lusts, Passions, or Habits to thwart or cross upon; and
then let us see, who would not be Christians indeed! Profitable Hearers of the
Word preached unto them? For, if not only bare Assent, Faith, or Belief, but
even Purposes and Resolutions of Obedience, were sufficient to profitable
Hearing, who would not profitably hear the Gospel? Who would not see, believe,
and rejoice in it, as a great Salvation? But, alas! so long as the Gospel
contains such Precepts as cross on the corrupt Lusts, Passions, and Habits of
Men, and Men retain such Lusts, Passions, and Habits to cross upon; these will
prove the great stumbling Stones, and Rocks of Offense against the Gospel; --
will cause, that the Word preached shall not profit the Hearers, but be barren
and unfruitful; -- that their Hearts shall wax gross, their Ears dull in
Hearing, and their Eyes dim in Seeing; so as, Hearing they shall hear, and not
understand, and seeing they shall see, and not perceive; -- nay finally, will
cause, that they shall turn away their Eyes from seeing, and like the deaf
Adder stop their Ears, and refuse to hear the Voice of the Charmer, charming
never so wisely.

LET us take heed then, my Brethren, of this Indisposition of our Hearts in
Hearing, viz. their Encumbrance with corrupt Lusts and Passions, and Habits
derived from them, which will be sure to defeat the Word, and render it
nnfruitful. Let us take heed of this Indisposition I say, so as to do all our
Skill and Diligence to correct or amend it. Can the Husbandman expect to reap
from Seed sown in a stony Field? Or is such a Field consistent with good
Husbandry and Cultivation? No more can a Gospel Hearer expect to reap from the
Word sown in his Heart cumber'd with Lusts, and Passions, and Habits of
Corruption; nor is such a Heart consistent with the Husbandry, Care, and
Cultivation required of a Christian. As surely as a stony Field will turn out
no Fruit to Perfection, from any Seed sown in it; so surely such Hearts of Men
will turn out no Fruit to Perfection, from the Word sown in them.

III. The third and last bad Disposition of Heart, in the Order of the Parable,
we are to take heed of for profitable Hearing, is that represented by the
Thorns; viz. the Heart charged and cumbered with the Things, the Cares and
Amusements of the World. And a strong and beautiful Emblem or Representation it
is. For in every Circumstance or Respect, as Thorns in a Field will defeat the
Growth or Increase of any Grain sown in it; so will the Cares and Amusements of
the World defeat the Increase of the Word, in the Hearts of Men. As Thorns in a
Field, like an oppressive rich Neighbor, will enhanse the Moisture of the
Ground, and deprive the poor tender Grain of its proper Nourishment; or as
growing up with the tender Blade or Stalk, they will entangle and oppress it;
or when grown up, the least Ruffle of Wind beating the Stalk or Ear against
them, they will tear, wound, and destroy it; etc. So answerably, in every
Circumstance, will the Cares and Amusements of the World choke, oppress,
entangle, and defeat the Increase of the Word, in the Hearts of Men. They will
enhanse that Moisture of Heart, that good Inclination, Thought, and
Seriousness, which should nourish it; growing up with it, they will entangle
and oppress it; and when grown up, will be sure, on the various emergent
Ruffles, either of Prosperity or Adversity, to wound, defeat, and destroy it.

AND how generally, alas! is this the fatal Case of Men? How many are there,
who otherwise would be profitable Hearers, but for the Cares, the Riches, and
Pleasures of the World. entering into their Hearts, choke the Word, and render
it unfruitful? Nor is it the absolute Case of any all at once, but which they
advance to in Time, and by Degrees. For before these grow up into confirmed
Habits, and get full Possession of the Heart, many are often so far profited in
Hearing the Word, as not only to believe, but also to take up full Resolutions
to obey or practice it. But then alas! how often also are these Resolutions
defeated by the World, and overcome? Some Care, some Pleasure, some Amusement,
or other, it always throws in the Way: Honors or Preferments, immoderate Gains
or Losses, Wives, Children, Weddings, Births, Funerals; some or other such
Care, or Pleasure, or Amusement it always throws in upon them, which either
quite oversets these Resolutions, or at least suspends the Performance of them
to a longer Day. And this Delay or Suspension once gained, it not only becomes
a dangerous Precedent for the future, but mean time also affords Opportunity
for other fresh Cares and Temptations to enter and obtain: So that they move,
as 'twere, in an enchanted Circle of Resolutions and Suspensions, Promises and
Non-performances, Purposes to do much, and yet doing Nothing at all.

THUS the Thorns and Briars of earthly Things, Cares, Riches, Pleasures,
Business and Concerns in the Hearts of Men, entangle and oppress the Word
preached, beat down every good Motion or aspiring, prevail over Reason, and
either defeat the strongest Purposes and Resolutions, or finally reduce and
limit them to certain Terms or Conditions. When these or the other Conditions
are obtained, (article such Men) -- This or the other Difficulty got over; --
This or the other Point gained; -- When such or such Matters, Things, Periods,
Circumstances in view, shall be accomplished; oh then, they will set about the
Duties of Religion in good Earnest; they will then be no longer only Hearers of
the Word, but Doers of the Work also, they will throw off the World, all its
Cares, Pleasures, Pomps, and Vanities, and wholly attend the laying up for
themselves Treasures in a better Place; where neither Moth nor Rust does
corrupt, and where Thieves do not break through and steal. But, alas! before
these can be brought to bear, these Conditions attained, and Matters adjusted
to their Minds, either the Evening of their Day draws on, or other and still
farther Conditions appear necessary, so as finally they turn out unprofitable
Servants.

HOW plainly then is the World Enmity against God? And agreeably, how much is
the Whole of our blessed Redeemer's both Life and Doctrines pointed against
this single Evil, as the main Root or Scource of Human Misery? His whole Lite
was a continued Scene of his Enmity to, Hatred, and Contempt of the World; --
The Son of Man had not so much of it as where to lay his Head. And scarce ever
opened he his Mouth in Doctrine, but to teach, and enforce Men's Imitation of
his own Practice and Example. To teach, that They cannot serve God and Mammon;
-- that If any Man love the World, the Love of God is not in him; -- that they
should take no Thought what they should eat, or what they should drink, or
wherewithal they should be clothed; -- be ready to forsake Fathers, and
Mothers, and Houses, and Lands, even to quit all earthly Possessions and
Enjoyments, to follow him, and have Treasure in the Kingdom of Heaven.

AND agreeably such indeed was the Behavior and Conduct of his Disciples and
Followers of the First Ages. Their Minds, their Love and Affections were set
upon Things above, and not on Things on the Earth. Their Spirits breathed too
free an Air, to be caught by any or all the Beauties and Charms this World can
afford; and their chief Care was to keep themselves unspotted from it; using
indeed, but not abusing it, as well knowing, that both this World and the
Fashion of it, quickly passes away. In Testimony of this I might produce you
all the Apologists and other Christian Writers of those Times, but Justin
Martyr alone shall suffice. Christians (says he) dwell in their own Country
but as Inmates and Foreigners; they have all Things common with other Men as
Fellowcitizens, and yet suffer all Things as Strangers. Every foreign Region is
their Country, and every Country is foreign to them. -- They are in the Flesh,
but do not live after the Flesh; they dwell upon the Earth, but their
Conversation is in Heaven. As the Soul lives in the Body, but is not of the
Body, so Christians dwell in the World, but are not of the World. An immortal
Spirit dwells in a mortal Tabernacle, and Christians while they sojourn in
these corruptible Mansions expect and look for an incorruptible State in
Heaven. -- We now return,

To consider that bad Disposition of Heart, which obstructs profitable Hearing,
represented in the Parable by the Way-side; which though first in the Order of
the Parable, we have chose to treat of in the last Place.

THE Parable sets forth Seed falling by the Way-side, which must suppose the
Field or Ground sowed in open and unfenced, so as to have Roads or Path-ways
made through it. Now as that Ground is altogether unfit or ill disposed for
bringing any Seed to Perfection, which lies unfenced, or open to all Comers and
Goers to make Path-ways in; -- For so the Seed will either be trodden down, or
lie so uncovered, that the Fowls of the Air will devour it: Even so, those
Hearts of Men are altogether unfit and ill disposed to bring any Fruit of the
Word to Perfection, which are not sufficiently fenced in, with Zeal according
to Knowledge; but lie open and exposed, to the Inroads of Skepticism on the one
Hand, and Enthusiasm on the other: -- For so the Seed of the Word will either
be trodden down by the Phlegmatic Notions of the former, or devoured by the
wild and frantic ones of the latter.

1. Without the Fence of a Zeal according to Knowledge, what Inroads or
Path-ways will Skepticism make in our Hearts! And how, by the phlegmatic
Weight of Coldness and Indifference, will its Notions crush and tread down the
Word sown there! And hence, alas! so many occasional or accidental Hearers in
these our Days, whose Attendance on the Word preached once a Month, may be
reckoned an extraordinary Attendance. Something or other is always the Matter
they cannot come; or marrying of Wives, or Farms, or Merchandise; or still much
lower, the Church begins too soon or too late, they have not a proper Seat, or
proper Clothes to appear in; it is either too hot or too cold, too dusty or too
dirty Weather. Some or other of these, or such like Reasons of Absence, is
always at Hand, while yet the true one is, if they would speak out, that it is a
Matter of the utmost Indifference to them, whether they come or stay away. Thus
occasionally or by Chance it is that they come to hear; but there is more
Certainty than Chance, that what they thus hear will not profit them. They come
as if they came not; that is, without proper Design, Desire, or Inclination of
Heart to be edified; and what Marvel if the Word preached be unto them as a
sounding Brass, and tinkling Cymbal? What less can God expect and demand of us
toward our Edification, than a willing Mind, a hearty and sincere Desire of
being edified? Or what less can we bring with us, if any Thing at all? Surely
it is but small and inconsiderable Matter, that is required of us in this
Behalf; viz. a willing Mind. Let us contribute but this Mite, the first
essential Requisite for our profitable Hearing. For as God has been pleased to
create us free Creatures, we cannot be edified without our own Consent, Will,
or Inclination, much less against them.

2. Without the Fence of Zeal according to Knowledge, what Pathways also will
Enthusiasm make in our Hearts? And how will its wild and frantic Notions
devour up the Seed of the Word sown there?

A First and common Consequence of the Want of this Fence, and a main
Introduction to Enthusiasm, is, the Itching of the Ears; that is, that Men run
to and fro to hear, more for the pleasing the Ear, or moving their Passions,
than the Instruction of their Minds. And how numerous such Hearers are every
where, I need not say. They love the Man (the Preacher) and will go to hear
him. Why so? Because as Ezekiel was to the Jews, so is he unto them, as a very
lovely Song of one that has a pleasant Voice. The Jews came to hear the
Prophet, not that they regarded the Matter he delivered, or intended to do
according to his Words; no, but because his Talent of Utterance hit their
Fancy, his Words were to them as a very lovely Song. They came only for Sound,
and Sound they had, and Sound they carried with them, and no more. And thus as
the Case was with the Jews of old, so it is with many Christians of our Times.
Their Religion, alas! derives not from the vital Principles of Divine Faith and
Love in the Heart, springing forth into Holiness of Life; but from the Phantoms
and Caprices of their Heads, which turn them a hunting after the fine Preacher,
the Man whose Tone and Air they are best pleased with, whose Voice is unto them
as a very lovely Song; accounting when their Ears and Fancies are most pleased,
their Minds are best instructed. This is a sore Evil, and the more so, that
there is seldom a Remedy for it in Human Power. Speak it out, you offend them.
Represent it in its true Light and Nature, you provoke their Indignation, and
their Returns of Hatred and Ill Will. Men are strongly averse to having their
Understandings called in Question, and not to be thought wise enough to judge
and determine for themselves. To accuse of Error, is to accuse of Folly and
Ignorance; and therefore rather than submit to the Accusation, though in the
softest Terms, they will choose to abide by their former Judgment, and to go on
in their own Way.

BUT the agreeable well turned Voice, is not always the alone Object of itching
Ears; but generally they extend, as did those of the Athenians, to new Things,
new or uncommon Notions or Doctrines, new Lights, or Revelations; -- are turned
away from the Truth, and turned into Fables. Now in such Case, while Men are
thus without Zeal according to Knowledge, their Ears itching after the fine
Preacher, who can please the Ear, rouse the Passions, and amuse the
Understanding with mysterious Doctrines, new Lights, and Revelations; is it not
ten thousand to one, but the ^ankest Enthusiast, with any tolerable Air and
Utterance, shall be the Man? Such Hearers indeed will not be long without Zeal;
but alas! a Zeal not according to Knowledge, is worse than none at all; a
furious rampant Thing! and which can serve only to rivet fast the Chains of
Error and Delusion: They want the Charming of the Ear; -- The Enthusiast either
has the natural Talents that will wholly answer, or his Fire and Impetuosity
will make good the Defect: They want to hear Things that will rouse their
Passions, as Children do Stories of Ghosts and Hobgoblines, which yet make them
tremble and afraid to go in the Dark; -- He is provided of these sufficiently
to scare and frighten them out of their Wits, if that will please: They want to
hear new Things, strange or mysterious Doctrines, new Lights or Revelations,
though only to amuse their Heads, and perplex their Understandings; -- No one has
greater Store; He is always speaking Mysteries in the Spirit, always full of
Impulses, new Lights, and Revelations. -- And thus must the Enthusiast be the
Man of God indeed! So thoroughly furnished to supply all the Wants, or Itchings
of such Hearers.

POSSIBLY, or rather commonly indeed, such Hearers are, at first, a little
stumbled at his high and confident Pretensions to the Spirit, his Impulses and
Inspirations; but how short a Time, under the Influence of the powerful Man,
will suffice, to remove all such Prejudice, and fully convince them of the
Reality of these Pretensions, and that of a Truth he has the Indwelling of the
Spirit in him? Nor only so, but this Point got over, and the Doctrine of the
Indwelling of the Spirit the Privilege of all Christians, a little more fully
opened and insisted on, they will soon be persuaded into a Feeling and
Experience of the same Motions, Impulses, and Inspirations in themselves. --
And now the Work thus far advanced; the Wheels of a heated Imagination set thus
a going, God only knows where they will stop, whether in Bedlam, or Rome or no
Christianity, or no Religion at all.

TAKE heed then (my Brethren) of this Way-side Indisposition of Heart in
Hearing. Give all Care and Diligence to fence in and secure your Heart with
proper and becoming Zeal according to Knowledge; for if lying open and exposed,
Enthusiasm shall enter in, how will its wild and frantic Notions devour up the
Seed of the Word! How little will you endure sound Doctrine, but be turned unto
Fables, and heap to yourselves Teachers, having itching Ears!

TAKE good heed, and guard strictly against the first Beginnings of this fatal
Malady, as of no small Danger whereunto they may grow. For if once Men's Heads
are set a Wandering, or (as we have said) the Wheels of their heated
Imaginations agoing, who shall prescribe or set the Bounds? No Reveries so
monstrous or absurd, which shall not be deemed Divine Impulses or Inspirations!
No Practices so wicked or immoral, which shall not be justified as Fruits or
Effects of these! If the wicked Fancy, Conceit, or Inclination be, to commit
Murder, Adultery, or Incest, etc. it is the Impulse of the Spirit, the Command
of God, and it shall be committed.

THIS is no Speculation, but what the World has sufficiently experienced in
Fact, in many and notorious Instances. -- What was all the Heathen Religion of
Sybils and Oracles, but rank Enthusiasm? -- What was it but judicial Enthusiasm
that destroyed Jerusalem and the Jewish Nation? While Titus, in his ever
memorable Siege of that glorious City slew his thousands without, did not
Enthusiasm give its ten thousands to the Sword and to the Famine within; and at
last the City, Temple, and Nation a Prey to the Roman Arms? -- And again, did
it not deliver up that unhappy People to the Carnage and their final
Dispersion, under Adrian? Was not Mahometism sounded in Enthusiasm? And does
not this run so strong in the Veins of that Religion, that all true Mussulmans
firmly believe the greatest Idiots or Madmen are the greatest Saints; that
their Idiotism or Madness is owing to their being ravished in Spirit, and taken
from themselves, as 'twere to the Fellowship of Angels; and agreeably hold 'em
in great Reverence, minister to all their Wants, kiss their Garments, and bow
to their Benedictions -- But are not Christians clear from all such Instances
among them? We need not go back for such to the Gnostics, Valentinians,
Man^chees or Montanists of old, nor so far as the Munster Anabaptists of later
Date; it may well suffice once for all to instance the Deludge of this fatal
Evil, which like a Torrent broke in and overspread the British Dominions, in
the Oliverian Days, and bore down Church and State and all before it! How did
Enthusiasm then rage and prevail in all Shapes and Degrees? How strangely did
it infatuate, and set Men's Heads a w^ndering after purer Worship and better
Edification, from the Church to the Conventicle, from one Conventicle to
another; from the Presbyterian to the Independent, from the Independent to the
Anabaptist, and from thence, after new Lights, Impulses, and Inspirations,
branching into all the Reveries of Quakers, Ranters, Muggletonians,
Antinomians, Seekers, and so many others, as whoever would be informed of, let
him consult a Book entitled GANGRAENA, wrote by Thomas Edwards a Presbyterian
Divine of those Times; -- containing the fullest and most authentic Account I
know of, of the numerous Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, and suitable Practices,
which then sprang up and prevailed! How strangely, I say, did the enthusiastic
Turn The following Specimen may not be amiss (by Way of Note) for the Use of
common Readers. Coll. Eccl. Hist Vol. II. P. 861-2

AT Walton upon the Th^mes in Sur^ey, a Soldier coming into the Church with a
Candle and Lant^orn, and being refused to hold forth there, went into the
Church Y^rd, and told the People, he had a Vision, and received a Command from
God, which he was to deliver, and which they were to govern themselves by,
under Pain of Damnation: It consisted of Five Lights.

1. That the Sabbath was abolished as unnecessary, Jewish, and merely
ceremonial; and here, says he, I should have put out my first Light, but the
Wind is so high I cannot light it

2. Tithes are abolished as Jewish and ceremonial, a great Burden to the
Saints of God, and a Discouragement of Industry and Tillage: And here the
second Light should have been put out, but for the Reason above mentioned.

3. Ministers are abolished as Antichristian, and of no longer Use now Christ
himself descends into the Hearts of his Saints, and his Spirit enlightens them
with Revelations and Inspirations.

4. Magistrates are abolished as useless, since Christ himself, is in the
Purity of the Spirit, come amongst us, and has erected the Kingdom of the
Saints upon the Earth: Besides Magistrates are Tyrants, and Oppressors of the
Liberty of the Saints, and tie 'em to Laws and Ordinances* mere human
Inventions. After this, he pulls a Bible out of his Pocket, holds it up to the
People, and then goes on with the following Blasphemy. Here is a Book you have
in great Veneration, consisting of two Parts, the old and new Testament: I must
tell you, says he, it is abolished: It contains beggarly Rudiments, Milk for
Babes ^ But now Christ is in Glory amongst us, and imparts a ^uller Measure of
his Spirit to his Saints than this can afford, and therefore I am commanded to
burn it before your Faces: Upon this, he set Fire to the Lease^, and then
putting out the Candle, let 'em know his fifth Light was extinguished.


set Men's Heads thus a Roving and Wandering, 'till finally they wandered into
all the Errors, Distractions, and Misery, that it is possible for Men to wander
into.

BUT why even so far back as those unhappy Times? Is not the remarkable Case of
the French Prophets much nigher Hand? What a Rout and to do did those Impostors
make, both in England and Scotland for some Time! What strange Agitations and
Distortions of their Bodies, as Effects of the Spirit, did they amaze the
People with! What Mobbs and Crowds followed them! And what a horrid Medley of
Jargon, Blasphemy, and Nonsense they poured forth amongst them, for the
Dictates of God's holy Spirit, see only the Warnings of one John surnamed Lacy,
a standing Monument to this Day! How strangely, I say, did this Farce succeed,
'till in the Fullness of the Spirit, they overacted their Part, and must
attempt the raising of one from the Dead; on Failure of which they dropped to
Pieces, and vanished, as 'twere, in a Moment!

BUT still nigher (my Brethren) and among Ourselves; you will remember the fatal
Enthusiastic Case of the Dutartres, which was attended with the Murder of Two
Persons, the Killing of One, and the Execution of Four for those Murders.

THE Dutartres, you know, were a Family of French Extract, (consisting of the
two Parents, and eight Children, four Sons and four Daughters) settled in
Orange Quarter in this Province. They were always in low Circumstances of Life;
but of honest Repute, and for many Years behaved themselves regularly and
blameless, in all outward Instances of religious and moral Duty. But some few
Years before the fatal Period, came hither a certain strolling Moravian, Dutch,
or Swiss Enthusiast ( Pietist as I could learn) named Christian George, or some
such Name; who partly by Conversation, and partly by the Writings of Jacob
Be^men, and other Authors of the some Stamp he put into their Hands, soon
filled their Heads with many wild and fantastic Notions. These so grew and
multiplied upon them, that in a Year or Two's Time, they began to withdraw from
public Worship, and all outward Ordinances of God in his Church, and from all
Conversation with the World; and strongly to conceit, that they were the alone
Family upon Earth, who had the true Knowledge and Worship of God amongst them;
and whom he vouchsafed to instruct and direct* either by the immediate Impulses
of his holy Spirit, or by Signs or Tokens which he gave them. Finally it came
to open Visions and Revelations. God raised up a Prophet unto them from among
themselves (PETER ROMBERT, who had married the eldest Daughter of the Family, a
Widow) like unto Moses, and to whom they should hearken. And to this Prophet
God was pleased openly and plainly to reveal, that the Wickedness of Men was
now again become as great upon Earth as in the Days of Noah* and that he
therefore purposed to destroy Mankind a second Time from off the Face of the
Earth, as he did in those Days* all but that one Family whom he would pre^erve
as he did Noah's, for raising up a godly Seed again upon it. This Revelation he
was sure of, he knew it, he felt it, as certainly as the Wind blowing on his
Body; and they with as full Assurance believed and depended upon it.

SOON after this, God was pleased to reveal himself again to the Prophet a
second Time, saying; Put away the Woman whom thou now have for thy Wife; for
when I have destroyed this wicked Generation from off the Earth, then will I
raise up her first Husband from the Dead, and they shall be Man and Wife as
before; and go thou and take to Wife her youngest Sister, who is a Virgin; so
shall that chosen Family be restored entire, and the holy Seed be preserved
pure and undefiled in it. The old Man (the Father) was staggered at so strange
a Message; but the Prophet assured him that God would give him a Sign; which
accordingly came to pass, and immediately on which the old Man took his
youngest Daughter by the Hand, and gave her to him (the Prophet) to Wi^^; and
he went in unto her, and lay with her, without any farther Ceremony, pursuant
to the Divine Command. And thus they continued in open and notorious Adultery
and Incest 'till the fatal Period, we now come to mention.

SO far possessed were these poor Wretches with a Conceit of their own
Holiness, and of the Impurity and Wickedness of others, that they would give no
Obedience to the civil Magistrate, nor any the Laws or Ordinances of Man; and
accordingly refused to comply either with the Militia Law (on Pretense that God
commanded them to bear no Arms) or the Law for repairing the Highways. After
long Forbearance Justice Symmons (a worthy Magistrate and Capt. of the Militia
in those Parts) saw it necessary to issue his Warrants, for levying the
Penalties of those Laws upon them. Moreover by this time, Judith Dutartre the
Prophet's Revelation Wife proving with Child, a third Warrant was issued for
bringing her before the Justice, to be examined and bound over to the General
Sessions for Basta^dy, pursuant to a Law of this Province. The Constable having
received these Warrants, got two or three of his Neighbors to go with
him-doubting what Usage he might meet with in the Execution, from so odd a
Family* The Family acquainted of their Coming and their Errand, consulted their
Prophet, who soon told them, that God commanded them, to arm and defend
themselves and their Substance from the Persecution and Robberies of the Men of
the Earth, and that no Weapon formed against them should prosper. On which they
forthwith arm themselves, fire upon the Constable and those Persons with him,
and drive them out of their Ground. -- This was not to be suffered; and
therefore the Justice taking with him ten or a Dozen Men of the Militia, went
straight to protect the Constable in the Execution of his Office. On their
Approach this wretched Family shut themselves up in their House, and thence
fired like so many Furies, shot the unfortunate Justice dead on the Spot, and
wounded several of his Men. At length the House was ^orced open, Mrs. Lesad
killed, and the Rest (six in Number) taken Prisoners, and brought hither to
Charlestown; where at a special Court of General Sessions held on the 29th and
30th of September, Anno D^m. 1724, five of them ( viz. Michael Boineau, Peter
Dutartre, Daniel Dutartre, John Dutartre, and Peter Rombert) were arraigned and
tried for Murder, found guilty, and condemned.

ALAS, poor miserable Creatures! How amazing a Delusion prevailed over them!
They had the Spirit of God (especially the Prophet) leading them into all
Truth. They were sure of it, they knew it, they felt it. This Spirit commanded
them not to bear A^ms in Obedience to the Laws, or for the Defense of their
Country; but this same Spirit commanded them to bear Arms in Rebellion against
the Laws of their Country, and to commit Murder. -- The holy Spirit of God
commanded them to commit Adultery, Incest, Rebellion, and Murder.

BUT were ever these miserable Wretches convinced of their Delusion? No, my
Brethren, not as to the three chief or principal of them ( viz. the Prophet,
the Father of the Family, and Michael Boinean) not to their last Breath! --
They appeared on their Trials altogether easy and unconcerned! They had God on
their Side, and therefore feared not wh^^t Man could do unto them! They freely
told the incestuous Story, in all its Circumstances, as above mentioned, in
open Court, and with a good Countenance; very readily owned the Facts and
Circumstances of the Rebelia^^ and Murder charged upon them; pleaded
^^^^ication in all as authorized of God, and (...) that they had done nothing
in one or other of the Cases, but by his express Order and Command.

AS the visiting of Persons under Sentence of Death is a part of my Duty as
Minister of this Place, so I attended these unhappy Creatures with more than
ordinary Pains and Diligence. They very readily owned, repeated, and confirmed
all the Facts and Circumstances, as before mentioned, with no material
Variation from what they had done in Court. But when I came to reason with them
on those Facts, and endeavor to convince them of the Errors and Wickedness
they were guilty of in committing them; -- they treated me with great Disdain!
-- Their Motto was answer him not a Word! -- They had the Spirit of God
speaking inwardly to their Souls, who was I to pretend to talk to, or instruct
them! -- They had obeyed the Voice of God, and were about to suffer Martyrdom
for it; but God had assured them, that he would either work a great Deliverance
for them, or raise them up from the Dead the third Day. And thus the three
beforementioned (who were executed) continued to insist and aver to their
dying Breath* Their last Words to the Spectators were, that they should surely
see them alive again from the Dead, the third Day.

AS to the other three; -- The Daughter Judith was not tried. The two Sons
Daniel, and John Dutartre. (Lads about 18 or 20 Years of Age) who were tried
and condemned, con^^^^ed (...) and reserved, 'till after finding no (...) the
others from the Dead, as they expected, they became sensible of their Delusion,
at least professed themselves so, and were pardoned. But alas! One of them
relapsed into the same Share; and murdered an innocent Person, without any
previous Quarrel or Provocation, and for no other Reason, as he acknowledged,
but that God commanded him to do it. He was tried for this Murder, found
guilty, condemned, and executed. I attended him again under this second
Sentence of Death, and it pleased God with all apparent Success. No one ever
appeared more sensible of his Delusion, or to die a more hearty and sincere
Penitent or, in greater professed Hopes of Salvation, through the all-sufficient
Merits of Christ his Redeemer.

AND thus ended this tragical Scene of Enthusiasm; in which no less than seven
Persons lost their Live; one killed, two murdered, and four executed for those
Murders. A remarkable Instance, to what Heights of Extravagance, Folly, and
Wickedcess, this Turn of Head or Imagination, will hurry the poor Sons of Men!

LET us take heed therefore (my Brethren) how we hear. As the Prophet sings
of his beloved touching his Vineyard, that he fenced it, and gathered out the
Stones thereof, etc Let us imitate the same Husbandry and Cultivation of our
Hearts, for profitable Hearing. Let us do all our Diligence to fence them in,
with Zeal according to Knowledge; -- to gather out the Stones, the corrupt
Lusts, Passions, and Habits; -- and to root up the Thorns and Briars, the Cares
of the World, that may prevail in them.

OUR Time is short, uncertain, and posting along; and the longer we delay, the
harder and more difficult will the Work be. Let us up then betimes and be doing
all we can, nor let us fear the Want of such Divine Aids and Graces, as shall
be sufficient for us, and make us more than Conquerors.

IN vain indeed, at any Time, shall we strive or struggle in this Work, without
the Holy Ghost coming upon us, and the Power of the Highest aiding and
assisting u^, as our main Strength, the chief and principal Cause: ^ut then
neither let us fear any Want of this, on the one Hand; no^ wholly rely upon it
on the other. The Promises th^^r we shall be endued with Power from on high,
shall all surely be performed. But be we sure also, that we rely not on this
Power for doing the whole Work, without any concurring Endeavors of our own.
We must not (^s speaks a pious. The Life of God in the Soul of Man.
Au^hor) expect that this whole Work should be done without any concurring
Endeavors of our own: We must not lie loitering in the D^^ch, and wait ^till
Omnipotence pulls us from therce: No, no, we must be^^i^ ourselves, and actuate
these Powers which we have already received: We must put forth ourselves, to
our utmost Capacities, and then we may hope that our Labor shall not be in vain
in the Lord. All the Art and Industry of Man cannot form the (...) Herb, or
make a Staik of Corn grow in the Field; it is the Energy of Nature, and the
Influences of Heaven which produce this Effect; it is God who causes the Grass
to grow, and Herb for the Service of Man; and yet no Body will say that the
Labors of the Husbandman are useless or unnecessary. Though there in^ervene a
Stroke of Omnipotence to effect this mighty Change in our Souls, yet ought we
to do what we can to fit and prepare ourselves; for we must break up our fallow
Ground and root out the Weed^, and pull up the Thorns, that so we may be more
ready to receive the (...) of Grace and the Dew of Heaven It is true, God has
been found of some who sought him not; he has cast himself in their Way who
were quire out of his; he has laid hold upon them, and stop their Course on a
sudden; for so was St. Paul converted in his Journey to Da^^^ascus But
certainly this is not God's ordinary Method of dealing with Men, though he has
not tied himself to Means, yet he has tied us to the Use of them; and we have
never more reason to expect divine Assistance, than when we are doing our
utmost Endeavors.

And now to God the Father, etc.
FINIS.

