A Continuation Of the Reverend Mr. Whitefield's JOURNAL From his leaving
NEW ENGLAND, October 1740. To his Arrival at Falmouth in ENGLAND.

BOSTON, Printed by G. Rogers, for J. Edwards and S. Eliot in Cornhill. 1741.

A CONTINUATION OF Mr. Whitefield's JOURNAL.

Rye in New York Province.
BEING kindly invited by a Minister of the Church of England, after Dinner I
went to Rye, about eleven Miles from Stanford. I read Prayers and preached to a
small Congregation. Was civilly entertained by the Minister, and then rode ten
Miles further to East-Chester. Here I spent an agreeable Evening with my dear
Companions in Travel, God filled me out of his own divine Fullness, and made me
to drink of his Pleasures as out of a River. I think I know what our Lord means
when he promises, He that believes on me, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers
of living Waters. Lord, evermore give me this Water.

King's-Bridge and New York.
Thursday October 30. Preached in the Morning to about 300 People, and observed
a sweet Melting amongst them. Dined and rode six Miles to King's-Bridge, where
I preached from the Steps of a public House to about 500; but did not perceive
much visible Effect. Hither several of New York Friends came to meet me. I
talked with them on the Way of the Things of God, and found an inexpressible
Satisfaction in my Soul when I arrived at the House of my very dear Friend Mr.
Noble. After Supper, the Lord filled my Heart, and gave me to wrestle with him
for New York Inhabitants, and my own dear Friends. To add to my Comfort, the
Lord bro't my Dear Brother Davenport from Long Island by whose Hands the
blessed Jesus has of late done great Things. In a Letter to his Mother he
writes thus: The Lord has, in infinite Mercy, given me, in my Parish, near
twenty, in a little more than two Months Time. In almost all these the Work of
Conversion seemed very clear. Let God have all the Praise, Even so, Lord Jesus,
Amen and Amen.

NEW YORK.
Friday, October 31. Met with a bitter Pamphlet wrote against me by some of the
Presbyterian Persuasion, and found Freedom given me to answer it. I long since
expected close Opposition from that Quarter. I believe it will be increasing
daily. The Lord will make me more than Conqueror through (...) Love (...) Met
also with two Volumes of Sermons published in London as delivered by me, though I
never preached on most of the Texts. But Satan must try all Ways to bring the
Work of God into Contempt. Blessed be God, who enables me abundantly to rejoice
in all Things that befall me. Preached in the Morning at Mr. P -- n's Meeting
House: But never saw the Word of God fall with such Weight in New York before.
Two or three cried out. Mr. Noble could scarce refrain himself. And, (...)
where I would, many seemed deeply wounded. At Night the Word was attended with
great Power. One cried out; and the Lord enabled me, at the latter End of my
Sermon, to speak with Authority. Alas! How vain are the Thoughts of Men! As I
came along Yesterday, I found my Heart somewhat dejected, and told Mr. Noble I
expected but little Movings in New York; but Mr. Noble bid me "expect great
Things from God," and likewise told me of several who were, as he hoped,
savingly wrought upon by my Ministry, when there last. O Lord, let these Things
humble my Soul for thy own Name's Sake.

Saturday, November 1. Finished my Answer to the Pamphlet. God enabled me to
write it in the Spirit of Meekness. O Lord, give it thy Blessing! Preached
twice as Yesterday to very crowded Auditories, and neither Time without Power.
In the Evening Exercise, some fainted, and the Lord seemed to show us more and
more, that a Time for favoring New York was near at Hand. O wherefore did I
doubt! Lord increase my Faith.

Sunday, November 2. Preached this Morning with Freedom and some Power, but was
much dejected before the Evening Sermon. For near half an Hour before I left
Mr. Noble's House, I could only lie before the Lord and say, I was a poor
Sinner, and wonder that Christ would be gracious to such a Wretch As I went to
Meeting, I grew weaker and weaker, and when I came into the Pulpit, I could
have chose to be silent rather than speak. But, after I had begun, the Spirit
of the Lord gave me Freedom, till at length it came down like a mighty Rushing
Wind, and carried all before it. Immediately the whole Congregation was
alarmed. Shrieking, Crying, Weeping and Wailing were to be heard in every
Corner. Men's Hearts failing them for Fear, and many falling into the Arms of
their Friends. My Soul was carried out till I could scarce speak any more. A
Sense of God's Goodness overwhelmed me. As I went down, a Woman said, Come and
s;ee what God has done for me Tonight. I looked, and her Daughter, in a great
Agony, was crying out, "Oh my Jesus, my Jesus!" Another, a little Boy, was so
concerned on the Pulpit Stairs, that he could scarce stand. One of my Friends
asked him why he cried, Who can help it? said he. Mr. Whitefield's Words cut me
to the Heart. After I came home, I threw myself upon the Bed, and in an awful
Silence, admired the infinite Freeness, Sovereignty and Condescension of the
Love of God. I was unwilling to move, but was called down to the Marriage of
Mr. B -- r, whom I met at Rhode Island, who being espoused to the young Woman,
was so struck at the same Place, by my Advice, who married her this Night, and
both are going as my Assistants to Georgia. Never did I see a more solemn
Wedding. Jesus Christ was called, and he was present in a remarkable Manner.
After Mr. P -- n had married them, I prayed. But my Soul, how was it enabled to
wrestle with and lay hold on God! I was in a very great Agony, and the Holy
Ghost was remarkably present, that most, I believe, could say, Surely God is in
this Place! After this, Divine Manifestations flowed in so fast, that my frail
Tabernacle was scarce (...) to sustain them. My dear Friends sat round (...) on
the Bed-sides. I prayed for each of them alternately with strong Cries, and
pierced by the Eye of Faith, even within the Veil. I continued in this
Condition for about half an Hour, astonished at my own Vileness, and the
Excellency of Christ, then rose full of Peace, and Love and Joy. O how am I
obliged to my Enemies? God has remarkably revealed himself to my Soul, ever
since I have seen the Pamphlet published by the Presbyterians against me. O how
faithful is he that has promised, It shall bruise thy Heel, and thou shall
bruise his Head; Lord enable me to lay hold on this, during the Time of my
sojourning here on Earth.

Monday, Nov. 3. Preached both Morning and Afternoon, and perceived the
Congregations still increase. There was a great and gracious Melting amongst
the People both Times, but no crying out. Near 110 l. Currency were collected
for the Orphans; and in the Evening many came and took an affectionate Leave.
About seven we took Boat; reached Staten Island about ten, greatly refreshed in
my inner Man. A dear Christian Friend received us gladly. We solaced ourselves
by singing and praying. And about Midnight retired to sleep, still longing for
that Time when I should sleep no more. Lord keep me from a sinful and 100 cager
Desire after Death. I desire not to be impatient. I desire quietly to wait till
my bless;ed Change come. Amen and Amen.

Staten-Island and Newark.
Tuesday, November 4. Preached from a Wagon on Staten Island, to about 3 or
400 People. The Lord came amongst them. One dear young Man, in particular, as
though his very Heart Strings would break, came to me after Sermon, with strong
Cryings and Tears, beseeching me, to pray that he might be converted. Many
others wept also, and several of God's Children felt the Presence of the dear
Lord Jesus in their Hearts. Many of them rejoiced to see me again. One
gray headed Man came and told me how God had brought him from Darkness to
Light, when I was here last. My Soul was also much refreshed with the Sight of
dear Mr. Gilbert Tennent and Mr. Cross. The former has lately lost his Wife,
and though dear unto him, yet he was enabled with great Calmness to preach her
funeral Sermon, whilst the Corpse were lying before him. This put me in Mind of
Melancthon, who, at the News of his Wife's Death, said. "By Kate, I Will come
after thee ere it be long." Since his Wife's Decease, Mr. Tennent has been in
the West Jerseys and Maryland, and told me how God remarkably worked by his
Ministry in many Places. -- Mr. Cross also has seen great and wonderful Things
in his Congregations, so great that when I came to desire a particular Account,
he said, It directly answered the Account given by Mr. Edwards, of the Work of
God in Northampton. What is the Lord Jesus about to do! If the Beginning is so
great, what will the End of these Things be! Rode after Sermon to Newark, about
ten Miles from Staten Island. Preached to a considerable Congregation, but it
being dark before I concluded, I could not see what Impressions the Discourse
made. I fear but little. However, at Night the Lord manifested forth his Glory.
For coming down to Family Prayer, where I lodged, and perceiving many young Men
around me, my Soul, was as it were, melted down with Concern for them. After
singing I gave a Word of Exhortation. With what Power none can fully express
but those that saw it. O how did the Word fall like a Hammer and like a Fire!
What a Weeping was there? One poor Creature in particular was ready to sink
into the Earth. His Countenance was altered, till he looked as it were, sick to
Death. At length he said, "What shall I do to be saved?" Others were dissolved
into Tears around him; and one of my Fellow-Travellers was struck down, and so
overpowered, that his Body became exceeding weak. H^ would scarce move all the
Night after. God, I believe, was now working powerfully on his Soul. As for my
own Part I was almost spent. I vomited, threw my self upon the Bed, humbled my
self before: God, and spent the Remaining Evening in hearin^* dear Mr. Tennent
give an Account of his late Excursion. Oh he is a choice humble Minister of the
Gospel! May I follow him as be does Christ. Amen and Amen.

BASKINRIDGE.
Wednesday, November 5. Set out about eight (...) ^he Morning. Got to
Baskinridge, the Place where Mr. Cross exercises his stated Ministry, about one
o'Clock. At the House where I waited in the ^ay, a Woman spoke to me, under
strong Convictions, and told me, "She was deeply wounded by (...) my last
Night's Discourse." When I came to Baskinridge, I found Mr. Davenport,
according to ^ppointment, had been preaching to the Congregation It consisted
of about 3000 People. As I ^ent along I told a Friend, My Soul wept for them,
and I was persuaded within my self, that the Lord would in that Day make his
Power to be known amongst them. In Prayer, I perceived my Soul drawn out, and a
Stirring of Affection among the People. I had not discoursed long, but the Holy
Ghost displayed his Power. In every Part of the Congregation, some Body or
other began to cry out, and almost all melted into Tears. This abated for a few
Moments, till a little Boy about seven or eight Years of Age cried out
exceeding piteously indeed, and wept as though his little ^eart would break.
Mr. Cross having Compassion (...) him, took him up into the Wagon, which so
^^fected me that I broke from my Discourse, and (...) the People, The little
Boy should preach to them, and that God, since old Professors would not cry
after Christ, had displayed his Sovereignty, and out of an Infant's Mouth was
perfecting Praise. God so blessed this, that an universal concern fell on the
Congregation again. Fresh ^^^sons dropped down here and there, and the Cry
^^eased more and more. At length I concluded, (...) as I was going away, I
asked the little Boy (...) that he cried for?" He answered, "his Sins," (...)
asked, "What he wanted?" He answered, (...) Christ." As I passed along, fresh
Instances of (...) Power presented themselves to my View. ^any mourning after
Jesus that would not be com^^rted. After Sermon, Mr. Cross gave Notice of
^^^ening Lecture in his Barn, about two Miles off. ^^ither we went, and a great
Multitude followed, ^r. Gilbert Tennent preached first, and that excellently
well upon the Necessity and Benefit of spiritual Desertions. I then began to
pray, and felt the Spirit of God working in me mightily. A great Commotion was
soon observed among the Hearers. I then gave a Word of Exhortation. The Lord's
Presence attended it in a surprising Manner. One in about six Minutes cried
out. "He is come, he is come," and could scarce sustain the Discovery that
Jesus Christ made of himself to his Soul. Others were so earnest for a
Discovery of the Lord to their Souls, that their eager Crying obliged me to
stop, and I prayed over them as I saw their Agonies and Distress increase. At
length we sung a Hymn, and then retired to the House where the Man that
received Christ continued till near Midnight, talking of and praising, his
sweet Christ, his free-(...) Christ, etc. A gracious Woman, who had been
wrestling with God for a Display of his Power, was so overcome with a Sense of
his Goodness, that she almost swoon'd away. And at length, my own Soul was so
full that I retired, and was in a strong Agony for some Time, and wept before
the Lord, under a deep Sense of my own Vileness, and the Sovereignty and
Greatness of God's everlasting Love. Most of the People spent the Remainder of
the Night in Prayer and Praises. Two or three young Ministers spoke
alternately, and others prayed as the Lord gave them Utterance. Oh! It was a
Night much to be remembered! May the Lord make (...) of it even to the Day of
our Death. Amen and Amen.

Baskinridge and New-Brunswick.
Thursday, November 6. After Breakfast this Morning, at the Desire of Mr.
Cross, I went and (...) a Word of Exhortation to, and sung and prayed with a
few People in the Barn. There was a sweet Melting amongst them again, and the
Lord was peculiarly present with us. Before I mounted my H^^se, (...) came to
me under great Soul-Concern. A Lad about thirteen Years old told me, He never
felt Sin before Yesterday. A poor "Negroe-Woman said, she was filled with a
Love of Christ; and being too fond of the Instrument, would fain have gone with
me. Her Master a godly Man confenced: B^t I bid her go Home, and with a
thankful Heart serve her present Master. When I was upon my Horse several Women
came to shake me (...) the Hand. I asked one "whether she knew Christ?" She
said "yes." "How long?" "Three Years, said she, the third Sunday in next
March." I asked another the same Question. She answered "Yes, but I am waiting
for a fresh "Breathing from the blessed Spirit. I, with Pleasure, took my Leave
of them, and rode agreeably in Company with many Children of God to
New-Brunswick, 23 Miles from Baskinridge. Here Letters awaited me from
Savannah, acquainting me that there had been a great Mortality amongst the
People of that Place. That my Family lived in Love, the Orphans continued very
healthy, and that a Minister was coming over to supply my Place at Savannah.
This last much rejoiced me, being resolved to give up Savannah Living as soon
as I arrived at Georgia. A Parish and the Orphan-House together are too much
for me: Besides God seems to show me it is my Duty to evangelize, and not to
fix in any particular Place. In the Evening I preached in Mr. Gilbert Tennant's
Meeting House, and was led in my Discourse to comfort the Hearts, of God's dear
People. A little after Mr. B -- r (a young Minister, who, I trust, will
hereafter come fairly out for God) preached for about an Hour, and then, at the
Define of dear Mr. Gilbert Tennent, I concluded with a Word of Exhortation, The
Lord was pleased to communicate himself to me freely. My Soul was filled with
his blessed Presence. The Word fell with Weight: And after Sermon in private
Prayer with my dear Friends, oh how did my loving Savior cause my Cup to
overflow! He permitted me to talk with him as a Man talks with his Friend.
This I take to be that P^rresia, or Freedom of Speech which St. Paul speaks of,
and through the Lord Jesus Believers have Access to the Father. Oh the
Happiness of those who are really born again of God!

New-Brunswick and Trenton.
Friday, November 7. Had some Thoughts of going to Freehold and ^^^sbury, but
was prevented by the Coming of Mr. William Tennent, whom I wanted to consult
about his Brother Gilb^^^^ going to Boston, in order to help in carrying on the
Work of God in New England. After Prayer, and some Arguments pr^ and con, we
thought it the Will of God that Mr. Gilbert Tennent should go to (...). He
(diffident of himself) was at first unwilling, urging his Inability for so
great a Work, but afterward being convinced it was the divine Will, he said,
"The Will of the Lord be done." With him also Mr. R -- s was to go, a young
Minister, one of the Tutors of Cambridge College, whom I brought with a View
that he should return with Mr. Tennent. God has been pleased to work upon his
Heart by my Ministry. I cannot but think he will be a burning and a shining
Light. It being the last Time we should be together for a long Season, we
thought it best to spend some Time in Prayer. Mr. Gilbert Tennent was our Mouth
to God. -- He prayed in the Holy Ghost. Many were greatly affected. About 11 of
Clock we parted in Tears, but with a full Assurance that we should see and hear
of great Things before we saw each other again in the Flesh. I then went on
toward Trenton, in Company with Mr. D^^enport and some others. The Lord was
with us on the Way. Some Time before we reached the Inn I could say but little.
I retired as soon as I came to Trenton; lay silenty before the Lord. He heard
the Cry of my Heart, He filled it with his abundant Presence, and gave me (...)
Freedom to write something, which, I trust, (...) tend to promote his (...)
Amen!

Trenton and Philadelphia.
(...) November 8. (...) Morning in (...) Meeting House, (...) to a very large
or much (...) -- Was restrained in public preach^^^ (...) an especial Presence
of God in my pri^^ Business. Set out immediately after Dinner, (...) was
mercifully and very providentially pre^er^ed in going over two (...), which lay
in the Way, and were much swelled by the Rain. In one of them two of my
Fellow-Travellers, in all Probability, must have perished had not a Woman cried
out, and bid us stop. A Man touched, as I after (...) ^ound, by my Ministry,
hearing my Voice came and swam our Horses over the other Creek. and conducted
us safe ever a very narrow Bridge. About 8 we reached Philadelphia, though the
Night was very dark indeed. Some Friends were just come in, who had been out
another Way to meet me. Several with great J^y came to salute me. We sang, we
prayed. The Lord inclined his Ear. My Soul was filled, as it were, with Marrow
and Fatness. I retired to Rest, praying the Lord that my Coming to
Philadelphia, might be in the Fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel of Peace.
Amen, so be it*

PHILADELPHIA.
Sunday, November 9 Had several gracious Souls come to see m^. -- We prayed
together. -- The Lord much enlarged my Heart. Preached about (...) in the
Morning to several Thousands in a House ^uilt for that Purpose since my last
Depature from Philadelphia. It is 100 Feet long, and 70 Feet-broad. A large
Gallery is to be erected all around i^. -- Many Footsteps of Providence have
been visible in beginning and carrying it on. Particulars I shall (God willing)
relate hereafter. Let it suffice a^ present, that both in the Morning and
Evening, God's Glory filled the House: For there was great Power in the
Congregation. It was never preached (...) before. The Root is not yet up, but
the People ^^sed a convenient Pulpit, and boarded the Bottom. The Joy of most
of the Hearers, when they saw me, was in^^^pressible: Some still mocked.
Between Services I received a Packet of Letters from England, (...) in March
last -- May the Lord heal, and ring Good out of the Divisions, which, at
present, (...) to be among the Brethren there! -- God giving me Freedom, and
many Friends being in the Room, I kneeled down and prayed with and exhorted
them all. But, Oh how did they melt under both; My Soul was much rejoiced to
look round on them, because there were some who were now fairly brought through
the Pangs of the New Birth, who had been most mavelous Offenders against the
great God. I shall mention two only. The first is one Mr. Brockden, Recorder of
Deeds, etc. a Man eminent in his Profession, but for many Years a notorious
Deist. In his younger Days, he told me, he had some religious Impressions, but
coming into Business, the Cares of the World so choked the good Seed, that he
not only forgot his God in some Degree, but at length began to doubt of, and to
dispute his very Being. In this State he continued many Years, and has been
very zealous to propagate his Deistical, I could almost say Atheistical
Principles among moral Men, but he told me he never endeavored to make
Proselytes of vicious, debauched People. When I came to Philadelphia this Time
Twelvemonth, he told me, he had not so much as a Curiosity to hear me. But a
Brother Deist, his choicest Friend, pressing him to come and hear me, to
satisfy his Curiosity, he at length complied with his Request, It was Night. I
preached at the Court House Stairs, upon the Conference which our Lord had with
Nicodemus. -- I had not spoke much before God struck his Heart. For, said he, I
saw your Doctrine tended to make People good. His Family knew nothing that he
had been to hear me. After he came Home, his Wife, who ha^ (...) a Sermon, came
in also, and wished heartily that he had heard me. He said nothing. After this,
another of his Family came in repeating the same Wish; and, if I mistake not,
after that another, till at last being; unable to refrain any longer, with
Tears in his Eyes. Why, says he, I have been hearing him; and then expressed
his Approbation. Ever since he has followed on to know the Lord, and I verily
believe Jesus Christ has made himself manifest to his Soul. Though upwards of
three score Years old, he is now I believe born again of God. He is a little
Child, and often (as he told me) receives such Communications from God, when he
retires into the Woods, that he thinks he could die a Martyr for the Truth. The
next is one CAPTAIN H -- L, formerly as great a Reprobate as ever I heard of:
Almost a Scandal and Reproach to human Nature. He used to Swear to ease his
Stomach, and was so fond of new Oaths that he used to go on Board the Transport
Ships, and offer a Guinea for a new Oath, that he might have the Honor of
coining it. It would be endless to give Instances of his vile Profaneness. To
the Honor of God's Grace let it be said, he is now, I believe, a Christian.
Not only reformed, but renewed. The effectual Stroke, he told me, was given,
when I preached last Spring at Pennypack, though under good Impressions before.
Ever since he has been zealous for the Truth, stood like a Lamb when was
beaten, and in Danger of being murdered some time ago, by many of my Opposers,
and, in short, shows forth his Faith by his Works. I might speak also of some
Quakers, who are fairly brought into an experimental Acquaintance with Christ,
who are chosen with my self, the aforesaid B -- n and H -- l, and some others
joint Trustees for the House lately erected. -- But I mention these in
particular, because I think they are remarkable Proofs of that too much
exploded Doctrine, I mean, God's Eternal Election and everlasting Love.
Whatever Men's carnal Reasoning may suggest, yet if the Children of God fairly
examine their own Experiences, if they do God Justice, they must acknowledge
that they did not choose God, but God chose them. And if he chose them at all,
it must be from Eternity, and that too without any Regard to any Thing foreseen
in them. Unless they acknowledge this, Man's Salvation must be in Part owing to
the Free Will of Man, and if so, unless Men descend from other Parents than I
did, Christ Jesus might have died, and never have seen the Travel of his Soul
in the Salvation of one of his Creatures. But I would be tender in this Point
and leave Persons to be taught it of God. I am of the Martyr Bradford's Mind.
Let a Man go to the Grammar School of Faith and Repentance, before he goes to
the University of Election and Predestination. A bare Head-Knowledge of the
Form of sound Words avails nothing. I am quite sick of Christless Talkers.
From such may I ever turn away! Amen and Amen.

Monday, November 10. Preached Morning and Afternoon to very large
Congregations, and observed a wonderful sweet Power attend both, but especially
the Evening-Sermon. Many afterward came and told me what God did for their
Souls thereby. All the vacant Time before and after preaching, I employed in
answering my English Letters. Lord bless what was written to the Consolation
and Edification of my dear Friends for Jesus Christ's Sake. Amen and Amen.

Saturday, November 15. Preached twice every Day this Week in the new House,
one Morning excepted, when I preached in Mr. C -- 's Meeting House on Account
of the Snow. A most sweet and wonderful Power went at that Time through the
Congregation. The Lord gave me the Text I preached on just before Meeting;
directed me to a Method as I was going up the Pulpit-Stairs; and enabled me to
discourse with an uncommon Clearness, Freedom, and Power. The Effects plainly
showed that it was of God. -- The Word seemed to smite them like so many
pointed Arrows. Many afterward told me what they felt, and in the Evening I
was sent for to a young Woman, who was carried Home from Meeting, and had
continued almost speechless. When I came, she looked like a Person dead and
laid out. I prayed with her, and heard afterward that she came out into a more
comfortable State. -- Blessed be the Name of the Lord. Indeed I cannot say we
had one dry Meeting. The least Moving, I think, was one Afternoon, when I was
unaccountable carried out to talk against Reasoning Unbelievers. When I was at
Dinner I had not fixed upon a Text. When I was going to preach, I was so ill
that some of my Friends advised me to go Home. I thought it best to trust to
God. I went on, began Preaching, and found my Heart, somewhat refreshed, but
all on a sudden, my Soul was so carried out to talk against depending on our
natural Reason, that my Friends were astonished, and so was I too: For I felt
the Holy Ghost come upon me at that Time, and never spoke on that wise before.
As I was going Home, I said to a Friend, Surely some Reasoners were in the
Congregation. Upon Enquiry, I found a Cluster of them were present, and then I
knew wherefore I was so assisted. Oh who would but trust in God! One of these
Reasoners a little after, meeting Mr. B -- n, said, What! Mr. Whitefield could
not make the People cry this Afternoon. A good Reason for it, says Mr. B -- n,
he was preaching against Deists, and you know they are a hardened Generation.
Lord, take from them a Heart of Stone, and give them a Heart of Flesh. Alba,
Father, all Things are poss^^^ with thee.

Another Afternoon, there was such an universal Commotion in the Congregation,
as I never saw in Philadelphia before. One or two cried out in a most piteous
Manner, and Numbers (...) sorely, that I broke off Prayer after Sermon sooner
than otherwise I should have done. The Children of God were melted down, and
their Souls magnified the Lord. I preached on those Words, What shall I do to
be saved? And as I afterward found, was very providentially directed to that
Subject. For one Mrs. P -- r, as I have it in a Paper taken from her own Mouth,
went to Mr. Cummins to know, "Why I should not preach in the Church?" He, after
several Invectives cast out against me, said, He could not answer his Oath to
the Bishop of London, if he did give me Leave, and cautioned her against going
to hear me; adding, That if she followed or adhered to what I said, she was in
a woeful Condition." Nay, said he, You are damned if you do. With all, he told
her, He was distressed in his Soul for her, because she was a good Liver, and
brought up under pio^s Parents. Mrs. P -- r asked, If she, by God's Assistance,
could live up to the Doctrine and Example of our Savior and the Apostles, as
laid down in the New Testament, she should not do well? He answered, "Yes."
Then, Sir, replied she, I must believe in Mr. Whitefield's Doctrine. There now,
says he, you are running out again; I tell you, you are mad. Go Home and hear
him no more, and you will do well enough. No, Sir, says Mrs. P -- r, I cannot
stay away. And seeing so many People admire Mr. Whitefield's Doctrine, and you
so, bitter against him, What must I do to be saved? For you are enough to
distract me between you. You are good enough, replied Mr. Cummins, and may
dance or play at Cards and be in a far better Way than Whitefield or his
Followers. -- For my Part. I will wash my Hand^ (...) your Blood, and will
leave you. No, said Mrs. P -- r, You love Money too well, Sir, to leave this
Place. After a great deal more Conversation, Mrs. P -- r left him in great
Distress of Mind, and often repeating to herself, Lord, what shall I do to be
saved? Contrary to Mr. Cummin's Advice, she went in the Afternoon, says the
Paper before me, to hear Mr. Whitefield, and he providentially preached on the
trembling Jaylor's Words. What shall I do to be saved? Which gave the
Gentlewoman so much Satisfaction and Comfort, that she is thankful to God for
having an Opportunity of hearing that Text explained, is much strenthened,
perfectly easy, and will by God's Grace follow his Commandments. Lord, for thy
Mercies Sake, work in her both her to will and to do, after thy good Pleasure.
Amen and Amen. It would be almost endless to recount all the particular
Instances of God's Grace, which I have seen this Week past. Many that before
were only convicted, now plainly proved, that they were converted and had a
clear Evidence of it within themselves. My chief Business was now to build up
and to exhort them to continue in the Grace of God. Notwithstanding many were
convicted almost every Day, and came unto me, under the greatest Distress and
Anguish of Soul. Several Societies are now in the Town, not only of Men and
Women, but of little Boys and little Girls. Being so engaged, I could not visit
them as I would, but I hope the Lord will raise me up some Fellow Laborers,
and that Elders will be ordained in every Place then we shall see a glorious
Church, settled and established in Philadelphia. Hasten that Time, O Lord, my
Strength and my Redeemer. I cannot leave off giving an Account of this Week's
Work, without mentioning another Instance or two of God's Grace. One Woman came
to me, I think fairly converted to our dear Lord Jesus. She told me, when I was
at Philadelphia last, She came desiring that I would baptize her Child. I being
otherwise engaged, refused. Upon this the Devil assaulted her, being under
strong Convictions, in a most violent Manner, and endeavored to persuade her,
that all I had told her were Lies. She was cast into Darkness, but reasoned
thus, It is impossible that it should be Lies, or that I should be a false
Prophet, since the Word came with such Light, Evidence and unspeakable Power
upon her Soul, when she heard me. She went home, retired to Bed, and there the
Devil would fain have persuaded her to cut her Child's Throat with a Pair of of
Scissars. She being bro't into the utmost Extremity, cried and looked up to
Christ. He delivered her out of her Distress. Satan immediately left her, and
God flowed in upon her Soul. She now knows that her Redeemer lives. Praise the
Lord, O my Soul! Another young Woman, who I believe was made a wise Virgin last
Spring, and received Jesus Christ in her Heart, acquainted me, "That she
continued in great Joy for near three Days, and went as far as New Castle, to
hear me, when I took my Leave last. As she was returning, some Body told her, I
believed Election. Alas! Then, said she, (though she was converted) what will
become of me? She fell into Darkness, retired into the Woods, and by Degrees,
she told me, solid Comfort returned to her Soul. And (...), said I, do you
believe Election? Yes says she. with the utmost Confidence. It cannot but be
so. Oh that all who are prejudiced against that Doctrine were thus taught of
God! They would not ignorantly call the Doctrine of Election the Doctrine of
Devils, or cry out vehemently against the HORRIBLE DECREE. But, as an excellent
Christian observes, The Doctrine of Election is such a glorious Mystery, that
it dazzles the weak Eyes even of some of God's dear Children. But I have
reserved the most sweet Proof of God's Grace and Power to the last. About the
Middle of the Week I was called to visit one Mrs. (...) then lying on a sick
Bed, but after prodigious Agonies, brought home to God when I was at
Philadelphia last Spring. Her Husband was (...) at Sea, and since his Return
home, has greatly persecuted his Wife, denying her spiritual Friends leave to
come unto her. God now inclined his Heart to let me come and pray with her,
according to her Desire. When I went the first Time, he was not in the Room,
but was offended that he was not called up to join with us. The next Day he
himself met me in the Street, and gave me an Invitation. I complied, and
visited his Wife several Times. But never before did I see a Soul so exult in
God, and talk so seelingly of the Love of Jesus, though sometimes in Extremity
of Pain. Sometimes she was so full of God that she could not speak, and at
other Times, when she could not speak, and I bid her lift up her Hands if all
was well, she stretched them with great Earnestness. As soon as ever she could
recover Breath, she would talk of Jesus, saying that his Love was above her
Pain, that she longed to be dissolved, but was willing to tarry the Lord's
Leisure. When I told her, that I wanted to be gone too. No, says she, do you
stay longer, and bring home some more Souls to Christ; with many other gracious
Words, which dropped from her Mouth. My Soul was much enlarged to hear a
Creature talk with such Assurance just upon the Brink of Eternity. Her Husband
and other Friends stood weeping by. God gave me great Assistance in Prayer. His
Presence filled the Room, and some I thought would have cried out. Oh that this
Sickness may be a Means under God of saving her Relations precious and immortal
Souls! After my Departure, she bid one of my Friends tell me, "That she ^ed and
lived from the Doctrine which I had preached." When he asked her, What she
thought of the Righteousness of Christ? "Oh, says she, my Soul is wrapped up in
it!" Lord Jesus, let her repose her Confidence in thee even to the last. Into
thy Hands I commend her Spirit: For thou have redeemed it, O Lord thou God of
Truth!

Sunday, November 16. Preached both Morning and Evening, and collected both
Times about 105 l. Sterling for the Orphans. In the Morning my Soul was
peculiarly enlarged, though I was somewhat dejected before I left my Lodgings. In
the Afternoon, I publicly baptized five adult Women, who had undergone a
strict Examination. Before Sermon I gave them an earnest Exhortation. They
melted sweetly under the Word, and every Thing was carried on with great
Solemnity. I preached from these Words of St. Jude, But ye, Beloved, building
up yourselves on your most holy Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your
selves in the Love of God, looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal Life. The Congregation was very large, though I think not near so large
as when I took my Leave last Spring. There was Abundance of Weeping when I came
to the Conclusion of my Discourse. Great Numbers flocked to my Lodgings, some
under Distress, some to give Thanks for what God had done for their Souls, and
others to present me with something for the poor Orphans. One that was baptized
brought three Children, I baptized them, prayed, and gave a Word of Exhortation
with a melting Heart to many dear Souls. In the Evening I went with my dear
Friend Mr. Noble to take a final Leave of Mrs. D -- yet rejoicing in God.
Visited a poor distracted Woman, and afterward went to the Boys Society, where
I met with a tender hearted Lad or two; then I returned home, and at last went
to Bed, quite weary as to my outward Man, but inwardly rejoicing in God my
Savior. Oh that I could do more for Jesus Christ! He is kinder and kinder to
me every Day. Praise the Lord, O my Soul!

Gloucester and Greenwich, West Jerseys.
Monday, November 17. Was much melted at parting from my dear Friends. Had it
much impressed upon my Mind, that I should go to England, and undergo Trials
for the Truth's Sake. These Words, The Jews sought to stone thee, and go
thou thither again? with our Lord's Answer, have been for some Time lying upon
me: And whilst my Friends were weeping round me St. Paul's Words darted into my
Soul. What mean you to weep and break my Heart? I am willing not only to be
bound, but to die for the Lord Jesus. After fervent Prayer, I took my Leave of
some, but being to preach at Gloucester in the West Jerseys, others accompanied
me in Boats over the River. We sung, as we failed, but my Heart was low. I
preached at Gloucester, but found myself weighed down, and not able to deliver
my Sermon with my usual Vigor. However there was an affecting Melting, and
several (as I heard afterward) who had been in Bondage before, at that Time
received Joy in the Holy Ghost. With Abundance of Tears, after Dinner most of
Philadelphia Friends that came over the Water took their last Farewell. To see
us part was somewhat Moving. I rode on in Company with several to Greenwich,
and preached to a few, and scarce with any Power. My Animal Spirits were almost
gone, and Assistances suspended. In the Evening we traveled on a few Miles,
but my Body was more and more out of Order, and I thought God was preparing me
for future Blessings. It is good to be humbled. I am never better than when I
am brought to lie at the Foot of the Cross. It is a certain Sign God intends
that Soul a greater Crown. Lord, let me always feel my self a poor Sinner. Amen
and Amen.

PILES-GROVE.
Tuesday, November 18. Was somewhat better in the Morning; preached at
Piles-Grove in the Afternoon to about 2000 People. Saw only a few affected. God
was pleased to restrain me, but at Night where I lodged, God was pleased so
abundantly to refresh my Soul, as to make me forget the Weakness of my Body. I
prayed and exhorted with great Power in the Family where I lodged. Visible
Impressions were made upon the Hearers. Oh that they may be abiding! Ate a
little: But was enriched plentifully with that Bread which is Meat indeed and
Drink indeed. An Earnest the Lord intends Good to some Souls hereabouts, Even
so, Lord Jesus. Amen and Amen.

Cohansie, 18 Miles from Piles-Grove.
Wednesday, November 19. Had two precious Meetings Today at Cohansie. Preached
to some Thousands both Morning and Afternoon. The Word gradually struck the
Hearers till the whole Congregation was greatly moved indeed, and two cried out
in the Bitterness of their Souls, after a crucified Savior, and were scarce
able to stand. My Soul was replenished as with new Wine, and Life and Power
flew all around me. At this Place, dear Mr. Gilbert Tennent preached some Time
ago. At his, as well as the People's Request, I came thither. Blessed be God,
his Gospel spreads more and more. Lord carry it on for thy own Name's Sake.
Amen and Amen.

Salem 18 Miles from Cohansie.
Thursday, November 20. Preached twice this Day; in the Morning in the
Courthouse in the Afternoon in the open Air, before the Prison, to about 2000.
Both Times God was with us. In the Morning especially there was one cried out
and shrieked most piteously, and would not be comforted. After Service two or
three came to me quite weighed down with the Burden of Sin. They told me, God
had "struck them by Mr. Tennent's Preaching, but now "they were struck much
deeper. I gave them what Advice I thought proper, and about five left Salem. Oh
that the Prince of Peace would come and take Possession of the Inhabitants
Hearts!

Newcastle, 13 Miles from Salem, and Whiteclay Creek, in Pennsylvania.
Friday, November 21, Got hither with some little Difficulty about Midnight.
Preached in the Morning in the Courthouse. Observed some few affected, and
some few scoffing. Met dear Mr. Charles Tennent. Went with him to Whiteclay
Creek. As we passed along, Mr. A -- n, the Presbyterian Minister who opposed me
last Spring at Fork's Manor, gave us the Meeting. Thinking he intended to go
by, I did not stop, only pulled off my Hat. He turning about said, What, will
you not shake Hands? I gave him my Hand. He then asked me, To have a
Conference, as he desired when last at Fork's Manor, I told him, "Since he had
begun by sending the Queries in Public, I was "resolved to decline all private
Conversation." This, as I found afterward, highly offended him. Two or three
more of his Associates were at Whiteclay Creek: And God was pleased to appear
for me in an extraordinary Manner. There were many Thousands waiting to hear
the Word. I have not seen a more lovely Sight. I sang the xxiii. Psalm, and
these Words gave my Soul unspeakable Comfort.

In Presence of my spiteful Foes,
He does my Table spread.
The Lord Jesus assisted me in Preaching. The Melting soon begun, and the Power
increased more and more till the greatest Part of the Congregation was
exceedingly moved. Several cried out in different Parts, and others were to be
seen wringing their Hands, and weeping bitterly. The Stir was ten Times greater
than when I was here last, After Sermon I went about three Miles, and lay at
Mr. Charles Tennent's House, who has lately married a young Lady whom God was
pleased to awaken by my Ministry. Here I had sweet Conversation with Mr. Blair,
and Mr. Craighead, but being taken very ill, I was obliged to retire to Rest.
Blessed be God, there is a Time coming, when all those Interruptions shall be
done away.

O! may I worthy prove to see
Thy Saints in full Prosperity,
That I the joyful Choir may join,
And count thy People's Triumphs mine.
Fork's Manor.
Saturday, November 22. Preached in the Afternoon to many Thousands, and God
was again pleased mightily to own his Word. There was a wondrous powerful
Moving, but it did not rise to such a Degree as when I preached last Spring. I
was taken ill after Preaching. Straining caused me to vomit much. I rode about
twelve Miles, was kindly received into House with all my Friends, and thought
it advisable to retire to Bed immediately. But on a sudden, God's Presence so
filled my Soul that I could scarce stand under it. I prayed and exhorted, and
exhorted and prayed again, but with such Power that every Person in the Room
seemed to be under very great Impressions, sighing and weeping from the very
Bottom of their Soul, and one in particular roared for the very Disquietness of
her Heart. This continued for near an Hour or two; but at last my outward Man
was so weak, and my inward Communications so strong, that I was quite
overpowered. A dear Friend undressed me. The Lord gave me sweet Sleep, and in
the Morning I arose with my natural Strength much renewed. Blessed be the Lord
my God, from whom alone comes every temporal Gift, as well as my eternal
Salvation!

NOTTINGHAM.
Sunday, November 23. Rode four Miles, and got to Nottingham about ten. But it
raining much, and the People thereby being prevented gathering so soon, I
preached about one to a large Congregation, who seemed in no wise no regard the
Rain, so they might be watered with the Dew of God's Blessing. The Lord, I
believe, lets the Doctrine distill like the Dew upon them. Immediately after
Sermon, we set out in a very great Company for Bohemia in Maryland, near thirty
Miles from Nottingham, and to my pleasing Surprise, as we were riding along,
met with Captain G -- n, whom I sent over with Mr. Seward to England. He
arrived at Newcastle in the Morning, and very providentially came to me in the
Afternoon. I have been waiting for Letters (that I knew were sent me) for some
Weeks. God has kept them from me, but he has sent me what is better. O may
this teach me, O Lord, more and more to wait on, and resign my Will to thine.
For I know thou will order all Things for my temporal and eternal Good. Oh
Grace, Grace!

Bohemia in Maryland, and St. Georges in Pennsylvania.
Monday, November 24. Got hither about 11 last Night, and was kindly received
by old Mrs. B -- d, a true Mother in Israel, many of whose Family are under
very good Impressions. Read my English Letters, had great Freedom given me in
answering them, and thought it was now the Will of God that I should im^ark for
my native Country next Spring. O Lord, prepare thy Way before me! Preached in
the Afternoon to about 2000, and have not seen a more solid Melting, I think,
since my Arrival. -- Some Scoffers stood on the Outside, but the Holy Spirit
enabled me to lay the Terrors of the Lord before them, and they grew more
serious. Several poor Souls wanted to go with me, and many of their Hearts
seemed ready to break, My Soul much rejoiced in the Lord to see Salvation
brought to Maryland. I parted from good old Mrs. B -- d in Tears, and rode with
my Friends about 10 Miles to a Place called St. Georges, where a kind and
courteous Quaker received us into his House. Here God gave me great Freedom of
Spirit, made my Pen the Pen of a ready Writer, and showed me more and more
clearly the Way wherein I should go. Lord guide me with thy Counsel till thou
do bring me to everlasting Glory!

REEDY-ISLAND.
Monday, December 1. Came to Reedy-Island last Tuesday Morning, and had a
wonderful Presence of God in the Assembly in the Afternoon. Several of my dear
Philadelphia Friends came to take their last Farewell. The Holy Ghost enabled me
to preach with such Power to them and some others in the Evening that one was
thrown into strong Convulsions, by the Violence of her Convictions. Others were
in great Agonies. All I believe were melted down. -- On Wednesday, Saturday and
Sunday I preached again. -- The Lord was with us every Time. My Soul enjoyed
much of the divine Presence in the Sloop, and I was greatly delighted to see
the Captains of the Ships, and their respective Crews, come constantly to
attend to hear the Word on Shore, and join with us in religious Exercises on
Board. Dear Captain H -- l Matthew-like, was very busy in bringing his Brother
Publican Sailors to hear the glad Tidings of Salvation, and he rejoiced my
Heart with the News that some of them felt the Power of God. This Morning the
Wind springing up fair set Sail from Reedy-Island. But before I go on, stop, O
my Soul, and look back a little on the great Things the Lord has done for thee
during this Excursion. I think, it is now ths 75th Day since I arrived at
Rhode Island. -- My Body was then Weak, but the Lord has much renewed it is
Strength. I have been enabled to preach, I think 175 Times in Public, besides
exhorting very frequently in private. I have traveled upwards of 800 Miles and
gotten upwards of 700 l. Sterling in Goods, Provisions, and Money for my poor
Orphans. Never did God vouchsafe me such great Assistances. Never did I perform
my Journeys with so little Fatigue, or see such a Continuance of the Divine
Presence in the Congregations, to whom I have preached. All Things concur to
convince me that America is to be my chief Scene for Action. May the Lord
prepare me for every Thing he has appointed for me to do and suffer, and then I
need not fear being more than Conqueror through his Love.

Charlestown in South Carolina.
Wednesday, December 10. Had a pleasant Passage, and arrived at Charlestown
last Night. As we came over the Bar, I was informed of a melancholy Fire, that
broke out about three Weeks ago, and destroyed 300 Houses in the best Part of
Charlestown in the Space of about three Hours. The News much affected me,
because I loved the People, and I preac'd to them this Morning from Isaiah i.
6. Except the Lord of Hosts had left unto us a very small (...) we should have
been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah. In handling the
Subject I endeavored to show what were the Sins which provoked God to punish
the Israelites in that Manner. I drew a Parallel between them and the
Charlestown-People, and then made an Application suitable to the solemn
Occasion of my preaching. May the Lord grant it may produce the desired Effect,
and be a (...) of preserving the Inhabitants from being cast into that Fire,
which never shall be quenched!

Bethesda in Georgia.
Sunday, December 14. Preached again at Charlstown on Wednesday-Evening.
Answered some Letters that I received from England. Went on Board on Thursday;
^reached Savannah on Saturday about Midnight; Preached this Morning, and
arrived safely at Bethesda (where I found my Family comfortably settled this
Afternoon* My Soul was much touched with a Sense of God's Mercies. When I came
to pray with an old Christian in our Infirmary, it so overwhelmed me that I
could scarce stand under it. The Love of God was shed abroad in my Heart
abundantly through the Holy Ghost. Than^ be to God for these, and all his other
unspeakable Gifts, through Jesus Christ our Lord!

Monday, December 29. Enjoyed a very comfortable Christmas at Bethesda, having
God often with us in my public Ministrations amongst (...) Family and
Laborers. One Woman received Christ (...) glorious Manner, and several others
were brought under strong Convictions. On Christmas Day I married Mr. Periam to
one of the School-Mistresses which I brought out of England; and last Saturday
I also married Mr. Habersham to Mr. B -- Daughter, whom I brought with me from
Philadelphia and who was converted some Time ago at Savannah. Both Times the
Bridegroom of the Church was present with us, in an especial Manner: And many,
I hope, felt an Union between Jesus Christ and their Souls. Having appointed
Mr. D -- r to take Care of the spiritual, and Mr. II -- m to super-intend the
outward Affairs of the Orphan-House, and settled all Things to my Sa^^^faction,
finding my Call clear to England, I, last Night, took a sorrowful and
affectionate Leave of my Family; and this Day went to Savannah, but narrowly
escaped being shot by a Labourer walking behind me with a Gun under his Arm.
The Gun went off unawares, but the Mouth of it providentially was toward the
Ground. Otherwise I and one of my Friends, in all Probability, should have been
killed: for we were directly before and not above a Yard or two distant from
it. How ^^ght we to live in such a State as we would not fear to die in! For in
the midst of Life we are in Death.

In the Evening I preached at Savannah, and took my final Leave of the People,
it being inconsistent with my other Affair, to act as their Pastor any more.
Another Minister is not yet come, but is expected daily. I gave the Trustees
Notice January last of my Design to give up the Personage. Blessed be God, I am
now more free to evangelize and go whithersoever the Lord shall be pleased to
call me. I yet hope well of Georgia, though, at present, in a very declining and
piteous State. It will flourish, I believed, when settled upon a ^^ligious
Foundation. Till then God will infatuate the Counsels of Men, or bring them
Naught. It was so with New England. I am persuaded it will be so with
New-Georgia. Glory be to God, I leave behind me some who love the Lord Jesus in
Sincerity. Heavenly Father, destroy not the Province for their Sakes, and for
thy own Names Sake grant it may yet take Root downwards, and hear Fruit
upwards! Amen and Amen.

Mr. Jonathan B -- 's Plantation near Port Royal in South Carolina.
Thursday, January 1. 1741. Left Savannah on Tuesday in the Afternoon. Arrived
here this Morning about two o'Clock, with some more Friends in Mr. Jonathan B
-- 's Boat, who, with some others, came to Bethesda, in Hopes of my returning
with them. I trust, he and two or three more, since our last Meeting, are
settled in Christ, and have got Satisfaction about their Interest in him. In
the Afternoon I preached at his House to several of the Neighboring People.
The Lord made it a Bethel. In the Evening came Mr. Hugh B -- n, his Brother,
lately converted at Savannah. His Wife died sometime ago; in what Frame, the
following Letter, which he sent to a Neice of his now at Bethesda will best
testify.

Dear Child,
UNder written are the dying Words of your Aunt, which I send for your
Satisfaction and Information. She died October 7th between the Hours of Nine
and Ten in the Morning, being filled with the full Assurance of Faith in
Christ, and a joyful Hope of eternal Salvation through his Merits and Mediation.

As your Aunt and I were praying to our Lord Jesus to give her the Comforts of
his Holy Spirit to support her under the Agonies of Death, she replied, I see
him! I see him! Now I see Light. After this she continued in Prayer about half
an Hour, but her Speech failing her, we could not during that Time understand
what she spoke, only we could hear the Name of Jesus often, and Come Jesus!
Come Jesus. Then again she spoke out plainly, and said, Who would die without a
God? Now I see Light. God has let me see my Error. I had not repented of my
original Sin. O the Falseness of our Heart! O search your Hearts, before you
come to this; for they are false. Then she lay in an Agony about half an Hour,
and again spoke out, and said, God has let me see great and glorious Things
which would not be believed, if they were told. Then your Uncle R -- s coming
into the Room spoke to your Aunt S -- s, and your dying Aunt hearing his Voice,
calls him to her, and when he was come, she spoke to us and said, Mind what I
say to you; for hereafter you must all give an Account of what I now say to
you; for I speak by the Spirit of God. He has enabled me to speak to you before
I go, (for I am just a going.) Then she said, God is a just God as well as
merciful. Be diligent in searching your Hearts. Brother, tell Mr. -- he is in
the Wrong. Then she said My Pain is great, but Christ is sufficient for me. And
she repeated that God had let her s^e great Things that would not be believed,
if they were told. She said also, Follow Whitefield, God will bless him
wherever he goes. -- Don't speak lightly of him. Bless him, bless him, God has
enabled me to speak to you before I go. I am just agoing. Farewell, Farewell. God
be with you!" Then she composed herself, and lay about half an Hour, and
neither moved nor groaned, except her Lips and Tongue, and the heaving of her
Breast in breathing, seeming to be in her perfect Senses till about a Minute
before she died. -- She looked round at each of us that were about her Bed, and
then departed in Quietness. Her Hands and Arms, up to her Elbows, were cold,
and also her Face, when she spoke what is here inserted, and some Time before.
As she lay begging that the Lord would take her away, I felt her Nose and told
her, it was cold; -- she replied, Blessed be God for it, and again, My Soul
thirsts after thee, I come, Lord Jesus, I come.


Thus far Mr. Bryan, I shall only add, O Death, where is thy Sting! O Grave,
where is thy Victory over true Believers! What Fools are they that count their
Lives Madness!

CHARLESTOWN.
Sunday, January 4. Came hither Yesterday in Company with both the Mr. B -- 's,
and several other dear Friends. Had the Satisfaction of meeting with my Brother
the Captain, and hearing from him some Account of Affairs among the Brethren in
England. The Lord enable me to s^eer a wise and steady Course, when I come
among them. Preached twice this Day, and expounded in the Evening to large
Auditories. Was most affectionately entertained at the House of Mr. F -- r, and
enjoyed much of the divine Presence and Consolations in my Soul. Happy they
whose Lives are bid with Christ in God!

Saturday, January 10, Preached twice every Day this Week, and expounded
frequently in the Evening to a great Company at Mr. F -- 's. The Lord Jesus
assisted and enlightened me. The Holy Ghost applied the Word with Power. Several
acquainted me what God had done for their Souls; and one was filled so with
Communications from above, when a Discovery of Christ was made to her Soul,
that she continued a whole Night praying to and praising God. Some have fallen
away for the Present, but blessed be God, the greatest Part continue steadfast,
and are rather more forward and affectionate than ever. Enemies are more
enraged. As a Proof of it, take the following Instance. -- When Mr. Jonathan B
-- n came to Georgia, he showed me a Letter Written by his Brother Mr. Hugh B
-- n, in which it was hinted that the Clergy break their Canons, and this he
desired me to correct for the Press. I did. It was published this Week.
Immediately Mr. B -- n was apprehended and bound over, and being asked, frankly
confessed that I corrected and made some Alterations in it. This Evening a
Constable came to me with the following Warrant.

South Carolina, Ss. By B -- W-, etc.

WHEREAS I have received Information upon Oath that George Whitefield Clerk,
has made and composed a false, malicious, scandalous, and Infamous LIBEL
against the CLERGY of this Province, in Contempt of His Majesty and His Laws,
and against the King's Peace.

These are therefore, in His Majesty's Name, to charge and command you and each
of you forthwith to apprehend the said George Whitefield, and to bring him
before Me to answer the Premises. Hereof fail not, at your Peril. And for your
so doing this shall be your and each of your sufficient Warrant.

To all and singular the Constables of Charlestown.
Given under my Hand and Seal this tenth Day of January, in the fourteenth Year
of His Majesty's Reign, Anno Domini, One Thousand seven Hundred and Forty. B --
W --.

I went before the C -- J --, confessed that I had revised and corrected Mr. B
-- 's Letter for the Press, and gave Security to appear by my Attorney at the
next general Quarter Sessions, under the Penalty of 100 l. Proclamation-Money.
Blessed be God for this further Honor! My Soul rejoices in it. I think this
may be called PERSECUTION. I think it is for Righteousness Sake. Oh! how gently
does the Lord deal with me, and by these little forwar^, and, I trust, prepare
me for greater Trials! Father forgive my Persecutors. Visit them not in
Judgment, but in Mercy. They know not what they do.

Sunday, January 11. Preached this Morning upon Herod's sending the wise Men to
find out Christ, under a Pretense that he intended to come and worship him,
when indeed he intended to kill him. I endeavored to show from thence how
dreadful it was to persecute under a Pretense of Religion. Mr. W -- d telling
me, that what he did was out of a Sense of Duty, and that binding me over to
the Sessions was no Persecution, led my Thoughts this Way. In the Afternoon I
preached from these Words, 1 Kings xxi. 12, 13. They proclaimed a Fast, and set
Naboth on high amongst the People, and there came in two Men, Children of
Belial, and sat before him: And the Men of Belial witnessed against him, even
against Naboth, in the Presence of the People, saying, Naboth did blaspheme GOD
and the KING. Then they carried him forth out of the City, and stoned him with
Stones that he died. My Hearers, as well as myself, made the Application. It
was pretty close. And I especially directed my Discourse to Men in Authority,
and showed them the heinous Sin of abusing the Power which God had put into
their Hands. In the Evening I expounded on the Story of Orpah and Ruth, and
exhorted my Hearers to follow the Lord Jesus Christ though his Cause be never so
much persecuted and spoken against. Lord Jesus, keep us from being ashamed of
thee or of thy Gospel. -- Amen and Amen.

Thursday, January 15. Received several comfortable Letters from my dear
Friends at Boston; amongst whom Secretary Willard an honorable Counselor,
writes th^s: Mr. Wibb tells me, tha^ diverse young Men in this Town, who are
Candidates for the Ministry, have been brought under deep Convictions by your
Preaching, and (as he hopes) are carried off from the Foundation of their false
Hopes (their own Righteousness) to rest only upon Christ for Salvation*" The
dear Reverend Mr. (...) writes thus: "I can inform you, that the^^ ^re many
abiding Proofs that you did not run in ^ain, and labor in vain amongst us in
this Place. I could much more than fill this Paper with the Accounts I have
received from the Persons who have been impressed under the Word preached by
you. But I can only now say in general, some have been awakened who where
before quite secure, and I hope a good Work begun in them. Others, who had been
under religious Impressions, are now more earnestly pressing into the Kingdom
of Heaven, and many of the Children of God stirred up to give Diligence for the
fall Assurance of Faith. There is a greater Flocking to all the Lectures in the
Town, and the People show such a Disposition to the New Tuesday Evening
Lecture, that our large capacious House cannot receive all that come. I am sure
your Visit to us has made a large Addition to the Prayers that are going up for
you in one Place and another, and I hope also the Jewels which are to make up
your Crown in the Day of the Lord." Mr. Welsh, a pious Friend, writes thus: "I
fear I am tedious, but I cannot break off till I just mention, to the Glory of
the Grace of God, and for your Comfort and Encouragement, the Success your
Ministry of late has had among us. Impressions made seem to be abiding on the
Minds of many. The Doctrines of Grace seem to be more the Topic of
Conversation than ever I knew them. Nay, Religious Conversation seems to be
almost fashionable, and almost every one seems disposed to speak or hear of the
Things of God, Multitudes flock to the Evening Lecture, though it has sometimes
been the worst of Weather. Ministers seem to preach with more Life, and the
great Auditories seem to hear, with solemn Attention, and, I hope, our Lord
Jesus is getting to himself the Victory over the Hearts of many Sinners."
Others write to the same Effect. All Love, all Glory be to God.

For this let Men revile my Name,
No Cross I shun, I fear no Shame;
All hail Reproach! and welcome Pain!
Only thy Terrors, Lord, restrain.
Tuesday, January 16. Preached twice every Day this Week, and expounded in the
Evening as usual. Congregations I perceived much increased since Saturday Night
last, as also the Power which the Lord gave me. I never received such generous
Tokens of Love, I think from any People before, as from some in Charlestown.
They so loaded me with Sea Stores that I sent much of them to Savannah. Having
now all Things finished according to my Mind, preached my Farewell Sermon last
Night, and spoke at the Burial of a Quaker Woman, at the Desire of her
surviving Friends, I this Day went on Board the Minerva, Captain Meredith, in
which I took Passage for myself and some others to England. Thou God of the Sea
and the dry Land, be with us on our Voyage, and prepare me for the many Perils
and Mercies that await me amongst my own Countrymen. Amen and Amen.

On board the Minerva.
Sunday, January 18. Continued on Board these two Days to settle our Ship
Affairs, and dispatch some other Business. Was but Weak in Body. The Winds
being contrary, many Friends came from Charlestown, and we spent the Afternoon
very comfortably together. I preached, and the Lord was with me. Toward the
Evening our Friends left us* not without Hopes of seeing each other hereafter
in the Land of everlasting Rest, if not on this Side Eternity. Blessed be God,
that there is such a Rest remaining for his People!

Sailed over Charlestown Bar, January 24. and arrived at Falmouth on the 11th
of March. The Lord was pleased to give us a favorable Passage. About three
Days after we set Sail, we had a violent Storm, which continued about four
Hours. During the rest of the Passage, we had uncommonly pleasant Weather and
fair Winds, till we came very near upon Soundings. Afterward, the blessed God
was pleased to detain us near a Fortnight. But the Weather was pleasant, and
through the Bounty of our dear Charlestown Friends, we had all Things richly to
enjoy. In the Beginning of the Voyage, my Body was Weak, and my Soul somewhat
low. But afterward God was pleased to strengthen me both in Body and Soul.
These Words came one Day with great Power upon my Heart, Arise, Go into
Nineveh, the great City, and preach unto it the Preaching that I bid thee. At
another Time, the Lord spoke to me by these Words, Take the Foxes, the little
Foxes that spoil the Vines: For our Vines have tender Grapes. This Part of
Joseph's Blessing was one Night brought home to me with a sweet Power: The
Archers have sorely grieved him, and that at him, and hated him. But his B^w
abode in Strength, and the Arms of his Hands were made strong, by the Hands of
the mighty God of Jacob, And, at another Time, when my Soul was dejected at a
Sense of my own Weaknesses, and the Number and Greatness of my impending (...),
the Lord raised and comforted me with this Promise: Fear thou not, for I am
with thee: Be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea, I
will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the Right Hand of my
Righteousness. The Books of Genesis and Exodus, which I expounded in Course,
Morning and Evening, were much blessed to my spiritual Comfort. And the Lord
has been pleased to give me Freedom to write down some of my extempore
Discourses, which I hope he will bless for his own Name's Sake. In short, this
Voyage has been a profitable Voyage to my Soul, because of my having had many
sweet Opportunities for Reading, Meditation and Prayer. I cannot but adore the
Providence of God in favoring me with such blessed Retirements as I have
frequently enjoyed on the great Waters. I dared not expect to meet with such
Success as he has been pleased to give me abroad: And I doubt not but I shall
yet see greater Things there as well as at home. I never had such a Variety of
Trials and Changes of Life lying before me as at this Time. But I throw myself
into the Hands of the blessed Jesus, and shall conclude this further Account of
God's Dealing with me, with a Hymn composed by my dear and honored Friend Mr.
Wesley.

I.
Ah! my dear Master! Can it be
That I should lose by serving thee?
In seeking Souls should lose my own,
And others save, myself undone.
II.
Yet I am lost (should thou depart)
Betrayed by this deceitful Heart,
Destroyed, if thou my Labor bless,
And ruined by my own Success.
III
Hide me! If thou refuse to hide,
I fall a Sacrifice to Pride:
I cannot shun the Fowler's Snare,
The Fiery Test I cannot bear.
IV.
Helpless, to thee for Aid I cry,
Unable to resist, or fly:
I must not, Lord, the Task decline,
For all I have, and am is thine.
V.
And well thou know, I did not seek,
Uncalled of God, for God to speak,
The dreadful Charge I sought to flee,
"Send whom thou will, but send not me."
VI.
Long did my Coward Flesh delay,
And still I tremble to obey,
Thy Will be done, I faintly cry,
But rather -- suffer me to die.
VII
Ah! rescue me from Earth and Sin,
Fightings without, and Fears within,
More, more than Hell myself I dread,
Ah! cover my defenseless Head!
VIII
Surely thou will. Thou can not send,
And not my helpless Soul defend,
Call me to stand in Danger's Hour,
And not support me with thy Power.
IX.
Lord* I believe the Promise true,
Behold, I always am with you;
Always, if thou with me remain,
Hell, Earth, and Sin shall rage in vain.
X.
^
Just Published, and to be Sold by J. Edwards and S. Eliot in Cornhill,
THe New Creature described, and considered as the sure Characteristick of a
Man's being in Christ: Together with some seasonable Advice to those who are
New Creatures. A Sermon preached at the Boston Thursday Lecture, June 4. (...)
public at the

(...)
