A Display of GOD's special GRACE. IN A familiar Dialogue BETWEEN A Minister
and a Gentleman of his Congregation, About The Work of GOD, in the Conviction
and Conversion of Sinners, so remarkably of late begun and going on in these
American Parts.

WHEREIN The OBJECTIONS against some uncommon Appearances amongst us are
distinctly considered, MISTAKES rectified and the WORK itself particularly
proved to be from the HOLY SPIRIT.

With An ADDITION, in a second Conferences, relating to sundry Antinomian
Principles, beginning to obtain in some Places.

To which is prefixed an ATTESTATION, by several Ministers of Boston.

Boston, N. E. Printed by ROGERS and FOUL, for S. ELIOT in Cornhill. 1742.

The ATTESTATION.
HE must be a Stranger in Israel, who has not heard of the uncommon religious
Appearances in the several Parts of this Land, among Persons of all Ages and
Characters.

This is an Affair which has in some Degree drawn every One's Attention, and
been the Subject of much Debate both in Conversation and Writing. And the grand
Question is, -- Whether it be a Work of God, and how far it is so?

The most serious and judicious, both Ministers and Christians, have looked
upon it to be, in the main, a genuine Work of God, and the Effect of that
Effusion of the SPIRIT of Grace, which the faithful have been praying, hoping,
longing and waiting for; while at the same Time they have looked upon some
Circumstances attending it, to be from natural Temper, human Weakness, or the
Subtilty and Malice of Satan permitted to counter-act this Divine Operation.

But here rightly to distinguish is a Matter of no small Difficulty; and
requires both a scriptural knowledge of, and an experimental Acquaintance with
the Things of the Spirit of God.

Mr. Edwards's Discourse concerning the distinguishing Marks of a Work of the
SPIRIT of GOD, has met with deserved Acceptance, and been of great Use. -- The
following Performance, by another dear and reverend Brother in a different Part
of the Country, is also, in our Opinion, exceeding well adapted to serve the
same Design, viz. to help People to judge of the present Work, whether, and how
far it is of GOD; and to remove those Prejudices, which may keep them from
owning it to the Honor of GOD, and from coming under the Power of it to their
own Salvation.

Here the Reader will see the ordinary Work of the Spirit of Grace, in applying
the Redemption purchased by Christ to particular Souls, judiciously described,
in those distinct Parts of it, Conviction, Conversion, and Consolation: The
Necessity of Regeneration and Faith in Order to final Salvation, and the
Necessity of Conviction and Humiliation in Order to these, clearly evinced,
from the Reason and Nature of the Thing, as well as the Method GOD has
established in his Word: Mistakes, which might prove fatal and undoing,
carefully guarded against: And very safe and fatable Directions given to one
who is awakened to that Enquiry, What must I do to be saved? --

Whoever takes up this Book and reads, has as it were in his Hands a Glass, in
which he may behold what Manner of Person he is; whether a natural or renewed
Man, a Hypocrite or a sound Believer.

The Form in which it appears, is Dialogistical; in the Manner of a
Conversation carried on by Persons under borrowed Names; which makes it not the
less pleasant, entertaining, and instructive, It is a Method the best suited of
any to answer the Design: For this Way of Instruction is the most easy and
familiar; engages the Attention more closely, strikes the Mind more directly,
and gets the nearest Access to Conscience, which the Reader will easily discern
to be the special Aim of the Author; whose Name would have been a sufficient
Recommendation of the Work, had he thought it proper to have prefixed it to a
Performance of this Kind.

But in the Want of that, as many of us as have had the Pleasure to read it in
Manuscript, do with Freedom and Satisfaction recommend it to those into whose
Hands it may come, and them to the blessed Influences of the DIVINE SPIRIT in
the reading of it. And if particular Persons, while they are reading it, would
as it were place themselves in the Room of the Inquirer in the Conversation
thus represented, with an open Mind and a serious Disposition, the important
Things which are the Subject of it, might, by the Blessing of CHRIST, be
brought so close and home to them, as to put them into something of a like
Frame with that which the two Disciples were in, while they conversed with the
risen SAVIOR in their Way to Emmaus, who said afterward one to another, Did
not our Hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by the Way, and while he
opened to us Scriptures?

And in recommending this Book to the World, we would be understood as owning,
and bearing a public Testimony to, what is called the present Work of GOD in
this Land, as it is here stated and distinguished (separate from those
Disorders, Errors, and Delusions, which are only the unhappy Accidents
sometimes accompanying of it) to be such a glorious Display of the divine Power
and Grace, as may well raise our Wonder, excite our Praises, and engage our
Prayers for the Preservation and Progress of it. --

May the Children of GOD then unite in this Request, Let they Work appear more
and more unto thy Servants, and thy Glory unto their Children; And the Beauty
of the LORD our GOD be upon us!

Benjamin Colman Joseph Sewall Thomas Prince John Webb William Cooper Thomas
Foxcroft Joshua Gee.

Boston, Aug. 10. 1742.
A Display of God's Special GRACE IN A Plain and Familiar DIALOGUE, Between a
MINISTER and a Gentleman of his Congregation, about the Work of GOD, in the
Conviction and Conversion of Sinners, so remarkably of late begun and carried
on in these American Parts.
A Minister being visited by a Gentleman of his Congregation, their
Conversation turned upon the religious Appearances, which are at present such
Matter of Speculation and Discourse. -- This Conference having proved so very
serviceable to that Gentleman, it is hoped that if communicated to the World,
it may not fail of some Usefulness to others also, in these Times of general
Debates, and searchings of Heart, about the Way of Salvation. I shall therefore
endeavor as faithfully as I can, to set the Substance of that Conversation in
View, with its happy Effects; representing the Persons concerned under the
borrowed Names of Theophilus and Epinetus.

The DIALOGUE proceeded in the following Manner.

THEOPHILUS. You have doubtless heard the joyful Tidings from several Parts of
the Country, of the great Revival of Religion, of the numerous Convictions and
(as we hope) saving Conversions to God, among Persons of all Ages and
Characters, as well as most different moral Qualifications. You cannot but have
heard of the serious and awful Concern among Multitudes of every Sort, about
the Salvation of their Souls; how Ministers have been quickened and revived;
secure and sensual Persons awakened; Formalists and SelfDeceivers detected and
undeceived; Sincere Christians comforted and strengthened; and how even out of
the Mouths of Babes and suckings Christ has perfected Praise. -- I hope you
will join with me in adoring and magnifying the Name of God, for this wonderful
Display of his Power and Grace.


EPINETUS. I am afraid either to speak or think any Thing that may be
derogatory to the free Grace of God; or that may reflect any Dishonor to his
blessed Spirit: And yet I cannot but acknowledge, that many of the late
Appearances are Matter of Stumbling to me; and very dissonant to the
Apprehensions I have hitherto entertained of Religion. -- I am therefore glad
you have introduced this Discourse, that I may have Opportunity to propose my
Difficulties; and that you may obviate them; and give me Satisfaction, if you
can.


THEOPH. I shall cheerfully endeavor according to my Capacity, to consider and
answer your Objections, if you will be pleased to propose them separately; and to
lay aside all Prejudices against the Truth and the Evidences of it, that may be
laid before you. -- This last Condition I have the greater Reason to insist
upon, because your eternal Interest does immediately depend upon it; and a Love
to your own Soul should divest you of all Prepossessions, in an Affair of such
infinite Importance.


EPINET. I acknowledge, Sir, that your Conditions are just and reasonable. And
I hope my Conduct will convince you, that I am not willing to lose my Soul, by
a tenacious Adherence to my own Sentiments, a fond Opinion of my present
Safety; or a wrangling Humor and Disposition. -- I shall therefore endeavor
modestly to propose my Objections; and impartially to attend to your Answers.


THEOPH. Be pleased then to propose your first Objection, that it may be
distinctly considered.


EPINET. I first object against those FRIGHTS and TERRORS, that so commonly
abound, not only among ourselves, but in several Parts of the Country. -- Can
it be supposed, that a merciful God should take Pleasure in the melancholy
Dejections, Soul-Distresses, and desponding Fears of his Creatures? -- I must
confess, I have a very different Idea of the divine Nature.


THEOPH. No, Sir, it cannot be supposed, that God takes Pleasure in the Misery
of any of his Creatures, as such. But it must be supposed agreeable to the
divine Goodness, to deliver his reasonable Creatures from their Misery, in a
Method agreeable to their rational Nature. And that this is applicable to the
Case before us, may perhaps appear evident to you, if you will be pleased to
answer me to a few Questions. -- And I first enquire, Whether we are not all of
us, whilst unconverted sinful and guilty Creatures in the Sight of God?


EPINET. Most certainly! Both Jew and Gentle are all under in; and the while
World are become guilty before God.


THEOPH. I ^nquire again, Whether all that remain in this State of Sin and
Guilt, are not under a Sentence of Condemnation by the Law of God?


EPINET. This must also be granted: He that believes not, is condemned
already; and the Wrath of God abides on him.


THEOPH. Is not every Unbeliever liable every Moment, to have this Sentence of
Condemnation executed upon his Soul?


EPINET. That cannot be denied. For we know not at what Hour the Son of Man
will come, whether at Evening, at Midnight, at Cock-crowing, or in the Morning.


THEOPH. Is it possible for any Man to be easy and secure under a sensible
Impression, that he is an Enemy to God, an Heir of Hell and Damnation; and that
he may be, for ought he knows, before to morrow Morning among Devils and damned
Spirits, in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone?


EPINET. But has not every one a Refuge to fly to? Is not Jesus Christ freely
offered in the Gospel?


THEOPH. It Is certainly impossible to have too high Apprehensions of the Riches
of Gospel Grace, of the Wonders of redeeming Love, or of the Readiness of the
Lord Jesus Christ to save the worst of Sinners, upon Gospel-Terms. -- But I
must yet enquire of you, what those Terms and Conditions are, upon which the
Lord Jesus Christ and his saving Benefits are so freely offered in the Gospel?


EPINET. The blessed Savior freely offers himself and his glorious Salvation
to all, who will believe in him and live to him.


THEOPH. But do all Men believe in Christ; and live to him?


EPINET. No! All Men have not Faith.


THEOPH. Has any Man a natural Power to believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; and
thereby to obtain an Interest in him and his offered Salvation?


EPINET. No! our Lord himself assures us, that no Man can come unto him, except
the Father draw him.


THEOPH. Does God the Father actually draw every Man on Christ, give them a
lively Faith in him; and a Title to his Salvation; or has he any where promised
that he will do so?


EPINET. No! he has hidden these Things from the Wife and Prudent; and revealed
them unto Babes. -- To some it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
God: but to others it is not given.


THEOPH. This then is the Case of a conviced Sinner. He has a sensible View,
that he is by Nature a Child of Wrath, that he is guilty of numberless Sine
both of Omission and Commission, that he is by the Law of God sentenced to
eternal Condemnation; and liable every Moment to have the dreadful Sentence
executed upon him, to his everlasting Ruin. -- He has hitherto withstood the
Offers of Salvation in the Gospel, which dreadfully aggravates his Guilt and
Misery. -- He finds himself incapable to comply with the gracious Proposals of
Salvation by Jesus Christ; and has therefore no Claim to the Comforts of them.
Though God can, if he pleases, give him this Power, he has not Security that
God ever will. -- He knows that if he dies in his present State, he has nothing
before him but a fearful Expectation of fiery Indignation, which shall consume
him. And whether he shall ever obtain a saving Change, is to him dreadfully
uncertain. He may die suddenly in his Guilt and Pollution. He may return (as
many others have done) like a Dog to his Vomit, to final Security and
Impenitence; or he may deceive himself with a false Hope; and be found too late
with a Lie in his right Hand. -- In a Word, He has utmost Certainty of a most
dreadful Damnation, if he dies in his present Condition; and at the best but an
Uncertainty, whether he shall escape the eternal Wrath of an angry God. And now
judge you, whether a reasonable Being can possibly avoid a distressing Concern,
upon a realizing Apprehension of such an amazing State of Guilt and Danger.


EPINET. I confess my self something surprised with this Representation of the
Case: -- You have set it in such a Light as I never before saw it. -- It will
be dreadful indeed, if it should prove my own Case, -- But yet I cannot
apprehend how Convictions and Terrors are any Way conducive to a Recovery from
this State and Condition be it ever so difficult and dangerous. -- Faith in
Christ is the only Remedy; and what more opposite to Faith than these
desponding Fears?


THEOPH. The Lord grant that you and I may take Head to ourselves, that our
Hearts hen't deceived and not cry Peace to our Souls, when God says there is no
Peace for us! It certainly concerns us solemnly to consider an Affair of such
vast Importance. -- I would therefore desire you to tell me, what you
understand by that Faith in Jesus Christ, which you mention as the only Remedy
for a guilty condemned Sinner.


EPINET. I understand Faith in Jesus Christ to be a receiving him, and resting
upon him alone for Salvation, as he is offered to us in the Gospel.


THEOPH. Well now, Can any Man receive the Lord Jesus Christ upon Gospel-Terms,
while he prefers the World, his Lusts, and sensual Gratifications before him?


EPINET. No! if any Man come to Christ; and hate not his Father and Mother, and
Wife, and Children, and Brethren and Sisters; yea, and his own Life also, he
cannot be his Disciple.


THEOPH. Do you think that the gospelized World in general have such a Value
for Jesus Christ, as to prefer an Interest in him to their most darling Lusts,
their dearest Relations; and even to their own Lives?


EPINET. No! The contrary to this is most visible, in the Multitudes that go on
in their sensual Pursuits; and will not come unto Christ, that they might have
Life.


THEOPH. What do you think is the Reason, that no Means will prevail upon these
sensual Worldlings, to consider the Interests of their immortal Souls; or to
set any suitable Value by a precious Savior?


EPINET. I know of no Reason, but their blockish Stupidity.


THEOPH. That is, they have no feeling Sense of their Sin and Danger; and
therefore no active Desire of a Deliverance from it. They have no lively
Apprehension of their Necessity of an Interest in Christ; and therefore no
proper Solicitude to obtain it. -- They are in Love with their Lusts and
Idols; which must be more embitter'd to 'em, before they can be willing to part
with them. -- Their earnal Mind is Enmity to God and Godliness; and they cannot
submit to the Yoke to Christ, until the Yoke of Sin and Satan more sensibly
galls their Necks; and appears an intolerable Burden to 'em. -- Their sensual
Pleasures and Gratifications appear more desirable and delightful to 'em, than
an Interest in Christ and a Life of Holiness and Piety. They cannot therefore
help but choose them, as preferable to the Salvation proposed in the Gospel,
until an awakened Conscience discovers to them their Misery and Folly, makes
them feel themselves perishing with Hunger; and thereby puts 'em upon a proper
Concern about returning to their Father's House.


EPINET. Don't every Body know the Danger of a sinful Life; and the Misery of a
Christless State, without these Convictions and Awakenings, Frights and
Surprises.


THEOPH. They who are brought up under Gospel Light, have a doctrinal Knowledge
of these Things: but no felling sensible Impression of them. We see in Fact,
how many Persons of Knowledge and Capacity there be, who have all their Lives
had the great Things of their eternal Peace inculcated upon them in the
Ministry of the Gospel, who yet live and die as if they had no Souls to be
saved of damned, no future Retribution or eternal World before them. We see in
Fact, that among those who have a sufficient speculative Knowledge of the
Doctrines of the Gospel, the Drunkard follows his Cups, and the Adulterer his
wanton and unclean Lusts; though they cannot but acknowledge, that these are the
Paths of Destruction and Death. But then on the contrary, how many Instances
(through the great Goodness of God) have we lately seen, of a thorough
Reformation of these sinful Courses, of an earnest Enquiry after an Interest in
Christ, of an hearty Acceptance of an offered Savior; and of a holy and
religious Life, among those, who by strong Convictions have been brought to a
sensible Impression of the great Concerns of an eternal World! -- In short, it
is impossible to be otherwise, but that the secure Sinner must indulge his
Lusts while they remain so pleasant to him, and he feels no Danger in their
Gratification; and that he most reject a tendered Savior, whilst he does not
realize his own perishing Circumstances and want of Salvation. -- And on the
other Hand, It is impossible to be otherwise, but that a convinced Sinner must
be in earnest enquiring after the Way of Salvation, while he feels his Danger,
Misery, and Necessity of an Interest in Christ.


EPINET. Do you then suppose that none are brought to believe in Christ,
without such previous Convictions and awakning Concern as you speak of?


THEOPH. Awakened Sinners pass through very different Degrees of Conviction,
preparatory to their Faith in Christ. -- But I cannot see how any Person that
is arrived to an Age of rational Consideration and Choice, can receive the Lord
Jesus Christ upon GospelTerms, till he is at least brought to some sensible
Apprehension of the Misery of his present State, and of his absolute Necessity
of a Savior. -- Be you (Sir) yourself Judge in this Case. -- Can any Man be in
earnest enquiring after a Savior from a State of Sin, Guilt and Misery, which
he is insensible of?


EPINET. That Is a plain Contradiction.


THEOPH. Can any Man in earnest flee from Dangers, which the neither sees nor
fears?


EPINET. No! that is manifestly inconsistent.


THEOPH. Can any Man be willing to accept of Christ upon his own Terms; and to
forsake all for him, while he sees not Necessity of an Interest in him; but
prefers his Lusts and Idols before him?


EPINET. This likewise in a manifest Contradiction.


THEOPH. Can any Man receive Christ for his Lord, while he is cheerfully and
delightfully living in the Service of Sin, Satan, and the World?


EPINET. No certainly! No Servant can serve two Masters, who have direct
contrary Commands.


THEOPH. Well then by your own Concession, it is necessary from the Nature of
Things, that preparatory to an actual Reception of Christ, a Sinner must have
some impressed Sense, that he is in a State of Sin, Guilt and Misery; and that
he is in Danger of the Wrath to come. He must have such a Discovery of the Evil
and deadly Nature of his Sins, as will cause him to prefer an Interest in
Christ and the great Salvation, to his most darling Lusts and Idols; and choose
the Service of Christ, before the Service of Sin, Satan and the World. And what
Inducement can such a Person possibly have, to give this Preference to the
Service of Christ, but either Love to him or Fear of Danger? Love to Christ he
cannot have. For that is the Consequence of Faith; and can never go before it.
This must therefore be the Product of Fear, of such Fear as is effective of
this wonderful Change in the Frame and Disposition of the Soul. -- And now
having thus allowed the Premises, can you deny the Conclusion, that such
Degrees of Conviction as will excite a proper Solicitude about Deliverance
from deserved Wrath, are a necessary Preparation to a Reception of Christ by
Faith?


EPINET. I don't see what Answer can be given to the Evidence you have offered
upon this Head.


THEOPH. If we consider this Case in another View, you will find the same
Conclusion follow. -- A saving Faith, according to your own Description, does
as well imply a depending upon Christ for Salvation, as receiving him upon
Gospel-Terms; and can any Man be brought to this without previous Convictions
of his lost and undone State? I would here also take Liberty to ask you a few
Questions, to which I only desire a considerate and candid Answer. -- And I
would first enquire, whether the most careless and secure of our Gospel-Sinners
could be so easy and quiet as they appear to be if they expected to live and
die in their present State of Sin and Guilt?


EPINET. No! They cannot but know that they are at present in the Paths of Death
and Hell. And Sinners in Zion would be afraid, Fearfulness would surprise the
Hypocrite, if they really expected to dwell with devouring Fire; and to inhabit
everlasting Burnings.


THEOPH. By what do you suppose they ordinarily quiet their Consciences, in
such a State as this?


EPINET. By Purposes of future Repentance and Reformation.


THEOPH. And is it not a Contradiction, to depend principally, if not wholly,
upon Purposes of future Repentance and Reformation; and yet to rest upon Christ
alone for Salvation.


EPINET It seems so.


THEOPH. Could these Persons possibly quiet their Consciences with these good
Purposes, if they did not suppose themselves capable to fulfill them; or at
least, if they did not expect by their Duties to obtain that Capacity?


EPINET. No! I think not.


THEOPH. It is therefore evident, that a secure World cannot possibly rest upon
Christ alone for Salvation, while their Security itself supposes that they are
depending upon their own Capacity to exercise, or at least to obtain the Grace
they hope for; and consequently that they must be brought out of that Security,
before they can savingly believe in Jesus Christ: Or in other Words, that
Convictions must proceed their Conversion to God. -- But I go on to enquire, By
what Means Sinners usually quiet their Consciences, when they upbraid them for
particular Sins, either of Omission or Commission; or set the Gilt and Danger
of their State before their Eyes? -- You are sensible that there is nothing
more common, than for Persons to wear off such Lashes of Conscience; and return
again to former Calmness and Serenity of Mind. And how do you suppose this is
done?


EPINET. You expect, I see, that I should now relate my own Experiences in this
Case. For I cannot but be a Stranger to the Operations of other Men's Minds. I
will therefore inform you something of the Exercise of my own Soul, in the Case
which you propose. -- Though (I thank God) I have been kept from gross
Enormities; and have had a good Reputation for Religion among Men; yet I
frequently feel the Accusations of Conscience, both for the Neglect, or
careless Performance of Duty; and for the many sinful Imperfections of my Life.
These awaken me to Resolutions through God's Grace, that I will be more
diligent and conscientious in the Performance of Duty, that I will maintain a
more watchful and careful Regard to my Heart and Life, that they may be
regulated according to the Gospel of Christ: and I cannot but hope that God will
for Christ's sake, accept my Duty and Repentance; and not impute my Sin to me


THEOPH. What you represent as your own Case, is common to Multitudes besides
your self. And indeed Sir, I should be guilty of greatest Unfaithfulness, if I
did not tell you, that all this is far short of any good Evidence of a State of
Safety. -- In your Purposes and Endeavors to reform and regulate your Duties
and Conversation, you do well: but while you raise your Hope of Acceptance with
God upon this Foundation, you are building upon a Quick-Sand. You expect your
Duties and Repentance will be accepted for Christ's sake before you clear it up
to your self, that you are interested in Christ, and have a Claim to his
Intercession. Has Christ purchased for you the Power to alone for your Sins by
your Duties, your good Resolutions and Reformations; or is this agreeable to
your Description of Faith? Are Endeavors to pacify an offended God by your
Performances, consistent with your resting upon Christ alone for Salvation? --
It is plain from this Account of your Case, that instead of depending upon what
Christ has done and suffered for you, your Dependence is upon what you do, or
intend to do for him. -- You are by Nature dead in Trespasses and Sins; and how
can your Duties and good Purposes revive you? -- You owe ten Thousand Talents
to divine Justice; and will your Resolutions of future Obedience pay the Debt?
-- You have (if Christless) no Title to Salvation; and will you purchase the
eternal Inheritance with your own Performances? -- Allow me to proceed as
before; and ask you a few Questions upon this Case of yours, as you have
represented it. -- Have you ever sensibly felt the Sinfulness of your Nature,
the Hardness of your Heart; and your natural Enmity to God and Godliness?


EPINET. Truly Sir, though I ben't ignorant of this, I date not say that I have
had a sensible and feeling Impression of it.


THEOPH. How then can you depend upon Christ for Salvation, when you have no
feeling Sense of your want of a Savior; nor what that Salvation is you are to
depend upon him for. -- Permit me yet to enquire, Have you had a sensible
Apprehension of your just Desert of God's Wrath; and of your utter Unworthiness
that he should ever bestow Mercy upon you? Or to use St. Paul's Expression, has
the Law come with such Power, that Sin has received and you died?


EPINET. I have always known this to be Truth, that I am by Nature in a State
of Guilt; and altogether unworthy of God's Mercy.


THEOPH. So do the very worst of Men; and even the Devils themselves. -- But if
you have no more than a doctrinal Knowledge of this, How can you depend upon
Christ alone for Salvation, when you have not so much as felt that you are not
already safe? How can you depend upon Christ to save you from the Wrath to
come, when you have no realizing Apprehension of your being exposed to that
tremendous Wrath? What Sort of Salvation can such a Person depend upon Christ
for? -- I must yet take Leave further to enquire of you, whether you have ever
been feelingly sensible that your highest Seize in Religion are not only
Loss, as being imperfect and unequal to the Demands of Justice; but Dung (a
polluted Thing) through the Sinfulness that attends them; and the Guilt thereby
contracted? -- You are sensible from whose Experience I take this Enquiry. And
have you ever been able to say as St. Paul did in this Case?


EPINET. I cannot say that I have.


THEOPH. How then have you won Christ, been found in him, and depended only
upon the Righteousness which is of God by Faith, while you yet have no your own
Righteousness which if of the Law; and have never yet realized to your self the
infinite Defects of all you are and can do? O Sir, if you had a just View of
the best Duties, and the best Frames and Purposes that you could ever boast of
you would be deeply sensible, that the Defect and Sinfulness that accompany
them, might justly condemn both you and them. -- Bear with me once more; if I
proceed to enquire, Have you given up all Hopes and Expectations of obtaining a
Victory over your Corruptions, of obtaining a more spiritual Habit and
Disposition of Soul; and a more acceptable Performance of religious Duty; or
even any good Qualification whatsoever, by your most earnest and active
Endeavors, until you are united to Christ; and derive all gracious Supplies
from him? -- Has this View of your Impotence brought you in a Way of most
diligent Duty, to lie at God's Foot as a guilty helpless Sinner, that have no
Claim to Mercy, resolving never to rest until you are interested in him, and
are thereby renewed in the Spirit of your Mind? -- Let your Conscience
impartially answer to these Enquiries. For you may assure yourself, that it is
impossible, from the Nature of Things, to depend upon Christ for Salvation; and
at the same Time to maintain a reserved Expectation of obtaining gracious
Qualifications by your own Endeavors. This, in other Words, is to depend only
upon Christ; while you depend partly upon yourself for Santification. And yet
it is equally impossible to depend upon Christ at all, in any other Way than a
Course of diligent Duty. For by neglecting this, you practically reject him and
his offered Salvation.


EPINET. You seem, Sir, to have forgot the Subject we were upon. -- How does
all this prove the Necessity of those Soul-Distresses, of which we were
discoursing?


THEOPH. No Sir, I have not forgot the Subject of our Discourse, I will now
leave it to you to judge, whether it is possible for any Man to be seelingly
sensible of the Sinfulness of his Nature, and the Enmity of his Heart to God,
of his utter Unworthiness of God's Favor, of the infinite Defects and even of
the Guilt and Pollution of his highest Seize in Religion, whilst
Christless; and of his own Impotence and utter Inability to help himself, or
ever make his Case better by any Power of his own; and yet under a Sense of all
this Misery, to remain secure and easy. -- Judge you, whether it be not
absolutely necessary, that this View must put any reasonable Being under
Distress, proportionable to the Impression of these Things upon his Mind; or
whether it does not appear from what has been said, to be an Inconsistency, for
any Man to believe in Christ, before he has had some sensible Imprestion of
these Things.


EPINET What Necessity is there of such a Sensibility of these Things, as you
speak of? Is it not sufficient, that we know 'em and act accordingly?


THEOPH. Have we not to do with an omniscient God, a God that searches the
Hearts and the Reins, a God that demands our Hearts; and requires Truth in
our inward Parts? And can our Hearts be in those Things, which we have no
Impression of? Be not deceived, God will not be mocked with lifeless Pretenses. He
will bring us indeed (and not in Speculation only) to lie at his Foot and bow
to his Sovereignty, before he will reveal his Son in us. He will bring us
sensibly and not doctrinally only, to see our own jost and undone State, to
renounce our own Confidences; and to fly to Christ for Refuge. -- If we have
but a national and not real Humiliation and Faith, we must likewise obtain but
a notional and not real Salvation.


[It was observed, that upon this Discourse the Gentleman changed Countenance,
fetched a deep Sigh, and fat some considerable Time silent in a musing Posture.
-- After which he proceeded as follows.] EPINET. You have (I confess) given
me rational Evidence of a Sort of natural Necessity of Convictions and
spiritual Distresses, preparatory toour receiving of Christ by Faith. -- But
how does it appear, these Convictions are the Operations of the Spirit of God;
or that they are any more than the mere Exercise of our natural Passions?


THEOPH. I do no suppose, that the Spirit God does in this Case put any new
Appetites or Passions into our Souls; but that he quickens and actuates our
natural Passions, to a rational and proper Exercise. -- And that this, is his
Work, that these Convictions are produced by his Almighty Energy, is manifest
from many Considerations; and especially from this that our Lord Jesus Christ
has promised to send the Comforter for that very End, that he may reprove or
convince the World of Sin, of Righteousness; and of Judgment. John xvi. 8.


EPINET. Don't you think, that any Man may be close Meditation upon the amazing
Terrors of God's Law, and Application of them to himself, raise these
distressing Apprehensions in his own Mind?


THEOPH. It is an evident Observation, that the secure World in general will
not closely meditate upon their Danger. They will not be persuaded by any
Attempt of their Ministers or godly Friends, to realize their Misery and
Danger; and to renounce their Lusts. They will not be awakened by the most
powerful Preaching; not by the most terrible Dispensation, of Providence, till
God takes the Work into his own Hands; and then the slightest Means are made
effectual, the Alarm is at one raised and continued in the Soul of the most
secure and abundon'd Sinner. -- It is further observable, that if such Sinners
do force themselves upon some Consideration; and do thereby prick their
Consciences; and awaken some Resolutions of Reformation; their good Purposes
are (like the Principle from whence they flow) but unsteady, transient and
shortliv'd. They fall again before the next Temptation; and then perhaps will
have a new Concern revived. Thus they repent and sin; and sin and repent. --
Thus Multitudes go on, and will go on, against the Dictates of their Reason and
Conscience, until they have a new and more powerful Impression, than they can
raise merely by their own Consideration. And does not this make it evident,
that this Work is from the Spirit of God, when it procures such an effectual
and lasting Change, as no Purpose, Promise, Resolution, or Endeavor flowing
(...) the more Power of Nature, could ever procure?


EPINET. How shall we distinguish beween mere rational Convictions; and those
which (as you suppose) proceed from the Spirit of God?


THEOPH. Temporary Convictions may proceed from the Spirit of God. Sinners may
quench the Spirit, and so provoke him to withdraw his Inf^uences. But we may be
certain that those Convictions are from him, that are powerful and lasting,
that imbitter the Sinner's Lusts to him, that put him upon a most earnest and
active Care about his eternal Interests, that empty him of his
self-Sufficiency; and cause him with Diligence to fly for Refuge to the Hope
set before him. -- From whence should these proceed, but from the blessed
Spirit of God? They are not the Productions of Nature; for that is Enmity
against God. And there never was one Instance yet seen, of any Man's producing
these Effects by the Power of his own good Purposes or Resolutions, as I have
observed before. -- They do not proceed from the Devil; for he is not such an
Enemy to his own Interest, as thus to drive Men from his Service into the
Kingdom of God's dear Son. -- The Change often appears powerful and wonderful;
and therefore must proceed from a powerful and wonderful Agent.


EPINET. We often see Men wearing off the greatest Impressions; and returning
again to Sensuality: which is a Prejudice against this Doctrine.


THEOPH. It is no just Cause of Prejudice. For though Men may quench the
Spirit, and provoke him to withdraw, as I observed before: Yet how many are
there in whom we see a wonderful, sanctifying, and listing Change, who are and
continue to be New Creatures in all spiritual Respects? And does not the
Greatness and Duration of this Change, fully declare the glorious Author?


EPINET. How come it to pass, that we hear so much of these Things of late
which former Times and Ages knew so little about?


THEOPH. This Question makes Way for two further Evidences, that the Spirit of
God is the glorious Author of this Work. First, I must inform you, that the
Fact in quite contrary to your Supposal. -- Read all the most famous Authors
upon practical Godliness, from the Beginning of the Reformation; and you will find
that they teach the same Doctrines which I have now insisted on. -- Read the
Narratives of particular Conversions, not only in the Scriptures; but in all
the proceeding Ages of the Church, and in all the most distant Countries and
Nations; and you will find that the Work has always been carried on in Men's
Hearts, in a Method substantially the same with what I have described, by the
same Progress of Convictions and Humiliations. -- And how could this possibly
be, unless it proceeded from the same blessed Author? For there could be no
Conspiracy, Collusion, or Endeavors of Imitation, in Persons so far removed
from, and so unacquainted with one another. -- And Secondly whence is it that
we hear of so much of these Things now, but from the more plentiful Effusion of
the blessed Spirit? -- Whence is it that this blessed Work has spread so
extensively, far and near, among young and old; and there are so many crying
out under the Burden of their Sins; and so earnestly enquiring after the Way of
Salvation? -- Is not human Nature the same now that it used to be? -- Whence is
it that the Ordinances, that were before but as a dead Letter, do now make such
a lively Impression? Certainly this is the Lord's Doing; and it is mavelous
in our Eyes.


EPINET. How do we know that these Convictions are any Thing more, than the
natural Effects of those pungent and terrisying Addresses, from some warm and
zealous Ministers, which we lately hear of?


THEOPH. I readily allow, that a short temporary Surprise may be this Way
excited; but then this Effect could last no longer than the Cause operates.
This only could never produce a real effectual lasting Change. -- I also allow,
that God deals with Mankind as with reasonable Creatures: and when he designs
this Change in the Hearts of any, he will provide and bless some suitable Means
to effect it. If he saw us, it will be in the Way of his own appointing. -- But
can you yourself imagine, that the most pungent Address of any Teacher under
Heaven, can in a natural Way produce those Effects that are frequently seen
among us? -- Consider I beseech you, the natural State of carnal Men. They are
dead in Trespasses and Sins. And can a plain Discourse of the most zealous
Preacher, how pungent soever, awaken these dead Men to such a lively lasting
Concern about their Souls, that they can rest no more until they find Rest in
Christ? -- They are blind and ignorant, they have no just Apprehensions of
their own deplorable Condition; of the way of salvation provided for 'em;or of
the glorious Excellency of an offered Savior. And will this enlighten their
Minds, to a lively View of, and acquaintance with the Things of their
everlasting Peace? -- They are proud and self-righteous. And will this lay 'em
in the Dust, and bring them to renounce all their own Seize, Duties,
false Hopes, and Refuges? -- They have a natural Enmity and Opposition to this
Change. And will this so suddenly conquer their Aversation to a Life of
Godliness, their Love to their Lusts, Ease and Security, their natural rooted
Inclinations to sensual Pursuits; and their habitual Custom in Sin? -- Will
this cause 'em to lay aside all their Prejudices, beloved Lusts, fleshly
Interests and Endearments? -- They have strong and mighty Opposition to
conquer. And will this overcome all the Craft and Power of Satan? Will it
constrain them to forsake all their Pleasures, worldly Pursuits, merry Company,
and alluring Expectations; for their present melancholy, fearful, pensive Life?
Will it fortify them against all the Persuasions of their carnal Acquaintance,
against the Banter and Reproach of their old Companions; and against the Doubts
and Misgivings of their own unbelieving Hearts? Could any of the Orators of
Greece or Rome produce such Effects as these upon their Hearers? -- If this be
a natural Effect, what is the Reason that it was produced no sooner, upon those
who have heard so many Scores of Sermons, as pungent and awakening as that
which at last proved successful? And what is the Reason that it has not a like
Effect upon others, naturally as capable of Impression; and as well prepared to
receive it, as those who are thus suddenly, thoroughly, and powerfully awakened?
In a Word, The Apostle himself assures us, that the Excellency of the Power is
of God and not of Man; and that neither is he that planteth any Thing; nor he
that waters: but God that gives the Increase. Let who will oppose the Work,
or deny to God the Honor of it, I shall be awfully careful not to ascribe that
to poor Worms, which is manisestly (as the Apostle speaks) the Working of God's
mighty Power.


EPINET. Though I cannot reply to the Evidence you have given, that this Work is
indeed from the Agency of the Spirit of God: Yet it still remains a great
Difficulty in the Way of this, that we hear Nothing of the extraordinary
Progress of Convictions, and of what you call Conversions to God, but only
under the Ministry of those warm Preachers, who directly calculate their
Addresses to awaken the Passions of their Hearers; and to put them into Frights
and Surprises.


THEOPH. Your Intelligence has been very defective; or else your Prejudice
against these. Things has called off your Attention, from some of the most
surprising Instances of God's Power and Grace, that have been heard of since
Apostolic Times. -- If you reflect upon the first Fruits of this extraordinary
and mighty. Work of God's special Grace, in the Concersions in Hampshire
Country ( Massachusetts Bay) where of there is so judicious a Narrative
published to the World, it will be a sufficient Answer to this Objection. Don't
you know and don't we all know, that the Ministers there under whose
Instrumentality that Work was carried on, are calm, sedate, and judicious Men,
unto whom the greatest Adversaries of this wonderful Work of God could never
pretend to impute the least Tincture of Enthusiasm or irregular Heat? And if we
overlook all the other astonishing Instances of this Nature; and attend to the
last refreshing Accounts we have of the like general Progress of converting
Grace, at York, Portsmouth, and other Places to the Eastward of Boston, This
was wrote before the Work remarkably spread in many other Towns, which now
might be added.
does it not appear, that no natural Cause has had the least Hand in making a
Difference between these Places and others? -- The Ministers there are some of
our grave solid rational Men, and yet the powerful Energy of the Spirit of God,
has been as remarkably manifested there as any where else. -- Every Objection
is therefore now fully silenced; and give me Leave to say, you must be
obstinately blind, or acknowledge that this is the Finger of God. -- O take
Heed, when God is in this extraordinary Manner manifesting himself to us, when
the Lord Jesus Christ is in these wonderful Works revealed from Heaven amongst
us, that you ben't found fighting against God. -- Beware less that come upon
you, which is spoken of in the Prophets, Behold, ye Despisers! and wonder and
perish. My Friend, Beware lest you reject the Counsel of God against your self!


EPINET. Methinks if these Convictions were so necessary as you suppose, we
should have more Examples of 'em; and more Directions about 'em in Scripture,
than I can at Present remember.


THEOPH. Don't you remember, how there were three Thousand at once pricked in
their Heart from St. Peter's Preaching; and driven by their Distress to that
Enquiry, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? Don't you remember the Conversion
of Soul and of the Jailor; and their Trembling and Astonishment under a Sense
of their Sin and Guilt? -- Don't you remember that it is promised, that when
God pours cut his Spirit upon us, we shall remember our own evil Ways, and our
Doings that were not good; and shall loath ourselves in our own Sight, for our
Iniquities and Abomination? (Ezekiel. xxxvi. 31.) -- Don't you remember, that our
Lord Pronounces those blessed, that are poor in Spirit, that mourn, that hunger
and thirst after Righteousness; and that weep? (Matthew. v. 3. Luke vi. 21.) --
Don't you remember, that an awakening Sense of our Guilt and Unworthiness is
recommended to us, in the Story of the Publican? (Luke xviii. 13.) -- Don't you
remember the Parable of the Prodigal Son, who was brought to see himself
perishing with Hunge, before he though it of returning to his Father's House; and
brought to approach his Father's Presence with a most humbling Apprehension,
that he had finned against Heaven and in his Sight; and was no More worthy to
be called his Son? (Luke xv.) -- Don't you remember, that Sinners are exhorted
to break up their fallow Ground, Jer.iv. 3. to rent their Hearts and not their
Garments, and turn unto the Lord their God, (Joel ii. 13.) to awake out of
their Sleep and arise from the dead, that Christ may give them Light? (Ephesians. v.
14.) Don't you remember what Carefulness was wrought in the Corinthians, what
cleaning of themselves, what Indignation, what Fear, what vehement Desire, what
Zeal, what Revenge? (2 Cor. vii. 11.) -- You certainly cannot forget what I but
just now showed you, that our blessed Savior promised to send the Comforter to
this very End, that he should convince the World of sin; nor can you forget
that our Lord came, not to call the Righteous; but Sinners to Repentance.
(Matthew. ix. 13.) -- But the Time would fail me, should I enter upon a
particular Detail of the many Passages of scripture, to the same Purpose. --
What has been said is sufficient to convince you, that the Scriptures are not
so silent in this Case, as you seem to insinuate. And it concerns you and I to
take Care, that our Hurt is not healed slightly; and that we don't say Peace
Peace, when there is no Peace, according to that Jer. viii. 11.


EPINET. Well, Sir, I must confess that I have had no Experience of these
Things; and am therefore afraid I have hitherto built my Hopes upon the Sand!


THEOPH. The Lord make these your Fears introductory to a more sure Foundation
of solid Hope and lasting Comfort.


[Upon this the Gentleman made a considerable Pause; and appeared very
thoughtful; But after a While seemed something to recover himself, and
proceeded.] EPINET. If Convictions, according to your Representation of them,
are allowed to be a necessary Preparation to Conversion, I am yet incapable to
account for some wonderful Things that I have lately heard of.


THEOPH. What Things do you refer to?


EPINET. One Thing is the CRYING OUT of considerable Numbers at a Time, under a
real or pretended Fright, whereby the Congregation is put into Confusion, the
Minister's Voice drow'd; and every one's Mind called off from their Devotions,
to attend to these Exclamations. -- These Things I have several Times seen my
self; and I confess, they are and cannot but be Matter of stumbling to me.


THEOPH. Don't you think Persons may have such sudden and powerful Impressions
of their Guilt and Danger made upon their Minds, that they cannot restain from
these outward and audible Expressions of their inward Agony and Distress?


EPINET. This may possibly be the Case with some; but I cannot think you will
pretend, that all these OUTCRIES are of divine Original. -- I have known some
of those that have been noted and famous for repeated Exclamations in Public,
whose future Conversations have not given the best Evidence in their Favor.


THEOPH. And have you known none of those that have thus openly expressed their
distressing Concern, who by their future Conduct have manifested a lasting
Change, both in their Hearts and Lives?


EPINET. I must acknowledge, that there are a considerable Number, of whom I am
obliged to make that charitable Conclusion: A Number that I am personally
acquainted with, who were before careless, secure and even profligate Persons,
but from the Time of these public Exclamations, have reformed their former
sensual Lives; and appear to be serious, devout, and truly religious.


THEOPH. This then must make It evident, that their Convictions are from the
SPIRIT of Grace, for the Reasons I have before assigned; if their inordinate
Passion be allowed to flow from their own Infirmity.


EPINET. But what shall we say so those others, of whom I spoke before?


THEOPH. According to what Light I at present have in this Affair, from what
Observations I have my self had Opportunity to make when I was lately abroad,
and from what Informations I have had about these Things, I have been ready to
come into the following Conclusions. -- I first take it for granted, that the
Power and Grace of God have remarkably appeared, upon some of these Occasions.
The sanctifying and abiding Effects of some of these convictions do loudly and
manifestly declare, that they proceed from God himself. -- Yet I cannot help but
conclude, that there has been a great deal of human Infirmity sometimes
discovered in this Case. Perhaps some of those who have thus openly proclaimed
their Distress, might have put a greater Restraint upon their passions, if they
had with the utmost Care and Pains endeavored it. -- Nay, I have been
informed, that some have supposed it their Duty thus openly to give Vent to the
Agonies of their Mind, rest they should quench the Spirit of God. -- And if
some of our Ministers have given too much Encouragement to these Exclamations,
this Circumstance of the Work (on that Supposition) will not appear so wonderful.
-- And it may besides, probably have happened that some who have (through the
Influence of the Spirit) been so deeply affected with a Sense of their Sin and
Misery, that they really could not r^frain these public Exclamations, have
thereby so alarmed the softer passion^ (...) ^any others, as to excite them
(from a (...) pathy) to break forth in like Cries (...), though they have had
no other speci(...)ons upon their Minds. I think, (...) something of this Kind
my self. (...) be wonderful, if such as these (...) themselves to be but stony
Ground- (...) And if any should be so prodigiousl(...) as to counterseit these
Degrees of (...) from mere Ostentation, and a Desire to be (...) religious, as
they find others have been for the same Reason, this also would add to this
Kind of Appearances. But Charity hops all Things.


EPINET. This Representation of the Case does (I confess) appear to be just and
satisfactory.


THEOPH. You must then allow, that none of these unusual Appearances are any
just Prejudice against the Necessity of Convictions, preparatory to our saving
Conversion.


EPINET. That Is true; but there are other Appearances, that have been no less
surprising; and are more of a Stumbling Block to me, than those already
mentioned.


THEOPH. What do you mean?


EPINET. When I was at -- while Mr. -- was preaching, I saw some of the Hearers
first TREMBLE, like paralitick Persons, or rather like Persons shaken with a
violent Ague; and then some of 'em fell upon the Ground in a SWOON, and lay for
some Time under considerable convulsive Motions. -- These raise strange Idea's
in my Mind.


THEOPH. I have not seen any of these Things my self: and am not therefore so
capable to form a Judgment about them. It may be safest for you and I to
suspend our Judgment of 'em, till we see what Fruits and Consequences appear.
-- On the one Hand, God can (if he pleases) make as powerful Impressions upon
Men's Minds by his Spirit, as he did upon Paul's by a Light from Heaven, that
shall suddenly and forceably cast 'em to the Ground. -- But on the other Hand,
as this has not been his usual Dispensation, I don't know that we have any
Warrant to expect such Things; not to conclude from these Agitations,
separately considered, that they necessarily are, or are not, the Consequences
of the Operations of God's Holy Spirit. -- Sudden and great Surprises may
produce strange Effects upon the animal Economy; whether with, or without any
due Impressions of Sin. But (as I have shown you before) a bare Surprise will
never raise Sinners from their State of spiritual Death; and procure a
sanctifying Change in their Hearts and Lives. If this therefore be the
Consequence of these unusual Appearances, give GOD the Glory; for the Work is
certainly from Him. If the Excess of Term and Passion be allowed to flow from
human Infirmity; yet the Change it self in its whole Progress, whether
considered as preparatory or saving, can proceed from Nothing else (as I have
before proved to you) but from thus Working of almighty Power whereby God (...)
even to subdue all Things to himself. -- But when on the contrary, we may
safely suspect this to be no more than a natural Surprise, or at most but a
temporary Conviction when there is no lasting good Effect thereby produced.


EPINET. I don't know what to say to these Things. For my Part I don't
understand 'em.


THEOPH. But cannot you leave these Things to God and Time to discover; and in
the mean while make it your earnest and Solemn Business to obtain those
gracious Qualifications, that you are certain you must obtain, or perish
forever?


EPINET. The Lord give me a Heart to comply with your Advice. I Am sure, it is
high Time to look about me; and will may Destruction from God be a Terror to
me, if I have not yet taken the first Step toward Salvation, as I am awfully
afraid that I have not.


THEOPH. It is indeed of infinite Importance for every one to see to it, that
their Hope for Eternity is well-founded; and to be now in Earnest striving to
enter in at the strait Gate, while the Day of Visitation lasts. And in Order to
this, it is of great Concern, that the Mind be wholly freed from all
Prejudicies against the Methods of converting Grace.


EPINET. That the present Conference may have that happy Effect upon my Mind,
as to remove all the Prejudices that I have heretofore entertained, and give me
a just View and Apprehension of Things, I shall take the Freedom to propose
some further Difficulties, from these late Appearances, which I don't know how
to solve; hoping for the Continuance of your friendly Assistance.


THEOPH. I shall rejoice in being any Way serviceable to your best Interests.
Be pleased therefore to propose your Difficulties.


EPINET. I cannot understand those excessive JOYS, which many of our late
Converts manifest in a very extraordinary Way and Manner. -- Some seem to be
acted with the most rapturous Exults; while others under the same comfortable
and delightful Apprehensions, fall into a Syncope, and faint away, remaining
for some Time under a Prostration of bodily Strength.


THEOPH. Can a weary and heavy-laden Sinner possibly do otherwise than rejoice,
upon his obtaining good EVIDENCES of an Interest in Christ and the Favor of
God; and thereby his Freedom from the dreadful Burden of Guilt, and amazing
Apprehensions of the Wrath of God, with which his Soul was so greatly
oppressed? Don't the Apostle accordingly tell us, that being justified by
Faith, we have Peace with God, -- and rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God?


EPINET. But the Text you mention, speaks nothing of those extatick Joys, which
have lately been so much talked of.


THEOPH. If that Text does not speak of such extraordinary Joy, there be many
other Texts of Scripture that do particularly speak of this also. Such as that,
(1 Pet. i. 8.) In whom believing, ye rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of
Glory. And that, (Ephesians. i. 13, 14.) After that ye believed, ye were sealed with
that holy Spirit of Promise, which is the Earnest of your Inheritance. -- You
certainly cannot have seen or heard of any Thing of this Kind, superior to JOY
UNSPEAKABLE and full of GLORY. And it is equally certain from the Nature of
Things, that Nothing can exceed the EARNEST, first Fruits, or Foretasts of the
future INHERITANCE. -- you must therefore acknowledge, that the Scriptures do
speak of Joys as eminent both for Kind and Degree, as any of those Instances
can be, which you refer to.


EPINET. How then does it come to pass, that we have heard nothing of this Kind
heretofore? Were there no Christians in the World till n^w?


THEOPH. This Question is founded upon a false and mistaken Supposition. --
These Joys have been experienced by very many of the Chrildren of God, in all
Ages and Dispensations of the Church. And I have met with former Instances of
this Kind more eminent and remarkable, than any of a late Date, that I have
heard of. -- It must indeed be supposed that in this happy Time of a more
general Effusion of the blessed Spirit, Instances of this Kind will be more
numerous; and these Experiences more freely spoken of.


EPINET. Then you suppose these Joys to proceed from the immediate Influences
of the Spirit of God.


THEOPH. Be pleased to read Romans viii. 15, 16. and try whether you yourself can
dare to think otherwise, than that it is the Spirit of Adoption, whereby
Believers can so joyfully cry Abba Father; and that this proceeds from the
Witness of the Spirit himself with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God.


EPINET. It seems to me an invincible Objection against this, that some have
experienced these self-same rapturous Joys, whose future Conversations have not
exhibited the Fruits of the Spirit; and have been very far from Evidences of
their good State. -- Can it be supposed, that the Spirit of God will witness to
the Adoption of proud, dishonest, and worldly Persons?


THEOPH. How do you know that those have experienced the same Kind of Comfort,
the self-same Joys that others speak of? -- These Joys of the Holy Ghost are
certainly incommunicable to any who han't themselves had the Experience of
them; or as the Apostle expresses it, they are unspeakable. They are a new
Name written, which none can know, but they that have it. -- Some Persons,
alas, may (from animal Impressions, or from diabolical Delusions) imagine that
they have these Sealings of the Spirit; and be lulled asleep in their Carnality
and Security, by this vain Dream. -- In this Way the Devil plays a sure Game;
and, no Doubt, often transforms himself into an Angel of Light, to this End,
that he may keep People secure, by an imaginary Experience of a State of
Safety. He never acts more like a Devil; no is he in any Shape more to be
feared, than in this plausible Disguise.


EPINET. How then shall we distinguish the Sealings of the blessed Spirit, from
animal Impressions, or diabolical Delusions?


THEOPH. Though I have told you before, that these divine Experiences are
incommunicable, inexpressible to those who are Strangers to them, yet there may
be a certain and safe Distinction made between the one and the other, by these
following Rules.

First, False and delusive Joys never do, but the unspeakable Joy and Comfort
of Believers always does, flow from good Evidences of a justified State. -- The
Spirit of God never does set his Seal to a Blank; nor cause Persons to rejoice,
they don't know why, or for what. -- They therefore, who depend upon their
Joys, as the only Evidence of a justified State, are always deceived: But they
whose Rejoicing flows from good Evidences of a justified State, are never
deceived. -- In those who are Christians indeed, this is the Order. They are
first justified by Faith, and have Peace with God; and thence rejoice in Hope
of his Glory. -- Should I congratulate you upon your Accession to the
Government of this Province, it might fill you with sudden Joy, from your
imaginary Promotion: But as this Rejoicing had no Foundation, it must quickly
end in Disappointment and Vexation. But should I bring you the King's Letters
Patent, vesting you with that Dignity, your Joy would be rational and grounded.
The Application of this to the present Case is easy and familiar. And then
Again. --


EPINET. Pardon me, Sir, if I take Liberty to interrupt you, that I may (before
you proceed further) enquire whether this Distinction of yours (which I
acknowledge to be most just and scriptural) don't necessarily conclude against
most of those sudden transporting Joys, of which we are treating. For how can
these flow from good Evidences of a justified State, which are such quick
Transitions from greatest Darkness and Distress?


THEOPH. Don't you think, that the Spirit of God can make a quick Discovery of
Jesus Christ, to the most dark and distressed Soul; and enable him to give a
speedy, hearty, and sensible Consent to the Gospel-Offer? -- Suppose the Case
to be (as it frequently is) that a Person is at least under a most
uncomfortable Suspense with Respect to his State. He sees many dark Symptoms
upon his Soul; and is filled with awful Jealousy of the Event; if not under
greatest Agony from a dreadful Expectation of eternal Misery. In the Time of
this thick Darkness, the Spirit of God shines with a surprising Light into the
Soul, discovers the Fullness and Sufficiency of Christ, and his Readiness and
Willingness to save all that come to him, enables the poor trembling Soul
heartily and willingly to accept this precious Savior upon his own Terms; and
to feel that he does so. By this Means he finds Joy and Peace in Believing. --
Now, in this Case, his Rejoicing is founded upon the most sensible Evidence of
a true Faith in Christ; though perhaps there may be but little or no
discernable Distance of Time, between his acting Faith in Christ, and this
ravishing Fruit of it. The Continuance or Renewal of this Joy in Believes is in
like Manner accompanied with such Outgoings of the Soul to Christ, and such a
shedding abroad of the Love of God in their Hearts, as carries its own Evidence
with it. -- They have Reason to rejoice, or else it would be a fallacious and
absurd Joy.


EPINET. This Explanation of the Case, removes the Difficulty beyond my
Expectations. -- You Will now be pleased to proceed, to give the other
Distinctions, you were about to propose, between the Souldeluding Joy of the
Hypocrite, and these Sealings of God's holy Spirit.


THEOPH. I would ( Secondly) observe, that the Joy of the Hypocrite tends to
exalt his Spirit, and life him up with a high Opinion of himself; it causes him
like the Pharisees of old, to think himself righteous and to desoise others:
But the Joy of the true Believer does always exceedingly humble his Soul, and
lay him low, under a deep Sense of his Vileness and Unworthiness. It fills him
with admiring, and adoring Thoughts of the wonderful distinguishing Grace of
God, to such a guilty and polluted Creature as he is. And

Thirdly, The Joy of the Hypocrite tends to Security; and to more Negligence,
slothfulness, and Formality in Duty: But the Joy of the true Believer has an
animating and quickening Influence upon him, in all the Duties of a religious
Life. It causes him to heartily love, and diligently attend all the Ordinances
of God; and to mount up with Wings as the Eagle, it run and not be weary, to
walk and not saint.

Fourthly, The Joy of the Hypocrite leaves him under the Dominion of his Lusts,
more careless of his Heart and Life, more bold and confident in the Commission
of Sin, from an Apprehension of the Safety of his State: But on the contrary,
the Joy of the true Believer causes him to loath himself for all his
Iniquities and Abominations; and from a Principle of Love to God, to be more
careful to approve himself to him; and more fearful of offending him. -- In a
Word, These ravishing and transporting Influences of the blessed Spirit, are
always a happy Source of habitual SpiritualMindedness, of Holiness toward God,
and Righteousness toward Men. For the Fruit of the Spirit is in all Goodness,
and Righteousness, and Truth.


EPINET. Are we not in great Danger of Mistake, in the Application of these
Rules?


THEOPH. I see no great Danger of Mistake by those, who will seriously and
impartially attend to 'em. -- For, on the one Hand, Can the Devil himself
delude any Soul by good Evidences of a justified State, and by the Exercise of
a lively Faith? Or will he endeavor by these transporting Comforts, to make
any Man walk humbly with his God, to quicken him in his spiritual Walk, to
embitter his Sins to him; and make him more watchful over his Heart and Life;
and more spiritual and heavenly in his whole Conversation? This cannot be. Such
Joys therefore must always be acknowledged to be the Fruits of Gods blessed
Spirit; and the Manifestation of his Love to the Soul. -- And, on the other
Hand, It is impossible that the Spirit of God should delude Men with false,
groundless, or unreasonable Comfort and Joy; or lead them by his divine
Influences to Pride, Self-Opinion, and Vanity of Mind; and to Hypocrisy and
Formality, Boldness and Security in Sin. This Joy therefore, however rapturcus
and extatic can be no other than a dangerous and fatal Delusion.


EPINET. I cannot but acknowledge, that you have given a just and reasonable
Solution of my Difficulties in this Case; and yet these Things are what I have
no sensible Apprehension of. But alas! that is what you cannot help me to. You
have convinced me, that Nothing but the powerful Influences of the blessed
Spirit of God can beget a saving Change in me, or give me the Comforts of it,
if I had it. And how should I except to know any Thing about this Joy and
Comfort, when I am afraid I know nothing else a I ought to know; and have yet
laid no Foundation for Rejoicing! -- However, since we have begun upon these
Subjects, I will take Liberty to be further troublesome to you, in proposing
one or two more of the Difficulties, I have had on my Mind from the late
Appearances, if your Patience will hold out.


THEOPH. Indeed, Sir, there is no resting with Safety in such a State, as you
apprehend your own to be. -- Certain it is, that you are either a Child of God,
or his Enemy; either an Heir of Heaven, or of Hell; either in a converted
State, or upon the Borders of eternal Destruction. You cannot be insensible,
that this is not a trifling Affair: but that it infinitely concerns you to see
to it, that you be not too late ashamed of your Hope. -- I though it it my Duty to
use this Freedom with you: and I hope you will accept it (as I am sure it is
designed) for an Act of Kindness and Friendship. -- As for the other
Difficulties you speak of, I hope your proposing them will not be unserviceable to
either of us; and I shall therefore be heartily willing to contribute what I
can toward their removal.


EPINET. I confess there is something else of greater Importance for me, than
to be finding Fault with other Men's Conduct. But I have Grounds to hope from
what I Have already experienced, that this Conference may serve to make my own
Path more plain before me: and therefore I shall proceed to inform you, that I
cannot understand the new Method, of discoursing about religious EXPERIENCES, in
all Company, and upon all Occasions, so very freely and commonly.


THEOPH. I hope you are not against Men's improving their Opportunities
together in conversing upon religious Subjects, and in Endeavors to assist and
quicken one another in the Way to the Kingdom of God. -- They that fear the
Lord, speak often one to another, and God keeps a Book of Remembrance; and they
shall be his, in the Day when he binds up his Jewels.


EPINET. There may sometimes be Occasion for such Discourse, when Christians
meet together. -- But do you suppose, that Religion should always be the
turning Point of Conversation?


THEOPH. I acknowledge we may be called by Business, or out of Civility to
others, and sometimes merely for the Diversion of our own Minds, to discourse
upon other Subjects. -- But as Religion is infinitely the most important
Concern, so it should certainly be most upon our Hearts; and then it would also
be most upon our Lips. For, out of the Abundance of the Heart, the Mouth
speaks. And it is indeed the Scandal of Professors, that they spend away
their social Opportunities in worldly, vain, trifling Discourse, as if they
came into the World for no other End, but merely to amuse themselves and one
another. -- But would they duly consider, that for every idle Word they speak,
they must give an Account in the Day of Judgment, they would be more careful
to follow that Advice (Ephesians. iv. 29.) to have their Communication such as it
good for the Use of Edifying, that it may minister Grace unto the Hearers. And
that Advice (Col. iv. 6.) Let your Speech he always with Grace, seasoned with
Salt. -- It is most evident from the Importance of religious Concerns, from the
infinite Value of our own Souls and the Souls of our Neighbors, as well as
from the plain Directions of the Word of God, that we should improve our
Occasions of conversing together ordinarily and chiefly in religious Discourse.


EPINET. What if we fall into the Company of such, to whom this Discourse would
be most burdensome and disagreeable?


THEOPH. The Apostle's Exhortation ( Heb. iii. 13.) is a sufficient Answer to
that Question: Exhort one another daily, while it is called to Day, left any of
you he hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin. -- The more irreligious any
Person is, the more should his perishing Soul be pitied; and the more Need has
he to be awakened, and excited to flee from the Wrath to come. -- There may
indeed he some open, abandoned, and profane Scossers at Religion; to whom our
Lord's Direction is applicable, in Matthew. vii. 6. Give no that which is holy
unto Dogs; neither cast ye your Pearls before Swine. But then, they should be
notoriously such, before we give over our charitable Attempts for their
Recovery.


EPINER. The Lord forgive me the horrible Mispense of all my past Opportunities
in Society! Perhaps you have purposely gone aside from the Case I proposed,
that you might reprove me for sinning away so much Time, in idle impertinent
Conversation: And I must own, there was good Reason for it. -- But what I
desired your Observations upon, was the Practice of many of our new Converts,
who are for discoursing of their own Experiences and Seize in Religion,
and examining others, upon almost every Occasion of Conversation.


THEOPH. You Will acknowledge ^^^t there may be Occasions to communicate (...)
religious Experiences one to another; and that it is at least sometimes a Duty
to do so. -- The Scriptures seem to require this of us. We should comfort them
which are in any Trouble, with the Comfort, wherewith we our selves are
comforted of God. 2 Cor. i. 4. -- We should comfort our selves together, and
edify one another.

1 Thessalonians. v. II. -- On some we should have Compassion, making a Difference;
and others we should save with Fear. Jude 22, 23.


EPINET. I doubt not, but that there are proper Occasions for these Things. But
don't it too much favor of Ostentation, to be so commonly speaking of our own
religious Seize, as though we were recommending ourselves for Examples and
Patterns to others?


THEOPH. There is (I confess) great Danger, not only of apparent, but of real
Ostentation, and spiritual Pride, by making our christian Experience the
ordinary Topic of Conversation. -- Christians themselves have unhappy Remains
of Vanity and Pride in their Hearts, which are too apt to be elated, and blown
up by every Representation of their own Excellencies. For which Reason they
should be very cautious of pouring Oil upon that Fire, which is so apt of it
self to blaze. -- They are also under the strict and curious Inspection of the
carnal World, who are always ready to take Occasion of Prejudice, from every
imaginary Appearance of Pride, or Self Exaltation. This should therefore excite
their Caution, left they bring Reproach upon the Operations of God's Holy
Spirit; and cause the good Ways of the Lord to be evil spoken of. -- And what
is as much to be feared as either of the Things now mentioned, is the Danger of
tempting and prompting some Pretenders in Religion, to exceed the Truth, in the
Narrative of their Seize, and to recommend themselves to their Company,
by speaking of Experiences which they have never had, when these are made the
common Subject of Discourse.


EPINET. What then are the proper Occasions for communicating our spiritual
Experiences to one another?


THEOPH. When Persons are in Darkness and Distress about their State, it is
needful that they should make their Case known, to their Minister, or some
faithful experienced Christian, that they may obtain that Assistance, Comfort,
or Counsel, which their Condition requires. For how can we comfort those in
Trouble (as directed, in forecited 2 Cor. i. 4.) if they don't make their
Trouble known? -- When a convinced Offender is so distressed with the Burden of
some particular Sin, or with some particular Darkness and Difficulty relating
to his Conduct, that he can find no Means to case his Mind, or quiet his
Conscience, he should in this Case also make his Difficulty known; and seek
Direction from his Minister, or some faithful Friend, that his wounded
Conscience may be safely healed, Here that Rule takes Place, Jam. v. 16.
Confess your Faults one to another; and pray one for another. -- Moreover, when
imparting our Experiences, whether we be applied to, or not may be likely to
alleviate the Agonies of any wounded and distressed Souls, it is then proper to
let such know, how we our selves have conflicted with the like Darkness,
Trials, or Temptations; and to endeavor to comfort our selves together, and
help them (if possible) to the same Comforts wherewith we have been comforted
of God, according to the forecited 1 Thessalonians. v. 11. and 2 Cor. 1. 4. --
Further-more, when by conversing with any, we find them building their Hope
upon a false Foundation, it may be seasonable to let 'em know how we our selves
have formerly been under the same dangerous Deceit; and how by the Power of
divine Grace, our Feet have been plucked out of the fatal Snare. This is a
likely Means to save them by Flar, pulling them out of the Fire, according to
that in Jude 23. This is the Course the Apostle took, to detect the
Self-Deceivers, Phil. 3. 4, etc. -- I may also add, that intimate Christian
Friends may profitably improve Occasions to assist, comfort, and quicken one
another, by mutual Communications of religious Experience. For as Iron
sharpneth Iron, so may a Man this Way sharpen the Countenance of his Friend.
Prove. xxxvii. 17. -- Upon the whole, I think that an ordinary and common
Discoursing of our spiritual Experiences, except upon such Occasions as I have
mentioned, is not so likely to promote the Interests of Religion; at least
without the utmost Guard against those Indiscretions, which to too frequent the
familiar Practice of it may tend to betray us into.


EPINET. I cannot but highly approve what you have said upon this Subject: but
there is one Thing you have not yet spoken to; and that is a Claim to EXAMINE
and ADMONISHES all they meet with that some Men seem to pretend to. I would be
glad to hear what Rules and Directions you think proper in that Case also.


THEOPH. You have now imposed upon me a very difficult Task: It is here
scarcely possible to suit Directions to every particular Case.


EPINET. Are we then, in this Case under no Rule for our Guidance?


THEOPH. We are under the general Rule of Charity to our Neighbor; and as to
the particular Application of that Rule, Wisdom is profitable to direct. And
these following Methods may be observed. -- We should always enter upon
Discourses of this Nature, in the most tender, kind and obliging Manner
possible, that we may insinuate ourselves into the Assections, and not ruffle
the Passions of those with whom we converse. Thus did our LORD himself by the
seven Churches of Asia, as you may see in his Epistles to them. -- We should
endeavor to describe the Danger, and to detect the Sins and Delusions of some
Men, in a more general and distant Manner, without special Application to them;
when we have Reason to conclude, that they would not bear personal Examination
and Admonition. Thus we may without Offense, in the most strong and pointed
Manner, address the Consciences of such Men as would be prejudiced and
affronted by a personal Address. This Method (you know) the Apostle Paul took
with Felin; and lest his own Conscience to make the Application. Acts xxiv. 25.
We should likewist take Care, not too bluntly and abruptly, without a proper
Introduction; nor unseasonably, in the Midst of Conversation or Business; much
less imperiously, in a Way of Challenge Or Demand, to examine any Man as to his
religious Experiences, lest we bring Contempt upon our selves and our
Profession. -- But yet it is doubtless our Duty upon proper Occasions, in a
kind affectionate Manner, to discourse our Neighbor upon his religious State
and Seize, so that the Rule be therein attended Romans xv. 2. Let every one
of us please his Neighbor, for his Good, to Edification.


EPINET. If I don't too much intrude upon your Time and Patience, I would still
propose one of my principal Objections against the Conduct of many of our late
Converts, which has proved a special Matter of Prejudice and Stumbling to me.


THEOPH. Be pleased, Sir, to speak freely without Compliment or Restraint. I am
yet ready to contribute what I can to your Satisfaction.


EPINET. What I refer to, is that JUDGING and CENSURING Spirit, which so much
obtains among us. I cannot see how these can be (as they pretend) converted
Persons, and Christians indeed; who so openly and avowedly judge their
Brethren; and set at Naught their Brethren.


THEOPH. Hold, Sir; Wherein thou jud^est another, thou condemnest thy self; for
thou that judge, do the same Thing. -- You are complaining of others for
Censoriousness; and in the same Breath, you censure and judge them as
unconverted Person, or in other Words, for mere Hypocrites. Don't you know who
has directed to first cast the Beam out of thine own Eye, that thou may see
clearly to cast the Mote out of thy Brother's Eye?


EPINET. Sit, I accept your Reproof and heartily thank you for it. I see that
the Fault is no both Sides, by which these Distances and Alienations of Mind
are kept up among Professors of Religion. -- But though I have carried my
Censure too far, even till I have fallen into the same Fault myself; yet you
must nevertheless own, that this judging and censuring Spirit is what the
Scriptures every where condemn.


THEOPH. There is nothing more certain, than that the Scriptures do repeatedly
and in the strongest Terms condemn our judging and censuring one another. -- It
may therefore be proper to consider what that Sin is, which the Scriptures so
often testify against. In Order to which I would enquire of you, whether you
think it an unlawful Judging and Censoriousness, to determine of a visibly
loose, scandalous and profligate Person, that he is in an unconverted State;
and as such, an Heir of Destruction and Death?


EPINET. No! That Is a clear Case: The Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God; and the Tree is known by its Fruits.


THEOPH. Is it sinful Censoriousness, to conclude, that such who are open
Despisers of vital Piety; and Neglecters of God's Worship, who don't pray in
their Families, or attend public Ordinances; who visibly abhor all religious
Conversation, and oppose all that promote it, are yet in a carnal State?


EPINET. Some Parts of this Question do (I confess) most sensible affect me:
You have brought the Matter home to my own Case. But though I thereby condemn
my self, I think this also must be answered in the Negative. For God is a
Rewarder of none but those, who diligently seek him: and they who for sake him
(much more they who despise him) will be cast off for ever.


THEOPH. May we not lawfully judge such Men to be insincere and in an
unconverted State, who rest in an outward Profession, in their moral Honesty,
or religious Duties, without any Experience of a regencrating Change, or of a
lively Faith in Christ?


EPINET. It is doubtless true, that there be such who have a Name to live, when
they are dead; and have a Form of Godliness, without the Power. And it can be
no Censoriousness to determine of such as these, in general, that they are
Hypocrites and in a carnal State. -- But what Business have we to make the
Application to particular Persons? Can we judge Men's Hearts; or know what are,
or are not, the secret Transactions between God and their Souls?


THEOPH. Suppose I were discoursing with any Man about his religious
Experiences and Seize; and found good Reason to conclude, that he rested
in a mere Form of Godliness, and was thereby in Danger of eternal Perdition;
Don't Charity and Compassion to his precious Soul oblige me to tell him my
Fears, with the Reasons of them, that I may (if possible) prevent his
perishing, with a Lie in his right Hand? -- To give you a more sensible
Apprehension of what I mean: Suppose from the Account you have given of your
self in the present Conversation, I have Reason to conclude, that you are yet a
Stranger to the Power of Godliness, am I not obliged in Duty to God and
Faithfulness to you, to set your Danger before you?


EPINET. I believe both these Question should be answered in the Assirmative.


THEOPH. Well then, there may be Occasion to represent to particular Persons
our Fears of their resting in a mere Form of God-liness. -- And pardon me, Sir,
if out of a tender Regard to your eternal Interest, I am obliged, to tell you
that I cannot but think the Occasion is now before me. I am awfully afraid, from
your utter Unacquaintedness with the Methods of divine Grace in a Sinner's
Conversion, that you have never yet experienced that Change, which you
certainly must experience, or never enter the Kingdom of Heaven. -- This, Sir,
is the greatest Kindness to you that I am at present capable of; and I hope,
you will accept it accordingly.


EPINET. Sir, you surprise me. Though my Conscience was before laying the same
Charge against me, your faithful Dealing (for which I heartily thank you) has
revived and quickened its Accusations; and my Mind is grown very uneasy, that I
am not so fit for further Discourse. -- But it may not be unserviceable to me,
to hear your particular Sentiments upon the present Subject. It may perhaps
further remove those sinful Prejudices, that I am sensible I have entertained.
-- As you have already shown who are not guilty or finfully judging one
another: Be pleased also to show what this Sin is, which the Scriptures so much
condemn, and who may be said to be guilty of it.


THEOPH. The Lord grant, that your present Concern may end in well-grounded
Comfort and Peace! -- As for my Sentiments upon the Subject under
Consideration, I shall offer them in the following Particulars.

1. There is no Doubt to be made but that there has be'n uttely a Fault among
us, in the Censoriousness and reproachful Aspersions, that have be'n so
commonly observed and complained of, in so many Parts of the Country: Nor can
it be doubted by any that have read the New Testament, that this is a very
great Sin, destructive of christian Charity, injurious to our Neighbor's
Reputation, productive of Divisions and Animosities; and of Prejudices in Men's
Minds against the Professor, and even the Profession of vital Piety: And
therefore very provoking unto God. -- But then it concerns us, that we our
selves may avoid this Sin, which we so justly condemn in others, charitably to
conclude, that some of these act with good Views, though upon mistaken
Principles; and that they have a Zeal for God therein, though it be not according
to Knowledge.

2. They who adventure to censure the State of such, who are of a regular and
blameless Conversation, Friends to a religious Life, and careful Observers of
the Ordinances of God, without any special Acquaintane with their religious
Experiences, are guilty of this Sin. Who art thou that judge another Man's
Servant? to his own Master he stands or falls. Romans xiv. 4. Judge Nothing
before the Time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to Light the hidden
Things of Darkness; and will make manifest the Counsels of the Heart. 1 Cor.
iv. v.

3. They who publish and proclaim abroad their Fears and Apprehensions, of
regular and blameless Professors, that they are but Formalists and Hypocrites,
though they may suppose they have good Grounds for their Fears, are
notwithstanding guilty of that judging, which the Scripture condemns. For they
hereby set at Naught their Brother, contrary to Romans xiv. 10. And speak evil of
their Brother; and judge their Brother, and thereby speak Evil of the Law, and
judge the Law; they are therefore not Doing of the Law, but Judges. Jam. iv.
11. -- These Apprehensions, if such we have, should either be concealed in our
own Breasts; or else (if we have Opportunity for it) privately, charitably, and
affectionately communicated only to the Person concerned, for his best Good and
Advantage.

4. They who with Rigor, Roughness and Asperity, in dealing with any Persons
of a regular Conversation, do admonish them of their Formality; and they who in
a positive, haughty Manner determine their present State and future Danger;
these are likewise guilty of this Sin, For herein also they are not Doers of
the Law, but Judges; and hereby they put a Stumbling Block and Occasion to
fall, in their Brother's Way, contrary to Romans xiv. 13. They hereby irritate
Men's Passions, prejudice them against the Persons and Profession of their
Admonishers: and inflame the Enmity of their carnal Mind to the Power of
Godliness?

5. When Men run into these Methods of judging those Ministers of the Gospel,
who are visibly well-qualified for the Ministry, and have visibly conducted
themselves well in the Discharge of their sacred Trust, they, they are more
aggravatedly guilty of this Sin; by prejudicing People against their Ministers;
and thereby making them flight the Ordinances of the Gospel, to the great
Danger of their precious Souls. This is to do direct Violence to that
Admonition, 1 Timothy v. 19. Against an Elder receive no an Accusation, but before
two or three Witnesses; and to that Exhortation, Phil. ii. 29. Hold such in
Reputation. -- Upon the whole, they who have been guilty in any of these
Instances, have great Reason for a particular and deep Repentance; and for a
solemn Care to reform their future Conduct. For, whatever Thoughts they may now
entertain, they must quickly stand before that Judge, who will let the World
see the Honor he puts upon Word; and the Regard he expects from all who
profess his Name, to the Rules which he has given them. -- Thus, Sir, I have
endeavored according to my Capacity, to answer your Demands in this Instances
also. -- Are there any other Difficulties before you, which you desire should
be considered?


EPINET. I should be something gratified by hearing your Opinion of the
Practice which has very much obtained of late, of positively determining the
Conversion of particular Person's and even of declaring to their Faces, that
they are in a converted and safe Estates; though perhaps in some of those
Instances, there has been but a very short Time to observe this great Change.
-- These Things have stumbled me. But I Am afraid, whether I have not been acted
more by Prejudice, than by a proper Concern for the Interests of Religion, in
my Opposition to 'em.


THEOPH. You must own, that these Operations of the blessed Spirit, whereof we
have been discoursing, are in their own Nature sensible Impressions; which may
be discerned by those who are the happy Subjects of 'em. They therefore, who
have had a convincing and humbling Sense of their Sin, Guilt and Impotency; who
have been thereby driven to Despain of Help from any Refuges of their own; who
in this their Extremity, have had a Discovery of the Sufficiency and
Willingness of the Lord Jesus Christ to save them; and have betaken themselves
for Refuge to this Hope set before them; such may be capable to exhibit in some
Measure these their Experiences, with the Comforts which flow from them, to
others; and thereby give good Reason to hope, that the Power of God's special
Grace has indeed passed upon their Souls. -- And if in any late Instances, this
Change has appeared very sudden and surprising, there is the clearer Evidence
of the almighty Efficiency, by which it is wrought; and the greater Resemblance
of the first Conversions in the Christian Church.


EPINET. Do you then suppose it proper in this Case, to inform such Persons, in
strong and positive Terms, that they are now converted to God, and become Heirs
of eternal Glory; and to publish and proclaim the same Thing abroad to the
World?


THEOPH. Man can look no further than to the outward Appearance; the Lord only
looks on the Heart. We are not therefore to assume the divine Prerogative, by
pretending to any certainty, even in the most comfortable and promising
Appearances of thi^ Kind. -- They who have made the highest (...) this Way,
have met with Instances enough to confute and shame their Confidence; and to
humble them for their own Claim to any Thing of an exact Spirit of Discerning.
-- It is enough for us to go as far in this Case, as the Apostles themselves
did ordinarily pretend to; and to say as in 1 Pet. v. 12. By Sylvanus, a
faithful Brother, as I suppose. -- Besides, this confident determining his
State may prove very mischievous to the supposed Convert. Our mistaking his
Case, and yet positively decreeing in his Favor, may lull him asleep in a
dangerous Security: And he will find but little Cause to thank us for our
Confidence, when all his Expectations are eternally cut off.


[On this Occasion, the Gentleman seemed to be in very great Perturbation of
Mind. He wept, -- and fat a good while silent: but at last in a sort of Agony,
he vented these abrupt Expressions.] EPINET. O Sir, you don't know with what
Force your last Words struck my Mind. ETERNAL Disappointment! O ETERNITY! Who
can dwell with everlasting Burnings! -- Dear Sir, Can you advise a poor
selfdeceiving Hypocrite how I shall escape the dreadful, the eternal
Consequences of my Self-Deceit! O what a Dream, what a Delirium have I been in,
to except Salvation by Christ without an Interest in him!


THEOPH. You know, Sir, what advice the Apostle gave to one, who was in the
like Case as you seem to be now in: Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ; and thou
shall be saved.


EPINET. But you have already convinced me, that this is not in my Power; this
depends upon the sovereign Agency of the Spirit of God, of that blessed Spirit,
whose Operations I have opposed and slighted; and he may justly now reject me;
and leave me forever, under the Guilt of my innumerable Sins; as I have so long
withstood, and upon every Occasion spoke against his divine Influences. -- It Is
certain, I cannot help my self; and I Am afraid he will now leave me in my
Distress, to call upon him and receive no Answer, to seek him early and never
find him.


THEOPH. I rejoice to see you despairing of all Help in your self: but take
Heed, that you don't despair of the infinite Mercy of God; and of the infinite
Merit and Compassion of the glorious REDEEMER. -- Go to God in Prayer: labor
sensibly to acknowledge the Sin of you Nature; and the Sins of you Practice,
with their special Aggravations. Lament before him this particular Sin, that
seems to fasten upon your Conscience at this Time. -- Acknowledge your Guilt
and Desert of his Wrath; acknowledge your Impotence and utter Inability to help
you self; and that you lie at his Mercy. Cast yourself at his Foot; and beseech
him, with importanate Ardour of Soul, that he will draw you to Christ. -- And
endeavor to look to Jesus Christ, as a Savior sufficient for you, how
numerous, how great, and aggravated soever you Sins are; and how dark and
difficult soever you Case is, or can be. And hold on in this Way, whatever you
Success appear to be.


EPINET. I Am an old Man, an old Sinner, and Despiser of Mercy. I Am afraid it is
too late.


THEOPH. It is indeed too late to rest any longer in your Security, or to put
off the Concerns of your Soul, and reject the Offers of Mercy and more. But
blessed be God! Behold, now is the accepted Time! behold, now is the Day of
Salvation! -- God has waited long upon you; and has not taken the Forfeiture at
your Hands; but is by your present Concern giving you a happy Evidence, that
your Day of Grace is not yet past. -- O therefore now fly for Refuge to take
hold of the Hope that is set before you. There is yet Hope in Israel as
concerning this Things.


EPINET. If I am saved, it will be one of the greatest Displays of Divine
Grace, that ever was known. -- Well! I will lie at the Footstool of God's
infinite Mercy: if I must perish, I will perish there!


THEOPH. A good Conclusion! If the Lord assist you to keep this Resolution,
your Case will be very hopeful.


EPINET. Sir, I heartily thank you for all your Kindness and Faithfulness to
me: And entreat your Prayers for a poor guilty worthless Wretch. -- It is now
grown late; and I must (though with Reluctance) bid you Farewell.


THEOPH. Sir, a good Night to you! -- It is my Duty to pray for you, that God
would carry on his Work in your Heart, enable you to bring your weary and
heavy-laden Soul to Christ; and not leave you to wear off these Impressions,
until you find Rest in him. May the God of all Grace show you his Mercy, and
visit you with his Salvation!


EPINET. Amen! Amen!


THE Second Conference.
THE next Day after the Conversation before recited, the Minister having
Occasion of a long Journey, was about a Month absent from Home. And the first
Day after his Return, he was again visited by the same Gentleman, who with a
cheerful Countenance addressed him in the following Manner.

EPINET. Sir, you are welcome Home, I am heartily glad to see you. -- I had
always a great Value for you; but much greater now than ever before. I can now
more feelingly say, How beautiful are the Feet of them that preach the Gospel
of Peace; and bring glad Tidings of good Things!


THEOPH. Sir, I rejoice to see you. As you have been very, much upon my Mind
since your last Visit, I have earnestly longed to know the Effect of that
Concern, which you the expressed, about your eternal Interests.


EPINET. If I ben't again deceiving my self, God has been wonderfully gracious
to one of the greatest of Sinners. And notwithstanding my long Abuse of Mercy,
and Opposition to the Operations of his blessed Spirit, --

[Upon the uttering these last Expressions, the Gentleman was stopped by his
Tears; and for some Time incapacitated to finish what he began to speak: but at
Length suppressing his Passions, he proceeded.] Notwithstanding (I say) my
enormous Guilt, a merciful God has, I hope, even in my old Age, made some
Manifestations of his Love in Jesus Christ to my Soul.


THEOPH. If you have indeed experienced a saving Change, you are laid under the
highest Obligations of Gratitude to the special, distinguishing, and sovereign
Mercy of God; and have Reason eternally to magnify and praise the Riches of
that Grace, by which you are accepted in the Beloved. -- Will you be pleased to
favor me with a general Narrative of the Methods, by which you were brought to
this comfortable Conclusion?


EPINET. I left you last with a Sort of a Resolution, that I would lie at the
Footstool of God's Mercy; and determined, if I must perish, to perish there.
And accordingly I retired to my Closet as soon as I came home; and attempted to
pour out my distressed Soul to God. But alas! my Mind was Nothing but Horror
and Distress. The Sins of my past Life, even from my earliest Youth, were set
in Order before my Eyes. I could not look to God, but as to a provoked Judge.
The Idea's of eternal Destruction seemed to interrupt every Confession of Sin,
and every Petition for Mercy; and in short, the whole Performance was mere
Medly of Distraction and Consasion: Insomuch that the small Glearn of Comfort,
which flowed from the forementioned Resolution, was now quite lost. For what
Hope could I entertain from such Lip-Service to an Omniscient God! -- I retired
to my Bed; and there lay tossing to and fro, until the Dawning of the Day. -- I
spend the following Day in Fasting and Prayer, with but little better Success.
-- I examined my Conduct toward Men, in all the Dealings of my Life, as
particularly as I could; and resolved upon Restitution to all whom I and
wronged, in every Instance that I could remember. But this Bed also was too
short for me to stretch my self upon. -- I saw that these Things, though
necessary Duties, would never appease the Divine Justice, and atone for my
Sins; nor purchase the Favor of God. -- I sometimes endeavored to comfort
myself with Resolutions of a more strict and watchful Life: and sometimes
endeavored to look to the Lord Jesus Christ for Salvation; but was sensible,
that I could not act Faith in him. -- I spent a great Part of my Time for the
first Fortnight, in Acts of Devotion; and yet found my Heart as hard as a
Stone. I could excite no Affection or Passion, but Fear, in any of my
Approaches unto God. -- I was now ready to conclude my Case hopeless: that I
was lest of God; and that my Day of Grace was past. -- In this Extermity I
retired to my Closet; and was enabled, with a more feeling Sense, to confess my
utter Unworthiness of Mercy; and was filled with Admiration at the Patience of
God toward me, that I was yet out of Hell. I saw that I could not help my
self; and did not deserve, that God should help me. I concluded the Duty with a
Sort of Resignation of my self into his Hands. I acknowledged, that I lay at
his Mercy; is he would grant me an Interest in Christ and his Salvation, it
would be to the eternal Glory of his great Name: But he would be most just, if
he should cast me off forever. I resolved to leave the Case with him, however
he would be pleased to deal with me. And this something eased my Mind; and put
me into a more calm and quiet Frame.


THEOPH. You speak of a Calm in your Mind, that followed this Submission. Did
you now conclude your self in a safe State?


EPINET. No, Sir, but my Hopes were something revived; and my Desires after
CHRIST were more than proportional to my Hopes. -- O (thought I) that I could
but obtain an Interest in CHRIST! How much is an Interest in him to be preferred
to all the World! I could not then envy the Magnificence or Grandeur of the
great Men of the World. -- I saw this World to be what it is, Bubble, a
Nothing, when compared to an Interest in Christ.


THEOPH. And how did you at last obtain Satisfaction in that important Point?


EPINET. After some Days spent in such ardent Desires after an (...) in Christ,
accompanied with (...) as I was capable of, (...) to read Luke Vii. 41, 42.
There was a certain Creditor, which had two Debtors: the one owed Five hundred
Pence, the other fifty; when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them
both. Tell me therefore, which of them will love him most. -- This gave me a
surprising View of the Freeness of redeeming Love; and the Readiness of our
blessed Savior to pardon and save all such Sinners that come to him, without
Distinction or Difference, the greatest as well as the smallest. -- With what a
full and convincing Light, and with what inexpressible Satisfaction, could I
now behold, that there was Safety for my poor guilty trembling Soul in Christ!
-- I though it if I had a thousand Souls, I could venture them all with him. Though
my Sins were ever so many and great, he would frankly forgive them all. The
Efficacy of his Blood was sufficient for any Sinner under Heaven; and therefore
sufficient for me. -- I found my self joyfully willing to accept this Savior
upon any Terms; to do, be, or bear whatever he called and enable me to. --
These delightful Operations of my Mind stopped the Progress of my reading for
some considerable Time. At length I undertook to read the remaining Part of the
Chapter, and when I came to the 48th Verse, And be said unto her, Thy Sins are
forgiven, a powerful Impression accompanied the reading those Words, as if they
had been spoken to me in Person. -- How did this fill me with Wonder and Joy!
Whence this astonishing Mercy to so vile a Wretch! O how in me has the Lord
Jesus Christ showed forth all Long-suffering, for a Pattern to them that should
hereafter believe on him! -- But I cannot describe to you the ravishing
Satisfaction of the Remainder of that Day, and the whole succeeding Night. --
Since that Time, my joyful Views of the Love of God are sensibly remitted: but
my Comfort remains; and I still find such Delight and Enlargement in all the
Duties of Religion, as I never experienced before. -- This is a brief and
imperfect Representation of my Case; and I desire you would deal freely and
impartially with me, in giving me your Opinion of it.


THEOPH. My Opinion will stand you in but little Stead. -- If you had a
Certificate from all the Ministers in the World, it would not be accepted at
the Bar of your final Judge. Or if they all decree you a Hypocrite; and the
Lord Jesus Christ accepts and approves you in the great Day, you will be safe
enough. -- I will cannot however but hope, that I have Cause to join with you in
praising God for this Work of Grace, which he has wrought in your Soul. May the
succeeding Fruits of the blessed Spirit convince us both, that our Hopes are
well grounded. If it be indeed a saving Change, (as I hope it is) it will have
a happy and abiding Effect upon your Heart and Life; by which your Hope and
Comfort may be further confirmed. -- I am glad to find you so cheerfully and
delightfully trusting your Soul in your Redeemer's Hands. But remember, that
you are not always to expect Sunshine and fair Weather. You must prepare for a
Storm; and resolve through Grace, that whatever Temptations or Corruptions you
may encounter, you will yet keep your Heart fixed, trusting in the Lord. --
Have you met with no Rub in your Way, since your first Comfort?


EPINET. Yes, Sir, I sell into Company the last Night, with a Gentleman who
vehemently exclaims against our Ministers, and the Doctrines they teach; which
put me into some little Confusion. But I chose to avoid any Disputation with
him; and urged him to meet me here to Day, which he promised to do; and I
expect him every Minute.


[ Just as these Words were spoken, the Person mentioned knocked at the Door,
who being introduced with usual Salutations, the following short Dialogue
ensued; in which this Gentleman will be represented under the borrowed Name of
LIBERTINUS.] THEOPH. I suppose this may be the Gentleman you referred to, in
your Discourse just now.


EPINET. Yes, Sir, He is come to let you know the Objections he has against
your Ministry, and the Doctrines you teach.


LIBERTINUS. Upon this Gentleman's Request, I promised the last Night, that I
would make the same Objections to your, (...) that I then made to him against
you (and other carnal Ministers, who are leading poor Souls blindfold in the
Way of Darkness and Misery) upon Condition that you will patiently hear what I
have to say.


THEOPH. Sir, If I am as you represent me, a carnal Minister, who am leading
Sinners in the Way of Destruction, it is high Time I should hear, and good
Reason I should patiently hear my Danger; and cheerfully submit to be led out
of it. I shall therefore attend in the Character of a Learner, to what
Instructions you are pleased to give me.


LIBERTIN. You show your legal Spirit, by teaching Sinners the Necessity of
Preparations for their coming to Christ; and not directing them to come
immediately, without Delay.


THEOPH. Be pleased to give me some particular Directions, that I may know how
to conduct my self for the future. -- And I first desire you would tell me what
you mean by coming to Christ?


LIBERTIN. I mean, receiving him by Faith.


THEOPH. Should we direct Sinners to come to Christ, and receive him by Faith,
before they understand the Way and Terms of Salvation, proposed in the Gospel?


LIBERTIN. No! you should instruct them in these Things; and then exhort them
to come to Christ. For how can they believe in him, of whom they have not
heard.


THEOPH, What should we exhort them to come to Christ for?


LIBERTIN. To save them from the^^ Sin and Misery.


THEOPH. Should we exhort them to come to Christ to save them from their Sin
an^ Misery, without any Sense that they are sinful and miserable?


LIBERTIN. That Is impossible; and a Contradiction.


THEOPH. Should we direct them to come to Christ, and receive him, with an
Apprehension and Expectation that they can save themselves; and have no Need of
a special Interest in the Redeemer?


LIBERTIN. No! you should teach them their Necessity of an Interest in Christ;
and exhort them to come immediately.


THEOPH. Should we teach them to come immediately to Christ, and to receive him
by Faith without any Desires of an Interest in him?


LIBERTIN. We should come to him for Desires to receive and trust him.


THEOPH. We should then teach Men, to come to Christ against their Wills: and
to believe in Christ, that he may make them willing to believe in him! --
Should we teach Men to bring their own Righteousness with them, when they come
to Christ? and to expect Salvation from him for their own sake, for their
Duties, their good Purposes, or Performances?


LIBERTIN. You had'nt Need (I dare say) to teach 'em any more legal Doctrines
then you do. This Legality of yours, is what I am now finding Fault with.


THEOPH. Should we teach Men to come to Christ, and to receive him, before they
see any Safety in so doing, and while they dare not venture their Souls in his
Hands?


LIBERTIN. Why do you ask such Questions! You know, that receiving Christ by
Faith implies trusting in him, and depending upon him.


THEOPH. Here then are fix different Preparatives, which you acknowledge
necessary to our receiving Christ by Faith. By your own Concessions, a Sinner
must first understand the Way and Terms of Salvation. -- He must be sensible of
his sinful and miserable State. -- He must see his Impotency and Necessity of
an Interest in Christ. -- He must have such Desires of an Interest in Christ,
as will make him willing to accept him upon his own Terms. -- He must renounce
all other Hopes and Confidences. -- And he must see such Safety in believing in
Christ, as will enable him readily to venture his eternal Interests in his
Hands. -- Now then, what Doctrines do we teach, but what you yourself are
forced to allow necessary to be taught? We are as earnest with Sinners to
believe immediately in Christ, as you can be: and therefore admonish them to
cry earnestly to God that he would remove all Hindrances out of the Way; and
enlighten, persuade and enable them to believe, that they may be saved. -- We
exhort them to look to Christ immediately; but not with their Eyes shut. -- We
call upon 'em to give Christ immediate Entertainment in their Souls: but we
advise them, in Order to it, to get the Doors of their Hearts opened which are
barred against him; that so be may come in and sup with them, and they with
him. We call upon them to use all oppointed Means, to awake out of their Sleep,
and arise from the Dead, that Christ may give them Light.


LIBERTIN. Poor deluded Soul! I see you have not been taught of God.


THEOPH. Though you find me unteachable in this Point, be pleased to proceed in
your Instructions; and see if you cannot find better Success hereafter.


LIBERTIN. You teach, that Men may be true Believers, and yet not know that
they have saving Faith: And on the contrary that they may have a joyful
Persuasion they are interested in Christ; and yet be Unbelievers. Thus you give
Men Hopes of Salvation, who want the very Essence of saving Faith; and would
throw uncomfortable Scruples into the Minds of those, unto whom God speaks
Peace.


THEOPH. Then you suppose, Manifestation or a Persuasion of our justified
State, belongs to the Essence of a saving Faith.


LIBERTIN. Most certainly! Can Men believe, and not know it? Is not Faith an
Exercise of the Mind? And can any Man be ignorant of the Operation of his own
Mind? -- Can any Man believe in and depend upon the Lord Jesus Christ, as his
Savior, and not be persuaded of the Truth and Certainty of it? Or will the
Spirit of God ever give Men this joyful Persuasion when there is Nothing in it?


THEOPH. Does not Faith in Jesus Christ consist in our receiving him upon
Gospel-Terms?


LIBERTIN. Receiving Christ is certainly (as I told you before) the
Scripture-Definition of saving Faith. To as many as received him, to them gave
he Power to become the Children of God, even to them that believe on his Name.
John i. 12.


THEOPH. Which is first in Order? Our Act, in receiving the Lord Jesus Christ;
or the Evidence, that we have received him?


LIBERTIN. It Is certain, that there can be no Evidence of an airy Nothing. The
Act must needs preceed the Evidence of the Act. That cannot be evidently true,
which is not really true at all. -- But what do you mean by this Question?


THEOPH. Does it not then follow, that we must have Faith before we know, or
have Evidence, that we believe in Christ; since we cannot know we have that,
which in Fact we have not? and consequently, that Manifestation is not of the
Essence of Faith?


LIBERTIN. There is but a very short Distance of Time between our receiving
Christ, and the Evidence that we have received him.


THEOPH. Suppose that there were but a Minute's Distance. -- If true Faith can
exit one single Moment, without Manifestation, it may for the same Reason exit
a thousand. -- If Persuasion of our good Estate be necessary and essential to
true Faith, then it cannot exist one Minute without it. If this be not
essentially necessary to true Faith, it may (though I don't think it ordinarily
does) exit always without it. -- I don't see how this comes short of
Demonstration: You must certainly fall under the Power of Conviction.


LIBERTIN. Demonstration! It is nothing but a Quibble. I see no Force in it to
convince --


THEOPH. Let me then enquire further into this Matter. -- Do you suppose, that
all true Believers always have the Manifestations of God's Love, and clear
Evidences of an Interest in Christ?


LIBERTIN. No! They may be under Desertions. God may hide his Face, and they
may be troubled. There may be such, who fear the Lord and obey the Voice of his
Servant, who yet walk in Darkness and see no Light. But they have then no Faith
in Exercise.


THEOPH. Are there not such as have had those Evidences and Manifestations,
which we are speaking of, who are afterward, the greatest Part of their Lives,
in Darkness and Doubt about their State?


LIBERTIN. This is notoriously true; but how comes it to be so, but from such
Teachers as you are; and from such Doctrines as you teach?


THEOPH. However it comes to pass, you allow it to be Fact. And what Class must
we rank these in, while in these dark and doubting Frames? Are they Believers,
or Unbelievers?


LIBERTIN. I have told you before, they are Believers, under Desertion. They
have the Habit of Faith; but are under a Suspension of the Exercise of it.


THEOPH. Suppose they should die. in this dark and doubting Frame, what would
their eternal State be?


LIBERTIN. That Is clear: When he justifies, them he also glorifies.


THEOPH. The Sum of your present Instruction then is this. That there may be
true Believers, who (while such) may want the very Essence of a saving Faith --
They may, the greatest Part of their Lives, have the Habit of Faith without the
Exercise of it; and be all this while wholly destitute of what is absolutely
necessary to the very Being of true Faith. -- They may die in this State, true
Believers, without the Essence of Faith; and be eternally glorified. -- Don't
you think it high Time, that a earnal Ministry and an ignorant World should be
enlightened by such Instructions as these!

Well now, if you please, consider the other Part of your Charge against the
carnal Ministry you complain of; and see whether we are so guilty as you
suppose, by preaching that Men may have a joyful Persuasion that they are
interested in CHRIST; and yet be Unbelievers. -- I would then enquire, Whether
we must conclude such a Persuasion to be a saving Faith, if it should puff a
Man up with Pride and Vanity of Mind; and cause him, like the Pharisees, to
think himself righteous, and to despise others; or like those in the Prophet,
to say, Stand by the self; come not nigh me; for I am holier than thou?


LIBERTIN. Than cannot be. But if it were supposed, all that can be inferred
from it, is, that they have Imperfection accompanying their Faith.


THEOPH. That this can be, is too evident from unquestionable Fact, open to
every Body's Observation. -- And you are to remember, that I am not enquiring,
whether these Persons have true Faith: but whether this Persuasion of an
Interest in Christ be essential to a true Faith. If so, this Pride and Vanity
does not only accompany their Faith, but is the Effect and Fruit of it. It
directly slows from what you call saving Faith, as the immediate Cause of its
Production. -- Suppose this Persuasion be put a Part of the Description of
saving Faith; yet, according to you, it necessarily belongs to the Description;
and is of the Essence of Faith: and thence it follows, that it is Faith it self
(what belongs to its Nature and Essence) that is the immediate Cause of
Haughtiness and Pride. -- But I forget that I am the Learner. What if some
Persons, who have this Persuasion, should live sinful sensual and scandalous
Lives; are they notwithstanding true Believers?


LIBERTIN. They will not live such Lives; they will love Holiness. But if they did
live as you suppose, they being interested in the Redemption of Christ, cannot
fail of Salvation.


THEOPH. The World has had too many Evidences, that Men may entertain this
comforting and delightful Persuasion of an Interest in Christ and yet live most
profligate and abandoned Lives. -- Was not this the Case of the Ranters,
Muggletonians, Seekers, Familists, etc? There are many now living amongst us,
who han't forgot the mad Freaks of the infamous CASE and BANKS, with their
Followers. And who could have a stronger Persuasion of an Interest in Christ,
than they had? How did they frequently go about the Streets in a Sort of
Rupture, crying JOY, JOY! -- Was this their joyful Satisfaction, and Persuasion
of their Interest in Christ, a true Faith, or not?


LIBERTIN. Poor Man! You have had no Experience what this satisfactory and
joyful Persuasion of an Interest in Christ means: Or else you would not have
imagined this People to be capable of it.


THEOPH. Be pleased then to give me some further Information about it. -- Is
our receiving Christ, and our personal Persuasion of an Interest in him, the
same Thing? Or are they not?


LIBERTIN. I cannot say, they are altogether the same Thing. For, the receiving
a Gift, and knowing that I do receive it, are two different Things; though they
accompany one another, and cannot be separated.


THEOPH. Is it not possible for a Man to deceive himself, by a strong
Persuasion of his having received the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith, when in
Reality he has not? May he not think himself Something, when he is Nothing? --
Did not Judas, did not the five foolish Virgins, and the Church of Laodicca,
deceive themselves? -- And will not all that live and die in such Self-Deceit,
necessarily perish?


LIBERTIN. "This cannot be denied."


THEOPH. The Sum then of the present Instruction you give me, is this: That the
Persuasion, which you say is essential to a true saving Faith, may be
productive of Pride and Vanity of Mind; and may consist with a scandalous and
profligate Life: -- That it is not the same Thing with receiving Christ, or
with saving Faith; but may, and sometimes does deceive Men to their eternal
Destruction: And yet that all who have this Persuasion, are actually intersted
in the Redemption of Christ; and cannot fail of eternal Salvation. -- This, it
seems, is the Doctrine you would direct us to teach to our People.


EPINET. I think, Sir, you have sufficiently exposed this Gentleman's Opinion.
You would now oblige me, if you would give us your own Thoughts upon the
Subject under Consideration.


THEOPH. I acknowledge the Truth of what he says, that Faith is the Exercise of
the Mind; and that every Man may know the Operations of his own Mind: But it
does now follow from thence, that every Man must know whether he be, or be not
a true Believer. -- Though we cannot but be conscious to the Actings of our
Minds, and feel them operate: yet we may not certainly know what is the exact
Quality of those Operations; and whether our Faith be saving and true, or not.
-- The Believer may sensibly feel such Exercises of Mind, as look very much
like true Faith: And yet through the Darkness of his Understanding, the
Prevalence of Temptation, or Fear of Presumption, he may be awfully jealous,
that this is but a counterfeit Grace, which may leave him exposed to
Disappointment and Confusion. Alas, it is to be feared that Thousands deceive
themselves in this most concerning Case, by taking the Resemblance for the
Reality: and hence we may well dread being cheated by mere Appearances.

It must also be acknowledged, that clear distinct and satisfying Evidence of
the Exercise of Faith is not only attainable: but is what has been actually
attained by many of the Children of God, to their unspeakable Consolation; and
is what should and will be earnestly pressed after by every true Believer. He
that can content himself without Assurance, does thereby evidence that he has
hitherto rested short of true Faith. A true Believer cannot willingly be at a
dreadful Uncertainty, what his eternal State is like to be: but will give
Diligence to make his Calling and Elections sure. -- Manifestation is
absolutely necessary to the Comfort, though it be not necessary to the Safety
of a Child of God. It Is necessary to the Joy of Faith, though not to the Being
of Faith. But this notwithstanding, it must be remembered, that it is our
Acceptance of Christ (and not our Persuasion that we have received him) which
given us the Power, the Privilege, to become the Children of God. Joh. i. 12.
-- It is Christ's Righteousness, and not our Evidence of an Interest in it,
that is the Matter of our Justification before God. We are justified freely by
his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Romans iii. 23. --
Accordingly, our Safety is founded upon our trusting in Christ, and committing
our Souls to him; and not upon the Satisfaction we have in our Minds about it.
Ephesians. i. 12. That we should be to the Praise of his Glory, who first trusted in
Christ. 2 Timothy i. 12. He is able to keep that which I have committed to him
against that Day. Whence it follows, that the Joy and Peace, which is commonly
found, first or last, in a greater or lesser Degree, in all true Believers, in
not Faith in Jesus Christ: But a Fruit or Consequence of Faith and the
Discovery of it to their own Consciences. AFTER they ye believed, ye were
sealed with that Holy Spirit of Promise. Ephesians. i. 13.

What a dreadful Train of Consequences will follow from the Supposition, that
Faith consists in a satisfactory Persuasion of our good Estate! IF so, Then our
Justification must depend upon our Frames; and be as mutable as our Comfort.
For how often soever we want this Persuasion, we are Unbelievers; and while
such, in a State of Condemnation. Joh. iii. 18. -- IF so, then tempted,
deserted, or melancholy Believers can have no possible Means of Comfort or
Relief. Those who walk in Darkness and see no Light, can no Ways be encouraged
to trust in the Lord, and to stay themselves upon their God; as directed in
Isa. I. 10. -- IF so, the most secure and presumptuous SelfFlatterers are in
the safest State: And how then can that be true, that he who thinks himself
something, when he is nothing, deceives himself! Gal. vi. 3. -- IF so, the
Church of Laodicca was in the Exercise of a true Faith, when she said, I am
rich and increased with Goods; and have Need of Nothing. Rev. iii. 17. -- IF
so, there can be no Occasion for the Apostle's Exhortation, 2 Cor. xiii. 5.
Examine yourselves whether ye be in the Faith. For we can be always certain,
whether we have a satisfying Persuasion of our own good Estate, or not. Nor is
there any Occasion to give Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure; as
we are exhorted 2 Pet. i. 10. For what Diligence can be wanting, to know what
is the settled and satisfying Persuasion of our own Minds? -- In fine, IF so,
there is no Means left to detect confident Self-Deceivers, or to recover bold
presumptuous Sinners out of their dangerous Soul-destroying Mistakes. Insomuch
that I don't know what Doctrine can have a directer Tendency to the Destruction
of Multitudes of poor Sinners, than this has.


LIBERTIN. These Consequences show the Darkness of your own Mind.


THEOPH. Well! What further Instructions have you to give, that may enlighten
my dark Mind?


LIBERTIN. You are so rooted in your Prejudices and erroneous Principles, that
it will be to no Purpose to talk to you any longer.


EPINET. Be pleased then for my Sake to proceed, according to the Promise you
made me the last Night.


LIBERTIN. One of those legal Doctrines, which I then did, and still do object
against, is, That Men are put upon evidencing their Justification by their
Sanctification. This is like lighting up a Candle to see the Sun. By this they
are looking to their own Seize, and not to Christ's Righteousness, for
Hopes of Salvation.


THEOPH. Don't you acknowledge, that a Life of Holiness is absolutely necessary
to Salvation; and that without Holiness no Man can see the Lord?


LIBERTIN. I told you before, that Believers will be holy.


THEOPH. Don't it therefore follow from thence, that those who will not be
holy, are not true Belivers? -- Do you yourself suppose that any Man may justly
esteem himself a Child of God, while he lives in the Service of Sin and Satan?


LIBERTIN. God will not impute Sin to his Children. He has laid upon CHRIST the
Iniquities of us all; and he will not lay 'em upon them too.


THEOPH. I thought that the Lord Jesus Christ had not come to save Men in their
Sins; but to redeem them from all Iniquity, and to purify to himself a peculiar
People, zealous of good Works: And consequently, that none have their
Iniquities laid upon Christ but those whom he saves from the Power and
Dominion, as well as the Guilt and Punishment of Sin. -- Pray, Sir, answer me
directly. -- Can any Man have this Hope in Christ, that does not purify
himself, even as he is pure? And on the contrary Shall not the pure in Heart
certainly see God; and he that order his Conversation aright, partake of his
Salvation?


LIBERTIN. I acknowledge, that those are the very Words of the Scripture: but
you don't understand them; you wrest the Scriptures.


THEOPH. Is it not certainly true, that be who does Righteousness, is
Righteous, even as he is Righteous? And on the contrary, is it not also true,
that he who sins, has not seen him, neither known him? And that he who
commits Sin, is of the Devil?


LIBERTIN. I acknowledge, that this also is Scripture Language.


THEOPH. Don't the Scriptures make the committing, or the not committing Sin,
the distinguishing Mark, by which the Children of God are manifest, and the
Children of the Devil?


LIBERTIN. "It does, I confess.


THEOPH. Well, Is there any other Evidence, that would give us a comfortable
Claim to the Character of God's Children, if this were wanting?


LIBERTIN. Yes; if this should be wanting, the Witness of God's Spirit with our
Spirits, that we are his Children, is a better Evidence in our Favor than
this.


THEOPH. Which Way shall we know, that we have the Witness of God's Spirit; and
are not deceived, as many Pretenders to it have certainly been?


LIBERTIN. He that believes on the Son of God, has the Witness in himself. He
feels it, he knows it.


THEOPH. So said the Ranters, Muggletonians, and Familists before mentioned.
But both they and you must excuse me from believing, that the Spirit of God
witnesses with your Spirits, contrary to his Witness in his Word. -- Where he
is a witnessing Spirit, he is also a sanctifying Spirit. -- They who live in
the Spirit, do also walk in the Spirit. Gal. v. 25.


LIBERTIN. Thus blind Men may undertake to judge of Colors, as you adventure
to speak Evil of Things you understand not.


THEOPH. Shall we then sum up your Instructions upon this Subject? -- You cannot
deny but that the Scriptures make Holiness absolutely necessary to Salvation;
that no one can have this Hope, who don't purify himself, as Christ is pure;
that every one has this Hope, that does thus purify himself; that he who does
Righteousness is righteous; and that they who live in Sin, have not seen him,
neither known him; and that this is the Light, by which the Children of God are
manifest, and the Children of the Devil. -- You cannot but acknowledge that all
this is the very Word of God. -- And yet you will hold, that we must not
evidence our Justification, by that which God himself has told us is a sure
Mark and Evidence of it; and without which he has assured us, that we are not
in a justified State. We must not make it manifest to our selves whose Children
we are, by that which God himself has told us, is the proper Manifestation of
it. -- And what is the Reason why we must not try ourselves by this Rule?
Because this were to light up a Candle to see the Sun. We may have a better and
clearer Evidence. What, without this I An Evidence, that may consist with a
Course of Sinning! And may with the greatest Assurance be pretended to, by Men
of most profligate and abandoned Lives! Let these but impute their presumptuous
Confidence to the Spirit of God, and call it his witnessing with their Spirits;
and their State is safe! -- You tell us indeed, that they who have this
Witness, will not sin; But what if they should? -- I conclude, you will answer
with a famous Rabbi of the present Day, "That we must not mind Sin any more
than a Fly." -- What Sort of Doctrines are these! I hope our People are better
instructed by their carnal Ministers (as you are pleased to stigmatize us) than
to receive such carnal, such dangerous and mischievous Principles as these are.


LIBERTIN. Poor Soul! I pity you and your deluded Followers: But I see it is to
no Purpose to talk any more with you; and therefore must bid you Farewell.


THEOPH. I hope, Sir, you will not go away disgusted. I have disign'd no personal
Incivility or Disrespect, in any Thing I have said. -- But if you are resolute
to go, I heartily wish you well.


EPINET. I see, he is ruffled: He Is gone away in a Pet. But though he is gone, I
hope you will for my Sake more particularly clear up the Subject before us; and
show how far we may depend upon internal Manifestation of the Love of God, as
an Evidence of our Safety; and how far we ought to look to our Sanctification
for the Comfort of a justified State.


THEOPH. You may remember, I said something to this in our former Conference.
To which I will now add; -- It is doubtless true, that the Believer may in such
a feeling and sensible Manner exercise Faith in Christ, he may have such a
clear Discovery of his Sufficiency, so heartily comply with the GospelCall, so
firmly depend upon the Promise; and have all this so clearly manifested to
himself by the Spirit of God, that he can at that Time no more doubt of it,
than of any other Operations of his own Mind. -- But then it must be remembered,
that these sensible Impressions are but transient Things. He may lose them: and
if the Spirit of God withdraw his comforting Influences, he certainly will lose
them; and not so much as retain a lively Idea of the transporting Comforts,
which he then had, And what shall he do now? Whither shall he betake himself
for Support? -- He remembers indeed, that he has had Comfort and Joy: But this
Prop is now knocked from under him. He goes forward, but it is not there: And
backward, but he cannot perceive it. -- Besides, Many have pretended to the
same Experience, and to the same Assurance that he has formerly had, who are
evidently Self-Deceivers. And how shall he know that he is not himself likewise
in a most dangerous Mistake, but by the Fruit of the Spirit, in his Heart and
Life? -- These therefore must be considered, as the Ordinary and standing
Evidences in his Favor.

If he maintains an habitual Course of vital and true Holiness, he thereby
clears up his Interest in CHRIST. For from his only, the Head of Influences,
this Sanctifying Change in the Man must proceed. If he has not a Principle of
Holiness in his Heart, and is not careful to be practically holy in his Life
and Conversation, he cannot belong to Christ, or be his Disciple; He can have no
Interest in Christ. For Christ come to save his People from their Sins. -- And
if we yet further consider this Case; how many true Believers are there, who
may never have experienced such clear, Lavishing, and unquestionable
Manifestations of the Love of God to their Souls? And which Way possibly can
such evidence their Justification, but by their Sanctification? They sometimes
doubt whether their Faith (taken under an abstract Examination) be sincere, and
genuine: But they may perhaps find beyond Doubt their Sorrow for and Hatred of
all Sin, their Love to Holiness, and their unfeigned Endeavors of Conformity
to God in all Things. They find the purifying Effects of Faith. By this
therefore, they may safely conclude their State good. They may safely conclude
themselves to be in Christ Jesus, because old Things are passed away; and all
Things are become new in them. -- In find, Sanctification is in it self a good
Evidence for us: But where that is wanting, we can have none at all.


EPINET. I must acknowledge, Sir, you have set this Matter in a clear and
convincing Light. -- Oh! What wild Schemes this Gentleman entertains! -- We had
several other such Doctrines taught us, in Conversation with him the last
Night. Particularly, that we are justified from Eternity; that the Law is not a
Rule of Life for Believers; that God sees no Sin in his Children, how imperfect
soever; and the like.


THEOPH. The Lord graciously prevent the spreading of such dangerous Contagion.
-- What! Justified before we had a Being! Pardoned, before we had sinned!
Acquitted from Guilt, before we were guilty! Why not sanctified and glorified
too from Eternity? Is it not true of all who believe not, that they are
condemned already? Are they justified from Eternity; and yet condemned for
their Unbelief? -- What, the Law not a Rule of Life to Believers! Have they
then no Rule to walk by! Are they under no Obligations to Obedience? Nay, are
they not even under greater Obligations, from the special Love of God
manifested to them? Do we then make void the Law by Faith? God forbid! Yea, we
establish the Law. -- What, does God see no Sin in his Children! Are we not
expressly told that the Thing which David did, displeased the Lord? 2. Sam. xi.
27. Don't Believers fin against greater Obligations? And are not therefore
their Sins especially displeasing to God? Alas, what dreadful Work would those
strange Doctrines make in the World, if Men should be generally acted and
influenced by them? The Lord deliver us from such loose and dangerous
Principles!


EPINET. A good Petition! -- And now, Sir, I heartily thank you for your
renewed Pains with me, and Kindness to me. -- I hope I shall have Occasion to
praise God to all Eternity, for my Acquaintance and Conversation with you. --
The Lord requite to you this Work and Labor of Love!


THEOPH. May God be with you, my Friend! And grant you continued Experience of
the sanctifying, quickening, and comforting Influences of his blessed Spirit;
that you may go on your Way rejoicing, may glorify God on Earth, and at last
enter into the Joy of you LORD, in the heavenly World.


EPINET. I thank you, dear Sir, for these your friendly Wishes: And beg the
Favor of a daily Remembrance in your Intercessions at the Throne of Grace. --
Sir, I wish you a good Night.


THEOPH. God forbid, that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for
you! I also desire your Prayers for me. -- My Love to all at Home.


FINIS
The principal CONTENTS.
Page 4. On the Necessity of a Work of Conviction, preparatory to saving Faith.
P. 24. On the Evidences, that the SPIRIT of God is the Author of this Work. P.
36. On the Outcries of awakened Sinners in the public Congregation. P. 40. On
Agitations, Swoons, etc. P. 43. On rapturous Joys. P. 47. On the Marks of
Distinction between true and false Joys. P. 53. On discoursing of our own
Experiences. P. 60. On exomining and admonishing of others. P. 62. On judging
and censuring others as unregenerate. P. 70. On suddenly pronouncing particular
Persons converted. P. 73. Advices in a Sinner under Awakenings. P. 78. The
Manner of Conversion related in a particular Instances. P. 85 A short Debate
between Theophilus and Libertinus, upon some Antinomian Conceints. --
ERRATA.
PAge 35. line 6. read, clearing, P. 94. I. 16 read, Well now.


