Dr. Chauncy's SERMON Cautioning against ENTHUSIASM.

ENTHUSIASM described and cautioned against. A SERMON Preached at the Old Brick
Meeting House in Boston, the LORD's DAY after the COMMENCEMENT, 1742. With a
Letter to the Reverend Mr. JAMES DAVENPORT.

By Charles Chauncy, D.D One of the Pastors of the first Church in said Town.

-- Non sum idoneus ad habenda, aut interpretanda somnia, neque eam facultatem
aut scientiam mihi expeto; et pactum feci cum Domino Deo meo, ne vel visiones,
vel somnia, vel etiam angelos mihi mittat. Contentus enim sum hoc dono, quod
habeo scripturam sanctam, quae abunde docet, et suppeditat omnia, quae sunt
necessaria cum ad hanc, tum ad futuram vitam. Huic credo, et acquiesco, ac
certus sum, me non posse falli. -- Moveor infinita illa multitudine illusionum,
praestigiarum, imposturarum, quibus mund^^ horribiliter sub papatu, longo
tempore, deceptus est per sathanan^: Deinde sufficientia scripturae sanctae,
cui si non adhibuero fidem, profecto nec angelo, nec visioni, nec somnio facile
credam.

Lutherus, in Comment, in Genesis 37. fol. 6. Edit. An. 1554. -- Multi enim
fanatici spiritus me adorti sunt, quorum alius somnia, alius visiones, alius
revelationes jactabat, quibus nitebantur me erudire. Sed respondi, me non
expetere ejusmodi revelationes; et si quae offerentur, me iis non habiturum
fidem. Idque ardentibus votis precatus sum, ut daret mihi Deus certam sensum et
intellectum scripturae sanctae. Si enim verbum habeo, scio me recta via
ingredi, nec facile falli aut errare posse. Haec mea sententia est, quam non
muto.

Ibid ad Cap. 40. fol. 61. BOSTON: Printed by J. DRAPER, for S. ELIOT in
Cornhill, and J. BLANCHARD, at the Bible and Crown on Dock Square. MDCCXLII.

A LETTER To the REVEREND Mr. James Davenport, Pastor of the Church of CHRIST,
in SOUTH-HOLD, on LONG ISLAND, now in BOSTON.
Reverend Sir,
YOUR coming to BOSTON, under the influence of impulses and impressions, taking
them for a call from GOD; and your manner of conduct since you have been in
town, (conformable in some measure to what it has been in other places) was the
occasion of my studying, and preaching, and afterward giving way to the
publication of the following Sermon: And, as I think, there is that in it,
which may be a word in season to a gentleman of your cast of mind, I herewith
make a present of it to you; and shall be glad, if it may be of service to you,
as I hope it will to others, guarding them against the wilds of a heated
imagination.

When you came to my house, some days ago, to inquire into the reason of the
hope that was in me, my intention was, to deal plainly and faithfully with you:
And I believe, you do not think, I was wanting upon that head. Whether you
heard what I then said with pity toward me, or becoming reflections on your
self, I know not: Time may discover which. But whatever the working of your
mind was, I am abundantly confirmed in it, that your real character was fairly
laid open before you.

I doubt not, you verily think, GOD sent you hither; and that your preaching
here is by immediate commission from him: But others must be excused, if they have not the same though it of the matter. They are in the opinion, your own stock is
your proper charge; and cannot easily be bro't to believe, that GOD would call
you to leave them, without making way for their supply in the mean time. This,
you may think, he has done: But others are of a different mind; those, to be
sure, are so, who know what a weak, raw, illiterate, young man, you have sent
to them; one, who lived in these parts, and gave sufficient proof of his
ignorance, and rashness, and unskillfullness, as well as other things, I shall not
here mention.

But that, more especially, which satisfies me, as well as many others, that
you are misled in the though it of being sent by GOD, in an extraordinary manner,
to this place, is, the mischief you are like to do here. What good you may have
been the means of elsewhere; I know not: But I am well assured, instead of
good, you will be the occasion of much hurt, to the interest of religion in
these churches. Your manner in speaking, as well as what you say, seems rather
calculated, at least at some times, to disturb the imagination, than inform the
judgment: And I am fully persuaded, you too often mistake the mechanical
operations of violent voice and action, for impressions of another kind. Some
are not without fear, least by your imprudencies, you should do much toward
bringing conversion, the very name of it, into contempt. It Is certain, many
good people are offended; and those, who have no serious concern about
religion, are in danger of throwing it off, as a wild, disorderly, imaginary
business. And if, by your extravagant conduct, you should excite such
prejudices in the minds of people against christianity, as should unhappily
prove the occasion of their ruin, would it not afford just ground of the most
severe reflections on your self?

The preaching of CHRIST crucified, may be, it is true, a stumbling block to
some, and foolishness to others; and the preachers, at the same time, a sweet
savor to GOD, even in them that perish. But how will this justify real
weaknesses, and just occasions of offense? If, under the notion of preaching
CHRIST, men will run into open imprudencies, and set religion in such an ugly
light by their unguarded conduct, as eventually issues in great damage to men's
souls, they are certainly chargeable with it; and to a greater degree of guilt,
than they may be sufficiently aware of. Enthusiastic wildness has slain its
thousands. This, Sir, deserves your most serious consideration. And while you
are so ready to fasten on others the guilt of the blood of souls, it would not
be amiss, if you were a little more critical in examining, how far you may,
your self, be guilty in the like kind. This is a momentous affair. And
self-deceit will be no more excusable in you, than in others. Be not
high-minded, but fear. Encourage a jealousy of your self, at least, so far as
to look over your conduct, and compare it faithfully with that grand rule of
trial, the word of GOD. I bear you record, you have a zeal of GOD; but if, in
any great instances, it is a zeal not governed by knowledge, or not tempered
with prudence, or not accompanied with charity, you may, be you ever so
confident you are in the right, bring guilt upon your self, as well as do hurt
to others.

Your design, in going through the town, from one minister to another, to examine
into their religious experiences, you have begun to open. You have not indeed,
as yet, particularly pronounced sentence, and called upon people, (as has been
your usual way) to separate from this and the other minister, as being in a
carnal state; though, if I have been rightly informed, you have, in general,
addressed to GOD in prayer, as to him who knew, that the greatest part of the
ministers in town were unconverted. How far this may tend to prejudice people
against their ministry, I cannot certainly say; but I have no such apprehension
of your importance, as to be afraid of any great inconvenience arising
herefrom. Some over zealous persons may be made still more uncharitable; but by
far the better part of the town, both for number, and solid piety, are aware of
this device of satan; and, I trust, upon their guard against any bad
impressions from it. I am therefore more concerned for you, than in fear of any
hurt you are capable of doing the ministers. You are certainly in a wrong way
of thinking, or you would not be able, with the name of GOD in your mouth, to
violate that solemn statute of heaven, JUDGE NOT.

Suffer me, Sir, to take this opportunity, to beseech you in the bowels of
CHRIST JESUS, and as you regard your own soul, to review your conduct in this
matter of rash, and uncharitable judging You know, how many worthy ministers
you have publicly condemned, as carnal and unconverted; though, so far as is
visible, they have been an example of the believers, in word, in conversation,
in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity: And you know also, how, by this
means, you have obstructed their usefulness; alienated the hearts of their
people from them; and encouraged heats and animosities, which have arisen, in
some places, to open divisions and separations. And can you reflect upon this,
and be easy in your mind? Have you had no misgivings of heart? No in^^rd
relentings? No secret twinges of conscience? (...) ^an't but think, this has
been, at times, the case with you. I am sure, if you have not been in trouble of
soul, it is not because you have not had just reason to be so: And I believe, if
ever GOD gives you a sound mind, you will cry to him from the deeps, for this
strange conduct you have unhappily fallen into.

You will doubtless say, you are in the right; you are sure of it: Your mind
has been impressed by the DIVINE SPIRIT; and you act in this matter, under his
special influence. But is this any more than every enthusiast may plead in
vindication of his conduct, be it ever so wild? What says the apostle PAUL, who
spoke under the inspiration of GOD? Does he not bring the pretenses of every
man, who calls himself SPIRITUAL, he pretends to a more than ordinary guidance
of the SPIRIT, to the standard of scripture, to be tried by that unerring rule?
And are you able to stead the trial by this book of God? What is there, in the
sacred volumes, that will justify your going about, from one part of the
country to another, enquiring into the state of the souls, particularly, of
ministers, and declaring them, most commonly, unconverted; Though they don't open
their hearts to you, and their lives give credit to their profession? What is
judging another man's servant, if this is not? And how can you be said, while
you act thus, to be in the exercise of charity, that charity which thinks no
evil, believes all things, hops all things? Is there any meaning to these
texts? Can persons be at all guilty of the sin of uncharitable judging? It Is
hard to say, wherein they can be guilty, if you are not.

You may, perhaps, plead the danger of an unconverted ministry to the souls of
men. But be the danger of this as great as it will, it can never be a good
reason, why you should assume a divine prerogative, and act as though you were
the constituted judge of your brethren. It Is true, where ministers make a
discovery of a bad heart, by that which is outwardly bad, they may justly be
condemned: But in no other case; to be sure, not publicly. We have no way of
judging but by what is outward and visible: Nor are we capable of judging any
other way. And to leave this way, and go into that of judging from men's
hearts; it tends to nothing, in the nature of things, but to destroy the peace
of churches, and fill the world with contention and confusion: And of this you
have had proof in your own conduct; sufficient, if you will suitably attend to
it, to work conviction in you.

But this you cannot do, while you give heed to impulses, and guide your self
by them, taking them for discoveries of the will of GOD. Your grand error lies
here: And it is a more dangerous one, than you may be ready to imagine. There is
nothing, while in this state of mind, but you may be bro't to: And how far GOD
may suffer you to be led aside, is known only to himself. Others, who have
appeared as zealous for CHRIST as you have done, have been as bold and daring
in judging their neighbors, as much under an imaginary divine conduct in every
thing, and as sure of it as you have been, have at length run into all the
wilds of delusion. I beg, Sir, you would take warning! Whatever you may think
of your self, you have certainly a heated imagination. It Is too evident to be
denied, that you too often take the motions of your own mind, for divine
communications. A flagrant instance of this, you gave your hearers not long
since, when you told them, it was impressed upon your mind, that the day of
judgment was at the door, and you were as sure of it as of some things you then
saw with your eyes. A thousand enthusiasts have deluded themselves and others
with the same impression, looking upon it as a revelation from GOD: And you
might have known it to have been a vain imagination, if you had only
considered, that the knowledge of the time of the judgment is a secret, the
FATHER has so reserved in his own breast, as that the SON HIMSELF, as man, was
ignorant of it: And if this day is to come unawares, and as a thief in the
night, you could never be called of GOD to give warning of the time of its
approach. To be sure, if your impression about the nearness of the judgment was
from GOD, your proposal soon after it, to raise moneys for the building a
school, or college, under the name of a Shepherd's Tent, that the churches
might be supplied with converted ministers, must be owned to have had its rise
from mere fancy: And this, no doubt, will generally be the though it of the town
upon it; especially, if what is commonly said, be true, that one of the persons
to be concerned in the management of this affair, is a gentleman that has been
lately turned out of the ministry, because among other things, he spoke most
contemptuously of the holy scriptures. -- But I must not be too long.

And now, having spoken my mind so freely, if you deal with me as you have done
with much better men, I may expect to be called a poor, carnal, unconverted
wretch. But I assure you beforehand, I esteem it a very small thing to be
judged by your Judgment; and the rather, because I certainly know, you are
ignorant of my state toward GOD.

But however you act toward me, I presume not to judge you. To your own master
you stand, or fall. I have taken notice only of that in you, which is visible
to the world; And though I have, and do condemn it, as what is opposite to the
plain laws of GOD; yet, I pronounce no sentence respecting your state. GOD
knows how far you may be under the power of a disturbed imagination, and will
make all the favorable allowances your case will admit of: I desire to do so
also, and would hope the best concerning you.

I shall add no more but a couple of passages, I think well worthy your serious
consideration. One is from Monsieur BANAGE, in his La Communion Saint, page
554, 555. Where speaking of a set of men in France, he says, They look upon
their neighbors to be more wicked than they really are, and think themselves
better than they really are. Und^^ ^retence of superior good conduct in
themselves, they ascend the tribunal, they cloth themselves with the rights of
the divine being, and boldly pronounce the irrevocable sentence of Damnation.
One would think GOD had committed his justice into the hands of these rigorous
spiritual men, who are oftentimes more melancholy than holy, that so they might
exercise it with supreme authority. Were it even true, that you were the
depositaries of divine justice, don't you know that this depositum were
dangerous in your hands? Woe to him that abuses it, that acts by passion, or
that judges with rashness. Judge not, says the SAVIOR of the world; for with
what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged. By what right do you violate the law
of your master? And why do you judge, when it is forbidden?

The other passage is from the famous Mr. JOHN DAVEN PORT, my predecessor, and
your great-grand-father. In a manuscript sermon of his, having admonished the
church of GOD, under troublesome exercises, he goes on in these words, -- --
But then, would you prevent such exercises for the future, know your duties and
do them; neither out-running your calling by an inordinate zeal, nor being too
slow in discharging the duties of it. Let the church look neither to the right
hand nor to the left, but to the revealed will of CHRIST, our head and
lawgiver in all administrations. Let every member attend the rules of order
and edification, in speaking and acting, and in all relations, in church,
commonwealth, families, and in both your callings general and particular, and
in all your converse and dealings with men. Let every one attend his own work,
do his own business, and keep his own place. Prove. 27.8. As a bird that
wandreth from his nest, so is a man that wandreth from his place. All such as
are above these duties, as the Familists, have not the SPIRIT OF CHRIST: True
believers are otherwise minded.

I am, Sir, wishing you well on all accounts, your servant in CHRIST, Charles
Chauncy,
Boston, July 17. 1742.
A Caveat against ENTHUSIASM.
1 COR. XIV. xxxvii. If any Man among you think himself to be a PROPHET, or
SPIRITUAL, let him acknowledge that the Things that I write unto you are the
Commandments of the LORD.


MANY Things were amiss in the Church of Corinth, when Paul wrote this Epistle
to them. There were envyings, strife and divisions among them, on account of
their ministers. Some cried up one, others another: one said, I am of PAUL,
another I am of APPOLLOS. They had formed themselves into parties, and each
party so admired the teacher they followed, as to reflect unjust contempt on
the other.

Nor was this their only fault. A spirit of pride prevailed exceedingly among
them. They were conceited of their gifts, and too generally disposed to make an
ostentatious show of them. From this vain glorious temper proceeded the
forwardness of those that had the gift of tongues, to speak in languages which
others did not understand, to the disturbance, rather than edification of the
church: And from the same principle it arose, that they spoke not by turns, but
several at once, in the same place of worship, to the introducing such
confusion, that they were in danger of being though it mad.

Nor were they without some pretense to justify these disorders. Their great
plea was, that in these things they were guided by the Spirit, acted under his
immediate influence and direction. This seems plainly insinuated in the words I
have read to you. If any man think himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let
him acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the commandments of
the Lord. As if the apostle had said, you may imagine your selves to be
spiritual men, to be under a divine afflatus in what you do; but it is all
imagination, mere pretense, unless you pay a due regard to the commandments I
have here wrote to you; receiving them not as the word of man, but of GOD. Make
trial of your spiritual pretenses by this rule: If you can submit to it, and
will order your conduct by it, well; otherwise you only cheat yourselves, while
you think yourselves to be spiritual men, or prophets: You are nothing better
than Enthusiasts; your being acted by the SPIRIT, immediately guided and
influenced by him, is mere pretense; you have no good reason to believe any
such thing.

From the words thus explained, I shall take occasion to discourse to you upon
the following Particulars.

I. I shall give you some account of Enthusiasm, in its nature and influence.

II. Point you to a rule by which you may judge of persons, whether they are
under the influence of Enthusiasm.

III. Say what may be proper to guard you against this unhappy turn of mind.

The whole will then be followed with some suitable Application.

I. I am in the first place, to give you some account of Enthusiasm. And as
this is a thing much talked of at present, more perhaps than at any other time
that has passed over us, it will not be though it unreasonable, if I take some
pains to let you into a true understanding of it.

The word, from it is Etymology, carries in it a good meaning, as signifying
inspiration from GOD: in which sense, the prophets under the old testament, and
the apostles under the new, might properly be called Enthusiasts. For they were
under a divine influence, spoke as moved by the HOLY GHOST, and did such things
as can be accounted for in no way, but by recurring to an immediate
extraordinary power, present with them.

But the word is more commonly used in a bad sense, as intending an imaginary,
not a real inspiration: according to which sense, the Enthusiast is one, who
has a conceit of himself as a person favored with the extraordinary presence
of the Deity. He mistakes the workings of his own passions for divine
communications, and fancies himself immediately inspired by the SPIRIT of GOD,
when all the while, he is under no other influence than that of an overheated
imagination.

The cause of this enthusiasm is a bad temperament of the blood and spirits;
it is properly a disease, a sort of madness: And there are few; perhaps, none at
all, but are subject to it; though none are so much in danger of it as those, in
whom melancholy is the prevailing ingredient in their constitution. In these it
often reigns; and sometimes to so great a degree, that they are really beside
themselves, acting as truly by the blind impetus of a wild fancy, as though they
had neither reason nor understanding.

And various are the ways in which their enthusiasm discovers itself.

Sometimes, it may be seen in their countenance. A certain wildness is
discernable in their general look and air; especially when their imaginations
are moved and fired.

Sometimes, it strangely loosens their tongues, and gives them such an energy,
as well as fluency and volubility in speaking, as they themselves, by their
utmost efforts, cannot so much as imitate, when they are not under the
enthusiastic influence.

Sometimes, it affects their bodies, throws them into convulsions and
distortions, into quakings and tremblings. This was formerly common among the
people called Quakers. I was myself, when a Lad, an eyewitness to such violent
agitations and foamings, in a boisterous female speaker, as I could not behold
but with surprise and wonder.

Sometimes, it will unaccountably mix itself with their conduct, and give it
such a tincture of that which is freakish or furious, as none can have an idea
of, but those who have seen the behavior of a person in a phrenzy.

Sometimes, it appears in their imaginary peculiar intimacy with heaven. They
are, in their own opinion, the special favorites of GOD, have more familiar
converse with him than other good men, and receive immediate, extraordinary
communications from him. The tho'ts, which suddenly rise up in their minds,
they take for suggestions of the SPIRIT; their very fancies are divine
illuminations; nor are they strongly inclined to any thing, but it is an impulse
from GOD, a plain revelation of his will.

And what extravagances, in this temper of mind, are they not capable of, and
under the specious pretext too of paying obedience to the authority of GOD?
Many have fancied themselves acting by immediate warrant from heaven, while
they have been committing the most undoubted wickedness. There is indeed scarce
any thing so wild, either in speculation or practice, but they have given unto
it: They have, in many instances, been blasphemers of GOD, and open disturbers
of the peace of the world.

But in nothing does the enthusiasm of these persons discover it self more,
than in the disregard they express to the Dictates of reason. They are above
the force of argument, beyond conviction from a calm and sober address to their
understandings. As for them, they are distinguished persons; GOD himself speaks
inwardly and immediately to their souls. They see the light infused into their
understandings, and cannot be mistaken; it is clear and visible there, like the
light of bright sunshine; shows it self and needs no other proof but its own
evidence. They feel the hand of GOD moving them within, and the impulses of his
SPIRIT; and cannot be mistaken in what they feel. Thus they support themselves,
and are sure reason has nothing to do with what they see and feel. What they
have a sensible experience of, admits no doubt, needs no probation. And in vain
will you endeavor to convince such persons of any mistakes they are fallen
into. They are certainly in the right; and know themselves to be so. They have
the SPIRIT opening their understandings and revealing the truth to them. They
believe only as he has taught them: and to suspect they are in the wrong is to
do dishonor to the SPIRIT; it is to oppose his dictates, to set up their own
wisdom in opposition to his, and shut their eyes against that light with which
he has shined into their souls. They are not therefore capable of being argued
with; you had as good reason with the wind.

And as the natural consequence of their being thus sure of every thing, they
are not only infinitely stiff and tenacious, but impatient of contradiction,
censorious and uncharitable: they encourage a good opinion of none but such as
are in their way of thinking and speaking. Those, to be sure, who venture to
debate with them about their errors and mistakes, their weaknesses and
indiscretions, run the hazard of being stigmatized by them as poor unconverted
wretches, without the SPIRIT, under the government of carnal reason, enemies to
GOD and religion, and in the broad way to hell.

They are likewise positive and dogmatical, vainly fond of their own
imaginations, and invincibly set upon propagating them: And in the doing of
this, their Powers being awakened, and pu^ as it were, upon the stretch, from
the strong impressions they are under, that they are authorized by the
immediate command of GOD himself, they sometimes exert themselves with a sort
of extatic violence: And it is this that gives them the advantage, among the
less knowing and judicious, of those who are modest, suspicious of themselves,
and not too assuming in matters of conscience and salvation. The extraordinary
fervor of their minds, accompanied with uncommon bodily motions, and an
excessive confidence and assurance, gains them great reputation among the
populace; who speak of them as men of GOD in distinction from all others, and
too commonly hearken to, and revere their dictates, as though they really were,
as they pretend, immediately communicated to them from the DIVINE SPIRIT.

This is the nature of Enthusiasm, and this its operation, in a less or greater
degree, in all who are under the influence of it. It Is a kind of religious
Phrenzy, and evidently discovers it self to be so, whenever it rises to any
great height.

And much to be pitied are the persons who are seized with it. Our compassion
commonly works toward those, who, while under distraction, fondly imagine
themselves to be Kings and Emperors: And the like pity is really due to those,
who, under the power of enthusiasm, fancy themselves to be prophets; inspired
of God, and immediately called and commissioned by him to deliver his messages
to the world: And though they should run into disorders, and act in a manner that
cannot but be condemned, they should notwithstanding be treated with tenderness
and lenity; and the rather, because they don't commonly act so much under the
influence of a bad mind, as a deluded imagination. And who more worthy of
christian pity than those, who, under the notion of serving GOD and the
interest of religion, are filled with zeal, and exert themselves to the utmost,
while all the time they are hurting and wounding the very cause they take so
much pains to advance. It Is really a pitiable case: And though the honesty of
their intentions will not legitimate their bad actions, yet it very much
alleviates their guilt: We should think as favorably of them as may be, and be
disposed to judge with mercy, as we would hope to obtain mercy.

But I come

II In the second place, to point you to a rule by which you may judge of
persons, whether they are enthusiasts, mere pretenders to the immediate
guidance and influence of the SPIRIT. And this is, in general, a regard to the
bible, an acknowledgment that the things therein contained are the commandments
of GOD. This is the rule in the text. And it is an infallible rule of trial in
this matter: We need not fear judging amiss, while we keep closely to it.

It Is true, it wont certainly follow, that a man, pretending to be a prophet,
or spiritual, really is so, if he owns the bible, and receives the truths
therein revealed as the mind of GOD: But the conclusion, on the other hand, is
clear and certain; if he pretends to be conducted by the SPIRIT, and disregards
the scripture, pays no due reverence to the things there delivered as the
commandments of GOD, he is a mere pretender, be his pretenses ever so bold and
confident, or made with ever so much seeming seriousness, gravity, or solemnity.

And the reason of this is obvious; viz that the things contained in the
scripture were wrote by holy men as they were moved by the HOLY GHOST: they
were received from GOD, and committed to writing under his immediate,
extraordinary influence and guidance. And the divine, ever-blessed SPIRIT is
consistent with himself. He cannot be supposed to be the author of any private
revelations that are contradictory to the public standing ones, which he has
preserved in the world to this day. This would be to set the SPIRIT of truth at
variance with himself; than which a greater reproach cannot be cast upon him.
It Is therefore as true, that those are enthusiastical, who pretend to the
SPIRIT, and at the same time express a disregard to the scripture, as that the
SPIRIT is the great revealer of the things therein declared to us. And we may
depend upon the certainty of this conclusion. We have warrant to do so from the
inspired Paul; and we have the more reason to rely upon the rule he has given
us, as he has made it evident to the world, that he was a prophet, and
spiritual, by signs and wonders which he did before the people, by the power of
the SPIRIT of GOD.

But the rule in the text is yet more particular. It refers especially to the
things wrote by the apostle PAUL, and which he wrote to the church of Corinth,
to rectify the disorders that had crept in among them. And whoever the person
be, that pretends to be spiritual, to be under the extraordinary guidance of
the SPIRIT, and yet acts in contradiction to what the apostle has here wrote,
he vainly imagines himself to be under the special guidance of the SPIRIT; he
is a downright enthusiast.

And here suffer me to make particular mention of some of the things, the
apostle has wrote in this Epistle, which, whoever will not acknowledge, in deed
as well as word, to be the commandments of GOD, they are not guided by the
SPIRIT, but vainly pretend to be so.

The first thing, in this kind, I would mention, is that which relates to
Ministers; condemning an undue preference of one to another, the holding one in
such admiration as to reflect disgrace on another. This was one of the
disorders the Apostle takes notice of, as prevailing in the church of Corinth;
and he is particular in his care to give check to this unchristian spirit,
which had crumbled them into parties, and introduced among them faction and
contention.

Now, whoever, under the pretense of being guided by the spirit, set up one
minister in opposition to another glory in this minister to the throwing undue
contempt on that, thereby obstructing his usefulness, and making way for strife
and divisions, they are not really acted by the SPIRIT, whatever they may
pretend. For they evidently contradict what the apostle has wrote upon this
very head: And if he was inspired, the spirit they are influenced by, cannot be
the SPIRIT of GOD.

Not that one minister may not be preferred to another; this is reasonable: But
no minister ought to be regarded, as though he was the author of our faith; nor,
let his gifts and graces be what they will, is he to be so esteemed, as that
others must be neglected, or treated in an unbecoming manner. But I shall not
enlarge here, having spoken fully to this point, in a Sermon you may, some of
you, have in your hands.

Another thing the apostle is particular in writing upon, is the commandment of
charity. And this he declares to be a matter of such essential importance in
true christianity, that if a man is really destitute of it, he is nothing in
the sight of GOD: Nay, though his pretenses, his seize, his gifts, be ever
so extraordinary or miraculous; still, if he is without charity he will
cetainly be rejected of GOD and the LORD JESUS CHRIST. This is beautifully
represented in the three first verses of the 13th chapter of this Epistle, in
some of the boldest figures. "Though I speak, says the apostle* with the tongues
of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a
tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all
mysteries and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove
mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods
to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity,
it profits me nothing." As if the apostle had said, though a man had the
languages of all nations, and could speak with the eloquence of angels; though,
like an inspired prophet, he had understanding in the deep counsels of GOD, and
knew even all things sacred and divine; though he had the faith of miracles, and
could do impossibilities; though he had the zeal of a martyr, and should give his
body to be burned; though he had a disposition to almsgiving, and should bestow
upon the poor his whole substance; still, if he was without charity, "that
charity which suffers long, and is kind; that charity which envyeth not,
vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up; that charity which behaveth not it self
unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil,
rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; that charity, in fine,
which bears all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all
things"; I say, if he was without this charity, this love of his neighbor,
these things would be all nothing; he would notwithstanding be out of favor
with GOD, without any interest in CHRIST* and in such circumstances, as that
unless there was a change in them, he would certainly perish.

This, in sum, is what the apostle has, in a distinct and peremptory manner,
delivered concerning charity.

And in vain may any pretend to be under the extraordinary guidance of the
SPIRIT, while in their practice they trample upon this law of christian love.
Men may talk of their impulses and impressions, conceive of them as the call of
GOD, and go about, as moved by them, from place to place, imagining they are
sent of GOD, and immediately commissioned by him: But if they are censorious
and uncharitable; if they harbor in their minds evil surmisings of their
brethren; if they slander and reproach them; if they claim a rights to look
into their hearts, make it their business to judge of their state, and proclaim
them hypocrites, carnal unregenerate sinners, when at the same time they are
visibly of a good conversation in CHRIST; I say, when this is the practice of
any, they do not acknowledge what the inspired PAUL has here wrote as the
commandment of GOD: They are not therefore acted by the same SPIRIT with which
he spoke; but are evidently under a spirit of delusion: And this is so
obviously the case, that there is no reasonable room to doubt upon the matter.

Charity, my brethren, is the commandment of the gospel by way of eminence.
It Is the grand mark by which christians are to distinguish themselves from all
others. By this, says our SAVIOR John 13.35.
, shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love to one another:
Yea, this is the grand criterion by which we are to judge, whither GOD dwells
in us by his SPIRIT. If we love one another, GOD dwells in us 1 John 4.12.
. And in the following Verse, Hereby, i e. by our loving one another, we know
that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of his SPIRIT. To
pretend therefore that we are led by the SPIRIT, and are under his
extraordinary influence, when, in contradiction to the plain laws of JESUS
CHRIST, revealed by the SPIRIT, we judge our brother, and set at naught our
brother, and plead a right to do so, and are in a disposition TO THANK GOD,
THAT WE ARE ENABLED TO DO SO; there is not a more sure mark, in all the
revelations of GOD, of a BAD HEART, or a DISTEMPERED MIND. If any thing will
evidence a man to be a prophet and spiritual, only in his own conceit, this
must do it: And if this is not allowed to be sufficient proof, there is no
knowing, when a man is under the influence of enthusiastic heat and zeal.

Another thing the apostle bespeaks this church upon, is that self-conceit
which appeared among them in the exercise of spiritual gifts: And it is more
than probable, there were those among them, who being vainly puffed up in their
minds, behaved as though they were apostles, or prophets, or teachers; leaving
their own station, and doing the work that was proper to others. It was to
rectify such disorders, that the apostle, in the 12th chapter, addresses to
them in that language, v. 29. Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all
teachers? The question carries with it it is own answer, and means the same
thing, as when he affirms in the foregoing verse God has set some in the
church, first apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, and so on. It Is
evident from what the apostle here writes, and indeed from the current strain
of this whole chapter, that there is in the body of CHRIST, the Church, a
distinction of members; some intended for one use, others for another; and that
it would bring confusion into the body mystical, for one member to be employed
in that service which is adapted to another, and is its proper business.

It Is not therefore the pretense of being moved by the SPIRIT, that will
justify private christians in quiting their own proper station, to act in that
which belongs to another. Such a practice as this naturally tends to destroy
that order, GOD has constituted in the church, and may be followed with
mischiefs greater than we may be aware of.

It Is indeed a powerful argument with many, in favor of these persons, their
pretending to impulses, and a (...) from GOD; together with their insatiable
thirst to do good to souls. And it is owing to such pretenses as these, that
encouragement has been given to the rise of such numbers of ^ay-exhorters and
teachers, in one place and another, all over the land. But if it is one of the
things w^^^e by the apostle as the commandment of GOD, that there should be
officers in the church, an order of men to whom it should belong, as their
proper, stated work, to exhort and ^each, this cannot be the business of
others: And if any who think themselves to be spiritual, are under impressions
to take upon them this ministry, they may have reason to suspect, whether their
impulses are any other than the workings of their own imaginations: And instead
of being under any divine extraordinary influence, there are just grounds of
fear, whether they are not acted from the vanity of their minds: Especially, if
they are but beginners in religion; men of weak minds, babes in understanding;
as is most commonly the ease. The apostle speaks of novices, as in danger of
being lifted up with pride, and falling into the condemnation of the devil: And
it is a seasonable caution to th^s kind of persons. They should study
themselves more, and they will see less reason to think their disposition to
exhort and teach to be from the SPIRIT OF GOD. And indeed, if the SPIRIT has
bid men to abide in their own callings, it is not conceivable he should
influence them to leave their callings: And if he has set a mark of disgrace
upon busiy-bodies in other men's matters, it is impossible he should put men
upon wa^^^ing about from house to house, speaking the things they ought not.

And it deserves particular consideration, whether the suffering, much more the
encouraging WOMEN, yea, GIRLS to speak in the assemblies for religious worship,
is not a plain breach of that commandment of the LORD Context, v. 35, 26.
, wherein it is said, Let your WOMEN keep silence in the churches; for it is
not permitted to them to speak -- It is a shame for WOMEN to speak in the
church. After such an express constitution, designedly made to restrain WOMEN
from speaking in the church, with what face can such a practice be pleaded for?
They may pretend, they are moved by the SPIRIT, and such a though it of themselves*
may be encouraged by others; but if the apostle spoke by the SPIRIT, when he
delivered this commandment, they cannot act by the SPIRIT when they break it.
It Is a plain case, these FEMALE EXHORTERS are condemned by the apostle; and if
it is the commandment of the LORD, that they should not speak, they are
spiritual only in their own tho'ts, while they attempt to do so.

The last thing I shall mention as written by the apostle, is that which
obliges to a just decorum in speaking in the house of GOD. It was an
extravagance these Corinthians had fallen into, their speaking many of them
together, and upon different things, while in the same place of worship. How is
it, brethren, says the apostle? When ye come together, every one has a psalm;
has a doctrine; has a tongue; has a revelation; has an interpretatien. It
was this that introduced the confusion and noise, upon which the apostle
declares, if an unbeliever should come in among them, he would take them to be
mad v. 23.
. And the commandment he gives them to put a stop to this disorder, is, that
they should speak in course, one by one, and so as that things might be done to
edifying 26, 27.
.

And whoever the persons are, who will not acknowledge what the apostle has
here said is the commandment of GOD, and act accordingly, are influenced by
another spirit than that which moved in him, be their impressions or pre^ences
what they will. The disorder of EXHORTING, and PRAYING, and SINGING, and
LAUGHING, in the same house of worship, at one and the same time, is as great
as was that, the apostle blames in the church of Corinth: And whatever the
persons, guilty of such gross irregularity may imagine, and however they may
plead their being under the influence of the SPIRIT, and moved by him, it is
evidently a breach upon common order and decency; yea, a direct violation of
the commandment of GOD, written on purpose to prevent such disorders: And to
pretend the direction of the SPIRIT in such a flagrant instance of extravagant
conduct, is to reproach the blessed SPIRIT, who is not, as the apostle's phrase
is, the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all the churches of the saints.

In these, and all other instances, let us compare men's pretenses to the
SPIRIT by the SCRIPTURE: And if their conduct is such as cannot be reconciled
with an acknowledgment of the things therein revealed, as the commandments of
GOD, their pretenses are vain, they are prophets and spiritual, only in their
own proud imaginations. I proceed now to

III. The third thing, which is to caution you against giving way to
enthusiastic impressions. And here much might be said,

I might warn you from the dishonor it reflects upon the SPIRIT of GOD. And
perhaps none have more reproached the blessed SPIRIT, than men pretending to be
under his extraordinary guidance and direction. The veryest fancies, the
vainest imaginations, the strongest delusions, they have fathered on him. There
is scarce any absurdity in principle, or irregularity in practice, but he has
been made the patron of it. -- And what a stone of stumbling has the wildness
of Enthusiasm been to multitudes in the world? What prejudices have been hereby
excited in their minds against the very being of the SPIRIT? What temptations
have been thrown in their way to dispute his OFFICE as the SANCTIFYER and
COMFORTER of GOD's people? And how have they been overcome to disown HIS WORK,
when it has been really wro't in the hearts of men?

I might also warn you from the damage it has done in the world. No greater
mischiefs have arisen from any quarter. It is indeed the genuine source of
infinite evil. POPERY it self han't been the mother of more and greater
blasphemies and abominations. It has made strong attempts to destroy all
property, to make all things common, wives as well as goods. -- It has promoted
faction and contention; filled the church oftentimes with confusion, and the
state sometimes with general disorder. -- It has, by its pretended spiritual
interpretations, made void the most undoubted laws of GOD. It has laid aside
the gospel sacraments as weak and carnal things; yea, this superior light
within has, in the opinion of thousands, rendered the bible a useless dead
letter. -- It has made men fancy themselves to be prophets and apostles; yea,
some have taken themselves to be CHRIST JESUS; yea, the blessed GOD himself. It
has, in one word, been a pest to the church in all ages, as great an enemy to
real and solid religion, as perhaps the grossest infidelity. Undoubted
instances of these, and many other things of a like nature, are well known to
such as are, in any measure, acquainted with the history of the church.


I might go on and warn you from the danger of it to yourselves. If you should
once come under the influence of it, none can tell whither it would carry you.
There is nothing so wild and frantic, but you may be reconciled to it. And if
this should be your case, your recovery to a right mind would be one of the
most difficult things in nature. There is no coming at a thorow-pac'd
enthusiast. He is proof against every method of dealing with him. Would you
apply to him from reason? That he esteems a carnal thing, and flees from it as
from the most dangerous temptation. Would you rise higher, and speak to him
from Scripture? It will be to as little purpose. For if he pays any regard to
it, it is only as it falls in with his own pre-conceiv'd notions. He interprets
the scripture by impulses and impressions, and sees no meaning in it, only as
he explains it from his own fancy. -- It Is infinitely difficult convince a man
grown giddy and conceited under the false notion, that the good SPIRIT teaches
him every thing. His apprehended inspiration sets him above all means of
conviction. He rather despises than hearkens to the most reasonable advices
that can be given him.

But as the most suitable guard against the first tendencies toward
enthusiasm, let me recommend to you the following words of counsel.

1. Get a true understanding of the proper work of the SPIRIT; and don't place
it in those things wherein the gospel does not make it to consist. The work of
the SPIRIT is different now from what it was in the first days of christianity.
Men were then favored with the extraordinary presence of the SPIRIT. He came
upon them in miraculous gifts and powers; as a spirit of prophecy, of
knowledge, of revelation, of tongue, of miracles: But the SPIRIT is not now to
be expected in these ways. His grand business lies in preparing men's minds for
the grace of GOD, by true humiliation, from an apprehension of sin, and the
necessity of a Savior; then in working in them faith and repentance, and such
a change as shall turn them from the power of sin and satan unto GOD; and in
fine, by carrying on the good work he has begun in them; assisting them in
duty, strengthening them against temptation, and in a word, preserving them
blameless through faith unto salvation: And all this he does by the word and
paayer, as the great means in the accomplishment of these purposes of mercy.

Herein, in general, consists the work of the SPIRIT. It does not lie in giving
men private revelations, but in opening their minds to understand the public
ones contained in the scripture. It does not lie in sudden impulses and
impressions, in immediate calls and extraordinary missions. Men mistake the
business of the SPIRIT, if they understand by it such things as these. And
it is, probably, from such unhappy mistakes, that they are at first betrayed
into enthusiasm. Having a wrong notion of the work of the SPIRIT, it is no
wonder if they take the uncommon sallies of their own minds for his influences.

You cannot, my brethren, be too well acquainted with what the bible makes the
work of the HOLY GHOST, in the affair of salvation: And if you have upon your
minds a clear and distinct understanding of this, it will be a powerful guard
to you against all enthusiastical impressions.

2. Keep close to the Scripture, and admit of nothing for an impression of the
SPIRIT, but what agrees with that unerring rule. Fix it in your minds as a
truth you will invariably abide by, that the bible is the grand test, by which
every thing in religion is to be tried; and that you can, at no time, nor in
any instance, be under the guidance of the SPIRIT of GOD, much less his
extraordinary guidance, if what you are led to, is inconsistent with the things
there revealed, either in point of faith or practice. And let it be your care
to compare the motions of your minds, and the workings of your imaginations and
passions, with the rule of GOD's word. And see to it, that you be impartial in
this matter: Don't make the rule bend to your pre-conceiv'd notions and
inclinations; but repair to the bible, with a mind disposed, as much as may be,
to know the truth as it lies nakedly and plainly in the scripture it self. And
whatever you are moved to, reject the motion, esteem it as nothing more than a
vain fancy, if it puts you upon any method of thinking, or acting, that cannot
be evidently reconciled with the revelations of GOD in his word.

This adherence to the bible, my brethren, is one of the best preservatives
against enthusiasm. If you will but express a due reverence to this book of
GOD, making it the great rule of judgment, even in respect of the SPIRIT's
influences and operations, you will not be in much danger of being led into
delusion. Let that be your inquiry under all supposed impulses from the SPIRIT,
What salth the scripture? To the law, and to the testimony: If your
impressions, and imagined spiritual motions agree not therewith, it is because
there is no hand of the SPIRIT of GOD in them: They are only the workings of
your own imaginations, or something worse; and must at once, without any more
ado, be rejected as such.

3. Make use of the Reason and Understanding GOD has given you. This may be
though it an ill-advis'd direction, but it is as necessary as either of the former.
Next to the Scripture, there is no greater enemy to enthusiasm, than reason.
It Is indeed impossible a man should be an enthusiast, who is in the just
exercise of his understanding; and it is because men don't pay a due regard to
the sober dictates of a well informed mind, that they are led aside by the
delusions of a vain imagination. Be advised then to show yourselves men, to
make use of your reasonable powers; and not act as the horse or mule, as though
you had no understanding.

It Is true, you must not go about to set up your own reason in opposition to
revelation: Nor may you entertain a though it of making reason your rule instead of
scripture. The bible, as I said before, is the great rule of religion, the
grand test in matters of salvation: But then, you must use your reason in order
to understand the bible: Nor is there any other possible way, in which, as a
reasonable creature, you should come to an understanding of it.

You are, it must be acknowledged, in a corrupt state. The fall has introduced
great weakness into your reasonable nature. You cannot be too sensible of this;
nor of the danger you are in of making a wrong judgment, through prejudice,
carelessness, and the undue influence of sin and lust. And to prevent this, you
cannot be too sollicitous to get your nature sanctified: Nor can you depend too
strongly upon the divine grace to assist you in your search after truth: And
it is in the way of due dependence on GOD, and the influences of his SPIRIT,
that I advise you to the use of your reason: And in this way, you must make use
of it. How else will you know what is a revelation from GOD? What should hinder
your entertaining the same though it of a pretended revelation, as of a real one,
but your reason discovering the falsehood of the one, and the truth of the
other? And when in the enjoyment of an undoubted revelation from GOD, as in the
case of the scripture, How will you understand its meaning, if you throw by
your reason? How will you determine, that this, and not that, is its true
sense, in this and the other place? Nay, if no reasoning is to be made use of,
are not all the senses that can be put on scripture equally proper? Yea, may
not the most contrary senses be received at the same time since reason only can
point out the inconsistency between them? And what will be sufficient to guard
you against the most monstrous extravagancies, in principle as well as
practice, if you give up your understandings? What have you left, in this case,
to be a check to the wantoness of your imaginations? What should hinder your
following every idle fancy, 'till you have lost yourselves in the wilds of
falsehood and inconsistency?

You may, it is true, misuse your reason: And this is a consideration that
should put you upon a due care, that you may use it well; but no argument why
you should not use it at all: And indeed, if you should throw by your reason as
a useless thing, you would at once put your selves in the way of all manner of
delusion.

But, it may be, you will say, you have committed yourselves to the guidance of
the SPIRIT; which is the best preservative. Herein you have done well; nothing
can be objected against this method of conduct: Only take heed of mistakes,
touching the SPIRIT's guidance. Let me enquire of you, how is it the SPIRIT
preserves from delusion? Is it not by opening the understanding, and enabling
the man, in the due use of his reason, to perceive the truth of the things of
GOD and religion? Most certainly: And, if you think of being led by the SPIRIT
without understanding, or in opposition to it, you deceive yourselves. The
SPIRIT of GOD deals with men as reasonable creatures: And they ought to deal
with themselves in like manner And while they do thus, making is wise and good
use of the understanding, GOD has given them, they will take a proper means to
prevent their falling into delusions; nor will there be much danger of their
being led aside by enthusiastic heat and imagination.

4. You must not lay too great stress upon the workings of your passions and
affections. These will be excited, in a less or greater degree, in the business
of religion: And it is proper they should. The passions, when suitably moved,
tend mightily to awaken the reasonable powers, and put them upon a lively and
vigorous exercise. And this is their proper use: And when addressed to, and
excited to this purpose, they may be of good service: whereas we shall mistake
the right use of the passions, if we place our religion only or chiefly, in the
heat and fervor of them. The soul is the man: And unless the reasonable nature
is suitably wro't upon, the understanding enlightened, the judgment convinced,
the will persuaded, and the mind entirely changed, it will avail but to little
purpose; though the passions should be set all in a blaze. This therefore you
should be most concerned about. And if while you are sollicitous that you may
be in transports of affection, you neglect your more noble part, your reason
and judgment, you will be in great danger of being carried away by your
imaginations. This indeed leads directly to Enthusiasm: And you will in vain,
endeavor to preserve yourselves from the influence of it, if you a'nt duly
careful to keep your passions in their proper place, under the government of a
well informed understanding. While the passions are uppermost, and bear the
chief sway over a man, he is in an unsafe state: None knows what he may be
bro't to. You cannot therefore be too careful to keep your passions under the
regimen of a sober judgment. It Is indeed a matter of necessity, as you would
not be led aside by delusion and fancy.

5. In the last place here, you must not forget to go to GOD by prayer. This is
a duty in all cases, but in none more than the present. If left to yourselves,
your own wisdom and strength, you will be insufficient for your own security;
perpetually in danger from your imaginations, as well as the other enemies of
your souls. You cannot be too sensible of this; nor can you, from a sense of it,
apply with too much importunity to the FATHER of mercies, to take pity upon
you, and send you such a supply of grace as is needful for you. You must not
indeed think, that your duty lies in the business of prayer, and nothing else.
You must use your own endeavors, neglect nothing that may prove a guard to
you: But together with the use of other means, you must make known your request
to GOD by prayer and supplication. You must daily commit the keeping of your
soul to him; and this you must particularly be careful to do in times of more
special hazard; humbly hoping in GOD to be your help: And if he shall please to
undertake for you, no delusion shall ever have power over you, to seduce you;
but, possessing a sound mind, you shall go on in the uniform, steady service of
your maker and generation, till of the mercy of GOD, through the merits of the
REDEEMER, you are crowned with eternal life.

But I shall now draw toward a close, by making some suitable application of
what has been said, And,

1. Let us beware of charging GOD foolishly, from what we have heard of the
nature, and influence of enthusiasm. This may appear a dark article in GOD's
government of the world; but it stands upon the same foot with his permission
of other evils, whether natural or moral. And, if we should not be able to see
perfectly into the reason of this dispensation, we should rather attribute it
to our own ignorance, than reply against GOD. We may assure ourselves, a wise,
and good, and holy GOD, would not have suffered it thus to be, if there were
not some great and valuable ends to be hereby answered.

Greater advantages may, in the end, accrue to true religion, by the sufferance
of an enthusiastic spirit, and the prevalence of it, at certain times, than we
may be capable of discerning at present.

It may furnish both opportunity and occasion for the trial of those, who call
themselves christians; whether they have just notions of religion, and courage
and faithfulness to stand up for real truths, against mere imaginary ones. --
It may serve as a foil to set off the beauty and glory of true, genuine
christianity. -- It may tend to the encouragement of reasonable and solid
religion; and, in the run of things, recommend it, in the most effectual
manner, to men's choice and practice. -- In a word, It may put men upon a more
thorough examination into the grounds of the christian religion, and be the
means of their being, more generally, established in its truth, upon the best
and most reasonable evidence.

These are some of the ends capable of being answered by the permission of a
spirit of enthusiasm, and the prevalence of it, for a while. And as to the
persons themselves led aside by it, it is, in the same way to be reconciled
with the general goodness of GOD toward men, as in the case of distraction,
and the evil effects consequent theruepon. The persons, heated with
enthusiastic imaginations, are either, in a faulty sense, accessory to this
unhappy turn of mind, or they are not: If the latter, they may depend upon the
pity and mercy of GOD, notwithstanding the extravagancies they may run into;
yea, if they are good men, as is, doubtless, sometimes the case, it may be
hoped, that this evil which has happened to them, will, after the manner of
other sufferings, work together for good to them: But if through the pride of
their hearts, a vainglorious temper, accompanied with rashness and arrogance,
or the like, they are really accessory to their own delusion, and mad conduct
following therefrom, let them not think to cast the blame on GOD: They do but
reap the fruit of what they themselves have sown. And if they should be totally
delivered up, as has sometimes been the case, to the devices of their own
hearts, and the lying inspirations of wicked spirits, they can fault no body
but themselves. GOD is just while he makes them an example for the warning of
others, lest they also be given up to believe lies. And he is good as well as
just; good to others, in putting them hereby upon their guard, though he is
severe toward them.

2. Let none, from what has been offered, entertain prejudices in their minds
against the operations of the SPIRIT. There is such a thing as his influence
upon the hearts of men. No consistent sense can be put upon a great part of the
bible, unless this be acknowledged for a truth: Nor is it any objection against
its being so, that there has been a great deal of enthusiasm in the world, many
who have mistaken the motions of their own passions for divine operations.
This, it must be acknowledged, should make us cautious; putting us upon a
careful examination of whatever offers itself, as a communication from the
SPIRIT, that we deceive not ourselves: But its no argument, why we should
conceive a slighty though it, either of the SPIRIT, or his influences, really made
upon the minds of men. Much less is it a just ground of exception against the
SPIRIT's operations, that they may be counterfeited; that men may make an
appearance, as if they were acted by the SPIRIT, when, all the while, they have
no other view in their pretenses, but to serve themselves. This has often been
the case; and points it out as a matter of necessity, that we take heed to
ourselves, if we would not be imposed upon by a fair show, and good words: But
at the same time, it is no reason, why we should think the worse of the blessed
SPIRIT, or of those influences that are really his.

Let us be upon our guard as to this matter. Many, from what they have seen or
heard of the strange conduct of men, pretending to be under divine impressions,
have had their minds insensibly leavened with prejudices against the things of
the SPIRIT. O let it be our care, that we be not thus wro't upon! And the
rather, least it should prove the ruin of our souls. This, perhaps, we may not
be afraid of: But the danger is great, if we take up wrong notions of the
SPIRIT, or encourage an unbecomming though it of his influences in the business of
salvation, least we should grieve the good SPIRIT, and he should leave us to
perish in a state of alianation from GOD, and true holiness.

It Is worthy our particular remark, it is by the powerful operation of the holy
SPIRIT on the hearts of men, that they are changed from the love and practice
of sin, to the love and practice of holiness; and have those tempers formed in
them, whereby they are made meet for the glory to be hereafter revealed: Nor
can this be done, in any way, without the special influence of the blessed
SPIRIT.

And is it likely, He should be present with men to such gracious purposes, if
they suffer their minds to be impressed with contemptuous tho'ts of him? If
they begin to call in question his office, as the great dispenser of divine
grace, or look upon his operations as all delusion and imagination.

We must have upon our minds a just though it of the good SPIRIT, and of his
influences. This is a matter of necessity. O let us encourage a steady faith in
him, as that glorious person, by whom, and by whom alone, we can be prepared in
this world, for happiness in the world that is come. And let nothing, no
wildness of enthusiasm, ever be also to tempt us to call this in question. And
let us so believe in the HOLY GHOST, as to put ourselves under his guidance;
and let our dependence be on him for grace to help us in every time of need.

Only let us look to it, that we take no impressions for his but such as really
are so: And let us not be satisfied, 'till we experience within ourselves the
real effects of the SPIRIT's operations; such as are common to all that are in
CHRIST JESUS; and always have been, and always will be, accompanied with a holy
frame of soul, and a conversation becoming the Gospel.

3. Let not any think ill of religion, because of the ill representation that
is made of it by enthusiasts. There may be danger of this; especially, in
regard of those who have not upon their minds a serious sense of GOD and the
things of another world. They may be ready to judge of religion from the copy
given them of it, by those who are too much led by their fancies; and to
condemn it, in the gross, as a wild, imaginary, inconsistent thing. But this is
to judge too hastily and rashly. Religion ought not to suffer in the opinion of
any, because of the imprudencies or extravagancies of those, who call
themselves the friends of it. Any thing may be abused: Nor is there any thing
but has actually been abused. And why should any think the worse of religion,
because some who make more than ordinary pretenses to it, set it forth in an
ugly light by their conduct relative to it?

There is such a thing as real religion, let the conduct of men be what it
will; and it is, in it is nature, a sober, calm, reasonable thing: Nor is it an
objection of any weight against the sobriety or reasonableness of it, that
there have been enthusiasts, who have acted as though it was a wild, imaginary
business. We should not make our estimate of religion as exhibited in the
behavior of men of a fanciful mind; to be sure, we should not take up an ill
opinion of it, because in the example they give of it, it don't appear so
amiable as we might expect. This is unfair. We should rather judge of it from
the conduct of men of a sound judgment; whose lives have been such a uniform,
beautiful transcript of that which is just and good, that we cannot but think
well of religion, as displayed in their example.

But however religion may appear as viewed in the lives, even of the best men,
it is a lovely thing, as required by GOD, and pourtrayed in the bible. We should
take our sentiments of it from this book of GOD; and this, in the calm and
sober exercise of our understandings: And if we view it, as it is here
delineated, we cannot but approve of it, the doctrines it teaches, and the
duties it requires, whether they relate to GOD, our selves, or our neighbor;
they are all so reasonable in themselves, and worthy of the GOD, the stamp of
whose authority they bear.

Let us fetch our notions of religion from the scripture: And if men, in their
practice, set it in a disadvantageous light, let us be upon our guard, that we
don't take up prejudices against it. This will blind our eyes, and may, by
degrees, prepare the way to our throwing off all concern about religion; yea,
we may be bro't to treat even with contempt; than which, nothing can be more
dangerous, or put our salvation to a greater risque.

4. Let us esteem those as friends to religion, and not enemies, who warn us of
the danger of enthusiasm, and would put us upon our guard, that we be not led
aside by it. As the times are, they run the hazard of being called enemies to
the holy SPIRIT, and may expect to be ill-spoken of by many, and loaded with
names of reproach: But they are notwithstanding the best friends to religion;
and it may be, it will more and more appear, that they have all along been so.
They have been stigmatized as OPPOSERS of the WORK OF GOD; but it is a great
mercy of GOD, there have been such OPPOSERS: This land had, in all probability,
been overrun with confusion and distraction, if they had acted under the
influence of the same heat and zeal, which some others have been famous for.

It Is really best, people should know there is such a thing as enthusiasm, and
that it has been, in all ages, one of the most dangerous enemies to the church
of GOD, and has done a world of mischief: And it is a kindness to them to be
warned against it, and directed to the proper methods to be preserved from it.
It Is indeed, one of the best ways of doing service to real religion, to
distinguish it from that which is imaginary: Nor should ministers be
discouraged from endeavoring this, though they should be ill-tho't, or
evil-spoken of. They should beware of being too much under the influence of
that fear of man, which brings a snare; which is evidently the case, where
they are either silent, or dare not speak out faithfully and plainly, lest they
should be called PHARISEES or HYPOCRITES, and charged with LEADING SOULS TO THE
DEVIL. It Is a small matter to be thus judged and reviled; and we should be
above being affrighted from duty by this, which is nothing more than the breath
of poor, ignorant, frail man.

There is, I doubt not, a great deal of real, substantial religion in the land.
The SPIRIT of GOD has wro't effectually on the hearts of many, from one time to
another: And I make no question he has done so of late, in more numerous
instances, it may be, than usual. But this, notwithstanding, there is, without
dispute, a spirit of enthusiasm, appearing in one place and another. There are
those, who make great pretenses to the SPIRIT, who are carried away with their
imaginations: And some, it may be, take themselves to be immediately and
wonderfully conducted by him; while they are led only by their own fancies.

Thus it has been in other parts of the world. Enthusiasm, in all the wildness,
and fury, and extravagance of it, has been among them, and sometimes had a most
dreadfully extensive spread. Ten thousand wild enthusiasts have appeared in
arms, at the same time; and this too, in defense of gross opinions, as well as
enormous actions. The first discovery therefore of such a spirit, unless due
care is taken to give check to its growth and progress, is much to be feared;
for there is no knowing, how high it may rise, nor what it may end in. --

The good LORD give us all wisdom; and courage, and conduct, in such a Day as
this! And may both ministers and people behave after such a manner, as that
religion may not suffer; but in the end, gain advantage, and be still more
universally established.

And, may that grace of GOD, which has appeared to all men, bringing salvation,
teach us effectually, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, and righteously, and godlily in the world: so may we look with comfort
for the appearing of our SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST: And when he shall appear in the
glory of his FATHER, and with his holy angels, we also shall appear with him,
and go away into everlasting life: Which GOD, of his infinite mercy grant may
be the portion of us all; for the sake of CHRIST JESUS.

AMEN.

