Dr. Colman's SERMON ON GOD's magnifying his WORD.

The Great GOD has magnified his WORD to the Children of Men. A SERMON Preached
at the Lecture in BOSTON, April 29. 1742.

By Benjamin Colman, D. D. Wherein his Testimony is humbly given, for the Great
and wondrous Work of GOD's Grace manifest in many Parts of the Land, and also
against some Things which may dishonor and obstruct it.

1 Pet. iv. 11. If any Man speak, let him speak as the ORACLES of GOD; -- that
GOD in all things may be glorified through JESUS CHRIST; to whom be Praise and
Dominion for ever and ever. BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for D. HENCHMAN, and
Sold at his Shop in Cornhill. 1742.

The WORD of GOD magnified by Him.
PSALM cxxxviii. 2. -- For Thou have magnified thy Word above all thy Name.


THIS is one of David's Psalms of Praise, and it begins magnificently; " I will
praise Thee with my whole Heart, before the Gods will I sing Praise unto Thee.
Whether we pray to GOD or praise Him, it should be with our whole Heart; with
the utmost Devotion of our Souls, all the Faculties and Powers of them being
exerted. An upright and fervent Heart in Worship, is the whole Heart.

" Before the Gods will I sing Praise unto thee: Before the Angels say some,
whose Presence in the Place of Worship was then represented by the Cherubims
over the Mercy Seat, and on the Vail before it. -- But we may rather understand
the King to mean his Fellow-Princes and Potentates of the Earth, the
neighboring States and Kingdoms round about him; and also the great Assemblies
and Congregation of the Nobles and Judges of Israel; of whom we read Psalm.
82.1, 6. GOD stands in the Congregation of the mighty, he judges among the
Gods; I have said ye are Gods, and all of you Children of the MOST HIGH.

WHEN David wrote to Hiram of the Greatness of the GOD of Israel, and when
Solomon showed the Queen of Sheba how he went up to the House of GOD; then was
this Scripture also fulfilled in the very Letter; " before the Gods will I
praise Thee.

THE Psalmist goes on, "I will worship toward thy holy Temple, and praise thy
Name for thy Loving Kindness and for thy Truth." The Temple was yet to be
built, but the Tabernacle or Sanctuary was the same Thing to GOD and his
Worshippers; and thither they went at the appointed Times with the Voice of
Praise; or if they were at a Distance, they worshipped toward the Place, as
Daniel did even when it lay in Ruins. Heaven is the Holy-place where GOD
dwells, and thither we direct our Prayers and look up; and CHRIST is our Temple
there, and to HIM at the FATHER's right Hand we lift up our Souls, and look by
an Eye of Faith, and our spiritual Sacrifices are acceptable.

THE Reason of Praise follows, " for thy Loving Kindness and Truth. These are a
special Part of his Glory passing before us; " abundant in Goodness and in
Truth. -- By Truth is meant the Promises that GOD had made and fulfilled to
David; in the making and performing of which the Loving Kindness of GOD was
glorious; freely made, and all made good; all of Grace, Mercy and Truth, which
David resolves never to forget, but ever to give GOD the Praise of. GOD had
promised him the Throne, and had set him on it, and now says he -- " Before the
Princes will I sing Praise to Thee, for thy Loving Kindness and for thy Truth.

MY Text follows, " For thou have magnified thy WORD above all thy Name. --
GOD's NAME is magnificent in every glorious Attribute and Perfection. He has
magnified it, and will magnify it again. It is Great above all the Praises of
Men and Angels.

IN a particular Manner GOD has magnified his Truth, that blessed and Divine
Perfection; and it is exalted infinitely above all that Men can say or think of
it: The Name of GOD is in it; it is revealed and magnified to us in his Word:
There especially is the Exhibition of his Loving Kindness to the Children of
Men. The Mercy of GOD to Mankind, hid in Him from before the Foundation of the
World is his Loving Kindness; the Mercy revealed to us in his Word is his Truth.

IN magnificent Manner GOD has made his Name, Himself, known to us in the Works
of Creation and Providence; but most of all in his Word: The Wonders of Grace
exceed those of Nature; the Discoveries by Revelation are much greater than
those by Reason.

I SHALL speak of the Word and Truth of GOD in general; taking in the
Doctrines, Precepts, Promises, Threatenings, Prophecies and History of
Scripture; all which is written for our Learning, and to make us wise unto
Salvation. In all of them together the Word of GOD is magnified.

To magnify a Thing is to make it great, famous, illustrious, and to put high
Honor on it. So GOD has magnified the Law and made it honorable. Isai. 42.21.
-- I shall here say,

I. The Word of GOD is magnificent in it self. As GOD is excellent, so must his
Word be. It is the Image and Picture of his Divine Majesty, drawn by his own
Pencil; the Brightness of his own Glory as far as it can be shown in Words.
Hence CHRIST, the SON, the express Image of the Person of the FATAER, is called
-- "THE WORD OF GOD.

THE spiritual and moral Glory of GOD's Law is infinite, eternal, ineffable.
All the Beauties of Knowledge, Wisdom, Holiness, Justice, Goodness and Truth
shine in it. We behold in it, as in a Glass, the Glory of the LORD. Read the
magnificent Things spoken of it by the LORD Himself, Deuteronomy. 4. and in the 19,
and 119 Psalms.

IT leads us into the true Knowledge of GOD and our selves; and of all our Duty
to Him, our selves and our Neighbors; that we may be happy in the Favor and
Enjoyment of GOD here and for ever, and in the Love of Men and they in us. It
teaches us how to honor, worship and serve GOD with Soul and Body, as becomes
his infinite Perfection and Glory; and is also the perfect Rule of
Righteousness and Charity to Men, in whatsoever Relation we stand toward them,
or in whatsoever Condition we or they are, or may be. -- It is the perfect and
royal Law of LOVE; that radiant Word wherein Light dwells. Whatsoever Things
are pure and lovely, every Virtue and every Praise, without any Darkness at
all, are written (as with a Sunbeam) in this most blessed Word. Such is the
Magnificence of the Holy Word.

IT is the Law of the supreme GOD, perfectly adapted for his Empire over Souls,
their Sanctification and eternal Happiness. A Word every Way suited to the
Souls of Sinners; a Doctrine of Wisdom adapted to their Ignorance; of Power
adapted to the obstinate, of Grace and Mercy to the guilty and miserable. It
commands, promises and threatens with a Divine Majesty and Authority; it
instructs with a heavenly Clearness, and it persuades with a Divine Force and
Efficacy. I^EMONGER.
This is the true Grandeur of the holy Word, the Name of GOD graven on it.

II. GOD has magnified it in the Manner and Way wherein He has given it to us.
The solemn Enacting, passing and Delivery of the Law puts Grandeur on it. The
GOD of Glory appeared to Moses at the burning Bush, and afterward came down on
Sinai with Thousands of his Angels, and lastly spoke to us by the Mouth of his
own Son, the Heir of all Things; who also upon his Ascension poured out the
HOLY SPIRIT in cloven Tongues of Fire on his Apostles and chosen Witnesses: And
thus GOD has magnified his Word to us in the Delivery of it.

1. AT Sinai, from the burning Mountain, He proclaimed his fiery Law in Ten
Commandments, with Sound of Trumpet, by the Mouth of his mighty Angels! How
awful a Descent of the Great GOD! " Lo, I come to thee in a thick Cloud, that
the People may hear when I speak, and believe thee for ever. This oral Delivery
of the Law was to magnify it unto the Children of Israel; and it did so; for
all the People in the Camp trembled, even MOSES himself exceedingly feared and
quaked: For the Mount was altogether in a Smoke, which ascended like that of a
Furnace, and the whole Mount quaked greatly. It was a Day never to be
forgotten, ever to be kept in Mind by them; Deuteronomy. iv. 32, 33. Ask now of the
Days that are past, since the Day that GOD created Man upon the Earth, from the
one Side of Heaven to the other, -- did ever People hear the Voice of GOD
speaking out of the midst of Fire, and live! Unto thee it was showed that thou
might know that the LORD he is GOD, there is none else beside Him.

INDEED the Thing is too great to be amplified on or magnified by any Words of
Man! It was a kind of Day of Judgment, and they that felt the Terror of it
prayed they might never again see or hear the like. The Scripture abounds in
the rhetorical and lofty Descriptions of it; Psalm. lxviii. 8. xcvii. 5.
GOD came from Sinai, the HOLY ONE from Mount Seir, with ten thousand of his
Saints; they sat down at his Feet, to receive his Words: The Earth shook, even
Sinai it self at the Presence of the LORD: His Thunder was in the Heavens, his
Lightnings light'ned the World, the Earth trembled and shook, and all the
People saw his Glory, worship Him all ye Gods.

2. YET greater Honor GOD has put on his Word in the Days of the Gospel, in
speaking to us by the Mouth of his own SON; by whom he made the Worlds (Heb.
1.) who being the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person,
and upholding all Things by the Word of his Power, when He had by himself
purged our Sins, is sat down on the right Hand of the Majesty on High; being so
much better than the Angels, as He has by Inheritance a more excellent Name
than they; for to which of the Angels said GOD at any Time, Thou art my SON,
this Day I have begotten thee! But when he brings his First-begotten into the
World, he says, Let all the Angels of GOD worship Him.

THE SON OF GOD took our Nature, to come and publish the FATHER's Will to us:
GOD was manifest in Flesh, and Men beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the " Only
begotten. The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by JESUS CHRIST.
This is the Ministration that exceeds in Glory. This Man had more Glory than
Moses, who was but the Servant, HE the LORD in his own House. Moses wrote of
Him, the Law of Moses led to Him, and was fulfilled in Him. At Sinai GOD
promised to raise up this Prophet, as a greater Thing than all that they had
seen or heard there. For which is greater, GOD in a Cloud, or on a fiery
Mountain, speaking in Thunder; or GOD in our Nature, found in fashion as a Man,
and speaking to us Face to Face, with a Man's Mouth? Which is greater, the Word
spoken by Angels with the Trump of GOD; or by the Mouth of GOD the Lord of
Angels, in the Form of a Servant? He made his Angels Flames of Fire on Sinai,
but to the SON it is said, " Thy Throne, O GOD, is for ever and ever. If then
the Ministration of the Law, in the Terrors of Death, was glorious, the
Ministration of Life in the Gospel of CHRIST exceeds in Glory.

PASS we then from the burning Mountain, and the quaking Congregation at the
Foot of it, to the Mount of Grace whereon JESUS far, and the Multitude around
him, divinely awed, and delighted by his heavenly Voice: Matthew. v. And he
opened his Mouth and taught them, saying, Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven; blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit
the Earth; blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted, etc. Thus
GOD having raised up JESUS, sent him to bless and save us. A spiritual Eye sees
more Glory in this Dispensation of Grace than in all the magnificent
Appearances on Sinai. A greater than Moses is here. See that ye refuse not Him
that speaks! We owe a greater Reverence to this softer Voice of GOD to us, We
are not come to the Mount which burned with Fire, etc. but to Zion, to JESUS
the Mediator and to the Blood of sprinkling. Our Eyes behold the Desire of all
Nations, and our Ears hear the Voice from the excellent Glory. Here all GOD's
Glory and Goodness is made to pass before us! and here are no Bounds about the
Mount to keep us off, but all the Force of Love, and Charms of Grace to draw us
on.

III. GOD has magnified his Word by the Miracles with which He has testified
unto it. A Miracle is some manifest supernatural Effect above the Power of
known natural Causes, and beside their known Course and Laws; which therefore
must be the Doing of the GOD of Nature, upon some great and special End or
Reason. Now it has pleased the sovereign and most wise GOD in this Manner often
to attest unto the Revelations of his Mind and Will unto us, and to the Mission
of inspired Persons with his Messages in their Mouths. This is properly a
Divine Testimony; and doubtless if GOD has given a Revelation to Mankind, it
has been attended with such his Testimony. And if the great GOD has testified
to his Word by Signs and Wonders, and Works truly divine, we must needs own
that he has herein magnified and put great Honor on it. It is as a
Sign-manual, the Finger of GOD, his Stamp or Seal put to his Word.

THUS the five Books of Moses are magnified to the Church for ever, in all the
Signs which GOD sent him to do in the Land of Egypt, to Pharaoh and all his
Servants and in all his Land; and in all that mighty Hand and great Terror
also, which he showed in the Sight of all Israel; who when they saw the
Miracles they feared the LORD and believed his Servant. Exodus 4.31.

To magnify his Word it was that GOD divided the Sea before his People, and
made the Waters to stand as an Heap, while they passed through as on dry Land: He
also clave the Rocks in the Desert, and gave them Drink as out of the great
Depths: He rained Flesh upon them as Dust, and feathered Fowl as the Sand of
the Sea. The Record of these Things is magnificent to the Church of GOD through
all Generations. Psalm. 78 and 105.

How was the Word of the LORD again magnified, when Jordan divided before the
Ark wherein the Tables of the Law were deposited? And how again when the Walls
of Jericho fell, blown down by the Breath of the LORD 's Priests, bearing his
Ark before the Congregation? -- GOD magnified his Word when he thundered on the
Philistines at the Prayer of Samuel, and shut up Heaven and opened it at the
Prayer of Elijah: In what Grandeur did that famous Prophet say to Ahab, "There
shall be no Rain for three Years to come, but by the Word of the Lord in my
Mouth? And again in what Grandeur sat he on the Hill and said, "If I be a Man
of GOD let Fire come down and consume thee and thy Fifty! And yet again, how
did the LORD magnify his Word in the Day when he answered Elijah by Fire, and
it consumed not only the Sacrifice and the Wood, but even the very Stones of
the Altar, and licked up the Water that was in the Trench; and the People fell
on their Faces and said, "The LORD He is GOD, the LORD He is GOD.

GOD had once magnified his Word in the Mouth of Joshua, before the Armies of
Israel and those also of the Aliens, and the Sun stood still in the midst of
Heaven, and there was no Day like it: Again he magnified it in like Manner to
the Sight and Astonishment of all Babylon, in the Day when the Sun went back,
and the Idol of Babylon was made to do Homage at the Prayer of the reforming
King; and the Idolaters sent with Reverence to enquire after the Sign. -- And
when Judah was sent into Babylon for violating the holy Word of their GOD, GOD
magnified it there by many astonishing Signs and Miracles; as Daniel's
Preservation in the Den of Lions, and his Brethren's in the fiery Furnace; "Of
a Truth, said the King of Babylon, your GOD is the GOD of gods, and the KING of
Kings. Such is His Word and Law above theirs.

BUT when we look into the holy Gospels, we find the numerous excelling
Miracles of our LORD JESUS and the Power which he gave to his Apostles to work
the like in his Name; Miracles of Mercy and Compassion, Benignity and Bounty.
Matthew. X. 1, -- 8. Joh. xiv. 12, 13. x. 38. Romans xv. 18, 19.
The Jews were convinced, though not converted, by these mighty Works, "If ye
believe not Me, believe the Works. But the Gentiles were made obedient, through
the mighty Signs and Wonders, by the Power of the HOLY GHOST; at the Prayer of
Faith, Acts 4. 29, 30. And now LORD, grant unto thy Servants that with all
Boldness they may speak thy Word, by stretching forth thy Hand to heal; and
that Signs and Wonders may be done by the Name of thy holy Child JESUS.

Indeed the two grand Miracles of the Gospel Day, whereby GOD magnified his
Word, were the Resurrection of CHRIST from the Dead, and the cloven Tongues of
Light which sat over the Disciples on the Day of Pentecost; and they spoke all
Languages, and Men of every Nation heard them speak the wondrous Works of GOD
in their own Tongue. GOD magnified his Word that Day unto all the Nations of
the Earth, and the Event was their Illumination and Conversion. These Miracles
which GOD has wrought in Honor of his Word are indeed magnificent Things. --
But yet again,

IV. GOD has magnified his Word in the Prophecies and Promises of it,
accomplished and fulfilled to his People. This is that particular thing which
my Text refers to; GOD had foretold and promised to David his Advancement to
the Throne of Israel, when there was no Prospect or Appearance of such an
Event; but it was gradually, in wondrous Manner brought about, in Spite of all
the Opposition made against it. Yet this was but a little Instance in it self,
but in its Consequence vast, in the Kingdom of the MESSIAH, the Son of David.

TRUTH and FAITHFULNESS is a transcendent Glory of the DEITY. All the
Perfections of GOD are glorified in this. "GOD maintains the Honor of his Word
by making it good for ever.

How has the LORD made his Word illustrious, from the Beginning of the Bible to
the End of it, in the Fulfillment of that Great Promise of the Messiah, a
Savior, the SEED OF THE WOMAN? The numerous Prophecies of the Old Testament
fulfilled in the Person, Life, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection and Kingdom of
our LORD JESUS: "HE born of a Virgin to break the Serpent's Head! He the Lamb
slain from the Beginning of the World in all the Sacrifices from the Day of
Abel! He the Seed of Abraham in whom all the Families of the Earth are blessed!
He the Lion of the Tribe of Judah! He the Shiloh at whose Coming the Scepter
should depart! He the Son of David, whose Throne is for ever and ever! He the
King upon the holy Hill of Sion, to whom GOD has said, Thou art my SON, this
Day have I begotten thee; ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thy
Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the Earth for thy Possession! He
IMMANUEL God with us, GOD in our Nature; to us a Child is born, to us a Son is
given, and the Government is laid upon his Shoulder. He the tender Plant and
Root out of a dry Ground! He the Man of Sorrows and acqnainted with Grief! He
of whom all the Prophets have spoken!

IN nothing has the LORD more magnified his Word than in this Testimony of
Jesus, which is the Spirit of Prophecy.

YET are there many other plain and magnificent Prophecies, such as Jacob's
blessing his Sons, and Moses blessing the Tribes, the Man of GOD against the
Altar at Bethel; those concerning the Captivity and Return of Judah, and of
Cyrus their Deliverer by Name; Daniel's Visions of the Monarchies and of the
Rise of Antichrist; to all which must be added the Prophecies of CHRIST JESUS
our Lord and his Apostles in the New Testament, respecting the Destruction of
Jerusalem, the Dispersion of the Jews, their Preservation a distinct People
among the Nations, the Revelation of the Man of Sin; the Pride, Idolatries,
Bloodiness and Abominations of the Papacy; in all which GOD has magnified his
Word of Truth. Verily, there has not failed one Word of all that the LORD has
spoken, from the Beginning of the Bible to the End of it. -- How ought the
devout Believer to fall down with Admiration and Delight at the Feet of Jesus,
and worship the infinite prescient MIND, the faithful GOD who keeps Truth for
ever. "It stands fast for ever and ever, holy and reverend is his Name.

V. GOD has magnified his Law by sending his SON from Heaven in our Nature to
obey it, to fulfill the Righteousness therein required, and to bear the Curse
for the Transgression of it. For these glorious Ends CHRIST came in the Flesh,
and they are the highest Honors that the Holy GOD has done to his holy Word:
According to those remarkable Words of the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 42. ver. 21.
"The LORD is well pleased for his Righteousness sake, He will magnify the Law
and make it honorable." -- The SON OF GOD came down from Heaven to satisfy
Divine Justice, to make ample Reparation to the Honor and Holiness of GOD, for
the infinite Injury down by Man's Sins to his Law and Government, his Crown and
Throne; which stand upon his asserting and vindicating the Honor of his Law;
which is more dignified in the Obedience and Sufferings of the Son of GOD, than
if Man had never sinned, or all Men had for ever suffered.

READ the magnificent and mavelous Thing: Psalm. 40. 5, 8. Many O LORD my GOD
are thy wonderful Works which thou have done, and thy Thoughts which are to us
ward! (but there is one that exceeds all the rest, and that is this) Sacrifice
and Offering thou would not; then I said -- lo I come, in the Volume of the
Book it is written of me, I delight to do thy Will, O my GOD! thy LAW is within
my Heart. Compare Hebrews X. 5, etc.
The Heart of the FATHER and SON were set on this, the doing Honor to the
broken Law, in the Salvation of an Elect Number of sinful Men; in order to
which, this was the deep Counsel between them both from the Days of Eternity;
"That the SON OF GOD should in the Fullness of Time take the Sinner's Nature,
and therein fulfill the Righteousness of the Law, and bear the Curse of it, and
answer hereby all the Demands of Justice; that the infinitely Holy GOD may be
sanctified in Righteousness while his Grace is abounding to the chief of
Sinners; that He may be just, and yet the Justifier of the Believer in JESUS.
Romans 3. 26.

BUT let us more distinctly consider the holy Law magnified, 1. in the active,
2. in the passive Obedience of our LORD JESUS.

First, By being made of a Woman he was necessarily made under the Law, the
moral Law; and being of the Seed of Abraham He subjected himself to the Law of
Moses then in Force, the Ceremonial Law. It behoved him therefore to fulfill all
Righteousness, and to present unto GOD a perfect Obedience in our Nature; and
an Obedience superior to that of any mere Creature, yea of all Creatures, may
be well conceived necessary in Him who was to satisfy for the Transgression of
a World of Sinners, and to bring in a Righteousness for the Justification of
Sinners, and become the LORD their Righteousness. Jer. 23.6.

IN this the Law was magnified; Isa. 45.24. Surely shall one say, in the LORD
have I Righteousness and Strength; even to Him shall Men come, and all that are
incensed against him shall be ashamed; in the LORD shall all the Seed of Israel
be justified, and shall glory. 1 Cor. 1.30. But of Him are ye in CHRIST JESUS,
who of GOD is made unto us Wisdom and Righteousness and Sanctification and
Redemption. Romans 5.19, 21. For as by one Man's Disobedience many were made
Sinners, so by the Obedience of ONE shall many be made righteous, that as Sin
has reigned unto Death, even so might Grace reign through Righteousness unto
eternal Life by JESUS CHRIST OUR LORD.

THE Eternal Word (says Lanctantius) became the living Law, that the broken Law
might have more Glory in his Obedience, than it had suffered Dishonor by Man's
Transgression. He that gave the Law magnified it by subjecting Himself to it.
GOD magnified his Word indeed, when He made his Only-begotten under it. Truly
the holy Word was magnified in the Life of CHRIST, the glorious Transcript of
it, which has set it in a Light dazzling to Angels as well as Saints. As feeing
the Light is more to us than any Description of it, so is the Exhibition of the
Sanctity of GOD's Word in the Obedience of his own SON. In his Face is the
Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of GOD. He the true Light which
enlighteneth the World! he has made other shining Lights in his Church, but is
Himself the Sun of Righteousness that has risen over them with Healing in his
Wings. Mal. 4.2.

BUT if the Law be thus magnified by the active Obedience of CHRIST, is it not
yet more so, Secondly, in and by his passive Obedience; his Obedience unto
Death, the Death of the Cross; the accursed Death! He bore our Sins, he bore
the Curse in his own Body on the Tree! -- He redeemed us from the Curse of the
Law, by being made a Curse for us; as it is written, " He that is hanged is
accursed of GOD. Deuteronomy. xxi. 23. Gal. iii. 13. Heb. xiii. 12. Phil. ii. 8. 1
Pet. ii. 24.


O sacred Law and glorious Justice! Here is Judgment and Righteousness, the
Habitation of GOD's Throne. When by the Law no Flesh could be justified, GOD
sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and He by making Himself a
Sacrifice for Sin, condemned it, that the Righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in those that walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans
8.3, 4.

To magnify the holy Law, the HOLY ONE OF GOD was numbered with Transgressors;
was made a Sin-Offering! The Day and Hour of our LORD's Crucifixion was that of
the Law's Triumph: It was seen so by Angels, the same Holy Ones who were at
Sinai, on the holy Mount, at the Law's Delivery in Fire; and now they saw a
fiercer Flame than any that had ever burnt up the Wicked. Now, to the
Principalities and Powers in the heavenly Places was shown more of the
tremendous Holiness than they had ever seen before. -- They had seen a World of
Angels cast down from Heaven for their Sin, and now they saw a World of Sinners
delivered from Hell by Faith in the Blood of a great Propitiation held forth
from Heaven! This, with great Reverence, they desire to look into, with covered
Faces; and cry, " Holy, holy, holy is the LORD OF HOSTS, the whole Earth is
full of his Glory.

O stupendous and magnificent Thing! estimate the Law of GOD by the Blood of
his Son! or illustrate the Matter by a low Comparison, accounted Great among
Men. "The noble Roman gave up his two Sons when they had conspired against the
State; and the People were ready to worship him, as more than a Man: for the
Law was visibly more to him, than any Ties of Flesh and Blood. -- But our GOD,
the supreme Lawgiver and Judge, to preserve the Honor of his Government,
"spared not his own most holy SON, but delivered Him up for us; for such a
Sacrifice and such an High Priest became us; holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from Sinners, and made higher than the Heavens. Heb. 7.26. If He would
save us, he must die himself, and satisfy the Law.

VI. GOD has magnified his Word, in that He now governs the World by it, and
will judge it hereby in the last Day. This is the natural and essential Honor
of the Holy Word, that it is the most wise, holy, perfect Rule of GOD's
Government and Judgment. And here,

1. The natural World has been dreadfully judged for Man's Transgression of the
Law of GOD, and shall at last be burnt up in Honor to it.

GOD magnified his Word when he cursed the Ground for Man's Sin. The whole
Creation groans to this Day and travails in Pain under it. The Creation shall
suffer, but not the Law. And it will be literally seen in the last Day, that
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but not one tittle of the Law in any wise.

2. THE intellectual moral World are governed and judged by the glorious Word
of GOD. Both the Kingdom of Providence and Grace are administered according to
it.

First, The Kingdom of Providence: GOD reigns over the Heathen, sitting on
the Throne of his Holiness; his Eyes behold, his Eyelids try the Children of
Men; from the Place of his Habitation he looks upon all the Children of Men;
He fashioneth their Hearts alike, he considers all their Works; He judges the
World with Righteousness and the People with his Truth. (See Psalm 33 and 96.)
Such is GOD's daily magnifying his Word in the written Promises and Threatenings
of it respecting Persons and Places: He brings forth his Judgments as the Light
through a wicked World; by terrible things in Righteousness he answers the
Faith and Prayers of his People, and fulfils the Fears of his and their
Enemies: He empties the Vials of his Wrath, and is known by the Judgments which
he executes; his Word is magnified in 'em all: Psalm. 58.11. So that a Man shall
say, Verily there is a Reward for the righteous, verily a GOD that judges in
the Earth.

Secondly, According to his Word is the present Kingdom and Empire of his Grace
in and over the Souls of his Elect. This is the spiritual Glory of the Word;
little observed but most observably magnified to a careless World.

ON the one Hand, it is dreadful to think how the Word of GOD is magnified in
the Obduration of obstinate Sinners, according to that amazing Message which
CHRIST put into his Prophet's Mouth when he saw his Glory, Isa. 6.9. Go tell
this People, hear ye indeed but understand not, and see ye indeed but perceive
not! make the Heart of this People fat, and make their Ears heavy, and shut
their Eyes; lest they see with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and
understand with their Heart, and convert and be healed.

BUT on the other Hand, how glorious is it to the divine Word, that it has a
Power and Efficacy given it for the Conversion and Salvation of as many as GOD
has ordained to Life everlasting! How great is its Glory in their effectual
Calling and Sanctification? -- So the Rod of Moses was at the same time
magnified in the Sight of Pharaoh and all his People, and in the Eyes of the
Israel of GOD; in the Destruction of the one and Salvation of the other.

WE read over and over the most magnificent Celebrations of the divine Law, in
its saving Effects on the Souls of Men: The Law of the LORD is perfect,
converting the Soul; the Testimonies of the LORD are sure, making wise the
Simple; the Statutes of the LORD are right, rejoicing the Heart, the
Commandment of the LORD is pure, enlightening the Eyes, etc. Romans 1.16. I am not
ashamed of the Gospel of CHRIST, for it is the Power of GOD unto Salvation to
them that believe. Heb. 4.12. For the Word of GOD is quick and powerful,
sharper than any two edged Sword, peircing even to the dividing asunder the
Soul and Spirit, and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart;
neither is there any Creature that is not manifest in his Sight, but all Things
are naked and open unto the Eyes of HIM with whom we have to do. 2 Cor. 10.5.
For the Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, but mighty through GOD to the
pulling down strongholds; casting down Imaginations and every high Thing that
exalts it self against the Knowledge of GOD, and bringing into Captivity
every Thought to the Obedience of CHRIST.

THIS, this is GOD's magnifying his Word to a spiritual Eye, to the best and
greatest Purposes, when Sinners are convinced and pricked to the Heart by it!
When the Commandment comes with a divine Light and Power on their Consciences;
when Sin by it becomes exceeding sinful; and Moses himself quakes, and the
hardy Tailor trembles and cries out, " Sirs, what must I do to be saved? -- But
then the mild Reign and Rule of Grace in the Souls of the Regenerate is yet
more magnificent; GOD having put his Law in their Heart, and written it in
them, and shed abroad his Love! and they become his Temple and Palace,
incomparably beyond those of Solomon or Herod! O how does the enlightened Soul
magnify the Word, whose Power it has felt, whose Glory it has seen, and calls
it honorable? It reverences and delights in it, fears and stands in Awe of it,
esteems it concerning all things to be right, and hates every false Way!
Because it is very pure, therefore the Soul loves it, takes it for its Heritage
for ever, and makes it its exceeding Joy; is quickened daily and comforted by
it, and esteems it as its necessary Food, tastes that it is good. O how the
holy Soul magnifies GOD for his Word and gives Him Glory on the Account of it!
I will never forget thy Precepts, for by them Thou have quickened me; I have
chosen the Way of Truth, thy Judgments have laid before me; and I will walk at
Liberty and seek thy Precepts. -- This is the Glory that excels! for what
are Prophecies or Miracles themselves, in Comparison herewith? as the LORD has
said, Mat. 7.22. Many will say to me, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
Name, and in thy Name have cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many wondrous
Works; and then will I profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me ye
that work Iniquity. -- The End of the holy Word is the saving Illumination and
Conquest of Souls, and in this it is magnified, has its Course and is
glorified, and GOD is admired in it for ever and ever. It remains only to say,

3. GOD has magnified his Word above all his Name, for it is the rule of the
General and eternal Judgment. Joh. 12.48. The Word that I have spoken, the same
shall jndge you in the last Day. What less than this can be the Honor of the
Divine Law, and what greater Honor can be done it? By it the Eternal State of
Men will be decided? How awful and reverend should this make it? according to
it will our final Judgment be.

IN humane Courts of Judicature the Law is the Thing magnified; the Judges
reverence and determine by the Law; the Jurors are sworn to go according to it;
the People submit their Estate, Liberty and Life to it. What is more venerable,
and what more formidable than the righteous Law, and the impartial
Administration of Judgment by it? But if the Determination of Men's temperal
Interests, by the Judgment of humane Laws, be so awful and venerable to Men,
how much more must the Decision of Men's eternal State, by the Divine Law,
magnify that and make it dreadful?

READ how the Apostle speaks of it, Romans 2.16: In the Day when GOD shall judge
the Secrets of Men by JESUS CHRIST, according to my Gospel; for as many as have
sinned in the Law shall be judged by the Law. So CHRIST has clothed the
written Word with his own Majesty and Glory, that it may be fearful to us: As
the FATHER has committed all Judgment to Him, that all Men should honor the
SON even as they honor the FATHER. -- " Have I not Power to crucify thee? and
Power to release thee? said the Judge of old, when he would magnify himself
above the Law: But the supreme Lawgiver must of Right and Necessity invest the
Law with this Glory, that it has Power to justify and condemn: This Power is
given it from on high, and it is herein greatly magnified; as in the Process of
the last Judgment, Revel. 20.11, 12. And I saw a great white Throne and Him
that sat on it, from whose Face the Earth and Heaven fled away! And I saw the
Dead, small and great, stand before GOD, and the Books were opened, and another
Book was opened, which is the Book of Life; and the dead were judged out of
those Things which were written in the Books according to their Works; -- and
Death and Hell were cast into the Lake of Fire.

THUS our Bible, that now neglected and slighted Book by many, will be opened
by the enthroned JESUS at the last Day; when he will magnify it by judging the
World according to it. This is his final aggrandizing it; Psalm. 76.7, 8. The
Earth feared and was still, when GOD arose to Judgment, to save all the Meek of
the Earth; surely the Wrath of Man shall praise thee. Psalm. 96. ult. Before the
LORD, for he comes, for be comes to judge the Earth; he shall judge the World
with Righteousness, and the People with his Truth.

BUT this for the Proof of the Doctrine, "that the Great GOD has magnified his
Word to us, and will magnify it in the highest Manner. -- I come now to the
Application.

LET us then see to it that we magnify GOD the LORD and his holy Word in our
Hearts and Lives, and with our Lips. -- We magnify it by believing it, and O
could we be strong in Faith, giving Glory to GOD! We magnify it by admiring and
loving it, thy Precepts are wonderful, therefore does my Soul keep them; thy
Word is very pure, therefore thy Servant loves it.

GOD has magnified his Word that we should fear it, tremble and quake at it;
and to this Man will the High and losty One look, even to him that is poor and
of a contrite Spirit, and that trembles at his Word.

GOD has magnified his Word to us to magnify our Sins to us, that by the
Commandment they may be exceeding sinful; for how have they vilified that great
holy Law which GOD has magnified in the Condemnation of them? -- We therefore
magnify his Word by our repenting in Dust and Ashes; turning from all Sin with
holy mourning, godly sorrowing, self-loathing: " O my GOD, I am ashamed and
blush to lift up my Fyes unto thee, my GOD.

WE magnify GOD's Word by hoping in it, and by looking for the Mercy of our
LORD JESUS CHRIST unto eternal Life according to it; for whose Righteousness
sake GOD is well pleased, will magnify the Law and make it honorable: I hope
in thy Word! I will praise thee, even thy Truth! The faithful GOD which keeps
Covenant and Mercy.

Finally, WE magnify the holy sovereign Word by our Obedience to it, and our
religious Observance of all its Institutions and Ordinances: Only obey my
voice, has the great and good GOD said to us; and again, Why call ye me LORD,
LORD, and do not the Things which I say? -- To obey is better than Sacrifice;
and to bearken than the Fat of Rams.

IN short, the whole Result of Faith, Love, Admiration, Fear, Repentance, Hope,
is Obedience. The Grandeur of the Law lies in its Rule over us, its Command of
us: That is, in our sincere, universal, delightful, persevering Obedience to
it; for Obedience is the Summary of Law and Gospel; it is the Religion,
Holiness, Blessedness, Magnificence of Heaven: Bless the LORD ye his Angels
that excel in Strength, that do his Commandments, harkening to the Voice of his
Word.

WE must magnify the Word of GOD in our Places, by honoring it to one another;
as Parents to their Children; Deuteronomy. 6.6. These Words shall be in thy Heart, and
thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, and talk of them when thou
sit in thy House: Householders to their Families, that the Blessing of
Abraham may come on them; Genesis 18.19. "For I know him, that he will command his
Household after him to keep the Ways of the LORD: Ministers to their Flocks;
preach the Word, be instant, in Season and out of Season, reprove, rebuke,
exhort, etc. by Manifestation of the Truth, commending your selves to every
Man's Conscience in the Sight of GOD: Magistrates to their People, as Ministers
of GOD unto them for good, Terrors unto Evildoers, and a Praise to them that
do well. Finally, all and every one of us in our several Places, as holy
Brethren, Partakers of the Heavenly Calling; a chosen Generation, a Kingdom of
Priests, a holy Nation, a peculiar People, to show forth the Praises of Him who
has called us out of Darkness into his mavelous Light. And thus GOD
magnifies them who magnify his Word, and they are unto Him for a Name, a Praise
and Glory.

To conclude, We magnify the Word of GOD by magnifying his Worship, private,
secret and public; in a constant reverend Observation thereof, in the most
serious and solemn Manner; in our Closets, with our Families, and in the
Assemblies from Sabbath to Sabbath, and on Lectures. -- In a particular Manner
we must magnify the Lord's Day, the Holy of the LORD and honorable, if we
would magnify his Word: for with this the Bible begins and ends, our being in
the Spirit on the weekly Sabbath; it is the first Thing in the Old Testament
and the last in the New. And the whole inspired Law and Gospel is full of a
holy Ministry, the Word Sacraments and Prayer.

WE magnify the LORD JESUS our King, our Lawgiver and our Judge, while we
assemble to pray in his Name, to sit at his Feet and hear his Word, bring our
Seed to his Baptism, and show forth his Death at his Table. -- He has said to
us, Blessed is the Man that hears me, watching daily at my Gates, waiting at
the Posts of my Doors! And again, I will declare thy Name unto my Brethren, in
the midst of the Congregation will I praise thee: And again, Behold I and the
Children whom thou have given me.

AND now, my dear People, the Day (my own and yours) calls upon me to seize the
present Opportunity, to leave my dying Counsel and Charge with you, both
Ministers and Churches.

AND first to Ministers, -- let us (my dear Brethren) magnify our Office, and
the Word which we are called to preach, by a due Care as to the Matter and
Manner of our Preaching. " If any Man speak (says the Apostle Peter, 1st Epist.
4th Chap. ver. 11.) let him speak AS THE ORACLES OF GOD; in a Manner worthy of
these sacred Oracles; beseeming the Dignity, Majesty, Sanctity, Authority,
Importance of those Divine Oracles. -- We are Laborers together with GOD, ye
are God's Husbandry and Building; as a wise Master Builder, I (said the blessed
Paul) have laid the Foundation, and another builds thereon; but let every Man
take heed how be build; that it be Gold, Silver, precious Stones; not Wood,
Hay, Stubble, 1 Cor. 3.9. -- My Brethren, we have precious Materials provided
for us, and great should be our Care that they be well laid together and
cemented; remembering that we are building for GOD and with Him; that by his
Power and Help we may both build up our own and our People's Souls on our most
holy Faith; a spiritual House to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to
GOD through our LORD JESUS CHRIST. 1 Pet. 2.5.

WELL Brethren, Did we serve out our Time well in preparatory Studies and
Prayers for our entering on this high and holy working with GOD and for Him? And
did we accordingly enter on it with a due Solemnity of Soul? with something of
Isaiah's Vision of the Divine MAJESTY on his Throne high and lifted up, and his
Train filling his Temples; the Seraphims covering their Faces before Him!
Isaiah, 6th Chap.

AH how wanting may we have been in this awful Consideration of GOD and his
Word, when we gave our selves to Him, and to his People by his Will, to
minister unto their Souls, as those that must give an Account? And how have we
served those for whom CHRIST died, in the Course of our Ministry? Have we
preached, not our selves, but CHRIST JESUS THE LORD; and our selves their
Servants for JESUS sake? -- Has CHRIST, his Doctrine, his holy Law and Life,
his perfect Example and glorious Works, his Humility, Meekness and Charity, his
Zeal for Truth and Holiness, his servent Devotions and absolute Submissions to
the Will and Glory of GOD; his ineffable Love to Souls, and Demands from us of
a like Love to Him and his Sheep and Lambs? -- Has his Obedience unto Death,
the Death of the Cross; the Atonement made thereby for the Sins of his Elect,
and Satisfaction to the Justice of GOD for the Violation of his sacred Law; and
the everlasting Righteousness thereby bro't in for the Redemption,
Justification and eternal Salvation of believing repenting Sinners; -- Have (I
say) these peculiar Glories of the Gospel been magnified by us in our Sermons
and Administrations in the House of GOD, and in our more private Applications
to the Souls of our Flocks? Have we thus behaved in the Church of the living
GOD, which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, regarding these Truths as the
Pillars, Strength and Ornament of the sacred, spiritual Edifice?

AND now, my dear and honored Hearers, I must give in my humble Testimony, and
a noble one, on behalf of CHRIST JESUS OUR LORD the Great HEAD of the Church,
and of his Grace to you, in the MINISTRY which in my Times He has set over you,
in this and many other Places of our happy and distinguished Land; -- "that a
great Number of them have been such as in their Doctrine and Conversation have
been enabled to magnify the Name and Word of our LORD JESUS to you, in their
Preparations for the Pulpit, and in their Manner of Address to GOD and you from
it; and the present Pastors of the Churches (in a great Number of 'em) if I am
able to judge, do not come short of their worthy Predecessors, but are building
fair and strong on their Foundation, as wise and faithful Servants; and GOD is
owning them greatly before you and blessing their Labors: The Blessing of Levi
is with them, the Urim and Thummim, in a happy Measure of Light, Zeal and
Sincerity, through free and sovereign Grace; and they do not serve GOD and you
with unbeaten Oil, with what costs 'em nothing, but the Lamps burn clear and
bright before you. In my Age I sit, hear and admire the labored, digested,
methodical, enlightening, servent Discourses they bring you; such as they might
bring before Kings and Universities, and not be ashamed; and yet all adapted to
the poor of the Flock and to the lowest Understandings among you; even to the
very Negroes of your Families, many of whom are become intelligent and serious
among us. And I humbly trust, that after my Decease CHRIST will be still
magnified in his preached Gospel among you; -- I mean by the rising Ministry,
many of whom appear to me to be coming forth into the Service of the Sanctuary,
as with a superior Zeal for the Honor of CHRIST, and to save themselves and
those that bear them; so with a Care for proper Furniture by diligent Study, to
give Light and Heat together, in their well composed and delivered Sermons,
which are acceptable and profitable to our Flocks.

AND I earnestly exhort these my younger Brethren, together with the very
promising, studious and serious Candidates for the Ministry now in our College,
that they emulate the Learning and Labors of the present Pastors of the
Churches round about them; and yet more those of the FIRST FATHERS of our
Country; who with equal Care and Speed founded our Churches, Schools and
Colleges together, and never separated their Bibles and Literature in their
Preparations for public Serviceableness, but kept the one in reverend
Subjection to the other. -- So my SONS, do you study your Bibles first and
most, and then use all your Acquisitions of humane Knowledge, and your peculiar
natural Gifts and Powers, whether of Reasoning or Oratory, to recommend and
enforce the lively Oracles of GOD to the Understanding and on the Affections of
those to whom you may be called to minister. -- For if you go off from studied
Sermons, you will I fear lose all that the Fathers of these Churches have
wrought for us; and will come (unlike them) to this People, with empty Noise of
Address to their Passions only, which is not the Way of your Bible, nor of the
HOLY SPIRIT who inspired it, who by the Understanding enters the Heart,
convincing Men of Sin, of Righteousness and Judgment, their lost and perishing
State, and Need of a SAVIOR.

LET me recommend to you Dr. WATTS his humble Attempt for the Revival of
Religion; a Book worthy to be read and deeply considered by Ministers and
People; and in a particular Manner by the Candidates for the Evangelical
Ministry, before they enter on the Work of Preaching; that in their Composures
they may equally remember how much they have to do with the Mind and
Understanding, and also with the Hearts and Consciences of their Hearers; and
with HIM that made Man's Heart and searches it, and only can reach and change
it: Accordingly " methodize, explain, illustrate, prove, infer upon and apply
the Subjects which you undertake, as in the Fear of GOD you truly judge will
most magnify the Word you preach, and benefit the Souls of Men. -- To which End
also I do with like Earnestness recommend to Students and younger Ministers
(and also to private Christians) a like admirable Book of Dr. WATTS's, of the "
Use and Abuse of the Passions in Matters of Religion; as surprisingly
calculated for our Instruction and Admonition at this Day.

AND suffer me, my dear People, now I am it may be taking Leave of this Desk,
in a particular Manner to intimate to you my Apprehension and Fear of great
Dishonor to the Word of GOD, and of Danger to your Souls and those of your
Families, and therefore of Ruin to the Churches of New England, if we give
Countenance and Encouragement to illiterate and half-learnt Persons to go about
exhorting and drawing Hearers by their Show of Affection to Souls for their
spiritual Profit and saving Good, or from their sincere Desire thereof; for it
certainly tends in Time to run the Churches into Confusion, and to bring the
Ministry of the Word into Contempt. -- I must needs therefore repeat my public
Caution to you some Months ago, that you would no more run from your own
Pastors with such open Disrespect after every new Face or fervent Voice, with
far less Furniture for your real spiritual Edification. We may well blush for
some who have sat so long, and profited so well, under our Ministry, and yet
have no more attained to a true Taste and Judgment. Your Ministers have been
and are, from Time to Time, earnestly and powerfully addressing to your
Affections and Passions as well as Reason, with a distinct Sound and superior
Light, such as no uncertain Flashes out of Clouds and Darkness may at all
compare with.

I close with giving Glory to GOD for the Great and good Work of his Grace,
which He has so visibly begun, spread and is carrying on, in every Part almost
of our Provinces; which that we may all in our respective Places subserve,
under the special Direction, Restraint, Influence and Enlargement of the
BLESSED SPIRIT of Truth, Holiness and Love; (WHOM I sincerely and most
thankfully desire to adore as " magnifying therein his Word above all his Name)
is I hope my single Aim in what I have now said; -- and may all the Churches
say, AMEN, praise ye the LORD.

FINIS.

