THE DOCTRINE OF PREDESTINATION TRULY and FAIRLY stated: Confirmed from clear
Scripture-Evidence, and Defended against all the material Arguments and
Objections advanced against it.

By SAMUEL BLAIR, late Minister of the Gospel at Shrewsbury in New Jersey, now
at Londonderry in Pennsylvania.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. FRANKLIN for the Author. M, DCC, XLII.

THE PREFACE.
I AM very sensible, that the Subject of the ensuing Treatise, is none of the
most acceptable in this Age, wherein we are so much degenerated and apostatized
from the true Doctrines and Principles of the Reformation: Yet being convinced,
that it is not only a Doctrine of Truth, but also a Truth of great Importance
in the Christian System, I am willing to appear for the Defense of it,
whatsoever Dis-esteem or Reproach it may expose me to, from such as cannot bear
to see or hear it maintained with any Moderation of Temper. It is a Doctrine
with which sundry other Doctrines of the Scripture are so inseparably
connected, that they cannot, with any Consistency, be maintained without it;
such as, Original Sin, the utter Impotency, or rather strong Aversion of the
human Will to true Holiness, the irresistible Efficacy of Converting Grace,
Free Justification by the imputed Righteousness of Christ alone, and the final
Perseverance of the Saints. It is therefore a foolish Question which some ask,
What need is there for preaching up this Doctrine, or meddling with it? It is
necessary to stand up for it, against the Tide of Opposition, for the Sake of
all these other Doctrines of God's Word, which must stand or fall with it. It
is necessary for bringing Sinners off from all Dependence upon themselves, to
the meritorious Righteousness of Jesus Christ alone for their Justification,
and to the supernatural efficacious Power of his holy Spirit for their
Sanctification. It is necessary for stopping every Mouth from boasting before
God, and that the apparent Heirs of Glory may ascribe the whole Praise and
Glory of their Salvation to him. It is a strong for the Consolation of
Believers, and Argument for their Love. It is moreover necessary for the Glory
of God's Sovereignty over his rebellious Creatures. On all these Accounts it is
a Doctrines of great Use, though it be not very agreeable to proud, unrenew'd
Nature, a^^ may sometimes appear awful to true Believers, when their Evidences
of a converted State are very dark to them.

It is now some Years since I entertained Thoughts of publishing Something on
this Subjects; the chief Reason enclining me to it was, that there were so many
small Pieces, in Opposition to the Doctrine, in People's Hands, abounding with
a great Deal of Misrepresentations and false Reasoning, yet fair and plausible
to the ignorant and unthinking; and so few, on the other Hand, in the Defense
of it. There is, indeed, a great Deal well written upon it; but then it is
generally in larger Volumes, along with other Subjects, so that People in
common have not the Advantage and Benefit of it. It Is true, there have been
some small Pieces upon it of late, of good Use; Mr. Whitefield's Answer to Mr.
Wesly's bold Sermon; and another Answer to the same Sermon, done by an
anonimous Author, are both very good, so far as they go; but I judged it
needful to treat the Subject more fully, and so have taken a larger Compass in
showing the Reasonableness of the Doctrine, confirming it from Scripture, and
answering all Objections.

It is likely this Essay may come under the View of Persons of very different
Sentiments about the Doctrine maintained in it. I would desire all to read it
with Care and Ari^ntion, giving every Argument its due Weight, and carrying
what you read along with you, from one Thing to another; so that when you have
read it through, you may have the Substance and Strenght of what has been said,
in your View. If this Method be taken, I persuade myself, that such as are most
opposite to the Doctrine, and prejudiced against it, will at least be
convinced, that it is not that horrid and monstrous Thing, which perhap, they
had conceived it to be: But whatever Influence this Treatise may have on the
Opposers of the Doctrine, I hope it will, through the divine Blessing, be
satisfying and confirming to others. I think the Doctrine of Election may be a
comfortable Support to exercised Christians, concerning the true Interests of
the Kingdom of Christ, at this Day, when there is such fierce Opposition made
against the Revival of Religion and Success of the Gospel amongst us, tho it is
the Doing of the Lord. Bold Men set themselves with all their Might against it,
and try to blacken it to the World with horrid Falsehoods, and odious malicious
Reflections: But God will carry on his own Designs, against all the feeble
Attemps of Creatures.

I commit this little Piece to the Reader's serious Perusal, and the Blessing
of the Almighty God.

The DOCTRINE of PREDESTINATION, TRULY and FAIRLY stated.
IN order to speak clearly, and to Advantage, upon any Subject; and especially
if it be much controverted in the World, it is in the first Place necessary,
that it be exactly defined, and bounded by its proper Limits; that it be
represented properly, as it is maintained by those who contend for it, that so
both Parties may have the same fixed, determinate Idea of what they reason
about, and speak both still to the self same Thing. Endless are the Confusions
and Contentions that are introduced into the World, either for the Want of this
Care in defining, and rightly understanding the Subject in Debate; or for 'Want
of Honesty in an Opposite, when he will not keep close to the very Thing, though
he does understand what it is. It is the readiest Way to bring any Controversy
to a right Issue, rightly to state and represent the Case, and then to keep
close to it, as so stated, and not suffer another Thing, under the same Name,
to be shuffled in, in its Place, through the Course of the Argument. In this Way,
such Objections, as suppose the Case to be different from what it is, are
easily answered, by reducing the Objector to the prefixed Limits, and so
showing his Argument to be Nothing to the Purpose in Hand. And I Thingk there
is no where more need of this Care and Attention, than about the Doctrine of
God's Decrees, or Predestination, which is the Subject of this small Treatise.
I know not any Doctrine more furiously opposed, without being rightly
understood; or by being disingenuosly and uncandidly misrepresented. I shall
therefore, first of all, state the Doctrine truly, and then defend and confirm
it.

I. As to the true State of the Doctrine, it may be taken up in these two or
three Propositions.

1. That as God, from everlasting, was pleased, in his own free Sovereignty, to
decree and determine, to create this World; and to make Man in it a reasonable
Creature, in his own Image, holy and upright, every Way fitted and empowered
for that Duty which was due, from such a rational Creature, to the great God
Creator, with full Ability to persevere and continue in that happy State of
Integrity; and to enter into a Covenant of Life with him, wherein all the human
Race were to be concerned and engaged; and Adam, their first Father,
constituted their public Head and Representative; so that as he kept or broke
the Covenant, they were to enjoy or lose the promised Blessings of it: And as
God infallibly foreknew the Fall and Transgression of Adam, as what he had
decreed to permit, and so the Depravity and Ruin of his Posterity consequent
thereupon, according to the Covenant; with all the actual Sins which every
Individual should ever be guilty of; so he was likewise pleased, of his own
mere Grace and free Favor, to deerce and determine, to recover and save a
Number, only known to himself, of that fallen wretched Race, through the
Meditation of his own Son's Redeeming them, by answering the Precept and
Penalty of the broken Law for them; and through the Sanctification of his eternal
Spirit, making them fit for and capable of glorifying and enjoying him forever.
2. That God's determining and appointing to save any of fallen Mankind, or any
in particular more than others, was not up on the Foresight of any Difference
which he foresaw they would make among themselves, by the better Improvement of
any common Helps and Advantages, as the Reason of it: But it was purely of his
own sovereign, free, wise Pleasure, and distinguishing Grace. 3. That the rest
of fallen Mankind, not thus chosen and ordained to eternal Life, he was
pleased, of his sovereign, wise and righteous Pleasure, as a just King and
Lawgiver, to determine to leave in their fallen State; and to punish them
according to all the Sin and Disobedience, which they should be guilty of, and
chargeable with.
This is, briefly, a just View of the Case I am upon; which I hope, with the
divine Direction and Conduct, to maintain against all the Arguments commonly
opposed to the Doctrine. I cannot indeed expect, that this Representation of
it, will render it generally acceptable and agreeable, to those who have been
long prejudiced againsst it; but that is not the Question, whether we would
incline and desire to have it so; but, whether it be truly and really so,
whether we would desire it should be so, or not? Many of the Laws and Commands
of God are very contrary to the Will and Inclination of depraved Sinners; but
they are not the less truly the Commands of God for that. ^n the Desence of
this Doctrine, I would first show, that it is a reasonable, and next, that it
is a scriptural Doctrine; and speak to the Arguments which may be urged, both
for and against it, from both these Topics, of Reason and Revelation.

II. 1. Those who oppose the Doctrine of absolute Decrees, generally bring in a
heavy Indictment against it, as big with the most glaring Absurdities,
Inconsistencies, and Contradictions to the very Light of Reason: And these such
as involve in them the grossest Impiety, and most horrid Blasphemy against the
divine Majesty; as, that it is directly contrary to, and necessarily infers the
exact Reverse of most of the glorious Perfections and Attributes, which Reason,
as well as Scripture, teaches us to ascribe to the great God; that it makes him
unjust, and tyrannically cruel: Some say (I dread to express it) worse than the
very Devil; that it makes him the Author of Sin, chargeable with most if not
all the Guilt of it; that it makes him a most gross, hypocritical Dissembler,
etc. But sure, it is not the proper Calvinistick Doctrine, upon that Head, that
these Men bring in all these awful and shocking Charges against; but some
horrid Composition of their own Brain, which they will palm upon the
Calvinists, whether they will or no: Or else they just resolve, to bring a
popular Odium upon the Doctrine, by such vile, bold, and daring Methods; to
impose upon such as are not well capable to reason clearly or closely, upon
such a sublime Subject, that they may abhor the very Thoughts of it. I readily
own, that whatsoever Notion infers any the least Impersection in God, is
unreasonable and worse than false. But let the Account I have given of this
Doctrine, be but duly and unbyass'dly considered; and then tell me, if there is
any Thing so dishonorable to God, or unreasonable in it: If there is, in which
of the three Propositions, or Articles is it? Is it in the first, when it is
said, that God decreed to permit Adam's Fall? But you must own, that he did
permit it, that is, that he did not prevent it, ^f you own that Adam did fall;
and consequently you must own, that God decreed to permit or suffer him to
fall; for it is highly absurd to say that he did permit it without determining
to permit it; that is the same Thing as to say, that he took no Notice of it at
all, till it was done; that it never once came under the View of his
all-comprehending, alldiscerning Mind, how Adam would behave himself in such
Circumstances as he was in, when he did transgress, if left merely to his own
Use of his original Powers: But this is to deny God's infinite and boundless
Perfection. Well then, if he had this View and Knowledge of what Adam would do
in such a Case, if thus left to himself; that is, that he would sin; he
determined either to hinder or suffer it, to prevent or permit it. It Is
manifest he did not determine to prevent it, for if so, it would not have been:
And his not determining or decreeing to prevent in when he infallibly knew it
would be if he did not, was decreeing to permit it. And then, upon this Decree
to permit the Fall, proceeded God's certain Foreknowledge of it, as future.
Moreover, this permissive Decree, and Foreknowledge of Man's Transgreision and
Apostasy, plainly appears, from God's having foreoroain'd a Redeemer before the
Foundation of the World, as acccording to 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20. And now, seeing
these Things are plainly so, viz. That God did thus determine to permit the
Fall of Man, which, in his perfect and boundless Knowledge, he saw would be, if
he did not hinder it by his immediate, super-added Influence; and consequently
foresaw it, as a Thing that would surely be; so plain, that he must have a
strange Art of managing his Reason, who will carefully follow these few Steps I
have here taken, and not be constrained to yield his Assent: Then surely one
would think, there was more Reverence and Honor due to the great and glorious
Majesty of God, than for any poor Worms of the Dust, to bring in their bold
Charges against him here; and say, that for these Things he is the Author of
Sin, either in that be created Man at all, or in that he did not prevent his
Sin, when he could have done it. Who art thou, O Man, that reply against
God! Surely it becomes us, to entertain more honorable, exalting Tho'ts of
God, than to give the least Way to such a vile Suggestion; even supposing our
poor Mole-Eyes should not be able to discern, to our Satisfaction, how it could
be otherwise. We may, on the one Hand, be clearly assured of God's permissive
Decree, and certain Foreknowledge of Man's Sin; and on the other Hand, as well
assured, that he is essentially, and infinitely holy: And though we should not be
able to reconcile these together, yet he can; and that ought to silence and
satisfy us: It does not well befit us, to put ourselves upon a Par with him;
and think, that he can know Nothing, but what we must know too. But yet, I see
no Need of leaving the Case at this Issue neither: For how unreasonable and
ridiculous is the Ground of the Charge? God did not purpose and determine to
prevent Adam's Sinning, when it was easy to his Power to have prevented it;
well, and what then? Did not the Lord give him sufficient Power to have
prevented it himself? And was not this enough to free the kind Creator from all
Blame in the Case? Cannot God make a Creature perfect, and complete in its
Order and Rank, endowed with full Ability and Power to preserve its Glory
unstained, and put it in a State of Probation and Trial, without a criminal
Charge? Must he be called to answer at the Creature's Bar, for its own
Miscarriage and voluntary Rebellion, in such a Case? Indeed, if we maintained,
that God did not give Adam sufficient Power to preserve his Fidelity, and
withstand the Temptation; or that God, by his immediate Energy, overpowered him
to a Compliance; then I confess, there would be no standing before the
Argument: But as we assert no such Thing, nor anything that will afford such a
Consequence, how unfair and inexcusable is it, to give out as if we did? Which
is the Method of too many, either ignorantly or wilfully. And let me observe,
that the Arminians, yea, Men of all Sorts of Religions in the World, are no
less obliged to answer this Difficulty, than the Calvinists; for they must all
ackowledge, that there is Sin in the World, and that God has permitted it,
otherwise it could not be; yea, you must acknowledge yourselves to have been
guilty of Sins, and such as you might have avoided. But dare you lift up your
Face before God, and say to him, I have done many Evils, even such as I had
Power to refrain; but they are thy Sins and not mine, because thou did not
keep me from them. Would not your own Reason confound you with Shame, at the
Thoughts of such a male-pert, senseless Speech to God? As little Reason is
there, whatever less, for charging the righteous God in the Case of Adam's
Transgression.

Or, is it Matter of just Prejudice against this Doctrine, that Mankind are
said to have been considered, in the divine Decree, as universally fallen in
Adam, in Consequence of his Breach and Violation of the Covenant of God,
wherein he was appointed the Covenant-Head and Representative of his Posterity?
But sure yourselves must acknowledge, that all Mankind did fall in Adam's
Transgression, if you profess to believe the holy Scriptures: So long as the
Fifth Chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans stands in the Bible, it will
be impossible, with any Face of Modesty, to deny it; where we are told, that by
one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; and so Death passed upon
all Men, for that all have sinned. And that by the Offense of one, Judgment
came upon all Men to Condemnation. When you say, that all Mankind are recovered
again, out of the Condemnation and Ruin which the Sin of Adam brought upon
them, by Jesus Christ; is it not an Acknowledgment, that they were all once
fallen, and ruined by it? And inasmuch as yourselves acknowledge it was so, you
must acknowledge it was reasonable, and no-way inconsistent with the
Perfections of God, that it should be so; or else you say, point blank, that
God was, at least once, unrighteous. And now, seeing Mankind were fallen in
Adam, which God's glorious Perfections will not suffer us to think it was any
Way unreasonable on unjust in him; it necessarily follows, that it would have
been no Way unreasonable or unjust in God, i^ he had so pleased, to have left
them all in that fallen State, without restoring any. Seeing there was once a
plain Forfeiture of all Rights and Privileges, according to Law and Justice, it
was at the free Pleasure o^ the great Lawgiver, to bestow them again upon any
or not; unless you will say, that our Recovery by Christ was not of free and
mere Grace, but what God was bound to order and bring about, or else oppose his
own Nature and be unjust; and so, that herein he did what we have no Reason to
thank him for: Which, to say, is not only a gross Inconsistency in itself, but
such an Impiety against God, that few, I believe, would be so bold as to
venture upon it. It is ridiculous to talk of our being redeemed, by God, out of
a miserable State, which it was unjust for him, either to suffer us to come
into, or yet to leave us in. There is no need of a Mediator and Redeemer, in
such a Case. Then indeed Christ is dead in vain. Thus far we have made our Way
clear. Well then, I say again, if it would have been no Way unbecoming God, if
he had so pleased, to have determined to leave all Mankind in that fallen
State; no Man will say, who duly considers what he says, that it would have
been any Way unbecoming him, had he so pleased, looking upon them in this
fallen, guilty, apostate State, to have made this Distinction among them, in
his eternal Purpose; which I am defending: And so the proper Doctrine of
Predestination, in the right Notion of it, must be owned to be entirely
reasonable; and the very Method, for what we know, that God (un^ess he has told
us the contrary) was pleased to take.

But to make all this yet clearer, I would give this farther brief Account, of
the Reasonableness of Mankind's partaking in the sad Fruits of Adam's
Transgression. I would account for it, from his being set up, as their public
Head and Representative, in the first Covenant. If this Constitution and
Appointment of God, was reasonable, then all that was natively consequent upon
it, according to the Tenor of it, must be so too. To make it appear, that this
Constitution was every Way just and reasonable, let it be considered, that it
was in its own Nature adapted, and directly calculated to the great Good and
Advantage of Mankind; securing to them a confirmed State of Innocence, and
everlasting Happiness, upon their first Father's continuing obedient, so long
as God saw ^it to leave him in a State of Probation and Trial; so that none of
them would have been any more in the Danger of a probationary State for
themselves. Adam was sufficiently empowered to manage this great Trust, endowed
with full Ability to keep the Covenant; yea, with as full as any of his
Offspring would have had, ^ad they been to pass a Time of Trial for themselves:
And his Motives to Care and Watchfulness, were as ^^rong as theirs could have
been, having his own eternal Interest as much engaged in the Case as theirs; so
that their whole Stock, all their everlasting Concerns, were every whit as safe
in his Hands as they would have been in their own. And seeing their Case was,
^his Way, as safe as if it had been in their own Management; and there was a
rational Prospect of a glo^ious, unspeakable Advantage by it, though there was an
^^wful Evil on the other Hand, in Case of Disobedience; (...), since the
rational Hope, on the one Hand, was ^r greater than the Danger on the other, it
was surely a reasonable, wise and good Plan; and which, I a^ satisfied, we
would all have admired, and praised the glorious God for, had our
Representative fulfilled hi^ Part of the Covenant, and we now been enjoying the
happy Consequences of it. If so, then how unreasonable and wicked must it be
now, to quarrel with the Scheme and its glorious Author, on the Account of i^
because it has eventually proved, through our Trustee^ Default, to our
Disadvantage? If it would have been just, and altogether right, had he obeyed;
does his Si^ and Disobedience make it wrong, and unjust? On^ Thing more may be
observed here, to free the Subjec^ of all Misapprehension, viz. That it is not
imagined that the same Degree of Punishment is justly due t^ Adam's Posterity,
merely on the Account of hi^ Transgression, which was due to himself for it.
Thu^ far only is certain in this Matter, that beside our being exposed by it,
to the various Miseries of this Life, an^ Death itself; we lost all Right and
Title to the Li^^ and Happiness which God promised in the Covenan^ and the
glorious moral Image of God in our Souls, viz our original Righteousness: So
that instead of being now naturally holy and upright, we are naturally depraved
and sinful; which is the awful Foundation an^ Spring of our numberless actual
Transgressions, whereby we deserve and awfully aggravated Condemnation I say,
Persons, for their actual Sins, though they flo^ from their original Corruption,
as the Spring an^ Fountain of them, deserve and awfully aggravated
Condemnation, or unspeakably greater than the Law denounces only on the Account
of Adam's Transgression inasmuch as that Man or Woman cannot be found, (...)
whom it could justly be said, that they had never bee^ farther guilty of actual
Sin, than what was absolute^ unavoidable from the original Depravity of their
Nature. These Things may suffice, to evince the Reasonableness of the Doctrine,
of all Mankind being fallen in Adam; and of their being considered as such, ^n
the Decree and Purpose of God concerning their ^^ternal States; which, as has
been already shown, ^roves the Reasonableness of the Doctrine of Predes^nation;
forasmuch as God might justly have determined, either to save none, or to save
all, or to save only a Part, as he pleased.

But farther, if any should yet be unwilling to yield ^he Reasonableness of
Mankind's being so disinherited of all their spiritual and eternal Privileges;
and their ^eing liable to such a State of Misery, by Adam's Sin and
Disobedience; whatever temporal Calamities they ^ight in Justice and Reason be
exposed to by it: I would prove the Reasonableness of the Doctrine I am chiefly
insisting upon, from Principles which they must ^navoidably grant, if they are
not lost to all the common Sense of Mankind. You must own, that all Mankind,
except Infants, have actually sinned, whether you own it to be the Effect of
Adam's Sinning or ^ot; All have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God:
That it is so, in Fact, is too notorious to be de^ied. Yea, you must own, that
Mankind are natu^ally inclined to Sin, and have a strong Bias and Propension
that Way: These Things you must confess, ^ccount for them how you will: And I
am apt to ^hink, the Scripture Account, resolving the universal Depravity and
sinful Propensions of the human Nature, into the Transgression of our first
Parent as the Cause, will answer full as well as any you can give: It will be
as satisfactory, as either Plato's pre-existent ^tate in the Stars, or the
eternal evil Principle of the Manichees; or yet the Imitation and Example of
Pe^gius. However, that Mankind are so universally ^uilty of Sin, let it come
how it will, is but too ma^ifest. Moreover you must grant, that they justly
deserve Punishment for their Sin, from the sovereign ^aw-giver of the rational
World; to say otherwise, is to say, that Sin is not Sin; Sin must be as good a^
Obedience and Duty, if the Sinner deserves no wors^ for it; which is an
Absurdity, a little too big to swallow, that takes away all Distinction between
mora^ Good and Evil, and destroys all the Notions of Justic^ in the World. You
must also grant, that God, from all Eternity, certainly foresaw all the Sins of
all Men, unless you have a God like yourselves, who knows now what he did not
know before, by Information from others. Now, lay these few Things together,
and then see if it does not follow, by an unavoidable, logica^ Necessity, that
God might justly have decreed, and purposed from everlasting, to punish the
sinful, disobedient Children of Men, and not to save any of them out of their
guilty State: For if God from everlasting foresaw, that they would deserve to
be thus cast off an^ punished; then he might justly determine to deal so by
them, unless you will say, it was unjust for him to determine to do what was
just to do. And is the Justness of his determining to punish a Part of them
only, according to the Rules of governing Justice, less conceivable, while he
determines to save the rest, in a Way agreeable to the Glory of his Majesty and
Government, through the Meditation and Redemption o^ his eternal Son? Thus you
may see, the Denying o^ Original Sin, does not overthrow the Doctrine of
Predestination; all that is gained by it, is a Certainty, tha^ all such as die
in their Infancy, were elected to eternal Life: But then, they were not chosen
in Christ a Redeemer, nor are they brought to Happiness through his Redemption;
which is a Notion that does not chime very well with the Scriptures, which every
where represent the Atonement of Chirst, as the only Way of eternal Happiness,
to any of the human Progeny: Which I think is a farther evident Proof of
Original Sin. And thus, I think, I have sufficiently cleared the first
Proposition.

2. In the next Place, is there any thing so horrid in the second Article, viz.
That God's Decree and Purpose, to save any of the fallen, apostate Race, was
not founded upon his Foresight of their good Works, and diligent Endeavors, as
the Cause of it; but was purely owing to his own sovereign Pleasure and Grace.
This is a Sentiment so far from being unreasonable, that I think the contrary
is plainly so, absolutely considered, viz. that the imperfect, corrupted, and
altogether selfish Endeavors, of rebellious, guilty Creatures, should be of
such high Price with God, as necessarily to determine him to save them; so that
he would be unjust, if he did not thereupon design and effectuate their
Salvation. Is this a Notion, either so very reasonable in itself, or honorable
to God? And yet this is the Principle that must be maintained, if the Doctrine
I am defending be charged with being, in itself, unreasonable. To manifest a
little the Unreasonableness of such a Notion, I would ask, If an entire and
perfect Obedience to the Law of God, without the least Defect, would be any
more than our Duty to him, (...) he is such a glorious Being, and we his
Creatures! If it would not (and no Man in his right Wits will say otherwise)
then how can the very imperfect, the every Way corrupt, and contemptible
Obedience, that is performed by guilty Sinners, make it so necessary for God to
pardon their past Disobedience, as that he would be unreasonable and unjust, if
he did not? According to this Principle, Pardon would not properly be pardon;
it would not be an Act of mere Grace, and rich Mercy, but of just Debt. But who
is there, that has the Front to demand it, as such, for all the good Works that
ever he did? I believe you would and hard Work of it, to bring the Notion into
Practice, and very formally tell the great God, that Though you had sinned
against him, and contemned his Authority; yet you had done so well since, that
you would not now be beholden to him for Pardon, you claimed it as your due, on
the Score of his essential Equity, which, he would be unjust, if he refused. It
is moreover a Notion, that entirely supersedes and takes away all Necessity of
Christ's Atonement and Satisfaction. What need of such a Propitiation and
Ransom, if any thing that guilty Sinners could do, could render it unjust in
God, not to save them? And now, seeing these Things are plainly so, it as
plainly and necessarily follws, that it was no Way unreasonable, nor unbecoming
any of the divine Perfections for God to make his own sovereign, absolute
Good Will and Pleasure, the Rule of his Determinations, of dispensing his
saving Mercies to any fallen, guilty Sinners; and not their Works or
Endeavors. Yea, I Will add, it is highly presumable from Reason itself, and
seems to be its very Dictate, that this was actually the Way of God's
Proceeding in the Case; as what was most suitable to his independent
Sovereignty, for the maintaining, and Illustration of his exalted Glory; and to
abase the Pride of all Flesh, that none should glory in his Presence; but as it
is written, He that glories, should glory in the Lord alone: That his redeemed
and saved People, should forever ascribe the whole Glory and Praise to his
sovereign, free, distinguishing Grace. This Method, in the Case, was proceeding
like a God; as becomes the supreme JEHOVAH: Exalts both his own Glory, and the
Happiness of saved Sinners, to the highest; while they are ever sensible, that
as he might justly have saved none, so they have Nothing to ascribe to
themselves in the Matter, why he saved them more than any others. Hence their
Hearts beat high with the tenderest, sweetest Resentments of Love and Wonder,
with the highest Ascriptions of Glory and Praise, to him that sits upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb, forever and ever. So that, I believe, this Doctrine
suits best with the Language of Heaven, however it be relished on Earth. If we
consider the hateful, horrid, and criminal Nature of Sin; what can there be in
any Sinner, to engage to him the Love and Favor of a God of infinite Holiness,
and incomprehensible Majesty; in whose Sight the Heavens are not clean; who
charges his Angels with Folly? Now, though all these Considerations make it
plainly appear, that it is every Way reasonable, yea, most becoming the adorable
Majesty of God, that the Reason of his appointing any fallen Sinners, in
particular, more than others, to eternal Life, should be wholly resolved into
his sovereign Pleasure; that it should be entirely founded in himself, and not
at all in them: Yet I Am apprehensive, that here lies the main Ground of the
Quarrel; for though Sin has made Man extremely poor, it hasn't made him humble,
but much to the contrary; the unbroken Pride and Haughtiness of Sinners Hearts,
will not allow it to be right or equitable at all, that it should be altogether
at the free, sovereign Pleasure of God, whether to save them or not; unless
they have it in their own Hand, they will quarrel with God himself; although they
deserve not so much as the least Ground for Hope, that ever he will save them.
It would surely, better become such Hell-deserving Rebels as we, to be so
humbly sensible of our vile Iniquities, as to acknowledge God's sovereign Right
to dispose of us as he sees fit; that if he should abandon us to Misery
forever, it would be but just and right, notwithstanding all that ever we could
do; and if he saves us, it will be an Instance of the most glorious, free,
sovereign Grace and Mercy, which he might righteously have denied. But these
Things may suffice here, to show that this Part of the Doctrine also, stands
free of all unreasonable Absurdity, and unbecoming Reflections on God. And if
you would have the whole Evidence again, in a narrow Compass, you may take it
thus. God, the great Creator and Upholder of all Things, is the rightful
Lawgiver, and moral Governor of the reasonable World; considering the
infinite, boundless Glory and Perfections of his Nature, and his Right in and
over us, as his Creatures, our Obligations of Love and Duty to him, are
inconceivably great and infinite: Hence Sin and Disobedience against such
infinite Majesty, and Obligations, is infinitely evil; deserving the Sinner's
everlasting Rejection from God, with a superadded positive Punishment. All
Mankind, through the Sin and Disobedience of their first Parent, are become
destitute of original Righteousness, and all Right to the Life and Happiness
promised in the first Covenant; and all such as are preserved to Years in the
World, have sinned actually in their own Persons, and that far beyond what was
absolutely unavoidable from their original Depravity; whence they in Justice
deserve a far greater Punishment. God had as clear and certain a Knowledge of
all this Apostasy, and Sin of, Mankind, from all Eternity, as after it actually
came to pass; so that in his Decrees concerning them, he considered them as in
such a fallen, guilty State, deserving the Execution of his vindictive Justice;
and atogether insufficient to do any thing, that might in the least satisfy its
Demands, for the averting of the Stroke. And so, from the whole, it clearly
appears, that God had as abosolute, just, and great a Sovereignty over them, to
appoint any Part of them for Life or Death, according to his own Pleasure, as
the Potter has over his Clay, of the same Lump, to make one Vessel to Honor,
and another to Dishonor.

And now, after all these Things, what can reasonably be said against the third
and last of the Propositions? Which is, That God determined to leave a Part of
these guilty Sinners, ( viz. those whom he did not choose to Salvation) in their
fallen guilty State; and to execute Justice upon them for their Sins. To say,
that this is unjust, etc. is to say, that Justice is In^ustice, etc. All I
shall farther observe here upon it, ^s, how injurious and unfair Treatment it
is, to give ^ut, as too many that oppose the Doctrine do, as though ye
maintained, That God doomed Men to everlasting ^erdition, without any Respect
to, or Consideration ^ad, of their Sin. We say, That the Reason why God chose
some, and rejected others that is, these ^ather than those, was not because of
the greater Goodness of the one Part, and greater Sinfulness of ^he other, for
all were Clay of the same Lump, without any Difference of this Kind among them,
amounting ^o such Value, but because it so seemed good in his Sight. We assert,
that none are doomed to everlasting Per^ition, but for their Sin: But then, it
is not the Reason of the Difference that is made between them, and ^^ose that
are chosen to everlasting Life.

Now, though what has been already hitherto said, in ^plaining and vindicating
the Doctrine of Predesti^ation, might sufficiently furnish a careful,
understand^ng Reader, with satisfactory Answers to the Objections, ^^at are
usually supposed to be deduced from Reason against it; yet, for the more full
Satisfaction of all, I ^all a little consider them particularly.

One Objection, that makes a mighty Noise in the World, is, That it makes God
the Author of Sin. But ^^s as easy for me to deny this, as for the Objector to
^ert it; and afferting is all he can do, if he obliges ^mself to urge it
against the Doctrine, only as I have ^presented and explained it in the
preceding Pages. ^et such Onjectors show us, what Part of it is justly able to
such a Charge; and how it contains, or infers ^y such Blasphemy: Does it make
God the Author Sin, to say, that he decreed to suffer Adam to sin; then in the
mean time we assert, that he gave him ^fficient Power not to sin; and only
suffered him, without any Compulsion, to abuse his Liberty? How ridiculous and
senfeless is such a Charge for this? Su^^ Onjectors seem to think, or else to
be willing to ha^^ it thought, that we maintain, that God either did n^^ afford
Adam sufficient Ability to persevere, or that (...) his superior Power he
forced him to Sin. But let the^ Slander die with them. Yet I think I have met
wi^^ an Author, that pretends to prove this vile Absurdi^^ consequent upon be a
rare Art, could he make it do, free the whole World of the Blame of Sin all at
once for if God cannot so much as permit Sin, without b^^^ing the Author of it
himself, then I think we a^^ pretty clear, and all the Devild too. He proves it
(...) a Simile: Suppose a Man to be standing on the Top of very high Wall,
holding a Child over it by the Ar^^ well, he don't press it down, or force it
to fall, but o^^ lets it, go, and suffers it to fall (if it will, I suppose^
and then the Demand is, Whether that Man was (...) the Author of that Child's
Fall, and Death? I thi^ it is no great Difficulty to answer the Question: I
b^lieve none would pretend to vindicate such a gr^^^ Murder. But then I would
demand, if the Cases a any Way like one another? If this Simile is suppor^ to
be parallel to the Case it is brought to illustra^ then our Opinion must be,
that God at first so u^^ held Adam by the Hand of his Power, as that it w^^
impossible for him to sin; and then withdrew his Ha^^ from him, so as that it
was impossible for him not sin: Whereas we assert the direct contrary of bo^^
Before the Simile can be made in any toleable D^^^ gree similar to the Case,
many other Things must supposed in it; particularly, that the Child is endow
with such a Power, as that it is as easy for it to sta^^ in the Air, as to fall
to the Ground; that the M^ has a rightful Sovereignty and Authority over it,
put it in such a Situation, and make it its indispensa^^ Duty to stand where he
has put it; that it has c^^ Knowledge of its Duty, and Warning of its Danger;
^^d the like. These Suppositions I believe will pretty ^uch alter the Case.

Another Objection, brought against the Doctrine, is, that is makes God
chargeable with the most unjust Cruel^^, and sovereign Tyranny. But I have
already sufficiently vindicated it from this awful Charge; unless it ^^e unjust
Cruelty to decree Justice; which is a Con^adiction in express Terms. Was it not
just in God, to make Man free, as well as perfectly holy and bright? To appoint
Adam the Covenant-Head, and representative of his Offspring, as it has been
ex^lain'd? To permit him to act, according to his ori^inal Freedom and Liberty?
To permit all Men to ^n, as they do? And to punish some of them, whom ^^e
pleases, for all the Sin they are guilty of? If these Things are all righteous
and just enough; was it unjust ^n God to fore-appoint and determine them? Would
those, who oppose the Doctrine of Predestination, but ^airly represent it, and
speak to it still as it is, they you would surely be ashamed to offer such a Charge
as this against it: And of this themselves seem to be sensible, and therefore
they commonly so manage the Objection, ^s grossly to misrepresent the Doctrine;
as though it contained in it, that God, in his eternal Purpose, doomed Number of
Mankind to Destruction, without any Consideration at all had of their Sin,
whereby they would justly deserve it; or that he purposed, by his ^resistible
Power, to compel them to sin, that so he might damn them with some Color of
Justice. Whereas we disclaim both the one and the other, with ^he utmost
Abhorrence.

Again, it is objected, that this Doctine makes God ^artial, and a Respecter of
Persons; which is justly ^eputed a very ill Character in Men, and therefore
cannot in the least belong to God. This Argument ^ems to be much depended on
among the more ignorant: But those who make so much of it, ought t^ consider
what that Respecting of Persons is, which is so criminal in Men. It is their
making such a Difference between Persons, in their Temper and Conduct toward
them, as is contrary to Right and Equity; o^ Account of some accidental Things
or Circumstances wherein they may differ from one another; such a Nation,
worldly Dignity, Relation, Gifts, Bribes, o^^ the like. And I readily own, that
Partiality and Respect of Persons, in this Sense, is very far from God He
accepts not the Persons of Princes, nor regards th^^ rich, more than the poor,
Job xxxiv. 19. He is no^^ only far from doing Injustice to any, but he makes
no^^ Account at all of the little Differences among them, of Nation of any of
his Dealings toward them: And it is in this Sense, that Respecting of Persons
is always taken in Scripture, wherever it is condemned in Men, or denied
concerning God. And sure the Doctrine I am defending, is so far from inferring
any such Respect of Persons in God, that it is at the first View directly
contrary to it. Yet farther I would observe, there may be among Men a savouring
of one more than another, which you may call Respecting of Persons, or if you
will, Partiality, or by what Name you please; but it carries no ill Idea in it:
Such, for Instance, as our Lord speaks of, Matthew. xx. where the Lord of the
Vineyard gave to some of his Laborers an undeserved Bounty, while he gave to
others only what Justice necessarily required: And this is brought in by our
Lord Jesus himself, for this very Case (sce vcr. 16.) to vindicate God's making
such a Difference among guilty Sinners, against such as make this Objection:
And God's Defense here, is unanswerable, against all the Murmurings of such as
he has not chosen to Salvation; Friend, I do thee no wrong, whatsoever good I
do to others; Is it not lawful for me to do what I will mine own? Is thine Eye
evil, because I am good?

It is farther objected, that according to this Doctrine, it is God's Fault,
and not theirs, that any perish; inasmuch as it was ever impossible for them to
be saved, seeing they were under an irreversible Appointment to Destruction,
before ever they had a Being. But what has been said already, will easily
answer all the Difficulty that may seem to be in this Argument, viz. That God
appointed them to be punished only for their Sins, whereby they in Justice
deserve it: And surely their Sinning is not any Fault in God; nor yet his
appointing them to deserved Punishment for it: But seeing all their Punishment
will be only according to the Demerit of their Sin, their whole Destruction
will properly be of themselves, and their own Fault. But if any should yet
foolishly think, that the mere Necessity, or infallible Certainty of the Event,
would render Sinners free of all the Blame of their Destruction, because it was
always certain, that so it would be in the End. Let them try any other Scheme
they please, and see if they can rid themselves of the Difficulty; for
whatsoever at any Time is, was always infallibly certain to be, whether you
allow a Deecree concerning it, or not: So that you must either deny, that it is
so much as possible for any Creature to perish justly, at all; or you must own,
that the bare Certainty of the Event, that they will perish, does not free them
from being the proper blameable Causes of their own Perdition: And its being
certain by a divine Appointment, makes them no more clear of the Blame; because
the Decree only is, to punish them for, and according to the Demerit of their
Sins; which Sins, it lays no forcible Constraint, or Compulsion upon them, to
be guilty of.

Again, it is said, That if this Doctrine be true, then it follows, that God
creates Men to damn them. This seems to be a ready-hand Argument, almost in
every ones Mouth that denies the Doctrine.

Before we speck to any Words or Propositions, w^^ ought to understand what is
meant by them. Now a^^ the Meaning I can conceive in this Sentence, [Go^^
creates Men to damn them] consistent with the Propriety of Speech, is, that
their Damnation is God'^ End in creating them; the final Cause and Reason o^^
his bringing them into Being: And this imports in it that God loves, and
delights in the Punishment and Misery of Creatures, merely as such, and for its
own Sake; which is a Thing most blasphemous to suppose of him. To suppose, that
the Misery of any Creature, strictly and abstractly in itself, without any
other Consideration, is agreeable and pleasing to God; yea so agreeable, that
he makes them for this very End that he may have the Pleasure of punishing
them; is indeed, to represent him like the very worst of Beings But then I
would ask, Does God's decreeing to punish Men for their Sin, as they deserve,
for maintaining the Dignity of his Government, and the showing forth of his
infinite Holiness, Justice, and rightful Authority; does this, I say, bear in
it any such Thing, as that he delights barely in the Misery of Creatures, so as
to create them for the Sake of it? How irrational is such a Consequence? But if
any will yet insist on it, as a just Consequence, I desire them to consider a
little, how they will free their own Scheme of it; which is every whit as
liable to the Charge: Unless they have stupid Ignorance, and blasphemous
Presumption enough, to deny God's infinite Understanding and Foreknowledge of
all Things, it is just as reasonable to bring this Objection against the
Arminians, as the Calvinists; and say, that God creates Men to damn them, if he
knows beforehand, that he will damn them; if he fore-knew that they would die
impenitent, in Unbelief; and thereupon has decreed their Damnttion, before he
has created them. The Truth in the Matter is this, God decreed to create all
Men for the Manifestation of his own Glory, which ^s his End in all his Works;
and looking upon Mankind in their Apostasy and Sin, he decreed to leave a
particular Part of them in that State, and to punish them according to their
Sin, for the Manifestation of the Glory of his Sovereignty, Holiness and
Justice, and the right and infinite Obligations of his Authority, as a
Lawgiver over his reasonable Creatures. This View of the Case gives no Ground
for the Charge contained in the Objection. Though God foresees that Mankind will
sin against him, cannot he, notwithstanding, create them; and determine to
punish them, or any Part of them, as their Sin deserves, for the Illustration
of his Glory aforesaid; without being chargeable with creating them, just that
he might damn them? To say so, is the same Thing as to say, that the Sin and
Default of the Creature, must bind up God's Hands from doing that which is in
itself every Way reasonable and Right; And in short, to say, that right is
wrong. But I presume, I have been long enough on the first Method proposed, for
defending and confirming this Doctrine: And that, from what has been said, it
sufficiently appears, at least, that it is a Doctrine free of all unreasonable
Absurdity in itself, and no way dishonorable to God. So that Reason has
Nothing to say, why it may not be so. And if in the next Place we find, that
God's infallible Word of Truth declares that it is so; this ought to put a
final Conclusion to the Debate, and fully determine the Controversy. If there
is Nothing in the Doctrine absurd, or contrary to Reason, why it may not be so;
then when a passage of Scripture is brought to prove that it is so, we mustn't
be put off any more with this Answer, That whatever the Scripture means, it
cannot mean Predestination. A great Asserter of the Arminian Doctrine, I think,
as good as owns their Reasonableness of the Calvinist Doctrine, I mean Bishop
Burnet, when he says, It is one of the Point^ wherein all agree, that God might
have condemned every Man to have Perished for his own Sins. Expos. XXXIX. Art.
p. 167. Fol. This great-Man manages the Debate with the greatest Can ^or and
Temper, of any I have met with, of the Arminian Side; and yet even he, is far
from dealing so tairly as be ought, especially when he represents the
Maintainers of absolute Predestination, as Maintaining, that the Decree lays a
commpulsory Force on the Creature to sin. On this Misrepresentation, much of
his arguing for the Arminions proceeds. He lays hold on the Supralapsarian
Scheme for it, and without sufficient Evidence, pretends that the Sublapsarian
Schems ^^ltimately resolves and terminates in the same, as so represented.
If God might have condemned all Men to Perdition for their Sins, then surely
much more a Part of them only. But farther, Reason not only readily allows,
that God might have formed his eternal Purposes and Decrees, concerning fallen
Man, according to this Doctrine; but (if duly attended to, without selfish
Prejudice) it seems, as has been already hinted, powerfully to persude us, that
so the Case really is, as being most becoming God's independent Sovereignty;
and most expressive of the absolute Freeness, and glorious Riches of his Grace,
to those that are saved; whereby the whole Glory of it is secured to himself,
and no Ground afforded to the Hell-deserving Sinner, for any Thing, contrary to
those humble Acknowledgments of his own Wretchedness that well become him:
Whereas the contrary Doctrine leaves Room to the Sinner, to trust to something
in himself, and ascribe something to himself, in the Matter of his Salvation.
It sets too high a Value upon the despicable, religious Endeavors of corrupted
Sinners; when it maintains, that God is thereby induced to receive the Sinner
to Favor, notwithstanding all his Rebellions. And by thus representing the
God, whom by Disobedience we have contemned and dishonored as so readily and
surely reconciled to us on such Terms, it depreciates his injured Honors, and
takes off from the Infinite Malignity, and due Horror of Sin. If Sin against
God, is looked upon as a Thing that is so easily Compensated; and the Breach
occasioned by it, so readily made up, on such low Conditions. What mean,
unworthy Conceptions are we like to entertain of God's infinite Perfections,
and adorable Attributes, when the Contempt of them by Sin is reckoned such
(...) small Matter? But

2. I proceed, with more express Evidence and Certainty, to prove and confirm
the Doctrine from the divine Oracles, the infallible Scriptures of Truth. And
here I shall first prove, That God has appointed, and chosen some of fallen
Mankind to eternal Life and Salvation; and that merely of his own sovereign
Grace and good Pl^asitre, and not upon the Foresight of any Goodness of theirs,
whereby they would distinguish themselves from others, as the Reason of it.
Next I shall prove, That the rest of Mankind, not thus chosen to Life, God has
appointed to leave in their Sins, and to punish them for them, according to
their Deserts. And then, I shall answer such Objections, as are supposed to be
in the Scriptures against this Doctrine, and give the true Meaning of such
Serip^ure-Passages, consistent with it.

The first Place of Scripture I shall adduce for the Proof of Absolute
Election, is Acts xiii. 48. where, after an Account of the Opposition made to
the Apostles Paul and Barnabas, at Antioch; and the strong En^eavours used by
some, to prejudice the People against ^he Doctrine which they preached, it is
said, that as many as were ordained to eternal Life, believed. The ^lain Sense
of these Words is, that notwithstanding all ^e Means used in that Place, to
hinder the People ^^om believing the Apostles Doctrine, yet a considerable
Number did believe; because God had ordained them to eternal Life, and so gave
them Faith to believe, in Spite of all the Arts of Men used with them to the
contrary; and therefore it was impossible for the Enemies of Christianity to
keep them in Unbelief. And this is perfectly agreeable to the Sense o^ our
blessed Lord, Matthew. xxiv. 24. when he says, tha^ false Christ and false
Prophets should arise, showing such Signs and Wonders, that if is were
possible, they would deceive the very Elect: Clearly implying, that God has
elected some to everlasting Salvation, and the necessary Means of it; whom it
is therefore utterly impossible for false Teachers, with all their Powers,
finally to deceive and keep from believing in the true Redeemer. If any should
say, that the Reason why these were ordained to eternal Life, and had Grace
give^ them to believe, was because they were more religiously disposed, and
better than the rest: This is no^ only contrary to the Scope of the Place, and
the Mode of expressing the Matter in the Text, but w^ find, in the next Verse
but one, that there were some of the most religious that believed not; we are
told that these Opposers stirred up the devout (that is, the religious) and
honorable Women, as well as the chief M^^ of the City, to persecute the
Apostles; but they cou'^ not have the same Influence upon those whom God had
ordained to eternal Life; it was impossible for the^^ to deceive the Elect.

Another very clear, and most express Passage to ou^ Purpose, is in Romans xi. 5,
6, 7. Even so then, at th^^ present Time also, there is a Remnant, according to
th^^ Election of Grace. And if by Grace, then it is no more of Works; otherwise
Grace is no more Grace. But (...) it be of Works, then is it no more Grace. --
Wh^^ th^^? Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for but the Election
has obtained it, and the rest w^^^ blinded. Here the Apostle observes, that as
in the Time of the greatest Defection of the People of Israel in Elijah's Days,
God had reserved to himself a Remnant of Seven Thousand; even so, at that
present Time, when the greater Body of the Jewish Nation had rejected Christ,
there was also a Remnant, according to the Election of Grace, that did believe:
This believing Remnant of the Jewish Nation, were those who were elected and
chosen out of it, to Faith and Salvation: And this Election, whereby they were
thus chosen, was an Election of Grace. Well, you will say, perhaps, you own all
this, that God had elected a Remnant of the Jews to Faith in Christ, and
Salvation by him; but then the Reason of God's electing them, was their good
Works; whereby he foresaw, they would render themselves more worthy of his
Choice than the rest. But don't you see, that the Apostle expressly bars against
such an Imagination, when he says, It is an Election of Grace; and that if it
be of Grace, then it is no more of Works: Or else Grace is not Grace. He tells
you, that the Election of Works, which you contend for, is not the Election of
Grace which he asserts: If it be of Works, it is no more Grace. An Election of
Grace, and of Works both, is a downright Inconsistency, if we allow St. Paul to
be Judge. Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for; there were many
of Israel, who were left to Unbelief; that were seeking for Righteousness and
Life as much as the others, that were, notwithstanding, sanctified by Faith:
Though they were thus equal among themselves; yet there was an Election among
them that obtained it, when the rest were blinded; that is, left to their own
Blindness. I cannot see how the Doctrine of Absolute Election can well be
asserted in more strong, plain, and express Terms, than the Apostle uses for it
in these Verses. ^t cannot be said, that all he means by the Election of this
Remnant, was only God's Purpose of affording (...) the Privilege of the Gospel,
and outward Means of Grace: For all the rest had these Advantages afforded
them, as well as they, according to the Word of our Lord, Matthew. xx. 16. Many
were called, bu^ few, (i. e. a Remnant of them only) were chosen which
manifestly shows, that they were elected to the saving Benefit of those Means,
in Consequence o^ which, they actually did obtain it: When the rest who had,
the same Advantage of these outward Means, and were seeking for Justification
and Life as well a^ they, did not obtain it, but were left in their Blindness
and Unbelief. To conclude this Argument, the Apostle here asserts an Election
of some, out of others, to Eternal Life; and asserts it to be an Election of
Grace, in such a full Sense, as that it cannot be o^ Works in any Sense. So
that you may see here a fla^ Contradiction between the inspired Apostle and the
Arminians. They say, Election is on the Account of Works foreseen; he says, it
is not of Works, but wholly of Grace. They say, it may be of Works, and of
Grace both; he says, it cannot, without destroying the Nature of both.

For another Proof, you may look as far Back as the viiith Chap. of this
Epistle to the Romans, 28, 29, 30. Ver. -- All Things work together for good,
to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his Purpose. For
whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the Image of
his Son. -- Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called and whom he
called, them he also justified; and whom h^ justified, them he also glorified.
Those whom the Apostle terms the Called, according to God's Purpose, h^ tells
us, ver. 28. are those that love God; and ver. 30. they are those who are
justified; and in the End, will be as surely glorified. So that by Calling
here, the Apostle means, being called effectually, to Faith and Holiness, by
the Spirit of God, or saving Conversion And he tells us, that those who are
thus effectually called, and converted by God in Time, are so called by him, in
Pursuance of his proceeding Purpose and Decree concerning them; for they are
called according to his Purpose. He predestined, or fore-appointed them to be
conformed to the Image of his Son; to be made like Christ in Holiness. And as
this Purpose and Fore-appointment of God, made their Sanctification and
Justification infallibly certain; so it equally secures their final
Glorification. For whom he did predestinate, them he called, justified, and
glorified. And those who are predestined, and fore-appointed of God to
Holiness and Happiness, are said to be those whom he foreknew: By God's
Foreknowing them, we are not to understand, his having a bare, speculative
Foreknowledge of them, and of what they would be before their effectual
Calling; for in this Sense he foreknew all others, as well as them; but his
having had a special Love to them, and gracious Design to do them good, beyond
the rest of Mankind: Or it signifies his fore-knowing them as his own; as those
whom he had chosen, and distinguished for himself, in his eternal Purpose,
according to what is said, 2 Timothy ii. 19. The Lord knows them that are his.
Thus you see, this Place is a clear Proof of an Election and Predestination to
Grace and Salvation; and that represented so sovereign, and entirely of God, as
not to be founded on any Qualification in the Creature: Ensuring both the
Sinner's true Conversion to Holiness, and his final Perseverance to the
heavenly Glory: And all this, according to God's Purpose, and not their own
Management or Behavior.

The 9th Chapter of this Epistle is very plain and express on this Argument. In
the Beginning of it, the Apostle speaks with Reference to the Unbelief of the
general Part of the Jewish Nation, their Rejection of the true Messiah;
declaring his great Grief on that Account. And then in the 6th Ver. he comes to
speak to a Difficulty which seemed to occur, concerning God's leaving the main
Body of the Jews to Unbelief and so casting them off from being any longer his
People, taken from his Word of Promise to Abraham and often afterward, that he
would be a God to him and to his Seed after him forever. It would seem, (...)
that Time, when God had cast off that People, all (...) a very small Remnant,
and removed his Church (...) the Gentiles, as if he had broke his Word, and h^^
Promise had not been fulfilled, or taken Effect. T^^ this the Apostle answers,
that that was no Argument that the Word of God had taken no Effect; and he
clear it up, by showing, that the Word of Promise peculiarly respected those of
Abraham's Offspring who belong'^ to the Election of Grace; saying, they are not
all Israel which are of Israel; that is, they are not all tha^ Israel which God
had principally in his Eye in the Promise, who belong to Israel by natural
Relation, o^ external visible Union: The peculiar Israel, or Children of the
Promise, were those whom the Lord ha^ elected and chosen among them to
everlasting Life; and to these the Promiss was always made good, whether they
were more, or sewer: The Promise, indeed, being a plain Intimation, that a
large Number, belonging to the Election of Grace, should be of Abraham's
Progeny, was the Foundation of a visible Church among them, and gave them all a
Right to the visible Privileges of it, till they made a Forfeiture themselves;
But the Promise, in the Full Import of it, by Way of Engagement on God, related
only to those whom he had chosen among them; that his is the Apostle'^ Meaning
here, appears plainly from all that follows; For the Illustration and
Confirmation of this Case, he shows, that God put a great Limitation upon that
Seed of Abraham, to which he particularly designed the Promise; in his Words to
Abraham himself, saying, In Isaac shall thy Seed be called. Hereby the Lord
s^gnified to him, that there was a greater Number of the Election to be of his
Posterity in Isaac's Line, than in the Line of Ishmael, or of any of his other
Sons that he should ever have, as he had several by a second Marriage; and
therefore God would take a more special Care of Isaac's Offspring. And indeed,
no other Account can be given, for his distinguishing Concern about them, more
than the rest of Abraham's Posterity; or for his affording greater Advantages
to one Nation than another, at this Day, but because of a much greater Number
of his elect Ones being among them; because he knows whom he has chosen. And
then the Apostle comes to give another Instance of the same Kind, viz. the
Distinction which God made between the two Branches of Isaac's Offspring, Ver.
10. and Sequ. And not only this, but when Rebecca also bad conceived by one,
even by our Father Isaac: (For the Children being not yet born, neither having
done any good or Evil, that the Purpose of God according to Election might
stand, not of Works, but of him that calls) it was said unto her, The Elder
shall serve the Younger. Here the Apostle shows, that though God had said, that
the Seed of Abraham, which he chiefly intended in the Promise of being their
God, was to be in Isaac's Line; yet he intended one Part of Isaac's Seed more
than the other; which he intimated to Rebecca before her Twin-Children were
born, when he said, the Elder shall serve the Younger. And thus he observes,
there was a distinguishing Purpose and Decree of God concerning them (before
they had done any good or evil) according to Election; which Purpose of
Election is not of Works, but of him that calls, according to his own
sovereign Pleasure. The Apostles Meaning is plainly this, that God's choosing
Jacob, and a great Number of his Posterity, more than Esau or his Posterity,
was not on Account of any good Works to be performed by any of them, more than
by the others, as the Reason of it; any more than it was on Account of good
Works already done, before they were born, when neither of them had done either
good or evil. So, though the Apostle's Words very likely refers to the respective
Posterities of those two Brothers, as well as to their own Persons; yet they
respect their spiritual Interest more than their temporal; and signify, that
God had many more of his Elect in the Posterity of Jacob than of Esau, at least
while they continued two visibly distinct Bodies; and therefore he took more
Care of Jacob's Posterity, taking them into, and keeping them in a visible
Church Relation to himself, while he suffered the Posterity of Esau to
degenerate into Heathenism and Pagan Idolatry; so casting them off from so much
as any visible Relation to him, as his Church; And this directly answers the
Apostle's Purpose; which is to show, that God had a peculiar elect Seed among
the Seed of Abraham, and of Isaac, which he principally designed, and referred
to, in the Promise; and therefore it was no Argument, that the Word of God had
failed or taken no Effect; though great Bodies of their natural Seed were
neglected, and separated from his Church; and it was as reasonable to suppose
the same Thing of Jacob's Seed. This Election, he asserts, was not of Works,
but purely of him that calls, as he pleases. And so, ver. 14. and Sequ. he
goes on, to answer the grand Objection, which he saw would readily he laid
against the Doctrine, viz. That it make God unjust, cruel, partial, and all
what not: What shall we say then? says he, Is there Unrighteousness with God?
God forbid. For he says to Moses, I will have Mercy on whom I will have Mercy,
and I will have Compassion on whom I will have Compassion. He observes, that
God had sufficiently answered the Objection himself, in these his Words to
Meses, Exed, xxxiii. 19. Which clearly signify, that all had sinned, and justly
deserved the Execution of his Wrath; and so were become Objects of mere Mercy,
which he might bestow or withold, according to his own sovereign Pleasure,
without any Unrighteousness: And, indeed, this is the Answer that will stand
forever; and wherewith God will one Day silence all the Quarrel^ings of haughty
Creatures. And in these Words he declares, that as he justly might, so he
really has reserved this royal Sovereignty to himself, of bestowing Mercy to
guilty Creatures, just as himself pleases; that he will have Mercy and
Compassion on whom he will. From whence the Apostle clearly infers, ver. 16. So
then, it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that
shows Mercy. i. e. The Election of any guilty Sinners, is not at all of
themselves, as being better inclined and behaved than others; but altogether of
God, who bestows Mercy as he pleases; who will have Mercy on whom he will have
Mercy, and who will have Compassion on whom he will have Compassion. But I
presume I need prosecute the Argument no farther from this Chapter; it is fully
clear already, beyond all reasonable Contradiction, that it maintains the very
Doctrine I have undertaken to prove.

And it is no less clearly maintained in the first Chapter to the Ephesions:
According as he has chosen us in him, (viz. Christ) before the Foundation of
the World, that we should be holy, and without Blame before him, in Love:
Having predestined us unto the Adoption of Children, by Jesus Christ, to
himself, according to the good Pleasure of his Will; ver. 4, 5. The Election
which the Apostle here speaks of, was more than a choosing of them to external
Church Privileges, even an Election to eternal Salvation; for he says, God had
predestined them to the Adoption of Children by Jesus Christ to himself: And
(as he says, Romans viii. 17.) if Children, then Heirs; Heirs of God, and joint
Heirs with Christ. Moreover he describes them, as those that were in a State of
saving Grace, ver. 3, saying, God has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings,
in heavenly Places in Christ Jesus: And then immediately adds, According as he
has chosen us in him, before the Foundation of the World, that we should be
holy. Their being blessed with all spiritual Blessings in Christ, was according
to God's foregoing Choice of them; it was the Fruit of a gracious and eternal
Purpose to that End; and they were chosen, not because they would be holy, but
that they should be holy; their Goodness was not the Cause, but the Effect of
their Election. And ver. 5. they were predestined, or fore-appointed, to be
the Children of God, not according to their good Works or Dispositions, but
according to the good Pleasure of his Will; not to their own Praise, but to the
Praise of the Glory of his Grace; as it follows ver. 6. And very expressly, to
the same Purpose, he says, ver. 11. In whom also we have obtained an
Inheritance, being predestined according to the Purpose of him, who works
all Things after the Counsel of his own Will. We are not predestined to the
heavenly Inheritance, says he, according to the Purpose of one, who proceeds
according to the Will and Behavior of others; but according to the Purpose of
him, who does all Things after the Counsel of his own Will.

Another Place of Scripture, very expressly asserting an absolute Election, you
may see in 2 Timothy i. 9. God has saved us, and called us with an holy Calling,
not according to our Works, but according to his own Purpose and Grace, which
was given us in Christ Jesus before the World began. The plain Meaning of these
Words (if they can be made plainer) is, as if the Apostle had said, God has
saved us. and effectually called us out of a State of Sin to Holiness; and this
is not to be ascribed to any Works or Endeavors of ours, a^ the Reason of it,
but to his own sovereign Purpose and Grace, or free Favor; which Grace was
made sure to us in Christ, by the Father's Engagement to him in the eternal
Covenant of Redemption, before the World began. This is a natural and easy
Paraphrase upon the Words, though indeed they don't need any: I Am very sure, if
they were found any where else but in the Bible, every one would readily
acknowledge, the contained the Calvinist Doctrine of Election. See also 2 Thessalonians. ii. 13, 14. 1 Pet. i. 2. Job. xv. 16. with many other Places of
Scripture, which it is needless to mention.

But beside these direct and immediate Testimonies of Scripture to the
Doctrine, it may be farther clearly proved, from such Scripture Passages, as
declare the Absoluteness and Sovereignty of God's Proceeding, in the effectual
Calling, and Conversion of Sinners, to himself. If God, in the Regeneration and
Conversion of Sinners, proceeds in an absolute, sovereign Way, calling whom he
will, without regarding their previous Motion and Behavior, as the Reason of
hi^ Proceeding, on which it is suspended; then his choosing of them must be
absolute, and sovereign too; for actual Renovation in Time, is just the Fruit
and Execution of the eternal Purpose; and therefore the one must exactly answer
to the other. Many are the Places of Scripture, which plainly teach us, that
God's renewing and converting of any Sinners, is wholly ^wing to his sovereign,
distinguishing Favor and Mercy, and not to any distinguishing Goodness of
their own. I shall just only select a sew. What can be more Express to this
Purpose, than those Words? ^^t. iii. 3, 4, 5. For we ourselves also were
sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures,
living in Malice and Envy, hateful, and hating one another. But after that t^^
Kindness and Love of God our Savior toward Man app^^^tred, not by Works of
Righteousness which we have done; but according to his Mercy be saved us, by
the Washing of Regeneration, and re^ew^ng of the Holy Ghost. In the same Manner
the Apostle speaks in the 2d Chapter to the Ephesians; And you has he
quickened, who were dead in Trespass^ and Sins; wherein, in Time past, you
walked according to the Course of this World, according to the Prince the Power
of the Air, the Spirit that now works i^ the Children of Disobedience. Among
whom also we a^^ had our Conversation in Times past, in the Lusts of ou^ Flesh,
fulfilling the Desires of the Flesh, and of the Mind and were by Nature the
Children of Wrath, even a^^ others. But God, who is rich in Mercy, for his
great Love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead i^ Sins, has
quickened us together with Christ, (by Grac^^ ye are saved. O Sirs, Thousands
that are now in Heaven, would have been in Hell, had God waited for their good
Works, or preparing themselves for hi^ Grace, before he had laid hold of them
by converting Power. And what great Excellency is there in all the good Works
(falsely so called) of an unregenerate Sinner, when he has done them, to engage
God to save^ him? How clearly is the free, absolute Sovereignty of God, in
effectual Calling, declared, 1 Cor. i. 26 to 30. For ye see your Calling,
Brethren, how that not many wise Men after the Flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble are called. But God has chosen the foolish Things of the World, to
confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak Things of the World, to
confound the Things which are mighty; and base Things of the World, and Things
which are despised, has God chosen; yea, and Things which are not, to bring to
naught Things that are; That no Flesh should glory in his Presence. Here you
see, God calls just whom he will, among the guilty Children of Men: Some of the
high and mighty of the World; but more generally he has ordered it, that those
whom he designs to call, shall be poor and mean in all worldly Respects: And
the general Reason is, to dash down all human Pride, that no Flesh should glory
in his Presence; but that he that glories, should glory only in the Lord, ver,
31. And it is remarkable, how the Apostle alters the Term, after he had begun
with Calling, he puts in Choosing in the Place of it; because temporal Vocation
exactly corresponds to eternal Election, as the certain Consequent and Evidence
of it; and the one is as free and absolute as the other, so that it was equal
which of the Terms he used. Numbers of Scripture Instances prove this Truth.
What good Works of Obedience to Christ had Paul done? Or what good Dispositions
had he toward him, before he reached him by his powerful Grace, to induce the
Lord to choose and call him? Were not great Numbers of his Nation, as good as
he, left to perish in Unbelief? What were the good Works and Dispositions of
Abraham, more than others, when God called him, as he was serving other Gods on
the other Side of the Flood, with the rest of his Father's House? Josh. xxiv.
2. of whom the Lord says, Isai. li. 2. I called him alone, and blessed him.
This Argument is so clear, and certain in all its Parts, that I think it would
be quite superfluous, to bestow any more Pains upon it.

Again, the Doctrine of Absolute Election appears from the only Way of fallen
Sinners Salvation, as it is laid down and declared in the Gospel, viz. The Way
of believing only and entirely in the Merit and Righteousness of the Lord
Jesus, for actual Reconciliation with God. The Argument here may be thus
formed. That Doctrine, which leaves no Room for guilty Sinners to rest and
depend on any thing, but the reconciled Favor of God, and their Acceptance
with him; (the contrary of which, does give Room to Sinners to rest, and depend
also, on something else, for Reconciliation and Acceptance with God) must be
true, and its contrary false, according to the Scriptures: But the Doctrine of
absolute Election leaves no Room for guilty Sinners to rest and depend on any
thing, for the reconciled Favor of God, and their Acceptance with him, but the
Merit and Atonement of Jesus Christ only: And the contrary Doctrine does give
them room to rest, and depend also, on something else for it, viz. something in
them, or done by them; Therefore the Doctrine of absolute Election is true, and
the contrary Doctrine false, according to the Scriptures.

The Scripture clearly teaches us, to look only to the Merit and Atonement of
Christ's Obedience and Sufferings, for actual Justification before God, and
Reconciliation with him: And it is as clear, that the Doctrine, of Sinners
being chosen in Christ, and fore-appointed to Justification and eternal Life
through him, of God's mere, sovereign, free Grace, agrees very well with this; it
cuts all the Sinews of Self-Dependance, and leaves the Sinner no other
Foundation to cast himself upon, but the sovereign Mercy of God, through a
redeeming Savior. And I think it is as clear again on the other Hand, that the
opposite Doctrine, of a conditional Election, founded either upon the actual
Existence of some Good in, or done by the Sinner, or upon the Foresight of it
to be in him, or done by him, lays a Foundation for Self-Dependance, and so
tends to keep undone Sinners from closing with Christ in the Way of the Gospel.
This delusive Opinion makes poor Creatures swell very big with a Conceit of
themselves, and what they do; when they imagine their Qualifications and Doings
are of such Price with God, it makes them halve the Procurement of their
Salvation between Christ's Righteousness and their own, which he will never
bear: It makes them patch their filthy Rags and menstrous Clothes, to his
complete, unspotted Robe, for a joint Recommendation of them to God's
Acceptance. Indeed I cannot see a material Difference between Arminian
Protestants and the Papists, about the Doctrine of Justification. And I find
two great Bishops, one of each Sort, of my Mind. Says Bishop Burnet, in his
Exposition (more properly Perversion) of the 39 Articles of the Church of
England, Page 126. This Matter was so stand by many of the Writers of the
Church of Rame (after the Reformation) that as to the Main of it, we have no
just Exception to it. The Bishop of Meaux, in his Exposition of the Doctrine of
the Catholic Church, Page 93, after he has been explaining their Sense of
Justification, and Merit of good Works, says, And indeed we must acknowledge,
that the learned of their Party (meaning the Reformed) do not contend so much
of late about this Subject, as they did formerly; and there are but few, who do
not now confess, there ought not to have been a Breach upon this Point. But if
this important Difficulty about Justification, upon which their first Authors
laid all their Stress, be not looked upon now, as essential, by the wisest
Persons amongst them, we leave them to think, what they ought to judge of their
Separation; and what Hopes there would be of an Union, if they would but
overcome their Prejudice, and quit the Spirit of Contention. Thus we see
Protestants and Papists cordially shaking Hands, and agreeing again, in one of
the most material Matters of Difference. And all the Contest remaining, is,
which Side has made the Approach to the other. The one says, You have come to
us: The other says, No, but you have come to us And this, I believe, will be
judged but a small Matter for Brethren to fall out about. However, I think I
might venture, in a Court of Equity, to undertake to obtain Sentence upon this
Plea, in Favor of the Romish Gentleman.

The last Argument I shall offer, for Confirmation of this Doctrine, shall be
taken from the declared Scope and Design of God in the Gospel; which is (as it
is highly reasonable) to secure the whole Glory of Sinners Salvation to
himself; and forever hide Prid^ from Man: He assures us, he has so concerted
the Scheme, and laid the Plan, that the saved Sinner shall not have the least
Ground to boast, or glory: Which evidently proves, that Election is not
conditional founded on Sinners good Works or Disposition; but absolute, founded
on God's good Pleasure. For upon the conditional Scheme, the justified,
converted Person, has it to ascribe to himself, that he, more than another, is
in such an happy State. The Reason cannot be God's distinguishing Love and
Grace to him, beyond others; but his own distinguishing Goodness: For the
others are supposed to have had as much Love and Kindness from God, as he;
Whence then came the Difference that is between them? Not from God, for he made
no Difference; but from himself. And does not this give some Ground for
boasting of himself in the Case? To arrogate some Glory and Praise to himself?
But the true Gospel-Way of Salvation, will not, in the least, admit of any such
Thing. It is cross to God's declared View, and Design in it. See Ephesians. ii. 8, 9.
For by Grace ye are saved, through Faith; and that not of yourselves: It is the
Gift of God: Not of Works, lest any Man should beast. The Way which God has
laid for Sinners Salvation, is such, that it precludes and bars against all
Boasting in those that are saved; and therefore it is not of Works, but through
Faith, which is a Soul-humbling, Self-emptying Grace, and a Gift of God's royal
Bounty, which he bestows at pleasure, Romans iii. 27. After the Apostle has
clearly laid down the true Gospel-Way, of guilty Sinners Justification and
Salvation, through the alone Righteousness of Christ, imputed in a Way of
believing; he asks, Where is boasting then? and answers, It is excluded. Not by
the Law of Works, but by the Law of Faith. All boasting is entirely excluded,
by that Method which God has established. And hence we may, with abundant
Evidence, conclude, that that Doctrine, which affords any Room for Glorying and
Boasting, is not of God, being directly contrary to the Plan and Design of the
Gospel.

Having now, I think, with great Clearness, from God's Word of Truth, proved
the Doctrine of absolute, unconditional Election; I proceed in the next Place
to prove, That those of guilty Mankind, whom God did not thus choose to
everlasting Life and Salvation through Christ, he determined to leave in their
guilty State, and inflict upon them their deserved Punishment. And upon this
Branch of Predestination, I need be but short, because it is adundantly proven
already, by the Proof of the former; for the one is a necessary Consequence of
the other. If God determined to deal with guilty Mankind, in such a soverign
Way as has been proved, making his own righteous, sovereign Pleasure, the only
Rule of his Proceedings toward them, then it necessarily follows, that such as
he did not ordian to Life, he did ordian to deserved Death. To suppose an
absolute and certain Election of a Part of guilty Sinners, to be redeemed and
saved, and yet, that the rest are not reprobated or rejected, are very
inconsistent Notions. For seeing all Mankind were looked upon and considered,
by God in his Decrees, as under a righteous Sentence of Condemnation to
Punishment for their Sin; then sure such as he did not determine to deliver out
of that Condemnation and Ruin, were left in it, to suffer the Law. To say, That
they were all elected conditionally, though the others were absolutely, is as
contrary to those Scriptures that have been adduced, as to deny an absolute
Election altogether. For they assert Election to be universally absolute,
contrary to such a Distinction of a twofold Election: It is a Notion,
especially contrary to those Passages, which declare the Absoluteness of
Effectual Calling, in all those that are so called: And those Passages sages
which declare, that all that are saved, are saved in such a Way, as excludes
all Self-glorying and Self-depending. But I proceed to offer a sew other Proof
from the Scripture, for the Confirmation of this Head. And first I argue thus,
Those who were not given in Charge by the Father to Jesus Christ, to be
redeemed and saved by him, were left in their Sins, and ordian'd to suffer the
Law for them themselves.

But those who were not certainly elected to Salvation, were not given in
Charge by the Father to Jesus Christ, to be redeemed and saved by him:
Therefore they were left in their Sins, and ordained to suffer the Law for them
themselves. That those, who were not certainly elected to Salvation, were not
given in Charge by the Father to Jesus Christ, to be redeemed and saved by him;
is plain from this, That all those, who were so given in Charge to Jesus
Christ, to be redeemed and saved by him, shall certainly be saved by him; and
were certainly and infallibly ordained to be so. This is clearly proved from
the Words of Christ, Job. vi. 38, 39. For I came down from Heaven, not to do
mine own Will, but the Will of him that sent me. And this is the Father's Will,
which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose Nothing,
but should raise it up again at the last Day. These Words I think, plainly say,
that all such, as are not in the End actually saved by Jesus Christ, if he be
faithful to his Trust, were not committed to his Charge to be redeemed by him,
and consequently they were left under the condemnatory Sentence of the Law.

Another Proof. that those whom God has not absolutely elected to Salvation, he
has left to perish, and abandoned from his saving Care, you have, Romans xi. 7.
where after the Apostle has said, that the Remnant of Israel, which God had
reserved to himself, according to the Election of Grace, had obtained
Righteousness and Life, he adds, And the rest were blinded. Very full and
express to the same Purpose are those Words, 1 Pet. ^i. 8. Christ is a Stone of
Stumbling, and Rock of Offense, even to them which stumble at the Word, being
disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed. God appointed to leave them to
Blindness, Stumbling and Disobedience; which Things are always consequent upon
God's leaving any to themselves.

This Doctrine, o Sinners Rejection or Reprobation in the eternal Purpose of
God, is indeed, I acknowledge, a very awful and solemn one; especially to those
who don't find in them the comfortable Evidences of Election; and might
reasonably excite in them a deep Concern about the great Concerns of their
Souls, and stir them up to take no peaceful Rest, till they find in themselves
the hopeful Token of God's electing Love, in a supernatural work of renewing,
san stifying Grace in their Souls. But then let us take Care, that we don't
charge God foolishly and wickedly in the Case, as if he were cruel and
unrighteous. What if God was willing to show his Wrath, and to make his Power
known, upon the Vessels of Wrath, fitted to Destrution, and worthy of Death,
who can justly find fault with him? What if he had reprebated all apostate
Mankind, as well as all apostate Angels, who could say, he had done wrong?
Every Mouth must have been stopped, all the World being guilty before him.

But I come to speak to the Objections, commonly urged from the Scriptures
against the foregoing Doctrine, in both its Branches. And here I shall first
take Notice of the Method, which those, on the other Side of the Question, put
a main Confidence in, for the overthrowing of this Doctrine; by going about to
prove a Universal Redemption; that Christ dyed equally for all, and every
Individual of Mankind; for one as ^^uch as another. This, they think, they can
very easily ptove from such Places of Scripture, as speak of his Dying for all
Men; for all the World; the whole World; for every Man; and the like. But these
universal Expressions of Scripture, will not amount to sufficient Proof of what
they bring them for; for all so plain as they think they are for them. If such
universal Terms of Scripture, must of Necessity be understood in such a large
Extent as they might seem to carry in them; we shall then as easily prove many
other Things from Scripture, which no Man of common Sense, will believe to be
intended in it: For Instance, as readily and plainly as they will prove, that
Christ laid down his Life for every individual Person of Adam's Race; as
plainly, I say, will I prove, that every individual Person of Adam's Race will
have Praise from God at the Day of Judgment; from 1 Cor. iv. 5. where the
Apostle says, Then shall every Man have Praise of God. As plainly and fully
will I prove, that after John Baptist's Preaching, every Individual of Mankind
pressed into the Kingdom of God; from Luke xvi. 16. Since that Time the Kingdom
of God is preached, and every Man presses into it. And by the same Rule you
may have it proved, that every human Creature spoke of the Faith of the
Christians at Rome, Romans i. 8. Your Faith is spoken of throughout the whole
World. These few Examples, instead of great Numbers which might be produced,
are sufficient to show, that such universal Terms in Scripture, must be often
understood under very great Restrictions; and quite in another Sense than our
Opposites will allow, when they are used concerning the Death of Christ. Some
of those Places of Scripture, where such universal Terms are used, concerning
Christ's Death, and the Effects of it, only signify the Virtue and Efficacy of
it, to those who partake of the Benefits of it. Some others signify, that his
Death was designed promiscuously for some of all Nations, and of all Ranks and
Conditions of Men, as not confined to any one particular Nation, or Degree of
Mankind. Others again only mean, that Christ is the only Savior, that none are
saved but through his Death. In the first Sense, we are to understand Romans v. 18.
The Design of that whole Chapter is to show, That Christ's Death and
Satisfaction, is of sufficient Virtue, for the justifying and saving of the
most guilty Sinners. For this Purpose, the Apostle observes the Efficacy of
Adam's Sin, and breaking the Law, to the condemning of those to whom it was
charged and imputed, declaring, that much more is Christ's fulfilling the Law,
effectual to the complete Justification of those to whom it is umputed,
notwithstanding their former Condemnation. And so when he say, that as by the
Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation: Even so, by the
Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all Men to Justification of Life.
His Meaning is, That as the Offense and Disobedience of Adam prevailed, to the
condemning of those to whom it reached, and was imputed; even so, the
Righteousness of Christ was sufficiently effectual, to the full Justification
of those to whom it was imputed, from the Guilt of that Offense, and all
others; so as to entitle them again to eternal Life. So that the Apostle's
Design, is not at all to run a Parallel between Adam's Offense and Christ's
Righteousness, in the Extent of their Influence and Effects; but to compare the
one with the other, as to the Efficacy of their Influence; in Respect of which
he observes, that Christ's Righteousness is much superior, as it justifies to
Life, even after Adam's Offense has condemned to Death. And thus the Phrase,
all Men, in both Parts of the Verse, is to be understood with this Limitation,
viz. All Men, on whom it came: In the first Part of the Verse, Judgment came
upon all Men, on whom it came, to Condemnation; i. e. so as to condemn them: In
the latter Part, the free Gift came upon all Men, on whom it name, to
Justification of Life; i. e. so as to justify them to Life. I presume, if every
Man had been in the Text, instead of all Men, the Universalists would have
though it it every whit as strong for their Purpose, as they do now. And you may
see how that this Phrase must be understood the same Way, in Mark viii. 25. I
accommodate myself here, to those who understand only the English Translation:
The Term, in the Orginal, is in the plural Number, all Men, as well as in Romans
v. 18. But it is equal as in the Sense, which of the Ways it is rendered.
Where it is said, of the Man that had been blind, to whom Jesus Christ gave
Sight, that he saw every Man clearly; which cannot be understood of the Extent
of his Sight, that he saw every Man that was in the World; but of the Strength
and Efficacy of his Sight, that he saw every Man, whom he did see, clearly. It
is indeed true, that by the Offense of Adam, Judgment came upon every
Individual of his Posterity, except the human Nature of Jesus Christ, to
Condemnation: And this Verse is a clear and certain Proof of it. But then I
conceive, it is not the Universality of the Term here, that proves it: It is as
fully proved from the next Verse, as from this; where it is only said, that by
his Disobedience, many were made Sinners; because the Imputation of his Sin at
all, is Evidence enough, that it is imputed to all and every one that descends
from him, in the ordinary Way of Generation; seeing his Relation was the same
to all, as the natural and common Parent of the human Race. But farther, there
is this plain Reason, evincing, that the Universal Term here, must be
understood in this limited Sense, viz. Because if it be understood in the
large, extensive Sense, in which the Arminians will have it, it will prove a
great deal too much for them; not a universal, conditional Redemption, which
they contend for, but a universal, absolute Redemption and Salvation. It will
then prove, that every Individual of the human Race, are actually justified to
eternal Life, by the Righteousness of Christ: And we are sure, that whom he
justified, them he also glorified, Romans viii. 30. Thus you see the true Sense
of this Text, and manifest Design of the whole Context, destroys all Foundation
of an Argument for Universal Redemption.

The proper Import, and Design of those Words, 1 John ii. 2. He is the
Propitiation for our Sins, and not for ours only, but also for the Sins of the
whole World, is, that the Death of Christ was a Propitiation, or Atonement,
not only for People among the Jews, or for those who were then Believers in
those Parts of World; but also for some, be they more or less, in all Parts and
Ages of the World: For he was to be God's Salvation unto the Ends of the Earth.

When the Apostle says, 1 Timothy ii. 6. That Christ gave himself a Ransom for
all; it appears from the Context, that he means Persons of all Ranks and
Degrees; for he brings it in as an Argument to enforce his Exhortation, to pray
for Kings, and all that are in Authority. The same universal Term he manifestly
intends in the same Sense, in the 1st Verse, when he says, I exhort therefore,
that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks,
be made for all Men. He cannot mean sure, that they should pray for the Millions
of Men that were dead, and gone to their own Place before that Time: Neither
can he intend, that they should pray for such as the Apostle John excludes from
an Interest in our Prayers, 1 John v. 16. There is a Sin unto Death: I do not
say, that a Man shall pray for it; that is, for such as are guilty of it: But
he explains his Meaning, to be for Men of all Stations and Degrees, the high as
well as the low; adding, for Kings, and for all that are in Authority. When the
Apostle says, Heb. ii. 9. That Christ tasted Death for every Men; the Meaning
is, for every Man that is saved; to signify, that none are saved but through
Christ's Death, that his Death is the only Purchase of Salvation for any Man.
In the same limited Manner we must understand the same Term, Col. i. 28. We
preach Christ, warning every Man, and teaching every Man; that is, warning and
teaching every Man, to whom we have Opportunity to preach. So 1 Cor. iv. 5.
When the Lord comes to Judgment, every Man shall have Praise of God; that is,
every Man that is saved, or has been truly godly. Another Place of Scripture
which is brought in, to serve the Cause of Universal Redemption, is, 2 Pet. ii.
1. where the Apostle speaks, of some who should privily bring in damnable
Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves
swift Destruction. But the Apostle only speaks of the Lord's having bought
them, as what might have been hoped concerning them as well as others. The
Gospel Revelation of a Savior, that died to redeem Sinners, affords Ground to
all, to whom it comes, to hope, that his Death might have been designed for
them, as well as others, (though it was not intended for all and every one alike)
seeing it does not point out the Persons in particular, for whom he did not
intend the Benefits of his Death. And so, concerning these Persons here, the
Apostle mentions it as a high Aggravation of their Crime, that they should deny
that Redeemer, of whom they had no Reason to conclude to the contrary, but that
he had bought and redeemed them; when they had the same Ground for Hope, this
Way, that any others had, before they had the special Evidences of it in
renewing Grace.

Thus, I have considered some of the most material Passages of Scripture, which
are advanced in Favor of Universal Redemption. And I think any considerate
Person might see, from what has been said, that they come far short of
answering the Design they are advanced for. And any other Passages of the like
Strain, are to be understood the same Way. I have already mentioned a Place of
Scripture, John vi. 39. which proves, that all those, who were given to Christ
to redeem, he will surely save and finally glorify; unless it may be said, he
was unfaithful to his Charge: For it was the Will of him that sent him, that he
should lose none of them, but raise them up again at the last Day; and so put
the finishing Stroke to their full Glorification: Which confirms a particular
Redemption, in Opposition to a universal. In the 10th Chapter of John, our Lord
speaks of a peculiar People, which he had both among the Jews and Gentiles,
whom he calls his Sheep, for whom, he says, he laid down his Life. And John
xvii. he speaks of those whom the Father had given him, as distinct from the
rest of Mankind: For these, he says, he prays, and not for the World, ver. 9.
and ver. 19. he says, For their Sakes I sanctify myself; that is, it is for
their Sakes that I set myself apart to the Office and Charge of a Redeemer, and
devote myself to be a Sacrifice.

I shall only farther point out, as briefly as may be, some Absurdities
attending the Doctrine of Universal Redemption; and so dismiss it. If God sent
his Son to die for Sinners, with an equal View and Design to save them all by
it, intending as much the Salvation of one as another, without any Difference;
then it will follow, that those who are saved, are no more beholden or obliged
to God, than those that perish: And it was not from him that they were saved,
any more than others, but from themselves; and so he shall not have the Glory
of it; nay, he is rather beholden to them, for letting him have his End. Again,
it will follow, that God in a great Measure comes short of obtaining his End
and Design, and that in the greatest Affair that ever he undertook, so far as
we are acquainted: An End which he was so intent upon, that he spared not his
own Son, but delivered him up to the Death, that he might obtain it. The End
which he was intently set upon, was the Salvation of all the human Race, and
yet he is greatly disappointed of it; for great Numbers forever perish. Now how
can any Man reasonably persuade himself, that God really proposed to himself,
and intended such and End, and yet did not made it sure, and ascertain the
Attainment of it? Was it not easy to his Power to do it? Has he not the Hearts
of all Men in his Hand? Would it have done tham any Injustice, to have
persuaded them by almighty Power, and made them willing to be happy? But seeing
he has not done so, it is plain, that the Salvation of all, was not the End and
Design he had in view, in sending his Son into the World to die. Would he have
left a Design he had so much at Heart, upon the precarious Bottom (to say the
best of it that any can say) of the Fee-will of corrupted Creatures, that were
no way well affected toward him, but awfully disaffected? Nay farther, it will
follow, that it might have so happened, as that he would have entirely lost his
End altogether: For, for-all so seriously as he intended it, and was set upon
it; yet it seems he did not make it certain, no, not as to the Salvation of any
one Soul, but left it altogether to themselves. One would think by this, that
he was not very Intent upon it, for all the great Pretenses of some, by this
Doctrine, to magnify his Love and Good Will to Men. And it may be considered,
which Doctrine magnifies the Love of God most? That which renders the Salvation
of a considerable Number infallibly certain; or that which leaves it altogether
uncertain, as to any? leaving it entirely to the good Pleasure of their
depraved Wills? I believe it will be found, that more will be saved in that
Way, than would have been in this: For I think, upon this Score, none at all
would be saved. However, it is plain, that great Multitudes do finally oppose
and contradict this supposed Intention of God; and what hinders, but all the
rest might do so too, according to this universal Scheme; and so not so much as
one be saved after all; for all are alike opposite to the Way of Salvation, by
Nature? But you will say, perhaps, there was no Danger of such a great
Disappointment, and Frustration of God's End as this; for he fore-knew who
would comply with the Gospel and be saved; and so knew that he would not
altogether fail of his Design. But this is so far from clearing the Doctrine,
that it introduces a new Absurdity. For how can it be conceived, that God could
really intend, and design the Death of Christ, and the Benefit of it, for those
who he infallibly knew would never be Partakers of it? Is it not an Absurdity,
may not I say Impossibility, in the very Nature of the Thing? To what Purpose,
was the Death of Christ designed for them; or for what Advantage? Not to save
them, for that the Lord knew would never be: And every designing of an End,
includes in it some Degree of Expectation, which could not be in this Case. Was
it to purchase sufficient Grace for them, that so they might be saved if they
would? Well, but the Lord knew, that they would not make the saving Use of it;
and why then was it intentionally purchased for them; sure you will not say, it
was to make their Guilt and Punishment the greater? Let the Admirers of
Universal Redemption consider a little, how they will digest and solve these
Things. But to proceed,

The Opposers of the Doctrine of Absolute Decrees, argue farther against it,
from some Places fo Scripture, which they suppose declare a general Will, and
Desire in God, of the Conversion and Salvation of all Sinners; and how much he
would be pleased with it: Which they suppose, is contrary to his having
purposed not to give to some the Grace necessary and sufficient for their
Conversion, but to leave them to perish in their Sins. I shall a little
consider the principal passages which they advance to this Purpose, and show,
that they intend nothing contrary to this Doctrine. One of them is, 1 Timothy ii.
4. God will have all Men to be saved, and to come unto the Knowledge of the
Truth. If all Men here, be understood for every individual Man in the World;
then God's willing them to be saved, cannot mean his having willed and purposed,
that they shall be saved; for then they all would be saved, because he can
easily fulfill all his Purposes, and surely will do so. For his Counsel shall
stand, and he will do all his Pleasure, Isai. xlvi. 10. The Counsel of the Lord
stands forever, and the Thoughts of his Heart to all Generations, Psalm.
xxxiii. 11. But if the Words be taken in this unlimited Sense, the Meaning of
the Place must only be, that the Salvation of all Men, in the Way of Faith and
Holiness, would be a Thing very agreeable to the approving, and preceptive Will
of God; as he delights in Holiness, and the Happiness which is connected with
it; and that Sin, for which it is that any perish, is disagreable and hateful
to his holy Nature: And yet, all this is no Way inconsistent with his
determining to punish Sinners for their Sin. But I think it is plain, from the
Context, that by all Men here, we are to understand, Men of all Characters and
Degrees; for the Words are brought in as an Argument to encourage Christians to
pray for Kings, and for all that are in Authority. And in the same Sense, the
Term all Men, is intended in the first Verse, as I have made appear before.

Another Place is, 2 Pet. iii. 9. The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise;
but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that
all should come to Repentance. I think it is pretty manifest, that the Persons
the Apostle speaks of here, are the Elect of God: The Persons to whom he writes
these Epistles, are considered under that Character, in his first Epistle,
Chap. i. 2. he calls them Elect, according to the Foreknowledge of God the
Father, through Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience, and to the spinkling
of the Blood of Jesus Christ. And in the first Verse of this Chapter we are
informed, that he writes this second Epistle to the same, or same Sort of
Persons: And of the same he speaks in the Verse under our present
Consideration, joining himself, as being also an elect Person, with them;
saying, The Lord is long-suffering to usward; i. e. toward us, the Election
of his Grace, not willing that any, viz. of us, should perish, but that, we,
all should come to Repentance, and be called in. The Apostle's Design, in the
Words, is, to show the Reason of God's delaying to put an End to the present
State of this World, and bring on the general Judgment; in answer to the
Scoffers, that, he says, should be in the last Days, saying, Where is the
Promise of his Coming? For since the Fathers fell asleep, all Things continue
as they were from the Beginning of the Creation, ver. 3, 4. In answer, I say,
to these Atheistical Scoffs, he observes, that God had done as great, unlikely,
and unexpected Things already, as the shutting up the Scene of this World in
such a solemn Manner, though they wilfully neglected to take Notice of them. He
had not only, by the Word of his Power, created the Heavens and the Earth out
of Nothing at first, but a long Time after, had destroyed the Earth, and its
ungodly Inhabitants, by a Flood of Water: And so it was no incredible, nor
unlikely Thing, that he should, at last, burn it with Fire at the Day of
Judgment, and Perdition of ungodly Men; and notwithstanding it had stood so
long, in much the same State, after the People of God had spoke of this, as
what would surely be, he observes, that a long Space of Time with us, is but
little with God; and then says, The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise,
(as some Men count Slackness) but is long-suffering to usward, etc. that is,
The Lord's deferring the End of the World, and last Judgment so long, is not
through Forgetfulness, or careless Neglect of his Promise to that Purpose; but
the true Reason of it, is, that all his Elect may be brought in, not being
willing that any of them should perish, but that all should come to Repentance,
be converted and saved; and therefore he will not come to Judgment, at a Time
when there are any of them on the Earth, uncoverted; nor until the last of the
whole Number is sitted for Glory.

There is another Scripture, that is always brought in upon this Head of
Argument, Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11. Where the Lord declares, with the Solemnity of an
Oath, As I live, says the Lord God, I have no Pleasure in the Death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from his Way and live. When the Lord says, he
has no Pleasure in the Death of the Wicked; the plain Sense of the Words is,
that the Death and Misery of Sinners is not a Pleasure to him in itself, or for
its own Sake, merely as it is a Misery to the Creature. But this does not say,
but that their Death and Punishment may be agreeable and pleasing to him, under
other Considerations; as it is an Execution of Justice, and Manifestation of
his own Glory. If it were not so, Would he inflict Punishment upon any of them?
Would he displease and make himself uneasy? And when he says, That it is a
Pleasure to him, that the Wicked turn from his Way, and Live. The Meaning is,
that righteousness and Holiness in his Creatures, and the Happiness consequent
upon it, is the Object of his Approbation and Liking, a Thing, in itself,
agreeable and pleasing to his holy Nature. But this, sure, is no Proof, that he
equally and alike designed the Sanctification and Salvation of all Sinners. If
it proved any thing this Way, it would prove, that he disign'd it certainly for
them all, if his Power could effect it.

The Words of our Lord, Matthew. xxiii. 37. are often brought in upon this Head,
where he says of Jerusalem, How often would I have gathered thy Children
together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would
not! If we understand the Lord Jesus to speak here, of his Willingness to have
gathered them, with Reference to his divine Nature, as God, the Words only
prove, that Sinners Compliance with the Gospel, and turning to Holiness, is a
Thing, in itself, agreeable and pleasing to God's holy Nature; Holiness being
the Object of his Love and Complacence; that his Dealings with that People, in
the Course of his Ministry among them, tended in their own Nature to bring them
thus to their Duty; and that their Unbelief and Impenitency was owing to the
Perverseness and Corruption of their own Wills, as the Cause of it. But if we
suppose him to speak of his Willingness, merely as Man, in his human Nature,
then I see no Inconvenience in allowing, that it may signify an intense and
passionate Desire in him of their Conversion and Happiness: But surely no such
Passions, or uneasy long Desires, and especially for Things which will never be
effected, are to be ascribed to the divine Nature. For my Part, I cannot
apprehend what Sort of a Will and Desire, for the Conversion and Salvation of
all Men, it is, which those who deny absolute Predestination suppose to be in
God, any Way consistent with his Perfection: They suppose includes much more,
than that the Holiness and Happiness of his Creatures is a Thing in itself,
lovely and agreeable to him; that it is his preceptive and approving Will, that
they should be holy and consequently happy: which is very consistent with the
Doctrine they oppose, from this Topic of a general Will: And they cannot allow
it to include so much as a real Purpose, that all shall be sanctified and
saved; because then all would be so; which is contrary to Fact: Or else God's
Purpose would be frustrated, and he would come short of what he certainly
intended should come to pass, which is highly absurd. But they seem to fancy a
Sort of an uneasy Wishing and longing Desire in God, for that which
notwithstanding will never be; and if this be not to make God such a One as
ourselves, I know not what is: Does it no argue God to be subject to the
Weaknesses of Creatures? and not only so, but that he suffers himself to be
made uneasy, and to be crossed in his Desires, by that which he could easily
prevent? which is what no wise Man would allow in himself: And therefore, though
God may sometimes condescend to speak to Sinners in such Language as they use
to one another, when they would express the Greatness and Ardency of their
Desire for any thing; yet we are not hence to imagine, that there are any such
human Passions and Creature-Weaknesses in him: The Design of such Modes of
speaking in God is only to signify, how desirable and excellent a Thing it is,
in itself, for Creatures to love, to obey and honor him; and how much it is
both their Duty and Interest to do so: And the Reason why this is expressed in
such a Manner, as imports weak Passions in Men when they speak so, is, because
it is the most suitable Way of Dealing with such Creatures as we are, best
adapted to our Capacity and Condition; it is a Method that has the most
suitable Tendency in itself to work upon and prevail with rational Creatures,
expressing best to their Capacity the Excellency and Necessity of Holiness, and
the horrid hateful Nature of Sin; for though it is the supernatural Power of
God's Spirit, that prevails with any Sinners to be holy; yet, as a wise Agent,
he makes use of the most suitable and best adapted Means for that Purpose,
dealing with Men in a Way suited to their rational Nature, and human
Capacities. Thus it is we are to understand the various Expostulations and
Entreaties of God in the Scriptures.

As another Topic of Argument against the Doctrine of God's Decrees, the
Opposers of it seem to think, that all Men have sushcient Power to do that
which is required as necessary to Salvation, and with which Salvation is
certainly connected; or, at least, that they have sufficient Power to ensure to
themselves such supernatural Power as is necessary for that Purpose: And this
is what is commonly called Universal sufficient Grace. For the Support of this
Opinion, they refer to such Places of Scripture in which God commands all Men,
where the Gospel comes, to be holy as he is holy, to repent and believe in
Jesus Christ, to make themselves new Hearts, etc. Hence they argue, that all
have Power some Way to do these Things; because, they say, it would be unjust
for God to require more of Men than they can perform. To this I answer, That
these Men seem entirely to overlook, in this Way of Reasoning, the Ruin
brought upon the human Offspring, by the Fall and Apostasy of Adam, the
Covenant-Head and Representative of all Mankind: He indeed, until he sinned,
was furnished with sufficient Ability to do whatsoever God did, or ever should
require of him; at least, had he not sinned, his Ability would always have been
increased equally with his Obligations: There was a full Proportion between his
Power and the Law he was under. And so it would have been with all his
Posterity, had he fulfilled and Conditions of the Covenant; but as, by his
Transgression, they lost all Right and Title to that Happiness and Life of
Communion with God, which was secured to them in the Covenant, upon his
Obedience: so they lost God's moral Image, and the Power of holy Obedience; and
it was at God's free sovereign Pleasure to confer Happiness again, and the
Grace necessary to it, as he pleased: And as God was then under no Obligation
to afford Strength answerable to the Law, so neither was he obliged to bring
down the Requirements of his Law to the Level and Capacity of the fallen ruined
Creature: Though Man, by his own Default, has lost his Power of Obedience, that
is no Argument, that God must lose his Right and Claim: The Creature's Sin, and
Wretchedness thereby, cannot dissolve his Obligations of Duty to God: God's Law
must still remain the same, as a perfect and eternal Rule of Righteousness, let
Creatures change and alter as they will. If it be asked, For what End the Law
of God is set before us, and his Commands laid upon us in his Word, if we have
not Ability to fulfill? I answer, For various Ends: To teach us what is our Duty
to God; what we ought to be aiming at and endeavoring after: To show us our
Sins and Transgressions; For by the Law is the Knowledge of Sin, Romans iii. 20.
as the Crookedness of a Line is discovered by laying it to a strait one: To
teach us our utter Inability fo fulfill the Law, and obtain Life by our
Obedience; (for which Purpose our Savior referred One to the Keeping of the
Commandment, Matthew. xix. 17. whom he found big with the Conceit that he could
do much) that so we may see our Necessity of getting Righteousness and Strength
from Christ, a Mediator: And thus the Law is given, as a Schoolmaster to bring
us to Christ; it is a Means whereby the Lord brings in his Elect to the
Redeemer by Faith: And it is given as a Rule of Life to the renewed Children of
God, to direct them how they are to honor and glorify him.

If it be objected to the above Account, of Sinners Inability to do what is now
required of them under the Dispensation of the new Covenant, that Adam had not
a Power of Believing in a Redeemer, of repenting and renewing his Heart, as
having no need of it; and the Exercise of it being inconsistent with his State
of Innocence; and therefore we cannot be said to have lost it in him, seeing it
was not given him while he stood in the Character of our Representative. To
this i^ may be easily replied, That though he had not his Power for such Acts and
Purposes as these, in his innocent State; yet, had we, in our guilty State,
that Power restored, which he had, we would be able to believe in the Redeemer,
to repent, etc. The Impossibility of his putting forth such Acts, was not from
the Want of inherent Power, but the Inconsistency of them with his Condition:
It was inconsistent with his State of Innocence, to have had any Occasion for
administering Physic, to recover his Health; yet that is no Argument, that he
had not sufficient Ability for it.

I would just farther refer it to the Consideration of those, who offer this
Argument against God's Decrees, and yet, in the mean time, acknowledge, that no
Man in this Life can fulfill the Law of God perfectly, how they are consistent
with themselves: For herein themselves acknowledge, that God requires more of
Men, than they can now perform, since the Fall; and sure they will not own,
that it is so, and say, it is unjust too.

For farther Proof of this Universal Power or Grace, they urge the Invitations
of the Gospel to believe in Christ, and its Promises to such as do believe;
such as Isal. xlv. 22. Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the Ends of the
Earth: And Rev. iii. 20. Behold, I stand at the Door, and knock; if any Man
hear my Voice, and open the Door, I will come in to him, etc. Such Invitations,
they think, infer, that there is a Power in Man to comply with them, otherwise
they would be vain and needless. But this is a vain Argument; For though Sinners
are without Strength, through the Darkness of their Minds, and Obstinacy of their
Wills; yet such Invitations are needful, to show them their Duty, and the only
Way in which they can ever be happy; and to afford them a Ground and Warrant
for believing in Jesus Christ, and resting their Souls upon him for Salvation:
By these Invitations, and Promises to Believing, the holy Spirit encourages,
and persuades convinced Souls to close with Christ, as their Savior, and cast
themselves upon his Meditation and Atonement, with humble joyful Confidence.
The Spirit of God, by his Power, brings a Sinner to believe in Christ, in a Way
agreeable to his Nature as a reasonable Creature; and so makes use of the
Offers and Promises of the Gospel, as the Soul's Warrant for laying Claim to
Christ, as his Savior, and believing in him for his Salvation. Likewise, these
Invitations and Promises are of great use for the Comfort of true Believers,
showing that there is a sure Connection between Believing and Salvation. When
Moses tells the People of Israel, Deuteronomy. xxx. 19. That he had set Life and Death
before them, Blessing and Cursing, and bids them choose Life; The Words may be
easily understood in the same Sense with the forementioned Passages, to
signify, that there is a certain and inseparable Connection between true
Holiness and eternal Life, though this Holiness is the Effect of a supernatural
divine Power, exerted only in whom the Lord pleases: And the Lord proposes this
Holiness, which is connected with Happiness, to Sinners Choice, to import the
Reasonableness and Necessity of their choosing it; and that he may deal with
them in a Way agreeable to the Nature of reasonable Beings. But yet, I think it
is plain from the Context, that the Life and Death there spoken of, was
temporal Prosperity and Adversity; which Life was promised to that People, upon
their strict Adherence to the outward Prescriptions of the Law that was given
them: And it will be readily owned that they might thus choose and perform
Obedience without special renewing Grace: And, in this Sense, Righteousness and
Life are to be frequently understood in the Old Testament.

It is further argued, for this Universal Grace, from the Parable of the
Talents, Matthew. xxv. But we are not to understand by these Talents, Universal
sufficient Grace, whereby all Men are enabled to convert themselves, if they
will; and savingly to renew and change their Wills: But other Gifts and
Bounties of divine Providence, such as natural Endowments of Mind, good
Education, Health, worldly Goods, outward Gospel-Privileges, and the like;
which God distributes to Mankind in various Measures, as he pleases. Those who
made such Improvement of their Talents, signify the truly godly, who are
effectually renewed by God's Power, according to his Purpose. The Person that
made no Improvement, signifies unconverted Sinners, who do not sincerely love
and honor God. The Account taken of these Servants, at their Lord's Return,
and his different Retributions to them, according to their past Conduct, are
designed to teach us, that the Lord Jesus will surely come at last to Judgment,
that we must all appear before his Judgment Seat, to give an Account of the
Deeds done in this Life, and that our past Behavior here, both in Heart and
outward Practice will be the Rule, according to which the Sentence of Judgment
will pass upon us: Though the Reward of Happiness, to the Godly, will not be
given them for their Godliness, as the Cause of it; yet it will be given to
them only, who have been thus qualified and fore-prepared by the Lord for it;
and that, in different Degrees, according to their different Degrees of Care,
Zeal and Diligence in the Ways of God, after their Conversion. On the other
Hand, all the Ungodly shall be condemned to Punishment, according to the
Demerit of their Works; and to different Degrees of Punishment, according to
their different Deserts. And thus, the Works, the Dispositions and Conduct of
Men in this Life, will be the Rule, according to which the final Awards will be
made at the last Day to all Mankind, though not the meritorious or procuring
Cause of them to all, but only to the Wicked. These Things I take to be the
very Scope and Design of the Parable; and so the universal Men have no Service
at all to their Cause from it. It is mere trifling to ask, as some do, If the
Servant, that was punished, had made as good use of his Talent, as the rest did
of theirs, would not have been as well accepted? That is, whether finally
impenitent Sinners would not have been accepted of Jesus Christ, as well as
true Believers, and sincerely godly Persons, had they been true Believers, and
sincerely godly as well as they? I am free enough, to answer in the
Affirmative: Had they been such, it would have been a certain Evidence, that
they had been elected to Holiness and Salvation, as well as the others; for
true justifying and sanctifying Faith, is not of ourselves, it is the Gift of
God, given according to his Purpose and Grace, which was made sure to all
Believers in Christ Jesus, before the World began. But then the Question does
not at all touch the Matter in Debate, viz. Whether unrenewed Sinners have had
as sufficient inward Grace given them, to be true Believers and godly Persons,
as those who are really such. Considering that Sinners Impotency consists
chiefly in their Enmity, their Inability in the Opposition of their Wills to
God's Will, I think it is plain, that no Grace is sufficient, but that which is
actually effectual: Their Wills are not just in Equilibrio, in an even Balance
between Holiness and Sin, as much inclined to the one Side as the other, so as
that they might bring their Wills to a Compliance with, and Complacence in the
Ways of God, by their own Reason; or by the Help of some divine Affistances,
which they might also reject: But their Wills are strongly set against the
New Covenant Way of Salvation, and the holy Law of God, in its spiritual Nature
and Extent; and therefore, No Man can come unto Christ, except the Father draw
him, Joh. vi. 44.

Again, they argue in another Method from the general Calls, Invitations, and
Offers of the Gospel, reasoning after this Manner: It would, say they, be the
highest Instance of Dissembling and Deccit, for God to call Sinners to repent
and turn from their evil Ways, with such Appearance of real Sincerity and
Earnestaness, if he had before infallibly decreed, that a great many of them
should not repent and turn (not to communicate the Grace of Conversion and
Repentance to many, it should be.) And what greater Insincerity and Illusion,
say they, can well be imagined, than for God to make such a general, unlimited
Offer of Christ, and Salvation through him, as Rev. xxii. 17. Whosoever will, let
him take the Water of Life freely; when he has already purposed, not to give
Salvation to many? How can such an open Declaration agree with such a secret
Purpose? Would there not be a direct Opposition between his outward Expressions
and inward Sentiments? Which is drownright Falsifying and Hypocrisy.

But all this plausible Reasoning, on which some of the greatest Patrons of the
Arminian Scheme bestow a great Deal of Eloquence, is grounded on a mistaken
Apprehension of the Nature and true Import of these Calls and Gospel-Offers:
God's Calls to Sinners, to repent and turn to him, to believe in Christ, etc.
are only so many Significations of what is Sinners Duty, and what is agreeable
to God's holy Nature, pleasing and approveable in his Sight: These Calls do not
signify what is God's Purpose concerning Men, but what is their Duty to him;
and that he loves Holiness in his Creatures, that the righteous Lord loves
Righteousness: And so, in all such Calls and Commands, there is an entire
Agreement between God's Words, and his Will signified by them: For he does
indeed will these Things, as the Matter of Sinners Duty, and loves them, as
agreeable to his own holy Law. This just View of the many Calls of God in
Scripture to Sinners, for their Repentance, and Convertion to Holiness,
destroys all the Force of the Argument taken from them, as though they were
incosistent with God's secret Will and Purpose, to leave many in their Sins
without converting Grace; for they import Northing in their true Design
contrary to it. And when God condescends to use Anguments and Expostulations
with Sinners, about what he requires, it is, that be may deal with them (...)
reasonable Beings, and convert his Elect, in a Way agreeable to their rational
Nature.

As to the Offers of Christ made to all where the Gospel comes, and Promises of
Salvation, through him, to all such as truly believe in him: It is most certain,
that God does will and purpose to save all such as truly accept of his Son
Jesus Christ, and believe in him, as he is proposed and set forth, in the
Gospel Revelation of him; for he declares, that all such shall be saved: But
then, we are to consider this Faith in Christ as the Gist of God, according to
Ephesians. ii. 8. and a Grace of his powerful Operation or Working, Col. ii. 12. Ephesians.
i. 19. 2 Thessalonians. i. 11. bestowed only upon, and wrought only in those whom he
has chosen; and therefore called the Faith of God's Elect, Tit. i. 1. And thus,
the Promises of the Gospel run exactly parallel with the Election of Grace, and
do not import any thing contrary to it. Indeed, to say, that God does not
really design to save all who shall believe in Christ, not withstanding he has
declared that he will, were to impute the grossest Falsehood and Deceit to him;
but there is no such Thing in the Doctrine which the Argument is brought
against. It is true, the Offer of Christ, as a Savior, is made to all, to be
accepted and believed in, for their Salvation in particular, wherever the News
of the Gospel-Salvation is sent: But then, this Offer does not signify or
import, that God designed him, and the saving Benefits of his Death, equally
for all; but that, inasmuch as all have equal Need of him, and God has not
revealed, or any Way pointed out who they are, whom he has not chosen to
Salvation through him, so as they might be known either to themselves or others,
it is the great Duty of all, to accept of him with all their Hearts, according
to the Declarations concerning him in the Gospel, freely and willingly to
comply with the Way of Salvation through his Atonement, casting a fiducial
Dependence upon him, and him only, for their eternal Life; for which Faith, the
infallible Promise of Salvation, to all such as so receive him, is sufficient
Warrant and Encouragement. And it was necessary that the Offer should be thus
universal, when it wa^ not revealed, who in particular were elected to
Salvation through him, that so the Elect might be brought to believe in him, upon
a rational Ground and Foundation; for they could not know, that they were
chosen to Life, through him, more than any others, before their Believing; and
therefore, could not have had a Ground for Faith to go upon, were it not for
the Promise to whosoever believes, and the Declarations, that it is every one's
Duty cordially to comply, and be pleased with that Way of Salvation, through an
attoning Mediator; and upon the Encouragement of this Promise, to cast a
Reliance, and the whole Dependence of their Souls, for Salvation, upon him. In
this Manner it is, that the Offers of Christ in the Gospel, are general and
universal: Not importing, that he died alike for all, or that he was equally
designed for all, in the Purpose of God; but that, seeing none have any Reason
certainly to conclude against themselves, that they were rejected in the divine
Purpose; and seeing Acceptance and eternal Life, through Christ, is promis' to
all that believe; it is the Duty of all, with their whole Hearts, to embrace
him as he is proposed, and believe in him: And yet, none will so believe in him
but the Chosen of God, who are called according to his Purpose. And thus, as
God is entirely consistent with himself in the Case, so are the Ministers of
the Gospel consistent with themselves, in maintaining God's absolute Decrees,
and yet making such general Offers of Christ, as a Savior, to all that hear
them, ^alling upon them to accept of and believe in him, using Arguments with
them for that Purpose, and promising Life and Salvation, in his Name, to all
that truly comply with the Gospel, and believe in him: And though they don't know
the Elect of God among their Hearers, he does, and will apply this Gospel to
their Hearts, so as to bring them to believe in Christ, and become truly godly.
These Considerations, if duly weighed and attended to, I think, may be
abundantly satisfactory in this Case.

There is another Argument, commonly insisted on by those on the other Side of
the Question, taken from God's Appointment of a Gospel Ministry, Ordinances of
Worship, and Means of Grace in his Church, as if they were altogether vain and
useless, on Supposition of such eternal Decrees. According to the Calvinist
Doctrine of Predestination, (say they) it is quite needless for Ministers to
preach, and as needless for People to hear, or to perform any religious Duty
whatsoever; and the Reason is, because they cannot alter the Purpose of God
concerning them, whatever it be, do they well or ill; they will fare as well,
let them live as they list, as if they did never so well; and so they had even
as good take their Swing: Nay, it had been much better for all the Reprobate,
that they had never had the Privilege of the Gospel; because, according to the
Scripture, the Condemnation and Misery o those that perish, will be much
aggravated by it.

This is an awful Charge indeed; and if it be just, the Doctrine is certainly
most insufferable; which takes off all Restraints from the most profligate
Course of Life, farther than what proceed from our temporal Interest in this
World; and Arguments from private temporal Interest, do often sway more to the
most inhuman Crimes, than moral Honesty. But I hope to make it appear, that the
Objection is most false and groundless: And to this Purpose, let these few
Things be considered:

First, Supposing there were no Arguments for a pious godly Life, to be had
from our own eternal Interest; yet there are Reasons of another Nature, of
sufficient Weight and Force in themselves, to induce us to it, and engage us to
endeavor after it. Is not the great God, who is infinitely good and glorious,
worthy of the greatest Esteem, profoundest Subjection, and highest Adorations
of all the rational Creation? And has he not an inviolable Right and Claim to
these Things from us, as our Creator and Preserver? And is not Conformity to
God, and to obey and honor him, the greatest Honor and Glory of a created
Being? These Arguments, I know, have little Weight with apostate Creatures,
whose Understandings are darkened, and all their other Faculties wholly
corrupted; but that is not for Want of sufficient Weight in their own Nature:
Nothing can ever dissolve God's Title to the Homage and Obedience of his
Creatures.

Secondly, I would have two or three Particulars considered and weighed
together: First, that the Elect are elected to Salvation, through Sanctification
of the Spirit; whom he did predestinate, them be also called. And this
effectual Calling and sanctifying Grace, wrought in the heart by the holy
Spirit, is the certain Fruit and Evidence of eternal Election; whereby those
who are the Partakers of this Grace, may, and frequently do come to a
comfortable Satisfation, as to their Election of God.

Again, you are to observe, that the Elect themselves, before their Conversion
and effectual Calling, have no Notices or Evidences at all of their being
elected, more than others: which must needs be a very uneasy and distressing
Condition, when the Spirit of God touches the Conscience. And then, in the next
Place, let it be considered, that God has appointed the Preaching of the
Gospel, and other religious Exercises, such as, reading the holy Scriptures,
and other good Books, Prayer, etc, to be the Means whereby be ordinarily
converts and sanctifies his Elect, and affords them the comfortable Tokens of
his electing Love. He has appointed these Ordinances and Means, as the ordinary
Channels wherein to communicate his special Grace to those whom he has chosen.
Now if these Things be duly adverted to, I think it will be clear, that there
is Use, and great Use too, for the Preaching of the Gospel, and other Exercises
of Religion, in a Consistancy with God's absolute Decrees: And that there are
sufficient Reason, to engage Persons to a very careful Observance of them, and
of all the Commands of God; for the Ordinances of God are the Means which he
s^es fit in his Wisdom to make use of, for the Conversion and Sanctification of
his Elect, which Work of Grace is the only Evidence of our belonging to God, as
his elect People: And therefore one can hardly think, that any, but such as are
stupidly unconcerned about their Souls everlasting States, could reason in
earnest in the Strain of the Objection I am now upon: Surely, one that is any
Way duly thoughtful, about a Matter of such vast Moment as his eternal
Well-being, would readily think with himself to this Purpose; Oh, what would I
not give, to have some comfortable, distinguishing Evidences of being chosen of
God, and appointed to Life: Well, his Ways and Ordinances are the Means he uses
for this Purpose; the Channels in which he is wont to communicate his special
Grace to those he designs to save; I must wait upon, and look to him in that
Way of Hope, and keep at the Pool where he uses to come and heal dis^^ed Souls;
it may be, he will-some time meet with me, in his own Way, which he has
appointed for visiting his chosen, and fulfill in me all the Good-Pleasure of
his Goodness, and the Work of Faith with Power, and cause me to rejoice in his
Love. These Ways of Religion are not only the Ways in which there is only
reasonable Ground of Hope to meet with such Blessings, but they are the
Commands and Institutions of God, recommended with his awful Authority; and
therefore, to disregard and neglect them, will be to disobey and contemn God
still the more, and also will expose me to a more awful Punishment. Consider
now, if this be not a just and right Way of Reasoning in the Case: Nay, I am
convinced, that the Calvinist Doctrine, rightly understood, and really
believed, will make People much more careful, serious and diligent Observers of
the Ways of God, than the contrary Doctrine will; for it tends much more to
bring them to a solemn solicitous Concern of Heart about their eternal State,
and consequently to make them more earnest in all the most hopeful, probable
Ways of meeting with Satisfaction about it.

Thirdly, Though it is true, that such as are rejected in the Purpose of God,
will never be converted in the Use of all the Means of Grace; yet, seeing they
do not know the secret Purpose of God concerning them, but have the same Reason
to entertain Hopes that they may be chosen to Life, that any other unconverted
Persons have, it would be a high and provoking Contempt of God for them, to
neglect the Ordinances, which he has appointed as Means, for the communicating
special Grace and sweet Consolation to his Elect; and which he therefore, by
his sovereign Authority, requires all, who have the Opportunity, to attend
upon: And they shall find it, if guilty of it, brought into the Account against
them, at the great Day, when every Man shall be judged according to his Works,
and they shall receive, proportionably, the greater Punishment.

Fourthly, As to the Elect converted, their Hearts are so renewed, as to love
God above all, and to make Obedience to his Will their hearty Choice; Believing
in Jesus Christ, his Love is shed abroad in their Hearts, and sweetly
constrains them to serve and honor him, to whom they are under such endearing
Engagements. The COnsideration of Go's having elected them to eternal Glory,
when he might justly have rejected them as well as any others; the Hope and
Prospect of that eternal Glory with him, and the Consideration of his having
sent his Son to answer the Law for them, and suffer in their Room, that they
might be delivered from deserved Misery, and made happy in the Enjoyment of
himself forever; their Apprehensions of his Glory and infinite Excellency in
himself, and his Right in and over them as his Creatures; all these Things are
powerful Arguments with them, to love and praise God; it is their Desire and
Delight to glorify and honor him. Moreover, the Lord Jesus takes them for his
peculiar Charge; it is a Part of his Office, as Mediator, to bring them safe to
Glory through all Dangers; accordingly, his holy Spirit dwells in them, as a
Sanctifier and Comforter: thus they are engaged to God, in the Way of Holiness,
by the most inviolable Cords and loving Bands: So that the Doctrine of absolute
Election is far from destroying Holiness of Life: It is a strong Excitement to
it, in all the renewed Children of God, who love him, when they are enabled to
see the hopeful Evidences of their own Election. And therefore, such as say (as
some, no less wickedly than foolishly, do) that if they were persuaded of the
Truth of the Doctrine of Predestination, they would never be at any Pains or
Care to serve God more, had just as good say plainly, they have no Love to God,
and that they are entire Strangers to the Nature of true Godliness.

Fifthly, Consider, the Method of Reasoning in the Objection, is such as you
would not allow to be just, in other Cases of the like Nature. Can you think,
it would have been just Reasoning in King Hezekiah to say, that because the
Lord had ordained he should live Fifteen Years longer (2 Kin. xx. 6.) he had no
more need of either Food or Physic? The Prophet Isaiah was of another Mind,
when he ordered a Lump of Figs to be laid to the Boil, ver. 7. This shows us,
that God brings about his Purposes in the Use of suitable Means, and that it is
therefore necessary for us to observe them. Was ever anything more absolutely
and positively fixed in the Purpose of God, than the Time and Manner of
Christ's Death? John vii. 30. and viii. 20. and xii. 32, 33. Was he therefore
unwise for using any Means for his Preservation from the Hands of his Enemies?
Of which we have frequent Instances, Joh. viii. 59. Luke iv. 29, 30. Joh. xi.
53, 54. Was St. Paul so inconsistent with himself, when, though God had told him,
that both he and all that were in the Ship with him, should be saved through all
the Hazards of their Voyage; yet, when the Ship-men were about to go off in the
Boat and leave the rest in the Distress, he said to them, except these abide in
the Ship, ye cannot be saved? Acts xxvii. In like Manner, it may be as truly
and reasonably said, that except the Elect be converted and sanctified, they
cannot be saved from Hell; because of the certain Connection God has made
between the Means and the End. And none have any Reason to expect converting
Grace, while they profanely neglect the Means of Grace.

As to the latter Clause of the Objection, that the Non-elect, who have had the
Opportunity of the Gospel, will be more miserable than if they had not: I
answer, It is very likely it will be so, with the most of them: But then, I
think, if they improved the Gospel, as they might do, though they would not be
converted and saved by it, yet they would not be the more, but perhaps the less
miserable for it. If it be inquired, For what End the Gospel is sent to such as
God has not purposed to save? I answer, It is chiefly for the Elect's Sake that
are among them; that thereby they may be brought in to Christ, and prepared for
the heavenly Glory.

I shall now conclude the Answer to the whole Objection with a general Remark
or two. Seeing the Doctrine, in itself, does not take away our Obligations to a
religious Life, but affords sufficient Motives and Arguments for it, then it is
no Argument against the Truth of the Doctrine, though some ungodly Men should
abuse it to a Liberty to sin: Other Doctrines of the Gospel are liable to the
same abuse, as well as this. Thus St. Paul observes, that some might be ready
to infer from the Gospel-Doctrine of Justification, as he laid it down, that
they might continue in Sin, that Grace might abound, Romans vi. 1. That some
would be ready to object against him, that he made Christ the Ministor of Sin,
i.e. one that gave Liberty and Encouragement to Sin, Gal. ii. 17. And that some
did actually affirm that he said, Let us do Evil, that Good may come, Romans iii.
8. Again, The Lord Jesus, who came to destroy the Works of the Devil, and
purchase to himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works, will have his
End; though some Men, of corrupt Minds, should abuse his Truth, to the awful
Aggravation of their Guilt in the Day of his appearing. And I think we have
little Encouragement, to go to the Arminian Scheme for the Advancement to true
practical Religion, if we confider what Advancement this Way, it has produced
since it came in Fashion.

What is farther brought as an Objection, by some, I think is hardly worth
taking Notice of, viz. That some will be apt to take Occasion, from the
Doctrine of Predestination, to live in a slothful Negligence and Security, from
a Presumption that they are elected, and so cannot miss of Salvation: And
others will be apt to fall into Despair, from a fearful Apprehension, that they
are not elected. As I hinted already, we are to distinguish between the Abuse
unreasonably made of a Doctrine, and its natural Tendency, in itself: And that
is there in this Doctrine, that leads to either of these wide Extremes? How can
it lead any to a groundless Presumption and slothful Negligence; when,
according to it, none have. Reason to persuade themselves they are elected,
until they are renewed and sanctified; and then they cannot be careless about
the Honor and Obedience due to God? How shall they that are dead to Sin, live
any longer therein? Romans vi. 2. All the Gospel-Arguments to a Life of Holiness,
and this of their Election among the rest, do then effectually engage their
Hearts to it. Indeed, if they knew their Election before their Conversion,
before they believed in Christ and loved God, no doubt they would abuse it to
Sloth and Licentiousness, till God changed their Hearts: But they have no sure
Evidence of their Election till they are brought to a better Disposition. And
how can it bring any to Desperation, when they cannot know that they are not
elected? For Persons to conclude positively, that they are appointed to
Destruction, is to conclude without Reason, and Pretending to know the
unreveal'd Secrets of God's Breast.

Some think the Words of the Lord Jesus, Luke xix. 42. are contrary to this
Doctrine; where he says of Jerusalem, If thou had known, in this thy Day, the
Things that belong to thy Peace! but now they are hid from thine Eyes. Which
Words, they suppose, import, that the Inhabitants of the City had, before that
Time, had such inward Assistance from God, as put it in their Power to convert
themselves; but which were then forever withdrawn from them, for their Abuse of
them, so that their Case was then beyond all Hope. And in this same Sense they
suppose, that all Men have a Day of Grace, in some Part of their Life, or, as
they rather choose to term it, a Day of Visitation. But this Opinion is without
any Foundation in the Text: How can the Words signify, that their Day there
spoken of, was a Time in which they had sufficient inward Grace; when they
clearly imply, that they did not so much as know the Things that belonged to
their Peace in that Day? The true Import of our Lord's Words is, That they had
had, in that outward Means of Conviction, that he was the true Messiah;
sufficient to prevail with them, as rational Creatures, to acknowledge and own
him as such; notwithstanding of which, they rejected and persecuted him, and
would, in a little Time put him to Death; for which they should, before long,
be punished with utter Ruin, both of their City and Nation, as it follows lows
in the next Words. And so the Words also signify, that there was less
Probabilty and reasonable Hope of their being converted to God, after all such
Means had been so long quite lost upon them, than there was before, according
to God's ordinary Way of Working.

And now I have gone through all the contrary Arguments and Objections, of any
Consequence, that I know of; and upon the whole, must desire the careful
Reader, seriously to look back and consider, if the Doctrine of absolute
Predestimation, as it has been stated and represented, be not entirely agreeable
to Reason, clearly founded on Scripture, and perfectly consistent with every
Part of it, and consequently a most certain Truth of God. Let us not be
wilfully resolved against admitting reasonable Evidence, but quit ourselves
like Men, and use our Understandings, with humble Application to God, on whom
all Creatures are dependant, for a right Judgment and a sound Mind. Don't say,
you will not believe it, just because you don't like it: That is both the Shame
and Crime of a reasonable Being; and the greatest Folly in the World; for if it
be a Truth, it will be so, whether you like it and believe it, or not. And let
us also consider, what is the proper Use, and native Tendency of the Doctrine:
And so, let us humbly lie low, as guilty Criminals, before the Footstool of
God's Sovereignty, acknowledging his Right to dispose of us, for Life or Death,
as he pleases. Let us not be stupidly easy in our Minds, without the Experience
of supernatural, sanctifying Grace in our Hearts, the only Evidence of our
Election, and Mean of solid Comfort, without which no Man shall see the Lord.
Let us seek and long for it, in all the Ways of God's Commands and Ordinances,
where it is most likely to be found; and not treasure up greater Loads of Wrath
to ourselves, against the Day of Wrath, by Disobedience to the great Lawgiver's
Authority. Let such of us, as God has given the Tokens of his special Love
unto, in our Sanctification, give the Glory and Praise to him alone: And still
endeavor, to live answerable to the Obligations of such wonderful,
distinguishing Love and Grace. Let us give up all Confidence of our own
Ability, and Dependence on our own Righteousness and good Doings, to entitle us
to Happiness; casting ourselves only on the Mediation and Atonement of the Son
of God, as he is revealed and proposed in the Gospel; seeking for that living
Faith in him that brings Joy and Peace to the Soul, that works by Love and the
freest Obedience. Such as these are the Things, which this Doctrine naturally
leads to; and so, it agrees to the great Design of God in the New Covenant, the
Illustration of the greatest Glory of his Free Grace, in the Salvation of
guilty Sinners: Whereas the contrary Scheme defaces and sinks it down: But God
will have the Glory, and it is sit he should: The whole Glory, from first to
last, he has secured to himself. As he laid the Foundation of Sinners Salvation
in pure, free, and rich Grace, so, at the la^^ Day, he will bring forth the
Head-stone thereof with Shoutings, crying, Grace, Grace unto it, Zech. iv. 7.

FINIS.
Just published, And sold by B. FRANKLIN, price, One Shilling.
THE distinguishing Marks of a Work of the Spirit of God. Applied to that
uncommon Operation that has lately appeared on the Minds of many of the People
of this Land: With a particular Consideration of the extraordinary
Circumstances with which this Work is attended. A Discourse delivered at
New Haven, Sept. 10. 1741, being the Day after the Commencement; and now
published at the earnest Defire of many Ministers and other Gentlemen that
heard it, with great Enlargements. By Jonathan Edwards, A. M. Pastor of the
Church of Christ at Northampton. With a Preface by the Rev. Mr. Cooper of
Boston.


