Mr. Ashley's SERMON At the ORDINATION of Mr. John Norton.

The united Endeavors and earnest Prayers of Ministers and People, to promote
the great Design of the Ministry. Recommended in a SERMON Preached at
Deerfield, Nov. 25. 1741. Upon the gathering a Church for Fall-Town, and the
ORDINATION of Mr. John Norton, A Pastor to the Church there.

By Jonathan Ashley, A. M. And Pastor of the Church in Deerfield.

To which is added, The CHARGE given by the Reverend Mr. BENJAMIN DOOLITTLE.
And a Right Hand of FELLOWSHIP, by the Reverend Mr. JOSEPH ASHLEY.

Dan 12 3. And they that be wise shall shine as the Brightness of the
Firmament; and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and
ever.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queenstreet. 1742.

An Ordination Sermon.
ROMANS XV.30. Now I beseech you, Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ Sake, and
for the Love of the Spirit, that ye strive together with me, in your Prayers to
God for me.


THAT same Spirit of Pride and Malice, which the Pharisees manifested toward
our blessed Lord himself, whilst fulfilling his Ministry in the Flesh,
prevailed very much against his Church after his Death, and Ascension into
Heaven; wherefore the Church of Christ at Jerusalem was greatly oppressed, and
many were afraid to unite themselves to it, for fear they should fall under the
Displeasure of the Rulers; and especially were the Rich and Great unwilling to
hazard their All for the Sake of Religion, so that the Number of Believers
consisted chiefly of the poorer Sort, who were not well able to support the
Gospel. St. Paul therefore the Apostle to the Gentiles, endeavors to stir up a
Spirit of Charity amongst them; and tells them, they were Debtors to the Jews,
and ought to give them of their carnal Things, since they had so largely
received of their spiritual Things, ver. 27. (Such was the Temper, and such the
primitive Spirit in the Days of the Apostles; and would to God there was more
of it handed down to us in these remote Ages.) And when the Apostle had
obtained a Collection among the Gentiles, and was going up to Jerusalem to
deliver the same to the Saints, he writes this Epistle from Corinth to Rome;
wherein he informs the Christians there, that when he should Journey into
Spain, he purposed to come to them, and assures them he should come to them in
the Fullness of the Blessings of the Gospel of Christ, ver. 29. And therefore he
beseeches them to strive in Prayer for him to God. In the Words we may observe,

1. The Duty recommended, and this is striving. And he lets them know he was
engaged in it himself. Strive together with me. He does indeed tell us, 2 Timothy
2.24. That it is not lawful for a Servant of the Lord to strive. But there he
uses a different Word (Machesthai) which signifies to contend in Anger and with
Weapons: But the Word here rendered strive, is ( Agonisasthai) to be in an
Agony, or to agonize; and the same Word is used, Luke 13.24.

2. The Manner of striving; and that is, in Prayer: in which we are to be in an
Agony. Thus Jacob wrestled in Prayer, Genesis 32.24. So Christ himself was in an
Agony in Prayer, Luke 22.44. And Epaphras labored fervently in Prayer, Col.
4.12. Our Prayers should all be fervent and inwrought Prayers.

3. What it is the Apostle urged them thus earnestly to strive for in Prayer;
and it was, that he might come unto them in the fullness of the Blessing of the
Gospel of Christ; that he might come to them with Joy by the Will of God, and
be refreshed with them, verses 29, and 32.

4. The Motives to this Duty of earnest Prayer for him. And they are the Lord
Jesus Christ's sake, and the Love of the Spirit. As if the Apostle had said; be
it so you have no Love for me, yet if you have any Desire to advance the
Kingdom of your Lord; and have any Desire to feel the blessed Influences of the
Spirit upon your own Hearts, and see the Operations thereof upon others, then
pray for me, that my Ministry may be prospered.

Hence the DOCT. That it greatly concerns both Ministers, and People, to unite
their earnest Endeavors, and most fervent Prayers to God, that the great Ends
and Purposes of the Ministry may be answered.

When our Lord had purchased a Church here with his own Blood, and was about to
ascend up on high; he did not leave it comfortless; but sent down his Holy
Spirit, which wonderfully filled the Hearts of his People: nor did he leave his
Church without Means and Helps for it is Growth and Increase; but gave Gifts to
Men, Ephesians. 4.8. He was pleased to constitute an Order of Men to teach and build
Men up in the Faith, and graciously has promised them his Presence to the End
of the World.

Now, do we consider what their Business is, who it is that sends them forth to
it, and how they must e're it be long, render an Account to him: how does it
concern them in an especial Manner to be fervent in Spirit serving the Lord?
Mankind are ready to think the Work of the Ministry is an easy Employment, very
much freed from all Difficulties; and many have envied them their Ease; yea it
is to be feared some have left their secular Employments, and turned into the
Ministry, that they might indulge greater Sloth and Idleness: But such Men are
grossly ignorant of the sharp Conflicts and severe Agonies, which attend a
faithful Discharge of the Ministry. Oftentimes Earth and Hell unite against
them.

Wherefore a People are not to look upon themselves altogether unconcerned
about the Ministry; whether it be succeeded or not; but must do all in their
Power to promote the great Designs of it: they must do nothing to oppose, and
hinder it themselves; and when they see it laboring under Difficulties, and
Oppositions, they may not sit still, and leave Ministers to grapple with them;
but must appear for their Help, and say to them as the People once did, to
Ezra, Chap. 10.4. Arise, for this Matter belongs unto thee; we also will be
with thee, be of good Courage and do it. It is of great Concern, that a People
as well as Ministers do what they can to forward the Ministry.

But in handling this Doctrine I propose,

First, To show what it is that Ministers and People are to endeavor after and
pray earnestly for.

Secondly, Point out the Manner in which they are to seek the Advancement of
the Ministry.

Thirdly, Give some Reasons of the Doctrine.

Lastly, Apply the Truth to Ministers and People.

First then, I am to show what it is Ministers and People are to endeavor
after and pray earnestly for.

And in general, it is the Glory of God by the Salvation of Men in the Way of
the Gospel. The Glory of God is the great End of our Creation, and it is what
we should always aim at in our Actions. As we are Men we should endeavor so to
live that God may be honored by us: and as we are Ministers and Christians we
are especially concerned to promote the Honor and Glory of God, by seeking our
own, and the Salvation of others, in that Way revealed by Christ in the Gospel:
And in order to this,

1. Ministers must strive and even be in an Agony, till Christ be formed in
their own Souls, and the Souls of their Hearers.

Men are not always converted when they enter into the Ministry: many Instances
there have been of their Conversion by their own Ministry. But if this be the
Case of any Ministers not to be converted, how should they cry to God Day and
Night for pardoning and sanctifying Mercy? And give no Peace to themselves till
they are born of the Spirit of God: lest whilst they preach the Gospel of
Christ to others, they be a Castaway themselves, 1 Cor. 9.27. How should they
wrestle in Prayer till they know the Work of God upon the Heart, and can
feelingly pity, and travail in Birth with others? And when this happy Change
is effected in their own Souls; how should they strive and agonize in Prayer
till Christ be formed in the Souls of their Hearers? Gal. 4.19.

And if Ministers have ever felt the Terrors of the Law, and experienced the
Comforts of God's Spirit, they cannot be easy till their People are bro't out of
a State of Sin and Death into the Favor of God, they will not rest till they
have rescued them from the Hands of the Devil, and introduced them into the
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ministers must take much Pains for the
Conversion of their Hearers; and especially if at any Time they perceive a good
Work begun in their Souls: they should never give over till it end in a thoro'
Conversion to God.

And at the same Time that Ministers of the Gospel are travailing in Birth for
their own and the Souls of others, a People must join with them and pray
earnestly for them. Have any of you an unconverted Minister, you may not reject
him even for that; you have no such Warrant from the Word of God; to do this
would be to impeach the Wisdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, who commanded the
Hearers to observe and do all that the Scribes and Pharisees taught them. Mat.
23.2, 3. And it would be to make your selves wiser than the Wisdom of God, who
chose one to the Apostleship whom he knew was in a State of Nature; and at that
very Time foresaw he would lift up his Heel against him.

Your Duty in such a Case is to pray earnestly to God for him; that he may be
made of God a faithful experimental Minister of Jesus Christ. And is your
Minister laboring for the Conversion of you or yours, can you neglect striving
with him, 'till such a blessed Work be effected in you?

2. Ministers and People are unitedly to endeavor to uphold and promote real
Piety and Godliness among themselves.

Ministers must strive to be exemplary themselves, to be Patterns of Patience,
Holiness and heavenly Mindedness; they must resist all Temptations to Lewdness
and Vanity. It is a great Reproach to Religion when Men, who bear the Character
of Christ's Ambassadors, give themselves up to Sensuality, and have no
Government over their Passions and Appetites. But this has been unhappily
sometimes the Case to the great Dishonor of Christ. Would we be Ministers of
our ascended Lord and glorified Redeemer, we must avoid every Thing, which
tends to bring our selves and his Doctrines into Contempt.

And all such as profess themselves Christians must be very watchful over
themselves, and walk circumspectly, not as Fools but as Wise, redeeming the
Time, Ephesians. 5.15, 16. They must avoid all Appearances of Evil, and live up to
the Character they sustain. Nor is it enough here, that Ministers and People
are externally sober and religious; but they must keep up the Life and Power of
Godliness, as well as the Form of it, 2 Timothy 3.5.

And do Ministers and People at any Time observe Religion dying, how should
they strive together, to revive it? Is any Sin prevailing and growing rampant;
they must awake to put a Stop to it, and face it down: It is not enough that
Ministers exert themselves; but a People must also join their strongest
Endeavors and most servent Prayers: they must strengthen the Hands, and
encourage the Hearts of Ministers; as they in Ezra 10.4. forecited.

3. Ministers and People are concerned to do all in them lies to preserve Peace
and good Order amongst themselves. Christ's Blessing to his Church was Peace.
Joh. 14.27. And the Gospel often enjoins Peace upon the Followers of Christ.
Hence we are commanded to live peaceably as much as possible, Romans 12.18. and
to follow the Things which make for Peace, Romans 14.19. And Peace amongst a
People is very necessary in order to the flourishing of Religion: The Spirit of
God will not dwell in the midst of War and Contention. How watchful therefore
should Ministers and People be that they don't fall into Strifes and
Animosities? Satan is always ready to cast in Bones of Contention: Ministers
must strive so to live that they may give none Offense to any; and that Satan
may have nothing to improve against them to destroy their Usefulness: And a
People must avoid all Occasions of Contention, by living in Love, by bearing
with, and forgiving one another. And is any Feud springing up, how does it
concern us all to quench the Coals?

4. Ministers and People must unite their Endeavors and Prayers that the
Doctrines of Christ may be preserved pure and unmixed with Errors. We are all
bound earnestly to contend for the Faith, Jude 3. And especially should it be
of a great Concern to such, as are appointed to teach the Truth to others, to
be well grounded themselves in the Truth. Ministers may not indifferently
embrace any Tenets; thinking it no Matter so their People are easy with them;
but they must examine the Truth, and when they are well instructed in it, must
teach it to others: and they are commanded to convince Gainsayers, Tit. 1.9.
And is any Heresy springing up at any Time, they must make a vigorous
Opposition; and a People must assist them herein, lest the Corruption become
epidemical, and prove fatal to the Souls of many.

So also it equally concerns Ministers and People to preserve the Worship of
God unmixed with the Inventions and Superstitions of Men. Moses in building the
Tabernacle, was to follow exactly the Pattern shown him in the Mount: So we in
all our Worship should pattern after the Mind of God revealed in his Word. We
must keep up a holy Jealousy for God's Worship, and be always ready to rescue
it from the Impositions of Men, which however pleasing they may be to carnal
Reason, yet are condemned by God, and unsafe for us.

5. Ministers and People must do all they can to support Christ's Authority in
his Church, that his Laws and Government may take Place upon Transgressors.
That Christ has left Authority in his Church is certain, Mat. 18. and 1 Cor. 5.
In whose Hands it is reposited, I shall not now attempt to determine; nor is it
necessary it should be decided, would Ministers and People assist and
strengthen one another, and both do what in them lies to reclaim Sinners and
bring them to Repentance; but so long as Ministers and People are jealous of
one another, and all they aim at is to engross the Power into their own Hands;
and refuse to strengthen one another, Things will grow worse and worse if
possible. It is a Reproach to Christians, that there is scarce so much as a
Shadow of Government in the Church; and it is so hard a Matter to bring
Offenders to humble themselves: and obstinate Men cannot be brought to submit
to Order. Happy would it be, would Ministers and People unite to recover the
sinking Authority of Christ in particular Churches; since we cannot have any
Help from Councils of Churches: Authority is as necessary in a Church as in a
Kingdom: and the more this sinks, the more will Religion die with it. Ministers
therefore must bear a Testimony against Offenders; must boldly call them to an
Account; and a People must strengthen a Minister's Hands and encourage his
Heart herein; and may not justify the Wicked, as is too commonly the Case.

6. It concerns Ministers and People to endeavor to support the Honor and
Credit of the Ministry. However a corrupt and degenerate Age may despise Men of
a sacred Character; yet certainly the Work of the Ministry is the most
honorable Employment in the World: and Christ assures us, that such as despise
them despise him, Luke 10.16. He will have them esteemed highly for their Works
sake, 1 These. 5.13. and accounted worthy of double Honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. And
when we consider how much the Success of the Ministry depends upon the Esteem
Men have of Ministers themselves, shall not both they and a People do all they
can to advance their Credit and Reputation? They must themselves live so holy
and exemplary, that none may have any Reason to Censure and Reproach them. They
must approve themselves to the Consciences of Men. Their Lives and
Conversations must be such as will command Reverence from Men: But then
Ministers are Men of like Passions, and subject to like Temptations with other
Men, Act. 14.15. And if they do any Thing inconsistent with their Character,
and Calling; a People must bear with their Infirmities, overlook, and cover
their Failings. God has guarded their Reputation better than any Men's whatever,
1 Timothy 5.19. How afraid then should you be to speak Evil of them, as is the
common Practice of Mankind? As though they hired them into the Ministry, to let
loose reproachful Words of them? But notwithstanding all the Care God has taken
to preserve the Reputation of Ministers, how ready are Men to spread every
Failing they are guilty of to the greatest Distance? But when Ministers are
thus wounded in their Reputations, their Usefulness is greatly destroyed.

And in order to your upholding the Credit of the Ministry, you must support
them honorably who labor for your Souls* God commanded that the Ox which
treads out the Corn should not be muzzled, Deuteronomy. 25.4. Which the Apostle
applies to the present Case, 1 Cor. 9.9, 10. And he lets us know there is the
same Reason they who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel; as they who
attended upon the Altar should be Partakers of the Altar, Verses 13, 14. But it
is certain, the Priests under the Law were allowed by God a vastly greater
Maintenance than Men are willing to allow Ministers of the Gospel. It is a vain
Imagination some Men have, that if Ministers are kept poor and dependant, they
will be more faithful, that they may not be rejected by the People: This is the
Way to make them Servants to Men's Humors, instead of Servants to their
Salvation; if they are kept mean and low, they will not have Courage to reprove
Men boldly, and face down their darling Sins: their Strength is not the
Strength of Stones, nor their Flesh Brass, Job 6.12. And if they are kept poor
and dependant, when Troubles arise and Men evil entreat them, they are ready to
sink, and know not how to persist in their Work. And it is to be feared this
has overborn and wasted the Spirits of some of the faithful Servants of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Secondly, I am to show in what Way and Manner Ministers and People are to
endeavor to promote the great Ends of the Ministry.

And the particular Way the Apostle points out to us all is Prayer: Yet we are
not to suppose this is the only Method Ministers and People are to use, for the
Light of Nature, and the Word of God it self, will teach us to add to Prayer
all reasonable Means and Endeavors; but as we are entirely dependant upon God
and Christ for our Salvation, and can do nothing of our selves; so nothing is
more reasonable than this, that we should make known all our Wants to God, and
commit all our Cares to him by Prayer; He alone can prosper our Endeavors, and
grant us our Desires. And especially should Ministers of Christ be frequent in
this Duty of Prayer; they are altogether of themselves insufficient for this
Work, and all their Sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. And how earnestly should
they implore upon their Knees the compassionate Presence of their Lord, and the
gracious Influences of his Spirit, to conduct them into the Paths of Truth, and
save them from the endless Labyrinths of Error? That he would Support and
Comfort them under all the great Difficulties and Discouragements they meet
with in their Work? How should they agonize in Prayer, and plead for the
Influence of the Spirit in all their more private or public Services? That
both in their Studies, and in the Congregation they may approve themselves to
God, and be faithful Ministers of the New Testament? They must also be much in
Prayer for their People; must carry all their Cases to God. They must confess
and bewail their Sins before God, and entreat God to spare them, Joel 2.17. Yea
they must do this, when God seems to be ready to destroy them: Ministers may
not hide themselves in the Day of God's Anger. Ministers must plead with God
for all the Mercies their People want; and especially for the Graces of his
Holy Spirit upon them. Ministers must be well acquainted with the State of
their Flocks, Prove. 27.23. That they may suit their Prayers to their various
Circumstances.

And at the same Time that Ministers are thus wrestling in Prayer, a People
must also lift up holy Hands to God, and labor earnestly in Prayer for their
Ministers and themselves. It is not enough that you put up some cold Petitions
for your Ministers on Lord's Days; and yet perhaps this is more than many, who
would be accounted Christians, do. You must wrestle in Prayer for them, that
God would be with them; direct, assist, succeed and prosper them in their Work;
and this should be Matter of your daily Prayer, both in the Closet and Family;
so also how earnest must you be in Prayer for your selves, that God would keep
you from Sin, and guide you in the Paths of Life and Peace.

But as Ministers and People stand in different Relations to one another, it
concerns them to strive in different Ways to forward and succeed the Ministry.

1. Then, as to Ministers they must take much Pains to be furnished with
Knowledge for their Work. They must give themselves to reading, and attend
continually upon these Things, 1 Timothy 4.13, and 15. That they may handle the
Word of God skilfully, and be Workmen that need not to be ashamed, 2 Timothy 2.15.
They must convince Gainsayers, Tit. 1.9. and give to every one his Portion in
due Season; which they never can do unless they are Men of Knowledge and
acquainted with Learning of diverse Sorts. It is in vain for Ministers to
pretend they need not take Pains for their Discourses; and that the Spirit of
God will suggest Truths while they are speaking. We are not so to expect the
Assistance of the Spirit at the present Day. We must search out acceptable
Words, Eccl. 12.10. However Men of such a Stamp who despise humane Learning and
Study may be admired and followed when Men are over heated with Zeal; it is
certain they cannot last long; and in a little Time their Folly will be known
to all Men; and the World will as much despise them, as now they admire and
caress them. A Minister may at some Times have a Call to enter into the Desk
with but little previous Meditation and Preparation; but always to do this, is
Presumption, and inexcusable Arrogance.

And while we are composing our Sermons, we must endeavor to suit them to the
Consciences of Men, and not to their itching Ears: We must strive for such
Words as will awaken Men's Hopes and Fears, and make them engaged for the
Salvation of their Souls; and not study for polished Words and strains of
Rhetoric, which will soar above Men's Understandings, and make no lasting
Impression upon their Souls.

And not only must Ministers strive to compose their Sermons well* but must
take Pains in the delivery of them. I shall not pretend to determine whether it
ought to be with, or without reading their written Notes: I think there is much
needless Dispute in this Matter: and after all there is Liberty of Conscience.
But let the Way and Manner be what it will, Ministers must speak in the Name of
God, and with Authority. Their Words, their Gesture, and very Countenance must
discover them in earnest for the Salvation of Souls. Ministers must not be cold
and lifeless in the Desk; but should be Flames of Fire, Heb. 1.7. When they
address themselves to Sinners, they must be Sons of Thunder, denouncing the
Terrors of the Law in such a Manner that Fear and Trembling may take hold on
them. And when they speak to awakened and weary Sinners, it must be with such
Tenderness and Compassion that they may be drawn to Christ for Life and Rest.
If Ministers are cold and lifeless in their Delivery, they will make careless
and dead Hearers.

So also they must take much Pains in their public Prayers; and manifest such
earnestness, and so suit themselves to the State of their Flocks, that they may
command the Attention of the People. And in all their Conversation they must
endeavor so to behave themselves, so to teach, exhort, and reprove Men
privately, that all may profit by them, as well as in their public Ministry.

2. On the other Hand a People must (according to the Relation they stand in to
Ministers) take much Pains that the Ministry may be succeeded. A People must
then take due Care to attain to a suitable Preparation of Heart to attend upon
the preaching of the Word of God. You must break up the fallow Ground of your
Hearts, Jer. 4.3. That the Seed to be sown may be received into good Ground. If
you come to the public Worship without any Preparation of Soul, you cannot
expect to profit by what is delivered to you: It will be no more than a dead
Letter. And is not this one great Reason why Multitudes have heard Thousands of
Sermons, and never profited at all by them? If Hearers do not awake the Powers
of their Souls with Meditation and Prayer to hear the Word preached, Ministers
may ordinarily preach to dead Walls and lifeless Images, to as much Advantage.

You must also embrace all Opportunities to hear the Word preached, and not
neglect assembling your selves together, Heb. 10.25. What will all the Study
and Pains of a Minister avail, if you will not attend upon their Ministry? You
must willingly miss no Opportunity of hearing, lest you miss of some Truth that
might awaken, convince, and comfort your Souls.

And you must strive to hear aright what is preached to you, Mar. 4.24. You
must take Pains to understand it, and not allow your Tho'ts to wander to the
Ends of the Earth; nor your selves drowned in Sleep, while Truths of the
greatest Importance are delivered to you.

And you must take much Pains to treasure up in your Memories; that you may
pray over what you hear. It is unhappily the Case of many Hearers, they never
carry any Thing from the House of God* But would you profit by the Ministry,
you must often think of what you hear, and pray over it, that God would bless
it to your Salvation.

And you must be careful to practice what you hear from Time to Time; otherwise
it will be of no Advantage to you, Mat. 7.24, -- 27. Many think if they hear
good Discourses and commend them, they answer their Duty; and are easy if they
never put them in Practice; but the End of Hearing is to Practice: and how
careful should you be to Practice what you hear, lest the wicked One take it
from you.

And to sum up all here with respect to a People, would you strive together
with Ministers to promote their Ministry; you must govern your own Families.
And herein you will make their Work much easier, and more happy: Hereby you may
do much toward the Peace of a Church, and flourishing of Religion; but if you
are negligent in this Point, you will lay a Foundation for Rebellion and
Trouble in the Church. If Children are not bound to obey at Home, they will not
submit either to Ministers or Magistrates. It is what God mentions of Abraham
to his Honor, that he governed his Household, Gen* 18.19. And a Want of this
has been the Cause of so much Trouble and Vexation to Ministers; and such a
World of Disorder and Confusion in Church and State. Would you then help and
encourage Ministers of the Gospel, you must train up your Children in the
Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.

Thirdly, Proceed we now to give some Reasons of the Doctrine.

1. Then, when we consider how very great and noble the Ends and Designs of the
Ministry are; it is enough to animate Ministers and People to do all they can
to promote the same: Now these are nothing short of the Glory of God, and the
eternal well-being of immortal Souls. What can we better employ our selves
about, and spend our Strength for, than these? These are worthy our highest
Ambition, and well deserve our warmest Endeavors. Can we do too much for God's
Honor, or the Salvation of our own Souls? And these are what the Ministry is
aiming at.

2. The greatness and weightiness of this Work of the Ministry calls for the
mutual Endeavors of Ministers and People. Have Ministers so much upon their
Hands, and will they not be concerned to accomplish the same? Can they loiter,
and indulge Sloth? And have a People any Pity for Ministers, and know how great
a Burden they sustain, can they refuse to assist, encourage and strengthen
them? God commanded his People to help even an Ass laboring under a Burden,
Exodus 23.5. And can you omit bearing with Ministers, and striving with them?

3. The Success of the Ministry depends very much upon the joint Endeavors of
Ministers and People to promote it. What can either Ministers or People do
alone? If Ministers are zealous and laborious in their Work; yet if a People
remain careless and slothful, they will have Reason to complain they labor in
vain: So, if a People are striving in Prayer, and Ministers are void of Life,
there will be but little Fruit: But when they both unite their Endeavors (...)
Prayers, there is a Prospect of a glorious Harvest.

4. The Consideration that Ministers are employed to advance the Kingdom of our
Lord Jesus Christ, ought to invigorate Ministers and People to use their best
Endeavors to promote the Ministry. If we have any Love to the Lord Jesus
Christ, who has loved us to the Death, shall we not seek the Advancement of his
Kingdom of Peace in the World? His Government is most happy and reasonable: his
Laws all just and good. And shall we not seek to promote such a Kingdom in the
World? Which the more it prevails, the more happy it will make Men; for his
Yoke is easy, and his Burden light, Mat. 11.29, 30.

5. Have Ministers and People any Love to the Spirit of God, they will thus
strive together. If they have any Desire to feel the blessed Influences of the
Spirit of God upon their own Hearts; or do they long to see the blessed Fruits
and Effects of it upon the Souls of others, they will strive together herefor:
The more faithful and labourious Ministers are, and the more a People strive to
profit, so much the more is the good Spirit of God cherished amongst a People:
But if Ministers are unfaithful, and a People careless and slothful, they will
quench the Spirit of God, and drive him from them.

6. The present Circumstances of Religion in the Country require the most
vigorous Endeavors of Ministers and People to support the same. God has been
pleased remarkably to revive his Work in our Land: But by Reason of the
Imprudence and overheated Zeal of one Set of Men; and the Coldness and
Indifference of another toward Religion; it is dying in many Parts of the
Land: and we are in the utmost Danger of falling into the wildest Confusion in
our religious Affairs. Some are hastening on the greatest Extravagance in
Religion, and others growing into a Coldness and Contempt of the Work of God.
And is it not now high Time for Ministers and People to use their best
Endeavors to guard Religion, and save themselves from these approaching
Calamities?

7. Both Ministers and People are accountable to Christ their Judge for what
they do. We must all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, Romans 14.10. And
must give an Account of our selves, Ver. 12. Ministers for what they have
preached, and you for what you have heard, and how you have profited by it: And
what Account can we give, if we have not done our Endeavors to advance the
Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ? If Ministers are not faithful to discharge
their Trust, and a People don't take Care to profit under their Ministry, how
amazing will their Account be?

What remains is to apply what has been said to Ministers and People.

USE I. Of Information. And what you have heard shows you how falsely they judge
of Things, who envy Ministers their Work because it is attended with greater
Ease than other Employments. They know not what Trials and Sorrows they are
exercised with, who attend upon the Ministry: While you eat and sleep sweetly,
Ministers feed upon the Bread of Tears, and Sleep flies from them: They have
Agonies and Struggles which the World know not of.

So also what has been said shows us what Reason both Ministers and People have
for Humiliation and Self-Abasement: We have all done too little for Christ:
Have not strove together as we ought to have done; the best and most faithful
Ministers have Reason to be ashamed they have strove no more to advance the
Kingdom of Christ, and the Salvation of Souls, and may justly say, they have
been unprofitable Servants, Luke 17.10. And that People who have strove most to
advance the Kingdom of Christ, and the Salvation of their Souls, may justly
say, in many Things we have offended all, Jam. 3.2.

We may also, from what has been said, account for it that the Ministry is
attended with no better Success. Ministers and People don't strive together,
and are not suitably concerned to promote Religion; would they stir up
themselves and put their Hands to the Work, would not a merciful God do for
them what they cannot do themselves?

We also learn from what has been said it should be Matter of great rejoicing,
when God pours out his Spirit, to both Ministers and People, for now Ministers
may expect much Success in their Work, and a People hope for the Salvation of
Souls. So on the other Hand, how should they mourn when God takes away his
Spirit from them; for then Ministers will labor very much in vain; and a
People will grow cold, and draw back in Religion.

USE. II. Of Direction to Ministers and People. Would they mutually strive
together:

1. Let both Ministers and People endeavor to entertain just Thoughts of one
another. It has too often happened, because Ministers and a People have
entertained wrong Thoughts of each other, in a little Time they have fallen
into a shameful coldness and indifferency toward each other: Thus a People
sometimes when they call a Minister among them, exalt him above Measure; and
scarcely will allow humane Frailties in him: but this is only to prepare him
for the greater Fall: Like a Pendulum, the farther it is stretched on one side;
will in its return swing as far on the opposite Side. And even such a People
are commonly as ready to debase him as before to exalt him. Let a People
therefore look upon their Minister as a Man of the same Passions and
Infirmities with themselves; and expect he will fail in some Things as well as
they.

So let a Minister look upon his People as Men who have many Remainders of
Corruption, from whom he must expect to receive Injuries and Abuses. Ministers
have sometimes been ready to look upon their People wholly free from these
Things, and when they have evilly entreated them, have been ready to sink under
it.

2. Let Ministers and People take pains to grow and increase in their Love for
one another; and then they will strive together; and will not oppose one
another.

Ministers must love their People, as their special Charge, whose Souls they
are accountable for. And if they perish through their Neglect, they (...) answer
for them to God. And let a People look upon their Ministers as special
Blessings bestowed by Christ the great Head of the Church, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13.
and a People ought to love them in a high Degree as such.

3. Would Ministers and People strive together, let them learn to bear with and
cover over one another's Failings. A Minister must be very sparing in spreading
abroad the Weakness or Sins of his People: and a People must always conceal as
much as possible the Infirmities of their Ministers, Let not the Failings of
Ministers be the Subject of your Conversation, and the News you carry abroad
with you. A want of this mutual bearing between Ministers and People, has
greatly hindered the Ministry and the Salvation of Souls.

4. Let Ministers and People make the Advancement of Religion their great
Business. Both Ministers and People are too cold in the Service of Christ, by
Reason of their being too much engaged in worldly Affairs. A People think hard
to support the Ministry, and do much to promote it; because they are more
concerned to promote something else. Now if the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom
lies nearest the Hearts of Ministers and People, they will strive together.

USE. III. Of Motive to Ministers and People to strive together. And

1. Let us all consider how much the Lord Jesus Christ has done for us. He
freely undertook for our Redemption; left the Glories of Heaven, came down and
dwelt in Flesh: He who was rich emptied himself and became poor, that we might
be made rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. He obeyed the Law which we had broke; and has paid
the Debt we owed to divine Justice. He suffered the shameful and cruel Death of
the Cross; and is ascended into Heaven, there to make Intercession for Sinners:
And now, can we be unwilling to do all we can for Christ, who has done so much
for us?

2. Let Ministers and People consider how awful it will be to perish after they
have lived under the Gospel, the one preaching and the other hearing the glad
Tidings of Salvation. Barely preaching the Word of God, or hearing the Gospel
preached, will not entitle Men to Salvation; and many who now preach, and hear
the Gospel preached, will another Day hear Christ say to them, I know you not,
Mat. 7.22, 23. Luke 13.25. But can Ministers or People bear the Tho'ts of being
thus disowned by Christ?

3. Often think what Joy and Satisfaction it will yield you in the great Day of
Accounts to be found together at the right Hand of Christ. What Pleasure will
it be to Ministers to see in that Day great Numbers of their People, whom they
travailled in Birth for, standing with them at the right Hand of Christ
clothed in white Raiment. This will afford mutual and inexpressible Joy to
Ministers and People.

To conclude, Let us all keep in View the Glories of the upper World, and that
unspeakable Reward which will be given both to Ministers and People who are
faithful and strive together to promote the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor can it enter into our Hearts to conceive
of the great Things God has prepared for such, 1 Cor. 2.9. And both Ministers
and People who strive together to promote the Kingdom of Christ; and are made
the happy Instruments of recovering Souls from Sin to God, will shine as the
Brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever.

THE END.
The CHARGE given the Rev. Mr. John Norton.
WHEN our blessed Lord ascended up on high, he gave Gifts to Men; and this was
one of the precious Gifts of our ascended Redeemer, even a settled Ministry, an
Order of Men separated and ordained to the Office and Work of the Gospel
Ministry, to teach and instruct Men in the Way of Salvation: And God having in
his wise Providence inclined the Hearts of this People, to call you to this
great and good Work among them; and yours also to accept their Invitation: We
the Elders and Messengers now present, being satisfied of your Gifts and
Qualifications therefore, do now heartily join together to separate and ordain
you to the Gospel Ministry, according to Christ's Appointment, and particularly
a Pastor over this Church, whose Call you have now accepted: And we give thee
Charge in the Sight of God, and before our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the Quick and the Dead, at his Appearing and Kingdom, to take the Oversight
thereof, not for filthy Lucre sake; but of a ready Mind. And we trust the great
Lord of the Harvest will be with you; who calls you to Labor in his Vineyard,
and make you an able, faithful, and successful Minister of the New Testament.

And we solemnly Charge you before God, to preach the Word; be instant in
Season, and out of Season: Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort, with all Long-suffering and
Doctrine.

Take Care to show thy self approved, a Workman that needs not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the Word of Truth; and give to every one his Portion in due
Season.

Give Attendance to Reading, to Exhortation, to Doctrine; holding fast the
faithful Word as thou have been taught, according the Scriptures of Truth; that
thou may be able both to exhort and convince Gainsayers.

Take care also to instruct the ignorant, convince the erroneous; contend
earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints: You must rebuke the
obstinate, and comfort the feeble minded.

Make full Proof of thy Ministry: Meditate upon these Things; give thy self
wholly to them; that thy profiting may appear to all Men.

Take heed to thy Self, and thy Doctrine; that thou may both save thy self,
and them that hear thee.

You must pray for this People both in public and private; and be their daily
Intercessor at the Throne of Grace.

Do thou also now receive Authority to administer the Sacraments, and Seals of
the New Testament, to Persons suitably qualified: taking Care always to
distinguish between the precious and the vile; remembering that Holiness becomes
God's House for ever.

Unto thee are now committed the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, the Key of
Doctrine, and the Key of Discipline; them that Sin rebuke before all.

And we now solemnly Charge thee before the great GOD, the LORD JESUS CHRIST,
and the elect Angels, that thou observe these Things without preferring one
before another; doing nothing by Partiality: keep thy self pure.

Let no Man despise thee; but be thou an Example to the Believers, in Word, in
Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity.

Consider also that a Bishop must be blameless, and the Servant of the Lord
must not strive, but be gentle toward all Men.

He must be patient, in Meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if
peradventure God may give them Repentance to the acknowledgement of the Truth.

Carefully thus feed the Flock of CHRIST now committed to your Charge; not as
being a Lord over God's Heritage, but as being an Example to the Flock: And
when our blessed LORD the great Shepherd shall appear, you shall receive a
Crown of Glory that fades not away.

The Right Hand of Fellowship given to the Rev. Mr. John Norton.
DEAR SIR,
WE now declare you a Minister of JESUS CHRIST, and a Pastor of this Church,
over which you have now received a solemn Charge, regularly introduced into the
Ministry, and consecrated thereto as GOD, Angels, and this Assembly now
Witness; and therefore with hearty Affection we now receive you into the
Fellowship of our Ministry; and acknowledge you as a Brother and
Fellow Laborer therein; which being attended with many and great Difficulties,
we may justly say with the Apostle, Who is sufficient for these Things? There
is also much Need of the mutual Prayers and Assistance of all employed in the
Ministry; and therefore we both promise the same to you; and expect it from
you: And as a Testimony hereof we give you our Right Hand, ever wishing Grace
Mercy and Peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, may be
multiplied to you, and this little Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has now
made you an Overseer.

FINIS.

