Mr. Tennent's SERMON PREACHED at the Tuesday Evening Lecture, January, 27.
1740, 1.

The Righteousness of the SCRIBES and PHARISEES considered.

IN A SERMON On MATTHEW. V. 20. Preached at the Evening-Lecture in BOSTON,
January 27. 1740, 1.

By Gilbert Tennent, A.M. And Minister of the Gospel at New-Brunswick, in
New Jersey.

Luke xiii. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate: For many, I say unto
you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. BOSTON: Printed by J. DRAPER
for D. HENCHMAN, in Cornhill. 1741.

THE Righteousness OF THE Scribes and Pharisees CONSIDERED.
MATTHEW. V. xx. For I say unto you, That except your Righteousness shall exceed
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no Case enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven.


THESE Words are as weighty and solemn, and as much deserve and require our
serious and speedy Consideration and close Application, as any I know of in the
whole Book of God.

It is a most difficult Task to bring back secure Sinners to the serious Search
of their State toward God, and their Springs of Action; they conclude without
an impartial Trial, without Reason, that they are in a safe Condition, and so
go on building a Fabric in the Air. They endeavor to grow in Grace, before
they get Grace. But can the fond and groundless Notions of Men's Brains alter
the Nature of God and of Things? Will a Building stand well without a
Foundation, or upon a sandy one? Would it not be better for Mankind, to labor
with Impartiality and Speed to know the worst of their State, while there is an
Opportunity to get it altered?

Is it reasonable for Men, in order to prevent a little necessary and transient
Trouble of Mind, to rush upon the Bosses of God's Buckler? To rush against the
strongest Remonstrances of Conscience and of God, into inexpressible,
incomprehensible, intolerable, and eternal Torments? Is not this just as if a
Man, in order to escape the Bite of a Musketoe, would run his naked Bosom
against a drawn Sword?

I am grieved to behold the preposterous Practice of many of this Generation,
who like foolish Children are attempting to raise a Superstructure, before they
lay the Foundation.

I would to God, that that golden Saying of our Lord, A corrupt Tree cannot
bring forth good Fruit, was better understood, and more seriously pondered
upon, by the Professors of this Age

If all that are born of the Flesh, be Flesh, and if he that is in the Flesh, (
i. e. unconverted) cannot please God, or perform acceptable Service, any more
than a Thorn can bring forth Figs, or a Thistle Grapes; then it is of the last
Moment for us, to begin at the right End of Religion, by enquiring into our
Hearts and Principles of Action, and not resting 'till we come to a scriptural
Conclusion about our present State. If it be good, we need the Comfort of it,
in a World of Labor and Sorrow; if bad, we need to know it, that so we may be
affected with the Miseries of it, and so with Earnestness use proper Means to
obtain an Escape. If Men know not the Miseries of their natural State, how
shall they be duly affected with what they know not? And if they be not deeply
affected, how can it be reasonably supposed that they will use Violence to take
the Kingdom of God? And without a holy Violence or Importunity, what Reason is
there to expect an Interest in it?

Conscience and Credit excite many Men to take some Care of their outward
Actions, and having done this, they rest securely with the old Pharisees: Many
nowadays cleanse the outside of the Cup and Platter, but leave the inside
foul and neglected.

This being the Case of Multitudes at this Time, Is it not necessary to sound
the Alarm of God's Judgments; to cry aloud and not spare, to show to Judah
their Transgressions, and the House of Jacob their Sins? To try by the Terrors
of the Lord to persuade Men? For this we have the Example of our Savior in the
Text under our present Consideration; which, doubtless, however it may seem to
the Sons of this Generation, was a terrible Paradox in the Age in which it was
spoken! For then the Scribes and Pharisees had the greatest Fame for Religion,
and took more Pains about it than any others; so that the People of that Age
had a common Proverb, That if but two were saved, one would be a Scribe, and
the other a Pharisee.

Seeing that Life and Immortality are bro't to Light by the Gospel, it is well
worth our Labor, to enquire, Upon what Terms an Interest therein may be
obtained: To this our Lord gives a plain and pungent Answer, in the Words of
the Text, which inform us, That except our Righteousness shall exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall in no Case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

By the Kingdom of Heaven here, we are not to understand the visible Church, as
elsewhere the Term is taken, but the Seat of the Blessed; for we have too great
Reason to believe, That many who have not a Righteousness exceeding that of the
Scribes and Pharisees, are too easily admitted as Members of the visible Church.

The lax Method of Admission to sacred Communion, which has too generally
obtained among the Protestant Churches, more especially of late, has been, I
believe, one great Cause of the lamentable Decay of Religion in them! This, the
first Fathers of this Country, who had much of the Simplicity and Power of the
Religion of Christ, were very sensible of, as appeared by their Practice
respecting Church Fellowship.

But however Hypocrites may, by their specious Pretenses deceive and intrude,
or by the Carelessness of Watchmen obtain a Place in the visible Church, yet
they shall in no Case enter into the invisible, viz. the Kingdom of Heaven; all
their Pleas and Pretenses will be baffled and rejected, their Mouths shut, and
their false Hopes turned into everlasting Despair and Horror!

The Paradise of God is compared to a Kingdom, to signify the Order and Harmony
that there subsists, as well as the impregnable Strength of the Place, and the
universal perpetual Subjection of all its Inhabitants, to the Empire of the
great GOD, the King of Kings.

Now in order to explain the solemn Proposition of our Savior in the Words
before us, I intend to pursue the following Method,

In the first Place show, what the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees
was. And

Secondly, Wherein we must exceed them upon Pain of Death. And

Thirdly, Offer some Things to confirm and illustrate the Proposition. We
return to the first.

The Scribes were Writers of the Law, and the Pharisees a strict religious Sect
of the Jews, who trusted they were righteous and despised others, of these many
were public Teachers of others. But before I speak of the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, I would premise this, viz. That I intend to discourse
upon the Seize of the strictest of them, and that with this View, that
what shall be said may have the greater Tendency to convince the Secure.

Some of the Pharisees were gross Hypocrites, who took up a Cloak of Religion,
in order to secure worldly Gain; for a Pretense they made long Prayers, that
they might devour Widows Houses. Some were much for Ostentation in Almsgiving,
and other Duties. But we are not to imagine that this was the Character and
Temper of the whole Sect. No, not at all; the young Man of the Gospel, Paul
before his Conversion, and the foolish Virgins were of another Stamp and
Disposition; they had a moral Integrity and Seriousness. Now Brethren, Until we
exceed the highest Reach of the best Sort of the Pharisees and all other
Hypocrites that have been upon the Stage of Time, I cannot see that we have the
least Ground for Peace and Quiet.

The Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees may be said to consist in these
two Generals, viz. 1st. In a certain Blamelessness or Freedom from gross
Crimes. And 2dly, In a strict Conformity to the moral and ceremonial Laws.

As to the Law, Paul, while a Pharisee, was blameless, Phil. 3 Chap. But it may
not be improper here to enquire more particularly, How strictly and punctually
the Pharisees performed the Duties required by the first and second Table of
the moral Law, as to the Letter of them.

They not only believed that there was a God, but were very zealous in
celebrating the Duties of his Worship; they were certainly one of the most
sound and ordox Sects of the jewish Nation, much preferable to the Sadducees,
(who in many Things resemble our modern infidel Deists,) they were diligent in
attending public Prayers at the stated Seasons: Hence we find that the
Pharisee is said, by our Lord, to go with the Publican to the Temple to pray;
as, no doubt, many of both sorts do this Night. They were also strict in
observing the Duties of Family-Religion; which some think is intended by that
Passage of our Lord respecting them, viz. That they prayed standing in the
Corners of the Streets, i. e. say they, in Corners of Houses; they were not
ashamed to perform the Duties of Religion in the most public and conspicuous
Places, although they must needs know, that this would expose them, in all
probability, to the Taunts and Fleers of the Sadducees, who could not brook
even so much as the dead Form of Religion! This is a greater Length than many
Pretenders to Christianity come nowadays, who, when they come to irreligious
Places, soon lay aside their Form, and turn with the Tide.

The old Pharisees prayed secretly many scores of Times in a Day, they had
Prayers suited to every Occurrence, which they punctually used. It is storied
of them, that some of that Sect, in order to excite themselves to secret
Devotion in the night Season, were used to put a brass Bowl by their Bedside,
and hold a Bullet in their Hand, that so by the Bullet's falling into the Bowl,
they might be alarmed to Prayer.

The Pharisees had also a great Veneration for God's Name: they they would not
mention the Name of JEHOVAH in their common Discourse. And so strict were they
in the Observation of the Sabbath, that they superstitiously charged our Lord
with a Breach of it, for doing Works of Necessity and Mercy, in healing the
Sick, and relieving the Necessities of Nature.

The Fame which the Pharisees obtained and retained as to Religion, necessarily
supposes, That a Number of them were strictly honest in their Dealings with
Men; for whatsoever Regard Men may pretend to the Duties of the first Table of
the Law, yet if they observe not the Laws of Honesty, in civil Life, they will
soon crack their Credit.

As to Chastity; the Pharisees were so strict, that it is reported of them,
that they wore deep brim'd Hatts, least through the Windows of the Senses, their
Minds should be stained by tempting Objects, and thus indulge unchaste
Meditations.

It is certain, that the old Pharisees, had a Zeal for the Good of the Souls of
their Fellow Creatures, and this they expressed by much Pain and Labor: They
compassed Sea and Land, to make Proselites to their Sect. Their Zeal was tinged
with that of a party Spirit; and thus it is with their Successors at this Day.
There are many rigid Bigotts of all Sects, who are more zealous about tything
Mint, and Annis, and Cummin, than about the weightier Matters of the Law! more
studious to proselite People to their several Parties, than to CHRIST. All that
are justified by CHRIST's Blood, and sanctified by his Spirit, upon Earth, will
doubtless agree in Heaven; and therefore they should not justle in the Way to
it.

We are informed, Luke 18.11, 12. That the Pharisee stood and prayed thus with
himself, GOD I thank thee, that I am not as other Men are, Extortioners,
Unjust* Adulterers, or even as this Publican: I fast twice in the Week, I give
Tithes of all I possess.

But to explain and illustrate this Head of Discourse, let me offer a few
Instances more.

That of the young Man in the Gospel, is very memorable: He was concerned about
the Salvation of his Soul; be gave our Lord a civil Salutation, Good Master,
said he, What shall I do to inherit eternal Life? And in his Answer to our
Savior, he asserted, That he had kept all the Laws from his Youth up, ( i. e.
outwardly) which our Lord did not contradict. Which of you now in this great
Assembly, exceeds that young Pharisee?

The next Instance I would mention, is that of Paul before his Conversion, of
which we have an Account, Phil. 3d Chap. He says of himself, That if any Man
thinks, that he has whereof he might trust in the Flesh, ( i. e. in his own
Righteousness) he more. He further adds, That he was of the Stock of Israel, of
the Tribe of Benjamin, an Hebrew of the Hebrews; touching the Law, a Pharisee;
concerning Zeal, persecuting the Church; as touching the Righteousness which is
in the Law, blameless. Well, my Fathers and Brethren, See what a dreadful Pitch
in Religion this Pharisee came to, and yet was not so much as convinced! Which
of you now exceeds the Seize of this Man, while under the Curse of
CHRIST? Don't say within your selves, that you have Abraham to your Father.
What will your good Parentage avail you, unless you walk in the Steps of their
Simplicity, Faith, and Holiness, but to aggravate your everlasting Pains?
because of your rebellious and ungrateful opposing of the Light of their
Instructions and Examples! May I not say unto you, as my Master once did to the
Jews, Ye are of your Father the Devil; for his Works you will do. A Pagan could
say, Quae avi et proavi, etc. What our Parents and Grand-Parents have done, are
not our's Think not that your being admitted to outward Ordinances, will screen
you from GOD's Vengeance; this was the foolish Confidence of the carnal Jews,
who said, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, are these. Saul, a
Pharisee, was circumcised, and no doubt he partook of the Passover: Do you
depend upon the soundness of your Sect, and inoffensiveness of your Life; why
Saul was of the strictest Sect of the Jews, and as to the Law, blameless.

The last Instance I shall mention, under this Head, is, that of the foolish
Virgins, recorded Matthew. 25th Chap. Were they not called Virgins, because of
their chaste and regular Conversation; did they not carry Lamps, which shows
their Profession of the true Religion; did they not keep Company with the Wise,
which supposes that they had some Love to those that were truly good? And are
not their Lamps said to go out? which speaks forth the Moving they once had in
their Affections toward God and Goodness, like the stony-ground Hearers, who
are said to receive the Seed of the Word with Joy, but wanting Root, in Time of
Temptation fall away. Had they not a strong Confidence that they should be
kindly accepted of at last by the Bridegroom? Had not the wise Virgins a good
Opinion of them, and did they not take Pains themselves to prepare for the
Bridegroom's Coming? And yet, behold and tremble, ye Pharisees! when the
Bridegroom did come, the marriage chamber Door was stove in their Faces: O
confounding dreadful Disappointment! Take Care, Friends, lest after all your
soundness in Principle, strictness of Life, Love to God's People, religious
Affections, Pains and Confidence, the Door of Mercy, of Hope, and Salvation
ben't shut against you, by and by, for ever!

But I proceed to consider the

Second general Head of Discourse, which was, To show wherein we must exceed
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees upon Pain of Death. I answer, in
two Instances, We must receive that Righteousness of the Savior by Imputation
which they rejected; and have an inward Righteousness by Implantation, which
they wanted. And,

1. I say, We must have an outward Righteousness by Imputation, which the
Pharisees rejected.

The Pharisees, as to the outward Part of Duty, did well; but herein they
unhappily failed, they depended upon their Doings for Acceptance with God; they
trusted in their own Righteousness and despised others: Yea, they slighted
Christ himself, for as Jesus observed, The Whole need no Physician, but the
Sick; they healed their slighty Wounds by their dead Performances, and thus
remained insensible of their absolute Need of an almighty Physician! Being
ignorant of the Righteousness of GOD, ( i. e. of the Righteousness of the
Messiah, which was of God the Father's sending out and Acceptance) and going
about to establish their own, they did not submit themselves to the
Righteousness of GOD. They sought after Righteousness (or Justification) and
did not find it, because they sought it not of Faith, (i. e. wholly by the
Righteousness of Christ, which Faith can only apprehend) but, as it. were, by
the Works of the Law. Observe, They didn't seek it wholly by the Works of the
Law, but in part: They though it that their Obedience would do something toward
their Acceptance with God; that the Almighty would be induced hereby to pity
and pardon them, and that it would be hard Treatment, if the Almighty should
reject them, after all their good Meanings, Harmlessness, and religious Labors.

But, to bring the Matter a little closer, for the Discovery of Hypocrites, let
it be observed, That those who receive the outward Righteousness of CHRIST as
Mediator, are first convinced by the Law and Spirit, of their Want of
Righteousness, according to the Promise of our Savior in his humbled State,
Job. 16.8, 9. and these Convictions are full, clear, constant; the Sinner is so
convinced of Sin, in Life, Heart, State, and has such a View of the Certainty,
Dreadfulness, and Eternity of that Damnation he is hereby exposed to, that he
is deeply distressed in Heart, (a wounded Spirit who can bear?) and cannot rest
'till he finds JESUS: And that which increases his Uneasiness, is the Sight and
sorrowful Sense he has of his Ignorance and Inability to help himself out of
his present State of Sin and Misery; and the Despair he has in the Help of all
mere Creatures. These Things are set in a strong Light, by that beautiful
Passage, in the Epistle of Paul to the Romans, 7th Chap. and 3d Verse, where he
says, That he was alive without the Law once: i. e. before the Law was opened
in its spiritual Breadth, by the Holy Ghost to his Mind, and set home with
irresistible Energy upon his Heart; he was alive to himself, as his last End,
to the Law as a Covenant of Works; he expected to gain Life by the Law; he was
also imaginarily alive, and was very perk and merry, as all natural Men are,
before they are wounded by the Law. Its a sad Sight to behold how merrily they
go on to Damnation; like Fools in Bedlam, they sing and dance in their
Shackels: But when the Law comes, Sin revives in their View, born as to its
Numbers, Aggravations, and Condemnation, like a Lion rampant, ready every
Moment to devour them! Then, and not 'till then, the Sinner dies to himself,
dies to the Law, dies to his former false Peace and Hope, and dies to all
worldly Hopes, Fears and Enjoyments! The Law slays him, and he through the Law,
as an Instrument, opened and applied, dies to the Law, as a Covenant of Works.
In this Case the poor Creature cannot rest, 'till CHRIST be revealed and
applied to his Soul, by the Word and Spirit of GOD.

Now, When the sick Sinner has got a Discovery of CHRIST's Fullness,
Suitableness, and Willingness to help the Distressed; being sensible of his
absolute Need of JESUS, in all his Offices and Relations, he receives him in
every of them; and is willing, not only to be governed by his Law, but to bear
his Cross, in its utmost Extent.

And here let it be observed, That Faith, which receives the Righteousness of
CHRIST, has effectual Influence upon the Heart and Practice; it purifies the
Heart, works by Love, and overcomes the World.

Those Persons who receive the imputed Righteousness of CHRIST, know what it is
to be poor in Spirit; what it is to have Peace of Conscience, after Distress,
upon the Application of Christ to their Souls; as also what it is to have the
Love of God spread abroad in their Hearts experimentally; they have a
Tenderness for God's Honor, Kingdom, and People. The

2d Particular, In which we must exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, upon pain of Death, is this, We must have an inward Righteousness by
Implantation, or Infusion, through the Spirit, which they wanted.

The Pharisees failed in the main Spring of Action: They wanted the New Birth:
They were utterly destitute of holy Principles, without which, Actions cannot
be good; they served God in the oldness of the Letter, but not in the newness
of the Spirit. Although the Matter of their Actions was good, yet because they
performed them by their own Strength, and for their own Ends, chiefly; that
GOD, who is a Spirit, and to whom spiritual Service is only acceptable,
rejected them.

When there is a Fault in the main Spring of a Clock, the Motion must be stopped
for a Time, and the main Spring set right, before it will answer its Design in
measuring of the Hours: And thus must it be with graceless Sinners; they must,
by Examination and Conviction, be bro't to a solemn Pause, and then get a new
Principle of Action infused by the New Birth, which will naturally and
necessarily turn the free and general Bias of their whole Souls toward GOD,
and so prepare them for, and dispose them to acceptable Service.

Now those that are born of the Spirit, receive the Kingdom of God as little
Children, and generally savor most the Things of the Spirit; as little
Children hunger after the Milk of the Breast, thus do they desire after the
sincere Milk of the Word, i. e. the Truths of CHRIST, spoken simply and
savourily from the Heart, without the vain Affection of humane Wit and
Eloquence. Little Children mourn at the Absence of their Parents, and grow in
Stature; thus those who are born of the Spirit, bitterly bewail Christ's
Absence, and insatiably thirst and honestly labor for Growth in Knowledge,
Holiness, and Usefulness; but Pharisees are contented with their dead dry Round
of Duties, though they make no more Progress than a Door on the Hinges, or a
turnspit Dog in a Wheel.

From those that are born of the Spirit, old Things pass away, and all Things
become new: Their old false Peace, false Hope, Hatred against God's Ways and
People, Pride of Heart, Covetousness, and worldly Conversation pass away; and
now they see divine Things in a new and affecting Manner, and have a new
Pliableness of Will, readily to comply with the Terms of the Gospel, a new Run
of their Affections to GOD as their Center, a new Tenderness of Conscience, a
new Love to Enemies, a new and heavenly Conversation.

I proceed to confider the

3d General Head of Discourse, which was to offer some Considerations tending
to confirm and illustrate the Proposition of our Lord, in the Text we treat
upon.

And here I may observe, That an outward, or pharisaical Righteousness, does
not answer the Demands of the Law, which proceeding from a pure and perfect
Spirit, requires not only an outward but an inward and complete Conformity to
it: A pharisaical Righteousness is defective, and the Law curses for the least
Defect, Gal. 3.10.

Neither does a pharisaical Righteousness answer the Demands of the Gospel,
because it wants those main Principles of acceptable Service, which the Gospel
requires, Namely, Faith and Love; without which, whatever we do is Sin.

A pharisaical Righteousness can neither prepare us for nor entitle us to
eternal Blessedness; because it may consist with a coverning Enmity against
God, his Ways and People. This is evident from the Example of the old
Pharisees, who notwithstanding their Strictness, were virulent Opposers of
Christ and his Followers. And here, My Brethren, Let me observe, That if this
Work of GOD which is more remarkably begun in New England of late, be carried
on, you will see some that profess the greatest Regard to Religion now, stand
up and oppose it with implacable Hate. Formalists cannot brook the Power of
Religion, our Lord and his Apostles were not opposed by any, so much as by that
Set of Men. Although Pharisees make a fair Show in the Flesh, yet are the main
Springs of their Obedience, mean and ignoble.

Some are bro't to this outward Strictness, merely by the Force of a religious
Education; long Custom makes the Performance of Duties easy, as it were a
second Nature, so that it creates Uneasiness to neglect them.

Some are regular in Life, through Want of much Temptation to the contrary. The
Devil does not tempt the Secure much, least he should scare them out of his
Clutches. While the strong Man armed keeps the House, all the Goods are in
Peace. What though a Rattle-Snake does not spit its Venom in the Winter, for want
of the warming Beams of the Sun, yet it has the poisonous Nature of a Snake
still.

Some obtain Credit among their fellow Creatures, or to preserve it when
obtained, labor for the outward Form: This is their main Motive, and a
wretched one it is.

Some are careful in the outward Duties of Religion, thiefly in order to
acquire or preserve Peace of Mind.

Some perform this outward Obedience, as Slaves, principally to escape the Whip
of eternal Damnation: If you hold a Whip over a Dog's Head, it will scare him
from snatching at a Bone, which notwithstanding he has a great Love to.

Others perform this pharisaical Obedience as Hirelings, chiefly out of Respect
to the Wages; they imagine that their rotten Truck of graceless Prayers, and
other dead Duties, will do something toward the purchasing of God's Favor for
them. They think that if they do what they can, the Almighty will be in their
Debt, their Salvation will be certain. They imagine that the Lord will be
induced by their Doings, to show them Kindness rather than Others. But it is
not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of GOD that shows Mercy.

Thus you may see, Brethren, That all this outward Obedience, inasmuch as it
springs not from Love to GOD, for himself, as its main Principle, but from
selfish Respects, is mean and sordid, and though it has a fair Sun, yet is it,
upon the aforesaid Account, rotten at the Core.

The IMPROVEMENT of this Subject remains.

And here, My Fathers and Brethren, I would solemnly in the Name of the great
GOD, my Lord and Master, ask you, What you think of your State toward GOD?
Pray have you a Righteousness exceeding that of the Scribes and Pharisees, or
have you not? Pause a while, my Brethren, and let your Consciences give an
impartial Answer to this important Question: O Conscience! I charge thee, in
the Name of the great GOD, to speak the Truth: Is it so, that our Righteousness
must exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, upon Pain of
eternal Death? O what Terror does this speak to those, who habitually fall
short of their moral Righteousness!

The Pharisees abounded in the Duties of Devotion: What will become of you
then, who knowingly and generally neglect secret or family Devotion, or
attending the Places of public Worship? Will not God's Wrath be poured out
upon the Families that call not on his Name? If you despise those who are sent
by Christ, do you not despise Christ who has sent them, and his Father also? If
the Foolishness of Preaching ( i. e. a simple Method of Preaching, from the
Heart, without the Affectation of Wit or Eloquence, which is reckoned, by the
worldly Wise, Foolishness) be the appointed Mean of saving those that believe,
then how shall those be saved who do not attend upon it?

The Pharisees had a great Veneration for the holy Name of GOD, and were strict
Observers of the Sabbath. What then shall become of you wicked Creatures, who
customarily profane his holy Name, and violate his sacred Rest? Surely the
righteous GOD will not hold you guiltless.

Were the Pharisees honest, chaste, charitable, zealous? Then how dreadful is
your State, who fall short habitually of those Hypocrites, upon whom our Lord
denounced so many Curses? Are not some of you habitually dishonest, unchaste,
uncharitable, and lukewarm about Religion? Does not a terrible Damnation await
you? Surely the Lord will spue such sordid Wretches out of his Mouth, i. e.
reject you with eternal Abhorrence.

You profane Herd of hardened Mortals, who have not so much as the outward
Form of Religion: Hear, with Confusion and Trembling, your Damnation denounced
by the Mouth of Christ, in the Text I am now discoursing upon; For I say unto
you (who am the Truth and the Life) that except your Righteousness shall exceed
the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no Case enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. All ye Publicans and Harlots, behold your dismal Doom
expressed, 1 Cor. 6.19. Imprime Verba.

But perhaps you will say, in your Excuse, I do exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, for I believe and trust in the Lord JESUS CHRIST, which
they did not; and I am sincere, thank God, but they were gross Hypocrites:
Therefore I scorn your Comparison! Answer, I say, stay Friend, not so hasty
neither; suffer me, for thy Conviction, to speak a Word in behalf of the old
Pharisees. You say, you believe, and trust in Christ: Well: But what is Faith?
You cannot tell. I suppose, you never saw you was without Faith; never felt your
Inability to believe; never felt Opposition made by Satan against your Faith;
never selt the Effects of Faith on Heart or Life; it is probable your Faith
never had so much Influence upon you, as the Faith of the Devils upon them, for
they believe and tremble. You needn't boast of your dead bypocritical Faith;
you will surely go to the Devil with it, if you get no better. You say, you trust
in Christ: Ay, trust; without Difficulty; with a whole Heart, and unholy
Practice: Why, you trust in the Devil, and not in CHRIST; for you have no Word
of Christ to trust upon, while in your present Condition. You say, you are
sincere; but what is Sincerity? it is like you cannot tell; What were you never
without it; has it cost you nothing; no Sorrow, no Mourning; then you are
without it still. Why your Sincerity is nothing but a moral Earnestnesss in
seeking yourselves as your last End: And had not the Pharisees this? Yes, they
had, witness Saul, and the young Man in the Gospel.

Thus it appears, That your Righteousness does not exceed the Righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, and therefore, so continuing, ye cannot enter into
the Kingdom of GOD.

Dear Brethren, and Fathers; Are there not a great Number in this large
Assembly, of old, middle-aged, and young Persons, who have not exceeded the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, in the Instances before mentioned?
You, aged Persons, What say ye to this? Is not your Religion a mere dead Form,
accompanied only with some selfish Earnestness? Are ye not Strangers to the
receiving of that outward and inward Righteousness before expressed? Search
your Bosoms by what has been said, and see if ye be not in the Gall of
Bitterness. I know its hard for old secure Professors to begin again, and cast
away their false Hopes; its hard, I confess; but yet its harder to be damned:
Choose you which you will.

And you middle-ag'd People, of thirty Years old and upwards, I ask you, in the
Name of the great GOD, wherein do you exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees? Don't you know in your own Consciences, that many of you are
unacquainted with Poverty of Spirit, and the new Birth?

And you, my younger Brethren, of fourteen Years and upwards; are not many of
you in the same doleful Case? Poor Things, Does not this Text condemn you to
Hell, if you continue thus?

I would not pass over the little Children, of six Years old and upwards.
Although the haughty Pharisees should, in their great Wisdom, sneer at my
Simplicity; You, dear little ones, are not many of you also Strangers to the
new Birth? My blessed Master has said, Suffer little Ones to come unto me, for
of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. You are not too young, dear little Creatures!
to mourn over Sin, and to come to Christ.

How wretched is the Case of all the Formalists in this Assembly? Woo to you
Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, ye make clean the outside of the Cup and
Platter, while the inside is left unclean: You are like whited Sepulchers,
which appear beautiful outwardly, but are within full of dead Men's Bones, and
all Rottenness: Ye Serpents, ye Generation of Vipers, how shall ye escape the
Damnation of Hell? Behold, the Ax is laid to the Root of the Tree, every Tree
that brings not forth good Fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast into the Fire

All you Publicans and Pharisees, in this Assembly, apply to your own
Consciences, the Threatening of our Lord in this Text, Ye shall in no Case
enter into the Kingdom of GOD. No! let the Devil, and your own false Hearts,
say what they will to flatter you; the Mouth of Truth says, That ye shall, in
no Case, enter into the Kingdom of GOD. The Door of Heaven is shut against you,
and seeing there is no Purgatory, where must ye go, why into the Kingdom of
Death, of Darkness, of the Devil, of Damnation! There (if ye die as ye are) ye
will suffer the Loss of the blessed God, and all the Sweets of Heaven. Now your
Minds are blinded, your Consciences stupify'd, your Hearts hardened, so that
you don't perceive your Loss, and ye are amused with worldly Projects, and
Entertainments: But by and by, your Minds will be enlightened to take a View of
your dismal dismal Loss! Your secure Consciences will be alarmed, to sting you
with eternal Reflections, which ye can as little endure as avoid. Your cursed
Hope, which makes you easy now, will then give Place to eternal Despair! GOD
will read your Confidence out of your Tabernacle, and bring you before the King
of Terrors! You will be stripped naked of all your temporal Comforts, and not
have so much as one Drop of Water to cool your flaming Tongues! The Springs of
your now frozen Passion, will then be opened, and run with incessant, but
useless Streams, There shall be Weeping and gnashing of Teeth! says our dear
Lord. Never did any so mourn over the untimely Bereavement of a dear Relative,
as you will over your lost and damned Souls! but in vain! Now if you would sow
in Tears, it might be of saving Service: But then it will be too late, too
late! O when you think in the gloomy Vault, of the Calls, Warnings and
Entreaties you have had from GOD and Man, and of your wilful Murder and
Madness, in rejecting of them, how will it rend your cursed Souls, with the
acutest Agonies, when you reflect how you have sold your Souls to the Devil,
for a Thing of Naught, and have taken such Pains to compass your own Ruin? You
will be ready to tear your own Hearts out with Indignation, and wish you had no
Being!

Think, my Friends, How dreadful it will be to fall into the Hands of the
living GOD! and to be swallowed up in the burning Main of his flaming Jealousy!
to have your naked Souls eternally lashed with the Whip of his insenced
Indignation!

O how shocking is it, to be exposed to intolerable, continual, inexpressible,
unconceivable, unavoidable, and eternal Pains!

Ye secure Sinners, think on these Things, 'till you be awakened, for ye must
be awakened, or damned!

You that are but slightly convinced, O think on these Things, in order to get
your Convictions fastened and rivited. I am jealous over you, my dear Brethren,
with a godly Jealousy, least your Convictions die away of their own Accord, or
be slightly healed. O don't rest, for Christ's Sake, till Jesus be discovered
and applied to your Souls! Think often upon the Uncertainty of your Lives, the
Uncertainty of the Spirit's Strivings, and the dreadful Consequences of
expiring Convictions, before Conversion. When the Blossoms are nipp'd, what
Expectation is there of Fruit? Don't rush to the Lord's Table, till ye receive
that Jesus, who is there represented.

One Word I must say to those that are deeply convinced of their Want of
Righteousness. Dear Creatures! There is a Balm in Gilead, there is a Physician
there; the Lord JESUS has come to seek and save those that are lost. He has
received a Commission from his Father, to bind up the broken hearted, and to
comfort the Mourners: He invites you that labor and are heavy laden to come to
him, and he says he will give them Rest: He is able to save to the uttermost,
all that come to the Father by him, and he that comes, he says, he will in no
wise cast them off. Don't be discouraged upon the Account of any Opposition
that may be made against you, or Contempt that may be cast upon you, in your
Way to CHRIST, either by Pharisees or Publicans. Some are so perverse that they
will neither enter into the Kingdom themselves, nor suffer those that are
entering to enter: Methinks they might be contented with their own Damnation.
Dear Brethren, and Sisters! Let not those Things dismay you, it is an Honor to
be dishonored by such People: What are the Trifles that we can suffer here, in
Comparison of the Weight of Glory before us? Go on therefore, in the Name of
GOD, seeking JESUS, sorrowing 'till ye find him. Which, may GOD grant, for
CHRIST's sake.

AMEN.

