Mr. TODD'S SERMON TO The Young People OF His Charge.

THE Young PEOPLE Warned. OR, THE VOICE OF GOD TO The Young People IN The late
terrible Judgment OF THE THROAT-DISTEMPER; Considered in a SERMON Preached to
the YOUNG PEOPLE at East Guilford, August 5th, 1740.

By Jonathan Todd, M. A. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST there.

Zeph. iii. 6, 7. -- I made their Streets wast, -- I said, Surely thou will
fear me: Thou will receive Instruction, so their Dwelling should not be ^ut
off, howsoever I punished them, --

N. LONDDON, Printed and Sold by T. GREEN, 1741

TO THE YOUNG PEOPLE OF my Charge.
My Dear Friends,
I Do here present you with that Discourse which I delivered unto you, upon the
Occasion of the Death of One of your Contemporaries by that fatal Sickness (as
we supposed) of the Throat-Distemper; and which you so earnestly desired might
be made Public.

I must confess, that it was with some Difficulty, I brought my self to be
willing to suffer this Discourse to appear in Print, as thinking, that it
wanted many Ornaments, to render it acceptable, nor was well eno' Labored to
be made public; and there were already many Exhortations to early Piety
published, done by able Hands, after whose, I might be ashamed, that mine
should be read.

But then, when I considered the particular Occasion and Circumstances of this
Discourse, I was fain to own it was yours; and dare not deny you the Use and
Improvement of it. It was at your Motion and Desire, that at that Time, I made
a Discourse to you: The Circumstances of the Time were such, that I could not
but be pleased with the Motion; it seemed as if there was the Hand of Heaven in
it; I could not but think my self obliged from Duty to comply with the Motion.
And as God was pleased to make the Discourse Acceptable to you, and you still
asked my Consent for the Publication of it, for your further Use and
Improvement, it seemed as if Providence made it my Duty, still to comply: I
could not consider my self as your Servant, in the Cause of Christ and your
Souls, and not own my Obligation to gratify You.

Such therefore, as it is, a Serious, Plain Discourse, designed for the Benefit
of Youthful Auditors, destitute of the Ornaments of a beautiful Style or any
well studied Method, it is offered unto you.

And, as you have desired the Publication of it for your Benefit, so I hope,
you will consider, that I may, justly expect from you, a serious Improvement of
it; and, if you make not a good Use of it, may charge you with Inconsistency,
and re^kon my self abused by you, as well as be disappointed in all the Hope
and Encouragement I had of seeing you excited to early Piety.

Nor may you think, that you make any good Use of such a serious Warning and
Exhortation, as this is, if you indulge your selves in Youthful Vanities and
Sins, put off the Work of Repentance till a Hereafter, and still live without
God in the World, -- Impenitent and Unconverted.

GOD forbid then, that any of You, who have Urged the Publication of this for
your Improvement, as though you were resolved to make a good Use of it, should
still, after the Reading of it, be found walking in the Ways of a carnal Heart,
pleasing your selves in the dangerous Paths of Sin, saying, You shall have
Peace, though you walk in the Imagination of your Hearts, to add Sin to Sin.

I have one Thing to add by way of Caution, viz. That you take Heed of saying,
that the Bitterness of Death is past, and the Danger over, because the seared
Distemper, since the Death of the justly remembered Youth, who was taken from
us, has not prevailed among us. For if GOD is gracious and spares a little
while, are You sure, he will spare for ever? Are you sure that, if GOD sees
you hardening your selves, the Distemper shall not be sent again? Is it not
possible, that GOD be provoked to give a new Commission to the destroying
Angel? Or, will not the affrighting Sickness attend GOD's sovereign Order, and
go when and where he bids it? Or, if you shall not be visited with this
Sickness, has GOD no other Judgments, with which to plead against secure and
provoking Sinners? Have you never known a Young Person hastened from among the
Living, to the Number of the Dend by any other Sickness? Has GOD but one way
to punish the Inhabitants of the Earth? If GOD shall not make your outward Man
a Theater of any remarkable Plagues and wasting Sorrows, yet, are you sure, he
will not inflict many spiritual Miseries upon your Souls? Or, are not spiritual
Plagues as formidable, as those that are inflicted upon the Body? If an
offended GOD gives you over for incorrigible, punishes you with Hardness of
Heart, and says, Why should you be stricken any more? Would not this be sad
and amazing?

Answer these Quaeries so as to discover any Knowledge or Reason, and you will
see, that you are never out of Danger, till lodged under the Wings of the
ALMIGHTY.

I add no more, but my sincere Wish, and Prayer unto Almighty GOD, that this
weak Endeavor may be blessed to the saving Advantage of your Souls, and you by
this and other Means under the Powerful Presence and Influence of the Holy
Spirit, may be persuaded to an early Choice of, and steadfast adherence to the
Ways of Religion; that so you may be a pious and a happy Generation; hoping
for, and earnestly desiring your Remembrance of me always in your Prayers,

Who am Your Loving Though Unworthy Pastor, And Servant in the Cause of Christ
and your Souls. Jonathan Todd.
East-Guilford, May 5th. 1741.
TO THE READER.
ISHALL not make any Apology here, for Appearing thus in Public, nor any
Excuse for my Method, Weakness, Deficiencies, etc. I only purpose to give a
brief Account of the Occasion of it; which a Stranger will find alluded to in
the Discourse, but not be thoroughly acquainted with.

He must be a Stranger indeed in these Parts of the World, who has not heard
of the Desolations made in sundry Parts of the Country, by that Distemper, that
is usually called, The Throat-Distemper.

Near Five Years ago, we in this Parish were Visited with the same; and sundry
very pleasant and hopeful Young Persons were taken away.

Since which Time, we have had an Account of more awful Desolations made by it,
in many Other Places.

Near the Latter End of July last, a very hopeful, serious and likely Young
Person, Named Prudence Bishop, the Eldest Daughter of Mr. John Bishop, was
taken Sick amongst us; At first indeed, we hoped, that her Sickness might be
only a hard Cold, a common sore Throat attended with a Fever, Or the Effects
of the Rash, as we called a Distemper, that was then among us.

But her Sickness presently increased, and she was brought into uncommon
Difficulty and Distress. The justly Famous and well known Physician of these
Parts was consulted; who judged her Sickness to be the Throat-Distemper. And to
be short, the Distemper made Quick Work and carried her off, August 2d, and her
Corpse was interred on Lord's Day, August 3d.

This Young Person gave us Ground to hope, that the Lord had been merciful to
her Soul; begun and carried on a good Work of Grace in her: so that we could
hope, that for there to die was Gain: But then, it seemed a dark Omen to the
Living, and a loud Warning to our Surviving Youth to be also ready.

Before this happened, our Young People had agreed among Themselves, to Meet
together on Tuesday, the Fifth Day of August, for Youthful Diversion and
Recreation; Or to use their own Terms, had agreed it should be a Day of
Frolicking among Them.

But Struck with this Sudden Death of one of their Number, and Alarumed with
the Thought of such a Sweeping Distemper's Entering the Place the Second Time,
Many of them get together at the Funeral, and agree to desire me to give them
an Exhortation, in the House of God, on said Tuesday, before intended for Mirth
and Diversion.

Accordingly, On the Evening following the Sabbath, some appointed by the Rest
came, and informed me of their Design of Turning their Meeting, before designed
for Diversion, into a Religious Meeting; and desired my Assistance, and a Word
of Exhortation:

I need not tell you, that I had not an Heart hard enough to deny such a
Request.

In a little Time after said Meeting, the Young People appointed some, in the
Name of the Rest to desire that the Discourse, which was at said Time,
delivered to them, might be made Public at their Charge and Expense: Which is
now published for the same End, as it was then delivered: And if the rising
Generation may hereby, as a Means, be any Thing Quickened to early Religion; the
desired End is obtained.

THE YOUNG People Warned.
AMOS III. 6. Shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the People not be
afraid? Shall there be Evil in a City, and the LORD has not done it?


SO great is the Corruption, and Depravedness of the Humane Nature, that a
spirit of Vanity and Sin, and an Inclination to depart from the Living GOD, are
become natural to Men.

Hence, perhaps there has not been found any Nation or people, of any long
Standing upon the Face of the Earth, who have not run such a length in Sin and
Wickedness, and so increased their Iniquities, as to render it necessary, for
the Vindication of the Divine Providence and Perfections, that awful Judgments
be sent upon them, to be Testimonies from Heaven for GOD, and against impious
blaspheming Mortals.

Indeed GOD is abundantly, yea infinitely good; he is kind to the rebellious
Nations, and does not at once stir up all his Wrath. But yet, if he spares for
the Present, and being full of Compassion does not speedily raise up Himself to
destroy them, he does not forget their Wickedness and Sins, but writes them
down in his Book; and when their Iniquities are ripe, he will visit their Sin
upon Them. Exodus xxxii. 34.

So the Prophet Amos in the Name of the LORD, assures the great and populous
Kingdoms, which then were famous in the World, that they had Iniquities
remembered by GOD, that must, when they had filled up their Measure, be punished
upon them. See Chap. i and ii.

Judah and Israel, though they were the peculiar People of God, the singularly
favored of Heaven, have their Sins remembered before GOD, as well as the Other
Nations; and so might expect that a Woe-Day would sooner or later come upon
them, Chap. ii. 4 -- 8. Yea, the Sins of These especially needed to be punished
upon Them: For GOD had done more for them than Others; laid them under stronger
Obligations: So that their Sins were attended with very aggravating
Circumstances; showed more Ingratitude, Unkindness and Stubbornness; were
greater Affronts to an indulgent Heaven, Chap. ii. 9 -- 13.

The Prophet, in our Context, in the Name of the LORD, declares the Necessity
and Certainty of GOD's Judgments against his own backslidden and greatly
provoking People of Israel; tells them, that as GOD has been especially good
to them, so their Sins especially call for Punishment; as he had peculiarly
undertook the Care and Government of them, and made them in a peculiar Manner
his own Family, so it was but congruous and fitting, that he should see the
Laws of his Family executed upon Them; correct them for their Offenses, and
punish them for their Iniquities, ver. 2. It Is indeed necessary, that they be
forsaken and left of God, and given up to Misery and Evil, when their Ways are
contrary and provoking to God; when they despise his Laws, and give him no
becoming Reverence and Glory, ver. 3. Can Two walk together, except they be
agreed? Can any Two walk together, and so have Communion and Fellowship one
with the Other, when they are not enough of one mind to walk the same Way, or
take the same Course? The Similitude is easily applied; when GOD and his People
are contrary one to the other, there is no Communion between them: In this
Case, as they walk contrary to GOD, so he to them; and that implies his
Forsaking and Punishing them.

And as it is necessary that they be punished for their Iniquities, so it is
certain, that the LORD is offended, and about to punish them; And therefore
they may be sure, that there are Sins found with them, rendering this necessary.
A Lion will not roar in the Forest, nor a young Lion cry out of his Den, for
Nothing; a Bird is not caught without some Sanre or Gin; and no Man will think
it worth his while to take up a Snare that has taken Nothing: In every one of
these Instances, whither a Lion's Roaring, a Young Lion's Crying, a Bird's
being caught, or a Snare taken from the Earth, there is some Reason and
Occasion for the same, ver. 4, 5. In which the Prophet seems to lead us to
consider, that there is Nothing done by the Design of any Agent, without some
Reason or moving Occasion: And his Intention doubtless is, to convince us, that
God does not threaten, nor send his Judgments for Nothing, or without any
Cause: So that, if God utters his Voice, brings any Judgments upon a People,
they may Konw, that there is some Reason therefore; God is offended, and is
about to punish them for their Iniquities; and that therefore it becomes them
to prepare to meet God.

This same Thing, the Prophet in a most convincing Way, further insists upon in
our Text: Shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the People not be afraid?
Shall there be Evil in City, and the Lord has not done it?

Shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the People not be afraid? Shall
there be an Alarm given, and the People take no Notice, nor be concerred? When
a Trumpet is sounded for such an End, men conclude there is Danger; their
Hearts are presently filled with Fear; they conclude there is not this Warning
for Nothing The Design and Application of this is easily seen, viz. That if God
has sounded his Trumpet, given an Alarm, there is good Reason to conclude it
is not for Nothing; but he warns us that he is coming forth in the Way of his
Judgments; and it concerns us to be ready to meet Him.

But perhaps this would not be convincing to some, except they better
understood what Alarm was given by God, or what Trumpet of the Lord had been
blown amongst them: They had heard, perhaps they would say, No Voice from
Heaven; knew not of any Warning God had given them that might be compared to a
Trumpet sounding an Alarm.

To inform the Minds of such, and fasten the Conviction, it is added, Shall
there be Evil in a City, and the LORD has not done it? Shall there be any
Judgments in the City, any Calamities, and the LORD not have a Hand in the
same? If there be Evils, any sore Afflictions, or any terrible Providence, are
not these the Doings of the LORD? By these God utters his Voice, warns and
threatens you.

From which Words thus opened, we may gather these Things as plainly implied
and insinuated in them, viz.

I. That GOD has an holy Hand in all the Judgments, brought upon us or our
Friends: Shall there be Evil in a City, and the LORD has not done it? II. That
one End of GOD's Judgments, is, to be the Warning of a People: They are
compared to a Trumpet sounded for an Alarm. III. That it is the Duty of All,
when GOD warns them in the Way of his Providence, to take the Warning, hear the
Voice, fear the Danger, and endeavor to Escape it: The Simile made use of and
improved upon this Occasion, plainly teaches us, that as a People, who hear
the Trumpet sounding an Alarm, fearing the Danger betake themselves to their
Arms or Forts so should a People take Warning by the Trumpet of the LORD; be
afraid of approaching Danger, and prepare to meet Him.
These Things, we purpose at this Time, to consider, as so many Doctrinal
Propositions.

I. GOD has an holy Hand in all the Judgments, brought upon us or our Friends.
Nothing is more Evident, than that the same Almighty Being, who at first
commanded the universal World to exist, exercises a Providence over the World
he has made This may be proved from the Perfections of the Deity, from the
necessary Dependence of the Creature upon the Creator, from the continued
Harmony and Order in the Visible World, and from Tokens of the Presence and
overruling Power of GOD in Providence that happen:

But at this Time, it is not our Design to offer Proofs for a Divine
Providence; but to consider the Extensiveness of GOD's Providence.

Many allow that GOD exercises a Providence in the World, who yet have but
stingy Tho'ts of his Providence: They allow, that he beholds the Children of
Men from the Habitation of his Throne; takes Notice how Things are managed in
the World; does Good to his Friends; yea, is kind to his Enemies, to the Evil
and Unthankful; sometimes also, he frowns upon the Workers of Iniquity: They
look for a Time also, when he will gloriously reward his Friends with immortal
Blessings, and spurn his Enemies from his Presence into outer Darkness and
everlasting Horrors But yet, there are a Thousand Things happening in
Providence, that they don't consider the Almighty as having any Thing to do
with, only as a Spectator.

But, if we well consider Things, we shall find the Providence of GOD to be
more extensive than such imagine; yea that it extends to all Things, and all
the Accidents and Circumstances attending Them. What we call natural or second
Causes, are conducted and influenced by GOD's Providence: It Is by his
Providence, that the regular Returns of Day and Night, and the Successions of
Summer and Winter are made. It Is by his Providence, that the Sun shines upon
the Good and Bad, Mat. v. 45. It Is by his Providence, that the Heavens are
covered with Clouds, and the Rain prepared for the Earth, Psalm exlvii and. And
even those Events, that to us may seem casual and fortuitous, are ordered and
overruled by his Providence; So we are informed, Prove. xvi. 33 The Lot is cast
into the lap; but the whole Disposing thereof is of the Lord. And although it be
true, that there are some Events, which happen by the Design of rational
created Agents, yet these also are overruled by Divine Providence: If any such
Agents do us Good, we should consider them as Instruments, which God improves;
and if we suffer Evil from them, they are the Rods, wherewith the Almighty
pleases to correct us. Thus the Assyrian, that had it in his Heart to destroy,
and grievously wounded Israel is called the Rod of God's Anger; and the Staff
in their Hand is said to be his Indignation, Isa. x 5 The destroying Assyrian
is again compared, to the Ax in the Hand of him that hewith therewith, and to a
Saw shaken or listed up by him, that makes use of the same, ver. 15. Again, he
is compared to a Razor that is hired, in the Hand of him that shaveth, Isa.
vii. 20.

Upon the Whole then, let us meet with what Things soever in the World, and
from what Cause soever, the Hand of GOD is to be acknowleged in the same;
whither good or evil Things b^f^l us, GOD's Providence is still concerned in
the same: I form the Light, says the LORD, and create Darkness: I make Peace,
and create Evil: I the LORD do all these Things, Isa, xlv 7.

Not only then, are we to acknowledge the Hand of God in all our Blessings but,
if there be any Evil in the City, we are to acknowledge, GOD has done it; if
there be any sore Affliction, heavy Calamity, any Sickness or Death amongst us,
there is the Hand of the Lord in the same. So doubtless, Eliphaz understood the
Matter, when he says, Job v. 6. Affliction comes not forth of the Dust;
neither does Trouble Bring out of the Ground: And therefore, as for himself, he
says, if at any Time he should be brought into Affliction, he would seek unto
GOD and unto GOD he would commit his Cause, ver 8.

But we proceed to consider,

II. That One End of GOD's Judgments, is, to be the Warning of a People.

The Judgments of GOD may be considered as his awakening Voice to a stupid
World: They are Signs or Effects and Fruits of his Anger against Sin; Tokens
from GOD that Sin shall not go unpunished.

The Apostle makes the Judgments of GOD brought upon any, even in distant Ages,
that come to our Ears, to be our Examples, and desi^ned for our Admonition, 1
Cor. x. 6, 7, etc. So the Apostle Jude makes the Fall and Misery of the Angels
to be Warnings to us, Jude, 5, 6, And tells us, That Sodom and Gomor^ha, and
the Cities about them, are set forth for an Example, suffering the Vengeance of
eternal Fire, ver. 7. So the Apostle Peter represents the Bringing in the Flood
of old upon the World, to be a Warning to all that hear of the same, 2 Pet. ii.
5, 6.

And, if the Judgments of GOD, that we hear of in such distant Ages, have such
a speaking Voice, how much more the Judgments of GOD that are just at Hand, and
fall within our Sight? Moses seemed to think, that the Judgments of GOD, that
fall out within the Sight and Knowledge of Any, have a clearer Voice than those
we hear to have been in distant Ages, Deuteronomy. ii. 2, -- 7 Know ye this Day: for I
speak not with your Children which have not known and which have not seen the
Chast^soment of the LORD your GOD, etc..... But your Eyes have seen all the
great Acts of the LORD, which he did.

GOD's Judgments then, that overtake us, in our Persons, Families or Friends,
are a loud Warning to us of the Danger of Abiding in Sin, and of the Necessity
of hiding our selves under the Wings of the ALMIGHTY, before the Floods of
Divine Indignation come upon us. Thus GOD's Judgments are called his Voice
crying unto the City, Mic. vi. 9. Thus the Prophet represents the Most HIGH, as
uttering a mighty Voice, and speaking very loud to Men in the Way of his
Judgments; Jer. xxv. 29, 30, 31. Lo, I begin to bring Evil on the City which is
called by my Name, and should ye be utterly unpunished? Ye shall not be
unpunished, etc. Therefore prophecy, and say unto them, The LORD shall rore
from on High, and utter his Voice from his holy Habitation, etc.

We come now to consider,

III. That it is the Duty of All, when GOD warns them in the Way of his
Providence, to take the Warning, hear the Voice, fear the Danger, and endeavor
to escape it.

When GOD's Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World should
see, and learn Righteousness, Isa. xxvi. 9, 10, 11. When the LORD's Voice cries
to the City, the Man of Wisdom will hear, Mic. vi 9. If GOD sends his
Judgments, for this End, Namely, to be a Warning to a careless World, it is
evident, that Sin will lie at the Door of those, that receive not Warning: For
we then only comply with the Design of God in his Judgments, when we consider
his Hand, hearken to his Voice, and do our best to be ready to meet him, that
we may escape the severer Judgments of Heaven, and be hid in the Day of the
LORD's Anger.

Indeed, this Proposition is so evident from what has been offered under the
foregoing and from the End and Design of GOD's Judgments, that I need not
detain you to offer any Thing more in Confirmation of it: For shall GOD himself
give us Warning, and we not think outselves obliged to receive it? Shall GOD
himself blow his Trumpet and we not be afraid When the Almighty gives Notice,
that he reserveth Wrath for his Enemies, and the Day of the Lord hastes, shall
we not think it reasonable, that moved with Fear, if it b^ possible, we prepart
an Ark, and secure out selves under the Cover of the ALMIGHTY's Wings?

What is yet before us, is the Application of these Truths, which we have been
considering.

USE, I. Of INFORMATION.
1. Is it as we have beard; that GOD has an holy Hand in all the Judgments,
brought upon us, or our Friends? Are all the Sorrows and Evils in the World
directed and overruled by him? Then we may infer, that those who have GOD
engaged for Them, and are secure of his Favor, are safe in the saddest Times;
and therefore we may with Hope and Security, commend our selves and
Circumstances to GOD in W^ll doing in the most difficult Times. The Face of
Providence is some Times overspread with Clouds and Darkness; the Eyes of Many
mourn by reason of Affliction: Terrors and pestilential Arrows fly by Night,
and Destruction wastes at No^nDay. There seems to be Distress on every Hand;
there is Desolation within doors, and Fear without; Abroad one Calamity
prevails, and another as dreadful at Home.

But in such dark Times, there is this for the People of GOD to live upon, and
comfort their weeping Hearts in the Consideration of, even, that the LORD
reigns, who rides upon the Heaven in the Help of his People, and in his
Excellency on the Sky. He overrules all, Justice and Judgment are the
Habitation of whose Throne; who is good, a strong Hold in the Day of Trouble,
and who knows them that trust in Him.

We may therefore in all such sad and doleful Days, when were it not for this,
it would not be strange, if our Hearts should sink and fail, I say, in such sad
Times we may put our Trust in GOD; make the Most HIGH our Refuge, and unto his
Wings betake our selves for Shel^er: And we may be confident, that Nothing
shall hurt us without his Leave; none of the destroying Arrows that fly about,
shall light upon us wihout his Permission. So that, it we can but be sure of an
Interest in his Favor, we need not fear, though an Host should ene^mp against
us, Psalm. xxvii. 3. Nor, though the Earth be removed, and though the Mountains
be carried into the Midst of the Sea. Tho the Waters thereof rore, and be
troubled, though the Mountains shake with the Swelling thereof, Psalm xlvi. 2, 3.
We need not be afraid of the Snare of the Fowler, nor the noisome Pestilence. We
need not be afraid for the Terror by Night: not for the Arrow that Flie^h by
Day: nor for the Pestilence that walks in Darkness: nor for the Destruction
that wastes at Noonday. We need not be afraid of any Evil that shall befall
us, nor of any Plague that can come nigh our Dwelling, Psalm. xci per totum.
Yea, though we walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, we need not fear
any Evil, Psalm. xxiii 4 For, GOD will cover us with his Feathers; and his Truth
shall be our Shield and Buckler. With Life will he satisfy us, and show us his
Salvation, Psalm. xci. 4. and 16.

2 Is it as we have heard, that one End of GOD's Judgments is, to be the
Warning of a People? If then there be Judgments amongst us, or round about us,
we learn what Interpretation to make of the same. By Them GOD gives us Notice,
What he will do unto us if we are found in the Ways of Sin, and return not to
him: And because he will do this unto us, hereby designs to excite us to
prepare to meet our GOD; to seek Righteousness and Meekness, before the Decree
brong Forth, before the fierce Anger of the LORD come upon us.

GOD being infinitely good, and delighting in Mercy, most frequently sends his
awakening Judgments, before he proceeds to the Utmost against Men; He warns
them, and gives them a Space for Repentance. He sometimes visits with awful and
distressing Sickness; so ^s the destroying Angel, and takes away some as a
Warning to the Rest. And, if some of the Best are taken away, the Warning is
not less; only there is more of GODs Love to Souls discovered, whiles those
that are ready, are taken away to Peace and the Enjoyment of Heavenly Love, and
Others are warned to be ready.

If then any awful Sickness, any sore Judgment is sent amongst us, we may
reasonably conclude that GOD is giving of us Warning to prepare for all Evens
and be ready to meet Him, in what Way soever he shall be pleased to come unto
us.

And particulary, We may so interpret the Disp^^sation of Providence, whereby
an awful Distemper has been sent into a Family in this Place; and One of your
Contemporaries by sudden Strike has been removed. GOD hereby calls upon us to
be also ready; that we bethink our selves, and put our selves into a ready
Posture to stand before Him.

And it may be justly considered, as being more especially, a Warning to You
that are in your Youth. To You, the LORD's Voice cries, Be ye also ready; make
Haste, and get all Things in Readiness for a solemn Meeting with GOD: Your
against the Young People especially, has the affrighting and desolating
Distemper been commissioned.

We of this Place, may still have in Remembrance our Affliction and our Misery,
the Wormwood and the Gall, when some Years ago, we felt some Strokes of the
Distemper, and sundry of your Comtemporaries were removed: And yet, the heavy
Stroke on us, was light, compared with what many other Places felf. Ah! What
Desolations is has made in some Places! How terrible has GOD been in has
^^oings! Numerous Families have been empried! A great Number of the Children
are cut off from without, and the Young Men from he Streets. Many once happy
Parents, whose Hearts have rejoiced in the Blessings of Children, are bemoaning
themselves as Jer x. 19, 20 Woe is me for my Hurt, my Wound is grievous: My
Tabernacle is spoiled, and all my Cords are broken: my Children -- are not.
Where but a little While ago, Abundance of youthful Songs of Mirth might be
heard, now, mournful Litties, elegi^ck Songs and Lamentations are chiefly in
Use. And ah! how Few are left to join the mournful Song! Here and there, a
Youth escaped, a Monument of sparing Mercy! wondering that he was not consumed
with the sweeping Contagion!

And is the fatal Distemper sent amongst us again? How loud is the Voice to
prepare to meet a Holy GOD, who threatens us of coming forth in his
Indignation? For if is prevails, and we prevent it not by earnest Prayer,
Humiliation and Amendment, how many of this pleasant Company will ^k^ly, in a
little While, be in the immovable Stare? It affects my Heart, to behold such a
Number of Youth tope her, and think of the sweeping Distemper's Coming amongst
them! -- To think what Desolations, if GOD should give Per^^s;ion, it would
make! O may a merciful GOD prevent so sad a Calamity; and spare us, and by
gentler Methods of Grace bring us to Amendment!

3. Is it as we have heard? Then hence, All should be carefully considering
God's Works, taking Notice of the Operation of his Hands: They should observe
the Judgments and Doings of the LORD, and behold his Works. Sometimes, God
speaks once, yea twice, and Men perceive it not; He speaks by his Word and in
his Providence, and is not heard Men's Eves are blinded, and they see not;
their Ears are dull of Hearing, nor do they give Attention to the Voice of GOD.
Yea, it is to be feared, that many hear not his Voice, 'till the Decree bring
forth, 'till the Day pass as the Chaff, and the fierce Anger of the LORD come
upon them; 'till their Fear comes as Desolation, and their destruction as a
Whirlwind. Ah! Miserable Souls! Unhappy Men! They perceive not GOD speaking to
them, till it be too late to cry for Mercy! or, to hope to avoid the Floods of
divine Indignation! Poor Creatures! How they feel, when Death has Snatched them
away, and all their Opportunities of Grace are over!

Don't it make all our Hearts to sigh -- to think of that sad Eternity before
them! Oh! how much more comfortable, will a due Confideration and improvement
of GOD's Judgments make us at last; when the good design of a merciful GOD
shall be happily ob^ained, by awakening us to Repentance, and driving as to the
Feathers of the ALMIGHTY's Wings for Protection?

But how can we hope, that the instructive Voice of divine Providence in those
terrible Things done in Righteousness, should have this happy Effect upon us it
we take no Notice of the Works and Doings of the LORD? If we will not yield
Attertion, what Means of Instruction are likely to availd? We know the
unobserving Learner never makes Proficiency, but leses many Means of
Instruction: And so whiles we observe not the Providence of GOD, we shall
likely lose the Benefit, we might otherwise have, from many instructive
dispensations of Providence: GOD may speak often, and we perceive it not: and
so the gracious End of divine Warnings may be frustrated.

4. If is be as has been showed, Then we may infer, that great th^'tfulness
and Serto^sness becomes us, when GOD's Judgments are amongst us. Shall a
Trumpet be blown, an Alarm given, and the People not be afraid? Shall Warning
be given us to prepare to meet our GOD, and we remain as senseless, tho'tless,
inconsiderate as ever? -- How unsuitable would this be? And shall the ALMIGHTY
himself awfully speak, and utter his Voice in the Way of his Providence, and we
yet indulge our selves in Levity and Mirth, and let our Heart cheer us, as though
we had no Warning to look out for an Evil Day, and were nothing concerted in
the Afflictions of our Friends, and Judgments of GOD? Can we but abhor such a
spirit? Methinks, Nothing seems more indece^t, than a jolly carele^se, merry
Humor indulged, when GOD in the way of his Judgments, is calling al^ud to
prepare for a solemn Meeting with his Dreadful Majesty. GOD's Judgments are
serious; and it is a serious Thing to meet him when he comes forth in the same.

And I cannot but be pleased (and I hope it is and ken for Good) that the Young
People of any Charge are inclined to be serious, and to consider the Voice of
GOD in the Alarm, ^^a seemed to be given Them. O that your Coodn^ss may not
prove as the Morning Cloud, and as the Early Dew go away.

USE, II. Of A WAKENING
Unto such, who though Unready to meed GOD in the Way of his Judgments, yet live
at Ease, and are seemingh Securs.

Is it as we have beard, that GOD's Judgments are for the Warning of People to
prepare to meet GOD? Then seeing Judgments from GOD have been sent among us,
Awake, ye careless Souls, who lie open to the Judgments of GOD, and have
nothing to defend you from the Arrows of his Vengeance, Shall a Trumpet be
blown, and the people not be afraid? Shall the Omnipotent JEHOVAH utter his
Voice, and his Creatures not tremble? Shall GOD by awful Judgemnts, warn us to
be ready to meet him, and we not fear? And may we not to apply this, say, as in
Context, ver. 8 The Lion has rored, who will not fear? The LORD GOD has
spoken, who can but prophecy? Has not the Lord warned the Youth of this
Place; called to them to secure an Interest in his Favor, before the Flood of
his Indignation overtake them? Has he not uttered a loud Voice in this Part of
his Zion, and called tho rising Generation to attend, and be ready for
Sickness, Death, Judgment and Eternity? I hope, we have not as yet forgotten
the Sound. Methinks, the Voice plainly cries, All Fleph is Grass, and all the
Goodliness thereof is as the Flower of the Field. The Grass withers, the
Flower fades; because the Spirit of the LORD blows upon it. Methinks, it
especially cries to us that are Young, Be ready to be next, be read quickly to
depart.

And, alas! What shall the Unprepared Soul do, if it be quickly called away? If
the fatal distemper seises, dispatches and maker short Work? Ah! my dear
Friends, how shad, how dreadful it would be? How reluctant must that poor,
unhappy Soul depart! And what becomes of that sad Soul in the eternal State!
How fearful a Thing will it be, to go into his Hands with an unsanctified
Heart, and unprepared Spirit? Als! what can such expect, but to be spurned from
GOD's Presence, cast out of his Favor, and hurled down to Hell in his Wrath?
What can they expect but everlasting destruction and the Horrors and deaths,
the Enemies of GOD are destined to? And, Oh! wh^^ knows the Power of GOD's
Anger, or can conceive the inexpressible dreadfulness o^ being pursued with his
Indignation? H^^ Power is infinite, and as his Power, so is his Wrath; how
miserable then, is that Soul tha^ must always endure the same? Would it not be
dreadful, if it should be one of us? Could our poor Hearts endure, or Arms be
strong? If either of us should this day, or the MOrrow, or the day following
that, or at any Time be seized with the devouring Distemper, hastened away
before our Judge, doomed a^ his implacable Enemies, be bound in Fetter of Wrath
and Chains of despair, would it not be unspeakably sad, beyond all the Notions
of Horror, that we can now entertain in our Minds? Don't our very Souls
tremble, and our Hearts almost move out of their Places at the Thought of this?
Are we not afraid then, to remain in such a Condition, as that we cannot stand
in the Judgment, nor safely meet the LORD, if he comes forth to punish the
Inhabitants of our Land?

Awake then, awake; Ye stupid and careless Souls, who are now void of Grace,
and have no Interest in the Favor of GOD; and so are unready for an evil day.
Awake speedily, lest are you are aware you be called away. The Warning has
been given; Add not Incorrigiblness to your other Sins; for thereby your danger
will be but the greater.

Nor is there any Safety or Reason in referring the Warning and danger to
Another, as though God means only to warn Others, and They were likelier to be
taken away than You. -- O remember that for any Thing you know, You may be the
next, that shall be Sun mon'd away. -- That very Person, that hopes, and
flatters himself, that wherever dies, he shall not, may perhaps be the next. --
And what do you mean to do, if it should be so? Are you willing to run such a
Hazard of being lost for ever, and having an Eternity to spend in extreme
Anguish and Woe? Are you willing to run the Venture of meeting GOD clea^hed in
Vengeance, and your destitute of every Thing to shelter you from his Wrath? Oh!
do you remember, that the day of the LORD, when it comes, to such (...)
d^^kness, and not Light; even very dark, and no Brightness in it? Do you
consider, how dreadful it will he, when the incensed Justice of the Powerful
GOD shall make an utter Fine and Asstiction shall not rise up the second Time
Have you thought how dreadful is the Presence of an angry GOD, how the very
Mountains tramble at his Presence, and the Pillars of Heaven shake at his
Rebuke; how much like Fire his Fury is poured our. -- And are You willing to
meet such a GOD in the Fierceness of his Wrath? Oh! for you Soul's sake
consider; awake from carnal Security, lest terrible Storms of Vengeance awake
you, when it will be too late to find any Advantage therein.

USE, III Of EXHORTATION
Unto all, to take Notice of the Judgments of GOD, consider his Ways, hearken
to his Providential Warnings, and prepare to meet GOD.

GOD has warned us: His voice seems (...) an o^us, to seek the Lord and his
Favous and be ready to meet him, before Wailing shall be in all Streets, and
Men in all Houses and Highways are saying, Alas, alas. GOD calls us to be
afraid of a day of Trouble coming on; to be afraid, lest, if we presently turn
not unto the LORD, we be emptied and utterly spoiled; our Joy be darkened, and
our Gates be smitten with destruction.

The Voice has cried the trumpet has sounded; Let us take the alarm, hasten
our Escape, fly to the Mountain. Oh! who knows how soon a fatal day may come
on, and a great part of You, who hope to Escape, be taken. Make Haste then, and
be ready for all Events; fly to Christ the Savior, delay not, look not back.

To enforce his Exhortation, consider,

1. That the Voice cries for early Repensance, and speedy Preparation to meet
GOD. Sometimes, when GOD has been warning a People, they are ready to say, The
Vison is for many days to come: Where is the Word of the LORD? say they, Let it
come now, jer. xvii. 15. They say, Let him make speed, and hasten his Work,
that we may see it: and let the Counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw night,
that we may know it, Isa. v. 19.

But, Methinks, the Voice of GOD now, earneslly urges speedy Repentance; that
we be prosently ready for the woeful Day. It not only ^ries, that all Flesh is
Grass, and the Goodliness thereof as the Flower of the Field; but, that the
Lord of the same is preparing and whetting his Scythe to cut it down. Methinks,
it calls, to be teaching our Young Men Wailing, and the Daughters of God's
People Lamentation, because the Pestilence is come amongst us.

Fly then, Ye Youths, unto the Wings of the almighty, before the Evil befall
you: It Is dangerous delaying for a day: There is no staying sat in all the
Palin. The best, if not the noly Opportunity for this, in a little Time may be
over. Death may be doing its Work, And, Oh! what an unhappy Time will that be
for the Work of Repentance! When the Soul, if sensible of its Condition, will
be full of Anguish and Consternation, and almost die within him! When
distracting Fears will likely fill the Soul, and disable from Consideration! In
what disorder will the distracted Soul likely be! How unfitted for a due
Preparation to come before GOD!

Besides, the Pains and Languishings of the Body render it an unhappy Time for
so great a Work. Men generally find it enough then, to bear the Pains of the
Body, and grapple under the Load of their Disease: Their girding Pains so
possess the Mind, or fainting Turns interrupt the Thoughts, as to render a
fixed Attontion to Soul work an impossible Thing; the Groans and Terrors of the
sinking and expiting Nature must needs very often, call away the Mind from
every Thing else. Alas! It this shall every be the unhappy Case of any One of
us, to be brought on a dying Bed, and our Work not done, how better will our
Complaint be! and our Stroke heavier than our Groaning! How will the unprepared
Soul then wish, it had been earlier, and earnester in seeking God, and making
it is Pear with Him? It is enough to startle one, only to offer to his
Thoughts, the Miserable Case of such.

These Hear (...) sink, their Souls tremble; their Looks call for Pity from
bystanders, and are affecting enough, to beget bender Motions of Pity, even in
cruel hearted Men! Poor Creatures! how earnestly they look to their unable
Friends, to do something for them! and yet know not to which of the Saints to
turn for Help! How earnestly they beg the Physicans best Endeavors! and with
flowing Tears and affecting Motions, beg the Minister to look to Heaven with
earnest crier, -- and use all his Interest there, that they may be spated! And
when they endeavor to improve a remaining Moment, in doing something for their
Souls, the distressed Body diverts the Tho'ts and forces away the Mind.

Moreover, the overwhelming Fear, that will likely attend Persons at such a
Time, may deprive them of that Prudence, that at other Times they amy have; and
lead them to take unlikely Courses to save their Souls.

At such a sad Time, poor Creatures, frightened and amazed, full of Perplexity,
and their whole Souls in a Tumult, oftentimes lay Hold of what will never save;
as a drowing Person will lay Hold of any Thing for Satety, though i^ be at the
Bottom, and a sure way to make him Ruin certain.

It Is not to be doubted, but Many in their dying Anguish fly to Courses, that
will prow altogether fruitless, nor help their Souls at all They lean upon that
which will sink undo their Weight: They turn to the Saints, and hope for Mercy
for their sakes: They depence on the Prayers of their Friends: They trust to a
dying Prayer for Mercy. They trust it their forced Sorrow and concern; to their
(...) forced Desires of Religion, and their lov^ Esteem of the World, because
they can (...) longer enjoy it. They comfort themselves is the Me^^ies of GOD,
when their Hearts a^^ as dead in Sin as ever.

So that there is the utmost Danger, lest the miserable Soul, at this unhappy
Time lay Hold on some foolish ground of Hope; miscarry and perish for ever. Oh!
then, Now wilst Health lasts, in the Calm of our Loves; even Now, while we have
so good a Time, let us be prepating to meet GOD.

2. The LORD now waits to be gracious. In Wrath he remembers Mercy. Though he
has warned and threatened; and listed up his Hand, yet he seems to slop, and
give us an Opportunity for Repentance; he hearkens and hears, if so be we will
speak aright; repent us of our Wickedness, and say, What have we done, ad Jer.
viii. 6.

As he has warned us, so he invites us to seek the LORD, before the Decree
bring forth -- before the fierce arger of the LORD come upon us, as Zeph. ii.
2, 3. He le^s us Know, that he is not inexorable; that he retains not his
Anger for ever, but delights in Mercy; is willing to turn again, and be
reconciled to us, it we will turn to him, Mic. vii. 18, 19. A Scepter of Mercy
is yet held forth, a Door of Mercy open: Oh! let us come in while we may ^owrd^
Let us take with us Words, and turn to the LORD, and sincerely say unto Him,
Take away all Iniquity, and receive us grariously; so shall we live in his
sight, Hos. xiv. 2, and Chap. vi. 2.

It would be sad, it after God had warned us of our Exposeness to his
Judgments, and in his abundant Goodness allowed us an Opportunity to hide our
selves from the approaching Evil, we yet shoud make light of his Warnings,
despise his Goodness, abide in our Sins, and be overtaken with the heavy Storms
of Wrath, we had Notice were a gathering.

3. Why should we delay? 'Twill never be a better Time for Repentance and
Making our Peace with GOD than now. We must turn to the LORD by true
repentance, or Iniquity will be our Ruin. Repentance is a Work that must be
done, or we are undone for ever: Our Sins or our Souls must die. We cannot
always abide in our Sins, estranged and alienated from GOD, at any cheaper Rate
than the Blood of our precious, immortal Souls. Christ has once, and again
assured us, that except we repent, we shall all likewise perish. As sure then,
as we are now here, we shall perish, if we be not converted: If we remain
unsanctified, we shall be cast off with the unholy, that shall never enter into
the Kingdon of GOD: So that, it concerns us, to repent and be converted unto
GOD, as much as our Souls are Worth.

And what must be done, why shall we not endeavor to do it now? Especially,
considering, that we sahll never have a better Time? For, supposing GOD in
Mercy prevent the prevailing of Sickoness and Mortality amongst us, and our
Space in the Word be lengthened out, Yet it will never be a better Time, for
Repentance amd Seeking a Reconciliation with GOD than now: Yea, never will
there be again, so good a Time for this Work as now.

Young People are strangely apt to imagine a more convenisent Season before
them; but it is a Delusion, and ungrounded Imagination. The Time of Youth is
really the best Time for this Work.

GOD directs his Offers of Mercy particularly to Young Persons: He calls to
them in a partcular Manner to come and partake of his Love; Pasal. xxxiv. 11.
Come, ye Children, hearken unto me, etc. See also Eccl.xii. 1. Remember now thy
Creator in the Days of thy Youth, etc.

There is a special encouragement given to Yourth, that, if they apply
themselves to seek the LORD, they shall speed; Prove. viii. 17, -- Those that
seek me early shall find me.

Moreover, GOD has manifested how pleased he is, when Persons in Earnest seek
him in their Youth. Remember the Instances of Samuel and Josiah, who sought the
LORD when they were Young; what gracious Respects GOD showed to them? He
blessed them and make them b^essings in the World.

Besides, there is not so much contracted Obstinacy in the Hearts of Youth, as
in those of more advanced Years. Not but that they have natural Corruption and
Principles of Sin in them, as well as Others; and Hearts so hard, as to need an
Omnipotent Power to soften the same. But yet there is an incereasing Obstinacy
in the Hearts of Men; and Young Persons have not made such Advances in it, as
by longer Continuance in Sin, they will arrive unto. But then by every Day's
continuance in Sin, this will increase upon Them; the Heart will grow more
hardened against the Counsels of Grace, more set against Religion and averse to
a Compliance with the Term of Peace; Repentance will become more difficult and
Hazardous: Jer xiii 23. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his
Spots? then may ye also do Good, that are accustomed to do Evil.

Again, the Encumbrances of Life increase upon Persons, as they increase in
Years. You will likely have more worldly Cares and Concerns, to call off your
Minds from the Care of your Souls afterward, if your Day in the World be
leng^h'ned out, than you have now. The Time of Youth is the freest from worldly
Cares and Troubles of any: And therefore the wise Man calls upon Youth, to
remember their Creator in the Days of their Youth, while the evil Days come
not, Eccl. xii. I.

Nor may we expect to be freer from Temptation to delay, and put off this Work
of Repentance, hereafter than now. There will be as many Temptations hereafter,
still to put off, without any doubt, as now. Delaying will not make it better,
but worses upon this Account. Say, have not some of you had Tho'ts of setting
about the Work of Repentance Years ago; but through one Temptation or another,
have neglected it till now? And is it any better upon that Account now, than
before? Are there not as strong Temptations to defer as ever? And so you may
expect there will be, if you delay longer. Delay no longer then, but seek the
LORD while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near. Improve a good
Time, while you have it.

4 If you will not hearken to the Counsels of GOD, nor take Warning by his
Judgmens, who know but GOD will say in righteous Judgment, Why should ye be
stricken any more, an leave you in the Congregation of dead Souls? It would be
but a righteous Retribution, if we resolve to delay the Work of Repentance any
longer, and harden our Hearts against the Warnings of God, If GOD should leave
us to a bard and impenitent Heart, to treasure up unto our selves Wrath against
the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the righteous Judgment of GOD.

And how sad a Judgment would this be? Then we might hear indeed, and
understand not, see but perceive not: Then, if we remained longer in the World,
we should be but like the barren Fig Tree, upon which no Fruit grew: Or like
the dejected Earth, which bears Thorns and Briars; whose End is to be burned.

Some have thus been left of God. -- So when GOD had Counseled and warned
Israel, and it proved to no Purpose; he righteously gave them up to their own
Hearts Lusts, and said, Why should ye be stricken any more? Ye will revolt more
and more, Isa. i. 5. And so sometimes, he lets Persons alone to go on in their
own Ways; takes away his holy Spirit, and strives no more with them.

And it has been sometimes observed, that when GOD begins early to warn
Persons, and to strive with them by his Spirit, if his Warnings be slighted,
and the Strivings of his Spirit resisted, GOD early leaves them, and takes away
his holy Spirit from them.

Thus Many, who have had awakening Means, and the Strivings of GOD's Spirit in
their Youth, have been left when they advance in Years, and suffered to walk in
their own Counsels all their days. O then whilst GOD warns, whilst his Spirit
strives, whilst we have a^pecial Season of Grace, let us hear his Voice.

5 If hereafter GOD shoud give you saving Repentance, the Delaying of it will
be Matter of bitter Sorrow to Tou then If there be some Instances of such as
have long delayed Repentance and found Mercy with the LORD at last, Yet they
mourn at the Last, and bitterly bewail their former Times: They find, that they
have been wornging their own Soul; and with Tears lament it before the LORD.
It fills their Hearts with Sorrow, that they have lost such precious
Opportunities; miserably wasted away their Days, and misspent a Season of Grace:
It afflicts their very Souls, to remember how much they have dishonored GOD,
and lived in Vain; or what is worse, to the evil Purposes of Sin, big with
Misery and Death. Now, the Sins of their Youth cause their Hearts to ache, and
sill their Bones with Sorrow.

So that, if we find Mercy at last, it will cost us Abundance of Sorrow, if we
delay the necessary Work of Repentance.

And that a Pity it is, to lay in for after Repentance and Sorrows? We have Sin
enough already, to cause Abund^ (...) of Sorrow, and make the very inmost Parts
of our Hearts to ache when we shall be brought to a Sense of the same. What a
Pity it is, that we should lay in any more fore repenting Tears and Hear
depressing Sorrow?

In a Word, what a Pity it is, that we should indulge our Sell es any longer in
That, of which, we many be fore, there will be no good Fruit, and of which,
there is danger, the End will prove the Death of our Souls and of which,
suppose the B^st, and we obtain Forgiveness from GOD, we shall be ashamed;
mourn and be in Bitterness for; and our Souls be humbled within us.

6. If you remain unconverted and impenitent, you will be all your Lifetime
through Fear of Death subject unto Bondage. Your Hearts will reproach and condemn
you; an unpeaceful Witness reside in your Bre^sts: Which if it be stifled will
some Time or orther awake, and give in Testimony for GOD against you.

There is a Principle of spiritual Horror in unco^ver^ed Souls, if they seem at
any Time to be at Ease, and to live in Security. Conscience may sleep a little
While, but Terrors stand ready to seize the Soul, as soon as it wakes

And in General, impenitent Souls are sain to take Pains to lull their
Consciences asleep which will be often reminding them of a day of Reckoning: So
that there is no Quiet in their Minds; but their Consciences cry out against
them, or they are doing Violence to themselves, to suppress their uneasy and
accusing Thoughts.

And for the most Part, after all their industrious and painful Labors, to
drown the Noise and Clamor, their Consciences raise within them, They have
many Terrors in the Night, and tedious Reflections by Day.

When ever God brings his Judgments upon them, and it looks as if God was
coming forth in Earnest to purnish the Inhabitants of the Earth, (except some
few hardened Wretches, whom God has given over to a reprobate Mind; who are
become past Feeling, having their Consciences seared with a red hot Irou) their
guilty Breasts tremble as the Leaves of the Forest. If Sickness light upon
Them, or Death present it self before them, They presently howl upon their
Beds; their Hands become faint, and their Hearts fail them for Fear, and for
Looking after those Things, which, they apprehend, are coming on them.

7. Nothing is more unkind and unreasonable, than to reserve for the Service of
God only the worst Part of our Lives. Thus to requite the LORD argues a vile
and wrethched Heart. What? can we think of devoting the best of our Time and
Strenght to the Service of our own Lusts, to gratify the Flesh and serve the
Devil; and of turning off GOD with the Leaving^ of ou^ Lusts? What! think of
devoting ^^^^rime and Strength to the Service of Sin, and when the evil Days
come, in which we cannot find Pleasure in gratifying our Lusts, devote that
Time to God! How vile is the Thought! and worthy of Hell!

Surely, such cannot be thought less blame worthy than those, the Prophet
complains of. Mal. Chap. i. who offered polluted Bread on Gods Altar; and the
Blind, the Lame and the Sick f^^ Sacrifice. As that, so this is such an
Offering as None would make to their Govermour; no^ would they expect the
Acceptance of it, i^ they did.

Methinks our Language does not furnish (...) with Words emphatical eno to
represent the Baseness, execrable Ingratitude and horrible Wickedness of
Purposing thus to treat the most High and Glorious GOD, to whom (...) are
indebred for Being and every Mercy, -- Or, the indignation and sacred Rage,
with which our Minds should rise against the detetable Thought.

GOD is full of Compassion, infinite in Goodness and Clemency, as well as in
his other Perfections, or we might conclude, the Heavens would never bear such
an Indignity as this, at the Hands of impious Mortals. It declares GOD to be
unspeakably good, if the Heavens don't immediately gather Blackness; angry
Storms arise, and devouring Lightning blast the impious Wretch, that thus
presumes to treat his GOD

And, it God spares a While, the Wretch that lives in Sin, and presumer that
God will accept the Lees of it is Life, may jostly fear, that er'e while
provoked Wrath will break out upon it.

And, if now there be one Soul of us, that entertains the base Though It and
Purpose of thus requiting GOD, let him seriously consider the Curse denounced
against the Deceiver, which has in his Flack a Male, and voweth and
sacrifices unto the LORD a corrupt Thing, Mal. i. 14.

8. Our whole Lifetime is not too much to be devoted to the service of GOD.

Why should we not be willing to devote our best Time, yea our whole Time to
the Service of GOD? We are his, and to him we owe our selves; and he may justly
claim our ^eft and constant Service; We have been born, and carried by him from
the Womb: And even to the old alge of any GOD is he, Isa, ^lvi. 3, 4. It Is GOD
that upholds and provides for us al our Lifetime; and therefore justly claims
the Whole.

Or, do we think our Life will be too long to be devoted to the Honor of the
Infinite GOD? Why; can we ever utter the Memory o^ all God's wonderful Works,
show forth all hi^ Praise and declare all his Greatness, that we think his
Service will be too Little for our whole Lives? Or, can we do too much for Him,
who gave us our Beings and supports u^ every Day: who is the Author of all our
Mercies, and Foundation of all our reasonable Hopes of any future Good? Surely,
an Eternity is not too long to serve and praise such a GOD in.

And can we then think the best Life, that such poor imperfect Creatures as we
can attain unto, too good an Offering for God? Or, can we think so small a
Space as that of the Life of Man in this World, too much for the Service of
GOD? Surely, if we have any such Thot's, we have no becoming Apprehensions of
the infinite Glories of GOD and our Obligations to Him.

And indeed, had we but any suitable Knowledge of GOD and our selves, we should
see, that it must be Grace in GOD, that he will accept of our Service, when we
have done our Best; that such Service as we can yield unto God, though it be of
our whole Lifetime, is but an imperfect offering.

9. Consider, How sollicitous and importunate your Friends are for your early
Conversion.

O ye Children and Youth, did you know, how much your Souls Salvation lay upon
the Hearts of your Parents and Friends; did you know their Concern for you; how
they travail in Birth again, until Christ be formed in you; how often upon the
bended Knees of their Souls, they are Wrestling with God for you; Methinks you
could not, but be concerned for your selves.

How much have our Parents undergone, and done for us? And shall we not try to
let them have some Comfort and Rejoicing in us? Now, Nothing will more rejoice
their Hearts, than to see us walking in the Truth; remembering our Creator in
the Days of our Youth.

O Children, your Parents Hope and their Fear, what a Burden you will ease
their Souls of, if you would now turn to the LORD in Truth? If they could see
you in earnest seeking the Kingdom of Heaven and its Righteousness, their
Hearts would rejoice; they will efteem themselves blessed of the LORD: Their
Souls will have Comfort, while they hope God means Good to their House for a
great While to come.

10. If we early turn to the LORD, and sincerely devote our selves to his
Service; there will be ground to hope for the Continuance of GOD's Presence,
when our Fathers are gone, and the rising Generation comes in their Place.

The Fathers don't live for ever: One Generation passes away, and another
Generation comes.

Now in all Generations, it is the Blessing of the LORD, and his gracious
Presence, that makes a happy People.

Our Fathers have been blessed with the Presence of GOD: He has dwelt with and
among Them: They have seen his Power, and rejoiced in his Grace. Ask them, and
they will speak highly for GOD, and give in large Testimonies for him: They
have found him a good GOD: By Him they have been often delivered in Dangers
helped in Weakness, saved in Troubles: GOD has often supported them, when they
have been ready to faint and to sink; done for them at such dark Times, when
vain was the Help of Man. They have trusted in GOD, and he has delivered them.
In a Word, GOD has been their Patron, their Defense and Glory; and great is
his Goodness, which he has wrought for them.

And how much is it to be desired and wished, that those who are next coming
upon the Stage, might also be accounted to the LORD for a Generation? That when
the Fathers are gathered to their People, and fallen asleep you may still have
GOD among You; a GOD near at Hand to do for You; and to whom you may repair at
all Times.

Well, if you, that are in your Youth, may be awakened to Repentance, and be
persuaded in good Earnest to set your selves to seek and to serve GOD; You may
hope that your Father's GOD will be your GOD: So David encourages us in that
well known Exhortation to his Son, 1 Chron^ xxviii. 9. -- My Son, know thou the
GOD of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect Heart, and with a willing Mind:
-- If thou SEEK Him, he will be FOUND of thee. --

But if our Youth will not regard the Works of the LORD, nor be awakened to
Repentance; if they will make light of their Fathers GOD; slight his Warnings,
and reject his Counsels, what a Generation! and what a sad Time will it be,
when the Fathers are gone! when the Glory shall be departed, and GOD have
forsaken those that may be left!

We can scarce imagine the Wretchedness of such a Generation. Forsaken of GOD!
it is a Kind of Damnation upon Earth! an Emblem of the Punishment of the Damned,
who are punished with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the LORD!

If GOD shall withdraw his Holy Spirit and forsake us, we shall be left in the
Hands and Power of Satan; shall be taken captive by him at his Will; and be
drawn by him from Sin to Sin, from one degree of Wickedness to Another, 'till
we have filled up the Measure of our Iniquities. The God of this World, the
spirit that now works in the Children of disobedience, will rule in us and
lord it over us, and drive us along the Road of Death and Misery: So that we
shall Jay up amazing Treasures of Wrath against the day of Wrath. And in the
mean Time we shall be wretched, while employed in the sordid Service of Satan.
Our Reason will be in slav'd to Passion and Lust: We shall eagerly pursue
Vanities that will deceive and disappoint us: Our Minds will he disordered,
restless and unquiet: Evil Passions will distract our Tho'ts, and prey upon our
Hearts like Furies of Hell. And such will be the Pride of our abandoned Hearts,
that a spirit of discontent will fill our Souls with continual Vexation. A
guilty Conscience also may likely often torture us with sad Reflections.
Moreover, besides these inward Miseries that attend unhappy Souls forsaken of
God, captived by Satan and led along the Paths of Sin, we may expect if GOD
withdraw his Holy Spirit, and leaves us to the Counsels of our corrupt Hearts,
Abundance of outward Evils to attend us is the World. Sin and Wickedness will
so prevail, that Men will likely be Plagues and Curses to each Other. Violence.
Falsehood and Oppression will reign; mutual Confidence and Trust be banished
from among Men; Confusion and every evil Work prevail. Then, if there shall be
some Few not given up with the Reft to the Power of Satan, they may with good
Reason turn themselves to GOD for Help, and complain as the Psalmist, Psalm. xii
1, 2. Help, LORD, for the godly Man cease; for the Faithful fial from among
the Children of Men! They speak Vanity every One with his Neighbor: with
flattering Lips, and with a double Heart do they speak. Yea doubtless, as the
Psalmist, they would mourn in their Complaint, and say, O that I had Wings like
a Dove! for then would I fly away, and be at Rest. Lo then would I wander far
off: and remain in the Wilderness, Psalm. lv. 6, 7.

Now, would it not be sad, if when our Fathers shall have left us, such Times
should follow; GOD be withdrawn, Faithfulness departed from among Men, Religion
and it is blessed Fruits retired and gone; and in the Room of these, Satan
lording, Sin prevailing, Wickedness destroying, and all Evils abounding?

Let us then by early Repentance and Religion, secure an Interest in the Favor
of our Father's GOD; that so we may hope, he will not forsake us, but dwell
with us, and carry on his own Work in the Midst of us, when they are taken away.

If these Considerations be weighed and laid to Heart by us, I cannot but hope
the Exhortation will come with Force upon us, that we early turn to the LORD by
true Repentance, and seek his Favor by an early Choice of Religion. O that the
Spirit of the LORD then, who can effectually open the Heart, and make Way for
his Truths to enter into our Souls, would impress these Considerations upon
your Minds, and cause them to sink deep into your Hearts; that so you may be
effectually stirred up to seek the LORD and his Favor in this Your Day, before
the evil Day comes.

Before I conclude this Discourse, let me plead with all the Earnestness I
possibly can; and Oh! that I could do it in a more moving Way, and in a deeper
Sense of the Worth of your Souls! I say, let me plead with you, and entreat of
you, consider what has been offered, and to suffer your selves to be prevailed
with by such weighty Motives to receive the Exhortation, take the Warning
given, and speedily prepare to meet GOD. My dear Brethren, Children in Charge,
for your own Sake, for your Friend's Sake, for your poor Minister's Sake be
entreated. Why will you not hearken, and consider? Why will you susse the God
of this World to blind your Eves? Why will you so expose your precious,
immortal Souls, and abide in the Way of GOD's Indignation? Why will you run so
dreadful a Venture of Meeting the Almigh clothed with Vengeance, and armed
with the Instruments of his devouring Wrath? Oh! consider the awful and amazing
Threatenings against the Sinner; open your Eyes, behold the preparing Storm of
Wrath! see the gathering Clouds! and who shall be able to abide the Storm, or
stand before the Indignation? Whose Heart can endure, or Hands be strong, when
he comes forth in the Fierceness of his Anger, the Mountains shaking, the Hills
moving, the Earth trembling at his Presence, Yea, the World, and all that dwell
therein? I hope, that None of you, the Youth of my Charge and Love, will harden
your selves against the threatened Vengeance, and the Terrors of GOD's Wrath:
For, alas! how soon, when the threatened Storm shall come, will your
Countenances change, your Courage fail, and you cry for Mercy, and wish you had
hearkened and prepared your selves to meet the LORD? I hope you may never know
by Experience the Dreadfulness of being pursued, overtaken and bor'n down by
the Vengeance of an angry GOD, as his implacable and obstinate Enemies must. It
raises Pity, and is affecting only to think of the Dreadfulness of the Day of
the LORD to such poor Creatures! What will they do! What can they say! -- How
confounded and amazed will they stand before their Judge! Oh then, be entreated
before the Day come, to reconcile your selves to GOD; and make Have, lest it be
too late.

Methinks I don't know how to conclude, or leave off Entreating, till I may
hope some are persuaded in Earrest to seek the LORD

And yet, there is this melancholy Though It in Laboring with you, Namely, That if
you will not be persuaded, nor hearken, the Day of the LORD's Wrath will be so
much the more dreadful to You. The Warning of GOD not considered, nor laid to
Heart, will make the Day more dreadful; and this Discourse and Exhortation
meant in Love to your Souls, will make it worse: For you will likely hear how
you receive this very Exhortation. If you hearken, you will likely, many a Time
bless GOD for it; and if you refuse, alas! it will be a Witness against you:
Conscience will say, when your Calamity comes, Ah! You was warned, entreated,
and you would not hear; and your Judge will say, I have called, and ye refused;
you set at Naught all my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof.

Le^ me then, with all the Seriousness and Solemnity I can, Charge you, that
you so improve this Exhortation, as that in the Day of the LORD, when You and I
must stand before my LORD and Master, who has sent me unto You, I need not be
forced to give in Witness against You.

Would to GOD, that, when I must come before my Master at his Judgment Seat, to
give an Account of what I have done, with Respect to the Souls committed to my
Charge, (tremble my Soul in holy Fear, remembering the Solemn Day) I say, would
to GOD, that I need not have to bring in Testimony against them! And
particularly, Dear Children of my Care, that I need not have to say against
You, that on this Day! I warned You, entreated and pleaded with You, and you
would not hear!

Be entreated then, to take this Warning, and comply with this Exhortation, and
turn to the LORD: So shall my Soul rejoice, even mine; and You your selves will
be so far from repenting of it, that it will make your Hearts glad for ever.

It seems to me, that Nothing would seem too much that was in my Power, if I
could but gain you for Christ: How willingly would I spend all my S^rength in
Entreating, if that would do? How willingly would I make my Self your Seryant,
and entreat upon my Knees, if that would do? But, alas! what can a weak,
insufficient Creature do? Oh that the Allpowerful GOD would undertake, and make
you willing, by his powerful Grace!

I want, Methinks to know whither there are None persuaded, and fain would hope
that there are some, whose Hearts are overcome. And for my Encouragement, there
appear some Countenances, showing as if they were effected, concerned and
intended to hear. But then, I am afraid, lest in a little Time, they forget
themselves; their Concern vanish, and their Goodness be at the Morning Cloud,
and as the early Dew that passes away; that in a little While they will forgot
the Exhortation, slight the Warning, and return to carnal Ease and their former
Carelessness, At this my Heart trembles, and almost moves out of his Place:
Even when I remember, I am afraid, and Trembling takes Hold an my Flesh! O
that it might not be so, but that the Impression may abide!

How ever fincerely, my Friends, I disire and long for your Soul's Salvation;
how willingly so ever I would do, what I may to promote the same, yet I can do
no more than I can. The Success of my poor weak Endeavor I must leave with
GOD, in whose Hands are the Hearts of Men.

If GOD graciously inclines your Hearts, and you are brought to be willing to
receive his Word, GOD shall have the Praise; the Glory will be His. If you will
not hearken, and find not Mercy with GOD, my Soul shall weep for you; and by
Reason of that Relation I stand in to You, that Charpe divine Providence has
committed to me, and that Love which I think I have to your Souls, I must have
continual G^ief and Sorrow for You.

But whether you will hear, or whether you w^^ ^^rbear, I will offer these Two
Directions to you; with which I purpose to conclude.

(1) Endeavor to Know your selves It cannot be expected, that any Motives will
prevail with us to turn to the LORD, and make it our Concern to secure his
Favor, if we know not what we are, nor our Relation unto GOD.

Now, it is one Part of the Misery men are naturally fallen into, that they know
not themselves; Know not that Manner of Persons they are, nor what is their
State toward GOD. Destruction and Misery are in their Ways, and they know it no

Hence it is easily accounted for, wh^ the most weighty Arguments, used to
persuade them (...) reconciled unto GOD, come but with little Force, (...) they
know not their natural Alienation from (...). From the same Reason it is, that
they are not filled with any great Concern, when the Terrors of the LORD are
mentioned, and GOD's Judgments are abroad in the Earth: Not being acquainted
with their own Guilt, and the Power of Sin and Death in their Souls, they
apprehend not their Danger, and Exposedness unto the same. Nor is it much to be
wondered at, if Men live in Vain, run into Misry and Ruin, so long as they know
not what they are, what they were made or live for, nor what is the State of
their Souls. Let every One then, be concerned and take Pains to know himself;
what he is, what is his last End, what is the State of his Soul.

And seeing that all Men are fallen into a State (...) Death; become depraved
and corrupted; Children o^^ Wrath, obnoxious to all Miseries, Temporal,
Spirtu^^ and Eternal; Let every one endeavor to search o^^ the Plague of his
own Heart; to become acquainte^ with the Corruption of his Natute, and his
Expo^^sedness to the Judgments of GOD.

A true Accquaintance with our own natural Poverty Nakedness and Misery, would
lead us in Earnest (...) tremble at GOD's Judgments, and enquire, What (...)
must do to be Saved.

(2) Acquaint your selves with Christ, the Savior, the only Name given under
Heaven among Men, whereby (...) must be saved. Endeavou^ to know who Christ is,
wh^^ was his Ensiness into the World what he has done and offers to do for
Sinners. And, O that you kne^ him as he is represented in the Gospel! As our
S^^viour said to the Samaritan Woman, if you knew th^^ Gift of GOD, you would
ask of him, and he would give you living Water. See Joh. 10. 10.

We must not how ever think, that every One that has learned to tell semething
of the Scripture Account of Christ, so know him as will infallibly lead him to
ask and receive the Grace of Christ. There is a sort of Knowledge that is
fruitless and vain; it does not move the Heart, nor influence the Life But the^
there is a Knowledge of Christ that is saving, was^^^ the Hea^^ and draws the
S^ul So to know Christ is Life Oh, let us then wait ^^^o: the Fatherof of
Lights; and beg that he would shine in cur Hearts; give unto us to know the
Mystery of the Kingdom of Heaven; make us to know the Voice of Chust; give us
such a Discovery of him, as that we may b^^ Enamored with his Excellencies;
esteem him as the ch^efest among ten Thousand; yield up our Hearts with
Plealure to him; choose him for our LORD and Righteousness, loving and resolving
to Worship Him.

FINIS.

