A CONTINUATION Of the REVEREND Mr. Whitefield's JOURNAL,

From his ARRIVAL at Savannah, May 7. His Stay there till July 25. From thence
to Frederica, at which Place he arrived August 8. His Return to Savannah again
August 16. His Departure from thence to Charlestown, South Carolina. From which
Place he took his Passage on Board Capt. Coc, bound to England.

A particular Account of his dangerous Voyage, while he was nine Weeks and
three Days upon the Seas, Provisions almost gone, the whole Ship's Crew in a
perishing Condition, till their Arrival at Ireland, (having then but about half
a Pint of Water) there they landed. From thence Mr. WHITEFIELD traveled by
Land till he arrived in LONDON.

With a PREFACE, giving the Reason, why he publishes a Continuation of his
JOURNALS.

BOSTON, Printed by G. ROGERS and D. FOUL; Sold by J. EDWARDS and S. ELIOT in
Cornhil. Also at the Printing-Office on the South-East Corner of the
Townhouse. 1741.

THE PREFACE.
THOUGH the Journals already published, were printed without my Knowledge, yet
as GOD has been pleased to let me see, by Letters sent to me, that he has
greatly blessed them, I now upon the Importunity of Friends, consent to the
publishing a Continuation of them, that those pious Persons who have interceded
in my Behalf, may see what GOD, in answer to their Prayers, has done for my
Soul.

I am sensible that this, as well as every Thing else of such a Nature, must
necessarily meet with great Contempt from natural Men, who are Strangers to the
Influence of the HOLY GHOST upon the Heart. But what have I to do with them? If
any of GOD's Children receive the least Consolation from my Experiences, Let
almost, formal Christians be offended, and the Scoffers of these last Days mock
on. -- I rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.

A CONTINUATION OF Mr. WHITEFIELD's JOURNAL, etc.
SUNDAY, May 7. Arrived at Savannah Town about seven this Evening, and joined
in Prayer, and a Psalm of Thanksgiving with Mr. Delamotte, and some pious Souls
that were rejoiced at my Arrival: The Good LORD sanctify our Meeting to his
Glory, and his People's Welfare.

Spent the Remainder of the Evening in taking sweet Counsel with Mr. Delamotte,
who seems providentially left behind at Savannah against my coming. How sweetly
does Providence order Things for us! Oh may I constantly follow it as the wise
Men did the Star in the East.

Monday, May 8. Begun to read pubilck Prayers, and expounded the second Lesson
at five in the Morning to seventeen Adults and twenty five Children. May GOD
open their Hearts that they may attend to the Things that were spoken.

In the Afternoon, Mr. Causlon sent Word, that he and the Magistrates would
wait upon me, but I chose rather to wait upon them, I was received with great
Civility, and our chief Conversation ran upon the Place of my Settlement; at
last it was resolved that I should have a House and Tabernacle built at
Frederica, and serve at Savannah, when, and as long as I pleased. I find there
are many Divisions amongst the Inhabitants, but GOD, I hope, will make me an
Instrument of composing them: Grant this, O Lord, for thy dear Son's Sake.

Sunday, May, 14. After another Week's Confinement, by the Return of my Fever,
under which God showed me great Mercies, and which went off with a Fit of the
Ague, I attempted to read Prayers, but was so exceeding faint and weak, that I
was obliged to leave off before I begun the second Service. Oh that my Friends
had seen me at that Hour, they then might have learnt not to have any Man's
Person in Admiration, and not to think more highly of me than they ought to
think.

Tuesday, May 16. Having by the Blessing of GOD gotten a little Strength, I
went to see Tomo Chachi, who, I heard, was near expiring at a Neighbor's
House. He lay on a Blanket thin and meagre, and little else but Skin and Bones.
Senauki sat by fanning him with some Indian Feathers. There was no body that
could talk English, so I could only shake Hands and leave him.

Friday, May 19. GOD still strengthening me more and more, I went this Morning
to two little Villages, Hampstead and Highgate, about Five Miles off Savannah:
The former consists of three* Families, making in all eleven Souls, one Man a
Jew; two Men, one Woman and seven Children Swissers. I was much delighted with
seeing the Improvements a few pair of Hands had made in their respective
Plantations, and was surprised to see what Industry will do. Surely they speak
not Truth, who say that the Georgia People have been idle; for I never saw more
laborious People than are in these Villages. They live exceeding hard, but with
a little Assistance may do very well. I was at a Loss, because I could not talk
French; but however I resolved, under GOD, to follow my worthy Predecessor's
Example, and to visit them once a Week, and read Prayers to as many as could
understand me. I also enquired into the State of their Children, and found
there were many who might prove useful Members of the Colony, if there was a
proper Place provided for their Maintenance and Education. Nothing can effect
this but an Orphan-House, which might easily be erected at Savannah, would some
of those that are rich in this World's Good, contribute toward it. May GOD in
his due Time, stir up the Wills of his faithful People, to be ready to
distribute, and willing to communicate on this commendable Occasion.

Saturday, May 20. Went once more to see Tomo Chachi, hearing his Nephew
Tooanoowee was there, who could talk English. I desired him to enquire of his
Uncle, Whether he thought he should die; who answered, He could not tell* I
then asked, where he thought he should go after Death? He replied, to Heaven.
But alas, how can a Drunkard enter there! I then exhorted Tooanoowee (who is a
tall proper Youth) not to get drunk, telling him, he understood English, and
therefore would be punished the more, if he did not live better. I then asked
him, Whether he believed a Heaven? He answered, Yes. I then asked, Whether he
believed a Hell? and described by pointing to the Fire; he replied, No, From
whence we may easily gather how natural it is for all Mankind to believe there
is a Place of Happiness, because they wish it may be so, and on the contrary,
how averse they are to believe a Place of Torment, because they wish it may not
be so. But GOD is true and just, and as surely as the Good shall go into
everlasting Happiness, so the Wicked shall go into everlasting Punishment.

Wednesday, May 24. Went to Day to Thunderbolt, a Village about six Miles off
Savannah, situated very pleasantly near the River, and consisting of three
Families, four Men and two Women, and ten Servants; I was kindly received,
expounded a Chapter, used a few Collects, called on a Family or two that lay
near our Way, and returned home to Savannah very comfortably, with my Friend
Delamotte, about six o'Clock in the Evening. Blessed be GOD for strengthening my
weak Body.

Friday, June 2. This Evening parted with kind Captain Whiting, and my dear
Friend Delamotte, who embarked for England about 7 at Night. The poor People
lamented the Loss of him, and went to the Waterside to take a last Farewell.
And good Reason had they to do so: For he has been indefatigable in feeding
Christ's Lambs with the sincere Milk of the Word, and many of them ( blessed be
GOD) have grown thereby. Surely, I must labor most heartily, since I come
after such worthy Predecessors. The Good Mr. John Wesley has done in America,
under GOD, is inexpressible. His Name is very precious among the People; and he
has laid such a Foundation, that I hope neither Men nor Devils will ever be
able to shake. Oh, that I may follow him, as he has CHRIST.

Monday, June 5. Had a Conference with a certain Person of the Parish, who, I
heard last Night, had been broaching many heretical Doctrines to one of my
Friends, particularly in denying the Eternity of Hell Torments. I therefore
invited him this Morning to Breakfast: and after imploring GOD's Assistance, in
the Spirit of Meekness, I asked him, Whether he believed the Eternity of
Hell Torments? He answered frankly, No. I replied, What do you mean, Sir, when
you repeat the twelfth Article of our Creed? He said, he believed wicked Men
were to be annihilated. I then read Pearson's Exposition of the last Article,
but he denied it all, said he thought himself in the right, and believed it his
Duty to inform Mankind, that they were to be annihilated. Upon which I repeated
to him that Passage out of the Revelations, If any Man shall take away from, or
add unto the Words that are written in this Book, GOD shall take away his Name
out of the Book of Life, and add unto him all the Plagues that are written in
this Book. This, he said, he believed. Afterward we discoursed afresh, but
finding him resolute to propagate his Principles, I then told him with the
utmost Calmness that I was sorry, that I gave him the Cup yesterday at the
Sacrament; but for the future, he must pardon me, if I refused ever to give it
him again. This staggared him a little, but he bore it pretty patiently, yet
thought me uncharitable. But I told him I should meet him at the Judgment- Seat
of Christ, and then he would see upon what Principles I acted. May GOD give me
Grace not to regard the Faces of Men, but with an humble well guided Zeal and
Courage to watch the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made me Overseer.

Saturday, July 10. Placed one that came with me, at Highgate, to teach the
Children English, that belong to that Village, and Hampstead. They are about
twenty in all, of French Extraction, but some few of them are able to speak a
little in our vulgar Tongue. I thought placing a Master there, would be of
great Consequence, First, Because I cannot think Children will ever be
naturalized to the Colony, till they can talk our Language. Secondly, Because
the present Generation will soon wear off, and these Children being well
instructed in ours, will make them forget their own Tongue, and should they
marry and have Children, they would naturally teach their Children the same; so
that at length we shall all be of one Speech. Thirdly, As they are but few in
Number, and no likelihood of any French Minister to come amongst them; I or my
Successors shall be unable to Cathechise or bring them to hear the Word of GOD
at our Church, unless they are acquainted with the English Tongue.

Monday, June 11. Opened a School to Day for the Girls of Savannah, a Friend,
whose Heart GOD was pleased to touch on Board the Ship, having at my Request
undertaken to teach them. The Work is for my Master, and therefore I doubt not
not of being supplied some Way or another with a sufficient Fund for the
Support of it. May GOD enable him who is set over them to feed them with the
sincere Milk of the Word, and give them Grace to grow thereby!

Thursday, June 22. Was taken (as all about me thought for Death) with a
violent Purging and Vomiting, which in the Space of five Hours quite exhausted
my Spirits, and brought me in appearance almost to the Point of Death. But GOD
supported me by his inward Comforts, caused me to rejoice in it; and cast me
into a deep Sleep, out of which I awoke perfectly well, to the Surprise of all
about me. O who can express the loving Kindness of the LORD* or show forth all
his Praise! My Parishioners in general showed they loved me; for they seemed
most follicitous for my Welfare. For their Sake, as well as for my own, I hope
GOD (...) so suddenly restored me. GOD grant I may now begin to be active in my
Master's Service, that whenever he shall call, I may be found so doing.

Friday, June 24. To the great Surprise of myself and People, was enabled to
read Prayers and preach with Power before the Free-Masons, with whom I
afterward dined, and was used with the utmost Civility. May GOD make them
Servants of CHRIST, and then and not till then will they be free indeed.

Friday, July 7. Being the Anniversary for opening the Court, I preached in the
Morning at the Magistrate's Request, and endeavored with all Plainness and
Humility to show both them and the People what they ought to do to promote
their Temporal and Eternal Welfare. O GOD, (...) thou bless it, and it shall be
blessed through JESUS CHRIST.

Tuesday, July 11. Returned this Evening from Ebenezer (Whither I went
Yesterday) the Place where the Saltzburghers are settled; and was wonderfully
pleased with their Order and Industry. Their Lands are improved surprisingly
for the Time they have been there, and I believe they have far the best Crop of
any in the Colony -- They are blessed with two such pious Ministers, as I have
not often seen: The^ have no Courts of Judicature, but all little Differences
are immediately and implicitly decided by their Ministers, whom they look upon
and love as their Fathers. They have likewise on Orphan-House, in which are
seventeen Children, and one Widow, and I was much delighted to see the
Regularity wherewith it is managed. Oh that GOD may stir up the Hearts of his
Servants to contribute toward that and another which we hope to have erected
at Savannah -- Mr. Boltzius, one of their Ministers, being with me on Saturday,
I gave him some of my Poor's Store for his Orphans, and when I came to
Ebenezer, he called them all before him, catechized and exhorted them to give
GOD Thanks for his good Providence toward them; then prayed with them, and
made them pray after him; then sung a Psalm, and afterward the little Lambs
came and shook me by the Hand one by one, and so we parted, and I scarce was
ever better pleased in my Life -- Surely, whoever contributes to the Relief of
the Saltzburghers, will perform an acceptable Sacrifice to our Blessed Master,
They are very poor; but with a little Assistance might live Comfortably and
well. They want a Place for Public Worship, and Money to buy Cattle, and other
Necessaries for the Orphan-House and People. May the great GOD raise up
Instruments to assist and relieve them; for surely they are worthy.

Tuesday, July 18. About ten o'Clock this Evening returned to Savannah, having
set out from thence Yesterday to visit four or five Families that live at some
of the outward Settlements about twelve Miles off. -- Their Beginnings as yet
are but small, but I cannot help thinking there are Foundations laying for
great temporal and spiritual Blessings in Georgia, when the Inhabitants are
found worthy. -- Blessed be GOD, in Savannah they will hear the Word gladly,
and People every where receive me with the utmost Civility, and are not angry
when I reprove them. -- May GOD keep them always thus minded, and prepare me
for whatever Sufferings he shall permit to fall upon me for doing my Duty.

Tuesday, July 25. I am now waiting for the Scout-Boat which Mr. Hortan has
sent to take me to Frederica, to preach the Gospel there also. For therefore am
I sent. -- I ^ould part with regret from the People of Savannah, did I not know
GOD called me from them. For they seem to have a sincere Affection for me, and
flock (especially every Evening) to hear the Word of GOD. -- I have endeavored
to let my Gentleness be known amongst them, because they consist of different
Nations and Opinions. -- And I have strove to draw them by the Cords of Love,
because the Obedience resulting from that Principle I take to be most genuine
and lasting. My ordinary Way of dividing my Ministerial Labors has been as
follows, --

On Sunday Morning at five o'Clock, I publicly expound the second Lesson for
the Morning or Evening Service as I see most suited to the People's
Edification; at ten I preach and read Prayers, at three in the Afternoon I do
the same, and at seven expound Part of the Church Catechism, at which great
Numbers are usually present. I visit from House to House, read public Prayers,
and expound twice, and catechize (unless something extraordinary happens,)
visit the Sick every Day, and read to as many of my Parishoners as will come
thrice a Week. -- And blessed be GOD my Labors have not been altogether vain
in the LORD. For he has been pleased to set his Seal to my Ministry, in a
Manner I could not, I dared not in America expect. Not unto me, O LORD, not
unto me, but unto thy Name be the Glory.

At FREDERICA.
Tuesday, August 8. After a pleasant Passage of five or six Days arrived at
Frederica, a Town situated southwardly above an hundred Miles from Savannah and
consisting of about an hundred and twenty Inhabitants. The People received me
most gladly, having had a Famine of the Word for a long Season. May GOD give a
Blessing to my coming amongst them.

In the Evening we had public Prayers, and expounding of the second Lesson
under a large Tree, and many more present than could be expected. Blessed be
GOD.

Wednesday, August 9. Began to Day visiting from House to House, and found the
People in Appearance desirous of being fed with the sincere Milk of the Word,
and sollicitous for my Continuance amongst them. Poor Creatures! my Heart ached
for them, because I saw them and their Children scattered abroad as Sheep
having no Shepherd. LORD, in thy due Time send forth some Labourer into this
Part of thy Vineyard.

This Evening had Prayers in a House which Mr. Horton hired for us during my
Stay, and most of the Inhabitants, I believe, were present. Blessed be GOD,
Timber is sawing for the erecting a more commodious Place for public Worship,
'till a Church can be built. GOD grant we may always worship him in Spirit and
in Truth, and then we may be assured that at all Times and in all Places he
will hear us.

Friday, August 11. Went in the Morning to, and returned in the Evening from
the Darien, a Settlement about twenty Miles off from Frederica, whither I went
to see Mr. Mac Leod, a worthy Minister of the Scotch Church, and GOD gave me a
most pleasant Passage.

Saturday, Aug. 12. This Afternoon was alarmed with the News of a Family
Disaster. My dear Friend H's Brother going to find a Horse that was lost in the
Woods, was lost himself, and many Guns shot after him for several Days, but in
vain. I endeavored to give Thanks to GOD for this and every Thing that befalls
me, because it is his Will, and resolved to set out for Savannah immediately,
knowing what Concern my dear Friend H. must be in at so sudden a Loss. Blessed
be GOD for this and all Crosses. Father thy Will be done in, by, and upon me
for Time and for Eternity.

In the Evening, because I was to go about Midnight, I gave Notice I would
preach as well as expound, at which almost all the Inhabitants were present;
for many were obliged to stand without the Door. The Lesson was very applicable
to my Cricumstances. It was the first of St. James wherein the Apostle bids us
rejoice when we fall into diverse Temptations. GOD enabled me to enlarge on it
pretty much. I told the People that God called me and I must away, at which
some wept. Oh GOD how do thou follow me with thy Blessings wherever thou
sends me! I looked for Persecution, but lo! I am received as an Angel of God.
Not unto me, O LORD, not unto me, but unto thy Name be the Glory!

Sunday, August 13. Being disappointed of going by the Boat last Night, I read
Prayers and preached to my dear little Flock twice, which caused great Joy
among them. Mr. Horton was extremely civil, and did every Thing he could to
oblige me. This Afternoon after Sermon intended to go with him to preach to the
Soldiers at the Fort of St. Simon's, and then the next Day* to go to St.
Andrew's, but Lord thou call me elsewhere. Oh grant I may have no Will of my
own, but whenever or wherever thou shall be pleased to call me, may I without
the least Reluctance say, lo I come! Had an Alarm brought to Frederica that the
Spaniards had taken Possession of Fort St. George, and fired at one of our
Boats: But this was quickly found to be entirely groundless.

About 2 in the afternoon having first read Prayers, and preached, most of the
Inhabitants recompanied me to the Bluff, and took their Leaves of me in an
affectionate Manner, and laded me with Things convenient for my Journey. The
good Lord reward them ten thousand sold, and make me thankful for his unmerited
Mercies!

At SAVANNAH.
Wednesday, August 16. Arrived this Day at Savannah, and had the Pleasure of
meeting my Friend who had been lost, he was from Tuesday till Friday roving
about the Woods, during which Time the great Guns were fired according to
Custom, and the People showed what a great Respect they had for me and my
Friends. Many of them going out all Day and Night after him. -- As Soon as I had
refreshed myself I went and visited my Parishioners from House to House to
return them Thanks for their Kindness to my Friends. An unusual Joy appeared in
their Faces at my unexpected Return, and they were ready to say, How beautiful
are the Feet of him that brings the glad Tidings of Salvation! At Evening
Prayers (and a very large Congregation was present) I returned my dear Hearers
hearty Thanks for the late Instance of their sincere Affection, I publicly
exhorted my Friend that was lost to show forth his Thankfulness not only with
his Lips but with his Life, and desired their Prayers to GOD for me that I
might now more and more devote myself to my Blessed Master's Service, and study
daily to purify my corrupt Nature, that I might be made an Instrument under him
of winning their Souls to GOD.

Wednesday, August 23. A Necessity was laid on me to Day to express my
Resentment against Infidelity by refusing to read the Burial Office over the
most professed Unbeliever I ever yet met with -- GOD was pleased to visit him
with a lingering Illness, in which Time I went to see him frequently. --
Particularly about five Weeks ago, I asked him what Religion he was of, he
answered, Religion was divided into so many Sects he knew not which to choose.
-- Another Time, I offered to pray with him, but he would not accept it, upon
which I resolved to go see him no more; -- But being told two Days before he
died, that he had an Inclination to see me, I went to him again, and after a
little Conversation I put to him the following Questions, "Do you believe JESUS
CHRIST to be GOD, the one Mediator between GOD and Man?" He said, "I believe
CHRIST was a good Man." -- Do you believe the Holy Scriptures? I believe,
replied he, something of the Old Testament, the New I do not believe at all. -
Do you believe, Sir, a Judgment to come? he turned himself about, and replied,
I know not what to say to that. -- Alas, said I, Sir, if all these Things
should be true -- which Words, I believe gave him Concern, for he seemed after
to be very uneasy, grew delirious, and departed in a Day or two. -- Unhappy
Man, how quickly was he convinced that all I said was true. Now he and I are of
one Mind: The Day after his Decease he was carried to the Ground, and I refused
to read the Office over him, but went to the Grave and told the People what had
passed between him and me, warned them against Infidelity, and asked them
whether I could safely say, "as our Hope is this our Brother does." upon which
I believe they were thoroughly satisfied that I had done right. -- GOD grant
this may be a Warning to surviving Unbeliever's.

Thursday, August 24. This Day went to Highgate with a Friend or two more, and
read Prayers, preached and baptized a Child, and catechized in a House lately
erected by the Inhabitants. For upon my sending a Master to teach their
Children, one offered to give me a Part of his Lot, and the rest to give their
Labor. Accordingly I accepted of it, found Materials, and to Day it was fit to
preach in, and be made a School-House. The Children though Foreigners, answered
admirable well, which gave me great Hopes that the other Foreign Children of
the Colony may also learn our English Tongue when a proper Master is provided.
-- After Service we refreshed ourselves together, thanked our Good GOD, and eat
our Bread with Gladness of Heart.

Sunday, August 27. GOD having now shown both me and my Friends that it was his
Will I should return for a while to England: This Afternoon I preached my
Farewell Sermon, to the great Grief of my dear Parishioners, for their Hearts I
found were very full as well as mine, which they expressed by shedding many
Tears. But a sensible Alteration appeared in their Countenances, when I
promised them solemnly before GOD to return as soon as possible. May GOD enable
me to perform my Promise, and prepare my Way before me.

The Weather was exceeding hot, and the Greatness of the Congregation made it
still hotter, but God enabled me to preach with Power. Thanks be to GOD for the
Strength he gives through JESUS CHRIST.

Monday, August 28. This being the Day of my Departure, it was mostly spent in
taking Leave of my Flock, who expressed their Affection now more than ever. For
they came to me from the Morning to the Time I left them with Tears in their
Eyes, wishing me a prosperous Voyage and safe Return, and gave me other Tokens
of their Love. For they brought me Wine, Ale, Cake, Coffee, Tea, and other
Things proper for my Passage, and their Love seemed without Dissimulation.

About Four in the Afternoon I went into the Boat provided for me by Mr.
Causlon, who with the Recorder came to my House and took their Leave. A great
Number of People came to the Bluff and wished me a good Voyage with all their
Souls, and a speedy Return; I thanked them, and having desired their Prayers,
blessed them in the Name of GOD, and took my Leave.

My Heart was full, and I took the first Opportunity of venting of it by
Prayers and Tears. I think I never parted from a Place with more Regret; for
America in my Opinion is an excellent School to learn CHRIST in; and I have
great Hopes some good will come out of Savannah, because the longer I continued
there, the larger the Congregations grew. And I scarce knew a Night, though we
had Divine Service twice a Day, when the Church-House has not been near full --
A Proof, this, I hope, that GOD has yet Spiritual and Temporal Blessings in
store for them. Hasten, O LORD, that blessed Time!

CHARLESTOWN.
Arrived last Night here, and preached twice to Day, I hope with some good
Effect. The Bishop of London's Commissary, the Rev. Mr. Garden, a good Soldier
of JESUS CHRIST, received me in a most Christian Manner. He and several others
offered me a Lodging, and were more than civil to me. How does God raise me up
Friends wherever I go! Who is so good a GOD as our GOD?

Was much pleased with the Neatness of the Buildings, and the Largeness of the
Place. The Church is very beautiful, and the Inhabitants seemed to be
excellently well settled. GOD's Judgments have been late abroad amongst them by
the spreading of the Small Pox, I hope they will learn Righteousness!

Monday, Sept. 4. Was much delighted with a Packet of Letters I received from
Savannah, not only as they were a Proof of the Writer's Affection for me, but
also that the Holy Ghost was effectually moving on their Souls.

Saturday, Sept. 9. Received another comfortable Packet of Letters from
Savannah Friends, and was soon hurried on Board, the Wind being fair for
Sailing. Great Kindness has been shown me at Charlestown, some Presents made
me, and there was a general and earnest Expectation of my Preaching on Sunday.
But GOD sees not as Man sees. Father, thy Will be done!

On Board the Mary, Captain Coc, Commander, bound from Charlestown to England.

Saturday, Sept. 9. About Noon came on Board with great Composure of Mind, and
thought of my absent Friends, settled my Things, wrote my Journal, and finished
some other Matters. The Wind being fair weighed (...) set sail about five in
the Evening. The Lord send us a prosperous Voyage, and bring us in his
appointed Time to the Haven where we would be!

Saturday, Sept. 16. Had contrary Winds all the Week, and got but a few Leagues
from Charlestown, yet GOD showed me great Mercies: For he enabled me to write
several Things, and correct others. I have been but a little Sea-sick; and
though I have not had my Clothes off, and lay upon Deck or on a Chest every
Night, yet the Goodness of GOD keeps me healthy and strong, and gives me a
feeling Possession of, his Holy Spirit. My Sphere of Action is now contracted
into a very narrow Compass. There are but few Souls on Board, and all that I
can do is to read public Prayers, and add a Word of Exhortation twice every
Day, and catechize those I brought with me. The Captain and all are very civil,
my Christian Friends have been much upon my Heart, and caused me some
Dejections, but GOD was my Comforter. Had I my own Will, I could wish myself a
speedy Passage, that I may return the sooner to those few Sheep I have left at
Savannah; but GOD knows best, and this Retirement, I hope, will break my Will,
purify my Heart, and fit me for the great Work that lies before me. Even so
LORD JESUS, Amen, and Amen.

Saturday, Sept. 23. Still GOD is pleased to send us contrary Winds, except one
Night about the Middle of the Week. -- However, he enables me to give Thanks --
and great Reason have I so to do -- For the Holy Spirit has been with me of a
Truth!

I have observed, that before GOD calls me to a public Work, he always sends
me into some Retirement, but never to so great a one as now. -- A Sign this, I
hope, that a greater Work is yet behind. Lord, ^it and prepare me for it!

My Mind blessed be GOD, has been composed and easy. Only the Absence of my
Friends, now and then struck a Damp upon my Spirits. -- But the Friend of all
is with and in me, and he by his Spirit, I trust, will supply the Want of their
dear Company. -- Amen, LORD JESUS, Amen.

Sunday, 24. Monday Sept. 25. Was oppressed much in Spirit these two Days. The
Wind was contrary and the Sea wrought, and was tempestuous; but blessed be GOD,
he enabled me to be resigned to his Will, this outward and inward Trial being
only what was to be expected after my late Assistances. We must not always be
upon the Mount in this Life.

Ever since Monday Evening, GOD has been pleased to send us fair Winds,
particularly to Day, when our Ship has sailed seven Miles an Hour, Blessed be
GOD.

I have been chiefly busied about writing Letters, to engage more Laborers,
and to get Contributions for my poor Flock.

Blessed be GOD! he has made me frequently rejoice in Spirit, and now quite
reconciles me to my present Retirement. When shall I have no Will but GOD's!

Sunday, October. 1. Had very little Sleep all Night, and was like to fall of the
Chest whereon I lay several Times, the Sea being very rough, and the Wind
turning in an Instant directly contrary. Oh that I could learn from Winds and
Storms to obey my Master!

Buried a young Man that came from Georgia, and died this Morning. LORD, what
is Man? He solaced himself with the Tho'ts of seeing his Friends in England.
But GOD saw fit to prevent it by shortning his Days. LORD, thy Judgments are
like the great Deep!

When I buried him, I could not say much, because of the rolling of the Ship;
but at Evening-Prayer I took occasion from the Lesson (which providentially was
the 15th Chap. of the first of Corinthians) to exhort all my Ship-mates to
consider so, as to prepare for their latter End. I believe my Words came with
Power. GOD grant they may have a due Effect. Amen, LORD JESUS, Amen!

Friday, October. 6. Before I left Savannah, the Lesson appointed for the
Morning, was St. Paul's Shipwreck, out of the Acts, and before I left
Charlestown, the Lesson was the First of Jonah, both which made such a deep
Impression upon me, that I wrote to my Friend Habersham, to acquaint him I was
apprehensive we should have a dangerous Voyage: Since I have been on Board,
what St. Paul said to his Companions, That he perceived their Voyage would be
to their great Damage, has frequently been pressed upon my Heart; and GOD has
now shown me wherefore he gave these previous Notices. For on Tuesday Night
last, after we had sailed 150 Miles, the last twenty Hours, about eleven
o'Clock arose a sudden violent East Wind, which continued till about Four in
the Morning, and put all the Sailors to their Wits End. -- Most of them
declared they never had seen the like before. The main Sail was slit in several
Pieces, and several of the other Sails, and much of the Tackling all to
Tatters; not a dry Place was to be found in all the Ship: The Captain's
Hammock, in the great Cabin, was half filled with Water; and though I lay in
the most dry Part of the Ship, yet the Waves broke in upon me twice or thrice.
In short all was Terror and Confusion, Men's Hearts failing them for Fear, and
the Wind and the Sea raging most horribly. But GOD ( for ever be adored his
unmerited Goodness) was exceeding gracious unto me. For I felt a sweet
Complacency in my Will, in Submission to his. Many particular Promises GOD has
made me from his Word, that I should return in Peace, flowed in upon my Heart.
And he enabled me greatly to rejoice. -- This is the first Day we have ventured
to pull down any of our dead Lights, which put me in Mind of the long Night the
Egyptians once saw. But I spent my Time in reading, and fervent Intercession
for absent Friends, and comforted my self much with the Remembrance of them;
most of our fresh Provisions are washed over Board, and our Tackling much out
of Order, so that we have a Prospect of but an indifferent Voyage. But blessed
be GOD, the Prospect pleases me. For now I shall learn, I trust, how to want as
well as how to abound, and how to endure Hardship like a good Soldier of JESUS
CHRIST. O Lord, let thy Strength be magnified in my Weakness, say unto my Soul,
It is I, be not afraid, and then let Storms and Tempests do their worst.

Saturday, October. 7. This has been a Week, blessed be GOD, though not of much
Action, yet full of Opportunities of exercising my passive Graces! To Day,
adored be the Divine Goodness, the Weather has cleared up more and more, and
our Ship has sailed directly before the Wind, at the Rate of four or five Miles
an Hour.

A Desire to see my Friends in England, to dispatch my Business, and to return
to my poor Flock, prompt me secretly to wish for a Continuance of this
prosperous Gale. But LORD I know not what to pray for as I ought. Do with me as
seems good in thy Sight. Only I beseech thee to sanctify my present
Retirement; that the longer I am upon the Sea, the more zealous I may be in thy
Service, when I come upon dry Land.

Saw a Jamaica Ship, Captain Phillips, who has been out nine Weeks, What Reason
have we to be thankful!

Having had no Opportunity before, since the Storm, of getting many of our
People together, gave a Word or two of Exhortation to my Shipmates, to bless
GOD for our late Deliverance, and to sin no more least a worse Storm should
befall us.

Saturday, October 14. Sailed this Week about 600 Miles; but Yesterday GOD was
pleased to send us a contrary Wind, which still continues. Father, thy Will be
done.

A few Days ago I flattered myself we should be soon at our desired Port, but
GOD is pleased to defer the Accomplishment of my Hopes: However, blessed be his
Name, He enables me to give Thanks.

Most of this Week has been spent in searching the Scriptures; and particular
Retirements for Direction and Assistance in the Work before me. -- GOD has been
pleased to send me many inward Trials. And now my fresh Provisions are gone,
and the People are put to the Allowance of a Quart of Water each Man for a Day.
So that I hope now the Spiritual Man will grow, having so little for the
natural Man to feed on. Amen, LORD JESUS. -- Blessed be GOD I can by his Grace
say that I rejoice in Necessities, and do in every Thing give Thanks. Keep me
thus minded, O Dear Redeemer, till thou perfect thy Work in my Soul.

Had this Sentence out of Henry much pressed upon my Heart to comfort me in my
Retirement; -- The Mower loses no Time whilst he is whetting his Scythe. --
Thus shall all Christians be taught of GOD.

Sunday, October 15. The Weather being calm, and I being kindly invited
Yesterday, went on board the Constant, Captain Philips bound from Jamaica, who
now sails in Company with us, and was kindly received both by the Captain and
his Passengers, and not only so* but they spared me what they could of their
Provisions. A most providential Supply; for ours was quite out. But our
Extremity is GOD's Opportunity. Blessed be his Name for thus strengthening our
Faith. May this be looked upon as a Pledge that he will never leave or for sake
us.

Our chief Discourse was about Georgia; and staying a little longer than was
thought, my Shipmates were very suspicious I should be detained on board. But
though their was Provision for the Flesh, yet I like my own Situation best,
because here are greater Opportunities of denying myself, and consequently of
making farther Improvement in the Spirit. Oh that I may always walk by this
Rule!

Saturday, October 21. Made but slow Advances in our Voyage, having had but one
or two Days of fair Wind. But notwithstanding, I believe we shall now soon
reach Shore; for GOD has been pleased to visit me all the Week with Variety of
inward Trials, which is a Sign to me that I shall experience yet more and more
of his Mercies. How good is GOD thus to prepare me by Sufferings, that so his
Blessings may not he my Ruin; these Things to the natural Man are not joious,
but grievous; but GOD enables me to take Comfort only in him, to thank him
sincerely for his loving Correction, and therefore when I am sufficiently
exercised thereby, I hope it will bring forth in me the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness. Amen.

Sunday, October. 22. At the Desire of the Captain preached my Sermon on rash
Anger, having hitherto used to expound only. In the Lesson were these
remarkable Words, Return to thy own House, and show how great Things God has
done unto thee. And again, It came to pass that when Jesus was returned, the
People gladly received him, for they were all waiting for him. These last Words
were remarkably pressed upon me at Savannah, when I was consulting GOD by
Prayer, whether it was his Will that I should go to England. Thus GOD's Word is
in particular Cases as well as in general, a Light unto our Feet, and a
Lanthorn unto our Paths.

Thursday, October 25. Was much comforted this Evening in reading the 33d and
34th Chapters of Ezekiel, wherein I could not but observe many Circumstances of
GOD's dealing with him corresponding with what I have experienced in myself:
The following Verses in particular were set home to my Heart, -- Also thou Son
of Man, the Children of thy People are still talking against thee by the Wall
and in the Doors of the House, and speak one to another, saying, Come, I pray
you, and hear what Word comes from the LORD. -- And they came unto thee as the
People comes, and they hear thy Words, but they will not do them, for with
their Mouth they show much Love, but their Heart goes after Covetousness. And
lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely Song of one that has a pleasant Voice,
and can play well on an Instrument: For they hear thy Words, but do them not.
-- Who that knows how GOD has dealt with me since I have been in the Ministry,
sees not that this Passage answers to my Circumstances, as Face answers to Face
in the Water? However, this I know, what I have spoken from GOD will come to
pass (lo it will come) and then shall these Scoffers and Despisers know, that a
Minister of CHRIST has been amongst them. O that I may never be brought forth
as a swift Witness against any; but we must all appear before the Judgment Seat
of CHRIST.

Saturday, October 28. Sailed about 300 Miles the four first Days of this Week:
Had a little Storm on Wednesday Night, and a great Calm ever since. We are now
within 150 Leagues of Land, and our Provisions and Water very scanty, and our
Ship very weak; but the Hour of our Arrival is not yet come. Lord, Teach me to
be resigned and thankful, and then deal with me as seems good in thy Sight.

Blessed be God! he has this Week enlarged my Heart, and filled me with great
Comfort, after great inward Conflicts. Is not all this to prepare me for
further Trials we are yet to endure e're we get to England? LORD, thy Grace I
know will be sufficient for me, and therefore I rejoice in the Prospect of
enduring Tribulation.

Had Reason to believe one on board was offended at my enlarging one Night on
the Sin of Drunkenness. -- I always endeavor to speak with the Meekness and
Gentleness of CHRIST. -- But if People will account me their Enemy, because out
of Love I tell them the Truth, I cannot help that. Lo, I have delivered my Soul.

Monday, October 30. Still GOD is pleased that the Wind, what there is of it,
should be contrary, and our Ship's Company are now brought into great
Streights. Their Allowance of Water is a Quart a Day, and our constant Food for
some Time has been on Salt Beef and Water Dumplins, which do not agree with the
Stomachs of some amongst us. But GOD enables me to rejoice in that and all
other our Necessities, yea, He so comforts me that many I believe are surprised
at my Cheerfulness. But when we are destitute of outward Comforts, then does
GOD more comfort our Souls. This Morning when I awoke, the Faith of Abraham was
greatly pressed upon me; and the Example of Daniel, and the three Children, who
were fat and well favored, notwithstanding they were fed with Pulse and Pease,
is continually before my Eyes. Some say we are within a hundred Leagues of
Land. But what does that signify, if GOD says, Hitherto shall you go, and no
further. LORD, in thy due Time, let that which now lets be taken away, but
not before this Trial has done what it was sent for, though it make us smart.

I warm myself by smiling on, and exhorting them, and this Afternoon we joined
in solemn Prayers suitable to our present Circumstances. LORD, let our Cry come
unto Thee. I know it will, and that we shall be answered, if it be best. But
great Blessings await me on Shore, and great Trials must precede. Oh that I may
by these small, be prepared for greater Sufferings. Amen, LORD JESUS.

Monday, October 30. Was comforted Tonight in my present Circumstances, by
these Verses out of this Evening's Lesson. -- I have learnt in whatsoever State
I am, therewith to be content. I know both how to be abased, and how to abound;
every where, and in all Things I am instructed, both to be full and to be
hungry, both to abound and to suffer Need. I can do all through CHRIST which
strengthens me. Even so come, LORD JESUS. Amen and Amen.

Reading afterward in the Book of Maccabeus, and thinking of my present
Situation, this Verse was pressed with unspeakable Comfort upon my Soul. After
this, they went Home, and sung a Song of Thanksgiving, and praised the LORD in
Heaven; Because it is good, because his Mercy endures for ever. I hope my
Friends will take care to fulfill this when we meet together on Shore.

Wednesday, Nov. 1. This Afternoon, about 4 o'Clock, as I was in Secret,
humbling my Soul before GOD, interceeding for my Friends, and had been praying
for a fair Wind, and Assistance in the great Work lying before me, News was
brought that the Wind was fair; which put me in Mind of the Angel's being sent
to Daniel, to tell him his Prayer was heard, when he was humbling his Soul with
Fasting, and praying for the Peace and Restoration of Jerusalem. Indeed I
cannot say, I have purposely, for these three Weeks, eat no pleasant Food, or
fasted, as he did; but our Food is so salt, that I dare eat but little, so that
I am now literally in Fastings often. Oh! that I may improve this blessed
Season for Humiliation, and extraordinary* Acts of Devotion, that I may be duly
prepared to approve myself a faithful Minister of JESUS CHRIST, whether by
Honor or Dishonor, by evil Report or good Report.

As soon as we found the Wind fair, we joined in Thanksgiving, and in singing
the first Part of the 34th Psalm, (new Version) which was very applicable to
our Circumstances. For they tell me they have not above three Days Water on
Board, allowing a Quart to each Man a Day. But he, that at one Time, at the
Request of his Disciples, considered the Multitude, and worked a Miracle for
their Relief; and, at another Time, at the Intercession of Moses, gave Water to
the wandering Israelites, I trust, now, has heard our Prayers, and sent this
Wind with a Commission to bring us where he will supply all our Wants, If not,
O blessed JESU, thy Will be done. Give me Grace, I most humbly beseech thee, to
hold out my three Watches, and at the fourth Watch I know thou will come. Even
so come LORD JESUS.

Thursday, November 4. For these two Days last past, GOD has been pleased
greatly to humble my Soul, and bring me low by spiritual Desertions. And Today
he has thought proper again to send us a contrary Wind, bl^^^^d be his Name.
Ou^ Allowance of Water no (...) but a Pint a Day, so that we dare not eat much
Beef. Our Sails are exceeding thin, some more of them were split last Night,
and no one knows where we are; but GOD does, and that is sufficient.

Last Night he lifted up the Light of his blessed Countenance upon me, and to
Day fills me with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory; so that though I have
little to eat, yet I inwardly possess all Things. I am sometime afraid lest
continued Abstinence may occasion a bodily Sickness. But wherefore do I fear?
If it does, that and every Thing else I know will work for my Good. -- What I
most dread, is lest any on Board should charge GOD foolishly; but I check the
first Motions I discern arising in any one's Heart, and endeavor to justify
our good GOD, in all the Evil that he has brought upon us. I put before them
the Example of the Widow of Sarepta, and caution them against murmuring like
the Israelites at the Waters of Meri^ah. And thus I endeavor to comfort and
support them with the Comforts wherewith I myself am comforted of GOD.

This is now the eighth Week I have been Aboard. If my Friends ask me, why I
arrived no sooner, I may truly answer, Satan hindered us. For I believe it is
he who is permitted to do this; but this still gives me greater Hopes, that a
more effectual Door than ever, will be opened in England, for preaching the
everlasting Gospel. O Satan, Satan, I defy thee to do thy worst; thou may
toss me up and down, and bring me into Jeopardy on evey Side; but Jesus Christ
is praying for me on the Mount. And when the Time appointed by the Father is
come, and my Soul hereby prepared, he whom Winds and Storms obey, will speak
the Word; and then I shall have a happy Meeting with my dear Friends!

Sunday, November 5. This Day we rejoiced with trembling. For though we thereon
commemorated our Deliverance from the Gunpowder-Plot, yet as our Circumstances
called for Acts of Humiliation, I used Part of the Office of Commination,
(besides solemn Prayer and Psalms three Times) and enlarged on these Words of
St. James, My Brethren, count it all Joy, when ye fall into diverse Temptations;
knowing this, that the trying of your Faith works Patience: But let Patience
have her perfect Work. I hope this had a good Effect upon my Hearers Hearts,
and calmed their Spirits. For indeed we are brought very low: But I can say
with the penitent Thief, That I suffer justly, and do not receive the ten
thousandth Part of the Reward due to my Crimes. Lord, remember me now thou art
in thy Kingdom!

Monday, November 6. Last Night, about seven o'Clock, GOD was pleased to suffer
a violent Wind to arise, which would not permit me to rise till this Afternoon,
about which Time it began in some Measure to abate* Blessed be GOD, through the
Precaution used by our Ship-Mates, we shipped but little Water, only we were
driven some Leagues back. The Weather was pretty cold, and a little Cake or two
baked on the Coals, and a very little Salt-Beef was all my Provision for the
Day; but thus Elijah lived for a long while, and why not I? Nay, he fasted
forty Days and forty Nights. And though I dare not presume to do so, yet if GOD
still brings me into greater Wants, I doubt not, but I shall find that Man
lives not by Bread alone, but by every Word that proceeds out of the Mouth
of GOD. Lord, I desire not to be exempted from suffering, but to be supported
under them. If thy Glory can be promoted by my Trials, lo, here I am, scourge
me, try me as it seems good in thy Sight!

Wednesday, November 8. Preached myself, Yesterday and this Morning, inwardly
weak and fainting, and unable to read scarce any Thing. But, blessed be God!
though he kill me, yet will I put my Trust in him.

When my Spirits are gone, I then find my Faith, as it were, less lively: But I
trust that is only owing to the Frame of my Body. For at all other Times I have
great Confidence in GOD! And was he now to put it to my Choice, whether this
Trial should continue, or he should send us a fair Wind, I should humbly refer
it to him again. For I know not what is best for me!

Most in the great Cabin now begin to be weak, and look hollow Eyed, yet a
little while, and we shall come to Extremities; and then GOD's Arm will bring
us Salvation. May we patiently tarry the LORD's Leisure! Amen, Amen.

Great Part of this Day I lay down, being weak and much oppressed in my Head;
but at Night when some doubted what the End of this Visitation would be, the
following Verses were with great Comfort pressed upon my Soul. For I am in a
strait between two, having a Desire to be dissolved, and to be with CHRIST,
which is far better. Nevertheless to abide in the Flesh is more needful for
you. And having this Confidence, I know that I shall abide and continue with
you all, for your Furtherance and Joy of Faith: That your rejoicing may be more
abundant in JESUS CHRIST for me, by my coming to you again. Thus Christians
have Meat to eat, which the World knows not.

In confidence of this, and such like Texts, that have been from Time to Time
applied to my Soul, I still, (as often as my Strength will permit) continue to
write Letters ready to send when I come on Shore. Which reminds me of
Jeremiah's being commanded to buy Land, when his whole Country was about to be
carried into Captivity. Blessed are they that walk by Faith, and not by Sight!

Though one in his Haste the other Day cried out, "What Jonah have we on
Board?" And I answered, I am he; yet many now, I believe, bless GOD, that I am
with them. For, say they, How should we have been blaming and cursing one and
other, had not Mr. W -- d been amongst us? Blessed be God, if my Ministry or
Presence can be instrumental to prevent Sin against thee, O Lord, toss me on
the Ocean as long as it pleases thee! O my dear Lord, I desire to be resigned!

Thursday, November 9. Enjoyed great Peace of Mind to Day, and was stronger in
Body than usual. Blessed be the Lord! We are now making for Ireland, and are
advanced some Leagues toward it. Whether we shall arrive there or not, GOD
only knows. I find all Uneasiness arises from having a Will of my own. And
therefore I simply desire to will what GOD wills. Oh! when will this once be?

Friday, November 10. Was much strengthened in our present Distress by the
second Lesson for the Day. It was our Savior's turning the Water into Wine at
the Marriage of Canaan. We have applied to him as the Holy Virgin did, and told
him in Prayer, that, "We have but very little Water?" At present, he seems to
turn away his Face, and to say, "What have I to do with you?" But this is only
because the Hour of Extremity is not yet come. When it is* I doubt not but he
will now as richly supply our Wants, as he did theirs then. May we in Patience
possess our Souls!

Saturday, November 11. Still we are floating about, not knowing where we are.
But our People seem yet to have Hopes of seeing Ireland. I know not whether I
am out in my Conjecture, but I imagine some of those Ships we have seen, are
arrived at England before us. Upon which, perhaps, my Friends will expect me,
pray for me, and at last give me up for lost. And then God will restore me to
them.

The Weather now begins to be cold, so that I can say, with the Apostle, I am
in Hungrings and Thirstings* Cold and Fastings often. Hereafter, perhaps, I may
add moreover in Bonds and Imprisonments. But I trust the Sufferings of this
Life will not move me. For they are not worthy to be compared with the Glory
that shall be revealed in us.

My outward Man sensibly decays, but the Spiritual Man, I trust, is renewed
Day by Day. I have besought the LORD many times to send us a fair Wind: But now
I see he does not think fit to answer me. I am wholly resigned, knowing that
his Grace will be sufficient for me, and that his Time is best.

Our Ship is much out of repair, and our Food by no means, enough to support
Nature in an ordinary Way, and that of the most indifferent Kind too: An Ounce
or two of Salt-Beef, a Pint of Water, and a Cake made of Flower and Skimmings
of the Pot. But I think often on him who preserved Moses in the Ark of
Bulrushes. And so long as I look upwards my Faith will not fail.

Blessed be GOD for these Things, I rejoice in them daily. They are no more
than what I expected, and I know they are Preparatives for future Mercies. GOD
of his infinite Mercy humble and try me, till I am rightly disposed to receive
them. Amen. LORD JESUS. Amen.

It pities me often to see my Brethren, lying in the Dust, as they have done
these many Weeks and exposed to such Streights: For GOD knows both their Souls
and Bodies are dear unto me. But thanks be to GOD they bear up well, and I hope
we shall all now learn to endure Hardships, like good Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST.

Sunday Nov. 12. This Morning the Doctor of our Ship took up the Common Prayer
Book, and observed that he opened upon these Words, Blessed be the LORD GOD of
Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his People. And so indeed he has, for
about 8 o'Clock this Morning News were brought, that our Men saw Land, and I
went and was a joyful Spectator of it myself. The Air was clear, and the Sun
arising in full Strength, so that it is the most pleasant Day I have seen these
many Weeks. Now know I that the LORD will not always be chiding, neither
keeps he his Anger forever. For these two or three Days last past, I have
enjoyed uncommon Serenity of Soul, and given up my Will to GOD. And now he has
brought us Deliverance. -- From whence I infer, that a Calmness of Mind, and
entire Resignation to the Divine Will, is the best Preparative for receiving
Divine Mercies. LORD evermore make me thus minded!

As soon as I had taken a View of the Land, we joined together in a Prayer and
Psalm of Thanksgiving, and already began to reflect with Pleasure on our late
Streights. Thus it will be hereafter, the Storms and Tempests of this
troublesome World will serve to render our Haven of eternal Rest doubly
agreeable. -- I fear now nothing so much as the Treachery of my Heart, lest
like the ungrateful Lepers, I should not turn to GOD and give Thanks by leading
a Holy Life. But all Things are possible with GOD, on whose rich Mercies and
free Grace in JESUS CHRIST, I alone depend for Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption!

Spent a good Part of this Afternoon in walking upon Deck, and blessing GOD for
the Prospect I saw all around me. His good Providence has been pleased to bring
us into a fine large Bay, surrounded on each Side with high Lands and Hommocks,
much like those near Gibraltar, and a large Light-House on the Fore-Land, from
which in the Evening was shown a Light. It lies on North-West of Ireland and
most suppose we are near Limerick, but are not certain, only one of our Men
having been here before. There are no Soundings till you come very near the
Land. The Wind being against us (that little that was of it) we could not get
much forward: But GOD in his due Time will bring us on shore. Blessed be his
Name, the Weather is exceeding clear, and this is the most comfortable Day I
have seen along Time. LORD make me mindful of these thy Mercies all the Days of
my Life!

Tuesday, Nov. 14. Let this Day, my Soul, be noted in thy Book, for GOD has
visited thee with his Salvation. -- On Monday midnight, as I was lying on my
Bed, my Sleep departed from me, and I had no rest in my Spirit, because
although the Weather was so exceeding Calm, and we in so great Distress, yet no
Boat was sent to fetch us Provisions. Upon this I spoke to the Captain, and he
to the Mate, who in the Morning went with a Boat, and about Noon this Day
returned loaded with Provisions and Water, and not only so, but told us, he was
kindly entreated by the People he met with, especially by a great Country
Gentleman, who came to his Seat at midnight, on purpose to relieve him and his
Companions; furnished them with a fresh Boat and other Necessaries, most kindly
invited me, though unknown, to his House, to stay as long as I pleased; and has
ordered Horses to wait ready to take me thither.

Who is so great, so good a GOD, as our GOD? Our Hour of Extremity was indeed
come: For we had but half a Pint of Water left, and my Stomach was exceeding
weak, through my long Abstinence; but now his Almighty Arm has brought us
Salvation.

Through all the changing Scenes of Life,
In Trouble and in Joy,
The Praises of my GOD shall still
My Heart and Tongue employ.
Of his Deliverance I will boast,
Till all that are distressed
From my Example Comfort take,
And charm their Grief to rest.
Fear him ye Saints, and you will then
Have nothing else to fear;
Make you his Service your Delight,
Your Wants shall be his Care.
As soon as the Provisions came, we kneeled down and returned hearty Thanks to
our good GOD, who has heard our Prayers, and sent his Angel before us, to
prepare our Way.

Therefore my Life's remaining Years,
Which GOD to me shall lend,
Will I in Praises to his Name,
And in his Service spend.
A little before our Provisions came, I had been noting in my Diary, that I
believed Deliverance was at Hand; for last Night and this Morning, I had the
most violent Conflict within myself that I have had at all. Thus GOD always
prepares me for his Mercies. Oh that this may strengthen my Faith, and make me
willing to follow the Lamb wheresoever he shall be pleased to lead me, Amen,
LORD JESUS, Amen!

Still greater Mercies GOD confers on his unworthy Servant. For after our
Provisions were brought aboard, the Wind still continued fair, and by six at
Night blew us to a little Place on Karrigholt Island, before which we cast
Anchor. Praise the LORD, O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his Holy
Name!

Ever since I have been on Board the Mary, these Words, Howbeit we must be cast
upon a certain Island (which were Part of the Lesson I read last at Savannah)
have been continually pressed upon my Heart, so that I have often mentioned it
to one of my Companions. Behold they are now fulfilled. Oh how unsearchable are
thy Doings, O LORD, and thy Ways past finding out!

Why GOD deals thus with me, I know not now, but I shall know hereafter.
However this I know, that this Voyage has been greatly for my Good. -- For I
have had a glorious Opportunity of searching the Scriptures, composing
Discourses, writing Letters, and communing with my own Heart. -- We have been
on Board just nine Weeks and three Days. -- A long and perilous, but profitable
Voyage to my Soul: For I hope it has learnt him, in some measure, to endure
Hardships as becomes a Minister of CHRIST. My Clothes have not been off
(except to change me) all the Passage: Part of the Time I lay on open Deck,
Part on a Chest, and the Remainder on a Bed-stead covered with my Buffaloe's
Skin. These Things, though little in themselves, yet are great in their
Consequences; and whosoever despises small Acts of bodily Discipline, it is to
be feared, will insensibly lose his spiritual Life by little and little. --
Many inward Trials also GOD has been pleased to send me, which I believe, he
has sanctified to my great Good. I am now going on Shore, to the House of a
wealthy Gentleman, whom GOD has commanded to receive me. I may yet be exposed
to many Perils by Land e're I see my dear Friends. But his Grace who has
preserved me from so many Perils by Water, will also be sufficient for me on
dry Land. Whilst I continue on this side Eternity, I never expect to be free
from Trials, only to change them. For it is necessary to heal the Pride of my
Heart, that such should come: With a particular fear and trembling, I think of
going to London. But he that preserved Daniel in the Den of Lions, and the
three Children in the fiery Furnace, will, I hope, preserve me from the fiery
Trial of Popularity, and from the misguided Zeal of those, who without Cause,
are my Enemies* Father, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit. Magnify still thy
free Grace in me. Guide me by thy unerring Wisdom, receive, O receive me for
thy infinite Mercies sake, in CHRIST JESUS, into Glory hereafter!

As for the Success of my Ministry, whilst on Board, I shall only say, That I
hope much Sin has been prevented, and one I hope effectually converted, who is
to be my Fellow Traveller to England. LORD if I can but be made instrumental to
save one Soul* I care not if I am tossed on the Ocean through my whole Life.
Glory be to GOD on High!

It is observable that just as we had cast Anchor, a violent Wind rose, which
(had it happened sooner) must have greatly hurt us. Mavelous are thy Works, O
LORD, and that my Soul knows right well!

About seven at Night I dressed myself and went on Shore, and was received in a
strong Castle belonging to Mr. Mac Mahon, the Gentleman who sent me an
Invitation. He himself was not at Home, having went some Miles up to meet me;
but his Maid Servant kindly received us, I asked for Water, and she gave me
Milk, and brought forth Butter in a lordly Dish: and never did I eat a more
comfortable Meal: About ten the Gentleman (having missed of me at the Place
appointed) came through the Rain, and entertained us most hospitably, and about
One we went to Bed; I hope with Hearts full of a Sense of the Divine Love. My
Song shall henceforward be always of the Loving Kindness of the LORD. I will
make mention of his Righteousness, and Truth, in the Assemblies of his Saints.
Now our Water is turned into Wine.

KILRUSH in IRELAND.
This Morning about 11 o'Clock, after being most hospitably entertained by Mr.
Mac Mahon, and furnished with Three Horses, I and my Servant and my new Convert
set out for Dublin and reached Kilrush, a little Town, about eight Irish Miles
from Kirrigholt, about two in the Afternoon, where we where sweetly refreshed;
and tarried the Remainder of the Day with Captain Coc, who last Night with his
whole Crew was like to be shipwrecked; but this Morning, by the good Providence
of GOD, was brought hither on Shore. Surely my Ship-mates will, of all Men be
most miserable if they continue impenitent, having such loud and repeated Calls
from GOD.

As I rode along, and observed the Meanness of the poor People's living in
these Parts, I said, if my Parishioners at Georgia, complain to me of
Hardships, I must tell them how the Irish live; for their Habitations are far
more despicable, and their Living as hard, I believe as to Food; and yet, no
doubt, Content dwells in many of these low Huts. A Man's Life does not consist
in the Abundance of the Things which he possesses.

At my first coming into our Inn, we kneeled down and prayed; and again at
Night sung Psalms, and prayed with the Captain and several of my Ship-mates. --
The first Time I believe the Room was ever put to such a Use by a Ship's Crew
and their Chaplain.

FOURTHFARGUS.
Friday, Nov. 17. Had a very pleasant ride, over a fine fruitful open Country
to Fourthfargus, a Village as was reckoned only ten, but at a moderate
Computation thirty English Miles from Kilrush: But this is not the first Piece
of Irish I have met with. -- Their innocent Blunders often extort Smiles from
me.

As I stopped to have my Horses shoe'd I went into one of the Poor Peoples
Cabins, as they call them; but it may as well be called a Stye, a Barn, or a
Poultry Coop. It was about twenty Feet long, and twelve broad, the Walls built
with Turf and Mud. In it, was a Man threshing Corn, two Swine feeding; two
Dogs, several Geese; a Man, his Wife, three Children, and a great Fire. --
Georgia Hutts are a Palace to it. -- Indeed the People live very poorly in this
Part, some walk barefoot with their Shoes in their Hands to save them from
wearing out, others out of Necessity. And I observed many of their Feet to be
much swelled, and ready to gush out with Blood, through extremity of Cold. --
LORD, Why is my Lot cast into a fairer Ground? Thy free Grace alone has made
the Difference!

Whilst I was in the Cabin, as they call their little Irish Huts, I talked with
the Woman in the House, and found she was a Roman Catholic: And indeed the
whole Commonalty almost, are of the Romish Profession, and seem to be so very
Ignorant, that they may well be termed the Wild Irish. No Wonder, when the Key
of Knowledge is taken from them. Woe unto their blind Guides. I can think of no
likelier Means to convert them from their erroneous Principles, than to get the
Bible translated into their own native Language, to have it put in their
Houses, and Charity-Schools erected for their Children, as Mr. Jones has done
in Wales, which would insensibly weaken the Romish Interest: For when once they
could be convinced that they were imposed upon, they would no longer suffer
themselves to be misled* Oh that some Man, in whom is the Spirit of the Holy
GOD, would undertake this!

LIMERICK.
Saturday Nov. 19. Presuming the People where I lay last Night, were Roman
Catholics, I neglected to call them in to join in Prayer, but to my great
Grief found afterward that some were Protestants and expected Prayers from me.
Oh base Ingratitude Is this my Zeal for my late signal Deliverance? O^
treacherous Heart! Fie upon thee, fie upon thee* GOD be merciful to me a Sinner!

About two this Afternoon we reached Limerick, a large Garrison Town, with a
Cathedral in it, about twenty one English Miles from Fourthfargus. The Roads,
as we came along, grew better; but the People much more subtle and designing.
Here are also many Beggars, which I impute to the Want of Parish Provisions for
them. -- At Evening-Prayer we went to the Cathedral, and returned public
Thanks for our safe Arrival. The Remainder of the Night was spent in necessary
Business, refreshing our Bodies, religious Conversation, and in writing some
Things I stood in need of.

Good GOD! Where was I last Saturday? In Hunger, Cold and Thirsting; but now I
enjoy Fullness of Bread, and all Things convenient for me, GOD grant, I may not,
Jeshurun like, wax fat and kick. Perhaps it is more difficult to know how to
abound, than how to want. But I endeavor to receive both with Thanksgiving.

Sunday, Nov. 20. Having sent last Night to inform Dr. Burscough, Bishop of
Limerick, that I was lately arrived: At his Lorship's appointment, I waited on
him this Morning, and was received with the utmost Candor and Civility. At his
Lordship's Request, I preached this Morning at the Cathedral, to a very
numerous Audience, who seemed universally affected, and full of expectation
that I would preach in the Afternoon; but Providence did not seem to open a
Door. But why should not a Strange Minister always offer his Service? I think
it is a wrong Piece of Modesty not to do it. For a Sermon from a Stranger may
do more Good than many from those the People are constantly used to.

After Sermon the Mayor sent twice to invite me, but I was pre-engaged to the
Bishop, who kindly invited both me and my Friend, thanked me for my Sermon, and
offered me the free Use of his Palace, and would have insisted on my accepting
of it, had I not told his Lordship I was to leave Limerick in the Morning: Oh
into what a wealthy Place has my Good GOD brought me? How does he every where
command some or other to receive me? As I was eating at Dinner, I was
meditating on the Divine Goodness in spreading such a Table for me, when last
Sunday I was in danger almost of perishing with Hunger. But I thought at the
same Time, if this was so great a Blessing, what an infinitely greater one will
it be, after the Troubles of this Life, to sit down and eat Bread in the
Kingdom of GOD. O that I may be accounted worthy of that heavenly Banquet!

TULLER-BRIDGE.
Monday, Nov. 20. Went about Limerick Town this Morning, to dispatch some
necessary Business. And found the good Seed sown yesterday, had received a
Blessing from above. For all the Inhabitants seemed alarmed, and looked most
wishfully at me, as I passed along. One substantial Tradesman in particular
even compelled me to come in, and showed me and my Friend uncommon Civilities,
and told me how solicitous the People were for my staying longer. -- Another
came to my Inn, and begged me to come and see him, which I did. -- And the good
Bishop, when I went to take Leave of his Lordship, kissed me, and said these
Words, Mr. Whitefield, GOD bless you, I wish you Success abroad. Had you staid
in Town, this House should have been your home.

About four in the Afternoon, against much Persuasion to the contrary, we left
Limerick, and reached Tuller-Bridge, about six Miles distant from thence by six
o'Clock, where I and my Friend were agreeably refreshed, and spent the
Remainder of the Evening in writing to some at Limerick, and strengthening one
another, and blessing GOD for these fresh Instances of his unmerited Mercies.
Who knows what a great Matter this little Fire may kindle? This I am assured
of, GOD did not send me to Ireland for nothing.

BURRASS and OSSERY.
Tuesday, Nov. 21. Went on journeying before Day, and came about five in the
Evening to Burrass and Ossery, twenty five Miles from Tuller-Bridge.

In my Way I had a short Conference with a Roman Catholic, who seemed more
knowing than the Generality of those of that Persuasion, but sadly misguided.
My main Drift was to convince him he was imposed upon. Am I? says he, with
great earnestness, did I know that, I would follow him, i. e. the Priest, no
longer.

As far as I can find by all I converse with, they place Religion in being of
the Protestant or Roman Catholic Communion, and are quite ignorant of the
Nature of inward Purity and Holiness of Heart. Lord, the Christian World is
cast into a deep Sleep, send forth, I beseech thee, some faithful and true
Pastors to awaken them out of it!

DUBLIN.
Thursday, Nov. 22. Came forwards last Night, to a Place called Neas, thirty
three Miles from Burrass and Ossery, and reached Dublin about Noon without the
least Fatigue or Weariness. Blessed be God, he causes me to renew my Strength,
or otherwise it would not be thus with me.

Two Things I can remark much for the Credit of Ireland, that the Roads,
especially to Dublin, are surprisingly Good, and Provisions exceeding cheap. A
Person may travel without much Expense.

Friday, Nov. 24. Went to Day with Mr. Bradford, Brother to Mr. Bradford of
Georgia, to visit Doctor Delany, who most kindly received me, and invited me to
dine with him on Sunday. Some other Part of the Day I was necessarily obliged
to go and see the busy Part of Dublin: But the more I see of the World, the
more I grow sick of it every Day. God grant that this Sickness may increase!

Sunday, Nov. 26. Preached twice to Day at the Churches of Warborough and St.
Andrew's, I believe with Success; for GOD enabled me to speak with Power. And
the People, as it were, not only hung upon me to hear me in the Morning, but
also flocked to the Church where I preached in the Afternoon; so that it was
like a London, Congregation. Great Good might be done in Dublin, by preaching
Charity Sermon for establishing Protestant Schools.

Tuesday, Nov. 28. By the Advice, and through the Introduction of D^. Delany, I
waited on Dr. Rundel, Bishop of Londonderry, and on his Grace the Archbishop
of Armagh, Lord Primate of all Ireland, the former engaged me to dine with him
on the Morrow if I staid in Town; the latter to dine with him at three in the
Afternoon, at which Time I waited on his Grace, and was courteously received
both by him and his Clergy. Having heard of me, as the Bishop of Derry told me,
from some Friend at Gibraltar.

Now GOD begins to show me why he so visited me in the Ship. Sweetest Jesus
give me Humility, and I shall see yet greater Things than these!

ENGLAND. PARK-GATE.
Thursday Nov. 30. After near twelve Months Absence from London, three Months
from Georgia, and a pleasant Passage of twenty four Hours from Dublin, to my
inexpressible Comfort, GOD brought me to Park-gate, and so fulfilled a Promise
which was pressed upon my Heart last Innocents-Day, in Hampshire, when I was
under a great Concern what my Mother would say to the Resolution I had than
made to go to Georgia. -- Rachel weeping for her Children, refused to be
comforted for her Children, because they were not. Thus says the Lord, Refrain
thy Voice from weeping, and thine Eyes from Tears; for thy Work shall be
rewarded. And there is Hope in thine End, says the Lord, that thy Children
shall come again to their own Border, Jer. xxxi 15, 16, 17. Many other Promises
there are which I have laid up in my Heart. I pray God I may be so blessed as
to believe: For there certainly will be a fulfilling of these Things which God
by his Spirit has spoken unto my Soul.

NANTWICH.
Friday, December 1. Rode from Park-Gate to Nantwich, in hopes of seeing my old
Friend Mr. Salmon, but GOD was pleased to disappoint me. However, he enlarged
my Heart, and enabled me to write several Letters to Friends at Dublin; and I
now, as I have often done before, make this Remark, "That GOD never disappoints
us one Way, but he opens a Door to do good in another.

MANCHESTER.
Saturday, December 2. Reached Manchester, by four this Afternoon, and was much
edified by dear Mr. Clayton's judicious Christian Conversation, for the Benefit
of which, I came so far out of my Way.

Sunday, December 3. Preached twice at Mr. Clayton's Chapel to a thronged and
very attentive Audience, especially in the Afternoon, assisted with six more
Ministers in administering the blessed Sacrament to three hundred Communicants.
Never did I see a Table more richly spread, nor a greater Order and Decency
observed. -- Blessed be God for my coming to Manchester, I hope it has greatly
benefited and strengthened my Soul. -- This has been a Sabbath indeed! May it
prepare me for that eternal Rest which awaits the Children of God!

STONE.
Monday, December 4. Set out at Daybreak and got to Stone, thirty four Miles
from Manchester, by five in the Evening, was a little fatigued; but quite
refreshed by the Morning. -- Blessed be God for these Conveniences. Oh that I
may always look upon myself as a Stranger and a Sojourner upon Earth!

Friday, December 8. After having rode thirty six Miles on Tuesday, and twenty
four on Wednesday, on Thursday about three in the Afternoon reached St. Albans.
-- In the Morning I set out for London, and was agreeably surprised with the
Sight of some of my Christian Friends, on the Road, who were coming to meet me,
which put me in Mind of St. Paul's Friends, meeting him at the three Taverns,
and I like him, was not a little comforted. Oh, that I may like him also, be
willing to follow my Master wheresoever he shall be pleased to call me, not
counting even my Life dear unto myself, so that I may finish my Course with Joy!

I.
Shall I, for Fear of feeble Man,
Thy Spirits Course in me restrain?
Or undismayed in Deed and Word,
Be a true Witness to my Lord?
II.
Awed by a Mortal's Frown Shall I
Conceal the Word of GOD most High?
How then before thee shall I dare
To stand, or how thy Anger bear?
III.
No; let Man rage! since thou will spread
Thy shadowing Winds around my Head:
Since in all Pain thy tender Love
Will still my sweet Refreshment prove.
IV.
Savior of Men! thy searching Eye
Does all my inmost Thoughts descry:
Does ought on Earth my Wishes raise?
Or the World's Favor, or its Praise?
V.
The Love of CHRIST does me constrain,
To seek the wandering Souls of Men:
With Cries, Entreaties, Tears to save,
To snatch them from the gasping Grave.
VI.
For this let Men revile my Name,
No Cross I shun, I fear no Shame:
All hail, Reproach, and welcome Pain!
Only thy Terrors, LORD, restrain.
VII.
My Life, my Blood I here present,
If for thy Truth they may be spent,
Fulfill thy Sovereign Counsel, LORD:
Thy Will be done? thy Name adored!
VIII.
Give me thy Strength, O GOD of Power!
Then let Winds blow, or Thunders roar,
Thy faithful Witness will I be --
It Is fixed! I can do all through Thee!
FINIS.
Advertisement.
As the foregoing Journal gives an Account of Mr. Whitefield's first Arrival at
Savannah, from thence to London; the next Continuation in Order, is from his
Arrival at London, December 8. 1738. and during his Stay there till June
following to his Departure from thence on his Way to Georgia; will speedily be
published and sold by J. Edwards and S. Eliot in Cornhil, and at the
Printing-Office over against the South-East Corner of the Townhouse.


