Mr. Shurtleff's SERMON On a Monthly Evening Lecture in BOSTON, September 18.
1741.

The Obligations upon all Christians to desire and endeavor the Salvation of
others.

A SERMON Preached September 18. 1741. On a Monthly EVENING LECTURE, At the
North Brick Church, in Middle-Street, BOSTON.

By William Shurtleff, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Portsmouth.

Published at the Desire of several Ministers that heard it.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhill. 1741.

The Obligations upon all Christians to desire and endeavor the Salvation of
others.
ROMANS X. 1. Brethren, my Heart's Desire and Prayer to God for Israel is, that
they might be saved.


AS we are fallen Creatures, and naturally in a lost, and perishing Condition,
the first, and chief Thing that should be thought of by us, and that, which,
(if we would act like reasonable Beings) ought in a Manner to swallow up all
our other Concerns, is; how, or whereby we may be saved? But who is there of
you, but must be sensible that it is something else that takes up the Thoughts,
and employs the Enquiries of a buisy World; and that with too many this is the
least, and last of their Cares?

BUT then of those that are not without all Manner of Anxiety as to their own
Salvation, the Generality of them appear to be too little concerned for the
Salvation of the rest of Mankind. Whereas though we are first to look to our own
Souls; the divine and heavenly Religion we profess, requires that we don't
confine our Regards to our selves, but extend them to others, and express a
just Concern, not merely for their present, but for their future and
everlasting Welfare. And accordingly the Words I have now read to you breath
the true Spirit and Temper of it.

THE Apostle having been speaking of the Rejection of the Jews, and the Calling
of the Gentiles, and being about to discourse farther upon the same Subject,
least what he had said, or might say, should seem to proceed from any
Disaffection to his Countrymen; he makes a solemn Declaration of his unfeigned
Love to them, and his deep Concern for them. Yea, so great was the Regard he
had for them, and so sollicitous was he for their Happiness, that he was almost
ready, and willing to forego his own for the sake of it. As in the third Verse
of the immediately preceding Chapter, For I could wish that my self were
accursed from Christ, for my Brethren, my Kinsmen according to the Flesh. If by
wishing himself accursed from Christ, he means that he could be content to be
cut off from the Land of the living, as an Anathema, or a devoted Person, and
to be removed out of the World in a most ignominious Manner, would it conduce
to their Felicity. Or if he intends that he should be willing to be
excommunicated from the Society of the Faithful, to be separated from their
Communion, and even to be accounted as a Heathen Man, and a Publican. That if
their best Interests would be promoted by it, he could wish himself no more
remembered among the Saints, and his Name blotted out of the Records of the
Church: This is a strong Evidence of his Affection and Regard for them. But
then there are some that carry the Expression higher, and suppose that he here
means his being really separated from Christ, and cut off from reaping any
Benefit by him. But then they justly observe, that he does not say, I do wish,
but could wish my self accursed from Christ. As we are wont to say, when we
would express a Thing to the Height which is not fit, nor intended to be done
by us: I could wish even so, or so: I could be content to do this, or that. So,
when the Apostle thus expresses himself, they conceive it to be as much as if
he had said, So great is my Concern for my Countrymen the Jews, that were it
proper, and would it prevail to the procuring of their Salvation, I could be
willing to undergo the greatest of Evils, and almost to wish my own Destruction
for the sake of it. So that the Apostle may be considered as giving us the
Sense of what he had before said, and as repeating much the same Thing, when he
makes this solemn Declaration, and says, My Heart's Desire and Prayer to God
for Israel is, that they might be saved.

IN speaking to these Words there are two Things that I would take Notice of,
and briefly say something to.

I. THE vast Worth and Importance of the Benefit, and Blessing here spoken of,
viz. The being saved. And,

II. THE vehement Desire the Apostle had that others might be Partakers of it.

I. I AM to take Notice of the vast Worth, and Importance of the Benefit, and
Blessing here spoken of, viz. The being saved. When the Apostle was about to
give the strongest and fullest Evidence that possibly he could of his good Will
to the Jewish Nation, how does he express it, but by his Desire that they might
be saved? Plainly intimating, that nothing else would be so advantageous, or
was of so much Moment to them: And it is certainly of equal Importance to all.
This being not the Thing that I had chiefly in View in discoursing from the
Words, I shall say but little to it at present.

BY the being saved, I here mean the being saved from the Wrath and Curse of
God, and the Miseries consequent upon it. This is what by the Sin of Adam, and
our own actual Sin, we have fallen under. But as there is a Possibility of
Salvation by Jesus Christ, it is a Thing of the utmost Consequence that we
attain to it. It is of very great Importance to us that we be saved at Death:
That our Souls when they put off these Earthly Tabernacles, may be delivered
from falling into the Hands of Devils: That they may escape that Place and
State of Torment that is prepared and reserved for the separate Spirits of the
Wicked, and go to associate with the pure and perfected Spirits of the Just.
And then it is of great Importance to us that we be saved at the final
Judgment, and general Dissolution. We are told of a Day that is approaching
when our Lord shall descend from Heaven in flaming Fire to take Vengeance on
them that know not God, and obey not his Gospel: When the Heavens shall pass
away with a great Noise, and the Elements melt with fervent Heat; when the
Earth, and the Works that are therein shall be burnt up. And if we look for
such Things, must it not be a Thing of great Concernment to every one, that
when this Day of the Lord shall come, they may be found of him in Peace? Will
it not be a fearful Thing to be then disowned and rejected by him? O! What will
become of you, when being doomed to everlasting Fire, you find your selves
surrounded with merciless Flames, and being cast out of the Divine Protection,
have no where to flee? How inconceivably wretched will be your Case, when you
find your selves cut off from the Prospect of present Deliverance, and from any
Hopes of future Release?

OF what vast Importance is it then now to provide a Place of Refuge and
Shelter against that great and terrible Day; that so you may be accounted
worthy to escape these Things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the
Son of Man? That whilst others are cast into outer Darkness, and left to dwell
with everlasting Burnings, you may be caught up to the Heaven of Heavens, may
take up your Residence with God, and blessed Spirits in those Realms of
uninterrupted Light, and your Body and Soul be possessed of complete and
perfect Blessedness for ever and ever.

ALL this, and much more is included in the Salvation spoken of in the Text. It
must needs then be a rich and valuable Blessing, and a Thing of the greatest
Importance to attain to it.

AND now if it be so, why should we any of us wonder, and now can we think it
strange, that Persons are so deeply anxious as they sometimes are, about their
own Salvation? Such is the Importance of the Thing; so much more difficult is
it than many are aware of to attain to it; so strait is the Gate, and so narrow
the Way that leads to it, and so few there be that find it: In a Word, such is
the Danger of coming short of it, and so dismal the Thought of miscarrying, and
of being lost for ever, that there is not the least Room to admire, that those
that are in the due Exercise of their Intellectual Powers should be under great
Concern, and in deep Distress of Soul, till they have a good and comfortable
Hope, and Prospect of it.

BUT on the other Hand, what Reason have we to stand amazed at the Carelessness
and Security of the greater Part of Mankind? Were we to argue from the
Behavior of the Generality of the Sons and Daughters of Men, we should be apt
to conclude that their Salvation was a Thing of but very little Consequence,
and be almost ready to think it a Matter of Indifferency to them, whether they
are saved, or whether they are damned. They have commonly very fearful
Apprehensions of Poverty and Contempt, and the other Inconveniences and
Mischiefs they are liable to in this Life, and take a great deal of Pains to
secure themselves from them: But they seem to be no ways afraid of Hell, or of
the endless and inconceivable Miseries of another Life, and take hardly any
Thought or Care that they may escape them. O! the lamentable Blindness and
Stupidity of the Sons of Men. Will thou be pleased infinitely good God, to open
their Eyes? Awaken their sleepy, dead Souls; show them the Dangers that
surround them; make them to see of what Importance it is to be saved; and then
they will give all Diligence to work out their own Salvation; and not only so,
but will be doing all they can to promote the Salvation of all that are near to
them. And so I come to the

II. Thing that I took Notice of, and am to say something to, from the Words,
viz. The Apostle's vehement Desire that others might be Partakers of the great
and important Blessing he here speaks of. Brethren, says he, my Heart's Desire
and Prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved. And in showing
himself thus earnestly desirous of the Salvation of others, he is to be
considered as a Pattern to Christians in all succeeding Ages, and as well
worthy of their Imitation. We are all then to take Example from him in
manifesting our selves earnestly desirous of the Salvation of others. And here
I shall say, 1st, Whose Salvation are we thus earnestly to desire. 2. How and
in what Way we are to manifest our selves desirous of it. 3. Whence or upon
what Account we are to do it: And then conclude with some proper Use of the
whole.

HERE then I am briefly to say,

1. WHO they are whose Salvation we are thus earnestly to desire. And in
general, we are to desire the Salvation of all, without excepting any of the
whole humane Race.

GOD made of one Blood all Nations of Men for to dwell on the Face of the
Earth. We had all one Father, and partake of one and the same Nature; and
therefore however distinguished into different Languages or Religions, we are
to be sollicitous for the everlasting Happiness one of another. There are none
of the Posterity of Adam, of whatever Nation or Complexion, but may be said to
be our Brethren; and therefore it should be our Heart's Desire, if it were the
Will of God, that they may be saved: We are to desire with the Psalmist, Psalm.
67.2. That God's Way may be known in the Earth, and his saving Health among all
Nations. That they that are Strangers to the great Salvation that God reveals
and offers in his Gospel may be made acquainted with it. And that they that
have the Overtures and Tenders of it, may accept of them and close with them.
And so I proceed to say, that though we are to wish the Salvation of all, there
are some whose Salvation we are in a more especial Manner to desire. And

1. WE are especially to desire the Salvation of those that are not only of the
same Nature, but of the same Faith and Religion with us.

BY those of the same Religion with us, I don't here mean those only that are
exactly of the same Opinion, or of our own Party and Persuasion; but all that
own the same common Faith, that profess the same Christian Doctrine; all that
are of the Church or Israel of God in general; all that as the Apostle
expresses it, in every Place call on the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord; both
theirs, and ours; to whom he wishes Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God our
Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1st Chap. 2d Verse. And thus far
are we all obliged to extend our good and charitable Wishes; even to all our
Christian Brethren, however they may be divided into different Parties and
Opinions, and distinguished by various Denominations: It should be our Heart's
Desire concerning them all, that they may be saved.

AGAIN, in the next Place, Christians should yet more especially wish this
Blessing to those that are peculiarly near and dear to them, either on the
Account of the special Relation they stand in to them, or any Benefits they
have conferred upon them. You are to be sollicitous not only for the temporal,
but for the spiritual and everlasting Welfare of Husbands and Wives; of Parents
and Children; of Brethren and Sisters; of Benefactors and Friends that are as
your own Souls. Brethren, it should be your Heart's Desire for them that they
may be saved. You are indeed to wish well to the spiritual and eternal
Interests of Strangers, and even of Enemies; to bless them that curse you; to
do good to them that hate you; to pray for them that despitefully use and
persecute you. But though your greatest Persecutors, and bitterest Enemies are
not to be excluded from your kind Wishes, there is no Doubt but that your near
Friends are peculiarly entitled to them.

AND then I may add once more, that Christians should in a very peculiar Manner
desire the Salvation of those of their own immediate Household. If he that
provides not for his own, especially for those of his own House, upon temporal
Accounts, and takes no Care for the Supply of their bodily Wants, meets with so
sharp a Reproof from the Apostle, of how much severer Censure shall he be
thought worthy, who neglects their eternal Interests, and cares not what
becomes of their precious and immortal Souls. Whomsoever they are that
Providence brings into your Families and puts under your Care, be they bond or
free, white or black, you are to be sollicitous for their Souls Welfare, and to
be heartily desirous that they may be saved. Having thus hinted to you who they
are whose Salvation we are earnestly to desire, I proceed to say,

2. HOW and in what Way we are to manifest our selves desirous of it. And,

1. WE are to show our selves heartily desirous of the Salvation of others, by
our fervent Prayers to God for it: This is agreeable to the Apostolic Pattern
here in the Text; My Heart's Desire, says this divine and inspired Writer, he
adds, and my Prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be saved. The same
Apostle elsewhere tells us, that it is the Will of God that Prayers and
Intercessions as well as giving of Thanks should be made for all Men. 1 Timothy
ii. 1.
Accordingly we are to pray for them that they may be saved, and come to the
Knowledge of the Truth. We are to beg of God that he would dispel those Clouds
of Ignorance and Error that overspread so great a Part of the known World; that
the Nations may be glad and sing for Joy, and that all the Ends of the Earth
may see the Salvation of God; that he would send forth his Light and his Truth;
that the Truth, even as it is in Jesus, may be embraced by all that profess his
Name; and that all that own the same common Lord and Savior, may share with us
in his saving Benefits.

BUT then we are to be peculiarly earnest and fervent in our Prayers for the
Salvation of such as fall under our more immediate Watch and Care; for such as
stand in any special Relation, and for all that have been remarkably kind and
beneficent to us. As we are especially to desire the Salvation of such, so I
say we are with a peculiar Fervency to pray for it: We are to interceed with
God for their temporal, but especially for their eternal Welfare: We are to
pray for them as the Apostle Paul does for Onesiphorus, who was not ashamed of
his Bonds, but when he was at Rome sought him out diligently, found him, and
often refreshed him: The Lord grant, says he, that he may find Mercy of the Lord
in that Day, 2 Timothy 1.18. Thus should we express our Desires of the Salvation
of others, by our fervent Prayers to God for it. And then,

2. WE are to do this by our earnest Endeavors to promote it. If these are
wanting, our seeming Desires that they may be saved are but an idle Pretense,
and our Prayers nothing more than a vain and empty Show. If we would make it
evident that we heartily desire their Salvation, we must do what we can as we
have Opportunity for the Furtherance of it. It will become us to do all that is
in our Power, that such as are destitute of the appointed Means of Salvation,
may be brought to the Enjoyment of them, and that those that enjoy them, may
reap the Benefit intended by them. We are particularly to endeavor the
Salvation of such as come under our immediate View and Observation; especially
of those we are any ways related to, or concerned with. Do we perceive them to
be in the Gall of Bitterness and Bonds of Iniquity, and apprehend that if they
continue in their present State they are in the Way to Death and Hell, we are
not to look upon them with Indifferency and Unconcernedness of Soul; nor barely
to behold them with something of Compassion and Concern, and secretly to breath
out a Wish on their Behalf; but to labor to convince them of their miserable
and dangerous Estate, and do what we can that they may be converted and brought
out of it: We are to endeavor that they may be reclaimed from their Errors of
Practice, and also from their Errors of Judgment, which, though they are in a
good Measure recovered from the former, may prove fatal to them: We are
particularly to do what we can to take them off from any mistaken Notion they
may be subject to, as to the Terms of their Acceptance with God: To put them
upon seeking for Justification only by Faith in the Son of God, by being found
in him, and having on his Righteousness; and to guard them against trusting in
their own Duties and Performances, which, without Doubt is, and has been the
eternal undoing of a great many Souls. This the Text leads me particularly to
take Notice of: It being the very Case as to those Jews for whom the Apostle
expresses so much Concern; and therefore he adds in the very next Words, I bear
them Record that they have a Zeal of God, but not according to Knowledge. For
they being ignorant of God's Righteousness, and going about to establish their
own Righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the Righteousness of God.
They were very zealous for the Law, and for the ceremonial Observances of it;
they were conscientious and scrupulous in complying with them; and were some of
them very exact and careful in their Morals: But here was their fatal Mistake,
that they rested in these Things, and thought hereby to recommend themselves to
the Favor of God. And this it is to be feared is the Error of a great many
professed Christians at this Day: They have some sort of Zeal for God, though not
according to Knowledge: They make a considerable Stir with respect to the
Circumstantials of Religion: They contend with a great deal of Warmth about
outward Modes and Forms; some one Way, and others the Reverse: They come before
God as his People, and observe all the stated Seasons of his public Worship:
They abound in external Performances, and are civilized in their Lives and
Manners; and upon these Things they depend to procure them Acceptance with God.
But if there be any of you that have no other Foundation for your Hope, it will
assuredly be cut off, and your Trust be as the Spider's Web. Upon Enquiry
you will find that the Pharisees did as much as this, and yet our Savior
expressly tells us, that our Righteousness must exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, or we shall in no Case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

WE are therefore in endeavoring the Salvation of others, to do all we can to
bring them to a humble Sense of the Insufficiency of any Works or Righteousness
of their own; to put them upon a cordial Acceptance of Christ, and an entire
Reliance upon him, who, as the Apostle tells us in the Context, is the End of
the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes.

AND thus you have briefly heard how and in what Way we are to evidence and
express our Desires of the Salvation of others. And so I pass to the

3d. THING proposed; which was to say, Whence or upon what Account we should do
it. And to pass over this Head in two or three brief Hints, we should heartily
desire and earnestly endeavor the Salvation of others,

1. OUT of Love to God, and from a Regard to his Glory, which is so much
concerned in it. He is the most amiable and excellent of Beings, and possessed
of all imaginable Perfections considered in himself: And how vast has been his
Bounty and Beneficence to us? He is the Author of our Beings; to him we are
indebted for what we are, and for all that we have or hope for; He ought
therefore to be the supreme Object of our Love, and consequently his Glory
should be our highest Aim, and what we should be ever sollicitous to promote.
And wherein is the Glory of God more advanced than in the Salvation of Sinners?
As his infinite Wisdom has pitched upon such a Way for the Accomplishment of
it, that it may be brought to pass without the least Reproach to any one of his
Attributes; so his Mercy and Grace will be herein highly exalted, and
unspeakable Honor will redound to his Name. Since then the Glory of God will
be so far promoted by the Salvation of others, upon this Account we should
desire it, pray for it, and do all we can in order to it. Again,

Nextly. We are heartily to desire and earnestly to endeavor the Salvation of
others in mere Love and Compassion to them. One of the two great Commandments
on which hang all the Law and the Prophets is, That we love the Lord our God
with all our Heart, with all our Soul, our Strength, and Mind. And the other
is, that we love our Neighbor as our selves. Mat. 22.37, 38, 39.
And if we have any real Affection for our Fellow Creatures, if we have any
Bowels and Mercies, when we look upon them as fallen from God, when we consider
the sad and unhappy State to which they are hereby reduced, and the amazing and
never-ending Torments, which unless they are brought out of it, must
unavoidably be their Portion, we must needs behold them with Compassion, and it
cannot well choose but be our hearty Desire, our fervent Prayer, and earnest
Endeavor that they may be saved.

Again,

ONCE more. We are taught by a great many Scripture Precepts and Examples, to
express our hearty Desires of the Salvation of others: It is included in the
great Commandment beforementioned, of loving our Neighbor as our selves. The
Scriptures are full of Injunctions to this Purpose. And then, how many
excellent Patterns of this Nature are there exhibited to our View? Particularly
we have the Example of JESUS the High Priest of our Profession to induce us to
it. From whence was it but from a Regard to the Salvation of Men, that he came
down from Heaven, that he was made Flesh, and dwelt among us? And whilst here,
with what unwearied Diligence did he prosecute this great and noble Design? And
as he was content to live a miserable Life, he willingly submitted to a
shameful and painful Death for the sake of it. And then I might mention the
Apostles of our Lord; particularly the great Apostle of the Gentiles, whose
Words I am discoursing from. How willing was he to spend and be spent for the
Good of Souls? How ready to become all Things to all Men, if so be he might
save some? What Labors and Perils did he go through? How far was he from
counting his Life dear to him, how freely did he part with the most valuable of
his temporal Interests for the sake of promoting the Cause in which he was
engaged? We see then that in desiring and doing what we can to promote the
Salvation of others, we imitate the greatest and best Examples; and upon this
Account it becomes us to do it.

HAVING thus briefly illustrated and confirmed the Observation here laid down,
I proceed to make some Use of it. 1. By way of Instruction. 2. Of Reproof and
Correction. And 3. Of Exhortation.

I. WHAT has been said may be profitable for our Instruction. And we may hence
learn something of the excellent and generous Nature of the Christian Religion.
So far is it from countenancing that Narrowness of Spirit that discovers itself
among so many of its Professors, that nothing has a greater Tendency to ennoble
Men's Minds, and to inspire them with Largeness of Heart. And when it is
heartily embraced, and has its due Influence, it teaches Men to look upon the
Happiness of others in a great Measure as their own, and as such, to wish it
and seek after it. Who that thinks of this Religion freely and without
Prejudice, can choose but see it to be becoming its blessed Author, and like
him, to be altogether lovely? The more closely we view it, and the better we
are acquainted with it, the more sensible we shall be of its Charms, and the
greater Beauties we shall discover in it. How can we enough admire this holy
and heavenly Doctrine, or be sufficiently thankful for it? How much does it
become us that profess it, to take Care that we don't debase and dishonor it,
but that by a becoming Temper and Behavior we exhibit the Amiableness and
Excellency of it? And then,

II. WHAT has been now offered may be profitable for Reproof and Correction:
And that as to several Sorts of Persons.

1. THEY must needs stand corrected, and deserve very severely to be rebuked,
who instead of wishing the Salvation of others, are imprecating the contrary
upon them. And how many such are there even among those that wear the Christian
Name? How many, who with the same Mouth, wherewith they are, or should be
blessing God, even the Father, are cursing Men made after the Similitude of
God, and calling upon him to damn them for ever? How can we choose but stand
amazed, that any who sustain the Character of rational Beings, especially who
profess themselves Christians, should suffer such horrid Language to proceed
out of their Mouths? Certainly when they thus express themselves, they are not
aware of what Damnation means, nor do they consider what they say. But this is
far from being a sufficient Excuse, that when they make use of these Terms,
they don't fix any Ideas to them, and that they don't intend what the Words
import in the strict and literal Acceptance of them. Must it not be highly
affrontive to the Divine Majesty for any thus solemnly to invoke him upon these
Occasions, and then to pretend that they have no Meaning in it? Is it not a
vile Prostitution and horrid Abuse of the great and terrible Name which the
Angels so highly reverence and adore, and at which the very Devils cannot
forbear trembling, for Persons to toss it about in their common and ordinary
Converse, to no other Purpose but to fill up the Vacancies of their idle
Discourse? Is it not a direct Violation of the Letter of his Law, and a horrid
Contempt and bold Defiance of his Vengeance? And besides at the Time of their
uttering this inhuman Language, their hellish Passions are sometimes raised to
that Height, that was it in their Power they would willingly inflict the worst
of Miseries upon those that are the Objects of their Rage. All then that allow
themselves in this profane Cursing, must needs be highly worthy of Rebuke. And
then,

NEXTLY, They likewise fall under Censure, and are justly liable to a Reproof,
who are one Way or other a Means of obstructing the Salvation of others, which
it may be feared is the Case with too many professed Christians at this Day.
Men's wicked and profane Imprecations upon others, have no direct Tendency to
obstruct their Salvation, though without a deep Repentance they will be a Bar to
their own. Their wishing one's Misery and Destruction will be no ways conducive
to it: For as the Bird by wandering, and the Swallow by flying, so the Curse
causeless shall not come, Prove. 26.2. But there are many other Ways whereby Men
may be instrumental of each other's Ruin, and are often a Means of leading one
another into those Practices that not only prove pernicious in this World, but
issue in their everlasting Misery and Perdition in the next. But how directly
contrary is this to the true Spirit and Temper of a Christian, and what a sad
Account will they have to give up when their Lord shall come and reckon with
them? Should any of you be found thus guilty, how will you be able to acquit
your selves from the Blood of those who by your bad Counsels, ill Examples, or
any other Ways, you have helped forward in the Way to Ruin? What will you do,
when not only God and your own Consciences shall accuse and condemn you, but
when this and that Person shall rise up in Judgment against you; yea, it may be
some that were nearly related to you, perhaps the Children of your own Bowels,
and lay their eternal Ruin to your Charge? How fearfully will this add to your
Account, aggravate your Doom, and enhanse your Misery for ever? And then,

ONCE more, They are worthy of Reproof, who if they do nothing that has a
direct Tendency to obstruct the Salvation of others, are yet careless and
indifferent about it, and unconcerned what becomes of them for ever. And this
seems to be too generally the Case with those that call themselves Christians
at this Day. They are too much of the Spirit and Temper of Cain: If Actions
speak as they certainly do, we cannot but hear one and another of them saying as
he does, Genesis 4.9. Am I my Brother's keeper? Is it any thing to me what becomes
of him? They seldom, if ever, look beyond themselves; they take but little
Thought for the temporal, and less for the spiritual and eternal Good of their
Neighbor; it seems to be much the same Thing to them whither he be saved, or
whether he perish; whether he be happy, or whether he be miserable for ever.
But such are certainly of a very different Disposition from that which the
Apostle expresses here in the Text: They are void of that Compassion which the
Religion they profess so strongly recommends, are Strangers to the Power of it,
and very justly fall under Censure. And then a

III. and last Use of what has been said is by Way of Exhortation. 1. If you
have not yet done it, to secure your own Salvation. And 2. To express a sincere
and hearty Concern for the Salvation of others.

IN the first Place, my beloved Brethren, let me earnestly exhort you, if you
have not yet secured your own Salvation, that you would now exert your selves
in order to it. And here I would first, offer a Word or two to such as are yet
so senseless and stupid as to take little or no Thought or Care that you may be
saved. And let me ask such of you, how you can possibly be easy in a natural
State, and what it is that encourages you in your present Security? Do you not
think your Salvation a Thing of any Importance, and that it is worthy of your
Concern? Do but think seriously what must be the Consequence of coming short of
it, and what it is to undergo the Damnation of Hell, and you will soon be
convinced of the contrary, and see all your other Interests to be but perfect
Trifles, and to vanish into nothing, when compared with it. Or do you think it
is a Thing so easily obtained, that there is no great Care or Pains required in
order to it? Do but impartially survey the Scriptures from first to last, and
you will find it to be a Mistake. Nay, if you do nothing more than consult the
Words of our blessed Savior himself, you will be convinced that you have a great
deal to do in order to your being saved: That if you ever enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, you must press and force your Way into it; and that there is
great Hazard of your coming short of it. Or is this the Ground of your
Security, that it is Time enough to set about this Business as yet, and that
you may safely put it off till hereafter? O that you would think seriously of
your own Frailty, and consider how soon your Time of Life, or Day of Grace may
come to an End, and from hence you will soon see your Error. Is there any one of
you that enjoys the most confirmed State of Health, or that is flourishing in
the Vigor of Youth, who can tell but this Night his Soul may be required of
him; and but that before another Day his Opportunity of securing his Salvation
may be at an End? What meanest thou then, O Sleeper, arise and call upon thy
God? O that all of you, young and old, or in the midst of your Days, would
awake out of your Stupidity; that you would now resolve, with a humble
Dependence upon God's Grace, to be more concerned for your Souls than you have
ever yet been. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, for it is
God that works in you to will and to do of his good Pleasure. As it is now a
Time when a great many are under a serious and deep Concern for their Souls,
one would think you should be afraid of missing this Season, lest you be left
in your Security and be lost for ever. I would hope there are none here present
that scoff at this Work of Conviction, or that make Light of it. If they do, it
is because they are unacquainted with the Scriptures, and with the usual Way of
Sinners being brought home to God. Consider how those that were converted by
the Ministry of the Apostle Peter, were first pricked at the Heart, and in the
deepest Agony cried out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do. Consider how it
was with the Jailer that came trembling to Paul and Silas; and how it was with
the Apostle Paul himself, who trembled and cried out, What will thou have me to
do? And consider what our Savior himself says of the Office of the Holy
Spirit, that when he was come he should reprove, or convince the World of Sin.
And how is it possible you should think strange of this Work? And whoever of
you expect Salvation without experiencing some Degree or other of it, you will
doubtless find your selves deceived. But then I would offer a Word or two to
such of you as are under a deep and distressing Concern for your Souls, (which
I trust is the Case with some of you) who are full of trembling, and are ready
with the Jailer before mentioned to cry out, What shall we do to be saved? And
how can I better reply than in the Words of the Apostle, Believe in the Lord
Jesus, and you shall be saved. He calls upon you to come to him for Life and
Salvation; and what is it that prevents your coming? Is it because your Sins
have been so many and great? If you are but truly sensible of them, this need
be no Hindrance to it; No, if you are weary and heavy laden, you are the very
Persons he invites to come, and whom he expressly promises upon your so doing,
that you shall find Rest for your Souls. Come then to him as your only and
almighty Savior, and don't cease seeking and praying till you have such a
Sight of his suitableness and sufficiency, as heartily to embrace him, and to
venture your Souls in his Hands: Then being found in him you will be safe and
secure. And then,

2. LET me exhort and persuade you, having secured your own Salvation, to
express a sincere and hearty Desire for the Salvation of others. Be much in
Prayer to God for it, and not only so, but be sure to use your best Endeavors
to promote it. There are doubtless some whose Happiness ought to be very near
your Heart. This as has been hinted to you, is the Case of all that stand in
any near Relation to you; accordingly be exhorted in an especial Manner to lay
out your selves for the Salvation of such. Be particularly sollicitous for
those of your own Househould. Let not those that serve with you, no not your
poor Negroes, be excluded from your Care, but be mindful of their poor
perishing Souls, and do what you can for them, that they may be saved. But let
your dear Children be in a peculiar Manner the Object of your Cares. As it must
needs be your Desire and Prayer, so let it be your earnest Endeavor, that they
may not be lost, but saved for ever. To this Purpose be sure daily to pray with
them, as well as for them, to instruct them, and faithfully to discharge your
Duty to them. But though your Charity may and ought to begin at Home, don't let
it end there, but extend it to all your Christian Brethren, and even to the
whole humane Race, and endeavor to promote the Salvation of all that come
within your Reach. You have, Brethren, the Love of God, of Christ, and of your
Neighbor to constrain you, and a great many excellent Examples to induce you
to it. Yea, you have the Example of no less a Person than the Son of God
himself, of the Apostles and primitive Christians, and a great many noble
Patterns of a later Date. What was it but an ardent Desire of promoting the
Salvation of precious and immortal Souls that induced that faithful Servant of
Christ The Rev Mr. Gilbert Tenvent.
that visited some of our Towns the Winter past to face these Northern Blasts,
to undertake such a Journey, and to go through such Fatigues in that difficult
Season? And as his coming into these Parts was owing to a Motion of Mr.
Whitefield, I cannot but speak of him as a bright and shining Pattern of Zeal
for the Salvation of Souls. Had he consulted his Ease, or had Wealth and
Preferment been his Aim, it is easy to conceive how he could quickly have made
his Way to these Things: But he took a Course that he might be sure would be a
Bar to his Attainment to them, and that was no likely Way to procure him the
Applause of any but the serious and strictly religious, which are by far the
smaller Part of Mankind. But the Salvation of Souls was infinitely dearer to
him, and this is the Thing that he was desirous at all Hazards to promote. And
how wonderful is it to see one in that Age with such burning Zeal and unwearied
Diligence prosecuting this great Design, and how glorious is the Sight? Did we
see one in the prime of his Days freely venturing his Life and Fortune, and
facing the greatest Dangers to rescue his Countrymen from the Ravages of a
potent Adversary, and to deliver them from the temporal Mischiefs and Miseries
which upon that Account they lay open to, it would doubtless gain our
Admiration and Esteem. How much more should it do so, to see an intrepid Youth
voluntarily engaging in the War betwixt Michael and the Dragon, to see him
boldly attacking this grand Adversary in his strong Holds, and exposing himself
to a continual Scene of Labors and Perils, to rescue poor Souls out of his
Hands, to save them from Hell, and to prevent them from being bound in Chains
of everlasting Darkness? However it may be looked upon by Men, it is I am well
assured a gracious Spectacle in the Sight of GOD and of the blessed Angels. Let
us then be thankful for the Examples that have been set us by these Servants of
CHRIST, and instead of discovering so base and envious a Disposition as to take
any Pains to find out their Failings, and magnify their Imperfections, let us
observe and emulate their Virtues; and if we cannot come up to them, let us
follow them, though it be at some Distance, in their fervent Desires and earnest
Endeavors to further the Salvation of others. Let us not only be careful to
avoid every Thing that may obstruct it, but do every Thing within our Power
that may be conducive to it. It Is certain we cannot be employed in a Work more
noble and honorable in itself, or that will be more advantageous to us; that
will yield us greater Satisfaction in this World, or procure us a higher Degree
of Glory in the next. They that be wise, says the Prophet, shall shine as the
Brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to Righteousness as the
Stars for ever and ever.

LET us all then lay out our selves in this Work, and let us be quickened to
Diligence in it, by considering that the Season for it is drawing to a Close,
and will quickly, we know not how soon, come to an End; remembering the Words of
the Lord JESUS, John 9.4. I must work the Works of him that sent me while it is
Day, the Night comes when no Man can work.

WHEN ever this Period shall arrive, may we enter into Rest, and join the
blessed Society of Angels and glorified Spirits in singing Songs of Praise to
the Lamb, and to him that sits on the Throne for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

