A SERMON UPON JUSTIFICATION: Preached at New-Brunswick on the Saturday before
the Dispensing of the HOLY SACRAMENT, which was the first Sabbath in August,
Anno 1740.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. And Minister of the Gospel in the Place aforesaid.

1 COR. i. 30. Who of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, and
Sanctification, and Redemption. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by BENJAMIN
FRANKLIN, in Market-Street. M,DCC,XLI.

ROMANS iii. 28. Therefore we conclude, that a Man is justified by Faith,
without the Deeds of the Law.


IT is as foolish and fatal as it is common, for Mankind, in general, to go on
contentedly and securely, if they have but an outward Reformation; without
Examining their State toward God, and the Principles of their Action.

Is it possible, that Men's Actions should be spiritually good, when their
State toward GOD, and the Springs of their Action, are bad? What can an
unjustify'd Person do who is an Enemy to GOD, that shall be acceptable to the
God he hates? Can those that are in the Flesh please God? No, surely! Is it not
the Practice of wise Builders to lay the Foundation first? But, alas! the very
Contrary is the common Course of the World. They suppose, without Examination
and Reason, that their Foundation is good; and so vainly attempt to build upon
the Sand. They carefully strive from time to time to mend and patch their
Practices; and if they can get that done, they are easy in the apparent
Cleanness of the outside of the Cup and Platter; although they know nothing of
getting into a new State by Justification, or of obtaining new Principles by
Regeneration.

It is for a Lamentation, that the most of People begin at the wrong End of
Religion; they attempt to grow in Grace, before they get Grace, and to bring
forth living Fruit, before they have a living Principle.

O! how hard is it to call foolish Sinners back from their empty, airy
Fabrics, to an impartial Trial of their States and Principles, that they may
lay a firm Foundation that will stand all Weathers; without which all their
wild Grapes, and dead Performances will but serve with the greater Ease and
Magnificence to lead their deluded Souls into everlasting Burnings. No doubt,
it is their Ignorance and love of Rest which make them so averse to examine
their States; which is notwithstanding of such vast Necessity.

To promote this, I have therefore determined to discourse at this Time upon
Justification; which, as Luther justly observes, Is the Article of a standing
or falling Church: It is undoubtedly a fundamental Truth of the Christian
Religion; For, no other Foundation can any Man lay, save that which is laid,
which is Jesus Christ. This, the Apostle, after a long Train of close
Reasoning, concludes to be by Faith, without the Deeds of the Law, i. e. by
Faith, as an Instrument applying the Righteousness of Christ to the Soul; for
which alone the Sinner is justified, without any Mixture of our Obedience to
the moral Law joined with it, as a deserving Cause thereof.

But, to make this more plain, I would discourse upon the two following Heads,
namely:

I. I would endeavor to open the Nature of Justification. And,

II. Prove that it cannot be by the Works of the Law.

The

I. GENERAL HEAD to be spoken upon, is, to open the Nature of Justification:
Here let it be observed, That Justification is derived from two Words which
signify to make Just. Now, he is Just, who is free from the Guilt of any Crime
(whereby Right is violated) and so deserves not to be punished; and to make
Just or Righteous, is either by infusing Righteousness, as was done to our
first Parents at their Creation; or by absolving or declaring to free one from
the Punishment due for Sin. It is in this last Sense the Word is generally
taken in Scripture: It alludes to Persons arraigned at a civil Court, who, upon
Hearing of their Case, are acquitted, by reason of another's Discharging their
Debt for them. Justification is diametrically opposed to Condemnation, and may
be said to be three fold, viz. In the Sight of GOD, Conscience, and Man.
Justification in the Sight of God, may be thus described, namely, That it is a
Declaration of God's pure Grace, whereby, upon the Account of the Obedience and
Sufferings of Christ, imputed and received by Faith, he frees Persons from the
Guilt of Sin, and gives them a Right to eternal Salvation. Justification in the
Sight of Conscience, is the Sense or Knowledge of being justified before God;
which usually follows the Exercise of a Saving Faith. Hence the Apostle
observes, That we have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear; but
the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father. Justification before Man,
consists in the spiritual Fruits of Faith appearing in our Practice; which
evidence to others the Reality of our Justification before God. In this Sense
the Apostle James asserts a Man to be justified by Works, and desired those who
professed Faith, to show it by their Works. And thus is the seeming Difference
between the two Apostles Paul and James removed; the former speaks only of
Justification before God, while the latter speaks of a Justification before
Man. It may be also observed, that these Apostles had to deal with very
different Sorts of People, viz. strict Pharisees and loose Libertines; while
the former depended upon their strict Obedience for Acceptance with God, the
latter depended on a Faith which did not produce Obedience. Now, as it was
necessary to drive the Pharisees from a carnal Dependence upon Works, that so
with Poverty of Spirit they might receive and rest upon the Redeemer, so it was
necessary to convince the Libertines that their Faith was not Justifying,
because it did not produce good Fruits, that so they might be humbled before
God, and with Importunity implore his Favor.

But it is Justification before God of which the Text under our present
Consideration treats, this therefore the present Argument concerns; which is,
as was before described, viz. a gracious Declaration of God, etc.

God alone is the Author of Justification, and that under the Consideration of
a Supreme Lord, Lawgiver, Judge and Creditor, whom by Sin we have offended, to
whom, by Sin, we are become Debtors, and who therefore can only dissolve our
Obligation to Punishment. It is he alone, who, in infinite Wisdom, devised the
Scene of Salvation for fallen Mankind, which the Gospel reveals. It is he, who
has, in infinite Love, provided a Surety for Sinners, qualified him for this
Work, and accepted his Accomplishment of it upon their Account. And, it is he,
who unites those that are to be justified, to the Mediator; as well as imputes
his Righteousness to them for their Acceptance. Now, God the Father does not
only concur in the Justification of a Sinner, as has been observed; but also
the Son of God concurs by Satisfying as a Sacrifice, and Interceeding as an
Advocate; and likewise, the Holy Spirit, by his testifying and sealing
Influences.

JUSTIFICATION, in its Nature, may be called a Declaration of Almighty God, or
judicial Pronouncing of Sentence Romans viii. 33, 34.
which was, as it were, conceived in the Mind of God from Eternity, by the
Decree of Justification Gal. iii. 8.
pronounced in Christ, as Head of his People, raised from the Dead; 2 Cor. v.
17.
but more sensibly and satisfactorily in the Conscience, upon the Exercise of
Faith in Christ; especially when the Holy Spirit testifies with ours, that we
are the Sons of God. By Faith we know we are justified, according to the divine
Promise: Romans viii. 1.
And indeed, before Faith is implanted in the Soul, the very Elect are under
Condemnation. Joh. iii. 18.


In the mean Time, the aforesaid Declaration is entirely gracious in respect of
us: It springs from the pure unexcited Goodness of the blessed God; No inherent
Righteousness in us, or good Work done by us, bears the least Part in our
Justification; for we have all sinned and come short of the Glory of God. The
same pure Grace that gave a Redeemer to the World, and calls the Elect to
embrace him, pronounces those Righteous who are by Faith united to him: For
what is our Justification but a Blotting out of our Iniquities, a Forgiving and
Hiding of our Sins Isa. xliii. 25. Psa. xxxii. 1.
as the Psalmist observes; hereby alluding to the Mercy-Seats Covering of the
Ark, in which were the Tables of the Testimony, which are against us. The
Freeness of the Divine Goodness in his Dealings with Sinners is most nobly
represented by the Prophet Ezekiel, where he compares Man in his natural State
to a newborn Infant lying in the open Field in its Blood, equally exposed to
Loathing and to Ruin.

Now, this, even this, be astonished O Heavens! is a Time of Love, a Time when
the great Lord of the Universe spreads the Spirit of his condescending Kindness
over us, and says to us, Live. Blessed God, how pure is thy Mercy, and how well
worthy of our Supreme Regards! But though they be Sinners whom God justifies, yet
are they elected, redeemed, called, regenerated and believing Ones. Romans viii.
30. Romans iii. 24. Ephesians. ii. 5.


Here it will be proper to enquire, what that Righteousness is for which a
Sinner is justified before God? Seeing the Judge of all the Earth must needs do
right, and that his Judgments are just and true, it will necessarily follow,
that he cannot pronounce those Righteous who have no Righteousness at all in
any Sense. And seeing that the Person to be justified is in himself ungodly,
having no inward Righteousness for which he can be justified, it is therefore
absolutely necessary that another's Righteousness intervene, for which the
Sinner may be pronounced Righteous. But the Righteousness of no mere Creature
can intervene; because every one of them owes it (by Virtue of Creation) as a
Debt to God, from whom he has received his Being and all his Benefits.

The Righteousness of Christ therefore alone remains, as the deserving Cause of
a Sinner's Justification before God: Hence he is said to be made Sin, for us,
who knew no Sin ( i. e. by Imputation) that in like Manner we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him: He is called, The Lord our Righteousness; and by
the Righteousness of One, the free Gift is said to come upon all Men ( i. e.
all Believers) unto Justification of Life. Him, as the Apostle justly observes,
Has God set forth to be a Propitiation (or Atonement) through Faith in his
Blood. As by the Unrighteousness of the First Adam all his natural Offspring
are condemned, so by the Righteousness of the Second, all his spiritual
Offspring, viz. Believers, are justified.

But seeing the Righteousness of Christ is twofold, viz. essential and
acquired, of his Nature and Life; it may be queried, which of these is imputed
to Believers? To this it may be replied, that, albeit, the whole Savior, and
his entire Righteousness, does conduce to our Justification, inasmuch as he is
wholly given of God to the World, that whosoever believes in him might obtain
eternal Salvation; his Birth and Life was not for himself, but for us; hence
it is said, that he came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and give
his Life a Ransom for many: Nevertheless, the essential Righteousness of
Christ, both divine and humane, does not conduce to our Justification, as our
Righteousness, for which we are justified; because that that was necessary for
himself: And to suppose that it is imputed to us, would render the
Righteousness of his Life and Death unnecessary. It was nevertheless necessary
to qualify the Person of the Mediator, to compass that Righteousness for which
we are justified, which is the Righteousness of his Life and Death. This is
usually called his active and passive Obedience: The active Obedience of Christ
is his perfect fulfilling the Commands of the Law of God: His passive, is his
Suffering those Penalties which were threatened for our Breaches of it, if not
altogether in Kind, yet in Weight. The Precept and Penalty of the Law must both
be fulfilled, because of God's Holiness and Truth, in order to free us from the
Guilt of Sin, and acquire for us a Right to Salvation, which we had forfeited
by it. Our Justification is to be ascribed to the whole Obedience of Christ,
both active and passive, considered complexly or together; because that
Satisfying and Meriting don't differ really in this Affair. Does not the
Scripture inform us, that as by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners,
so by the Obedience of one shall many be made Righteous.

That the Satisfaction of Christ was sufficient to answer the Demands of the
Law and Justice, violated and incensed by the Creature's Sin, will appear, by
considering the Quality of his Person, the Degrees of his Sufferings, and the
Perfection of his Obedience.

The blessed Jesus was not the Son of God merely by Office, but by Nature: On
this Account we are told, that he reckoned it no Robbery to be equal with God;
and hence he is called the Brightness of his Father's Glory. Now the Dignity of
his Person must needs derive an infinite Value both upon his Sufferings and
Obedience, seeing they were endured and performed by one who was as really God
(in the strictest Sense of the Word) as he was truly Man; they must of
Necessity contain in them infinite Worth. Is it not the unniversal Suffrage of
all Nations, that Punishments receive their Estimate from the Quality of the
Persons suffering? Had not our Lord been Man he could not have suffered at all;
for the Deity is impassible: And had he not been God as well as Man, his
Sufferings could not have contained infinite Value in them, and so never have
answered the infinite demerit of Sin.

Now, the Sufferings which our Lord endured in his Body and Soul in his Life,
and at his Death, were great in degree; this, his Agony and bloody Sweat in the
Garden, and Outcry on the Cross, viz. Eli, Eli, lama sabacthani, sufficiently
confirm. Hence he is said to tread the Wine Press of his Father's Wrath alone:
Undoubtedly a Weight of Wrath equal, in Degree, to the Number and Heinousness
of all the Sins of the Elect-World, was laid upon the Soul and Body of Christ,
which nothing less than the Divine Nature could support him under. O how
affecting is the Narrative which the Evangelists give us of the Sufferings of
Christ in his Body, by Blows, Scourges, Nails, Thorns, and a cruel Spear! And
was not his Soul sorrowful even to Death?

Had not our Lord, in the Quality of a Surety, sufficiently satisfied the Law
in his Death, he could not have obtained an Acquittance in his Resurrection;
but inasmuch as he was released from the Grave, as a Prison, by public
Sentence, and had a triumphant Entry into Heaven, it evidently proves the
Sufficiency of his Satisfaction. And the active Obedience of Christ, was
complete and spotless. Hence we are told, that he was holy, harmless and
undefiled, and that it became him to fulfill all Righteousness.

That the Satisfaction of a Surety in the Sinners room should be accepted upon
his Account, is wholly owing to the absolute Sovereignty and mere good Pleasure
of the great God.

Right Reason will inform us, that the Almighty, by an Act of Supremacy, might
relax the Law as to the Letter of it (which required perfect, personal
Obedience, upon Pain of Death, to be endured by the Delinquent) and dispense
with its Execution upon such Considerations, as might answer the Ends of
Government. And this, we are assured by the sacred Oracles, the blessed God
did. Men not being able to obey perfectly, they being themselves imperfect, and
being equally incapable to satisfy for their Offenses, themselves being finite;
in order to prevent their unavoidable and everlasting Ruin, it pleased the
eternal Father to appoint a Mediator to interpose, by Way of Surety, to
authorize and qualify him for this Office, and to declare his Acceptance of his
Execution of it. Hence we are told, that Him has the Father sealed, and that
in him is the Father well pleased.

But that which compleats the Whole, is the Redeemer's consenting to his
Father's Proposals, viz. to suffer and obey in the Sinners room, and thereby to
satisfy divine Justice for them. The Efficacy of the Redeemer's Obedience
depends much upon his own voluntary Engagement; for being the Lord of Heaven
there was no superior Authority to compel him; and supposing there were, he
being perfectly innocent, it would not accord with Justice, to force him to
suffer for another's Crimes: But as the Proverb is, To a willing Mind there is
no Injury done. Our Lord informs us, that he had Power to lay down his Life,
and that he was willing to do it. He himself also assures us, by saying, Lo I
come, in the Volume of thy Book it is written of me: I delight to do thy Will,
O my God; yea, thy Law is within my Heart.

But however excellent and perfect the Righteousness of the Mediator is, it can
be of no avail to us, without an Appropriation. Here therefore it will be
necessary to enquire how it is made ours? and that is two Ways, viz. by
Imputation, and Faith, as was observed in the Description; the former is
without us, and the latter is within us.

He that has no inward or inherent Righteousness of his own, for which he
should be justified; can be justified no other way but by Imputation. However
this Term has been scoffed at by Papists, and other Opposers of the Doctrines
of Grace; yet we find it is a scriptural one. It is said of Abraham, that he
believed God, and it was counted to him for Righteousness; and that the Man is
blessed to whom God will not impute Sin. Romans iv. 3, 4, 7, 8.


Now the aforesaid Imputation consists in the Father's giving of his Son to us;
Job. iii. 16.
and in his referring or accounting the Virtue of his Death and Obedience so
far to us as thereby to free us from everlasting Punishment, and entitle us to
everlasting Rest.

But the inward Mean on Men's Part, of Appropriating the Righteousness of
Christ to us, is Faith; not a dead Faith! which is destitute of good Works: No,
such a historical, ineffectual Assent to Truth, if it be depended upon, will
but serve to deceive us into Ruin, and aggravate our everlasting Pains through
Surprise. The Faith which justifies, is a living Principle of good Action,
formed by God's almighty Power in the Soul, by which we are resolved to have
God for our last End, and Christ for our only Mediator. Jam. ii. 18. Ephesians. i.
19. Job. i. 11, 12.
This operative Faith is only a Mean of our Justification, or prerequisite to
it; not any deserving Cause of it, either in Whole or in Part: Therefore our
Text asserts, that we are justified by Faith, not for Faith: Faith, in the
Business of Justification, is only an Instrument whereby we apprehend and lay
hold of the Righteousness of Christ for our Justification. If Faith, considered
as a Work of the Creature, was in any degree a meritorious Cause of our
Justification, then we should be justified by Works, contrary to the
Scriptures. That Faith should have any Instrumentality in our Justification
above other Graces, is entirely owing to the most free Constitution of Almighty
God: But in the mean Time, we may venture to say, that in this Method the
Pureness of divine Grace shines with the greatest Glory toward poor Sinners,
in that God will justify them upon the Account of the Righteousness of his Son,
received by Faith alone: And the Wildom of God is also discovered in Choosing
this Grace to be the Instrument of a Sinner's Justification, or a Prerequisite
before it; because as it inclines to exalting Thoughts of God, so it empties a
Man of Self, and breaks the Pride of the Heart.

It was before observed, in the Description of Justification, that God thereby
frees Persons from the Guilt of Sin, and gives them a Right to eternal
Salvation.

By the Guilt of Sin, an Obligation or (...) to Punishment, by reason of the
Threatenings of the Law against Transgressors, is intended. There is no
Condemnation to those that are justified. Romans viii. 1, 33, 34.
It is true, by Justification the almighty God does not take away the Stain of
Sin; for that is done afterward by Sanctification. Neither are all Effects of
Sin together and at once removed. Even justified Persons are excercis'd with
various Afflictions, and at last endure the Pains of a temporal Death. But
these are not proper Punishments inflicted with any view to compensate the
Injury offered by Sin to God. Neither do they proceed from his vindicative
Justice, or tend to the Hurt of the Person afflicted: No, they are Chastnings
indeed! occasioned by Sin, but proceeding from the fatherly Love of God; they
are made to promote the Good of the Justified. Romans viii. 28.
Now, seeing the Guilt of Sin is twofold namely, potential and actual, it is
not to be supposed that Justification removes both: No, potential Guilt is
inseparable from Sin; for it is contradictory to suppose any thing to be Sin
and not at the same time to deserve Punishment: It is therefore the latter only
which Justification abolishes, namely, the Sinner's Obligation to Punishment;
and that by transferring it upon the Surety, who in this respect was made Sin
for us, and therefore bore our Iniquities ( i. e. the Punishments due for them)
on his Body on the Tree.

Moreover, as the Guilt of Sin involves or includes a certain Captivity to
Corruption, a Debt or Subjection to Punishment, and an Enmity against God; Romans
viii. 7.
so that Absolution, which Justification includes, has a threefold
Denomination: In respect of Bondage it is called Redemption, which is the
Freeing of a Captive Soldier, by the Payment of a certain Price: In respect of
Debt and Punishment, it is called Remission or Forgiveness: Psa. xxxii. 1.
In respect of Enmity and Hatred thereby removed, it is called Reconciliation 2
Cor. v. 20.
inasmuch as it signifies the Application of Reconciliation to the Soul. When
Guilt, which is the only Cause of Enmity, is removed, then a sweet Peace,
Friendship and Communion with God is hereby introduced into the Soul. Truly,
such have Fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

The Guilt of Sin being removed, a Right to eternal Life must needs succeed;
which it is best to ascribe to the whole undivided Righteousness of Christ,
viz. of his active and passive Obedience, as the meritorious Cause thereof.
Inasmuch as there seems to be no real Difference between a Freedom from eternal
Death, and a Right to eternal Life, no more than between Satisfaction and
Merit; it therefore seems not proper (in our Sentiments) to deprive the passive
Obedience of Christ of the Honor of Deserving, or the Active of the Honor of
Satisfying.

Albeit, that Justification is an unalterable Sentence of almighty God, that
can never be repealed, the Sins of the Justified will not be remembered to
their Condemnation; for it is God that justifies, who is he therefore that
condemns? Yet it is necessary to have the Righteousness of Christ repeatedly
applied to the Soul by frequent Acts of Faith; because of Sins committed after
the Beginning of our Justification, that so it may be continued until it is
consummate at the last Judgment by that Voice of Christ, Come ye blessed of my
Father.

Although the Perseverance of the Justified is bottomed upon the Promise of a
faithful God; Jer. xxxii. 40.
yet it is such as renders the Use of a Means necessary. We must labor to keep
ourselves in the Love of God: And although Works are no meritorious Cause of our
Justification, yet are they necessary Means to obtain it from God, who will be
enquired of the House of Israel to do those Things for them which he has even
purposed to confer.

But it is time to proceed to the

SECOND GENERAL HEAD of Discourse, which was to show that Justification cannot
be attained by the Works of the Law. To this end, let it be considered, that in
order to Justification by the Law a Perfection of Obedience is necessary; the
Law curses for the least Default in Thought, Word or Action. Gal. iii. 10.

Now, this is, at present, impossible for us to perform; for we have already,
in our first Parents, sinned and come short of the Glory of God; and on this
Account every Mouth is stopped, and the whole World is become guilty before God:
That awful Trespass has robbed us of our original Integrity, Harmony and
Beauty, and introduced into all our Powers a universal Depravity, Discord and
Deformity. How therefore can such imperfect Causes produce perfect Effects?
This is impossible in the Nature of Things. But supposing we could keep the Law
of God in time to come; yet how could we make Satisfaction for our past
Disobedience? seeing that Sin is an Offense committed against a Being of
infinite Perfections, a Being to whom we are under infinite Obligations, not
only by reason of his essential Excellency, but communicative Kindness to us;
of all which, Sin is a rebellious and ungrateful Breach; it must therefore, in
its Nature, deserve infinite Punishment. which God, in Justice, is obliged to
inflict. But this, contracted into a finite Space, no mere Creature can
sustain; it would surely destroy his Being: Therefore what the Punishment wants
in Weight nust be made up in Continuance; and thus the sinning Creature will be
forever suffering, and can never satisfy.

Before Persons have Faith, the divine Word informs us, that whatever they do
is Sin; and as soon as they attain Faith, they are united to Christ, and so
must needs be justified by his Righteousness. Now, is it not unreasonable to
suppose that what is Sin, at least in the Manner of Performance, should be a
meritorious Cause of Justification?

To suppose that we are justified by Works, is to say that the Reward is not of
Grace but of Debt; contrary to the most plain and repeated Declarations of
Scripture, that our Justification is free and gracious. Romans iii. 20, 24. Ephesians.
ii. 7, 8.
Neither can our Justification be partly of Grace, and partly of Works; for
thus, as the Apostle justly observes, Grace would be no more Grace, and Works
would be no more Works. To be justified by Grace is to be justified freely,
without a Respect to any Work of the Creature as a deserving Cause thereof: But
to be justified by Works, in any degree respects them as a deserving Cause.
Now, here is an unreconcilable Contradiction. It is the same Thing
substantially in the Case before us, whether Merit is supposed to consist in
the Worth of the Work done, or in a Promise of the Almighty, pretended to be
annexed to the Endeavors of natural Men: Which the Papists distinguish by the
Terms of Congruity and Condignity; for both Ways God is bound, by the Labors
of his Enemies to give them Happiness. Whatever Probability of obtaining does
attend the Endeavors of natural Men, there is no certainty, otherwise
Justification would be by the Works of the Law; and indeed, we may as easily
reconcile Light and Darkness, Fire and Water, Life and Death, as Justification
partly by Works, and partly by Grace; for Grace must lose its Nature, if it be
by Works with it, and Works must lose their Nature, if it be by Grace together
with them.

Besides, to suppose that the Works of the Creature are joined with the
Righteousness of Christ, as deserving Causes of Justification, reflects great
Dishonor upon his Satisfaction; for it plainly intimates that it is
incomplete: If it is complete, as the Testimony of the Father declares, by
saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; then there is no Need
of the Creature's Additions: If it be incomplete, then how can an imperfect
Creature accomplish that which God himself is supposed to have left unfinished.
Undoubtedly, there is still a Necessity of Obedience to the moral Law, as it is
an invariable Rule of Righteousness corresponding to the divine Perfections, in
order to testify our Regard to God's commanding Authority, and our Gratitude
for his Love to us, as well as to testify the Truth of our Faith in him: But by
no means is our Obedience to be admitted as a meritorious Cause of our
Acceptance with God; for in that respect Christ has become the End of the Law
to every one that believes; as Bernard, of old, observed, Though Works be the
Way to the Kingdom, yet they are not the Cause of our Reigning there. Surely we
should expect Justification only in that Way in which Abraham, the Father of
the Faithful, obtained it; but that was not by Works, but by Faith. If Abraham,
says the Apostle Paul, were justified by Works, he has whereof to glory; but
not before God.

The Scripture asserts, that we are justified in that Way, which excludes all
Boasting; but by what Law is it excluded; is it by the Law of Works? nay, but
by the Law of Faith. If Man contributed any thing toward his Justification, he
would have whereof to glory, but this no Man has; hence we are told that God
justifies the Ungodly, i. e. such as have no Righteousness of their own to
commend them to his Favor; and that he imputes Righteousness without Works.

If they which are of the Law be Heirs, i. e. if Men by Obedience to the Law
can procure an Interest in the heavenly Inheritance, then is Faith made void,
and the Promise made of none Effect: There is no need of Believing in Jesus for
that which we have in ourselves; nor any need of his Atonement, seeing that
the Matter can be otherwise adjusted, according to this Notion; and if so the
very Foundation of the Gospel is overthrown; for what need is there of a
Savior to do that for us which we can do for ourselves.

The Apostle Paul on the Contrary informs us, That Israel, who sought after
Righteousness, did not obtain it; because they sought it, as it were, by the
Works of the Law; and that being ignorant of God, and going about to establish
their own Righteousness, they did not submit themselves to the Righteousness of
God: But of himself he says, That he desired not to be found in that
Righteousness which is of the Law; but that which is through the Faith of Christ.

Well, seeing Justification by Works is of impossible Attainment, and there
being no other Way of Justification opened but by Faith, it must therefore of
Necessity be by Faith; and this, indeed is frequently and and roundly asserted
in the Epistles of Paul to the Romans and Galatians.

The Righteousness of Christ is such alone as can discharge the Sinner's Debts,
and procure for him an heavenly Inheritance; and in this Way of Acceptance God
is most glorified, and Man most humbled.

Neither does this Scheme of Free-Justification, open a Door to Licentiousness,
as some have imagined; but on the Contrary, it secures Obedience upon the best
Foundation, inasmuch as that Faith, which justifies, is a living, lasting
Principle of holy and humble Action; and the more free and rich the Love of God
is to us the more it must needs excite our Love to him: For Love is Love's-Load
stone; and must not every one confess that Love is the only Principle of
evangelical and acceptable Obedience; and that in Proportion to the Strength of
the Cause, will be the Effects produced by it. That Obedience, which
principally springs from a meaner Source, viz. slavish dread of the divine
Revenge, or hireling Notions of thereby purchasing Happiness, however fair
Appearances it may have in the Eye of Man, is fleshly and dead; and therefore
abhorred by that God who is a Spirit. The Apostle therefore, justly rejected the
aforesaid Cavil with Detestation, Shall we continue in Sin that Grace may
abound? God forbid, said he: How shall we that are dead to Sin, live any
longer therein? And elsewhere, do we make void the Law by Faith? Yea (says he)
we establish the Law: Namely, by providing a Righteousness which fully answers
its Demands, and by exciting Obedience to its Precepts from the noblest
Principle, viz. Love.

If it be opposed, to what has been before observed, that we can no more be
righteous, because of another's Righteousness, than we can be wise or learned,
because of another's Wisdom or Learning; it may be replied, that the Objection
will hold so far as it concerns an essential or inherent Righteousness, which
cannot, by Imputation, be so made another's, that through That he he should be
reckoned inherently Righteous; neither do we affirm any such Thing relating to
Justification. Besides, there is also a Difference in this, that one cannot be
united with another, so as Believers are with Christ, as Members with the Head.
By the Righteousness of Christ being imputed to us, we understand no more, than
that his Merit and Satisfaction is so far reckoned to us as that we are thereby
freed from the Guilt of Sin, and obtain a Right to Salvation.

But it is time to proceed to the IMPROVEMENT of this noble and important
Subject: And here let us consider a little of that Honor that is hereby
reflected upon the divine Atributes. With what surprising and unrivaled Glory
does the unsearchable Wisdom of Jehovah shine, in Devising and Concerting a
Method, which at the same time establishes his inviolable Truth, engaged to
issue the Threats of the broken Covenant, satisfies his awful and inflexible
Justice, wronged by the Creature's Sin, through an almighty Surety's Sufferings
in their Room and Stead; secures the End of Government, by Honoring the Law
more than it ever was before, through the spotless Obedience of one who was God,
as well as Man, in the Guilty Sinner's Place: And yet opens a Door for the
Manifestation of the purest and richest Grace upon unworthy and condemned
Rabels, in their Acceptance and Salvation! while fallen Angels, a nobler Order
of Creatures, are wholly passed by, and no Offer of Mercy made to them! What
Man, what Angel, can sufficiently declare the Depth, the Glory of divine
Wisdom, which has taken occasion by the Creature's Sin, which is the vilest
Evil, to bring the greatest Glory to himself, and the greatest Good to Mankind?
O! with what Majesty and Sweetness, does the Harmony of divine Perfections
sparkle forth in the Redemption of Man by Jesus Christ? And, O! how amazingly
is their Salvation hereby secured upon a more unshaken Foundation than while
Man remained in a State of Innocence; for now is their Stock in the Mediator's
Hands. O! let us dwell upon the Thoughts of these Things 'til our Hearts be
fired with Love and Gratitude.

But how can we express Gratitude without Searching the Foundations of our
Hope; seeing that all our Peace and Consolation in Adversity, depends upon the
Certainty of our Justification? It must needs be a Duty of the last Necessity
for us to enquire into our present State: Which that we may do to some Purpose,
Faith, which is the Instrument of our Justification, should be impartially
examined. Now, those that have true Faith, have been, according to the Promise
of our Savior, convinced of their Unbelief, i. e. of their total Want of
Faith, their Inability to believe, their utter Unworthiness of the Gift of
Faith; as well as of the Rebellion and Ingratitude, that is grasped in
Unbelief, and of the horrible Miseries consequent thereupon. And seeing Faith
is a Receiving of Christ, in all his Offices, upon Gospel Terms, Joh. i. 12.
Therefore, those that do believe, have been made sensible of their Need of
Christ in all his Offices: They have groaned under the Burden of their
Ignorance, Guilt and Slavery, and have experienced a Virtue flowing from the
several Offices of Christ to the Healing of the aforesaid Diseases. And indeed,
every Believer feels a daily Need of Christ, in all his Offices; he daily lives
upon Christ, and to him, and no more to himself; he comes out of the Wilderness
of this World leaning upon his Beloved; for to him to live is Christ. Christ is
the principal Support and highest End of the Believer's Life; as the Glory of
Christ is the highest Mark of all the different Kinds of his Action (in
general) so the Love of Christ, as a Principle, constrains him to act; and
under a Sense of his own Folly and Weakness, by the Exercise of Faith, he
desires Strength from Christ, as the Head of Influence, to serve God
spiritually, not in the Oldness of the Letter, but in the Newness of the Spirit.

Again, as the vital Act of Faith consists in the Consent of the Will to Gospel
Terms; therefore, those that believe to Justification, must needs know, and
have seriously considered them, as well as without Reserve, and with Resolution
complied with them. Hence, we may safely assert, that such who know not, in
some Measure, by Experience, what it is to deny their natural, civil, sinful
and religious Self, are Unbelievers: For, not only Sin, is to be denied or
forsaken absolutely and immediately; but even the other Kinds of Self, in some
Respects: And those also who take not up the Cross of Christ, and follow him,
do not believe in him with a justifying Faith.

It may be here observed, that as the Person (mentioned in the Gospel) in his
Coming to Christ, was thrown down and torn by the Devil; so it is common for
those, that believe to Justification, to be opposed and tempted by the Devil in
Believing. Justifying Faith does also produce powerful Effects; as it makes
Christ precious to the Soul, so it humbles the Sinner's Heart, and makes him
think, with Paul, that He is less than the least of all Saints: It gives
Victory over the World ( viz. the Lusts of it) and works by Love to God and
Man. What is said of Hope may be justly applied to Faith, viz. that it purifies
the Heart, i. e. makes Persons desirous after, and laboring for Heart-Purity,
and causes them to enter into a Course of War against the Contrary.

Such as have a justifying Faith, must needs have been brought to a
Heart-affecting Complaisance with the Gospel Scheme of Salvation by Grace: This
Way they desire to be saved, and no other. Phil. iii. 7, 8, 9.

And seeing that Faith is the Bond of Union to Christ, it must needs affect
Believers with a high Regard to his Honor and Kingdom. Every Believer
therefore has a a single Eye to the Glory of God in the Course of his Actions.
O how much depends upon this! If our Eye be single, our whole Body is full of
Light; if not, it is full of Darkness. O! if you think that this is of easy
Attainment, and that you have always had it, you are surely ignorant of God and
yourselves! For no natural Man on Earth has, or while he so remains, can have
a single Eye: A Fountain cannot send forth Streams above a Level with itself.

If you have a justifying Faith, my dear Brethren, ye surely have a tender
Regard to the Church of God; as a Member of the natural Body, that is united by
a living Band to the Whole, must be sensibly touched with the Pains and
Pleasures of any Part thereof. Thus it is with you, if ye believe. When God's
Name is profaned, and his Kingdom is not promoted, ye mourn; but when God is
glorified, and Sinners are convinced and converted, ye rejoice.

Again, such as are justified, are effectually called, Romans viii. 30. The Voice
of Christ is accompanied with supernatural Light and irresistible Power upon
their Minds and Hearts, which banish their natural Darkness, Rebellion and
Prejudice, and make them stoop to the Savior's Scepter. He that commanded the
Light to shine at first out of Darkness, gives them the Light of the Knowledge
of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ. God sends the Rod of his Strength
out of Zion, and makes his People a willing People in the Day of his Power.

And those that are justified do confess their Sins with deep Humiliation,
Shame and Sorrow; as the Publican, who stood afar off, and smote upon his
Breast, and said, God be merciful to me a Sinner. This Man went to his House
justified, when the proud Pharisee was rejected.

But the justified Person does not only confess Sin, but forsake it in his
Heart, and Practice: For there is an inseparable Conection between
Justification and Sanctification, 1 Cor. vi. 11. As Justification includes in
it Reconciliation to God; this, in the Order of Nature, as well as of God,
necessarily supposes our being sorrowfully sensible of our natural Enmity
against him; and therefore such as have not been made sensible of the latter,
may assure themselves that they are unacquainted with the former, Romans viii. 7.
2 Cor. v. 20.

And those that are reconciled to God himself, must needs be reconciled to his
People, his Laws and Providence.

By these Things, my dear Friends, we should examine ourselves, and see whether
we be justified or not.

As to those who have experienced the aforesaid Signs of Justification, ye are
blessed indeed! Psa. xxxi. 1. Blessed is the Man whose Iniquity is forgiven,
and whose Sin is covered: For ye have Peace with God, and Peace with
Conscience; that Peace which passes all understanding; that Peace which Christ
left as a Legacy to his Disciples, Romans v. 1. And such have free Access, with a
humble Boldness, to a gracious God in all their Straits, who is both willing
and able to relieve them, Ephesians. iii. 12. And, O how noble! how sweet! how
precious! and how important, is thy Privilege! Who can express it? Such shall
persevere in the Grace of God, and be carried by his mighty Power through Faith
unto Salvation. The Gates of Hell shall never prevail against them, nor Death
or Life separate them from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus. Such may
rejoice in the Hope of the Glory of God, and triumph in all Adversity; seeing
every Affliction they meet with springs from a Father's Love, and shall surely,
by his Direction, promote their Good; especially considering that under
Affliction the Love of God is more frequently shed abroad in their Hearts. Such
are by the Righteousness of Christ freed from the Guilt of Sin, the Wrath of
God, and eternal Condemnation. O what sweet Consolation springs from the
Doctrine of Justification to every pious Soul in every Distress! whether it be
Trouble of Conscience about the Multitude and Heinousness of their Sins, or
Fears of Death, Judgment and Hell, or worldly Calamities and unjust Censures.
What can more effectually support the Soul than to think that it is God who
justifies, against whom neither the Accusations of Satan and of the World;
nay, nor of our own Consciences, can in the least avail. As also, that God does
not justify the Righteous, but Sinners; and that of the deepest Dye, namely,
the Ungodly and Rebellious, from pure Grace; whereby he imputes the
Righteousness of his only begotten Son to them; and thereby, upon their
Believing in him, frees them from the Guilt of all their Offenses, how many and
great soever they be, and entitules them to eternal Glory. Hence he is said,
not to behold Iniquity in Jacob, or Perverseness in Israel.

But on the Contrary, how miserable is the Case of all unjustify'd Persons!
namely, such who want the Signs of Faith and Justification, before described:
Such who profess Christ in Words, but in Works deny him: Such who have only a
dead Faith without Works: Such who are Strangers to the Power of experimental
Religion, Communion with God, and Conformity to him.

If we consider the Unjustify'd in Life, their Persons are covered with the
basest Deformity; their Bodies are Instruments of Unrighteousness to Sin; and
their Minds and Consciences are defiled.

In respect of their worldly Goods, they are Usurpers; Man having by his Fall
lost his original Right to the Creatures, it can be only recovered by an
Interest in Christ, through Faith; who is made, by his Father, Heir of all
Things. Now, inasmuch as they want this, they are Usurpers in the Sight of God,
whatever civil Claim they may have notwithstanding.

In regard to their Pleasures and Prosperity, it is justly said, that their
Table is a Snare and a Trap to their Souls, and that the Prosperity of Fools
destroys them; they stand on slippery Places, and are but the more prepared for
an aggravated Ruin by all their prosperous Successes; even their very Blessings
are accursed, as the Prophet Malachi expresses it.

Their honorable Exaltations serve but to sink them lower at last in the
Dungeon of Devils.

Their Afflictions are dreadful Presages of their approaching, unavoidable and
eternal Miseries.

And, O! how dreadful is the Case of the Unjustify'd at Death (especially if
awakened to a Sense of Danger) when they must turn their Backs forever upon all
created Enjoyments, face Death with all its grizly Horrors, feel its envenomed
Sting, and launch the eternal Deep; and in the mean time have no Grain of
Comfort, or Glimpse of Hope; to use the Psalmist's Words, How are they brought
into Destruction, as in a Moment, they are utterly consumed with Terrors!

But if in our Mediation we follow the Unjustify'd farther, we may behold their
increasing Miseries: With what Confusion shall they stand before the Bar of the
great God at the general Judgment! while every of their Sins are exposed in all
their awful Aggravations, and they have none to plead their Cause. What Horror,
Indignation and Pain must tear their guilty Souls, when they hear the great
Judge pronounce their final Sentence, Go, ye accursed, into everlasting
Burnings, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: And, behold him laughing at
their Calamities.

But if we view their eternal State, alas! how dreadful and how shocking is the
Sight! For in that Prison where they are irrecoverably fixed; there their Worm
does not die, and the Fire is unquenchable, and they shall be an Abhorring to
all Flesh, Isa. lxvi. 24. How shall Horror for past Sins, and lost Mercies,
with Fears of future Miseries, and utter Despair of Relief from them, together
with the Vials of divine Vengeance, everlastingly rack damned Souls!

Now, seeing the Miseries of the Unjustify'd are so great, then let Sinners be
entreated to beware of abusing the precious Doctrine of Justification to their
own Ruin, by vainly imagining themselves to be Possessors of it, when they are
far from it. Those who justify themselves when God condemns them, are an
Abomination to him; they deceive themselves, and obstruct the Way to their
Justification and Salvation, Prove. xvii. 15. Gal. vi. 3. Mat. xiii. This those
do, who depend upon Church-Privileges, a dead Faith, the uncovenanted Mercy of
God, the Death of Christ unapply'd to the Soul, or their own Righteousness.

It is infinitely better for you, my Friends, to know and own the worst of your
Case, and to seek after Justification through Christ with the utmost Vehemence,
by denying your own Righteousness (for he that is proud of his own, will not
prize, seek or obtain another) by deep Humiliation for your many and heinous
Offenses, in the Language of the penitent Publican, by seeking the Knowledge of
Christ crucified, and Help from God to receive him by a living Faith.

And the Saints of God should be careful that they abuse not the aforesaid
Doctrine to Sloth and sinful Indulgence in their cold Frames; for as this is
very Grieving to the Spirit of God, and blots our Evidences for Heaven; so it
manifests the vilest Ingratitude, and ministers an Occasion of Reflection to
the Adversaries of the Doctrines of Grace.

The People of God should also beware of condemning themselves when God
justifies them; seeing that the Father has laid upon Christ the Iniquities of
us all, why should we as ungratefully as foolishly lay them upon ourselves? and
so act the Adversary's Part against our own Interest. We ought not to cast away
our Hope because we have not had such deep Convictions, such great Temptations,
and Consolations as some others; or because we have not arrived to the like
Degrees of Goodness; rather let us deal with Christ as Aaron, of old, did with
the live Goat, who laid both his Hands upon him and confessed the Iniquities
of the Children of Israel over him, Lev. xvi. 21. After which he is said to
bear their Iniquities into a Land not inhabited. Let us cast the whole Weight
of our Souls and our Sins upon Christ, by Believing, and then we need not fear
Condemnation.

But in the mean Time the Freeness of Justification, the Honors and Happiness
of that Condition into which the rebellious, mean and miserable Sinner is
thereby introduced, should excite the utmost Gratitude to the Author of so
great and durable a Benefit; the Sense of the Worth of this Mercy should be
ever in our Minds, and the Perfections of its Author perpetually celebrated
with our Lips; while in the mean time in our Lives we glorify God by all holy
Obedience. Seeing God has justified us freely, without good Works, we should
express our Thankfulness to him, by a more cheerful, sincere and steady
Practice of them; to which let the Love of God constrain us.

And particularly, let justified Persons obey their Lords command, in sitting
down at his Table, and Commemorating his dying Love. Here! ye Friends of God!
you may see, as in a Glass, what the Purchase of your Pardon cost your dearest
Lord. At this Banquet you may behold the dreadful Agonies of his Soul, and
Sufferings of his Body for your Sins; which should stir up in us, my dear
Brethren, the strongest Affection. O methinks! the holy Jesus looks exceedingly
lovely as he comes with died Garments from Bozzra and Edom.

O Sirs! it is the Exercise of a justifying Faith, which as an Eye, can only
help us to behold our Lord's Sufferings in a right Manner; and, as a Conduit,
can convey to us the Benefits of them. Which may it please the good God to give
us all for Christ's sake. Amen.

THE END.
Lately Published, GOSPEL SONNETS, OR, SPIRITUAL SONGS. By RALPH ERSKINE, M. A.
LONDON: Printed. PHILADELPHHA: Reprinted and Sold by B. FRANKLIN.

Lately Published, CHRIST Triumphing and Satan Raging. A SERMON on Matt. xii.
28. Wherein is proven, that the Kingdom of God is come unto us at this Day.
First preached at Nottingham in Pensilvania, Jan. 20. 1740, 1. And now
published for the common Benefit. By Samuel Finley, Preacher of the Gospel.
Printed and sold by B. Franklin.


