DISCOURSE UPON CHRIST's KINGLY-OFFICE. Preached at Nottingham, in Pensilvania,
Sept. 24th 1740.

BY Gilbert Tennent, M.A. Minister of the Gospel at New-Brunswick in New Jersey.

Psalm. ii. 1.2, 4. Why do the Heathen rage, and the People imagine a vain
Thing; the Kings of the Earth -- Take counsel together against the Lord, and
his anointed -- He that sits in Heaven shall have them in Derision. BOSTON
in NEW ENGLAND, Printed for C HARRISON, over against the Brazen-Head in
Cornhil. 1741.

A Prefatory Address TO THE People of Nottingham.
My dear Friends,
YOU have been Eye and Ear-Witnesses of surprising spiritual Conquests wrought
by the King of Zion, through the Ministry of some despised Servants of Christ
among you. These supernatural Effects of the Word with you, namely, humbling,
renewing and reforming of the most proud, prejudiced and profligate Sinners in
many Places, does plainly prove the Work to be of God: For surely any Effect
cannot exceed the Virtue of it is producing Cause. It is an Evidence of awful
Blindness and Prejudice in any to ascribe this Work to Nature, or the Devil;
for a Man may as well make a new World, as renew his own Heart: And to imagine
that the Devil has a Hand in this Work, is to suppose that he acts contrary to
his own Interest, and that therefore his Kingdom is divided against it self,
and so cannot stand. To ascribe the proper Work of God's Spirit to the Devil by
those that have been convinced, comes near to the unpardonable Sin. This was
the Practice of the Pharisees who lived in the Time of Christ and his Apostles;
these Men notwithstanding of their strict Form of Religion, were the most
implacable Opposers of Christ and his Followers, although they had the clearest
Evidence of the Divinity of Christ's Doctrine and Mission; yet through the
Prejudice of their natural Enmity, together with their Fear of losing their
Honor and worldly Interest, they set themselves to oppose the spreading Power
of Godliness by blackening the Character of the Instruments whereby it was
promoted, that so they might prejudice the People against them, and thus hinder
the Success of their Labors. In particular, they represented them as
disorderly Persons and Disturbers of the public Peace, because they were not
careful enough to observe the Traditions of the Fathers, and on the Account of
the Divisions and Disturbances that attended their Labors in diverse Places.
Certainly, it must be acknowledged that Church Rules do not bind when they
hinder the Edification of the Body, for which they are supposed to be made. And
is it not reasonable to conclude that Rules which may be proper in ordinary
Cases, may be hurtful in extraordinary; and therefore may there not be a
Suspension of some Rules for a Time when the Church is in an extraordinary
Situation, without the overthrow of Discipline. Do not general Rules admit of
Exceptions; and do not the Formers of Church Rules acknowledge them to be
alterable according to various Circumstances? Now to be more zealous about the
Observation of some Rules, than for the spreading Power of Godliness, does it
not look like the Pharisees tything Mint and Annis and Cummin, while in the
mean Time they neglected the weightier Matters of the Law?

As to Disturbances and Divisions which natural Men are so much afraid of, our
Lord has warned us not to think that he came to send Peace on Earth, but Fire
and Division. It is not to be wondered at that the Seed of the Serpent should
rise up and oppose the Seed of the Woman, when the Kingdom of the Devil is
shaken; for thereby their false Peace is disturbed, and their Master is
enraged, who will doubtless influence his Servants to contend for him.
Contentions and Divisions even among Relations is no other than what our Lord
foretold would be the Consequence of the powerful preaching of his Gospel.

My dear Friends, My earnest Entreaty to you is, that you would submit to the
Government of Zion's King, and depend upon his Power and Promise that he will,
maugre all Opposition of Men and Devils, promote and maintain the Interests of
his Kingdom. I add no more, but remain,

Yours, G. Tennent.
Nottingham, Sept. 24. 1740.
A DISCOURSE UPON THE Kingly Office of Christ.
PSALM ii. 6. YET have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Zion.


N the preceding Verses we have an Account of a cruel Combination formed
against Christ and his Cause by the Grandees of the Earth. Kings and Rulers
take Council together, and set themselves against the Lord and his Anointed,
saying, etc. Great Men, alas, are seldom Good. But the Folly and Danger of this
impious Attempt is justly exposed in the 4th and 5th Verses of this Psalm;
where we are told that the great Sovereign of the Universe who rests and reigns
in Heaven, derides their vain Attempts, which can no more disturb his Peace
control his Power, or destroy his Interest, than the Waves of the Ocean the
firm Rocks they dash themselves against. But though their deep Devices and
effronted Efforts shall be surely rendered ineffectual as to him against whom
they are directed, yet they will be ruining to themselves; for the righteous
God shall speak to them in his Wrath and vex them in his sore Displeasure. And
further to increase the Terror of Zion's Enemies, and revive the Hearts of her
true Friends, our Text opens to our view, a solemn Description of the
Investiture of the Son of God into his Kingly Office. -- Here let us consider
the following Particulars,

1. The Person investing. I; viz. God the Father, as appears from the 7th
Verse, where he speaks concerning his Son. Here the Word I is taken oppositely,
as if the Lord had said, Although the Kings of the Earth extol themselves, yet I
have anointed my King, who shall confound their Devises.

2. The Person invested, viz. The Messiah, Jesus Christ: This appears evidently
from many Passages of this Psalm: For in it, first He is called expressly the
Son of God, which Character belongs to Christ alone, Heb. 1. A Son begotten by
God to Day, i. e. From Eternity, for this was spoken of Christ long before his
Incarnation. Again, He is represented, Ver. 11.12. as the Object of religious
Worship, the Foundation of Hope and Source of true Happiness. And in the 8th
and 9th Verses as having the Heathen for his Inheritance, and the utmost Ends
of the Earth for his Possession. It Is also observed in the 9th and 12th Verses
that Destruction and Ruin flow from his angry Frowns. These Things can be
justly ascribed to Christ alone, and none but he.

3. The Office in which Christ is invested, namely, that of a King, who is a
Monarch and Head of a Kingdom. Now Christ is called the Lord's King in the Text
to signify his eternal Generation, divine Anointing and Mission, as also the
peculiarity and peerless Excellency of his Kingdom, which not only differs much
from, but is infinitely superior to all the Kingdoms of the World. He is a King
worthy of God who rules with him and for him. Now the Subjects which King Jesus
governs over are described in these Words, My holy Hill of Zion. Zion was a
certain Fort of the Jebusites almost impregnable, which David having routed,
the Inhabitants converted into a Palace for the Seat of his own Residence, on
the Border of which was the Mount Moriah, on which the Temple stood, 2 Samuel
5.9. 2 Chronicles. 3.1. But mystical Zion is the Church of God, which is so called
because of it is unconquerableness. Our Saviviour informs us, that the Gates of
Hell shall not prevail against it; and also because the Gospel proceeds
therefrom, Psalm. 110.2. The Lord shall send the Rod of thy Strength out of
Zion. To this we may add, that David who was the King of the natural Zion, was
a Type of Christ, Ezekiel. 34.23. Now Zion is called holy in the Text, relatively,
because of the Temple's being built on the neighboring Mount Moriah, by reason
of which the Town and People were called holy, Dan. 9.24. and Isa. 63 18. and
what is here intended by the holy Hill, viz the Church of God, is called holy,
because a holy God as it were dwells in her, and his holy Worship is celebrated
by her, and because she is made holy by the Blood and Spirit of Christ, both
imputatively and inherently; as also because it is her Duty to desire after,
and labor for Holiness in the highest Degree.

4. The Act of investiture, Set Yet have I set, or anointed, as it is in the
Margin, or created or appointed, as some render it, by which we are to
understand the Father's giving the Son a rightful Claim to exercise the kingly
Office, as Mediator. The Words are expressed in the preter Tense, to show that
the Constitution of Christ to be King, was done of old in the Council of the
Trinity, when the Device of Man's Salvation was formed. The Word anoint may
also denote the Father's conferring such Qualifications upon Christ as
Mediator, as were necessary for the right Discharge of all the Duties of his
Kingly-Office* Psalm. 45.7.

That Jesus Christ is King of his Church, and he only, appears by the following
Considerations,

1. From the Prophecies of the old Testament, concerning him, Gen 49.10.

2. From the Types and Figures of his Kingly-Office which we find in sacred
Writ, such as that of Melchisedeck, David, and Solomon.

3. From the Kingly Titles which are frequently ascribed to him, in the Book of
God. Such as King of Zion, King of Kings and Lord of Lords, Lord of Glory,
Prince of Peace, Captain of our Salvation, Head of the Church, Judge and
Lawgiver.

4. From his solemn Investiture into this Office, as in our Text.

5. From his own Confession before Pilate, and the Writing affixed to his
Cross, by which his very Enemies acknowledged his Kingly Authority.

Which Particulars aforesaid can be ascribed to none but Christ; for as no mere
Creature is able to manage the Reins of Government, so none of them has a legal
Claim thereto. To imagine that one Body the Church has two or more Heads is to
deform her Beauty, defile her Honors, and render her monstrous.

Now the Kingly-Office of Christ may be more generally thus described, namely,

It is that mediatorial Function by which he dispenses and governs with all
Power and Authority, whatsoever respects his People's Happiness, Luke 1.32, 33.

The Kingdom of Christ is indeed twofold, viz. Either essential or personal.
His essential Kingdom is that infinite Power of Government which belongs to him
as God, and is common to all the Persons of the sacred Trinity. His mediatorial
Kingdom is that Power of Government which was committed or delegated to Christ
as Mediator, God-man, by his Father, as our Text confirms; and this is also
twofold, either universal or particular. The universal mediatorial Kingdom of
Christ extends to all Things, with a view to the Churches Good, Ephesians. 1.22. And
gave him to be Head over all Things to the Church. The particular mediatorial
Kingdom of Christ respects the Church only, and the compassing her Good in all
the different Periods of Time, whither in this Life or that to come.

But more particularly in order to have a clearer View of the Nature of
Christ's Kingly-Office, let us consider the Answer in the Assembly's Catechism,
to the 26th Question concerning it; which is thus, Christ executes the Office
of a King (say they) in subduing us to himself, in ruling and defending us, and
in restraining and conquering all his and our Enemies. Here are several Acts of
kingly Power pointed to by the Assembly, which deserve our Attention;

The 1st of which is, that of subduing Persons to himself. But who are these?
why those who were chosen from Eternity to Salvation, and given by the Father
to Christ in the Covenant of Redemption, and no others, Ephesians. 1.4. Joh. 17.6, 8,
9. I have manifested thy Name to the Men thou gave me out of the World. Now
this Act of subduing to himself supposes, that these very Persons who have been
given by the Father to the Son are while in a State of Nature, Enemies to and
Rebels against his Government, and that they will not be bro't any other ways
to submit thereto, but by sovereign Power and Conquest; and this indeed both
Scripture and Experience confirm, Romans 5.10. and 8.7. Christ does not only as a
Prophet propose to the Elect the Terms of Peace, but as a King by the Almighty
Power of his Spirit, through his Word, convinces their Minds and persuades
their Wills freely to comply with them, Job 16.8, 9. Psalm 110 3. Sinners will
never submit kindly to Christ's Government, till the strong Man armed be cast
out, and the stubborness of their Wills be subdued and broken.

2. Another Act of Christ's Kingly-Power is his ruling of his People, after
they are subdued to himself; and this he does outwardly by his Laws, and
inwardly by his Spirit. The Government (...) the Churches is upon Christ's
Shoulder; him has the Father given to be a Leader and Commander to his People.
As he has given a perfect System of Laws for their Direction, so he helps his
Elect to understand, love and obey them by his Spirit, sincerely,
unexceptionably, willingly, and perseveringly. He puts his Fear in their Hearts
that they shall not depart from him, Jer. 22.40.

Therefore for any Men to devise new Laws and obtrude them on the Subjects of
Christ, is as needless as it is presumptuous, and injurious to his royal
Prerogative and their Liberty.

3. Another Act of Christ's Kingly-Power is his defending his People. It is
doubtless the Duty of a Prince to protect his Subjects, to procure and preserve
their Peace by maintaining good Government among them; as well as by guarding
them from Violence by foreign Foes. Now the King of Zion has given his People a
Peace, which their Enemies can as little understand as bereave them of. The
King of the Church preserves her from outward Violence so far as serves her
best Good, and any more would be a Loss instead of a Benefit. If Christ had not
interposed by the Arm of his almighty Power to screen his People from the Rage
of their Enemies, his Church would have been entirely destroyed long ago. And
as the King of the Church defends the Persons of his People, either from or in
Trouble, so as to make them issue in their Benefit according to his gracious
Promise, Romans 8. ( By this the Iniquity of Jacob shall be purged, and this is
all the Frait to take away his Sins.) so he defends their Graces, from being
utterly destroyed, by the vigorous and unwearied Assaults of their inward
Corruptions and outward Enemies; by his Power they are revived out of their
uncomfortable Deadness, and reduced from their ungrateful Strayings; and so
guided by his Council and carried by his Strength to eternal Glory and
Blessedness, 1 Pet. 1.5. Psalm. 73.24. O if they were lest to themselves, they
would be utterly swallowed up with Despair and Discouragement, under their
doleful Desertions, or else lose all Relish of Religion by Security and Sloth,
and thus wander eternally from God. O! If our Stock were in our own Hands and
we had no better Security for our standing, but our own Endeavors, we should
all surely prove Bankrupts with our first Parents, and none of Adam's Posterity
would cross the Threshold of Glory: But blessed be the gracious God, the
Father, Son and Spirit by Men and Angels throughout all Eternity, that the Case
is otherwise; Zion's King is his People's Surety. His almighty Power is
engaged, by his gracious Promise, for his People's final Perseverance, Jer.
32.40. Job. 10.28. Our Power, Purposes and Promises are little worth, God
knows: O! But the Purposes of Christ stand like Mountains of eternal Brass. His
Power all the Creation cannot withstand, and his Promise will never, never
sail: We may with fullness of Confidence lay the stress of our eternal Salvation
upon it. O! the Compassionate King of Zion comforts those that are cast down;
though he hides his Face for a little Moment, yet he returns! he returns! O he
returns dear Brethren! to the equal Astonishment and Consolation of his People!
When the poor People of God are dried like a Leaf in his Absence from them, and
almost quite discouraged, because of the View they have of their own meaness,
vileness, worthlessness and unprofitableness, O how strangely does it affect
them to behold their dear Lord coming again and again over the Mountains of
Bether to their Souls Succor, after their manifold and ungrateful Abuses of
his Love Tokens, after their repeated Wanderings and Breaches of their Vows,
Purposes, and Promises. After Souls have been stained by Sensuality and Sloth.
O! How does it fill their Mands with Wonder, cover their Faces with Shame, and
thoroughly break their Hearts into bitter weeping, from Love to think, that
either God or Man should take any kind Notice of such poor, ungrateful, sinful
and worthless Worm; as they, the like of which they do not think is in all the
World. Their Hearts are swelled so big with Gospel Grief and Gratitude, that
they are ready to burst in Pieces; the secret Language of their Souls this
Occasion, is perhaps to the following purpose; Dear Lord! How strange and
surprising is the Glory of thy pure Grace, which thus pursues, with the most
unwearied Patience and endearing Methods, a wicked, wretched, worthless,
wandering Worm, the like of which, in every respect is not among all thy
rational Creatures! Merciful God and dear Savior, I blush and am ashamed at
the Riches of thy free and enduring Kindness* Good Majesty, wherefore will thou
love the meanest Dust, without a Motive? and continue thy infinitely valuable
Regard, after the vilest Abuse both of thy comforting and chastening
Providence? How, O how great God! shall I obtain Mercy to walk answerable to
the Obligations of thy matchless Love, and return the Gratitude it demerits.
Alas! woe is me, for my Instability and Ingratitude, my Sensuality and Sloth.
But, O my God! how invariable is thine Affection, how unwearied thy Patience,
and how sure and faithful is thy Word. Well, great Majesty, I deserve thy
Rebukes, if thou will smite me dead or lay other heavy Rods upon me, I durst
not speak against it, it would surely be righteous and just. I therefore commit
my self into thine Hands, O thou glorious Sovereign, do with me, thy poor
Creature, what thou please, only if thou art pleased to let me live, O let me
live to thee, and serve thy Glory and Kingdom.

But a 4th Act of Christ's Kingly-Power is his restraining his and their
Enemies. The Church of Christ in this World is compassed with many and powerful
Enemies. She sojourns in Mesech, in Kedar's Tents, among the envious
Philistines. She has her Seat of mournful Residence in Dens of Lions and on
Mountains of Leopards. These cruel Beasts of Prey, who are incessantly
laboring to worry her, to rob her of her Honor, or Innocence, her Ease or her
Life. Men, Devils and Corruptions join in a hellish League to Plot and procure
her Ruin. The Children of the Bondwoman, some of whom have a strict but dead
Form of Religion, like the old Pharisees, persecute her under a religious Mask:
Sometimes the Keepers of the Vineyard will smite her, and take away her Vail
from her: Sometimes her Mothers Children, unexperienced Professors of the same
Religion, will be angry with her; yea so angry as to cast her out of their
Communion, and say, Let the Lord be glorified! In the mean time, the Devil goes
about like a Lion rampant, roaring and raging as if he would devour them at
once; and indeed he would make short Work with them all, if he had Liberty. Now
with those Enemies their Corruptions are ready to conspire, for these do also
War against their Souls, 1 Pet. 2.11. God's People are not able to withstand
one of these Enemies apart, how much less all together. How soon then would
they be ruined by them if the King of the Church did not interpose by his
restraining Power to check their Rage and blast their Devices. Indeed he does
not destroy them at once, but lets them plot and conspire against his Heritage,
and when they think they have brought their hell-hatch'd Counsels to Ripeness
and Perfection; he turns them to Foolishness, catches Ahitophel's in their
Craftiness, and puts Hooks in the Jaws of Pharoah's, and restrains the
remainder of their Wrath, that it shall not produce such pernicious Effects as
they maliciously intended. And thus the Power and Love of Zion's King is
glorified in preserving his Church which is afflicted and tossed with Tempests
from being drowned in these Waters, in preserving the burning Bush from being
consumed by the Flames with which it is scorched. The Lord Jesus does also
restrain Satan from doing that Injury to God's People which he would otherwise
commit, and will shortly bruise him under their Feet. Again, the King of the
Church restrains the Corruptions of his People from breaking out, as they
naturally tend to, otherwise there is not one of his Subjects but would be a
Reproach to his Prince and Profession.

The last Act of Kingly-Power which the Assembly mentions is that of subduing
his Enemies. Which he does by Degrees that the Sincerity of his Subjects may be
proved and their Graces exercised! But in the End of Time, he will gloriously
triumph over all his Enemies, and at his Name every Knee shall bow.

But it is Time to speak something of the Royal Prerogatives of the King of
Zion; and they are principally these following;

1. His anointing, by which he received the Spirit and Power without Measure,
yea the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Psalm. 45.6. Col. 1.9.

2. His investiture, whereby according to God's eternal Decree, he was
appointed to be King, and also promised and prefigur'd, as was hinted before,
as well as proclaimed at his Birth by the Angels, and acknowledged at his Death
by his Enemies. But,

2. Another royal Prerogative of the King of Zion is his Coronation, which was
in his humbled State a little before his Death, by a thorny Crown in Derision,
but after his Ascension into Heaven, by a Crown of Glory at the right Hand of
his Father, Heb. 29. A Crown is an Ensign of Kingly-Majesty, Esth. 1.11. Christ
is said to have many Crowns upon his Head, Rev. 19.12. not only to signify that
he is King of Kings, but also to point out the many Victories he has gained
over his and his People's Enemies. For it is the Custom of victorious Kings to
take the Crowns of the Heads off the conquered, and put them on their own, 2 Samuel 12.30. It was an afflictive Sight to see the blessed Head of Christ
crowned with Thorns. But O its joyful to behold him now crowned with Glory and
Honor infinitely above the highest Angels! and to consider that by his
Sufferings he has purchased for his People an incorruptible Crown, a Crown of
Righteousness, a Crown of Life, a Crown of Glory, 1 Cor. 9. 2.4. 1 Pet 5.2, 3.

4. His Palace-Royal, which exceeds in Beauty and Magnificence any Ideas that
we can form of it. Hence the Blessed and only Potentate is said to dwell in
that Light which no Man can approach unto, 1 Timothy 6.15, 16. But indeed the
Country Seat of this great King's Residence, is the contrite and humble Hearts
of his faithful Subjects, Isa. 57.15.

5. His Throne: Now a Throne is a Seat for a King, an Ensign of royal State and
Majesty, Est. 5.1. The Throne of Christ is so far superior to all earthly
Thrones, that they are placed on his Footstool, Isa. 66.1. Now the Throne of
Christ is a Throne of Majesty and Glory, Heb. 8.1. a Throne of Grace and Mercy,
Heb. 4 16. an exalted, established and eternal Throne, Isa. 66.1. Psalm. 93.2.
Heb. 1.8.

6. His Scepter, or royal Rod; which is another Token of Kingly-Power and
Majesty, Esth. 5.2. Now the King of Zion, has a twofold Scepter, viz. of Gold
and Iron. His golden Scepter is that by which he rules his Subjects, outwardly
by his Word, especially of the Gospel, Psalm. 110.2. and inwardly by his Spirit,
which is on this Account called the Finger and Arm of the Lord, Luke 11.20.
Isa. 53.1. His Iron Scepter, is that by which he breaks and confounds his
Enemies, Rev. 2.27. Justly has the Apostle observed concerning this King of
Zion, Heb. 1.8. Thy Throne O God is forever and ever, a Scepter of
Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom.

7. His Laws, that are holy, just and good, Romans 7.12. Hence the Apostle James
informs us, that there is but one Lawgiver, Jam. 4.12. It is the royal
Prerogative to authorize the public Coin, which the King's Image and
Inscription makes current among his Subjects, Matthew. 2.2. and 20.21. so most
certainly it is only the Stamp of Christ's kingly Authority that can give
religious Laws such a Sanction as deserves the regard of his Subjects: And to
coin others in addition to his is to confront his Wisdom, usurp his royal
Prerogative, and enslave his Subjects: But it is our Duty, our Honor, and our
Interest to be as careful that we be not ensnared and enslaved by the
Commandments of Men in religious Matters, as of receiving counterfeit Coin in
civil Affairs, for they are both rebellious Cheats; It Is fasest to walk in the
King's Highway to Heaven, observing the Directions of Christ's royal Law, and
as for human Taditions in Religion, let us out of loyal Love to our King and
Savior reject them with Abhorrence, and stand fast in the Liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free.

To the aforesaid Particulars, I may add he following Prerogatives, viz.
Tribute, a Treasury or Armament, and judicial Power? The Tribute of Trust,
transcendent Love and religious Worship is due to Zion's King from Men and
Angels, Heb. 1.6. He has also a Magazine or Armoury sufficient to furnish all
his People in all their Combats with Sin, Satan and the World. Ephesians. 6.11, --
19, The King of Zion is also the supreme and final Judge of Life and Death,
having Power to pardon or condemn, Mark 25.3.

From what has been said, it appears that the Kingdom of Christ is,

1. Spiritual; though it has something resembling the Kingdoms of the World, yet
it is Nature differs much from them: Hence our Savior observed that his Kingdom
was not of this World, Joh. 18.36. It Is not at tended with outward Pomp and
State, but it is Administrations are spiritual; and indeed it was this that
stumbled the Jews at Christ, for they expected that the Messiah would come
attended with the Ensigns of worldly Glory and Grandeun.

2. Another Property of Christ's Kingdom is, that it is universal, as to all
Times, all Places, and all Creatures, so far as they serve to promote the Weal
of Christ's Subjects: His Kingdom rules over all, Matthew. 28.18.

3. Eternal: It Is a Kingdom that shall stand forever, Dan. 2.44.

4. It Is rich and glorious; hence it is called the Kingdom of God, of Heaven, of
Peace, of Light, Glory, because it brings the sweetest Peace and most perfect
Felicity to all the sincere Subjects of Christ.

I proceed to the Improvement. And

1. This Subject serves to inform us of the Glory of Christ on the account of
his Kingly-Office. He is called the Lord of Glory, the King of Glory. Now the
Glory of Christ is illustrated by diverse Similitudes, as particularly by that
of a Horn, Psalm. 79.24. in which consists the Honor and Power of Beasts: By a
Lamp, which scatters its Splendour or Brightness, Psalm. 132.17. By a Crown
flourishing, Psalm. 132.18. By Thrones, in which Monarchs manifest their State
and Grandeur, Luke 1.32. Now the kingly Glory of Christ was prefigured by the
Magnificence of David and Solomon; and it will be the more affecting to us if
we consider the infinite Wisdom, Justice, Mercy and Power of this Prince, by
which he is every way suitably qualified to manage the Reins of Government. He
is the wise and wonderful Counselor, the mighty-God of hosts, the Wisdom and
Power of God, Justice and Love itself. His Kingdom is vast and ample, extending
to the utmost Boundaries of the Universe; for to him all Power is given in
Heaven and Earth. His Kingdom is peaceable and durable, extending to the utmost
Limits of Time; these Things may incline us to honor our glorious Sovereign,
by Thoughts, Words and Works, and to glory in him:

2. If Christ be the only King of Zion, by divine Appointment then we may
learn, that it is a bold Invasion of his Crown and Dignity to make new Laws
without his Interposal, to govern his Subjects by, in religious Matters, and
naturally tends to set up a human Kingdom in the room of Christ's and in
opposition to it; as also to draw the Subjects of Christ from their Allegiance
to him, and subject their Consciences to the Humors and Lusts of their
Fellow Creatures, as well as to rend the Church of Christ into an infinity of
Parts. Whether the Pride and Presumption of those that frame new Laws in
religious Matters, be a greater Evil than the Simplicity and Cowardice of those
that obey them, is hard to determine. I proceed to a

2d Use, viz. of Examination; Let us examine, whether the King of Zion has
subdued us to himself? To this end,

1. Has Christ set up a Court in your Bosoms, and caused your guilty
Consciences to draw up an Indictment against you, for your Rebellion in State
and Practice; and to produce Evidence to prove this dreadful Charge? and have
your Consciences as Judges on the Bench, passed Sentence upon you according to
Law and Evidence, that you were in your present Condition, Rebels against the
great God, your rightful Sovereign, and that for this you were cursed by God,
and must be damned to all Eternity, unless ye obtain Reconciliation and
Conversion?

2. Have ye bitterly bewailed from your Hearts with Shame and Indignation, that
you have been so long, unjustly, ungratefully and foolishly Rebellious against
the Son of God, the King of Zion? And has this your mourning proceeded from
Love, and been frequently repeated? Psalm 51.4, 17, Ezra 9.5, 6. Jer. 31.19.

3. Have you renounced your former Masters, Sin and Satan, and under a Sense of
your own Vileness, Misery and Inability, hankfully accepted of the Act of Grace
proclaimed by the King of Zion in his Gospel, for the Pardon of returning
Rebels? Did ye surrender your selves entirely to his Government, and do you
wholly lean upon his Righteousness for your Acceptance with God? Matthew 6.24.
Joh. 1.12. Jer. 3.12, -- 14. and Isa. 55.1.

4. Are the Laws of the King written on your Heart? other Princes have their
Image on their Coin, but Christ engraves his on his People's Hearts. Do ye
sincerely and habitually love Christ's Laws, so as to desire honestly and
endeavor earnestly and generally to be conformed to them without Exception?
Heb. 8.10. Psalm 1. Matthew. 11.29. 2 Cor. 3.18.

5. Are your Wills made subject to Christ as King? Temporal Princes may ty the
Hands of Rebels, but cannot turn their Hearts; but Zion's King can and does
change the Hearts of the perversest of Men, and make them willing in the Day of
his Power, Psalm. 110.3. Are ye now in the general as willing in the Duties of
Obedience, as before in Acts of Rebellion?

6. Do you sincerely love God's People, and that for their Goodness sake, and
in Proportion thereto? of whatever Denomination they be? if you are reconciled
to their Husband and Father, you must needs love them, and deem them the most
Excellent in the Earth. I proceed to a

3d Use, which is of Consolation to those that have experienced the aforesaid
Signs; O! What unspeakable Reason have ye to rejoice, in that ye have such a
wise, powerful and merciful Prince to rule over you: In that ye are made the
Subjects of such a rich, ample and everlasting Kingdom; in that ye are ruled by
such an easy Scepter, equal Laws and sweet Persuasions of the Holy Spirit. Does
not your Souls experience, my Brethren, that Christ's Burden is light and his
Yoke easy? Rejoice Sirs! and again, I say, rejoice! Light is sown for the
Righteous, and Joy for the Upright in Heart. Rejoice that ye shall quickly
inherit a Crown of everlasting Glory. Let Hell and Earth roar and rage against
you; let Men and Devils conspire and contrive your Ruin, yet rejoice, for
Zion's God and King reigns! Your Husband holds the Scepter of Government in his
Hand, and can easily crush Men and Devils into nothing by his Word. However
numerous, crafty, malicious and powerful they be, they cannot move a
Hair's-Breadth farther against you than he gives them leave. You are safe and
secure under the almighty Protection of your King, therefore rejoice greatly, O
Daughter of Zion, and shout O Daughter of Jerusalem! Zech. 9.9. But,

4thly, This Subject opens a Scene of Terror to all those that have not
experienced the aforesaid Signs of Subjection to Christ's Government; but are
on the contrary still in a State of carnal Security, going on in a Course of
carnal Merriment and obstinate Rebellion against Christ's Authority, as well as
of vain Confidence in his Mercy; whose Hearts have never been changed by the
almighty Power of God; who though they cry, Lord, Lord! do not the Things that
Zion's King commands, but in Works deny his Government: They also disrelish his
Laws, his Ordinances, his People. Now all such unhappy Souls are Enemies to him
who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; who shall rule in the middle of his
Enemies, till he make them his Footstool, Psalm. 110.1. Your King is the
Black-Prince, the God of this World; ye are Slaves of Satan, the Servants of
Perdition, whom our King, (if ye persist) will surely speak to in his Wrath,
vex in his sore Displeasure, and dash to Pieces like a Potter's Vessel with his
Iron-Rod: Joh 12.31. 2 Pet. 2.19. Psalm. 2.5.9. I proceed to a

Use of Exhortation; And here I do beseech all of you to perform all the
Offices that are due to the Person of your Prince. Namely,

1. Ye should kiss him with a Kiss of Homage, which was wont to be conferred on
new Kings. Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the
Way. Ye should kiss the King of Zion with a Kiss of Love, Dependence and
Submission. You must love him above all Enjoyments, submit to him in all
Circumstances, and entirely depend upon him for the supply of all your
Necessities. Cant. 1.1. Job. 14.6. Moreover, We owe to our King, Honor, Fear,
Faith, Obedience and Tribute. He should be to us the chiefest among ten
Thousand, the Object of our Fear and Reverence, and Foundation of our Trust and
Confidence. His Laws are the only Rules of our Obedience and Charity. Psalm.
73.25. Ps. 2.11, 12. Psalm. 96.8. We ought to perform these Offices to the King
of Zion, because they do of Right belong to him, who is King of Kings and Lord
of Lords; who confers upon his People such durable and valuable Benefits, and
inflicts on his rebellious Enemies, such inexpressible Torments, Ps. 2.12.

2. We should labor to promote the Kingdom of Christ in our selves and among
others, according to our Places, Abilities and Opportunities, by earnest Prayer
and laborious Diligence. O let Sinners lay down their rebellious Arms, and
speedily submit to the gracious Scepter of Zion's King, lest they feel the
Weight of his iron Rod; and if we are Instruments of promoting the Kingdom of
Christ, what Comfort will it yield here, and increasing Comfort in the next
State? O then let generous Projects for Zion's Prosperity, ennoble and inspire
our Minds; let ardent Desires to serve her valuable Interests, inflame and
oppress our Hearts, and unwearied Endeavors, directed to the same excellent
Mark, crown and adorn our Practice.

3. Let Magistrates imitate the personal Excellencies of the King of Zion, as
well as the excellent Manner of his Government: They should adorn their
Character by eminent Wisdom, Holiness, Humility, Meekness, and an impartial
Administration of Justice, in protecting the Innocent from Oppression and
Violence, and punishing the guilty proportionable to their Crimes, in promoting
Virtue and Religion, and suppressing the contrary. In so doing, they will cast
their Crowns, their Authority, at the Redeemer's Feet, and are like to receive
a better and more durable Crown from him.

Finally, All Christians should endeavor to imitate Christ as a King, seeing
they are made Kings by his Grace, Rev. 1.5.

They should be wise, just, merciful, Phil. 4.8. As our King commands all, so
should we command our selves and our Affections, and not suffer our selves to
be brought under the Power of any. As our King contended with spiritual
Enemies, so should we in his Strength oppose Satan and Sin, and so Fight the
Fight of Faith. As Christ our King did not lead a worldly Life, but avoided all
worldly Pride and State, so should we be spiritual, and look upon all vain Pomp
and immoderate Love to other worldly Things, to be below our kingly Dignity. In
this Imitation of Christ consists our greatest Perfection and highest
Happiness; for if we are made like to Christ the King here by Grace, we shall
be like to him in eternal Glory.

NOW to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only true GOD, be Glory for
ever.

AMEN.

