Mr. Chauncy's SERMON ON THE Various Gifts of Ministers.

The Gifts of the SPIRIT to Ministers considered in their DIVERSITY; with the
wise Ends of their various Distribution, and the good Purposes it is adapted to
serve.

A SERMON Preached at the BOSTON Thursday-Lecture, December. 17. 1741. And made
public at the Desire of the Hearers.

By CHARLES CHAUNCY, A. M. Pastor of the first Church of CHRIST in BOSTON.

I. Cor. xii. 31. But covet earnestly the best Gifts: and yet, show I unto you
a more excellent Way.

BOSTON, Printed and Sold by Rogers and Foul at the Head of Queen Street. Also
by S. Eliot in Cornhill. 1742.

The Gifts of the SPIRIT to Ministers considered in their DIVERSITY.
I. Cor. xii. 4. Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same SPIRIT.


THE words were spoken of those extraordinary miraculous gifts, which various
persons were endowed with, for the good of the church, in its first and infant
state: But it is not my design to consider the text in this view, but as it
may, by way of accommodation, be applied to those more common gifts, wherewith
the ministers of religion have, all along, been, and are, at present, furnished,
for the use of edification.

The method I propose is this,

I. To take a view of these gifts in their diversity.

II. To consider them as all proceeding from one and the same SPIRIT, though
they are thus diverse.

III. To make some inquiry into the reasons of this various distribution of
these gifts.

The whole will then be followed with a plain and faithful Application.

I. I am, in the first place, to take a view of the gifts of ministers in their
diversity. Says the apostle, there are diversities of gifts. And so great is
this diversity, that there are, perhaps, no two ministers, but if you compare
their gifts, you will find a manifest difference between them. Some have one
gift, others another; some have more gifts, others fewer; some have greater
gifts, others smaller: And among those who excel in gifts, some excel in this
gift, others in that, none in all; but he that excels most in one gift, is yet
excelled by another, in some gift of another kind, as great and valuable.

Some have the gift of applying to men's understandings. They have, in their
own minds, a distinct perception of the truths of GOD and religion; and their
talent lies, in a readiness to set these truths in a strong and clear light
before others. A vein of sound reasoning runs through their discourses. Their
sermons are well digested, and well connected, and, in their general
contexture, well adapted to inform the judgment, to open and enlarge the mind;
and, in a word, to fill men with the knowledge of GOD's will, in all spiritual
wisdom and understanding. Such was the preaching of the great apostle of the
Gentiles. He appears to have had an admirable gift in applying to the reason of
men for their instruction in righteousness. His writings, to be sure, are all
of them in the rational, argumentative style; calculated, not only to convey
truth into the mind, but to do this in a way accommodate to men, by laying
before them the proper evidences of it. And his preaching was of the same kind.
'Twas an address to men's understandings, in the way of reasoning. Hence the
writer of the acts of the apostles, when he would speak of Paul's preaching,
expresses himself in that language, Acts 18 ^.
He REASONED in the synagogue. Agreeable whereto is that observable remark, in
the preceding chapter, V. 2.
And Paul, (...) HIS MANNER WAS, went in unto them, and -- REASONED with them
out of the scriptures. There never was a more close, rationale, argumentative
speaker than the great St. Paul. It was his MANNER to REASON in his preaching.
His chief natural talent seems to have lain this way. He had been caught up
into the third heavens; and if any man, he who had been so exalted with
revelations, might have spoken in raptures of zeal and flame: But his gift lay
in addressing rather to the reason, than passions of men; leading them into a
clear and comprehensive knowledge of Divine things.

And an excellent gift this is. It Is well adjusted to the character of men whom
it has pleased God to endow with reason and understanding: Nor is there a gift,
the due exercise whereof, will more powerfully tend to answer the design of
making men wiser and better, which ought always to be the great end of
preaching.

Others have the gift of moving the passions. Their voice is strong, yet sweet
and pleasant. They have got the art of pronunciaton, can agreably modulate
their words: and together with a good elocution, they have a becoming gesture;
their action is easy and natural, and their general air graceful. They have the
gift of the tongue, the faculty of expressing themselves in so engaging a
manner, as to command the attention and affection of their hearers. This seems
to have been the gift of the prophet Ezekiel. Hence he is said to have been as
a very lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
instrument Ezekiel. 33.32.
: To be sure, this was the gift of young Apollos. He is said in the acts, to
have been an eloquent man Acts 18.24.
. i. e. a graceful speaker, a man of an easy flow of words, one that could
address to his auditory in a moving manner. It was doubtless owing to this, the
engaging way in which he spoke of the things of CHRIST, and of the kingdom of
CHRIST, that he had so many admirers in the city of Corinth.

And a desirable gift this is. It would not be misspent labor, if ministers
took some pains to become possessed of it. Not that it is possible, after the
utmost pains, that all should equally excel here; nature wont allow of it: but
there are no preachers, but might attain this gift, in a less or greater
degree. And however, in it self considered, it may be a gift less valuable than
some others, yet there is no gift more recommending, or that will give what we
say, the advantage of coming with more force, upon the passions of our hearers.

And let me add here, it is very proper these should be applied to. For the
human passions are capable of serving many valuable purposes in religion, and
may to good advantage be excited and warmed: always provided, that they are
kept under the restraints of reason; for otherwise they will soon run wild, and
may make those in whom they reign to do so too. Light and heat should always go
together; and if there be not some good proportion of the former, it will turn
to little account, if there be ever so much of the latter.

Some have the gift of touching the consciences of sinners. They can speak in
words of terror, and so speak as to rouse sinners out of their security, and
set them a thinking. They have a faculty at weilding the sword of the Spirit;
and it is, often, in their hands, like a sharp two-edged sword, piercing even
to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow. This
was the talent of John Baptist, the forerunner of our LORD. He came in the
spirit and power of Elias. And that was the genius of his ministry, O ye
generation of vipers! who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Now
also the ax is laid to the root of the trees: and every tree that brings not
forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire. James the son of
Zebedee, and John his brother, were possessed of the like gift. They were
therefore surnamed by our Savior, BOANERGES, or SONS OF THUNDER. They had the
faculty of thundering out the vengeance of almighty GOD against impenitent
Sinners: And they dealt much in this way; it was probably the burden of their
preaching.

And this also is a useful gift, if rightly managed. Says the inspired Paul, we
persuade men by the terrors of the LORD. And they area proper means of
persuasion: To be sure, they are propounded as such in the gospel; and ought,
accordingly, to be displayed before sinners. They should be plainly and
faithfully told of that wrath of God, which is revealed from heaven against
such persons as they are; yea, that they are, in their present state, under
actual condemnation by the holy and righteous law of GOD, and in such
circumstances, as that it is impossible but they should be miserable. And the
terrors of GOD ought the rather to be set in array against them, because it is,
in this way, ordinarily, that sinners are awakened out of their security, and
put upon endeavors to get into a state of safety respecting another world. It
is, being moved with fear, that they commonly begin their flight from the wrath
to come. But then, it ought to be considered, that hope is a very powerful
spring of humane action as well as fear, and applied to as such, every where in
the gospel. Not only is the danger, sinners are in, opened to their view; but
the help likewise a merciful GOD has provided for them, in the LORD JESUS
CHRIST; and as much care is taken to encourage their hopes as to alarm their
fears: And what may be worth our remark, it is by the mixed influence of these
passions, that sinners are effectually wrote upon to become true and real
christians. Fear without hope tends only to desperation; nor will the sinner
ever suitably repair to GOD for help, till he is encouraged to hope in his
mercy through the LORD JESUS CHRIST. Both these principles therefore are to be
addressed to; and a great deal of wisdom is necessary to direct us in our
application to them, that they may not run People into the extremes of despair
on the one hand; nor presumption, on the other; but may jointly operate, in a
powerful manner, to bring them to repentance and salvation.

Others have the gift of speaking comfortably to distressed sinners. Their words
are meek and mild, full of tenderness and compassion, and much savouring of
that mercy which is the distinguishing glory of the gospel. They have a
dexterity in setting before the view of sinners that loving kindness of GOD in
JESUS CHRIST, which has appeared toward man. They have a comprehensive
knowledge of that remedy GOD has provided for undone, miserable sinners, and
their skill lies in making application of this remedy; which they are able to
do, suting the consolations of GOD to the particular cases of those, whose
distresses they are acquainted with. This was the gift of Joses, who was
therefore surnamed by the apostles Barnabas Acts 4.36.
, which is, being interpreted, the son of consolation. He was one "eminent for
comforting the LORD's People, and speaking peace to wounded, troubled
consciences. He had an admirable felicity that way". And this was the gift of
our blessed SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST: Not that he had not other gifts; for he was
furnished with every gift befitting a preacher of salvation; but he appears to
have distinguished himself in the exercise of this. He could indeed, as there
was occasion, speak powerfully to the awakening of sinners; and his preaching
was sometimes in this strain; particularly, when he had to do with the scribes
and pharisees. And never were the wo^^ of GOD denounced with such awful
solemnity, as when he uttered them against these accursed hypocrites, as you
may see in the 23d Chapter of Matthew's gospel. But his preaching was more
commonly in words of mildness. He rather drew than drove men to himself. That
was the spirit of his discourses, "Come unto me all ye that labor and are
heavy-laden, and I will give you rest. Him that comes unto me, I will in no
wise cast out. If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink. How often would
I have gathered you, as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, but ye
would not. O that thou had known, even thou, in this thy day, the things of
thy peace, but now are they hid from thine Eyes." Never was there the discovery
of so much compassion to the souls of men, as in the preaching of the LORD
JESUS CHRIST. He spoke with love and pity, so as never man spoke. The tenderest
and weakest conscience might have heard him without fear. He would not have
broken the bruised reed, nor quenched the smoking flax. He was indeed anointed
to preach good tidings to the meek, he was sent to bind up the brokenhearted,
and to proclaim the acceptable year of the LORD. So it was prophesied of the
MESSIAH by the prophet Isaiah Isa. 6.1.
. And it is remarkable, our blessed SAVIOR, while a preacher on earth, took up
the book of this prophet, and having read to the people the words of this
prophesy, he preached to them, saying, this day is this scripture fulfilled in
your ears Luke 4.21.
.

And there is not, perhaps, a more useful gift than this of being able to speak
comfortably to distressed sinners. They need the consolations of GOD; and it is a
great mercy, there are those among the preachers of CHRIST, who have an aptness
to make application of them to their souls. It Is true, great care should be
taken not to daub with untempered mortar, not to prophecy peace, when GOD has
said, there is no peace: And those, who have skill in words of comfort, will be
careful in this matter; and while they are so, no preachers are more
serviceable; to be sure, none are more like to the GREAT PREACHER of salvation,
whose glory is was, to heal the broken in heart, and bind up their wounds.

Thus various are the gifts of ministers. And I may add, their manner, in the
exercise of these gifts, is as various as the gifts themselves. Some speak in
lofty strains of language, others in a more plain and familiar way; some are
close and connected in their discourses, others more loose and unconfined; some
are flowing in their Style, others short and sententious: Some are all zeal and
flame, others more calm and composed; some utter themselves in thunder, others
in a still and small voice; some are tenderhearted and affectionate, others
appear more firm, and without much sensible emotion. But whatever variety there
is in the gifts of ministers,

II. It all proceeds, which was the second thing, from one and the same SPIRIT.
So speaks the text, there are diversities of gifts, but the same SPIRIT. And in
the following verses, these gifts are particularly represented in all that
variety, in which they appeared in the first days of christianity: Upon which,
the apostle makes that observable remark in the 11th. V. But all these works
that one and the self-same SPIRIT; dividing to every man severally as he will.
It Is true, the gifts here spoken of were supernatural powers, such as advanced
human nature above it self; enabling the persons endowed with them to think,
and speak, and act, so as it was impossible for any man to do, who was not, as
they were, immediately inspired by the HOLY GHOST. But common as well as
miraculous gifts come down from him, who is the giver of every good and perfect
giving. The self-same SPIRIT endows ministers now, that did it in the primitive
state of the church* The manner in which they are furnished with gifts may be
different; but their gifts are still his; the fruits of (...) favor: He is the
great Donor of them, in all their variety, whether in themselves, or the
measures in which they are possessed, or exercised.

Most men, indeed, are too ready, when they observe the difference there is in
the accomplishments of ministers, to overlook the hand of GOD herein, ascribing
it to the different advantages they have been favored with, or the different
improvements they have made under the same advantages: And these things, no
doubt, have their operation, in the place of means, in order to this diversity
of endowments; but the Divine SPIRIT has, notwithstanding, the chief influence
in this whole affair.

'This solely from him, that ministers receive, what we call, their natural
parts. They are by him, as the GOD of nature, formed, and sent into the world
with all their natural abilities, both for kind or degree: And some he endows
with greater, others with smaller capacities; some with this turn of mind,
others with that; some with a large and extended genius, others with a more
contracted one. And these natural gifts he divides severally to every one, not
according to their will, not with the concurrence of any power or endeavors of
theirs, but according to his own sovereign pleasure. And it is observable, these
different natural abilities, which are the gifts of GOD, in a sense so free and
absolute, that ministers contribute nothing at all to them, or the original
ground of all that diversity there ever appears in their endowments; and this,
though they should have the same education, and be placed under the same
advantages, and make a like good use of them.

Not that these natural gifts an't capable of improvement. They may, by use and
exercise, under a proper regimen, be greatly strengthened and enlarged, refined
and brightened; but this makes a difference only in the measure of these gifts;
they remain the same in kind, though different in the degree of their excellence.
And yet even in respect of this acquired difference, there is more of the
efficiency of GOD than we may generally imagine. For he it is that so disposes
things, in the course of his providential government, as that there shall be a
concurrence of greater or smaller advantages for the improvement of the natural
gifts, he has bestowed upon those, he intends to employ as his ministers: And
he may have a greater hand than we are commonly aware of, in influencing those
secret springs, which put them upon those various degrees of active diligence
in the use of these advantages, in proportion whereto will be their
acquirements.

There is yet another way, wherein these gifts may be improved; and this is, by
grace, which is the highest and most glorious improvement they are capable of.
It Is by this they become animated with true christian life and spirit; it is by
this they are directed to a right manner of exercise, and to a good end; it is
by this they are rendered most conspicuous in themselves, and most useful to
the world. And need I say, that this improvement of these gifts, is, in the
most proper sense of all, to be ascribed to the Divine SPIRIT? We all know, the
appropriate Style of the SPIRIT of GOD, in the holy scripture, is that, the
SPIRIT of GRACE. And he is the grand dispenser of the grace of GOD to fallen
man. It Is his special office, in the economy of man's redemption to sanctify
both ministers and people, their gifts as well as hearts. And whenever the
gifts of ministers are improved by sanctifying grace, whether it be in a
smaller or greater degree, it is his work; and we are taught, from the bible, to
ascribe it to him, and give him the glory of it.

So that the endowments of ministers, whether natural or acquired; acquired by
education, or grace, are properly gifts, the effects of the free favor of GOD.
They proceed, in all that variety, in which we behold them, from the one
immense SPIRIT, as the author of nature, the over-ruler of all things in the
course of providence, or the dispenser of grace.

III. But I must now proceed, in the third place, to inquire into the reasons
of this various distribution of gifts to ministers. And could no other account
be given of the matter than that, even so Father, because so it has seemed
good in thy sight, it would be enough to satisfy every serious, pious mind: But
we have no need, in this case, to recur to the absolute sovereignty of GOD; as
though we were at a loss, and could only say with the apostle, Romans 12.33.
O the depth of the riches of the knowledge and wisdom of GOD! How unsearchable
are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? Several things lies open to
view, as weighty reasons of this various distribution of gifts. As,

1. The glory it reflects upon the Divine goodness. An illustrious display is
hereby made of this attribute of GOD. Had the gifts of ministers been only few
and small, this would have argued goodness in GOD; how much more now he has
bestowed them in kinds so various, and in degrees so excellent? There is an
admirable beauty in this variety; and the goodness that has effected it, shines
forth with a glorious luster.

Some, perhaps, may think, it would have been more for the glory of the Divine
goodness, if all ministers had been endowed with the same excellent gifts: And
if the measure of gifts was that only which reflected honor on the goodness,
which bestowed them, it might be thus; but it is far otherwise. It Is the glory
of Divine goodness, in all its displays, to be under the direction of wisdom,
in consistence with holiness and justice. And it is this that has made way for
those innumerable different beings, with infinitely various capacities, and for
infinitely various ends and uses, that we behold in the creation. It would have
been glorious goodness, if GOD had made all beings with equal perfection, and
capable of equal degrees of happiness; but the beauty of the universe would
then have been lost: To be sure, there would not have been those amazing
contrivances of wisdom, which now reflect a glory on all GOD's works of
goodness. That goodness certainly shines brightest that bestows its gifts, not
always to the utmost, as it were, by necessity; but with though it and design, and
so as shall best answer the wise intentions of their bestowment. This is the
beauty of the Divine goodness in all its gifts; and it is particularly so in
those conferred on ministers. They are, by being various, much better adapted
to serve the great and wise ends of their being furnished with them, than if
they had been the same: Which leads me to observe,

2. How admirably well adjusted this various distribution of gifts is, to the
various dispositions of those, for whose benefit they are designed. It is not
for their own advantage only, but for the good of people, that God bestows his
gifts upon ministers; and they are wonderfully suited in that variety in which
he bestows them, to promote this merciful intention. There is an amazing
difference in the natural make of people. Some are of one temper, others of
another; some of this contexture of soul, others of that. Some, from their
original frame are apt to be pleased with one way of preaching, others with
another, others with another still, and so on, according to the difference
there is in that relish they bring into the world with them. The same gifts in
ministers would not therefore be at all adjusted to these various tastes in
people; for which reason a good God has been pleased to vary his gifts: And the
variety in these gifts is admirably fitted to the variety of gusts in people;
insomuch, that every palate may be suited by some gift or other, whereby some
minister or other is distinguished. If some are apt to be wro't upon by that
preaching, which has a tendency to let light into the understanding, there are
gifts suited to such a cast of mind; if others are better pleased with an
address to their passions, there are gifts adapted to work upon these; if some
must be alarmed as with thundrings from Sinai, there are gifts formed to such a
purpose as this; and if others must be drawn with the bands of love, in words
of kindness and gentleness, there are gifts of this tendency also; And so
whatever the distinguishing turn of mind is, it may be suited among the
preachers of salvation; some or other of them are blessed with a gift answerable
thereto.

And this reason of the various distribution of gifts, it is falling in with the
various dispositions of people, is the reason not only suggested, but largely
insisted on in my context. The apostle here compares the church of GOD to an
humane body, and the several gifts bestowed for its edification to the various
members of this body; all which have their use, and are necessary in their
place: And though some are more excellent, and serve to a better use than others,
yet all are serviceable; insomuch, that no one can complain of the other, and
say, I have no need of thee: And it is by the united influence of these various
members, so variously disposed, and serving to such various purposes, that the
exigences of the body, are, in the best manner provided for. The apostle's
words are these, "The body is not one member, but many. If the foot shall say,
because I am not the hand, I am not of the body, is it therefore not of the
body? And if the ear shall say, because I am not the eye, I am not of the body,
is it therefore not of the body? If the whole body were an eye, where were the
hearing? If the whole were hearing, where were the smelling? But now has GOD
set the members every one of them in the body, as it has pleased him. -- And
the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee; nor again the head to
the feet, I have no need of you." The application of this comparison, the
apostle himself gives us, in the 7th V. and onwards. "Now ye are the body of
CHRIST, and members in particular. And GOD has set some in his church, first
apostles, secondarily prophets, thirdly teachers, after that miracles, then
gifts of healing, helps, goverments, diversities of tongues:" In which words is
contained an enumeration of the various gifts, that then appeared in the
church. The sum of the apostle's arguing is this, That it is with the church,
CHRIST's mystical body, as with the body natural. Its necessities are various,
and require a variety of gifts, some of one kind, others of another; some of
superior excellence, others inferior, according to the use they are intended to
serve; every one of which is needful in its proper place, nor could the
exigencies of the church be supplied without them. It would not have done so
well, if all gifts had been alike. Had the whole body been an eye, where then
were the hearing? There is really need, considering the different make of men,
that there should be different ministerial gifts: And though in this variety some
gifts will be smaller, and others greater, yet are the smaller equally
necessary in their place; nor would the real advantage of the church be so well
answered in any other way. Those members of the body, which seem to be more
feeble, are yet necessary; and the same may be said of gifts. Those that are
weak may yet, in their place, be as useful as those that are strong. For in the
church of CHRIST, there are babes as well as grown men; and the former need
milk, while strong meat is more proper for the latter; as, by reason of use,
they have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil.

Instead then of finding fault, we have reason to admire that wisdom of GOD,
which has so varied the gifts of ministers, as to suit the various dispositions
of people. By this method of distribution, there are gifts adapted, not only to
please all, but to work upon all, in that way, which is most consonant to their
peculiar frame and make.

3. I add, in the last place, as another reason of this various distribution of
gifts, that hereby opportunity is given for the trial, both of ministers and
people; of ministers toward each other, and of people toward ministers. Had
the gifts of ministers been the same, there had been no room for those of
superior gifts, to have given evidence of their humility and modesty; esteeming
others better than themselves, and taking all opportunities to speak of them
and treat them with all due love and respect: Nor, on the other hand, for those
of inferior gifts, to have shown, that they were not envious at the greater
accomplishments of others, but could rejoice in them, and heartily bless GOD
for them; wishing that they might be greatly useful, in proportion to the
greatness of their gifts. -- Neither, if the gifts of ministers had been alike,
would there have been opportunity, for people to have showed forth an impartial
disposition; thinking neither too highly of some, nor too despicably of others;
but entertaining such a just though it of all, as to be ready to gain advantage
from all, without falling into contention and strife, preferring some to the
neglecting and contemning others. -- But I may not enlarge here. Enough has
been said to justify both the wisdom and goodness of GOD, in thus variously
bestowing his gifts on ministers.

The APPLICATION now remains. And it shall be in several uses, relative both to
ministers and people.

To begin with those that relate to ministers. And,

1. They may learn a proper temper and conduct, whatever their gifts be,
whether greater or smaller. Is it the privilege of any to be favored with a
distinguished furniture for the work of the ministry? They should look upon it
as a free gift of GOD, and take heed, they be not elated with pride. There may
be danger of this. The holy apostle Paul had a thorn given him in the flesh,
lest he should be exalted above measure, through the abundance of revelations.
And pride was too commonly the fault, even of those, who, in the first days of
christianity, were endowed with miraculous gifts and powers. They were too apt
to be puffed up; entertaining so high a though it of themselves as to despise
others. Hence that solemn exhortation of the apostle, Romans 12.3.
I say, through the grace given to me, to every man among you, not to think more
highly of himself than he ought; but to think soberly. As if he had said, Don't
encourage too high an opinion of your gifts; don't be self-conceited and vain,
putting an undue estimate upon your own excellencies as greater than others;
but think soberly of your selves. i. e. maintain a modest, humble sense of the
gifts you have received of GOD: Though some understand by this sobriety, as Mr.
HENRY observes, that sobriety which would keep them in their own place and
station, from intruding into the gifts and offices of others; of which modest
care, in the exercise of spiritual gifts, he gives us a noble example in the
great apostle Paul, who did not stretch himself beyond his measure, nor boast,
in another man's line, of things made ready to his hand 2 Cor. 10.13 to the 17.
. And very observable is the argument, with which the apostle enforces this
necessary caution against pride in gifts. It Is couched in those words, of this
same verse, ACCORDING AS GOD HAS DEALT to every man the measure of faith. And
in the 6th V. where he speaks of gifts differing ACCORDING TO THE GRACE that is
given to us. The though it is the same with that in the text. There are diversities
of gifts, but the same spirit. And what consideration can have a stronger
influence to suppress all undue elation of mind, on account of any advantages
by superiority in gifts? What have thou, O man of GOD, that thou did not
receive? Now, if thou did receive it, why do thou glory, as if thou did
not receive it? Art thou the best, and most accomplished minister in the world?
Thou art no more, thou art no better, than the free favor of GOD has made you.
And the same good pleasure of GOD that has distinguished you, might have
distinguished others: nor can you assign any reason of the difference between
you and them, but that, even so, Father, because so it has seemed good in thy
sight. What ground is there then of glorying? How unseemly is this? How unlike
to the high priest of our profession, who was lowly in spirit, though possessed of
gifts beyond measure?

And what though your gifts are superior to the gifts of others? Their's may be
necessary; yea, in their place, and for the end designed in the bestowment of
them, their's may be as useful as yours. The al-wise GOD saw the state of his
church to be such, as to need gifts of various kinds, smaller as well as
greater; and they are all, in their place, equally conducive to the good of the
body of CHRIST. Why then should they, who have greater gifts, despise those who
have smaller? Why should they undervalue them? Why take advantage from their
superior repute and influence to lessen their usefulness in the church? What is
this but to make a schism in the body of CHRIST? What is it but for the hand to
despise the foot, and say, I have no need of thee?

But on the other hand, Is it the lot of any to be endowed with fewer and
smaller gifts? We have no ground of complaint, but the greatest reason to be
content. We have what an al-wise GOD though it proper to give us. 'Twas he that
divided to us this portion of gifts, and shall we find fault with his
distribution? "Shall not the SPIRIT of GOD do what he will with his own? May he
not give to what persons he pleases, and in what proportion he pleases? One
gift to one man, and another to another; to one more, and another fewer, as he
thinks fit? Is he not the best judge, how his own purposes shall be served, and
his own donatives bestowed?" Let us be thankful we are what we are. If we
sustain the place of a foot only in the body of CHRIST, let us not murmur,
because we are not the head. The sovereign GOD may certainly have liberty, to
make us one or 'tother as pleases him. And we should be particularly careful,
that we don't envy others their superior gifts, nor do any thing to lessen the
good influence of them, duly exercised. As it is for the good of the body of
CHRIST, there should be gifts of greater excellency, we should be thankful any
are endowed with them, and not repine that we are not the persons.

My fathers and brethren, It is by this mutual christian good temper and
conduct of ministers, that they are to help forward the usefulness of each
other's gifts, for the common good: And it is really a matter, on which the
interest of religion greatly depends, that they thus endeavor to make one
another as serviceable as they can. Let me use here the words of the late
excellent Mr. WILLIAMS in his convention sermon, See P. 14.
Those, says he, that are strong should not despise those that are weaker, nor
these envy, or by any means obscure or lessen the gifts of those, who outshine
them; but should rather rejoice in them, and bless GOD for them. This is one
way, wherein humility, the chiefest of christian graces, should appear in us.
How unworthy of ministers is it to supplant, and depreciate one another? A
thing that is very grateful to Satan and his instruments, but dishonorable to
CHRIST, and tends much to lessen their usefulness in the church. To the like
purpose are those words of holy Mr. FLAVEL; where speaking of ministerial
prudence, in its exercise toward brethren and fellow-workers in the LORD; he
says, this prudence will dictate and enjoin it on us, that by the firmest union
with them, we make their gifts and graces as useful as possible for the
furtherance and advancement of our great and difficult work. We cannot be
ignorant, how much satan has gained, and CHRIST's interest has sensibly lost
by those unhappy divisions and alienations among brethren, and
fellow laborers, in the work of the LORD. CHRIST has shed down a variety of
ascension gifts upon them, which are not capable of a full improvement, but in
union and conjunction with each other. Gifts are improved in us by prayer and
study, but the benefits of these gifts are showed among us by love and unity.
Love and union bring EVERY MAN'S GIFTS AND GRACES INTO THE COMMON BANK, and
instead of MONOPOLIES, they drive a free and open trade to the great enriching
of the Church. See his works, vol. 2. P. 745, 746.
He adds a little further onwards, When GOD has cast the lot of two or more
fellow laborers in the Gospel, upon the same city, town, or neighborhood,
what a blessed advantage have they, beyond solitary ministers, to carry on the
work of the LORD cheerfully, vigorously, and successfully? Whilst love causes
their hearts to clasp and close, how must their work be facilitated, sweetened
and prospered in their hands? But if once jars and jealousies get in among
them; if pride, envy or carnal interest dissolve the bond of brotherly love; if
instead of planting for CHRIST, they once begin to supplant one another; no
words are able to show, what a train of mischief and sins will now break in
among them, to the great dishonor of CHRIST, and obstruction of the gospel. I
do therefore, says he, in the name of CHRIST, as upon my bended knees,
earnestly entreat and beseech my brethren, by all the regard they have to the
honor of CHRIST, the souls of their people, their own comfort, or the success
of their labors, that no envyings nor strifes, no supplantings or detractions,
be once admitted or named among them.

I may not improperly add to what has been said, that ministers should be in a
disposition, no more to lessen one another's graces than gifts. If the degrees
of grace in some are greater than in others; If they have a more ardent love to
CHRIST, and zeal in his service; or would express these things in a way
different from what others choose to do, they should not herefrom entertain evil
surmises of their brethren, as though they had no grace, no real love for
CHRIST, or the souls of men; to be sure, they should not say or do that which
may have a tendency to leaven the minds of people with fears and jealousies of
this kind. It might alienate the hearts of people from ministers, and put it
out of their power of being so useful, as otherwise they might be; and what is
worse, it might end in all those dreadful evils, which are the genuine fruits
of faction and contention. It Is true, where ministers have forfeited their
character as men of religion, by a conduct disagreable to the gospel, it will
be a service, and not a hurt, to the cause of CHRIST, to represent them as they
are; but the case is different, where the profession of ministers and their
lives, agree with one another. They have a right, in this case, at least, not
to be spoken ill of; and it is plainly a breach upon the great law of christian
love to censure and judge such, or indeed so much as to think evil of them.

And the same may be said as to smaller differences in the sentiments of
ministers; they should not, on this account, be out of all charity, despising
and condemning one another; there should not be heard among them names To this
purpose, is the following passage in a letter of the ministers of New England,
to Mr. John Dury about his pacification, published from the original copy, in
the year 1664. Epiphanius would not that christians should have any By-name.
Let the nickname of Zuinglians and Calvinists then cease, the marks rather of
faction, than of brotherly-union. What should we have to do with Luther? What
should we have to do with Calvin? We profess the gospel, we believe the gospel.
This letter, as is declared in the preface to it, was returned with the
subscription of the names of almost all the elders universally in New England.
of reproach, which tend only to provoke and exasperate. I speak not against a
due concern for the great truths of GOD and religion. Ministers are set for the
defense of the gospel; and it is their duty to contend earnestly for the faith
once delivered to the saints; But wherein ministers may differ, and yet be good
men, why should not they think well of one another? That rule of the apostle
ought, in this case, always to take place, Romans 3.14.
Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not; and let not him which
eats not, judge him that eats. It cannot be expected, in this world of
imperfection and frailty, but that good men should see many things in a
different light. They always have done so, and always will do so. And indeed
these instances wherein ministers may differ, and yet be good men, are the very
ones wherein they should express their christian charity and forbearance
toward each other: Yea, in respect of these things, there should be love and
charity among christians universally. Very excellent, to this purpose, are the
words of one of the first fathers of this country, I mean the pious Mr.
HIGGINSON, says he, Let none say, that these or those are disaffected to the
cause of GOD and his people, because they see not in some things as others do.
Do not impropriate the cause of religion to some, in opposition to others, who
profess the same cause. None should speak of themselves, as if they were the
godly party, and eminently saints, and skilful, with despising others. Nothing
is more offensive among christians, than to confine religion to some singular
opinion, as if religion did mainly center there. There were differences in
Corinth. How does the apostle write to them all? To the saints at Corinth, and
to all that call on the name of the LORD JESUS, their LORD and ours. Mark that
expression, their LORD and ours. Their's and our's, wherein the apostle checks
the conceitedness in some, that would impale and enclose the common cause of
CHRIST to themselves, and some peculiar opinion of their's: Let us beware of
this. And the apostle saw it needful to admonish the best christians, Let
nothing be done through strife or vainglory, or in a way of provoking one
another; avoiding jealousies and uncharitable censures, being watchful that
satan get no advantage. This also is for our admonition --.

2. Ministers should consider, what their own proper gifts are, and be faithful
and diligent in the use of them. Every minister has his own gifts; and they are
peculiar to him: See his election sermon, preached in the year 1663, page 21, 22.
He may be known and distinguished by them. And as in the distribution of these
gifts, the blessed God knew which were best for this minister, and which for
that, and accordingly endowed every one with his proper gifts; so they should
endeavor to know their own gifts, and not affect the use of the gifts of
others. This is, virtually, to find fault with the divine distributions; it is a
constructive declaration, that other gifts would have been better for us, than
those the alwise God has been pleased to furnish us with: Nor will it,
eventually, turn out to our own honor, any more than the advantage of the
public. It Is obvious to a discerning eye, when the use of a gift is natural, and
when affected: Nor can a man, ordinarily, exercise himself in any gift, so well
as that, which falls in with his natural turn and genius. Some ministers (though
but few) are formed for sudden speakers; they have a quick though it, and ready
utterance: Others have no natural fluency either of thot's or words; and it is
pity, such should so mistake their gifts, as to affect to be, and to do, like
those, they are, in their original make, so different from. Instead of envying
the gifts of others by a vain show, that we are endowed with them, we should
rather consider, we have our own gifts, as others have their's; and that our's
are as proper for us, as their's are for them. How preposterous would it be,
should the foot attempt to act the part of the hand, or the ear the part of the
eye? 'Twould tend to the confusion of the body natural; and it would bring the
like confusion into the body mystical, if ministers, leaving the use of their
own proper gifts, should affect the use of the gifts of others.

But what is of greater importance, ministers should be faithful and diligent
in the use of their gifts. The apostle exhorts 1 Timothy 4.14.
, neglect not the gift that is in thee. And he assures us, in my context, that
the ministration of the Spirit, i. e. in his various gifts, is given to every
man to profit with all. i.e. that they may do all the good they can with their
abilities. And indeed, what other valuable reason can be assigned for the
bestowment of ministerial gifts? Surely, they were not given merely for the
honor and advantage of those that have them; no, but that the body of CHRIST
might be increased and edified. The body natural was not formed with so great a
variety of members for mere show, but for real use; and wherein any member
fails in this point, it becomes a burden. The same may be said of the body of
CHRIST, the church. He has furnished it with pastors and teachers, and these
with gifts of various kinds, and in various degrees: And why, not that they
might be useless, but be bro't forth into exercise: Nor, unless ministers are
active and faithful, in the use of their gifts, will they, in any tolerable
measure, answer the end of their being endowed with them. It Is true, the way
and manner in which ministers may think proper to express their fidelity, in
the exercise of their gifts, may be different; so that one minister ought not
to be judged unfaithful, because he does not, in all things, act as does
another: Neither are the same improvements to be expected of those, who have
few gifts, as of those who have many: But yet all ought to be faithful. Yea,
those, who have the smallest and fewest gifts, can give no reason, why they
should not faithfully employ them. The industrious improvement of our gifts, be
they great or small, few or many, is absolutely required of us; nor unless we
are faithful, shall we do our duty to that body, of which we are members, or to
CHRIST the common head of this body: Nor will any thing prevent his finally
cutting us off, as members that are useless and unprofitable.

I say not these things to encourage any jealousies in the minds of people
against ministers, as though they were unfaithful; so far from it, that I would
take this occasion to express it as my real though it, that the people, in this
land, are blessed with as faithful and diligent a set of Pastors, as are to be
found in any part of the christian world. I don't mean, that there are no
ministers, that may not be complained of for their negligence; but that, in the
general, and as a body of men, there is reason for thankfulness, they are so
active and laborious in the duties of their calling; and to represent them as
otherwise would be an unjust reflection on them, as well as a denial of that
grace of GOD which appears in them. But to proceed,

3. Ministers should be cautious, lest, under the pretense of depending on the
SPIRIT, they should neglect that preparation, in the use of study, which is
really necessary. The blessed SPIRIT, it is true, is the great dispenser of all
gifts, as well as grace. It Is he that furnishes men for the work of the
ministry, and assists them in it; and ought accordingly to be trusted in and
depended on: But then, together with this dependence, there ought to be the
endeavors of ministers themselves, in the use of means. Their case is
different now, from what it was in the days of the apostles. That was the age
of inspiration. Ministers were then assisted immediately from above, without
any previous though it or care of their own. They might then venture to speak
without premeditation, depending on the SPIRIT, to give them, in a miraculous
way, what they should say. But the SPIRIT does not now assist ministers, as he
did in those times of extraordinary revelations. He does it in a way more
humane, in the use of previous preparation by meditation and study. And while
ministers, in this way, depend on the SPIRIT for his assistance and blessing,
they may humbly hope he will be present with them to all the purposes, wherein
they need his help: Whereas, they have no warrant to expect, he will make up
for their neglects, by any miraculous descent upon them, as it were, in tongues
of fire.

This I would recommend to the consideration, particularly of those, who are
candidates for the ministry. There is such a thing, my young friends, as
presuming upon the Divine SPIRIT, as well as neglecting to place a due
dependence on him; and there may be danger in one as well as 'tother of these
extremes. Avoid them both. Let your dependence continually be upon the Divine
SPIRIT for all ministerial gifts; but, at the same time, so place your
dependence, as not to think your own endeavors needless. You may not expect to
be accomplished with gifts, but in the use of labor and pains. You must
therefore mind your studies, be diligent in an attendance to reading and
meditation, as well as prayer. And when you are, in this way, under the
influence of the blessed SPIRIT, furnished with suitable gifts, let me advise you
not to think of venturing into the pulpit, without a suitable care to prepare
your sermons before hand. You ought not to expect immediate inspiration; nor
may you depend upon the assistance of heaven, but in the way of previous
diligent study. You may, in this way speak without your notes; but if this
should be your choice, let it ever be from your memories, and not in the
extemporaneous way. You cannot well take too much pains about your sermons;
especially, at first, and 'till you have got formed in you a readiness to
deliver your selves in a clear and methodical manner: And even after this, you
must, ordinarily, study before you preach, if you would speak as becomes the
oracles of GOD. Hearken to the sentiments of that apostolical man, the renouned
ELIOT, upon this matter These words were transcribed from a manuscript sermon
of Mr. ELIOT's; but they express his known sentiments, as may appear from the
following paragraph in Dr. COTTON MATHER's life of this excellent man. Says he
of him, page 54, "He liked no preaching, but what had been well studied for;
and he would very much commend a sermon, which he could perceive had required
some good thinking and reading in the author of it. I have been present, when
he has, unto a preacher then just come home from the assembly with him, thus
expressed himself; Brother, there was oil required for the sanctuary; but it
must be beaten oil; I praise GOD, that I saw your oil so well beaten to day.
The LORD help us always by good study to beat our oil, that there may be no
knots in our sermons left undissolv'd, and that there may a clear light be
thereby given in the house of GOD! And yet, he likewise looked for something in
a sermon beside and beyond the mere study of man. He was for having the SPIRIT
of GOD, breathing in it and with it --."
. In one of his sermons, he expresses himself thus, Ought not ministers to cast
themselves upon the assistance of the SPIRIT, and lay aside their study, or at
least study only the heads of things, and trust to the SPIRIT's assistance for
the enlargement? Answer, No. For though in an extraordinary case, before enemies,
or in preaching, if GOD calls to work with little preparation, trust him the
more; yet, ordinarily GOD's SPIRIT helps when we study and prepare, though it
will not be wanting in the delivering. And the contrary, as it arises out of a
spirit of sloth, so it fosters and maintains it, and pride. (2.) It exposes a
man to speak rawly and indigested matter to a people, and involves often in
ambiguities, or impertinencies, or mistakes, etc. (3) The office of the
ministry is a labor, wherein we must give all diligence, and study and
watchfulness. Study what we can, pray and believe for the rest. Hear also the
advice of the venerable Dr. INCREASE MATHER. Says he, in his sermon preached at
Cambridge, in the hearing of the students there, Ministers See his book
entitled, Practical truths plainly delivered, p. 112, 113.
should come to their people with well studied sermons. 2 Timothy 2.15. Study to
show thy self approved unto GOD, a workman that needs not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the word of truth. As the priests were to divide the
sacrifices, that every one might have their share, so the minister must apply
comfort to whom that does belong, and terror to whom that does belong. He that
will show himself a workman that needs not be ashamed, must study for it. --
Ministers should be elaborate in their sermons. Says Solomon, The preacher
sought to find out acceptable words, Eccl. 12.10. Men that come into the
pulpit, and utter whatever comes next, without any premeditation, or
dijudication, do not seek to find out acceptable words. And the son of this
memorable father, that flame of fire in the cause of GOD, Dr. COTTON MATHER,
has expressed himself in words to much the same purpose. Says he, in his
directions for the candidates of the ministry See his book of that title, p. 90.
, The first thing I have to demand of you is, that you entertain the people of
GOD, with none but well studied sermons; and employ none but well beaten oil
for the lamps of the golden candlestick. To which, let me subjoin what he has
offered upon this same head, in his account of the discipline of the churches
in New England. See p. 59.
Says he, A faculty of preaching with little study, has been by too many, it
may be, endeavored in the churches of New England; and there have been diverse
temptations leading to it. But well studied sermons are those, which among
judicious christians, in these churches, find the best acceptance, and are the
best esteemed: The churches do not, ordinarily, reckon it a commendation for
ministers, e manicis concionem excutere. If they hear of ministers boasting,
that they have been in their studies, only a few hours on a saturday, or so,
they reckon that such persons rather glory in their shame. Sudden sermons, they
may sometimes admire, from their accomplished preachers, when the suddenness has
not been a chosen circumstance; but as one of old, when it was objected against
his public speeches (in matters of less moment than the salvation of souls)
that they were studied, replied, I should blush at the incivility of treating
so great and wise a people, with any thing but what shall be studied: so the
best ministers of New England, ordinarily would blush, to address their flocks
without premeditation.

I cannot better conclude this head, than in the words of that eminent Divine
now living, I mean the aged faithful pastor of the church of Roxbury. They were
delivered to the body of the clergy in New England, in his sermon to them See
Mr. WALTER's conv^ (...) p. 24.
. We may not, says he, expect immediate inspiration, as the apostles had, so as
not to need to think beforehand, what we should say upon any occasion. All
gracious assistance comes in, only in the actings of diligence. To neglect our
studies, and yet to hope that CHRIST will help us, will be found in us the most
aggravated presumption. We must therefore be in the use of all means, even
private readings and meditations; especially, studying the holy scriptures,
which are our only rule and guide in all our work. In this way of painful
study, we may hope to be more and more enriched with all gifts and graces. This
is the course, which the apostle directs Timothy to, in order to his
proficiency in spiritual gifts and abilities. 1 Timothy 4.13, 15. Give attendance
to reading, meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy
profiting may appear to all. In this case, that will be found a truth, Prove.
10.4. The hand of the diligent makes rich.

But it is more than time that I proceed to those uses, which relate to people.
And,

1. You should be thankful to GOD, who, for your benefit, has distributed so
great a variety of gifts to ministers. There is scarce a gift, in any kind, or
measure, but it may be found in some minister or other; and in some, there is a
glorious collection of many of the most valuable gifts. It was not, my
brethren, for their sakes, but yours; it was not for their own single
advantage, but for your edification, that GOD has thus shed down his gifts on
his ministers. O be thankful to him for these effects of his free love and
favor! And while you give glory to the FATHER, neglect not to adore the SON;
for when on earth, he purchased these gifts for the perfecting the saints, and
the edifying his body; and this, not with corruptible things, such as silver
and gold, but with his own precious blood: And now he is ascended on high, he
dispenses these gifts, in free favor, as acts of his royal grace and bounty.
Only, as the DIVINE SPIRIT is the person, with whom these gifts are entrusted
by the FATHER and the SON, to be divided severally among the preachers of
salvation, as he pleases, let HIM also have his share of your religious
acknowledgments.

2. You should be careful to improve the various gifts of ministers to your own
advantage, and not turn them into an occasion of strife. The design of GOD, in
variously distributing his gifts to ministers, was that he might suit your
dispositions, and by this means render them the more serviceable to you. Your
own spiritual benefit therefore, is what you should aim at, from the exercise
of these gifts. You should put a due value upon them all, and do your utmost to
get as much good by them all as is possible. O how happy would it be, if this
christian good temper reigned universally in people! O how much more profitable
would the preaching of ministers be, than now it is! Their gifts, however
various would then have their proper influence, without obstruction, in doing
service to the body of CHRIST; and by this union in people, to gain advantage
by every gift for edification, it is inconceivable what would be the good
arising here from. --

But this variety in the gifts of ministers, as it is capable of much good, so
it is likewise of much evil. It may be turned into an occasion of emulation and
strife, faction and scism. And alas! that this has so often been the case! It
was so, even in the days of the apostles, and in respect of those ministers
too, who were miraculously endowed by the HOLY GHOST. An unhappy instance of
this, we have in the church at Corinth. The apostle, in his first epistle to
them, 3 chap. 3 v. complains, that there was among them envying, and strife,
and division. And in the following verse, he particularly acquaints them, with
the ground of this complaint. One says, I am of Paul; and another, I am of
Apolles. They had got, it should seem, into parties, on account of the
preachers among them; some calling themselves after the name of this preacher,
and others after the name of that: And each party so admired the preacher they
denominated themselves from, as to hold the other (comparatively at least) in
contempt; the effect whereof was, those emulations and contentions, which broke
the peace of the church. The holy apostle was exceedingly grieved to see such a
spirit of strife and debate prevailing among them; and very severely rebukes
them for it. He compares them to babes, v. 1. i. e. Persons that had grown to
no considerable maturity in the spiritual life; yea, he pronounces them carnal.
Whereas, says he, v. 3. there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions,
are ye not carnal, and walk as men? And again, in the following verse, while
one says I am of Paul; and another, I am of Appollos, are ye not carnal? As if
he had said, "Your thus getting into parties, is a plain evidence of the
remains of a carnal spirit in you, that you are too much under the influence of
corrupt passions and afflictions. From whence come variance, emulations, wrath
strife? Come they not of men's lusts? They are certainly works of the flesh:
And as these appear among you, it is a sure argument, if not of the power of
carnality in you, yet at least of its prevalence, that it is not so much subdued
in you as it ought to be."

And this is always the case, when people take occasion from the different
gifts of ministers, to contend with heat, and animosity; crying up some, so as
to reflect undue disgrace on others. Not that people are to think alike of all
ministers: By no means, some ministers are blessed with superior gifts, and
people may undoubtedly prefer those that are best gifted. There is no harm in
this, nothing can be objected against it; it is indeed impossible, they should
do otherwise: Especially, ought they to prize and value those ministers, who
have been instrumental of spiritual good to them. They should esteem such
highly in love, for the use GOD has made of them to their edification in faith
and holiness. But they should not prefer one minister, be his gifts or graces
ever so great, to the disparagement of another. It Is utterly a fault to despise
this minister, because he has not those endowments, another is favored with.
Shall Paul be slighted, because he has not the eloquence of Apollos? Or, Apollos
be meanly though it of, because he has not the reason of Paul? Shall James and John
be undervalued because they cannot speak in the mild, soft, tender manner of
Joses? Or, he be treated with neglect, because he cannot utter himself in their
words of thunder? This would be to bring confusion into the church of GOD. It
would unhappily occasion that variance and strife, which would eat out the
bowels of true christianity. It is, my brethren, according to the pleasure of
the Divine SPIRIT, that gifts are variously divided to ministers; and it is
really for your good that it is so. Hereby you may all be pleased and
gratified. And if some of you are more pleased with one minister, others with
another, and others with another still, why should you pervert the good
intention of a good GOD in the bestowment of these gifts, by mutual emulation
and strife? Instead of needless debates, whether this, or the other minister,
is best qualified with gifts, you should admire the wisdom of GOD, in so
wonderfully adjusting his gifts to your various dispositions: Instead of
preferring those of greater gifts, so as to throw contempt on those of smaller,
you should endeavor to get all the good you can from them all. And let me say,
there is no faithful minister of CHRIST, be his gifts what they will, but you
may reap advantage from them, if it be not your own fault: Especially, may you
do so, if you look upon ministers as they really are, nothing more than
instruments in the great affair of men's salvation. The not attending to this
may be one reason of the undue preference of ministers. The apostle in the case
of the Corinthians, in order to give check to this party spirit, which appeared
among them, applies to them in that language 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7.
; Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye believed, even
as the LORD GAVE TO EVERY MAN? I have planted Apollos watered; but GOD GAVE THE
INCREASE: So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters; but GOD THAT GIVES THE INCREASE. The best preacher in the world, the
most moving and awakening, the most rational and convincing, can produce no
saving change in the heart of any, but as a Divine power goes along with his
endeavors. Neither Paul, nor Apollos, nor Cephas, are any thing without God;
and with the concurrence of his grace, ministers of inferior gifts may speak
effectually to the salvation of their hearers. This should govern your estimate
of ministers; restraining you from too high thoughts of the best, and too low
ones of those that are inferior to them. The former cannot be the authors and
the latter may be the instruments of sanctification to you.

Brethren, I speak not these things with a design to offend any; but because
they are a word in season: And whoever is not sensible of this, must be
unacquainted with the situation of affairs in this place. There has certainly
been too much beat and strife about ministers; some contending for one, others
for another: And, I believe, no one will pretend to justify those hard
speeches, which have sometimes dropped from the lips of those, who, I would hope,
are otherwise good christians. If you prefer some ministers to others, yet
don't slight those, of whose gifts, you have not so high an opinion. If, in
your apprehension, they be men of inferior gifts, they may not be so in the
though it of others; they may have a great esteem of their gifts; yea, and of their
graces too: Don't do any thing to hinder their usefulness to those, who value
them, though they should not be so well fitted to be useful to you: Or, if their
gifts are really small, they are such as GOD has given them, and they ought not
therefore to be despised: Besides, their gifts being small, their work is so
much the harder: Don't make it still more burdensome, by heaping upon them the
occasions of grief and discouragement.

And bear with me, while I go on to caution you against such an itch after
other preachers, as may lead you to forsake your own ministers on the
Lord's Day, to the breaking in upon the good order of the Town: And I the
rather mention this, because it has been taken notice of by the body of your
ministers, who have more than once, come into an agreement among themselves,
not to ask those ministers to preach on the sabbath, who might be the occasion
of your coming into such disorders on this holy day. And this agreement has
been generally approved of by the most pious and judicious among us, so far as
I can learn.

I cannot more agreably close this head than in the words of the late pious and
excellent Mr. WILLARD See his lectures on the catechism, p. 641.
. Says he, speaking of the person, who had adjoin'd himself to some society of
professors, and put himself under the dispensation of the ordinances there, He
ought ordinarily to give his attendance upon the preaching of such a ministry,
as is there established. I say, ordinarily, for there may be such occasions
offered him in the providence of GOD, which call him to be elsewhere, and he
ought not to neglect the opportunity, in the place, where he may enjoy it: And
for this reason there is a communion of churches necessary to be upheld: Nor is
there reason to be censorious of such, as may on special considerations, for
once and away, attend upon the preaching in another congregation; especially,
if in the same town: But for such, on the sabbath, to go to other towns for
their curiosity or prejudice, when they are at a considerable distance, when
they have the word preached at their doors, and in their own congregations; this
is not only a casting contempt upon their own ministers, but a profanation of
the Lord's Day: And for such to run this day, or part of the day, to one, and
the next to another, merely to please their fancy, or itching ears, is contrary
to the mind of CHRIST. Paul, writing to a particular church, gives that
caution, Heb. 10.25. Not forsaking the assembling of your selves together, as
the manner of some is. And if many should drive this trade, as there are too
many that do, it would offer unworthy discouragements to GOD's stewards, who
have taken pains to provide their spiritual nourishment. Nor can a christian,
with a regular faith, ordinarily promise himself that blessing and profit from
another, that he might from him, whom GOD has appointed to dispense to him.

3. In the last place, People should be careful, to encourage those only, to
undertake the work of preaching, who are sutably endowed with gifts. This is an
obvious inference from what has been offered. For certainly, the SPIRIT would
not have been appointed to distribute gifts to men for the work of the
ministry, if they might be though it qualified persons for this work, without the
bestowment of these gifts. And, as the SPIRIT does not now furnish persons for
preachers, in a miraculous manner, but in a way more accommodate to the nature
of man, by learning and study; those, who han't had the advantage of an
education, and pretend not to any tolerable degrees of learning, cant,
ordinarily, be though it proper persons, to be employed in this sacred business;
and to encourage such to engage in it, may be of dangerous consequence;
especially, at present, when so many are ready to think themselves sufficiently
gifted for this great undertaking. The first fathers of this country, who were,
perhaps, a set of as holy men as the world ever saw, since the days of
inspiration, had no notion of men's being sufficiently qualified to be
ministers, without education and learning. Had they had such a though it, they
would never have founded the college, in the very infancy of the country, when
they were but poor and low, and had a thousand difficulties to encounter. They
seem indeed to have been afraid, lest an unlearned ministry should take place
in the land; and have been particular in their care to guard against it. Suffer
me to read to you what that famous servant of JESUS CHRIST, Mr. RICHARD MATHER,
one of the first fathers of this country, and* if I mistake not, one of the
chief compilers of our platform of church discipline, has said upon this head:
And I would the rather make use of his words, because they are contained among
his farewell directions to his beloved people at Dorchester. Says he to them,
See his farewell exhortation, p. 7, 8.
If through profaneness, or worldliness, or high flown imaginations of excellent
seize, you shall once think an able ministry, and CHRIST's ordinances to
be of no great necessity, believe not that your hearts are in a right frame in
such (...). -- It is not like but 'ere long I shall be taken from you; and then
(if not sooner) see that you do your utmost endeavor to obtain a faithful and
an able minister to be set over you in the LORD. -- And though it be now a time,
when many think, that no great abilities are requisite in a minister, or
preacher of the word, but that almost any may suffice for such employment; yet
you shall do better to be of his mind, who counts a man fit for such a work to
be one of a thousand, Job 33.23. Which imports, that such men are not very
common, but rare men. And otherwise, what need was there for Paul to cry out,
Oh! who is sufficient for such things? 2 Cor. 2.16. Sure, there was little
reason for such an exclamation, if ability to read english be sufficient; but
one would think that speech implies that such abilities and sufficiencies are
requisite for this work, as are not very easy to be found. Sure it is, the rule
requires, that such men should be able to deliver the whole counsel of GOD,
Acts 20.27. And to be able, not only to deliver some truths, and by sound
doctrine to exhort, but also to convince gainsayers, 1 Timothy 1.9. And if the
ordinary sort of people can do this I am much mistaken. -- Amongst the sins of
the house of Jeroboam, which were causes to cut it off, and to destroy it from
off the face of the earth, this is reckoned for one, that he made of the lowest
of the people priests, so that whosoever would might be consecrated to such
employment. 1 Kin. 13.33, 34. And therefore, I exhort you, prize the ministry,
and an able ministry, as an ordinance of JESUS CHRIST; and do not think it can
be well with you, if either you have none, or none of any competent abilities.
To the like purpose is the following observable passage, taken from a sermon of
our memorable ELIOT, from that text, 1 Cor. 3.18.19. Where, in answer to this
question, What is it to become a fool, or so to deny our own wisdom as to lean
on the wisdom of CHRIST? One of the things said is, that it is not to let it
lie by, and make no use of it in the ministry; -- for this is Familistical; who
abusively interpret the denial of learning, that they must have no books but
the bible, and need no learning, nor must use any, but rely on the SPIRIT: And
this cursed opinion helps on some in their opinion about private men's
propehsying in such a corrupt and disorderly way, as to slight and neglect the
ministry. And some of late, in this land, have not spared to say, that if this
generation of ministers were but dead, they should have more liberty of
prophesying, as it seems; hoping that the next generation will have no
learning. And they further plead, that there needs no learning in preaching the
gospel, and if one of them had but the text in hand, they could by the SPIRIT
do better, than the minister by his learning; as if the SPIRIT did not breathe
in learning, and as if learning were not a special, sanctified instrument for
the SPIRIT to use in preaching. Yea, they have pleaded, what learning had the
apostles? -- Nay, some have been so blasphemous as to say, what learning had
CHRIST? Who is the GOD of all wisdom, learning and knowledge. I might cite
words of the same import from many of your eminent fathers in the ministry,
from the first settlement of NEW ENGLAND, and down along to the present day. --
But the time will not permit: Yet suffer me to transcribe a few lines from a
faithful advice to the churches of NEW ENGLAND, by several ministers; some of
whom were as noted for their learning and piety as any who have ever yet
appeared among us. We are not unsensible, say they, that one thing which has
much exposed some injudicious people among us, is an opinion that illiterate
men may be serviceable and admirable preachers. -- And though some unlearned men
have been useful to the interests of religion, yet no man ever decried
learning, but what was an enemy to religion, whether he knew it or no. When our
LORD chose fishermen to be ministers, -- he would not send them forth, until
they had been a considerable while under his tuition, (a better than the best
in any college under heaven!) and then also he miraculously furnished them with
more learning than any of us by seven years hard study can attain unto. If GOD
should be provokt by the unthankfulness of men, to send the plague of an
unlearned ministry upon poor NEW ENGLAND, soon will the wild beasts of the
desert lie there, the houses will be full of doleful creatures, and owls will
dwell there. Ordinarily, that man who undertakes the ministry of the gospel,
without some education for it, is, we doubt in as presumptuous an error as the
unhappy Uzziah, that perished in his error; though we also allow different
Measures and places for that education. And that man was never worthy to preach
one sermon, who did not feel, and would not own, that all the learning that can
be had, is little enough to accomplish an able minister of the new testament.
This advice is signed by INCREASE MATHER, JAMES ALLEN, SAMUEL WILLARD, MOSES
FISK, NEHEMIAH HOBART, JOHN DANFORTH, COTTON MATHER, NEHEMIAH WALTER, JONATHAN
PIERPOINT, JOSEPH BELCHER. See Dr. MATHER's Hist. of New England, Book 7. p.
30. The other copy of this advice, printed by it self, has added to it, the
names of the late Rev. President WADSWORTH, and Dr. BENJAMIN COLMAN. --


I have not mentioned the names of these pious and eminent fathers, as though I
aimed at establishing any truth by their authority: No, that can be done only
by reason and scripture; but that it might be seen, that those who are for
encouraging an unlearned ministry, do not only depart in this article, from the
principles of the best and first ministers in NEW ENGLAND, but are falling into
the very error they were afraid of, and very zealously cautioned people against.

Neither was it my design, in what I have spoken from these great men, to
insinuate as though nothing but learning was necessary to furnish a
gospel-minister. -- No man ought to be put into the ministry, who is not
visibly, and in the judgment of charity, a good christian: Nor can a man that
is not really so, ever save his own soul, though he may be the means of saving
the souls of others. But however necessary a qualification sanctifying grace
may be for ministers, whether in respect of themselves, or their people it is
not all that is necessary. There must be gifts as well as grace; and these too,
attained in the common and ordinary way, by education and study: Nor otherwise
may it be thought, there are the needful accomplishments for the work of the
ministry. -- Grace and learning are no ways inconsistent with each other. And
where ministers have grace, the greater their learning the more capable will
they be, of being most eminently useful: -- Nor without some good measure of
learning, let the graces of any be what they will, are they fit for preachers;
-- and 'twill, in the end, prove a great dis-service to the interest of
religion, if people encourage such to take upon them the employment of
ministers. --

Your patience (which I have too far tried already) will allow me to add
nothing more, but my hearty prayer, that the design of GOD in bestowing his
various gifts on ministers, may be effectually accomplished in you, in your all
coming in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the SON of GOD, unto
a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of CHRIST. To him
be glory in the church, on earth and in heaven, forever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

