REMARKS UPON A PROTESTATION PRESENTED TO THE SYNOD OF PHILADELPHIA, June 1.
1741.

By GILBERT TENNENT, A. M. and Minister of the Gospel in New-Brunswick,
New Jersey.

PROVE. XVIII. 17. He that is first in his own Cause, seems just; but his
Neighbor comes and searches him.

PHILADELP^^^ Printed and Sold by BENJ. (...) 1741.

PRE^^^^
Candid READER,
I HAVE through bodily Indisposition and many Avocations, been prevented writing
the following Remarks so soon as I intended.

IT is with some Degree of Reluctance, that I enter the thorny Maze of
Controversy, and more especially with my Brethren.

I would much rather we had been contending in a united Way, who of Us should
do most in promoting vital Godliness amongst us.

AND I cannot but think, That, if peaceful Measures had been concerted, the last
Synod, and suitably pursued, the Ferment of Opposition would have, in some
Course of Time, languished and expired.

I can sincerely declare, that it was with a View to promote Peace and Union,
that I went to the last Synod; and I know that others of my Brethren, who are
now rejected, were of the same Disposition.

BUT Affairs being brought to a sudden Crisis, a melancholy Necessity urges our
just Vindication.

ALL that I desire of the Reader, is an impartial Consideration of what is
proposed in the following Sheets, after humble Supplication to GOD for Light
and Direction.

MAY the All-powerful Sovereign of the Universe, and King of the Church,
overruled these uncomfortable Debates, to his own Glory, and his Kingdom's
Good. I add no more; but remain

Thy Servant in CHRIST, G. TENNENT.

I. REMARKS Upon the INTRODUCTION to the Protestation.
OUR Brethren observe justly, That there was some Dissatisfaction in the Minds
of some of the Synod, (the Occasion thereof was two Acts or Canons made by the
Majority, which are afterward mentioned) the Removal of which, it is said, was
industriously tried by the greater Part of that Body. It is true Proposals were
made, and that by Persons on both Sides of the Question; which ought in Justice
to have been observed. The Rev. Mr. Jonathan Dickinson did offer such an
Overture, (as our Protesting Brethren mention) viz. Of getting the State of the
Case debated drawn up, by the Consent of both Parties, and sent to the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland, or to their Commission, or to the General
Synod in Ireland, etc. We gave in before the Synod in Writing; the Reasons why
we declined a Compliance with this Proposal; which our Protesting Brethren
thought proper to omit entirely: We were of Opinion, that a Representation of
the State of Debate, consented to by both Parties, would be exceeding
difficult, if practicable. Again, we thought, that this would keep the Matter
in a long and uncomfortable Suspense; not to say, that after repeated and
deliberate Enquiries, we were fully fixed in our Judgment, and found the Smiles
of Heaven upon our Practice, according to it. And therefore, to consent to make
Application to distant Judicatories, where Matters might be misrepresented,
when we were Conscience-bound in the controverted Affair, was, we thought, but
a Tempting of GOD; and would, as we conceived, insinuate what was not true,
namely, That we were not fixed in our Judgment, when the Case was otherwise.

But although we couldn't consistent with the Dictates of our Consciences, comply
with the Measures which the aforesaid Gentleman proposed; yet in the general,
we cannot but approve of his taking Pains to preserve a Union in this
Infant-Church. And I am of Opinion, that, if our Protesting Brethren were of
the same Catholic Principles with him and the rest of the Brethren of that
Presbytery, they would not have forced such a sudden Rupture as they have done.

Our Protesting Brethren proceed to observe, That still the Synod used their
Endeavors to accommodate this Difference, -- that they protested and assured
us, that they had no other Design in their late Act or Agreement, but to secure
a learned Ministry, etc. -- Well; and didn't we on the other Hand, whom they
have rejected, assert the same Thing, viz. That we desired and designed a
well-qualified Ministry as much as our Brethren? Only we thought that the
Method, which the controverted Act proposed, infringed upon the Rights of
Presbyteries, which we could by no Means give into, either by a Compliance with
the Act, or any Equivalent: We judged the aforesaid Design sufficiently
secured, without overturning the Plan of our Government.

As to what is said concerning the Overture brought in by the Rev. Mr. Gillespy
-- and my declaring (as is said) upon that Occasion, that the protesting
Brethren would be only accountable to the Synod for their Conduct in Licensing
and Ordaining Candidates -- and that I insisted, that they should be obliged to
receive all whom we should license or ordain.

So far as I remember, the Case was thus; I was then as I am now, willing to
come into all regular Subordination of Judicatories to one another; but what I
principally intended to oppose, was this, namely, A superior Judicatory's
assuming to itself a Power, upon groundless Jealousies and Surmises,
arbitrarily to examine over again, Candidates who had been in an orderly Manner
licensed or ordained: I apprehended, that if this was given into, as it would
encourage Uncharitableness, so it would effectually baffle all our Endeavors
to maintain the respective Rights of different Judicatories.

I confess I was in some Suspense of Mind, not having studied the Point, what
Power the superior Judicatory had to invalidate the Acts of the inferior in the
particular Case referred to. I do not well remember what I said upon that Head;
but what I said, was not by Concert with my Brethren; and if there was a
Mistake in it, it was not theirs but mine.

It is like that I might urge the Reasonableness and Necessity of the Synod's
receiving as Members of their Body, such as we did license and ordain; without
calling them to any farther Account. And this, in ordinary Cases, is no more
than what is rational, and what has been practiced by the Synod of
Philadelphia, ever since it had a Being. And therefore to say that this
Practice would ruin our Constitution -- as our Brethren suggest, is in Effect
to say, that to act according to the Frame of our Constitution, tends to
destroy it; and that our Synod have been ruining their own Constitution, ever
before the controverted Act was framed. It Is true when Matters of Complaint are
offered against any particular Candidate, no doubt they ought to be judged of,
according to their Weight and Evidence; but to set up a Court of Inquisition,
is, I think, of dangerous Tendency.

But though our Brethren severely censured One whom we had ordained, contrary to
their Canon, without hearing him in his own Defense, and would not admit him as
a Member of their Body; yet we never pretended to separate from them upon this
Occasion. And here it may be observed, That, in order to remove the Jealousies
some of our Brethren seemed to entertain respecting our Care as to human
Learning in Candidates, one of our Number offered a Proposal of this Tendency
to the Synod, That we were willing they should appoint Two of their Number to
be present at our Examination of Candidates for the Ministry; who, if they
found us guilty of male Conduct, might accuse us before the Synod. But some
were not satisfied with that Proposal, urging that a Majority should sit with
us in our Judicatory; which we could by no Means consent to, because it would
take away the Power of our Judicatory, by setting a Negative over it.

Our Brethren farther observe, That while they were making fruitless Proposals
to accommodate the Difference, they found their protesting Brethren
industriously laying the Foundation of a Separation, and going farther from
them by their Practices than ever, for they claimed (say they) as their
particular Right, by Virtue of the Rev. Mr. Whitefield's Orders, to preach at
Society-Hill, and would not allow any but themselves and Adherents this
Privilege; though it was desired in Favor of Mr. Dickenson; and thus, in some
Measure, they refused ministerial Communion with the Synod, when requested.

A. Here it is insinuated, that what was done in the aforesaid Affair, was done
by the joint Consent of all the Brethren, whom they oppose; which was not Fact:
If there be any Fault in the aforesaid Business, it is my own entirely; however
I will relate the Reasons of my Conduct, and leave them to the Reader's
Judgment.

When Application was made to me, as aforesaid, I was in some Confusion of
Thoughts for a Time, and knew not well what to do. But being informed, that the
People of the Town generally desired to hear those who did preach on the Hill,
more than others; I though it it would be an Imposition upon them, to do otherwise
than I did. The Stage being raised for the Rev. Mr. Whitefield by his Friends,
did, as I conceived, properly belong to them, and therefore was to be disposed
of by their Direction. Mr. Whitefield having publicly advised his Friends, to
hear some particular Ministers, whom he expressed a peculiar Value for; If I
had encouraged others, without his Consent, to come into his Pulpit, I knew not
but that it might be offensive to him. And I confess I had an earnest Desire to
preach myself at the Time requested; it being the Season, when in all
Probability the greatest Number would convene.

I think it strange, that the Protesters should call this a Breach of Communion
with the Synod: Pray, is one Member the whole Synod, or was any Request made in
the Name of the Synod? I would have been far from denying the aforesaid
Gentleman, or any other of the Brethren, the Liberty of my own Pulpit; but the
Stage was what I had not a Right to dispose of. I may farther add, That I had
no Thoughts of what our protesting Brethren suggest, viz. Of opening a Breach
with the Synod, by the aforesaid Transaction.

If any of our Number have refused to keep Christian and ministerial Communion
with any of the protesting Brethren, since the Time aforesaid; I doubt not but
they will be able, at a proper Season, to vindicate their Conduct in so doing.
But this by the by I may observe, That the greater Part of those who are now
rejected, (so far as I know) have not refused Communion with their Brethren.

As to what is farther alleged, in respect of our encouraging the Flocks of
our Protesting Brethren to forsake their Ministry, I know nothing of this. I
have not done it myself, neither do I know of any of our Number that has.

Whether our Protesting Brethren be found Divines, and of a
Gospel-Conversation, will probably farther appear, in the Course of this Debate.

And thus, they say, we have industrioufly rent their Congregations, by
unscriptural Methods, without taking Notice of Christ's Rules, Matthew. 16.

A. That there have been some Divisions consequent upon our Preaching in some
Places, we acknowledge; but that we industriously or designedly rent their
Congregations, by unscriptural Methods, we deny.

As to the Papers of Complaint, which our Brethren now call Libels, they
contained Grievances distressing to us, which we thought it our Duty to make
public Mention of; and the Synod, I remember, did not think proper to censure
us for so doing. We did then offer to prove the Matters of Charge against
particular Members, if the Synod required it; but this was waved.

As to what is farther alleged of Mr. Blair, my Brother Charles, and Myself,
that we were earnestly pressed by the Presbytery of Newcastle, to table our
Complaints against them, if we could convict any of them of any Thing
unbecoming a Minister of the Gospel; but all to no Purpose. As to my Brethrens
declining to offer Complaints at that Time, they are of Age, and able to speak
for themselves. As to my own Conduct, this, I think, may be a sufficient
Apology, namely, That the Proposal was Matter of Surprise to me; I had no
Thought about any such Thing, before it was mentioned in the Face of the
Judicatory; my meeting with the Presbytery at that Time and Place, was merely
accidental; and my entering into a judicial Process against any of them, was
utterly inconsistent with my Design, and previous Appointments, of Itinerary
Preaching.

From the Particulars aforesaid, our protesting Brethren conclude, That the
Separation has been made by us, for a considerable Time past, though we were
united in Name: But how justly, I leave to the impartial Reader to determine.

The Truth is, though we differed in Sentiment from our Brethren in respect of
some Acts or Canons they had made; yet we designed no Separation from them upon
that Account; we thought that mutual Forbearance would be the best Expedient in
the Case aforesaid. As we desired Liberty of acting according to our
Consciences, in the controverted Affair; so we were far from a Desire of
imposing our Judgment upon our Brethren, or imagining that there was a
Necessity of Separation upon the Account of the aforesaid Diversity of
Sentiment.

Our Protesting Brethren, in their Narrative, have quite omitted any Mention of
the late extraordinary Act or Canon framed by the Presbytery of Donnegal, which
ipso facto excommunicates, or deprives of Church-Privileges, all of their
People that go to hear any of the Itinerary Preachers.

Whether this showed a Disposition to Peace and Union, I leave others to
determine.

Our Protesting Brethren add, That at their meeting this Year, when they called
to Mind, how unsuccessful they had been in using all healing Measures, that
this damped their Hopes, and cut off all probable Grounds to think that we
would listen to any new Proposals of this Kind; and therefore they chose to lay
open some of their crying Grievances, and to complain of our infringing and
violating the known Rights of Presbytery, etc. -- That if we had any Intention
to an Accommodation, or were resolved to adhere to the Presbyterial
Constitution, this would open a Door for us to make Proposals for Peace, and to
testify our Dislike to Confusions and Disorders in Christ's Church: But after
much Time spent (say they) without being allowed to enter into the Merits of
the Cause -- by a mere Circumstance; -- This put them out of all Hopes of
obtaining Peace with their protesting Brethren upon Scriptural Terms.

A. The Case, so far as I remember, was thus; When the Roll was called, the
Protesting Brethren having Exceptions against Mr. Craighead, and having
suspended him, thought it proper for the Synod to enquire into that Matter
first, before they proceeded to other Business; which Motion was complied with.
Hereupon the Presbytery who had passed the Censure, related diverse Reasons for
their so doing, (in their Minutes) and among others this, of his preaching in
Mr. Allison's Congregation without Leave. -- Mr. Allison several Times desired,
that this Article might be considered, immediately and separately by itself;
this we opposed, as judging it reasonable that it should be considered in the
Place and Order it was brought in before us, namely together with the other
Reasons of the Presbytery's Process against Mr. Craighead; though in the mean
time, we often declared our Willingness to reason upon, and consider that
Matter distinctly, in its proper Time and Place. But after we had entered upon
the Consideration of Mr. Craighead's Affair, not being able to come to any
final Determination about it, for want of Evidence; while some of the Members
were discoursing about referring the Affair to a Committee, I was surprised to
see Mr. John Thomson rising up, and hear him protesting against some Brethren
in the Synod (who he said were of a different Opinion from the rest) being
concerned in the Committee. This inclined me to think, that our Brethren were
determined for a Rupture, and discouraged my proposing an Overture for Peace
and Accommodation, which I was waiting for an Opportunity to communicate.

This Incident also strengthened my Persuasion (as aforesaid) namely, that when
according to the Order of last Year's Minutes, they should have appointed a
Committee for the Fund, as usual, they waved it to another Time.

Their whole Management looked in my Opinion, like a pre-concerted Scheme; and
if our protesting Brethren would heartily tell the Truth, I Am persuaded they
would acknowledge, That before they came to Philadelphia this Year, they had
resolved on a Rupture, and so prepared Matters for it.

However I couldn't persuade myself, that Matters would be brought to such a
sudden Crisis, as they were, by Mr. Robert Cross's bringing in of a Protest,
and desiring it might be read. After the reading of this, our Brethren signed
it with great Precipitation; and although we desired to be heard, again and
again, upon the Reasons of the Protest, our Brethren were deaf to our
Importunity, till they had finished the tragic Scene.

And yet they declare a Willingness to receive us, with all Tenderness, upon
our hearty Return to the Obsevation of the Rules of the Presbyterian
Constitution; (what, with all the Errors they charge us of being guilty of? O
strange!) But whether this Declaration be consistent with the aforesaid
Practice, let others judge.

II. REMARKS UPON A PROTESTATION Presented to the SYNOD, June 1. 1741.
IN what preceeds the Articles of Protest, these Things following may be
observed.

1. The Protesters acknowledge, That notwithstanding of the comely Order and
sweet Harmony, which they say have subsisted in this organized Church, for
above these Thirty Years past, in a very great Degree; that there was a great
Decay of practical Godliness in the Life and Power it, and many abounding
Immoralities. If so, then we query, Why was not this tragical Outcry raised
before, of the Expiring of this Infant-Church? -- Is there not more Reason of
Complaint, when there is a Decay of vital Religion, than when Church Order is
broken? upon the Supposition the Charge be true. Is it not unreasonable to take
more Care about the Tything of Mint, Anise and Cumin, than the weightier
Matters of the Law?

2. The protesting Brethren inform us, That they are wounded and grieved at
their very Hearts, at the dreadful Divisions, Distractions and Convulsions,
which, they say, have all of a sudden seized this little Infant-Church, to such
a Degree, that she is in no small Danger of expiring outright, as to the Form,
and Order, and Constitution of an organized Church -- unless he who is the King
in Zion do interpose!

Well, no doubt, Divisions are to be lamented, in respect of their Authors and
Tendency; because of the Guilt hereby contracted, and the Prejudice hereby
frequently occasioned, to inconsiderate and unregenerate Sinners.

Yet we are far from imagining, with our protesting Brethren, that this Church
is in such Danger as they apprehend upon the aforesaid Account; because we are
assured by the sacred Oracles, that the spreading Power of Religion is usually
attended with the aforesaid Consequences, in a greater or lesser Degree. Our
Lord himself informs us, that he came not to send Peace upon Earth, but a
Sword, Fire and Division; and to set at Variance one Relation against another.
Not that the Gospel is the proper Cause of such Divisions; no, but the innocent
Occasion only.

The protesting Brethren proceed to inform us, that after the most deliberate
and unprejudiced Enquiry into the Causes of these Confusions, they evidently
see, that their protesting Brethren, and their Adherents, are the direct and
proper Cause thereof, by their unscriptural, anti-presbyterial, uncharitable
and divisive Practices; which they have been pursuing (say they) with all the
Industry, they have been capable of, for above these twelve Months past, etc.

Here, after, we hope, an impartial Examination of the Case, we must beg leave
to differ in Sentiments from our Brethren, and to ascribe the present Debates
to a different and more early Source.

That which, in our Opinion, gave Rife to the present Controversy among us, was
our Brethren's Framing two Acts or Canons some Years past; the one respecting
the Admission of Candidates to the Ministry, and the other against itinerary
Preaching.

We conceiving the aforesaid Laws to be (in our Opinion) unscriptural and
arbitrary, as well as of fatal Tendency to mar the Progress of the Work of God
in this Land; did judge ourselves obliged, in Conscience, to oppose them, both
by Speech and Practice. Our Brethren, on the Contrary, thought it proper to
maintain them 'til last Year. That against itinerary Preaching has dropped; but
the other was still preserved.

Our Brethren express their Protest with extraordinary Solemnity, but we hope
that this Method, without sufficient Evidence and Foundation, will not
influence the Impartial and Judicious.

We agree to the first Article of their Protest, namely, That it is the Duty of
this Synod to maintain and stand by the Principles of Doctrine, Worship and
Government, as the same are summed up in the Confession of Faith, Catechisms
and Directory, composed by the Westminster Assembly, which this Synod have
adopted.

We also judge, that Part of the Second is reasonable, namely, That the
Confession of Faith, Catechisms, and Directory, should be adopted by the
Members of the Synod: But, that no Person should be allowed to sit and vote in
the Synod who acts or persists in any Practice contrary to any Rules contained
in the Directory, or Orders made by the Synod, until he professes of his Sorrow
for such sinful Disorder, to the Satissaction of the Synod, or such inferior
Judicatory, as the Synod shall appoint for that Purpose; is, we think
unreasonably severe.

According to this Plan, not only all the Rules in the Directory, are Terms of
Communion, but also every Canon, formed by the Majority, is a new Term added
thereto, which may be multiplied yearly to an immense Volume.

And if one did adopt the Directory, in the strictest Sense, it is no
sufficient Security against Exclusion, unless he can swallow all the
after-Canons, which shall be contrived by the Majority.

Such a Scheme allows no Mercy for scrupulous Consciences, and renders
synodical Communion as precarious as the variable Humors and Fancies of Men.

In Adopting of the Directory, the Synod declared, that they were resolved to
conform to it in Practice as far as was suitable to the Circumstances of the
Church in this Country. This Resolution we adhere to.

But although we highly approve of the Plan of Government, asserted in the
Directory; yet we think it hard and unreasonable to make every Rule in it a
Term of synodical Communion: For at this Rate our protesting Brethren would be
excluded from the Synod also.

And we cannot but think it strange, that our protesting Brethren should with
such Solemnity declare to the World (in Effect) that they themselves have no
Right to sit and vote in the Synod; for they act and persist in Practices
contrary to the Doctrines and Rules of the Directory, as will appear by the
following Instances.

The Directory faith, that the Scripture does hold out Deacons as distinct
Officers in the Church. But have our protesting Brethren any such?

The Directory faith, it is convenient that ordinarily one Chapter of each
Testament be read at every Meeting; and that the Canonical Books be read over
in Order. Do our Brethren observe this?

The Directory faith, concerning Marriage, that the Minister is publicly to
solemnize it, in the Place appointed by Authority for public Worship. Do our
Brethren observe this?

The Directory faith, that he that is to be ordained, must bring with him a
Testimonial of his taking the Covenant of the three Kingdoms, and that he be 24
Years old, etc. Do our Brethren observe this, or think it should be observed
upon Pain of Exclusion?

The Directory says, that the Power of ordering the whole Work of Ordination,
is in the whole Presbytery. May our protesting Brethren be reasonably supposed
to like this well, when they have cast us off for Conformity to it?

How little Mercy soever our Brethren were disposed to show to us, yet we think
they should have had some upon themselves!

The three following Articles, being grounded on the former, fall with it.
(...) But,

I must proceed to consider the Reasons of the Protest.

The first alleged is the Charge of heterodox and anarchical Principles, in
denying (as is said) that Presbyteries have Authority to bind their dissenting
Members, etc. For the Confirmation of which they refer to the 28th and 29th
Pages of our Apology. Our protesting Brethren think that the Tendency of the
aforesaid Pages, is to divest the Officers and Judicatories of Christ of all
Authority, and that they contradict the 31st Article of the Westminster
Confession of Faith, which we have adopted.

A. We cannot discover the Justness of the Consequence our Brethren speak of.
We think that all that Authority, which is consistent with the Rights of
Conscience, and private Judgment, and the Peace of the Church, is asserted in
the Pages referred to.

No doubt it is the Duty of Synods to have a Confession of Faith, in which they
ought to express their Sentiments, concerning the Essentials of Doctrine,
Worship, and Discipline; which ought to be adopted by those they admit as
Members of their Body.

But to suppose that a Majority of that Body, who have complied with the
aforesaid Terms of Communion, are vested with a Power authoritatively to make
new Laws or Acts, from time to time, binding the smaller Number to obey them,
who conscienciously scruple and oppose them, and that from the very Time of
their Formation, so that they shall be excluded from synodical Communion, upon
their conscientious Dissent and Nonconformity, is, we think, to signify, that
the Confession of Faith and Directory already agreed to, is insufficient to
answer its Design, without additional Articles, and Terms of Communion; as well
as to open a Door for continual Oppressions, Schisms, and Convulsions in the
Christian Church.

If a Majority of the Brethren, after adopting the Confession of Faith, etc. as
aforesaid, shall judge some new Rules or Acts necessary for the Good of the
Church, no doubt they may agree to observe them, and may reason with their
scrupulous Brethren concerning their supposed Lawfulness or Expediency; but if
conscientious Scruples notwithstanding remain, we think it unscriptural and
severe, to exclude them from synodical Communion for such a Dissent in
Judgment; in such Cases we judge that mutual Forbearance will better answer the
Design of Government, viz. The Edification of the Body of Christ, than any
rigorous Measures whatsoever, in imposing new Terms of Communion.

As to Appeals or References, we think our Brethren don't give a full and fair
Representation of the Case, as it is in the Apology, to which we refer the
Reader for Satissaction.

We would hope, that our Brethren will not labor to defend any supposed
Authority in Synods, to infringe upon the Rights of Conscience and private
Judgment, which we think ought to be preserved as sacred and inviolable. We
know of no Authority on Earth, that can bind us without the Word of God, and it
is our own and not another's Judgment of that Word, which we are to Follow.

We cannot see any Inconsistency, between our Sentiments expressed in the
Apology, and the 31st Article of our Confession. The Article says, that it
belongs to Synods and Councils, ministerially (not magisterially) to determine
Controversies of Faith, -- and although the Article speaks of an Authority, to
determine concerning Complaints about male Administration; yet it afterward
informs us, that these Decrees and Determinations, if consonant to the Word of
God, are to be received with Submission. -- This plainly implies, that if we
don't apprehend the Decrees aforesaid to be agreeable to the Word of God, we
should not submit to them; and therefore it is added, in the next Paragraph,
That Synods or Councils are not to be made the Rule of Faith or Practice;
seeing that all of them since the Apostolic Times, may err, and many have. Our
Confession urges no other Subjection, but in the Lord, and asserts his alone
Sovereignty over Conscience, and that he has left it free from the Doctrines
or Commandments of Men, which are in any Thing contrary to his Word, or beside
it, in Matters of Faith or Worship; so that to believe such Doctrines, or obey
such Commands, out of Conscience, is to betray true Liberty of Conscience: And
the requiring of an implicit Faith, and an absolute blind Obedience, is to
destroy Liberty of Conscience, and Reason also. See Confess. chap. 20. paragr.
2.

We acknowledge all that Authority, which consists with the Rights of
Conscience, and private Judgment; but in the mean Time we cannot but abhor an
implicit Faith, and blind Obedience, whatsoever plausible Epithets of Order
and Government they may be garnished with, or whatsoever Churchmen they may be
urged by notwithstanding.

A second Reason of the Protest, is our protesting against the Synod's Act in
relation to the Examination of Candidates, together with our Proceeding to
license and ordain Men to the Ministry of the Gospel, in Opposition to, and
Contempt of said Act of Synod.

In order to understand the Nature of this Act, as well as the Reasons of our
Protest against it, I must refer the Reader to the Apology hereto annexed: And
shall only as present add, That our protesting Brethren misrepresent the Case,
when they say we ordained Men; it was but One we ordained, contrary to the
Synod's Act.

If our Brethren by these Expressions, viz. And Contempt of said Act of Synod,
design to insinuate, that in our Practice aforesaid, we contemned the
scriptural Authority of the Synod, or the Judgment of the Majority of our
Brethren, they wrong us; we gave all that Deference to our Brethren's Authority
and Judgment, which was consistent with our irrefragable Right of Thinking for
ourselves; we endeavored to examine, with all the Impartiality and Care we
were capable of, the Reasons of our Brethren's Judgment, after supplicating
Jehovah for Light and Direction; and not finding the Arguments upon which they
went, in our Opinion, relevant or sufficient, we were constrained by our
Consciences to act as we have done.

But though we did protest against what we apprehended (after deliberate
Enquiries) to be wrong in our Brethren's Conduct, a Practice not unusual in
Judicatories of our Denomination; yet we were far from carrying Matters to the
present Crisis, which our Brethren have done by their Protest, namely, to
exclude our Dissenting Brethren from Communion upon that Account.

The third Reason of the Protest, is our making irregular Irruptions (as they
say) upon the Congregations of others, without Order or Allowance, -- sowing
the Seeds of Division among People, and doing what we could to alienate their
Minds with unjust Prejudices, against their lawfully called Pastors.

Here these Things following may be observed, viz. That what is proper in
ordinary Cases may be prejudicial in Extraordinaries; when the Church is
planted with a found, faithful and lively Ministry, no doubt, those Rules
respecting Ministers keeping within the Bounds of their particular Charges,
until they are invited in an orderly Manner to go elsewhere, may be of Service:
But upon the Supposition that a Number of of the Ministry are either unsound in
Doctrine, or unfaithful, and contentedly unsuccessful in their Work: Then is it
not lawful to suspend the aforesaid Rules for a Season? especially in such a
Situation of Affairs as this; namely, when there is an earnest Thirsting, in a
Number of the People, after the close and affectionate Preaching of the Word;
and Ministers being also importuned by some of the People of the Places whither
they traveled, find themselves spirited to uncommon Labors, and perceive those
attended with uncommon Successes.

But what our Synod did the last Year, at their Session, in my Apprehension,
weakens the Force of the preceding Reasons: Did they not cashier and vacate an
Act formerly made against itinerary Preaching, and openly in the Face of the
World, acknowledge that there was a Work of God carrying on in the Land, and
express their Gratitude to God for it? Did not Mr. Robert Cross, who introduced
this Protest, at that time, in a particular Manner, speak honorably of the
Work of God aforesaid, and of itinerary Preaching, and excite his Brethren to
invite such into their Pulpits, mentioning what he and his Colleague had done to
this Purpose in Philadelphia? What is the Occasion of this sudden Change, that
what was then allowed of by our Synod, should now, by some of the same Persons,
be loaded with bad Names of unscriptural, anti-presbyterial, uncharitable,
divisive Practices, and barefaced Arrogance; and that a Number of Ministers
(equal to those that cast them off) should be rejected, because that they were
said to follow what was approved of last Year, and that before they were heard
in their own Defense?

What is the Reason that our protesting Brethren were so full in Favor of the
Work of God last Year, in their public Speeches and Acknowledgments; and that
they make no honorable mention of it in their Protest this Year? Has a little
Space of Time altered the Nature of Things?

But supposing that Ministers were both sound and faithful, would it not be of
Service to the Church of God for such as are sincere of their own Communion
especially, to preach in their Places? And if so, is it not their Duty to
invite them? Which if they neglect or refuse, when a proper Occasion offers,
are they not guilty of an uncharitable and divisive Practice? This, as I am
informed, has been done by more than one of our protesting Brethren.

As to what is alleged, of our sowing the Seeds of Division among other
Congregations, and doing what we can to alienate and fill their Minds with
unjust Prejudices against their lawfully called Pastors; is, I believe, without
sufficient Foundation; the Seed sown by myself and Brethren, so far as I know,
is the Word of God. I hope our protesting Brethren will not call that the Seed
of Division. And our Intention in itinerary Preaching was not as our Brethren
unkindly suggest, to alienate and fill the Minds of the People with unjust
Prejudices against their Pastors; but to glorify God, and bring Sinners to him.
But the Truth is, that some of those who were awakened, without any Speech of
ours in their Prejudice, have entertained, of their own accord, meaner Thoughts
of the Ministry of some of our protesting Brethren than formerly. THIS, THIS,
seems to have alarmed their Jealousies and Resentments about and against the
Work of God, and such Instruments as he has been pleased graciously to use in
promoting of it.

Again, the aforesaid Reason of Protest, seems to insinuate, that all of us,
whom they have excluded from their Judicatories, have preached in the
Congregations of other Ministers without their Consent: A Charge which cannot
be fairly proved. But to proceed: The Fourth Reason of Protest, is (as they
say) our Principles and Practice, of which, Judging and Condemning all who do
not fall in with our Measures, both Ministers and People, as carnal, graceless
and Enemies to the Work of God. For the Proof of this, they refer to my Sermon
against unconverted Ministers, and to two Papers of Complaint offered to the
Synod last Year, by Mr. Blair, and myself. Answer; We know of nothing in the
aforesaid Sermon and Papers that gave Ground to the aforesaid Charge. We own
that rash Judging is a Sin against God; but we know of nothing in our
Principles that leads to it. We are far from such Narrowness and Bigotry as to
imagine that all God's Ministers and People are cooped up within the Verge of
any one particular Denomination; or that they are all of our Sentiments, and
willing to comply with our Measures in lesser Things.

Our Brethren allege, that rash Judging has been our constant Practice for
above Twelve-Months past, as well as of (as they call them) our disorderly
Probationers. This Charge, our Opponents, we think, will not be able to prove.
Indeed, we have been very jealous about our protesting Brethren's States
toward God, because of their inconsistent Conduct in respect of the Work of
God, sometimes Approving and sometimes Disapproving of it; and representing of
it in a gloomy Dress, because of some uncommon Incidents and Circumstances,
which might admit of a favorable Interpretation. Has not Mr. John Thompson
termed the late Revival of God's Work a newfangled Stir about Religion; as
also a spiritual Frenzy? And have not the Authors of the Pamphlet, entitled,
The Wandering Spirit; expressed great Bitterness against it? We have Reason to
suspect some of our protesting Brethren to be guilty of Forming that malignant
Satyr: And are there not some shrewd Strokes of this kind in the Sixth Reason
of the Protest, which we are now considering?

We are sorry that our protesting Brethren have, by their Speeches and Conduct,
given us such Reason to believe them to be Opposers of God's Work.

As to what is said in the Conclusion of the present Argument, namely, that
since their Congregations have been shattered and divided, few or none of them
can say that they have that Comfort or Success among their People which they
enjoyed before. As to Comfort, we believe them; but respecting Success, we
thought it had been the same as formerly; for, truly, this is the first time
that ever we have heard of the Success of most of them. The

Fifth Reason of the Protest, is, that we (as they say) industriously persuade
People to believe, that the Call of God whereby he calls Men to the Ministry
does not consist in their being regularly ordained, etc. but in some invisible
Motions and Workings of the Spirit: And that the Gospel preached in Truth by
unconverted Ministers, can be of no saving Benefit to Souls. In answer to the
aforesaid Charge, we declare our Opinion as follows, namely, we believe that
there is a Necessity of previous Trials and Ordination in order to the
Ministry; and that such who are regularly set apart, being sound in Doctrine,
and blameless in Life. however their inward State may be, are true Ministers in
the Sight of the Church, and that their Ministrations are valid. But in the
mean time, we think that none should undertake the ministerial Work but those
that are truly gracious; those that intend therein chiefly the Glory of God and
Good of Mankind; those that are inclined of God thereto: For we know not how a
graceless Man can be faithful in the Ministry. Now, whether those inward, pious
Dispositions aforesaid be termed the inward Call of God to the Gospel Ministry,
or only Qualifications necessary or pre-requisite in the Persons whom God
calls, it seems to be the same in Substance. A Debate about Words we judge
needless.

As to what is farther alleged in this Paragraph, namely, that the Gospel
preached by unconverted Ministers in Truth can be of no saving Benefit to
Souls, according to our Opinion. This Charge we deny as slanderous. God, as an
absolute Sovereign, may use what Means he pleases to accomplish his Work by. We
only assert this, that Success by unconverted Ministers Preaching is very
improbable, and very seldom happens, so far as we can gather. Alas, for them
poor Souls! partly through Ignorance of the Nature of vital Religion, and partly
through a native Enmity against it, and partly through Fear of losing their Credit,
etc. by its Spread near their Borders; they are under great Temptations
(instead of Befriending of it) to rise up against it, and try to pull it down
by all their Art and Eloquence. The

Sixth Reason of the Protest, is, our Preaching (as they say) the Terrors of
the Law in such a Manner and Dialect as has no Precedent in the Word of God,
but rather appears to be borrowed from a worse Dialect; and seditiously Working
on the Passions of weak Minds as to cause them to cry out in a dismal Manner,
and fall down in Convulsion like Fits, to the Marring of the Profiting both of
themselves and others, who are so taken up in Hearing and Seeing their odd
Symptoms, that they cannot attend to, or hear what the Preacher says; after all
Boasting of these Things as the Work of God; which we are persuaded do proceed
from an inferior or worse Cause.

A. This Reason, when applied to all whom they reject, as it doubtless is by
our Opponents, which their indefinite Manner of Expression signifies, is
groundless and slanderous. We challenge our Opponents to prove their invidious
Charge against the greater Part of those whom they have rejected: If any one of
our Number has been guilty of Indiscretion at any time in his Manner of Address
to the People, we will not pretend to justify it; but to charge the Whole with
this Fault, is unjust.

We know not that we use any Dialect in inculcating the Terrors of the Law, but
what accords with Scripture and Reason; or that we endeavor to excite the
lower Passions, but after the Information of the Understanding, and that by
scriptural Incentives: Which is so far from being seditious, that it is the
Duty of every Gospel Minister. We are bid to cry aloud and not to spare; to
show to Judah her Transgressions, and to the House of Jacob her Sins. Knowing
the Terrors of the Lord, we must persuade Men. If we speak smooth Things, or
please Men, we are not the Ministers of Jesus Christ.

If any one among us has boasted of People's falling into Convulsion-like-Fits
as the Work of God, as our Opponents suggest, I think it is a culpable Weakness
in the Person guilty of it. It is, doubtless, the Duty of People to labor to
keep their Passions within due Bounds, especially in public Assemblies, lest
they interupt their own and others Edification.

I know of none among the rejected Brethren who look upon the aforesaid
Convulsion-like-Fits to be a sufficient Evidence of the Work of God.

We only judge such Appearances to be probable Indications of Concern of Mind,
which when it issues in a Closure with Christ by Faith, a Communion with him by
Love, and Conformity to him in humble Holiness; we believe it to be a special
Work of God's Grace: But even before it has those Effects, while Sinners are
only bewailing Sin, chiefly through Fear of divine Wrath, we think we have Reason
to hope that it is a common Work of that Holy Spirit, whom Christ has promised,
to convince of Sin, in order to Conversion and Consolation.

And although some under Conviction of Sin, should be overcome by an Excess of
Sorrow or Fear, we think that a milder Construction might be put upon this,
than to ascribe it to the Devil.

In the mean time it may be observed, that there are but a few that are
overcome as aforesaid, in Comparison of the Multitudes that are convinced.

It may be proved, by many Witnesses, that several Times when the Truths of God
have been preached in the mildest Gospel-Strains, that many Persons have been
overcome with Love, Joy or Sorrow.

What worse Representation of the Work of God, now Spreading in the World,
could be expected from a professed Enemy of all Religion, than we have from our
Brethren? Is it not doleful to see Religion thus wounded in the House of its
professed Friends?

Do they not manifestly make use of an uncommon Circumstance to blacken the
whole Work?

But while our protesting Brethren were expressing warm Resentments against the
Work of God, under the plausible Umbrage of a seemingly exceptionable Incident;
methinks they should have taken some Care to avoid horrid Reflecting against
the sacred Scriptures, and even against God himself.

When they say we preach the Terrors of the Law in such a Dialect as has no
Precedent in the Word of God, but rather appears to be borrowed from a worse
Dialect: Does not this, comparative worse, necessarily suppose the positive
bad? So that the Meaning of the Sentence is this; The Scripture contains a bad
Dialect, but they have chosen worse. And when they speak of our Boasting of
People's Outcries, etc. as the Work of God; which (say they) we are persuaded
do proceed from an inferior or worse Cause; Does not this suppose God himself
to be a bad Cause, in their Apprehension? But hoping that this was only a Slip
of their Pen, I therefore pass it by without any farther Observation.

Must they not be stone-blind that do not see, that there be all the Evidences
of a Work of GOD now among us, that can reasonably be desired? Are not the
Ignorant enlightened, the Secure made solicitous about their Salvation, the
Profane reformed, many Formalists shaken off their false Foundations, and
brought to experimental Christianity? Have we not all needful Evidence from
their Speech and Practice, that the prevailing Temper of many Men's Minds is
turned into a holy, humble and heavenly Channel?

Diverse Opposers of God's Work in several Places of this Land, have been lately
struck to the Heart, and made to acknowledge their Wickedness in the most
public Manner.

Some aged Persons, some middle-aged, Multitudes of young People in the Bloom
of Life, as well as many little Children, have been brought to experience deep
Sorrow for Sin, and the Sweets of a Savior's Love. Of young People turned from
Sin in its Strength, we may say, as in another Case, Thou Sea, wherefore
fleddest thou? and thou Jordan, why wast thou driven back? Shall any dare to
reproach the Work of GOD, while out of the Mouths of Babes he is ordaining
Strength?

Yea, diverse Negroes, and Indians, have been of late, to all Appearance,
effectually wrought upon. Several Places in this Continent, are at this Time
joining Hand in Hand, in seeking of the LORD; they are setting their Faces
Zion-ward, and weeping as they go.

And have not Persons of almost all Denominations been wrought upon by the Word
as aforesaid? Do they not unite to give Testimony to God's Work, and celebrate
his Praise? Herein Judah and Ephraim have harmonized. What can be desired more
to prove it to be the Work of the Eternal GOD?

If it be objected, that many of those who are said to be under good
Impressions, are guilty of rash Judging. A. I cannot think it rash Judging to
believe those to be graceless, who, in the midst of Means of Conviction, do
habitually oppose the Work of God, under the Covert of some supposed or real
Indiscretions.

A seventh Reason of the Protest, is our preaching and maintaining (as they
say) that all true Converts are as certain of their gracious State, as a Person
is of what he knows by his outward Senses; and are able to give a Narrative of
the Time and Manner of their Conversion, or else we conclude them to be in a
graceless State; and that a gracious Person can judge of others gracious State
otherwise than by his Profession and Life, -- that People are under no sacred
Tie to Pastors, etc.

A. Our Judgment as to the aforesaid Particulars, is this, namely, That
gracious Persons may attain a full Assurance of their good State, and some of
them do attain it; but we do not believe that all arrive thereto in this Life;
and those that do, may, no doubt, lose it again, and get under Clouds and
Darkness.

But in the mean time we think, that all who are converted, ordinarily have a
lesser or greater Degree of comfortable Persuasion of their gracious State,
either immediately upon their Closure with Christ, or some Time afterward,
when Faith is in Exercise, either for a shorter or longer Duration. Surely,
those that are rightly humbled by the Spirit of God, will not be satisfied 'til
they obtain this.

And although those that are converted in adult Age, can generally remember the
Time and Means of their Conviction, and give a satisfactory Account of their
Experiences to those who are proper Judges of such Things; yet the Case, we
suppose, is somewhat different with those who are converted in Infancy and
Childhood; yet it must be confessed, that even some Children pass under
considerable Convictions. I know of none of our rejected Brethren, that do or
ever did believe it to be just or proper, to judge any to be in a natural or
graceless State, merely because they could not tell the Time of their
Conversion; if they have Evidences of the Thing, it is enough.

We know of no Way of Judging respecting the gracious State of others, but by
their Doctrines, Experiences, and Practice.

No doubt there is a Relation between a Pastor and his People; but the Design
of this being to promote their Good, we think it unreasonable that it should
subsist to the Prejudice of that, which it is designed to procure. However, in
ordinary Cases, we think it to be the People's Duty, to make regular
Application to their Pastors, for Liberty to go where they get the greatest
Benefit.

But when Ministers conspire to oppose the Work and faithful Servants of God,
in the most open and flagrant Manner, we see no Harm in this Case, in using an
extraordinary Method.

FOR these, and many other Reasons, our Brethren do in a most solemn Manner
protest, that we have no Right to sit with them in Judicatories: The Reasons
they have mentioned we have considered, and leave it to the Reader to
determine, whether they are sufficient to procure our Exclusion; but as to the
rest, we know them not; however through Mercy we are not afraid of seeing the
Bottom of their Budget. We hope, and pray, that they would bring forth all
their Strength, in their Reply to this; for we design no more but another
Answer. We have got something else to do, which is more desirable than
Controversy. We only want the State of the Case to be fairly opened; and then,
I hope, we shall be easy about the Judgment of the World, respecting our
Conduct. But to return.

From the aforesaid Particulars our protesting Brethren reason for the
Necessity of a Rupture.

But having before considered the Grounds upon which our Brethren's Reasonings
are built, I think it needless to speak to them separately; for they can be but
such as their Foundation is, and must needs stand or fall with it.

After these Reasonings, our Brethren profess themselves to be resolvedly
against the Principles and Practice of Anarchy and Schism.

A. Whatever they profess, I think they are guilty of both, in their Protest,
namely, 1. In laying down this as a Principle, that there must be a complete
Uniformity to all the Synod's Rules, or Canons, upon Pain of Exclusion. See the
2d Reason of Protest. And 2. their casting us out of Communion for our
conscientious Nonconformity to their unscriptural Canon. Does not the first of
these Particulars, because of the varying Opinions of Men, according to the
ordinary Course of Things, open a dreadful Necessity of continual Confusions in
the Church of God, or else of implicit Faith and blind Obedience to prevent the
same? And pray, is not the Remedy worse than the Disease?

We are sorry that our protesting Brethren have given us Reason to suspect
them, of being guilty of verging toward the Doctrine of implicit Faith and
blind Obedience; this appears from their finding Fault with us (in their
Protest) for not obeying the Rules, in the making of which we are in the
Negative.

Here we must beg to be excused from Concurring in Sentiment with our Brethren:
We are resolved, by the Grace of God, that no gingle or cant of Order and
Government shall gull us out of our Reason and Conscience, or rob us of our
Privileges, as Men, as Christians, as Protestants, and as Presbyterians: We
declare our utter Abhorrence of all such Pretense to Power in Churches, as is
built upon the Ruins of human Nature.

We cannot but join with our protesting Brethren, however, in their Prayer,
that God may arise, and that his Enemies may be scattered, and that those who
hate him may fly before him. But, I think, their Application of it to us, shows
them to be guilty of that rash Judging which they would charge upon us, Turpe
est Doct. -- quod tibi fieri non vis, etc.

Our protesting Brethren farther observe, That to give Way to the pulling down
of the Hedge of Discipline, is far from being the Method of causing his tender
Plants to grow.

A. If so, then why are they guilty of it, by their unscriptural Impositions
upon, and rash Separation from their Brethren, in such a Manner as is, for what
I know, without all Precedent?

Particular Rules of Churches, are only so far to be valued and obeyed, as they
serve to answer their supposed Design, namely, the Edification of the Body of
Christ. To say that we should regard and obey them when the Case is otherwise,
is to say, that we ought to esteem and promote the Injury of Christ's Kingdom;
which is absurd.

Our protesting Brethren say, that they doubt not but that when God sees us
humbled for our Sins, he will return again in Mercy. No doubt we have at all.
Times Reason to humble ourselves before God: But if they be not blinded with
Prejudice, or otherwise, they may see Reason now to rejoice, that God has
returned to his Church in Mercy.

Once more: Our protesting Brethren think that their Protest, which they call
their Testimony, may be of use to their Children yet unborn. It may so, for
what we know, in showing them their Fathers Opposition to the Work of God, and
schismatical Separation from their Brethren.

But though we are called to speak plainly, yet we wish our protesting Brethren
all needful Mercies from the Bottom of our Hearts.

REMARKS UPON THE APPENDIX.
THE Narrative our Brethren give of what happened after the Protest was signed,
is a strange Misrepresentation of the Affair.

After the Protest was entered and subscribed (say our Opponents) the Brunswick
Party insisted that a great Number of us, who are now the Synod, should be cast
out of Membership; for (say they) there were several Brethren, who did not sign
this Protest, who were not of the Number we protested against, and they
concluded that all these Members would join with them, and they were exact in
Counting of the Roll, and found that when they had counted all such with
themselves, they could not make the Majority: But some of the Members, who did
not sign this Protest, soon convinced them, that they would not be of their
Party; And upon this, they thought it expedient to withdraw.

As to the Brunswick-Party's (as they are pleased to call us) insisting that
they should be cast out of the Synod, it is what I know nothing of; such a
Thought did not enter into my Heart.

But how can our Brethren assert, what it was not possible for them at that
Time to know, without our Declaration, which they had not? namely, That we
concluded that all these Members, who had not signed their Protest, would join
with us? What we concluded upon, was this, That those who had not signed the
Protest, had not rejected us; and therefore were so far upon our Side of the
Question, that they could join with us in Judicatories.

Our Brethren call themselves a great Number; the Truth is, there was but a
small Difference between them and us as to Number, which will appear thus; The
Persons they protested against, were these, viz.

Ministers.
William Tennent, senior. Richard Treat, Samuel Blair, Charles Tennent, James
Alexander, Alexander Craighead, William Tennent, Eleazar Wales, John Rowland,
Gilbert Tennent.
All the rest of the Ministers in Synod (besides these now mentioned, and the
Protesters) were only Four in Number, namely,

Messirs.
George Gillespy, Alexander Hutchison, Jedidiah Andrews, -- M" Henery.
The Two first of those last mentioned, seemed inclinable to join with us;
which put us on a Par as to Number with our Opponents: And Mr. M" Henery was
also dissatisfied with the Protest. But the Number of the Elders, on each Side
of the Question, I cannot tell; not having the Synod's Minutes by me.

It is evident from what has been said, that there was a Majority of
Non-protesting Ministers.

Our protesting Brethren assert, that they are the Synod; but I think it is
easier for them to assert, than prove it. Does not their offering a Protest
before the Synod, signify, that the Synod were a Number distinct from them, in
their own Judgment? For it seems unreasonable for a Number of Men, to offer a
Protest to themselves.

It is alleged by our protesting Brethren, That when some who did not sign the
Protest, convinced us, that they would not be of our Party; that upon this, we
thought it expedient to withdraw. This is a gross Mistake; for some of the
Non-protesting Members convinced us of no such Thing. Neither was any Thing
like this, the Occasion of our Withdrawing; we stayed 'till the Moderator
commanded Silence.

Our protesting Brethren say, That our Withdrawing put the House into a little
Confusion. Here is another strange Misrepresentation; for the Confusion the
House was in, was neither after, nor occasioned by our Withdrawing; it was
before we came away, and was occasioned by the Reading and Signing of the
Protest; we did not come away 'til our protesting Brethren came with us; and
that was after the Session was concluded, with Prayer, as usual.

The Roll indeed was counted, but not with the View mentioned by our Opponents,
but to see whether in respect of Number, our protesting Brethren could cast us
out, according to the Tenor of their Protest.

The Truth is, the Reading and hasty Signing of the Protest, put the Assembly
into Disorder; we were surprised with the extraordinary Method of Proceeding,
and knew not well what to do; we were loath to be cast out so hastily, without
speaking any Thing in our own Defense; but our Attempts to speak were repulsed,
the House being confused, one spoke one Thing, and another another, and
sometimes two or more at once; so that it is hard to tell what was said. Mr.
Blair, I remember, offered more than once, to read a Paper; but the Motion was
rejected, and Silence enjoined by the Moderator; and thus the Assembly, after
Prayer, broke up.

No doubt Societies have a Right to judge of the Qualifications of their own
Members, and to reject such as render themselves unworthy of their Communion.
But according to the Laws of Nature, of Nations, and of God, they should be
first heard in their own Defense, before they are condemned and rejected.

Our Brethren have their Liberty to prove all they can against us; and we have
little Reason to doubt their Inclinations that Way. But if they will keep to
the Rules of Truth and Justice, we fear not their Allegations.

Their saying, that it was only want of an Opportunity, and not of a willing
Mind, that prevented us from turning of them out, is uncharitable and severe;
if we had had such a Desire to separate, as our Brethren suggest, we might have
easily done it long agone.

But forasmuch as a Historical Narrative of the whole Affair of Debate, will in
a little Time be exposed to public Light, I will add no more at present.

May the gracious GOD grant that these Contentions may issue in Zion's
Prosperity. Amen.

New-Brunswick, July 3. 1741.
The End of the REMARKS.
THE APOLOGY OF THE PRESBYTERY of New-Brunswick, FOR Their Dissenting from Two
ACTS or NEW RELIGIOUS LAWS, which were made at the last Session of our Synod.
Humbly offered to the Consideration of the SYNOD now convened at PHILADELPHIA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by BENJ. FRANKLIN, 1741.

THE APOLOGY OF THE Presbytery of New-Brunswick, etc.
Moderator, and Reverend Fathers, and Brethren,
WE hope we may, without Boasting or Offense, observe, that, so far as we know
our own Hearts, we do not only, in some Measure, desire the Prosperity, but
Peace of Zion; and that we are heartily willing to pursue all scriptural and
rational Measures to compass and preserve both: And therefore the late cloudy
Appearances of Uneasiness and Debate among ourselves in this infant Church have
been peculiarly afflictive to us; not so much, we trust, for the Fears of any
personal Prejudice that our Debates with you may possibly occasion to us, as of
the Reproach and Disadvantage that may probably issue therefrom if increased
and brought to a fatal Period upon the Honors and Interests of Religion in
general.

However, we cannot think, that for the Sake of Peace we should sacrifice the
Interest of what we apprehend to be Truth and Justice, and cross the Dictates
of our own Consciences: No, we rather concur in Sentiments upon this Head with
Luther, who justly observed, That an honorable and necessary War was
preferable to a mean and ignoble Peace. Potius coelum and terra ruerent, etc.

We charitably hope, that a Number, at least, of the late Synod designed the
Advancement of Christ's Kingdom by their Conclusion: But we are sorry that
there is so great a Difference among us in the (...) of Expedients to answer
the aforesaid truly valuable Design.

We crave leave to inform and assure you, Moderator, and Reverend Brethren,
that it was not from any Disregard to your Persons, or just Authority, that we
so warmly opposed the late religious Acts or Laws you have been pleased to
form; but from a Principle of Conscience, influenced by Scripture and
Arguments; which we now beg Liberty of proposing to your farther Consideration,
in the following Order:

The Tenor of the first Act we dissented from, is, that approved Ministers and
Members of this Synod are thereby debarred from Preaching in any Vacancy which
is in the Bounds of another Presbytery, when any Minister of that Presbytery
informs them that he thinks their Preaching will cause Divisions and Disorders;
until that Matter be tried by the Presbytery where the Vacancy is; or until he
obtains Liberty from the Synod.

Against the aforesaid Law, we offer the following Objections, viz. That we
cannot find any Foundation for it in the Holy Scriptures. It was judged, by a
Majority of the Synod, that it was a suitable Expedient to preserve Peace and
Order in Congregations; and this is the only Reason proposed why it is enacted,
without ever once pretending any particular Order or Direction from God about
it; and yet it is enacted with as great Appearance of Authority, and made as
universally Binding upon all the Members of this Synod, although a Number thereof
did oppose it in its Embryo, as if it had a Thus says the Lord expressly for
its Foundation. If it can be made appear from the Holy Scriptures that the the
King of Zion has appointed this Act, or the Matter therein contained, in his
Word; we hope that there is none in this Synod that would be more careful to
observe it than ourselves; and that from a Regard to the Authority of GOD, and
not of Men.

But on the Contrary, we humbly conceive, that the aforesaid Act opposes the
express Command of God, which obliges Ministers to be constant in Season, and
out of Season, 2 Timothy iv. It bereaves both Ministers and People of the
Privileges Christ has given them; and restrains them from the Performance of
commanded Duty for the time being. The Exercise of the Minister's Office, when
he is regularly called to preach by the united Voice of Providence and of the
Christian People, is suspended for a Time by one Man; and that not for any real
Fault already committed, or so much as alleged; but upon Suspicion that some
bad Consequences will follow upon his Preaching in such a Place. And, in
consequence hereof, the People are debarred from doing a positive Duty of high
Importance and Concern in Christianity, viz. Hearing an approved Minister of
Christ when they have convenient Opportunity. Here is something that is very
extraordinary indeed; every Minister in the Bounds of the Synod, that is
inclined to be uncharitable to his Brethren, is by the Act aforesaid vested
with a Power (in this Instance something more than prelatical) to lord it over
his Brethren, and inflict upon them one of the most grievious Church Censures;
and that without any Pretense of Fault committed. We cannot think that
Uncharitableness gives any just Claims to superior Powers or Pretense; and
therefore to encourage such a Disposition which is so evil in its Nature and
fatal in its Effects, in an Age in which it so much abounds, to the great
Reproach of Christianity, is, in our humble Opinion, as unreasonable and
prejudicial as it is unequal. If it be contrary to the Laws of Nature, of
Nations, and of God, to condemn Men (although shrewdly suspected to be guilty of
Crimes that deserve it) before they be heard in their own Defense; how much
more so must it be to punish actually and grievously without the least Pretense
of Fault committed? That an approved Minister's stated Preaching in one
Presbytery should be safe, and his occasional in another, should be dangerous,
is a Riddle to us which we profess we cannot see through. If a Minister
preaches sound Doctrine, why should it be deemed dangerous in or unsuitable to
any Place? If not, why is he approved or suffered to preach in any? Are not
Souls equally precious in all Places? and therefore ought not the Synod's Care
be equally extended to all within their Bounds? Will not the same Gospel serve
the whole Synod? And if any preach another, why are they received by that
Judicatory, and suffered to preach in any of her Territories? If not, why are
they hindered from Preaching occasionally and transiently which are invited
regularly?

What is offered, as the Reason of the aforesaid Suspension, rather serves to
condemn than justify the Synod's new Law, in our humble Opinion, namely, the
Suspicion that one Minister has, that his Brother's Preaching in such a
Vacancy will cause Divisions and Disorders: For hereby the Synod so far
approves of the uncharitable Suspicions of her Members of one another's
Performances, which is a great Sin in itself, as to make it a sufficient
Foundation or Warrant for their committing another, viz. their censuring their
Brethren, and bereaving them of the Privileges which the King of the Church has
expressly and designedly given them, and that before they hear them. And
therefore, inasmuch as this Canon gives License to do Evil that Good may come;
we think it plainly contradicts the express Word of God, Romans iii. 8:

We beg Leave farther to observe, that we cannot well reconcile these two
Things in the Synod's Conduct in relation to the aforesaid Law, viz. that the
Synod approves of all her Members, and yet in the mean time encourages them to
suspect each other, and punish upon Suspicion. Now, seeing Justice and Charity
are the Springs and Principles of Peace and Order; what is contrary thereto,
must have a direct Tendency to destroy both. Of this Kind we take the aforesaid
Law to be, for the Reasons before and after-mentioned; and therefore this Canon
contradicts the professed Design thereof; instead of preventing Divisions and
Disorders, it procures them; and so opposes all those Scriptures that establish
the contrary.

The aforesaid Law gives Liberty to censure a Brother upon mere Conjecture.
For, what other Knowledge can any of us have of future contingent Events,
unless any Members of the Synod have the Spirit of Prophesy, which we do not
think they will pretend to? But supposing they had the aforesaid Branch of the
Apostolic Character, we see not how they could punish their Brethren for an
Event, before it came to pass, an Event which might come to pass without their
being any ways culpably accessory thereto.

This therefore leads us to observe, that the Reason annexed to the aforesaid
Law, is expressed in ambiguous Terms, Divisions, Disorders, etc. which, as they
follow upon Preaching, may be taken in a good or bad Sense: If these Words be
taken in a bad Sense, for sinful Divisions properly caused by Preaching; then
certainly it is sinful Preaching, that procures them. Sinful Divisions can
never be the proper Fruits of Gospel Truths; to say otherwise, is to pour
Contempt upon the glorious Gospel. If so, then it is unreasonable to hinder the
Preaching of Truth in any of our Borders, in order to prevent Divisions. And
Truth, we are by the Law of Charity obliged to hope, will be preached by our
approved Brethren, until we have good Reason to the contrary.

Can any Member of one Presbytery, know certainly beforehand, that a Member of
another will preach false Doctrine in any of their Vacancies, more than one of
their own Presbytery? If not, then he may with equal Reason hinder the Brethren
of his own Presbytery from preaching in such Vacancies; and so they shall never
be supplied; for, another may hinder him by the same Rule: If yea, then we ask
how this can be without a Claim to Infallibility or immediate Revelation?

If a Fear of our Brother's preaching false Doctrine, merely because he is
fallible, will justify his being suspended from preaching for a Time, before he
has preached it; then we query, if this, followed in its just and natural
Consequences, will not silence this Synod and all the World with them? This
Method of preventing the Preaching of false Doctrine, is, we confess, effectual
to answer the End designed: But then it concludes or infers rather more than we
suppose the Synod will allow of; for it destroys all Preaching entirely, except
by inspired Persons.

But if there are other sufficient Foundations for the aforesaid Fear; then why
are not the scriptural Methods of private Reproof, and public Charge, before
his proper Judicatory pursued? If there are not sufficient Reasons; then why is
the aforesaid Fear followed, and made the Foundation of Censure; seeing it is
unreasonable?

But if the aforesaid Terms are taken in a good Sense for these Disturbances
which the powerful Preaching of the Gospel only occasions, in which respect our
Savior observes, That he came not to send Peace on Earth, but a Sword, to set
a Man at Variance with his Father, etc. (See Matthew. 10. 34 -- 36.) and that
while the strong Man armed keeps the House, all the Goods are in Peace; -- Then
is the aforesaid Law very extraordinary and unaccountable indeed: For, wherever
the Gospel becomes the Wisdom and Power of God, to the Conversion of Souls,
there it is generally opposed by the Devil and his Emissaries: These that are
converted, do ordinarily endeavor to convince others of their secure
Neighbors of their Danger and Misery (which is but their Duty;) this is apt to
provoke the Children of Belial to reproach the People of God; and in the Choice
of a Minister, these Persons who have a better Knowledge and Savor of true
Religion, may be also very cautious; which is also their Duty: Hence Divisions
and Disorders may ensue. Now, if this Opposition of Satan and his Seed against
the Power of the Gospel, be the Divisions intended, and Ministers must be
debarred from preaching in particular Places, lest the Devil's Kingdom should
be disturbed, and Satan himself vexed or drove out of Places where GOD has
sealed their Labors for the same Reason; Then the Law we plead against, is
most iniquous. But we charitably hope, that it did not appear to our Rev.
Brethren, who passed it in this Light; and that they were inadvertently led
into a Consent to the aforesaid Act, by the heavy Complaints and frightful
undistinguished Terms of Divisions and Disorders: And we are persuaded, that
now they will join with us in opposing this unequal Act, when the Divisions and
Disorders pointed at in it, come to be particularly distinguished and specified
by their proper Causes and remote Occasions.

But whatever favorable Sentiments Charity obliges us to entertain of the
Intentions of the Formers of the aforesaid Act; yet we must in the mean time
observe, that the Ambiguity of its Terms, gives Room for the aforesaid terrible
Effects.

Suffer us, Reverend Gentlemen, again to observe, that we think it hard and
highly injurious, that a Minister approved of by the Synod, when he is warned,
etc. must forbear the Exercise of his Office in any Vacancy of another
Presbytery, where he is providentially called; and if he would clear up his
clouded Character, or answer the just Request of the People, he must wait in
his Travels far from Home, till a Presbytery meets, not that which he properly
belongs to; and he hears their Decisions about his Brethren's Suspicions, or
else their prophetical Determinations about what is not yet come to pass, viz.
Whether his preaching in such a Place, will be attended with Divisions; yea or
not. We hope you will not be offended, Gentlemen, when we assure you, that our
feeble Powers are perfectly puzzled and nonplus'd, when we would labor to
sound the mysterious Depths of this Act in all its Parts; but thus far we think
we may safely say, That according to the Notions we have of it, its general
Scope and Tendency seems to be to discourage utterly all occasional Preaching
out of the Bounds of the Presbytery we live in, and to subject the Exercise of
the ministerial Office to the capricious Humors of uncharitable, ill-natured
Brethren.

We thought indeed, that when Ministers were ordained, they had a Right to
preach Christ where they were providentially called, whether it was within
their Presbytery-Line, or beyond it: But now we are learned the Contrary; for
by this new Law they must have new Commissions from a Presbytery or Synod, if
they happen in their Travels to cross their Presbytery-Line, or meet with a
cross Brother. Besides there is something in this new Law implied, that is, in
our humble Opinion, very injurious to ruling Elders and the Christian People,
viz. That, according to it, they have no Power to invite a regular Member of
another Presbytery to preach among them one Sabbath in his Travels: If any
Member of their own gives Warning to the Contrary, thus one disorderly Brother
is empowered by the aforesaid Act, to trample upon the Rights of Ministers,
Elders, and People: We call the supposed Person disorderly, because by
unreasonable Jealousies he breaks the Law of Love, which obliges to hope all
Things that are good of our Brethren, as far as it is reasonable, and to suffer
long, and be kind: If his Jealousies be without sufficient Ground, he is
disorderly; if it has sufficient Grounds, he is also disorderly, in taking such
an unscriptural, yea, antiscriptural Method with his Brother, as this Law
directs to. We cannot see any Consistency between our Savior's Law, mentioned
Matthew. 18. 15 -- 18. and this of the late Synod; nor any Kindness, but rather
great Cruelty, in accusing a Brother before an improper Judicatory, and that
when unprepared to make his Defense.

Once more: The aforesaid Act seems to us, to contradict the generous and noble
Temper of the Apostle Paul, who resolutely rejoiced that Christ was preached,
though by some it was done through Envy, Insincerity, Strife and Contention,
supposing to add Affliction to his Bonds. Phil. 1. 16, 17.

Neither are we able to discern the Consistency of the aforesaid Act with the
Care that Presbyteries should have that their Vacancies be supplied; especially
considering the Situation of Affairs in this Country is such that some
Presbyteries are not able, without wronging their own Congregations, to supply
the Vacancies in their Bounds; therefore, one would think, they should be glad
of Help en passant from their approved Brethren in their occasional Travels.
But the Contrary of this appears by the Law under our present Consideration,
which casts unscriptural Hindrances in the Way of Help, and makes it extremely
precarious, and even almost impracticable. But to proceed:

The Second Religious Law made by the last Synod, which we dissented from, is
to the following Purpose, viz. That no Presbytery has (according to it) Liberty
to examine any Candidates who offer themselves to to them, in order to license
or ordain them, before they be examined and approved respecting their
Literature by a Committee of the Synod.

That our Reasons against the aforesaid Law may be set in a just Light, we beg
leave to premise the three following Positions, viz.

I. That there is a Parity of Equality of Power among Gospel Ministers, is a
Truth universally owned by Presbyterians; a Truth very evident from the
Commission Christ gave to his Apostles.

II. That a Presbytery, or the smallest Association of Ministers, have a Power
from Christ to ordain, is also a Truth which the Scriptures fully vouch, 1 Timothy
iv. 14. 2 Timothy ii. 2. A Truth which the Presbyterians have universally
maintained in their Defenses, and conformed to in their Practice: A Truth which
gave rise to the Presbyterian Name. He who denies the aforesaid Positions
oversets, consequently, in his Opinion, all Presbyterianism both in Name and
Thing, and unchurches all the reformed Churches (strictly so called) He who
owns them, will, in our humble Opinion, be obliged, in Reason, to own a

III. Position necessarily resulting from them; which is this, that
Presbyteries have Authority from Christ to examine all Candidates (who
regularly offer themselves) respecting all Qualifications that are necessary
for the Ministry; for this the Power of Ordination, in the Nature of the Thing,
necessarily supposes. If they may set them apart to the ministerial Work, they
must judge of their Qualifications for it, or act by implicit Faith in their
own proper Business, which is absurd.

Having offered the aforesaid Conclusions, we would reason against the
aforesaid religious Law, which restrains the Exercise of that Power which
Christ has given to Presbyteries, as to the Examination of Candidates, for a
time, as to some whom they may approve of, and perpetually as to others whom,
perhaps, they may not approve of; in the following Manner, viz.

I. We think that the aforesaid Act is an unscriptural Law: We cannot find any
Directions in the Scriptures that Candidates for the Ministry must be examined
and approved by a Committee of any Synod, before a Presbytery takes them under
Examination in order to license or ordain them.

II. We look upon it to be an uncharitable Act: It seems necessarily to suppose
a Suspicion of the Insufficiency or Unfaithfulness of their own Members for or
in the Performance of the Task Christ has assigned them as its Foundation. Now,
unless this Suspicion be pleaded, how can any tolerable Pretense of Necessity
for the aforesaid Law be urged? And if it be, how can the Conduct of the
Members of this Synod in sending such into the Ministry, approving them in it,
and allowing them the Privileges of an associated Body or Presbytery, be
justified?

III. We think the aforesaid Law is anti-scriptural: If the Scripture allows
and injoins Presbyteries to examine all Students who are of good Report (that
regularly offer themselves) as has been before proved, then it is against the
Scripture to impair or hinder the Exercise of said Power, unless the Possessors
thereof consent thereto, or be judicially convinced of such Faults as deserve
such Treatment.

If a godly Candidate, who is sufficiently qualified for the ministerial Work
according to the divine Prescription, should scruple the Lawfulness of this
synodical Law, and yet offer himself to a Presbytery, etc. they are obliged by
the Law of Christ to receive him, 2 Timothy ii. 2. Romans xiv. 1. 4. Romans xv. 7. But
by this Law of the Synod they are obliged to reject him.

IV. It Is unjust (in our Opinion) to impair a Power given by Christ to any, or
to restrain the Exercise of it allowed by him, against the Consent of the Wills
and Dictates of the Consciences of the Possessors, unless they be proved Guilty
of such Crimes as deserve such Penalties. To condemn and punish before any
Accusation is offered, is an odd Way of Judging.

Farther, we cannot see how it can be reconciled to the Maxims of Justice, to
oblige all Candidates to spend Time and Money (which some can ill spare in
attending upon synodical Committees) when the Matter can be otherways well
managed, according to the divine Direction.

V. The aforesaid Law is (in our Opinion) unnecessary: Why may not or cannot
Presbyteries try young Men now, as they have done this Twenty or Thirty Years
by past, even ever since this Synod was formed? If this Committee be so
necessary, what a poor State must this Church have been in, 'til the last Year!
and how defective must the Laws of Christ be, which have not a Word of this
Committee in them, so far as we can gather?

VI. It is (in our Esteem) anti-presbyterian: This Law, by taking from
Presbyteries their proper Business, and restraining them in the Exercise of
their original Powers unscripturally, tends to render them useless, and so to
destroy them entirely, and with them that Subordination of Judicatories
dependent on them, without which the Presbyterian Government in its present
Model cannot subsist.

According to the Presbyterian Constitution we conceive, that all the Ministers
of the Gospel are equal one with another in all the Parts of the Pastoral
Office; so that none have any peculiar Powers or Privileges beyond others: And
yet particular Presbyteries, consisting of such a Number of Ministers, more or
less, with the Elders of their several Congregations, as can conveniently meet
together so often as Occasion may require, have full and complete Power for
ordering all the Affairs of the Church within their Bounds. In a Word, they
have Power to execute all the Parts of Government which Christ has appointed in
his Church, (which, by the Way, is not inconsistent with their Liableness to be
brought to Account by Synods, or larger Assemblies consisting of several
Presbyteries, either for Errors in Doctrine or wrong Conduct in Practice) and
consequently they have the whole Management of the Admission of Persons to the
Preaching of the Gospel, who may and ought to apply to them for that End. Now,
certainly, this Act we oppose, is an Abridgment of the aforesaid Right and
Privilege; for, according to it, no Presbytery must try or license any
Candidate, until they obtain the Liberty and Approbation of those who are
constituted their Superiors in the Business; and such as these Examinants think
fit to reject; they must by no Means admit: Whereas we cannot be assured but
that some may have a Sufficiency of Learning and Knowledge, of whom these
Gentlemen may think otherwise. Possibly some of them might think very meanly of
a Candidate, who has, perhaps, as much useful Knowledge and as improving
Abilities as themselves, if he is not so well acquainted with some Metaphysical
Niceties and sublime critical Disquisitions of the Schoolmen; though he might
probably do as much to the Defense of Gospel Truth, and the saving Instruction
of immortal Souls, as themselves, notwithstanding of their other Speculations:
Whence it is the more necessary for Presbyteries to preserve their just Rights
and Liberties in this as well as all other Cases.

And to make it farther appear, that this Act is an Encroachment upon them, let
it be observed, that by the same Method of Proceeding, all the Power of
Presbyteries may be taken away; and so our Constitution of Government, in the
present Plan thereof, entirely unhinged: For, if the Synod can take away, at
its Pleasure, one Privilege and proper Business of Presbyteries, what hinders
but that by the same Power they may take away another, and another, 'til they
take away the Whole, by the same Rule that this Act is made? And we think, for
as weighty Reasons, they might take the Licensing and Ordaining of Candidates
entirely into their own Hands (it would prevent Trouble) and also go through
Stitch with all the other Branches of the Presbytery's Work, which they have an
equal Right to with the former; and then we should have an End of Presbyteries
altogether: And indeed if the Thing be taken away, why should not the Name go
with it? We profess, Gentlemen, that we cannot brook mere Shams and empty Names
of Things without the Substance.

Besides, we are at a Loss to conceive how it can accord with Presbyterian
Parity, to set a smaller Number over a greater, with the Power of a Negative
(against their Wills) in the Business of their proper Province, and that before
they have any Opportunity to attempt the Performance of it. It seems to us to
be a great Step to Prelacy: For what are the Members of the Committee,
especially as to those who gave no Consent to their Claims, but a Combination
or Convocation of Superintendants and Deputy-Prelates, to whose lordly
Authority the inferior Clergy, the poor Curates, I mean the Presbyteries, are
obliged to submit.

But to prevent being tedious, we must not add that the aforesaid Act is
inconsistent with itself, and cannot well hang together. The specious Reason
offered in the first Part, viz. to supply the Want of Colleges, clashes with
the latter Part, which obliges even such as have had a College Education, to
repair to the Synod's Committee.

Thus we have in as brief a Manner as we could, offered some of our Reasons
against the Matter of the two late Acts of this Synod. We now proceed to offer
our Sentiments about the Power from which they sprung, with the principal
Reasons thereof, seeing it is to little Purpose to takeaway bad Branches while
the bitter Root remains untouched; for so long as it continues, it will be apt,
upon all Occasions, to produce as bad or worse again. We will therefore, by
divine Assistance, venture a Blow at the Root.

We humbly conceive that the aforesaid Acts in their present Form are founded
upon a false Hypothesis or Supposition, namely, that a Majority of Synods or
other Church-Judicatories have a Power committed to them from Christ to make
new Rules, Acts or Canons about Religious Matters, on this Ground or
Foundation, viz. That they judge them either to be not against or agreeable to
the general Directions of the Word of God, and serviceable to Religion; which
shall be Binding upon those that conscientiously dissent therefrom, under
certain Penalties which are to be inflicted even upon those who judge the Acts
they enforce to be contrary to the Mind of Christ, and prejudicial to the
Interests of his Kingdom. This is in brief a legislative or law-making Power in
religious Matters, and this we do utterly disclaim and renounce for the Reasons
which we shall anon mention, and are pleased that we have our Synod's
Concurrence therein in a printed Declaration, which was sent to Ireland some
Years agone: That Declaration, which we apprehend worthy of a protestant Body,
we purpose to maintain inviolably in our Practice as well as Profession. Now,
we conceive that a religious Law may be said to be new in two Respects, viz. in
respect of the Matter inserted in it, or the Penalty annexed to it, i. e. when
any Thing is required or forbidden by it which is not required or forbidden by
God in his Word, the Law is new. Again, a Law may be said to be new (as we
conceive) when, though the Substance thereof be according to or contained in the
Word of God, a Penalty is inflicted for the Breach thereof, which is not
prescribed by the King of the Church.

Now the principal Reasons that incline us to believe that there is no
legislative Authority in the Church of Christ, are these following.

I. If Church Judicatories have a Right to such a Power as this, then they have
received it from Jesus Christ. This, we hope, will admit of no Dispute; for he
is the great Head of his Church, the Government is laid upon his Shoulders.
Again, if Christ has given them such a Power, he has somewhere signified the
Grant of it in his Word. But the Place or Places of Scripture we cannot find
wherein the Lord Jesus Christ authorizes the greater Number of a
Church-Judicature to lord it over their fewer Brethren, and the Heritage of God
under their Inspection, by making Laws of their own Devising over their Heads,
enforced with penal Sanctions, and particularly that of Noncommunion among the
rest.

Neither can we find in the Word of God, any Passage wherein our blessed
Redeemer Jesus Christ has enjoined his Ministers, and other Members of his
Church, to submit or yield a blind Obedience to the Laws and Ordinances of a
greater Number in a Church Judicatory, although they judge them to be sinful and
contrary to the Good of his Kingdom. When either of the aforesaid Particulars
is made evident from the Scriptures of Truth, then we will readily subject our
Consciences to the Guidance of other Men, and yield undisputed Obedience to all
their Decrees: But, we hope, never before.

II. The making of new religious Laws, seems to us to be an Invasion upon the
kingly Office of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whose Royalty it peculiarly belongs
to give Laws to his Church. Hence the Apostle James informs us that there is
one Lawgiver (i. e. one only who is exclusive of all others) who is able to
save and destroy: Subjoining, Who art thou then that judge another, Jam. iv.
12. Col. i. 18. Christ is the Head of the Body, the Church, he is constituted
the King of Zion. Now, if the Church of Christ has but one Head, one King, one
Law giver, how can any Man on Earth make Laws in Addition to Christ's for the
Government of his Subjects in religious Matters, without making the Church a
monstrous Body, with many Heads, without commencing Kings in his Kingdom, or
rather setting up a Kingdom of their own in Opposition to his? If making new
religious Laws, as to their Matter, or adding new Penalties to old ones, be not
Acts of kingly Power, we desire to know what is.

Likewise the Members of Christ's Church are, from from this very Argument,
dissuaded from yielding Submission to such a Claim of Power. 1 Cor. vii. 23. Ye
are bought with a Price; be not ye the Servants of Men. Mark vii. 5. 6. -- ix.
Then the Pharisees and Scribes asked him, why walk not thy Disciples according
to the the Tradition of the Elders, but eat Bread with unwashen Hands. (To whom
Christ replied) In vain do they worship me, Teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men. Here was an Act of the Jewish Synod concerning a Thing
very innocent in its Nature, and yet we see of what dangerous Tendency it was
in the Judgment of our Savior. When the false Brethren would have brought the
Galatian Church into the Bondage of the Jewish Ceremonies, the Apostle Paul
would not give place by Subjection, no not for an Hour, that the Truth of the
Gospel might continue with them, Gal. ii. 4, 5.

III. The aforesaid Power of Legislation (or Law-making) in religious Matters,
seems to us to be utterly inconsistent with the Perfection of the Holy
Scripture; of which the Apostle Paul testifies, That it is profitable for
Doctrine, Correction, Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect and thoroughly furnished to every good Work, 2 Timothy iii. 16. 17.
Whatever good Work there is in the whole Sphere of Religion, the holy
Scriptures afford sufficient Laws for the Performance of it; by these the Man
of God may be thoroughly furnished and perfect; and can any Man desire more
than Perfection? or can there be any good Work in Religion, which is not
prescribed by the Author of it? If so, then Superstition is justified, contrary
to the many Passages of Holy Writ that condemn it. If not, then where is there
any room for new religious Laws of human Invention?

If the King of the Church and Author of the Scriptures be Wisdom and Love
itself, then certainly his omniscient Eye must pierce the Vail of Futurity, and
perfectly behold all the various Difficulties which his poor Church was to
grapple with through all the successive Scenes of its Duration here; and his
boundless Love excite his unsearchable Wisdom to form every Law that was, is,
or shall be necessary for its Direction in every of them. Now, if the Case be
so, what need can there possibly be of new religious Laws made (at any time) by
short-sighted, fallible, corrupt Creatures; and if it be not so, our Religion
and Faith are vain, and we are yet in our Sins. To imagine a Necessity of new
Laws in religious Matters, contains in it (in our Opinion) an ungenerous
Reflection upon the divine Word, and the Wisdom, Goodness and Faithfulness of
its Author.

IV. A Power of Law-making in religious Affairs, is (in our Opinion)
inconsistent with Christian Liberty, which, we think, contains in it a free Use
or Disuse of Things, in their general Nature indifferent, according to the best
Judgment we ourselves can form of their Expediency or Inexpediency, from the
general Directions of the divine Word applied to our Circumstances.

Undoubtedly there are many Things which are in their general Nature lawful to
be done or avoided, which are not necessary by any Law of the Gospel, any
farther than as varying Circumstances may render them expedient, as Helps for
the Performance of commanded Duties, or inexpedient, as Hindrances. Now if a
Majority of Church Rulers may fix and determine all these Things for us by Laws
of their Invention, armed with Penalties against those that conscientiously
dissent, then we are in a poor Box indeed. If these Things that Christ has left
free be not left so by Church Authority, then what shall become of the Liberty
which our dear Redeemer has bought for us by his Blood, 1 Cor. vii. 23. Gal. 1.
Being made free by so great a Price, wherefore should we become the Servants of
Men, and tamely suffer ourselves to be ensnared and enslaved by a Yoke of their
Framing and Imposing. Are we not commanded to stand fast in the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free. It has been frequently, and, we think,
justly observed by the most eminent Defenders of our Persuasion, against the
exorbitant Claims of another Church, viz. That it is not to be imagined that
our merciful Redeemer would die to free his People from a Yoke of ceremonial
Laws of divine Institution, and at the same time leave them exposed to the Will
of their Fellow Creatures, to be oppressed with a Multiplicity of their
Inventions, which have been often as unreasonable as cruel.

Every new religious Law cuts off a valuable Branch from our Christian Liberty;
and how soon they may be so multiplied as to bereave us entirely of that
precious Privilege (in the Sense before mentioned) we know not: But this seems
evident to us, that, according to the Law-making Scheme, our Liberty lies at
the Mercy of Men, who may, if we stupidly couch under the Burdens they impose,
soon destroy it.

V. The aforesaid Power of Legislation in Matters of Religion, Prudence, and
Conscience, opposes and tends to destroy (in our Opinion) the ancient
Church Discipline that Christ has appointed, by fixing new Terms of Communion.
The Substance of that Discipline which Christ has appointed in his Word (as we
conceive) consists principally in excluding from Communion such grossly
erroneous or vicious Persons in Principle or Practice, as his Word points out;
and receiving them again into it, upon their showing the Signs of Penitence: In
short, the Terms of the Discipline of Christ are fixed and invariable, and
should be inviolably observed by all Churches; but the Legisative Power
aforesaid, by coining new religious Laws, makes a new Term of Communion by
every one of them, in Addition to those our Savior had ordained, so that
hereby the Discipline of Christ is gradually drawn off its ancient Foundation,
namely, the Laws of God, to the Lusts, Fancies and Traditions of Men, through
which the former are sometimes made void; for by their Traditions they are
sometimes obliged to reject those whom the Laws of Christ oblige them to
receive, those whom they themselves were wont to receive; e. g. The Laws of
Christ oblige them to receive to Christian Communion all those that are sound
in the main Points of Faith, and regular in Life, although they err in
Circumstantials or lesser Points; and to Ministerial all those that have the
Qualifications which the King of the Church requires in his Word. Romans xiv. 1,
4. Him that is weak in Faith, receive ye; but not to doubtful Disputations. Who
art thou that judge another Man's Servant? whereas the new Laws of Churches
have excluded and do exclude such. Every Man, how pious, peaceable, useful and
eminent soever he be, in all valuable Respects, if he scruples and opposes such
Church-Canons as he thinks are dishonorable and detrimental to true Religion,
though Christ receives him to Glory, and bids them receive him; yet by these
human Ecclesiastical Laws they will reject him, some from Christian and
Ministerial Communion both, and some from Ministerial only. Thus a dreadful
Foundation is laid for a Succession of Schisms in the Church of God, while such
a Claim of Power is pretended to, and exercised, by which the Seamless Coat of
Christ is rent and torn into an almost infinite Number of Parts. For, the
Charter of Law-making (in our humble Opinion) is hard to be found in the Bible,
and the Prudentials about which they exercise it, are oftentimes difficult to
be determined. Good Men are apt to have different Minds about them, and being
of different Sentiments, and conscientiously inclined to act according to the
best of their Light; so long as there is Conscience and Courage on Earth, while
the aforesaid Engine is mounted on the Wheel, a sad Scene of Debate and
Division is opened.

In short: If we may be suffered to speak plainly, a Legislative Authority
makes the Terms of Communion as variable as any Weathercock; so that a Man is
in continual Danger of being cast out of Communion, where it is exercised in
its Rigor, unless he has a Conscience as pliable as Wax, ready to receive
every Impression, or can alter his Sentiments out of Complaisance to a Majority
of Votes, as fast as the Camelion its Colors. Which leads us to the

VI. Reason, which we humbly offer against a Legislative Authority in Matters
purely religious, and it is this, That we think it an unwarantable Encroachment
upon the Rights of Conscience and private Judgment; because it determines for
us, what properly falls within their Sphere, and obliges us to submit thereto
whether convinced or not, or suffer certain Penalties, which Almighty GOD has
not prescribed in his Word in such Cases.

That Matters of Prudence and Expediency under a religious Consideration, come
within the Sphere of Conscience, is evident from this, That by doing what is
prudent and expedient, much Service acrues to Religion, and by the contrary
much Damage: Now, can any Man be a true Christian and not have a conscientious
Regard to do and avoid what promotes and hinders the Interests of true
Religion? Again, we think it evident from Scripture, that God has given the
only Right to every Man to judge for himself in the Particulars aforesaid. 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. 1 Cor. 11.13. Romans 14.14, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 6.12.

The Right of private Judgment in general is equally apparent from the
Principles of natural as well as revealed Religion; if every Man must answer at
last for his own Actions, and the Misguidance of others will not clear him from
Guilt or guard him from Punishment in following them, it is but equal that he
should judge for himself also: The holy Scriptures frequently enjoin this Duty
of examining what is proposed to us in religious Matters, and commend the
Performance of it in the Bereans; and to what Purpose should we examine these
Things, but to form a Judgment about them, and act accordingly? If we must act
contrary to our Judgment, because of the Laws of our Fellow Creatures, then our
Examination serves but to increase our Guilt and Punishment; for he that
doubts, is damned if he eat, Romans 14.23. And if we must believe, that to be
prudential and serviceable to Religion which any Set of Men make into Laws,
merely because of their supposed Authority; then certainly Ignorance is the
Mother of Devotion; then implicit Faith and blind Obedience are found and
wholesome Doctrines; then in order to qualify us for thorough Subjection to our
spiritual Governors, it will be necessary to pluck out our own Eyes, that we
may see clearly through their Spectacles.

Neither does that plausible Apology of the Patrons of a Legislative Power,
viz. that their Acts or Canons about Prudentials, are grounded upon and
agreeable to the Word of God, or general Directions of Scripture, make the
unhappy Case of those that are under such a heavy Yoke, a Bit the better, so
long as the minor Party are deprived of the Right of Judging for themselves,
whether these Things be so or not, and of acting according to their Judgment
without Censure. This leads us to

VII. Another Reason against Legislative Authority in religious Matters, which
is this, namely, That such a binding Power necessarily supposes one of these
two Things, viz. either that Church-Judicatories are infallible in their
Determinations, and so cannot injoin what is wrong; or that they have Power to
legitimate an Error, and make that which was antecedently Evil, to become Good,
by Enjoining it. A legislative Authority in the Church, must of Necessity be
resolved into one or other of these two as its first Principle: But we are
persuaded that both the one and the other will be disclaimed by us all, and
consequently so ought this Power, which cannot be claimed consistently without
them. That there is such a Connection in this Case is most manifest; for if
Church-Judicatories are not infallible, then they may err, either requiring
that to be done which ought not, or forbidding that which ought; in neither of
which Cases certainly are we bound to obey, unless their Authority is also such
that it can alter the Nature of Things, or secure us from the Punishment we
deserve for doing what is Evil, or neglecting what is Good. In a Word
Legislators in Religion must be either infallible or omnipotent. This not only
Reason teaches, but the Word of God confirms, Jam. iv. 12. We have no Certainty
but that a Church Judicatory may injoin something very prejudicial to the
Church of Christ, either through the Short-sightedness and Misapprehensions of
well-designing Men; or it may possibly happen that a considerable Number are
influenced by wrong Principles and Motives; and if Things appear to be so to
others, must their Hands be bound up from doing their Duty in Endeavoring to
promote the Interests of Christ's Kingdom; and so subject their Consciences,
and the valuable Interests of Religion, to the Commandments of Men? For Persons
to impose Laws of their own Devising upon others, without any Pretense to
Infallibility, is (as we conceive) a very inconsistent Proceeding.

The Protestant Legislators in religious Matters, by owning the Fallibility of
their Church-Judicatories, are obliged either to abandon their favorite
Scheme, or assert the binding Power of erroneous Laws; but not being willing to
do the former, they chose to attempt the Defense of the latter, namely, that
Submission is due to erroneous Laws and Sentences. To make this the more
plausible, they acknowledge that we ought to refuse active Obedience to unjust
Sentences, but not passive, i. e. as we understand it, we must, according to
their Notion, neglect the Performance of a Duty which God and Conscience
enjoin, because Church Authority forbid it. If the Case be so, then the Church
has Power to oblige to Sins of Omission, but not of Commission. Then we ought
to obey negative sinful Commands, but not positive. But we humbly conceive that
this Distinction in the present Case is full nice; for if we must obey Man
rather than God in the one, why not in the other also, and so make thorough
Work of it.

To this shocking Extremity does the legislative Scheme necessarily lead its
Patrons; for if they allowed that sinful Canons were null and void in
themselves, although passed by a Majority of Votes, and gave Liberty to the minor
Party to judge for themselves, and to act according to their own Judgment
without Censure; their darling Structure would crumble into deserved Ruin. But
while they labor to maintain the contrary exorbitant and awful Claim of Power,
their Doctrine tends to destroy every Thing that is valuable in the humane
Nature, as well as to sap the very Foundations of the protestant Religion. And
this is

VIII. Another Argument which we beg leave a little to insist upon. The Notion
of a legislative Power in religious Matters, with the Necessity of submiting to
its erroneous Decisions, seem to us to condemn the Reformation from Popery, and
our Dissenting from the Church of England: For if it be necessary to submit to
erring Sentences of Churches, then how could the first Reformers oppose the
Authority and Revolt from the Jurisdiction of the Church of Rome? and how can
the Nonconformists, upon this Plan, vindicate their opposing the Canons of the
Church of England (which they own to be a true Church) from the Charge of
Schism? If any Church have a Power of Legislation about Prudentials, they must
of Consequence have Authority to judge and determine what are such, and so to
oblige to the Observance of them, and the avoiding their Contraries under the
Penalty of Non-communion. If the Presbyterians have this Power, then certainly
the Church of England have it also: And in pursuance of this supposed Claim of
Power, they have actually made a great many Canons or religious Laws
establishing, under the Penalty of Non-communion, their Liturgy, Hierarchy,
Cross in Baptism, and many other Usages, which they deemed very expedient to
promote Order and Decency. Now, how can we, according to the aforesaid Scheme,
justify our not Submitting to the lawful Authority of that Church?

We think it very inconsistent to maintain such a Claim of Power, as would have
forever prevented the very Being of all the reformed Churches in general, and
such as condemns our Dissenting-One in particular.

It seems also to us inconsistent, to grasp after a Power for ourselves which
we condemn in others, or to disclaim it in Word, while we practice it in Deed.
We cannot think that any Church can need any Thing for its Support, which would
overset its Foundations; or that Truth can alter its Nature in a Succession of
time: We suppose that what was true at the time of the Reformation, is so
still. Again,

IX. We know not how to free all new religious Laws from the Charge of
Superstition and Uncharitableness, whatever pious Designs the Formers of them
may have notwithstanding: For who has required these Things at their Hands, and
why are they righteous overmuch. Eccless. vii. 16. Wherefore do they teach the
Fear of God by the Precepts of Men, Isa. xxix, 13. and impose their human
Commandments upon their Brethren's Consciences, which though they have a Show of
Wisdom, are really the Contrary; because they are Additions to the unerring
Laws of the Wisdom of the Father, and naturally tend to draw his People from an
entire Subjection to him as the Head of his Church, Col. ii. 21, 22. Wherefore
do they introduce a System of human Commandments when Christ has abolished the
old ceremonial Institutions, which were of a divine Original, and thereby put a
stumbling Block in their Brother's Way, contrary to the following Places of
sacred Scripture, Ephesians. ii. 15. Romans xiv. 13, 14. Let us not therefore judge one
another any more; but judge this rather, that no Man put a stumbling Block, or
an Occasion to fall, in his Brother's Way. To him that esteems any Thing to
be unclean, to him it is unclean. But if thy Brother be grieved with thy Meat,
now walk thou not charitably. Destroy thou not him with thy Meat, for whom
Christ died.

Once more we beg leave to observe, that the legislative Power aforesaid, is
introductive of very great Evils and Mischiefs into the Church of Christ, and
in particular, it opens a wide Door for the Introducing of an intolerable
Bondage under human Yokes: Neither does it only open a Door for this, and so
make it possible, nor yet only tend to it, and so make it probable; but it is
what it has done in Fact to high degree, as the deplorable Experience of many
Ages witness.

We are persuaded that a Claim of Power made by the Church-Rulers to frame Laws
deemed by them to be orderly, deceut, prudent, expedient, gave Rise to Prelacy
and Popery itself, and to all the burdensome Train of unscriptural and
ridiculous Ceremonies which the latter of these Churches does now groan under,
as well as to stated Liturgies, and other unhappy Usages, in which some
Protestant Churches have too much copied after the Roman Superstition. These
Things are Yokes which neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear. If this
Power be taken once for granted, who knows where it may stop in its Effects? We
cannot see that we have any more Security at this day upon this Plan, in the
protestant Church, to prevent the like Bondage again, than the Church had when
the inspired Apostles left it. It Is true it is probable we may not like the
Yokes that others have made for us, and wreathed about the Necks of Christ's
Subjects in Ages past. But possibly we may be pleased with as bad or worse,
which we either do or may make ourselves.

Again, this supposed binding Power exposes Persons to be persecuted for their
Consciences; when any either of our Brethren in the Ministry, or of a private
Station in the Church, cannot with a clear Conscience observe or submit to
Church-Canons; then they are liable to be reproved and censured, and who knows
to what Degree? Yea, it may even cause Schism and Separation itself, which lies
at the Door of the Imposers who forced it, and whereof they alone are the
Authors. What dismal Havoc has been made in the Churches by this terrible
Engine of legislative Authority, in anathematizing and excluding from Communion
some of the worthiest Men in our Mother-Countries and elsewhere, is so flagrant
in History, that we need not mention Instances.

When a Majority in a Church-Judicatory are supposed to have Power to coin Laws
according to their own Fancy, whereby they may judge of a minor Party, only
pretending in the mean Time some general scriptural Direction as (...), as also
their Usefulness, etc. which it is (...) in any Case, and has been actually done
in Favor of the grossest Superstitions of the Roman Church; may they not then,
according to this Scheme, wreck their angry Resentments upon, crush and oppress
their fewer Brethren, just as they list, whom perhaps they could not justly
censure, if they kept entirely to the good old Laws of Jesus Christ.

Such being the natural Effects of a Legislative Authority in Religion, we
cannot think the Cause is good that produces them, or that our wise and good
Redeemer would put an Engine of so much Mischief and Oppression into the Hands
of Churchmen, thereby giving an Occasion to worry one another. On the contrary,
does not our LORD inform us, how he resents it, when his Servants by Office
begin to beat and smite their Fellow Servants, and exercise a tyrannical
Dominion over them, which is the common and natural Effect of Men's adding Laws
of their own unto the Laws of Christ? The LORD indeed has authorized the
Stewards of his House to censure the Violators of his own Laws; but not to bind
where he has not bound, in Consequence whereof his faithful People may be
oppressed.

If it be opposed to the preceding Reasonings, that according to this
Principle, it is impossible to maintain a Decorum and good Order in the Church,
but that all imaginable Confusions must be expected to ensue, without any
Possibility of Restraint; and that, though Authority may be abused in some
particular Instances, yet even bad Government is better than Anarchy, or no
authoritative. Government at all; and that, then there is no Occasion, much
less Necessity for Synods, or other Ecclesiastic Judicatories, to meet at all,
and so the whole Constitution which Christ established for ordering the Affairs
of his Church, falls to the Ground. To this we answer;

1. That the Objection bears in its Bosom gross and grievous Reflections upon
the Laws of Christ contained in the Scriptures, as well as upon the Lawgiver,
namely, That that System of Laws he has given for the Government of his Church,
is imperfect, insufficient to answer the End designed by it, without the
After-Additions of his Subjects. And indeed the Objection bears hard upon the
Honor of his Wisdom, (...), Faithfulness, and Truth, as if he either could
(...) not give his People sufficient Laws for their (...) had not done it when
he says he has. In the (...) charitably hope, that these Reflections are not
intended by the Objectors; but they are most certainly the natural and
necessary Fruits of the Objection itself.

2. We think the aforesaid Objection against the preceding Reasonings, is a
mere Non-sequitur, or false Consequence. The Lord Jesus has given such Power
and Authority to the Guides of his Church, as is sufficient for the Edification
of his Body, without this Power of making Acts of their own Divising, as
obligatory Laws. Particular Presbyteries ought undoubtedly to meet, to enquire
into the Fitness and Qualifications of those who offer themselves to the sacred
Work of the Ministry, and either to admit or refuse them, according as they
find them qualified, and likely to do Service or Disservice to the Church in
that Office.

They have Liberty and Authority also to deny Church Communion too, and cast
out of Communion such as by plain scripture Directions are disqualified for it,
either by such fundamental Errors in Doctrine or enormous Practices as are
inconsistent with true Christianity; and to inflict such Censures upon
irregular Church Members as God in his Word makes due to such Offenses as they
are guilty of.

In Cases of Conscience proposed to them, or Cases of Difference regularly
brought before them from particular Congregations, they ought to give their
deliberate Judgment, with their best Counsel and Advice.

They have likewise Liberty to agree and conclude among themselves upon such
Things as appear to them to have a good Tendency to the Advancing of Religion,
and are founded upon or agreeable to the Word of God; and so engage themselves
voluntarily to the Observance of these Things, provided that they do not
incroach upon the just Liberties of the People under their Charge, nor pretend
to bind their dissenting Members to observe their Agreements, who may have a
different View and Apprehension of them.

Likewise, it is reasonable and useful that Synods, consisting of several
Presbyteries, meet together, whether Matters may be brought by Way of (...) or
Reference from particular Presbyteries in order to (...) the Judgment and
Sentiment of a greater Number (...) in the Multitude of Counselors there is
Safety; and (...) doubt their Duty to take such Cases under (...), and give
their best Advice in them: But we think that they should not proceed to any
further Authority except in such Cases wherein God has given particular obvious
Direction in his Word, which is to be exactly followed; and even then they do
no more than show from the Scriptures what is the Mind and Direction of God in
such Cases, and declare their own Resolutions to act according thereto, so far
as they are concerned.

Now we conceive, that such a Method of Management in Church Judicatories is
that which the Lord Jesus has only appointed; and we think it is far better
adapted to answer all the valuable Ends of Church Government, than that Strain
of human Authority which we are opposing: And had the Pastors of the Church
always contented themselves with that Power which Christ has given them,
without Claiming more, it is hard to conceive how the Christian World could
have been so generally corrupted and divided as it has been for many Ages, and
is at this Day.

To conclude, we profess a hearty Charity for those Gentlemen who are on the
other Side of the Question in this Debate. Doubtless Things appear to them in
another Light. We have only, in the Course of our Reasonings, labored to
expose the Absurdity of an Opinion which we think prejudicial to the Interests
of the Savior's Kingdom: And if we are herein mistaken we are willing to be
convinced by Scripture and Reason; but whether we get Conviction or not by our
Brethren's Arguments, we believe that the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of
Peace may be preserved notwithstanding a Diversity of Sentiment about lesser
Things, if moderate Counsels be followed, and that mutual Forbearance be
allowed, which the Gospel of Christ requires.

THE END.

