Mr. Callender's SERMON To a SOCIETY of YOUNG MEN.

THE Advantages of early Religion.

A SERMON Preached at Newport on Rhode Island. To a Society of young Men on the
LORD's DAY Evening, Jan. 3d. 1741, 2

By JOHN CALLENDER.

Titus 2.6. Young Men likewise exhort to be sober minded.

NEWPORT: Printed by the Widow Franklin under the Town School-House

THE ADVANTAGES OF Early Religion.
LAMENTATIONS III. 27. It is good for a Man to bear the Yoke in his Youth.


THE Prophet in this Book pathetically la^ents the miserable State of the Jews.
And in this Chapter, after bewailing their Calamities He suggests to them
several powerful Arguments to persuade them, to humble themselves under the
mighty Hand of God, to comfort and encourage themselves in his Goodness, Mercy
and Faithfulness, and quietly to Hope and Wait for his Salvation. So that there
can be no Doubt but that by the Yoke in the Text, He means the Yoke of
Afflictions, which God had laid on them for their Iniquities, and which in the
first Chapter He calls the binding on them the Yoke of their Transgressions. --

That their Young Men particularly, should not too eagerly fret against God,
nor abandon themselves to Despair, He suggests to them, that there are peculiar
Advantages in bearing Afflictions in Youth, which might silence their
Complaints against the Conduct of Divine Providence, and teach them Patience
and Submission to the Will of God. For as Afflictions are often necessary, and
very useful to awaken careless Sinners out of their Security, and to show them
their Misery and Danger, and even to quicken humble and instruct the Children
of God; so they are often peculiarly Advantageous in Youth, to teach us
effectually true Wisdom and Obedience to God betimes, and so to prevent ou^
going astray from God, and all the miserable Effects of a sinful Life: And
particularly to prevent severer Chastisements, which might otherwise be
necessary aftowards, to wean us from sinful Courses and reduce us to the right
Ways of the Lord.

But as Religion in general is called in the Scripture, a Yoke, and as
Afflictions are good only to prevent or take away Sin, and make us partakers of
true Holiness, and to p^oduce the peacable Fruits of Righteousness. -- as they
serve to open the Ear to Discipline, and dispose us to bear the Yoke of
Instruction, I propose to consider the Words only in this Light, as asserting
there are peculiar Advantages of early Religion -- A Subject which has been so
often handled, that nothing new can be said upon it; and which ought
neverthelss to be frequently inculcated on Youth. And that both, because it is
in it self, of such vast Importance to their temporal and eternal Welfare; and
because they have in general such a native Aversion and Reluctance; because
they are surrounded with so many and so dangerous Temptations; and are so
eagerly inclined to walk in the Sight of their own Eyes, and in the Ways of
their own Hearts; not sufficiently observing, and regarding the natural
Consequences of gratifying the corrupt Desires of the Flesh and of the Mind,
nor remembering, that for all th^se Things GOD will bring them into Judgment.

In speaking to this Subject on this Occasion, I shall observe the following
Method. Viz.

1. I shall premise briefly, that Religion is and may be compared to a Yoke And
2. That It is good for us to bear this Yoke 3. I shall endeavor to represent
more at large, the peculiar Advantages of taking this Yoke upon us in Youth. 4.
and lastly, I shall make some Application of what shall be said, to this
Society.
I. In the first Place, I am to show that Religion in general may be compared
to a Yoke.

And it is so called, Partly, as it is the Law, and Rule which God has given to
guide and govern us; and as it is a Restraint on the Passions and Appetites and
a Burden on corrupt Nature. Accordingly, both the Apostles St. Paul and St.
Peter call the Law of Moses, a Yoke. It was, it seems, a customary Jewish
Phrase. And hence our blessed Savior uses that Exprestion, Take my Yoke upon
you; by which he plainly means his Religion, The Submission to his Authority,
the Belief of his Doctrine, the Imitation of his Example, and the Obedience to
his Commandments. And,

This shows us, what it is to take on us or bear the Yoke of Christ; It is to
become his Disciples, to learn of him and to conform our selves to the Rules of
his Religion --

These are admirably summed up by St. Paul Tit. 2.11, 12. The Grace of God that
brings Salvation. has appeared unto all Men, teaching us, that denying
Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present World.

To take Christ's Yoke on us, don't intend, a bare putting on a Form of
Godliness, that we yield some external Homage and Reverence to Jesus Christ,
and submit to his Institutions, and call him Master and Lord; but that we obey
from the Heart the Form of Doctrine we have received from him; that we deny our
selves, take up the Cross, and follow Christ in the Regeneration, and sincerely
practice his pure and undefiled Religion. That we truly copy after his most
perfect Example, and heartily obey his most holy wise and just Commands of
Piety, and Purity, of Humilty, of Integrity and Charity; and that we endeavor
to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, and to
perfect Holiness in the Fear of God. In fine it implies, that our Hearts being
purified by Faith in Christ, and being made free from the Law of Sin and Death,
we become the Servants of God, and have our Fruit to Holiness, that the End may
be Life everlasting.

So that though real Christianity, or true Religion is, and is called a Yoke, yet
there is nothing in the Term when rightly understood, any more than in the
Thing it self that may justly prejudice us against it. It is a Yoke indeed, but
such an one as is necessary and useful in all Respects. For,

II It is good for a Man to bear the Yoke of Religion. Jesus Christ himself has
told us, His Yoke is easy, and his Burden is light. And that it is the Way to
find Rest to our Souls It is evidently reasonable and proper that we should
submit to the Laws of God, and how our W^lls to the Obedience of Christ. It is
plainly necessary that we do sooner or later, renounce and forsake the Service
of diverse Lusts and Pleasures, and that we believe and obey the Gospel, if we
would obtain the Forgiveness of our Sins, and an Inheritance among them who are
sanctified through Faith that is in Christ Jesus.

The Obligations of Religion, arise out of the absolute Right and Authority of
God in and over us, the Perfection of his Nature, the Excellency Justice and
Goodness of his Laws, and the glorious Reward he has promised to them that obey
him. We are indispensibly obliged to yield a sincere, and universal Obedience
to the righteous and holy Will of God, our Creator, Preserver, and Redeemer,
our sovereign Lawgiver, and Judge. We are his, for he made us, and therefore we
ought to serve him; we are bought with a Price, even the precious Blood of
Christ, and therefore we ought to glorify God in our Body, and in our Spirit,
which are his.

The Advantages of true Religion are Infinite and Eternal. For the Lord will
give Grace and Glory, and no good Thing will he withold from them that walk
uprightly. His Favor is Life, and his Loving Kindness is better than Life.
Jesus Christ is the Author of eternal Salvation, to all them that obey him.
Godliness is profitable to all Things, having the Promise of the Life that now
is, and of that which is to come. So that it is good to bear this Yoke. The
Statutes of the Lord are right, and in the Keeping of them there is a great
Reward.

The real Advantage of Religion, appears from the Constitution of Nature, and
the Course of Things which God has established in this present World. For it is
evident, that Righteousness really and naturally tends to Life, and that he
that pursues Evil, pursues it to his own Hurt. So has the Lord ordained, that
the moral or Christian Virtues, have a necessary and strong Tendency to the
Peace and Cheerfulness of the Mind, to the Health and Vigor of the Body, to
the Good Will and Esteem of others, and the Comfort and Tranquillity of our
whole Lives. While on the other Hand, there is a natural Tendency in the Ways
of Sin, to all manner of Evil. So that it is evidently the Will of God, that we
should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present World, from the very
Constitution and Course of Nature; for the Laws of Nature are manifestly
sanctioned by the God of Nature. And besides we may reasonably believe the Lord
will bless the Righteous, and encompass them with Favor as with a Shield. The
Righteous Lord loves the Righteous, his Eyes are upon them, and his Ears are
open to their Cry^; But the Face of the Lord, is set against them that do Evil;
besides the many Evils which naturally follow the Violation of his most wise
and holy Laws. So that if there was no future Life, but Death concluded our
Existence, it would be good for us to bear the Yoke of Religion (i. e.) to deny
our selves the unreasonable Gratification of our Passions and Appetites, and to
live according to the strict Rules of Purity Truth and Righteousness. It must
certainly be best in all Respects for us to live agreeably to the Nature God
has given us and the Relations we bear to him and to our Fellow Creatures. For
of Necessity, this must be the Way to the Favor of God and the greatest
Degrees of Happiness we are capable of. Hence the Wiseman says, Happy is the
Man that finds Wisdom, and the Man that gets Understanding -- All the
Things thou can desire are not to be compared with her, Length of Days is in
her right Hand, and in her left Hand Riches and Honor, her Ways are Ways of
Pleasantness and all her Paths are Peace. But Thorns and Snares are in the Way
of the Froward. --

But if we consider our selves as made to be immortal, and an Image of the
divine Eternity. That our everlasting Welfare and Happiness depends on the
Conduct of our present Lives, because God has appointed a Day in which he will
judge the World in Righteousness, and render to every Man according to his
Deeds done in the Body, even Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish on
every Soul of Man that does Evil; and G^^ry Honor and Immortality to them
that continue in Welldoing --

This Renders it of infini^ely greater Consequence and Necessity to submit^^^
^he Yoke of God's Laws, and that it will be of eternal Advantage to fear God
and work Righteousness or keep his Commandments.

And if we consider the (...) Systeme of the World the real Condition of
Mankind, and the Method God has taken in his infinite Wisdom and Goodness to
redeem and save Sinners; the Necess^^y and Efficacy of true Religion, and so
its unspeakable Advantages will appear in a vastly stronger Light. For it is
plain we are fallen and Degenerate Creatures, in a State of Ruin, have lost the
original Rectitude and Integrity of our Souls, alienated from God and at Enmity
with his Laws, and at the same Time are under their condemning Power; Children
of Wrath, Servants of Sin, and Heirs of everlasting Misery and Vengeance -- And
that God so loved the World, as to send his only begotten and dearly beloved
Son to expiate our Oflences, and reconcile us to God, to renew us in the Spirit
of our Minds, and create us anew to good Works, to make an End of Sin and bring
in an everlasting Righteousness, that whoever believes in him should not
perish but have everlasting Life. This shows us it is of the last Necessity and
Importance to receive Christ Jesus the Lord, and heartily submit to his
Authority; for how can we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? It is
necessary we renounce and forsake the Service of diverse Lusts and Pleasures,
those Lords that have had Dominion over us, and take on us Christ's Yoke, and
Parn of him; that we not only call him Lord, but that we do the Things which he
says, that we may be made Partakers of the Redemption purchased by him. And if
we through the Spirit mortine the Deeds of the Body we shall escape the strange
Punishment prepared for the Wicked, and shall stand before the Son of Man in
his Kingdom for ever. For there is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus who walk not after the Flesh but after the Spirit.

In fine as we are the Creatures and Subjects of God, it must be good for us to
love and fear him, and keep all his Commandments always, and that in Regard
both to our temporal and eternal Wellare. And as we are fallen Creatures and
enjoy the Privileges of the Gospel Dispensation it must be good for us in the
highest Degree to take on us the Yoke or Religion of Jesus Christ; because
there is no other Name given under Heaven whereby we can be saved.

Thus it is good (i. e.) just, necessary, and of infi^ite Advantage to us to
bear the Yoke of Religion. And surely if it be so in reality to such a Degree,
it must be always good, and there can be no Season of Life, in which it is
improper or disadvantageous. If it be necessary, there can be no just Reason or
excuse to neglect or delay it all, but the sooner, the better we begin to
^eturn to God from whom we have revolted and to shun the Paths of the Destroyer
and to work out our own Salvation. It must therefore be good to b^ar this Yoke
in Youth, notwithstanding the strong Reluctance and Aversion we naturally have
to the Restraints of Religion, and the violent Inclinations to put it off to a
surposed more convenient Season. And this brings me to s;hew in the Third Place.

III. That there are peculiar Advantages in bearing the Yoke of Religion in
Youth. And indeed they are very many and of the greatest Evidence and
Importance; and such as ought effectually to p^rswade all that are young to
remember their Creator, and early devote and surrender themselves to his
Service. I shall endeavor to reduce them to these. Three general Heads, Viz.
1. the peculiar Advantages there are in Youth toward taking this Yoke on us.
2. The peculiar Benefits flowing from early Religion. And 3. that thereby we
prevent or avoid the many great Dangers and real Disadvantages which
necessarily attend the Neglect of Religion in Youth.


1. First I am to show you there are peculiar Advantages in Youth toward
taking this Yoke of Religion upon us. As it is of the last Necessity and
Importance for us to apply our Hearts in good earnest to Wisdom or true
Religion, so it is acknowledged to be a very difficult Undertaking; for it is
nothing less than to mortisy our Members, to crucify the Flesh, and the World,
to deny our selves, to set our Affections on Things above, and to walk by Faith
and not by Sight. Though Christ's Yoke is truly light and easy, in it self, to
right Reason, or to a renewed Nature; and though in Keeping God's Commandments
there is a great present and future Recompense of Reward; yet there is a
Reluctance in our corrupt Nature, the Carnal Mind is not subject to God's Laws,
but is Enmity against them and would not have Christ to reign over us. It is
therefore one ^rand Reason and Obligation on Youth, to take this Yoke on them
betimes before all the Difficulties in the Way are unhappily increased and
Multiplied. Before their own evil Propensities are strengthened and their
Abilities to control and resist them are weakened; and above all, while God is
working in them to Will and to Do of his good Pleasure.

Notwithstanding the Ignorance and Vanity, the Impatience and Paesumption of
Youth, and the Strength and Impetusity of Youthful Lusts which often precitate
them into sudden Ruin and remediless Destruction, yet we don't find the Matter
is mended by Age, or that Men are of their own Accord more inclined to Religion
in any after Period of Life; Or that by gratifying their corrupt Affections
they gain any Skill Power or Inclination to conquer them, and submit to the
Yoke of Religion, but the Contrary. So that Youth has the vast Advantage to
take up Christ's Yoke before corrupt Nature is strengthened by Indulgence,
before we have had Time to contract strong Habits of Negligence and
Disobedience, before the Cares of the World perplex us, and the Pleasures of
Life have enslaved us, before we have provoked God to take from us his holy
Spirit, and while we have for our Encouragement in the arduous Conflict the
express Assurance of Divine Assistance, and that the first Fruits of our Lives
will be a Sacrifice pleasing and acceptable in the Sight of God our Savior.

1. Let us then observe that it is usually allowed, to be easier in it self to
take on us the Yoke of Religion in Youth than afterward.

For though we cannot convert and regenerate our selves, though we can do nothing
without the Grace of God and Help of Christ, and are not as of our selves
sufficient for a good Thought, yet since the holy Scriptures, as well as Reason
represent the Condition of inveterate and hardened Sinners, as daily growing
more and more difficult and dangerous, we must needs conclude the Case of such
as are yet in their Youth is more hopeful (...) easy. It is easier to prevent
than to cure Disear^s that have already taken a deep Root in us, at least it
must be best to begin with them betimes. The more ^^e gratify our corrupt
Natures, and the longer we adict our selves to do Evil, the more do we
strengthen the corrupt Principle within, and enlarge the sinful Biass. It
indeed the Impe^uo^ity of Youth abates with Age, and Experince convinces Men of
Necessity of some Kind (...) Self-Government, yet the Evil Heart of Unbelief is
farther estranged from God, and Guilt and Shame and Fear drive Men farther away
from his Presence, they seek out many Inventions to amuse and pacify
Conscience, and to encourage themselves in their Evil Ways. The Evil Fountain
don't purge it self by Time or by Running in new or different Channels. No, the
native Ave^sion to the Yoke of Religion, the original Corruption and Depravity
of our Nature, like a spreading Infection grows upon us continually, so that
the Prophet says, when the Blackamore can change his Skin or the Leopard his
Spots, then may they who are accustomed to do Evil learn to do well.

Besides Youth is more vat ant and at leisure to attend to the Care of our
^uls, than we can b^, when the Cares and Basiness of Life engage our Time and
Thoughts. The love of this present evil World to a great Degree excludes and
prevents the Love and Service of God. The anxious Desire and eager Pursuit of
earthly Things, The Hurry and Multiplicity of Affairs, so engross the Man as to
leave little Room and less Inclination for our Spiritual and eternal Concerns,
if Religion has been unhappily neglected and postponed in Youth. Prosperity
takes away the Hearts of many from God and Religion; and the Difficulties and
Distresses of humane life frequently confound and dispirit many others, and
entangle them in fatal Temptations.

Moreover the Mind in Youth is more susceptible of good Instruction, and more
apt to fear the Wrath of God and the Dangers of eternal Misery, which is the
most powerful, and usually the most effectual Motive to Repentance and
amendment of Life, than when we are habituated to the Danger, and grown
obstinate and hardened to the Terrors of the Lord. For though nothing is more
plain than that Sinners go continually in Jeopardy of their Lives; and in the
dreadful Danger of falling into the Hands of the living God; and that every
Moment brings them nearer to the eternal Judgment, and their Preservation out
of eternal Burnings grows more precarious; yet their Fears decrease. And having
escaped long, they presume on the Mercy and Patience of God. And being
familiarised to Danger, the Impressions wear off, and grow fainter by Degrees,
At least till the evil Days draw near and they find themselves on the very
Borders of the Grave, just ready to sink into Death with all their Guilt about
them.

Conscience likewise is more tender and more faithful to reprove and warn
Sinners in the beginning of life, than when by a long Custom of resisting
neglecting and opposing its Dictates, it becomes hardened, and as it were seared
with an hot Iron. Moreover in Youth we experience the Strivings of Gods Spirit
with us; and have more Reason to expect and depend upon his gracious and
powerful Assistance, than after we have long quenched his Operations and
grieved ^im, and provoked him to depart from us and leave us to our selves, and
the Power of our Spiritual Enemies. But this brings me to mention,

2. The peculiar Encouragement and Assistance which God has given and offers to
Youth.

It is be reasonable to hope our compassionate Redeemer, will never cast out
any that come to him though at the eleventh Hour, yet we must needs think it more
pleasing to God, for us to devote our selves early to his Service, and to go on
to live all the rest of our Time in the Flesh to the Will and Praise of God,
than to offer our first Fruits to the God of this World, and consume the best
of our Time in the Service of Sir, and offer God only the Dregs of Life; and in
the last Agony call upon him for that Mercy, and Grace, which we have slighted
and abused all our Days.

Accordingly God has expressly promised, that they who seek him early shall find
him, and has given the plainest Assurance of their Success and Acceptance. Now
this naturally tends to animate and invigorate. the Mind, and raise it above
Fear and Despondency. There is not such Room for a melancholy Discouragement,
nor such Danger of sinful Despair as if we had long refused the Offers of Mercy.

But the Divine Assistance which is promised to such as seek God early is the
most solid and effectual Advantage toward the taking Christ's Yoke upon us,
his Grace is sufficient for us, and with his Help we may easily overcome the
greatest Difficulties. The Weapons of our Warfare will be mighty through God to
the pulling down of strong Holds, casting down Imaginations, and every Thing
that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity
every Thought to the Obedience of Christ.

In fine Youth is the important Season in which we generally Form our Character
both for Time and Eternity; It is a State of Discipline for mature Age, and
eternal Ages, and if unhappily we let slip this first, this best, this the
proper Opportunity of aplying our Hearts to Wisdom, we do unavoidably render the
Work in it self more difficult, and weaken, disincline and incapacitate our
selves, and drive away the Influences of the Divine Grace that are necessary to
the Renovation of our Nature, and the Salvation of our Souls. And we can never
again expect such another convenient Season, but have Reason to fear, God will
cast us off for ever, and at last laugh at our Calamity, and mock when our Fear
comes, when Fear comes as Desolation and Destruction as a Whirlwind, because
we would none of his Councels and despised all his Reproof.

At least we shall run our selves into unavoidable Dangers, and Dissiculties,
and miss of those Benesits which in the Course of Things, and by the Will of
God, are the blessed Effects of early Religion. These we are to consider under
the next Head. Which is,

2. That there are peculiar Advantages that follow on the bearing the Yoke of
Religion in Youth.

The Profit and Benefit of Religion in general I have already shown, is much
every Way, infinitely great and endless. And the happy Influence early Religion
will have on our future Existence in this World and that which is to come, Is
so great as to comprehend all the Things we can desire; the good Effects are so
many I know not how to range them in their proper Order: However we may form
some Idea of them in this Manner.

1. By hearing the Yoke in our Youth, we prevent a great deal of Sin and
Sorrow: For Lust when it has conceived, brings forth Sin, and Sin when it is
finished brings forth Death. If we conld be sure to secure the Salvation of
our Souls by a late Repentence, yet both Prudence and Ingenuity would incline
and determine us to bear the Yoke in Youth, to prevent those innumerable
Transgressions wherewith God must b^^d shonoured and offended, Mankind injured
perhapsin their eternal Interest, and our own Souls wronged and pollured, in a
long Series of Rebellion and Disobedience. Besides we shall thereby prevent all
the Woldly Sorrow which may be the natural or judicial Effect of making
Provision to gratify corrupt Nature, and wilfully flinging off the Restraints
of Religion; And that Godly Sorrow we must necessarily feel for our Folly, and
Wickedness, if ever God give us Repentance unto Life.

We can never cast off the Fear of God and sin against him, without wounding
our own Sold; so that Religion preserves us from those Evils that would be the
Consequences of our Sins; and what an Advantage there is in early Religion on
this Account appears from considering the Violence of Youthful Passions, the
dangerous Temptations we are then exposed to, the Nature and necessary
Consequences of those Sins to which we are tempted; and that Errors and false
Conduct in Youth, necessarily reach to, and greatly affect the Comfort and
Happiness of our whole Lives. The Consequences of unbridled Passions and
Appetites in Youth are fatal. We cannot afterward avoid, or remedy the ill
Effects of indulging corrupt Nature, in many Instances. Even though we should
come to sincere Repentance, and find Forgiveness with God, and obtain
everlasting Life; yet we must in this World groan under some of the miserable
Effects of our Folly. So that there is a great Benefit in bearing the Yoke of
Religion in Youth, in that it happily prevents those many Evils, that would
naturally follow, from spending our Youth in Sin, and Wickedness.

2. To bear the Yoke of Religion in Youth, is the Way to arrive at the greatest
Degrees of Holiness, and to excel in the Knowledge, and Practice of true
Religion.

It is the Way to become more perfect in Holiness, to become more like God, to
become more expert in the Practice of all the Duti^s of Religion, and to
practice them with more Pleasure and Delight. Though it be the Grace of God alone
that can renew and sanctify a Sinner, and though God is able to do abundantly
above what we are able to think; yet we find by Experience, that Sanctification
is usually a Work of Time and Labor. The sooner therefore we begin, and the
longer Time we have to exercise our selves to Godliness, the greater Progress
may we expect to make, with the divine Blessing. (...) may expect (...) grow in
Grace, to be continually p^^^ng forwards to ward the Perfection of the
Christian Life; and the^ we shall be more perfectly transformed into the di^in^
Image, by the Renewing of the Holy Ghost. The Wiseman tells us, The Path of
the Just, is as the shining Light, which shines more and more, to the perfect
Day

It is certain, Use makes perfect, and Custom renders Things delightful; and
what we are accustomed to, in Youth, we grow most of all expert in. And on the
other Hand, it requires Time and Labor, to conquer our unnatural Propensities
to Evil, and to acquire settled Habits of Virtue and Goodness. So that it is an
Advantage to begin betimes, not only as it is then easier to overcome corrupt
Nature, before it is strengthened by Custom and Habit, but because an Habit of
true Religion formed and settled in Youth, promises a gradual Approach to the
highest Degrees of Perfection we are capable of in this World. -- And this is
no mean Encouragement to such as perceive and own the Excellency of true
Religion, and the real Happiness of recovering the Image of God; which is our
Glory and Safety.

3. Again, It is the Way to inward Peace, Comfort, and Tranquillity of Mind all
our Days.

When the Guilt of Sin is removed, by the pardoning Mercy of God, through the
Blood of Christ. And the Power of it, broken by the sanctifying Influences of
the Holy Sphit; then the Work of Righteousness, is Peace, and the Effect of
Righteousness, is Quietness, and Assurance for ever. The Ways of Wisdom are
Pleasantness and all her Paths are Peace. While on the other Hand, there is no
Peace to the Wicked. He is like the troubled Sea when is cannot rest, whose
Waters caft up Mire and Dirt. Or if Conscience should be in a dead Calm, and he
should flatter himself in his own Eyes that all is well and safe, or if he
should amuse himself with the vain Hopes of a timely Repentance, and so
encourage himself in an Evil Way; yet the Tyrany of unruly Lusts and Passions
is painful and uneasy. Whence come Wars and Confusions in our Breasts, but
from the Rage and Tumult of unhallewed Passions. No Man can be happy while
these are unsubdued, and riot in his Bosom.

We must mortify our Members, deny our selves, and take up the Cross, the Yoke
of Christ, if we would find Rest and Ease to our Souls. There is no other way
to obtain it. And the due Subordination and Government of our Affections, the
Right Exercise of our Faculties, the Testimony of a good Conscience, a Sense of
the divine Favor and the joyful Hope of Eternal Glory, will afford a continual
Feast of fat Things, full of Marrow, of Wines on the Lees, well refined. So
that there is this farther Benefit of bearing the Yoke of Religion in Youth,
that it lays a good Foundation for, and has a happy Tendency to the constant
Peace and Serenity of our Mind, which is so essentially necessary, that all the
World without it, cannot make us happy; and no outward Circumstances, can
sender us miserable, while we have Peace within, and Confidence toward God; of
so great Advantage is it to be reconciled to God through Jesus Christ, and
renewed in the Spirit of our Mind. And this brings me to observe in the next
Place.

4. That it is worthy to be considered, what Comfort and Consolation we must
needs find under all the Trials and Distresses of humane Life, from having born
the Yoke in our Youth.

However fair and promising the Morning of Life may be, and however apt we are
to promise our selves continual Ease and Prosperity; yet Man is born to Trouble
as the Sparks fly upwards. Of Necessity we must pass through many Sorrows,
before we come to the House appointed for all Living; and under all the
Miseries the Fresh is Heir to, we need such Comfort and Consolation as this
vain World cannot give us. There is none, at least none comparable to Peace
with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

How miserable is their Condition, who when oppressed with outward Troubles,
have at best, only uncasie Fears with; and perhaps the Reproaches of a guilty
Conscience. Apprehensions of the Wrath God, and the Ferrors of the World to
come must sink the Spirit, already depressed with the Weight of its Ca^amities.
Or it Afflictions are sanctified and produce the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness in the End; yet there can be no solid Comfort, 'till they
experience the Love of God shed abroad in their Hearts. But they who have born
the Yoke from their Youth, can much bo^ter bear the Troubles of Life, than if
the Pride of their Hearts, and Impatience of their Spirits had never been
subdued and mortified. They can ^^e^rfully submit to the Co^^e^tions of their
Heavenly Father; knowing that He afflicts them in very Faithfulness and
Kindness, and that his infinite Wisdom, Power, and Goodness are employed to
conduct all Things for their best, their eternal Interest. They know these
l^ght Afflictions will work out for them a far more exceeding, and an eternal
Weight of Glory; and therefore they can endure as seeing him that is invisible.
They count it all Joy when they fall into diverse Temptations, knowing that the
T^ial of their Faith works Pa^ience, and and when Patience has her p^fect
Work, they shall be perfect and entire, wanting nothing.

Thus, by Early Religion we make Pro^ision to possess our Souls in Patience and
Resignation to the Will of God, amidst all the Calamities of Life, and under
all the Chastisements he may fee fit to exercise us with, for our Profit, and
in order to make us Partakers of his ^ioliness. But to waste our Youth in
sinful Pleasures, Negligence and Disobedience to God, is the Way to imbitter
all, the Sorrows of this World; to draw down upon us the Anger and Judgments of
a right us and holy God; to enfeeble and dispirit our selves; and provoke God
to leave us without any Support. The Spirit of a Man may sustain his Infirmity,
but a wounded Spirit who can bear. Gnilt and Fear increase and aggravate every
Pressure of Life, or rather, they are themselves the heaviest and most
insupportable Burdens. So that since we must needs be in Heaviness through
manifold Temptations, it is a great Benefit of Early Religion, that it enables
us to pass through all the Trials and Afflictions of this Life, with more
Comfort and Satisfaction.

5. Early Religion is the Way to lay up in store, a good Foundation against the
Time of Old Age. God only knows whether we shall ^each Old Age; by far^ the
greatest Part of Mankind are cut off in the Morning or the midst of their Days.
But as we naturally desire long Life land h^pe to be old, it is evidently our
Wisdom, and of great Importance, to make a timely, and suitable Provision, for
our Comfort and Happiness, under the Decays of Nature, and the Infirmities of
Age. We all are Witnesses to the Complaints of those, whose Strength is Labor
and Sorrow. We see they want some Cordial, to support them in their declining
Days, and under the continual Expectations of aproaching Death, and Judgment.
How deplorable is their Condition, who are then ashamed to look back, on a long
Life of Folly, Vice, and Wickedness; and afraid to look forward, on the just
Judgments of a righteous God, and his fiery Indignation prepared to devour them.

But if we have early made our Peace with God, and have passed a Life of
Obedience, and Communion wi^h him, as the outward Man decays, the inward Man
will be ^e^ewed; the last Days may prove the best. They will be passed in the
divine Favor; in a comfortable Reflection on the Goodness, and Faithfulness of
God to us all our Life long; and in the pleasing Hope of a speedy Deliverance
from all Sin and Sorrow; and that we shall soon receive the End of all our
Faith and Patience, in the Salvation of our Souls; and that we shall have an
abundant Entrance, administered to us into everlasting Glory.

They, who have by God's Grace early forsaken the Paths of Sin, and have
patiently continued in Well-doing, and have held the Beginning of their
Confidence steadfast to the End, mu^t needs find unspeakable Satisfaction
herein, at the Conclusion of Life. They have by the Blessing of God, escaped
the Pollutions of the World, they have served their Generation according to the
Will of God, and though they are conscious of many Infirmities, and look on
themselves at the best, but as unprofitable Servants, yet having the Testimony
of a good Conscience and, God's Spirit witnessing together with their Spirits,
they can say with St. Paul, I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my
Course, I have kept the Faith, and therefore they can triumph also with him,
henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness.

How happy is it for old Age, to be found in the Way of Righteousness, to be
able to look back on a Life spent in the Service, and to the Praise of God.
Such Persons are not made to posses the Iniquities of their Youth. But they
derive a florid old Age from their Piety, Purity, and Temperance; at least that
flourishing Health and Vigor of Soul, which enables them to bring forth much
of the Fruits of Righteousness, to the Praise and Glory of God. They enjoy that
Spiritual Knowledge, and Experience, that quiet Hope, and humble Assurance of
the divine Favor, that is worth the Labor of our whole Lives to attain. God
is faithful, to stablish them, and keep them from Evil, and to direct their
Hearts into the Love of God, and the patient Waiting for Christ. But by
neglecting Religion, and refusing the Yoke of Christ in Youth, we provoke God
to our us off by Premature Death, and not suffer us to live out half our Days;
or if he should spare us in the World, yet we do what in us lies to make Old
Age miserable in every Respect; and if we continue to neglect the great
Salvation, we treasure up to our selves Wrath, against the Day of Wrath, and
the Revelation of the righteous Judgments of God.

6. To bear the Yoke in Youth is the Way to make a seasonable and effectual
Provision for an happy Death.

Death unavoidably will overtake us sooner or later. And whenever it comes, it
is of infinite Importance to us to be ready. And as we know not the Day of of
our Death, nor how suddenly it may come upon us, it is our highest Duty and
Interest^^ in the first Place, and above all Things to prepare to die. Lest
Death seize us at unawares and we are snared suddenly in an evil Time, for as
Death leaves us, Judgment will find us, there being no Work Knowledge on Device
in the Grave. Besides the Wisdom and Necessity of being prepared for the
Judgment of the great Day, every Man would have Peace in his later End, and
Desires to die with Composure and Satisfaction of Mind; but this can hardly be
expected, if we have deser^ed. Religion, till our Feet stumble on the dark
Mountains.

If we would die the Death of the Righteous, we must live their Life. Mark the
perfect Man, and behold the Upright, for the End of that Man is Peace. But
there can be no real Ground of true Peace, and Comfort at Death, but the
Evidences that we are reconciled to God through Jesus Christ, and are Heirs
with him, to the Inheritance of eternal Life. An Interest in the Redemption
purchased by Christ, affords infinite Comfort at the Approach of Death; it
disarms the King of Terrors, and enables us on the Borders of the Grave, to
look into Eternity, with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. And in the mean
Time, it delivers us, from being all our Lifetime, subject to Bondage through
the Fear of Death.

They who are early prepared for Death, have this great Advantage, to wait all
the Days of their appointed Time, in Patience and Security. And at last to quit
the World in Faith, and Hope, knowing him in whom they have believed, and to
whom they have committed the Keeping of their Souls in Well-doing. If their
Days are lengthned out on the Earth, they are looking for the blessed Hope, and
the glorious appearance of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ. Or if
God is pleased, early to take them away from the Evil to come, the Day of their
Death is better than the Day of their Birth.

In fine, by Early Religion we are made soon ready for the awful and important
Hour of Dying. And this Readiness, makes a dying Bed easy, which nothing else
can do. Yea an early Preparation, gives a better Hope and more Comfort, than if
we had neglected Religion i^ our Youth, and had only begun to fear God in the
Evil Days, or had turned to him only on our Deathbed. Who would not be willing
to prevent, that dreadful Anguish and Distress of Soul, which we see Persons
under, who have lived as without God in the World, 'till Death stars them in
the Face, and their Feet take bold on Hell? How do they then for ever b^wail
their Folly and Madness, their Misery and their Danger? And how do they warn,
and beseech all around them, to mind Religion in Season, and not to depend on
Sickness, and Age to prepare for the eternal Judgment?

Let this then be considered as a great Recommendation of Early Religion, that
it reconciles us to the Thoughts of Death, by preparing us for it; and makes
our Departure out of the World, when ever it comes, safe and joyful. The Sting
of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the Law, but Thanks be to God, who
gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

7. Again, The Benefit of Early Religion, may be considered, in Respect to the
happy Influence it will have on the Success of our Temporal Affairs.

And here we shall find that Religion is on all accounts the best Way of
setting out in the World. And the most na^ural and effectual Method of securing
to our selves, all the solid Advantages of Life As we are by the Will of God,
to act a Part on the Stage of Life, it is of very great Advantage to begin
right, that we may act well. Now our own Reason, the Experience of all Ages,
and the Wisdom of God, teach us, to seek first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness. As we are Members of Society, as well as we are accountable
Creatures, the Principles of true Religion, are the best and only right
Principles of humane Conduct. We cannot indeed certainly promise our selves,
Prosperity in this World, but we can promise our selves, what is a great deal
better; even that all Things shall work together for our gre^^est Good, our
spiritual and eternal Welfare; for so they use to do, to them that love God,
who are the Called according to his Purpose. We ought not desire any other
Circumstances in Life, than what God sees, on the Whole of Things to be Best
for us: And by taking on us his Yoke in Youth, we effectually secure the Care
and Blessing of his Providence.

Though, the Reward of the Righteous, is not Riches, or Honor, or any earthly
Good; yet Godliness is profitable unto all Things, and has the Promise of all
Things pertaining to Life, as well as to Godliness, that, our heavenly Father
sees we have Need of; and can use and employ for his Glory, and our own eternal
Happiness. God's Providence governs the World, and both Riches and Honor, come
of him, in his Hand is Power and Might, and in his Hand it is to make great;
and to give Strength to all. It is therefore evidently our Wisdom, and Prudence
to acknowledge God in all our Ways, that so he may direct and succeed our
Affairs. And there is also a real and natural Connection between Obedience to
the Laws of God, and humane Happiness; for as Sin originally brought in Death
and Sorrow, so great Part of our Miseries on Earth, are the proper Effects of
our own Folly and Wickedness. By Diligence and Industry, Frugality and
Temperance, Fidelity, Truth and Charity, by Humility and the Fear of the Lord,
are Riches and Honor and Life. And hence the Holy Spirit has repeated it: What
Man is He that desires Life and loves Days, that he may see Good, let him
refrain his Tongue from Evil, his Lips from speaking Guile, let him depart from
Evil, and do good, let him seek Peace and pursue it. For the Eyes of the Lord
are over the Righteous, his Ears are open to their Prayers, but the Face of the
Lord is set against them that do Evil.

8. Early Religion naturally tends to gladden the Hearts of our Friends and
Relatives.

It is the Duty and usually the Ambition of Youth to gain the Esteem of their
Parents and Benefactors, and recommend themselves to the Good Will of all Men.
Now this is done in the best Manner, and most effectually, by a sincere
Obedience to the Gospel of Christ. For Religion really approves it self to
every Man's Conscience, to be true Wisdom and Excellence. And genuine Religion
in Youth, is so beautiful and amiable a Character, that all Men admire it. The
greatest natural Abilities and the most promising Genius, cannot give so much
Pleasure and Satisfaction to our Friends, as a true Sense of Religion.
Application to, and Success in Business, though highly pleasing to our Friends,
can by no Means give them so great Joy, as to see our Souls in Health, and
Prospering in the Grace of God. And why should it, since Religion is really the
One Thing needful? What shall it profit a Man to gain the whole World, and lose
his own Soul? There is no Proportion between Time and Eternity. Industry and
Diligence about Temporal Concerns, makes Spiritual Slothfulness, and Negligence
about our eternal Interest, to appear the more dangerous and inexcusable. The
greatest Talents, misaply'd, only enable us to dishonor God the more; and
expose the Sinner, to an heavier Condemnation. For to whomsoever much is given,
of him shall be much required; and to whom Men have committed much, of him they
will ask the more. To Man he says, The Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and
to depart from Evil, is Understanding.

If Parents are themselves irreligious, yet they can scarce help being pleased
to see their Children walking in the Paths of Truth, and Life. Such Children
are a Credit to them, and more useful than otherwise. But if Parents are
themselves the Children of God, then it is a double Joy, to see Christ formed
in their Offspring. This is what they have above all Things desired for them,
and even travailed again for them, that they might be born from above, and of
the Spirit of God. It is an unspeakable Anguish to a religious Parent, to see
one of his Children become a Child of the Devil, and an Enemy to God, and going
down to the Chambers of Death. And it is equal Pleasure to see their Children
adopted into the the Number of God's Children, regenerated and created anew in
Christ Jesus, and become Heirs of eternal Glory.

And as this is the most moving Argument, to persuade Parents, to bring up
their Children, in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, that they may at
last be able to say, Here are we and the Children whom thou haft given us. So
it is no small Motive to Children that have any Gratitude, and Ingenuity in
them, to remember their Creator in their Youth, that they may please, and
gladden the Hearts of their Parents, to whom they are so much indebted, and on
whom they have such a Dependence. Hear then ye Children, the Instruction of
your Father, and forsake not the Law of your Mother. For the Law is Light, and
the Reproofs of Instruction are the Way of Life. A wise Son makes a glad
Father, but a foolish Son is the Heaviness of his Mother.

9. It is the Way to glorify God, and to serve our Generation, to the greatest
Advantage.

By a religious Life we do good and render our selves useful to Mankind in the
highest Degree. A good Example of every Thing that is virtuous and
praiseworthy, is of great Influence, to oppose the Evildoers, and to persuade
Men to glorify God by a professed Subjection to the Gospel of Christ. The
fervent Prayers of the Righteous avail much to turn away Wrath, and suspend the
Judgments of God and draw down his Blessing on all around us. So that by
working out our own Salvation, we make our selves Public Blessings.

And hereby we glorify God, as we answer the End of our Creation, and the
Designs of Providence and Grace, and give Occasion of many Thanksgivings to God.

But few comparatively are called to public Offices, but all Men may be truly
Benefactors to Society, in a private Station. By leading quiet and peaceable
Lives in all Godliness and Honesty, we may effectually serve our Generation,
according to the Will of God. And particularly by Early Religion, we are likely
to awaken, instruct and encourage the Rising Generation, to know and to serve
the God of their Fathers, with a perfect Heart and a willing Mind. And if we
are instrumental to prevent the Corruption of Youth, and promote a Reformation
of Manners, we do in the best Manner contribute to the Prosperity of the People
among whom we live; for Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is the
Reproach and Ruin of every People. And besides this, we shall prevent a
Multitude of Sins, and save many Souls from Death eternal, and they who turn
many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, and as
the Stars for ever and ever. Which brings me to add,

10. In the last Place, That bearing the Yoke in Youth is the Way to arrive at
greater Degrees of Glory in the World to come.

For though there be no Deficience of Happiness among the Spirits of just Men
made perfect, nor any Envy in the Presence of God, yet one Star differs from
another Star in Glory. We may justly expect that such as have been here
distinguished with the Graces of the Divine Spirit, and have excelled in the
Virtues of the Christian Life, in Usefulness to Mankind, and in their
Serviceableness to the Church of God, will hereafter shine with a distinguished
Splendor in the Kingdom of their Father. So that from an early devoting our
selves to the Service of God and a patient Continuance in Well-doing, we may
reasonably expect from the good Pleasure of God to be more highly exealted in
the Day of Christ's Appearing, and when God shall be All in all.

Thus there are the greatest Benefits relating both to Time and to Eternity,
following on an early Submission to the Yoke of Christ. It has a happy
Influence on us during the whole Extent of our Duration: He that sows to the
Spirit in his Youth, shall of the Spirit reap Life everlasting.

3. I proceed to show, That all these Advantages of bearing the Yoke in Youth,
will be very greatly heightened, from the Consideration of the Dangers and the
Disadvantages of wilfully or carelessly neglecting Religion in Youth.

For,

1. If we refuse, or neglect Religion in our Youth, we run such dreadful and
amazing Dangers, and Hazards, as show the Benefit of Early Religion, in a most
affecting Light.

Let us but only observe what Infinite Hazard there is, that if we don't bear
the Yoke in Youth, we never shall at all. But either we shall die in Youth and
perish in our Sins; or if our Days are lengthened out, yet his own Iniquities
shall take the Wicked, and he shall be holden in the Cords of his Sins, in the
Greatness of his Folly he shall go astray, and die without Instruction, and
have this of God's Hand at last, to lie down in everlasting Sorrow.

1. In the first Place, There is nothing so uncertain as Humane Life.

We know not what a Day will bring forth; much less can we promise our selves
many Years, and safely depend on long Life. It is the Portion but of a very few
of Mankind. And very many are taken away without any particular Warning, at
every Age. It is therefore extravagant Folly to neglect Religion on the vain
Presumption of a long Life, which we can have no good Reasons to expect and
depend upon: But a great many Reasons to think we shall never attain. For what
is our Life? It is even as a Vapor that appears for a little Time, and then
vanishes away. If it be then absolutely necessary for us to bear the Yoke of
Religion, before we go hence, and are here no more for ever, it is evidently
our highest Prudence, to improve with the utmost Care, the first Opportunity we
have, lest Death prevent us of any Opportunity hereafter.

But if we consider that we are by Nature Children of Wrath, that they who
believe not are condemned already. That until we are justified by Faith, and
have Peace with God, we are in a State of Enmity and Rebellion, and under a
Sentence of Condemnation -- What Folly, and Madness must it appear, to continue
willingly in such a Condition one Moment? To delay in a Matter of such
Necessity and Importance? To run such a dreadful Hazard, as to venture
Eternity, on the slender Thread of ^umane Life? And continually expose our
selves to the amazing Danger of the eternal Judgment, and of eternal Vengeance?
But to do all this purposely and on Design, and all for the Sake of Things that
profit not, but perish in the Using, which we shall scon be ashamed of, and
whose End is Death; is Folly beyond Expression. And yet this Folly is
aggravated by its very Excuse. For, to run such Hazards, on the vain Dependence
on long Life, and a future convenient Season for Religion, not only without any
Assurance of our Life; but against so many Probabilities from the constant
Course of the World, and the Danger that God will judicially out short our
Time; this is altogether beneath that Prudence and Understanding with which God
has endowed rational Creatu^s.

So that the Uncertainty of Life, puts our eternal Salvation to infinite
Hazard; and it must be egregious Folly to depend on many Years in the World,
when we know not, but that God may this Night, require our Souls of us; and
then what will our Condition be, if we have refused to bear the Yoke, but
remediless Destruction.

2. But there is another dreadful Hazard, that, if Life be indeed prolonged,
yet, the Sinner will never come to Repentance; but be hardened through the
Deceitfulness of Sin, and given up of God, to Hardness of Heart, and a
Reprobate Mind.

If Youth wilfully defer Religion, in order to gratify their Passions, and
Appetites, there is a great deal of Danger, that God will withdraw his holy
Spirit, and lea^^^ them to themselves, to commit all Iniquity with Greediness.
That he will suffer them to walk in the Sight of their own Eyes, and the Ways
of their own corrupt and foolish Hearts, 'till they run riot to all Excess of
abominable Iniqui^ly, so as to bring on themselves, a quick Destruction of
Body, and Soul for ever. How many by the Impetuosity of their own ^u^^^, the
Councels and Examples of their evil Companions, and the subtle Devices of
Satan, are ^^cried out to such criminal Courses, as bring them early to Shame,
and Diseases, to Poverty and Ruin? Some suffo; under the Penalties of humane
Laws; and others under the natural Sanction of the divine Laws, of Purity, and
Sobriety, Truth and Justice, or the immedlate Providence of God. Madness is
in'their Hearts while they live, and after that they go to the Dead.

One Sin makes way for another, and they who wilfully refuse the Yoke of
Religion, and cast God's Law behind them, are in great Danger to be holden in
the Cords of their Sins, and to be insensibly lead on to other Sins, that they
may at first think of with Horror and Aversion. There is a Way that seems
right to a Man, in his own Eyes, but the End thereof are the Ways of Death.

If Youth set out on the Principles of Good Husbandry, and Worldly Prudence,
without Regard to the Fear of God and the Salvation of their Souls, there is
great Danger, they will perish by some of their Spiritual Enemies. If out of
Regard to their Interest and Credit among Men, they refrain from some Sins, yet
there is Danger of their growing meet Worldlings, that Covetuousness will prove
the Root of all Evil. We cannot serve God and Mammon. His Servants we are to
whom we obey. And if any Man love the World, the Love of the Father is not in
him. It will seduce him from the Truth, and pierce him through with many Sorrows.

If Persons put off Religion in Youth (whatever are their Motives) there is the
greatest Danger. They will grow secure and presumptuous. And so ^e hardened in
an habitual Negligence of their Souls, and an habitual Dependence on a future
and more convenient Opportunity. That they will go on deferring and delaying
'till the Summer is ended and the Harvest is over, and they are not saved. For
such is the very Nature of Sin, such are the Designs and Stratagems of the
Devil, such is the Weakness and Corruption of our own Hearts, that we cannot
reasonably expect, but that they who wilfully choose the Paths of Sin for the
present, will continue to choose them. Their evil inclinations will continually
gain fresh Strength; and they gradually put themselves in the Condition of
those whose Heart is wa^^ed gross, and their Ears dull of Hearing, who have
closed their Eyes, lest at any Time they should see with their Eyes, and hear
with their Ears, and should understand with their Hearts, and should be
converted and Christ should heal them.

In fine there is great Danger that if they ever seriously reflect on their
Conduct and Circumstances, they will be discouraged from any Endeavors to
break off from their Sins, and turn unto the Lord; and sink into a Despair of
Mercy, and pine away in their Sins.

Upon the Whole. The Danger, they are in of being hardened through the
Deceitfulness of Sin and their own Hearts; and being left of God to fill up the
Measure of their Sins, and ripen for Destruction, even everlasting Destruction
from the Presence of the Lord and from the Glory of his Power, should make
Youth afraid to indulge themselves in any evil and false Way. And excite them
to Work out their own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, while God is working
in them to will and to do of his good Pleasure.

2. But if all these Hazards should through the infinite and unmerited Mercy of
God, be escaped, and they should be effectually brought home to God in their
Evil Days, yet, we must consider, there will be very many and great
Disadvantages, necessarily attending a late o^ a Deathbed Repentance. So many
and so great are they as to render it good for a Man to bear the Yoke in his
Youth, if it was only to avoid them

Though the most early Convert will find enough in the Sinfulness of corrunt
Nature, and the Errors of a short Life, to be deeply humbled for before God,
and to be filled with unutterable Anguish of Mind, in a Sense of his Misery and
Danger without an Interest in the Redemption purchased by Christ; yet there
must needs be a deeper Humiliation and more Heart-akeing Distress, when the
Sinner has gone on adding Iniquity to Transgression, and has filled up a long
Life with a constant Series of Rebellion against God. He has turned a deaf Ear
to innumerable Calls, and Warnings, has obstinately abused the Goodness, Mercy,
and Patience of God, his Sins are enereased over his Head, and grown up to the
very Heavens, and attended with innumerable aggravating Circumstances. Now
surely a just Sense hereof, must ^ll the Soul of the Penitent, with such
Anguish and L^^tress, with such Self-Abhorrence and Abasement, such Grief, and
Sname, and Fear, as it would be exceeding happy to prevent by an early
Conversion to God.

Beside, if it be so difficult, to crucify the World and the Flesh in the
Morning of Life, before we have been accustomed to do Evil, How much more
difficult must it be, when we have been confirmed in Ha^its of Sin, and the
Practice of Iniquity is by Custom become natural and delightful, and even
necessary to us. It is true, all Things are possible with God; but yet as it
must always cost the Sinner, most Self-Denial to cut off his Right Hand Sins,
and renounce and conquer his own Iniquities, so it mu^t b^ still more difficult
to do so, after the natural Inelination has been strengthened by a long
Indulgence. How hard is it for Persons to wean and break themselves off from
old Customs, even in indifferent. Things, and such as are contrary to their
Judgment, and Interest? But how much harder must it needs b^, to s^^d^^^: a
corrupt Inclination grown into a confirmed and settled Habit.

So that though the Grace of God is able to cure, and conquer the most inv^terate
Habits, and without it we cannot escape any of the Pollutions that are in the
World, yet it is evident, they who neglect their Salvation in Youth, not only
runs many dreadful Hazards, but ran themselves on certain and unvoidable
Disadvantages. They make Work for Repentance; and render Repentance it self
more bitter, and more difficult.

To all which we may add, the Hopes and Evidences of Salvation can hardly be so
satisfactory, and comfortable to a late Penitent, as if he had been converted
in Youth, and was able to appeal to God, That he had walked before him in
truth, and with a perfect Heart. At least it must be owned, that a Death Bed
Repentance can never be so comfortable, or we so sure of its Sincerity, if it
were only for this Reason, That such Appearances have so often proved vain and
delusive. And this is undeni^ble, that though a late Convert will for ever adore
the distinguishing Goodness of God, the Patience which bore with him so long,
and the Mercy that called, and received him at the eleventh Hour, and snatched
him as a Brand our of the Burning; yet, it will be a perpetual Grief and
Humiliation to him, that he was so evil, and unthankful, and to every good Work
reprobate. And that he so long abused the Patience and Mercy of God. And was
guilty of so great Wickedness, Folly and Ingratitude. The Sins of his Youth,
and the Transgressions of his riper Age necessarily fill him with Grief, and
Shame. And though God has sealed his Pardon, yet he cannot help lamenting the
Dishonor he has done to God, and the Injury to Men, and to himself, by his
Sins. He is now convinced of the Folly, and Danger of an Irreligious Youth, he
is ashamed of his Past Life, wishes he could recall Time, and earnestly
advises, warns, and beseeches all that are in Youth, to take the Yoke on them
immediately without any Delay.

Should not then, such as are young, believe and hearken to the Advice which
old Age continually gives. Should they not begin, to lead their Lives, as all
that have gone before them, direct and exhort them. All Men that arrive at old
Age, either wish they had served God in Youth, lament their Folly, and bewail
the sad Effects of it; or else rejoice in the divine Goodness, that disposed
and enabled them to bear the Yoke in their early Days. Who would purposely lay
up in store, a Foundation for Sorrow, Shame, and M^sery in old Age? And not
rather endeavor to conduct himself in such a Manner, as will render his Life
more happy to himself, and more useful to the World, and will secure a peaceful
Death and a glorious Immortality? And yet by refusing or delaying to bear the
Yoke in Youth, we render it unlikely ever to bear it at all; we certainly
prevent our s^l^ves all the happy Consequences of Early Religion, and expose
our selves to the most deadly Hazards, and real disadvantages.

Thus I have endeavored, as briefly as I could, to lay before you, a Summary
of the principal Reasons, why it is good for a Man to bear the Yoke in his
Youth. And now this brings me to the

IV. Improvement.

1. And the first Use I would make of these Things, is to awaken, convince and
persuade such (if any such there be here) who carelessly. or wilfully neglect
to take Christ's Yoke on them in their Youth.

Alas! Why can you think it too soon to be reconciled to God, and submit your
selves to the Rules of Religion? How can you think it soon enough to fly from
the Wrath to come, and escape the Danger you are in of eternal Vengeance? What
Comfort or Advantage is there in remaining under the condemning Sentence of the
law of GOD? Why will you not fly for Refuge, and lay hold on the Hope set
before you in the Gospel?

Are you sure of a long Life on Earth? Or rather, Are you not convinced of the
utter uncertainty of your Lives? And do you not know that if Death seizes you,
while in the Bonds of Iniquity, you are undone for ever? Are you sure God will
continue to afford you his Grace, or rather, Have you not the highest Reason to
expect, that if you continue to abuse his Goodness, He will utterly reject you,
and cast you off for ever?

Consider the Iniquity, and the Ingratitude of Rebellion against the God of
your Lives, and the Danger of provoking him, in whom you live, and move, and
have your Being. Can you conceal your Sins from him? Can you impose upon, and
deceive an allseeing and a jealous God? Can you escape from his Presence Can
you resist his Power? Are you stronger than he? Will you contend with the
Almighty, and rush on the thick Bosses of his Buckler? On be afraid of his
righteous Judgments, and let the Fear of God be in you, the beginning of true
Wisdom.

You already experience the Necessity of bridling your Passions, and curbing
your Appetites, in order to your present Comfort, and all your Hopes of future
Success in the World. You feel the Necessity of Discipline, and Restraint, Why
then will you nor lay on your Corruptions, that Yoke which God has provided,
and obey those Laws and Rules which He has given you? You are on Probation for
temporal Happiness, as well as eternal Glory; and generally speaking, your
Comfort in this World, depends upon, at least is most effectually secured by
the same Method, that is necessary to obtain eternal Life. Why then will you
gratify your corrupt Inclinations, at the Hazard both of your temporal and
eternal Welfare? Or, if you deny your sel^es in any Respect for temporal Good,
Why will you not deny all Ungodliness and every Worldly Lust, in order to work
out and secure the Salvation of your precious and immortal Souls?

How can you think it is not good for a Man to bear the Yoke in his Youth? What
10th the Lord our God require of us, but to do justly, to love Mercy, and walk
humbly with him? To be holy in all manner of Conversation, as he that has
called us is holy. And what can you lose, or hazard by Obedience to the Will of
God, that is worthy to be compared with the Benefits of a religious Life, and
the Glory that shall be revealed?

In fine, Do you satisfy and encourage your selves in Wickedness, with the
Design to repent hereafter? And is there not the greatest Absurdity and Folly
in such a Design? Do you indeed Sin with a Resolution to repent hereafter? Do
you know or think what Repentance in Truth is? And, Can you possibly
Transgress, with a Design to be really sorry for it? Such Conduct discovers
gross Ignorance of the Nature of Repentance, or is a plain Self-Contradiction.
It is only a miserable Delusion of the Devil A foolish Expedient to quiet the
Clamours of your Consciences, to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin, without
Disturbance from the the Upbraidings, and Threatenings of Conscience. If you are
in any Measure convinced of the Evil and Danger of Sin, be persuaded to mind
the Things of your Peace, now in the Day of them, before they are hidden from
your Eyes. If you have any Design to take Christ's Yoke on you at all, be
persuaded to do it now, for behold, Now is an accepted Time, and Now is the Day
of Salvation; and you know not how soon, or how suddenly it will come to an End.

2. In the next Place, these Things serve to confirm and encourage, you that
have chosen to bear the Yoke of Religion in Youth

I presume, and I hope it is no vain Presumption, that you of this Society are
sincere, and in earnest; and really aim at the Glory of God, and the Salvation
of your Souls. And that you mean not to make a fair Show in the Flesh, but to
become the Disciples of Christ in Deed, and in Truth. I have endeavored to
show you, the Propriety, the Obligations, and the Advantages of remembering
your Creator in the Days of your Youth. And I have done it, with a View to
confirm, and establish you in your happy Beginning. If God in Mercy has awakened
you to see the Wisdom, and Necessity of Religion, do not suffer the good
Impressions to wear often, but cultivate and improve them, 'till you are renewed
in the Spirit of your Mind. Let not your Goodness be as the Morning Cloud, and
as the early Dew, which suddenly pass away. Be not like him in the Parable that
said, I go Sir, and went not. Be not laugh't out of the necessary Care of your
Souls. Be nor ashamed of your Religion. Rather be ashamed of the Folly, of
li^ing as without God in the World. Let no Temptation divert you from a steady
Pursuit of Righteousness, and Life. Set your Affection on Things which are
above, where Christ is at God's right Hand in Glory. As you have begun well,
let nothing hinder you. Be not weary of Well-doing, hold out to the End, and in
due Season you shall reap, if you faint not.

It is good for you to bear the Yoke in your Youth, it is good in all Respects,
and in the highest Degree. It is the best Thing you can do, both in regard to
the Life that now is, and that which is to come. Yea it is the One Thing above
all, and absolutely necessary. Religion is your Duty, your Wisdom, and your
Happyness, your Ornament and Glory.

3. What has been said, authorizes, and directs me to give you some Councels,
and Warnings, that may be necessary. You see it is evidently, an Affair of
great Difficulty and Importance, and in which Mistakes may be of the most
pernicious, and fatal Consequence. You are transacting for Time and Eternity,
you have need therefore to work out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling.

1. In the first Place, do not mistake your own Aims, and Veiws in this Matter.
But see that your Hearts be right with God; that you are sincere and upright
before him -- Remember God looks at the Heart, That he searches the Hearts,
and the Reins of the Children of Men. That he is a Spirit, and seeks such to
worship him as worship him in Spirit and in Truth. Be sure then that you truly
desire and mean to serve God, and save your Souls. 2. Do not mistake the true
Nature of Religion. Do not mistake the Means, for the End, and so rest in what
will finally deceive you. The End, of all the Means of Religion, is to make you
partakers of a divine Nature or Temper, That after you have done the Will of
God, you may inherit the Promises. Be therefore as much concerned to be
delivered from the Power and Dominion of Sin, as from the Guilt and Punishment.
3. Be not contented with good Desires and Resolutions; nor mistake them, for
Regeneration. Who is there that has not some good Desires in Youth? Who is
there that is not so far enlightened, and convinced, as to be almost persuaded
to be a Christian, and wish to die the Death of the Righteous? But an almost
Christian, will entirely come short of eternal Life. Be not contented with a
few lazy Wishes, or delusive Promises; but directly carry your Purposes and
Desires into Practice; and be, and do, now, what you wish, and design to be,
and do hereafter. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate, for many, our Savior,
tells us will seek and shall be able. 4. Do not settle in the Preparatives to
Conversion. Do not imagine, you are passed from Death to Life, 'till you feel
your selves renewed in the Spirit of your Mind, after the Image of him that
creates you anew in Christ Jesus unto good Works; And until you can prove the
Truth of your Faith, by its genuine Fruits; until you are redeemed from a vain
Conversation, 'till old Things are passed away, and all Things become new; for
if any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature. And therefore you should give
diligence to make your Calling and Election sure; and with all Importunity,
beseech him that has begun a good Work in you, to perform it to the Day of
Christ. 5. Be deeply sensible, of your absolute Need of the Grace and Spirit of
God, to renew and sanctify you. And therefore above all Things ask of God, his
holy Spirit, to work in you, the whole good Pleasure of his Will, and the Work
of Faith with Power. As you depend on the Mercy of God, and the M^rits of Jesus
Christ for Pardon and Justification of Life, so depend on the gracious
Influences of the holy Spirit, to transform you into the divine Likeness, and
re-impress the divine Image upon your Souls. He that trusts in himself is a
Fool, but blessed are all they that trust in the Lord. 6. Conscientiously
attend all the Duties and Exercises of Religion. You must not expect Grace but
in the Way of Duty; and if you truly desire Grace, you will choose to be found
in the Way of Duty; and will not easily dispense with the Neglect or Omission
of any Thing which Christ has appointed as a Means of Grace. Be sure therefore
to maintain a constant Intercourse with God, in the Exercises of Piety, and
Devotion; in stated, and faithful Self-Examination, in pious Meditation, and in
the most humble, and earnest Prayer, and Supplication to the Throne of Grace.
7. Watch, as well as pray always, that you enter not into Temptation. Keep your
Hearts with all Diligence, for out of them are the Issues of Life. And g^^^d
all the Avennues to your Souls, your S^nses and Faculties, with the utmost
Caution. Watch the first Spring of Thought, and the whole Current and Train of
Thinking, see that it be innocent at least, and such as tends to the Use of
Edifying. It is impossible to cleanse the Life from Sin, unless the Fountain of
all our Actions be kept pure. The Government of the Thoughts, is a difficult
and important Part of the Christians Duty and Exercise. If your Hearts be
purged from an evil Conscience, the sweet Fountain will cast forth pure
Streams. 8. Take heed and beware of the beginning to grow slack and negligent.
Lose not your first Love; but gird up the Loins of your Mind be sober, and hope
to the End. Suffer no Iniquicy to have Dominion over you; and abstain from
every Occasion, and the very Appearance of Evil. Be afraid of turning back to
Folly, and of losing the Things which you have wrought, of dishonouring God,
and weakening your selves by your Falls and Errors; and of the bitter Anguish
it must cost you to be renewed again by Repentance, and restored to Tranquillity
of Mind. And remember if any Man draws back, God's Soul will have no Pleasure
in him. 9. Keep your Consciences tender, be afraid of contracting any Guilt;
and fear all Sin as Sin, however pleasing, or profitable, however secret it may
be, or comparatively little; and for ever aim at Purity of Heart, and
Conscience, that Integrity and Uprightness of Heart may preserve you.
Studiously endeavor to keep always, a Conscience void of Offense, both toward
God, and toward Man. 10. Take heed of settling on your Lees. Do not think you
have already attained, or are already perfect, and so grow remiss and secure;
but forgetting the Things that are behind, press toward those that are before,
endeavoring to grow in Grace and Holiness, in the Love and Likeness of God. It
must be observed to you, for your Warning and Admonition, that some young
People have made specious Pretensions to Religion for a While, and then have
shamefully fallen away, and returned with the washed Swine to their wallowing
in the Mire. Do you therefore be wise by their Folly; and carefully avoid the
Rocks, on which they have made Shipwreck of their Faith and a good Conscience.
11. Take heed of Pharisaism; of spiritual Pride, and Affectation, and
Oftentation. Be uniformly good, but be not vain Boasters, nor act to be seen of
Men. And take heed, no Man have Reason to reproach you, with neglecting
Judgment, Mercy and Fidelity. Be just, and sober, as well as devout. Put to
Silence the Ignorance of froward Men; and adorn the Doctrine of God our
Savior, by an unaffected B^haviour, in all holy Conversation, and Godliness.
I shall finish with just mentioning a few necessary Rules. particularly,

Plan out the Method of your Lives, so as that the Worship of God, and the Care
of your Souls may be steadily attended in a constant regular Manner, with our
Interruption, or Distraction.

Avoid bad Company; bid the Evildoers depart from you, and shun them, as you
would Persons infected with the most odious, and dangerous Diseases. For evil
Communication, corrupts good Manners, and a Companion of Fouls shall be
destroyed.

Flee all youthful ^usts, which war against the Soul. Keep your ^elves from
your own Iniquities, and the Sins which mose ^ality beset you.

Ever maintain on your Mind, a s^^^ous and awful Sense of the divine Presence.
Always remember that God s^^s you, That all Things are naked, and open to the
E^es of him with whom you have to do. Set the Lord always before you. And
behave as in the P^^sence, and under the Inspection of your Master, Savior,
and Judge.

Always bear in Mind, the supreme Excellency, and Necessity of Religion. And
that it is the great Bu^in ^s of year whole Lives, to cleanse your selves from
al^ the Filthiness of Flesh, and Spirit, and perfect Holiness in the Fear of
God. And that your Happiness throughout eternal Ages, is at Stake, and depends
on your present Conduct.

Finally, be always thankful to God for Jesus Christ, and the Privileges of
the Gospel. Show your Gratitude, Gratitude, by a constant Endeavor, to walk
worthy of him who has called you our of Darkness, into marvelous Light. Walk as
Children of the Light, and of the Day, and as becomes the Candidates of Glory
Honor and Immortallty. --

I heartily pray God, to bless you with all spiritual Blessings, in heavenly
Things in Christ Jesus; that he will preserve you by his mighty Power, through
Faith unto eternal Life; and that he will make you Instruments of his Glory,
and the Reformation of this Place; and particularly that many of the rising
Generation, may by your good Example, be excited to know, and serve the God of
their Fathers, with a perfect Heart and a willing Mind. AMEN.

FINIS.

