What think ye of CHRIST?

A SERMON Preached by the Rev. Mr. George Whitefield, On Kennington-Common,
after he was refused the Use of all the Churches.

BOSTON, Printed by D. Foul, for D. Henchman in Cornhill. 1741.

What think ye of CHRIST?
MATTHEW. xxii. 42. What think ye of CHRIST?
WHEN it pleased the eternal Son of GOD to tabernacle among us, and come
preaching the glad Tidings of Salvation to a fallen World, different Opinions
were entertained by different Parties concerning him. -- As to his Person, some
said he was Moses; others that he was Elias, Jeremias, or one of the ancient
Prophets; few acknowledged him to be what he really was, GOD blessed for
evermore. -- And as to his Doctrine, though the common People, being free from
Prejudice, were persuaded of the heavenly Tendency of his going about to do
Good, for the Generality heard him gladly, and said he was a good Man; yet the
envious, worldly-minded, self-righteous Governors and Teachers of the Jewish
Church, being grieved at his Success, on the one Hand, and unable (having never
been taught of GOD) to understand the Purity of his Doctrine, on the other;
notwithstanding our LORD spoke as never Man spoke, and did such Miracles which
no Man could possibly do, unless GOD was with him; yet they not only were so
infatuated, as to say, that he deceived the People, but also were so
blasphemous as to affirm, that he was in league with the Devil himself, and
cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. -- Nay, our LORD's own
Brethren and Kinsmen, according to the Flesh, were so blinded by Prejudice and
Unbelief, that on a certain Day, when he went out to teach the Multitudes in
the Fields the^ sent to take hold on him, urging this as a Reason for their
Conduct, viz, That he was besides himself.

Thus was the King and Lord of Glory judged by Man's Judgment, when made
manifest in the Flesh: Far be it from any of his Ministers to expect any better
Treatment. -- No, if we come in the Spirit and Power of our Master, in this, as
in every other Part of his Sufferings, we must follow his Steps. -- The like
Reproaches which were cast on him, will be thrown on us also. -- Those that
received our Lord and his Doctrine, will receive and hear us for his Namesake.
-- The Poor, blessed be GOD, as our present Meeting abundantly testifies,
receive the Gospel, and the common People hear us gladly; whilst those that are
sitting in Moses his Chair, and love to wear long Robes, being ignorant of the
Righteousness which is of GOD by Faith in CHRIST JESUS, and having never felt
the Power of GOD upon their Hearts, will be continually crying out against us,
as Madmen, Deceivers of the People, and as acting under the Influences of evil
Spirits.

But he is unworthy the Name of a Minister of the Gospel of Peace, who is
unwilling, not only to have his Name cast out as evil, but also to die for the
Truths of the Lord JESUS. -- It is the Character of Hirelings and False
Prophets, who care not for the Sheep, to have all Men speak well of them. --
Blessed are you, says our LORD to his first Apostles, and in them to all
succeeding Ministers, when Men speak all Manner of Evil against you falsely for
my Name sake. -- And indeed it is impossible but such Offenses must come: For
Men will always judge of others according to the Principles from which they act
themselves. -- And if they care not to yield Obedience to the Doctrines which
we deliver, they must necessarily, in Self-defence, speak against the
Preachers, lest they should be asked that Question, which the Pharisees of old
feared to have retorted on them, if they confessed that John was a Prophet,
viz. Why then did you not believe on him? In all such Cases, we have nothing to
do but to search our own Hearts, and if we can assure our Consciences, before
GOD, that we act with a single Eye to his Glory, we are cheerfully to go on in
our Work, and not in the least to regard what Men or Devils can say against, or
do unto us.

But to return. You have heard what various Thoughts were handed about
concerning JESUS CHRIST whilst here on Earth: Nor is he otherwise treated, even
now he is exalted to sit down at the Right Hand of his Father in Heaven. -- A
Stranger to Christianity, was he to hear we all profess to hold one LORD, would
naturally infer, that we all thought and spoke one and the same Thing about
him. But alas! to our Shame be it mentioned, though CHRIST be not divided in
himself, yet Profossors are sadly divided in their Thoughts about him; and that
not only as to the Circumstances of his Religion, but also of those essential
Truths which must necessarily be believed and received by us, if ever we hope
to be Heirs of eternal Salvation.

Some, and that I fear a Multitude which no Man can easily number, there are
amongst us, who call themselves Christians, and yet seldom or never seriously
think of JESUS CHRIST at all. They can think of their Shops, and their Farms,
their Plays, their Balls, their Assemblies, and Horse-races, Entertainments,
which directly tend to exclude Religion out of the World (but as for CHRIST,
the Author and Finisher of Faith, the LORD who has bought poor Sinners with his
precious Blood, and who is the only Thing worth their thinking of, alas! he is
not in all, at most in very few, of their Thoughts. But believe me, O ye
earthly, sensual, carnally minded Professors, however little you may think of
CHRIST now, or however industriously you may strive to keep him out of your
Thoughts, by pursuing the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride
of Life, yet there is a Time coming, when you will wish you had thought of
CHRIST more, and of your Profits and Pleasures less. -- For the Gay, the
Polite, the Rich also must die as well as others, and leave their Pomps, their
Vanities, and all their Wealth behind them. -- And oh! what Thoughts will you
entertain concerning JESUS CHRIST, in that Hour.

But I must not pursue these Reflections: They would carry me too far from the
main Design of this Discourse, which is to show what those that are truly
desirous to know how to worship GOD in Spirit and in Truth, ought to think
concerning JESUS CHRIST, whom GOD has sent to be the End of the Law for
Righteousness to all them that shall believe.

I trust, my Brethren, you are more noble than to think me too strict or
scrupulous, in thus attempting to regulate even your Tho'ts about JESUS CHRIST:
For by our Thoughts as well as our Words and Actions, are we to be judged at
the Great Day. And in vain do we hope to believe in, or worship CHRIST aright,
unless our Principles on which our Faith and Practice is founded, are agreeable
to the Form of sound Words delivered to us in the Scriptures of Truth.

Besides, many Deceivers are gone abroad into the World. Mere Heathen Morality,
and not JESUS CHRIST, is preached in most of our Churches. And how should
People think rightly of CHRIST, of whom they have scarcely heard? Do bear with
me a little then, whilst, to inform your Consciences, I ask you a few Questions
concerning JESUS CHRIST: For there is no other Name given under Heaven, whereby
we can be saved, but his.

And First, What think you (...) the Person of CHRIST? Whose Son is he? This is
the Question our LORD put to the Pharisees in the Words following the Text; and
never was it more necessary to repeat this Question than in these last Days.
For Numbers that are called after the Name of CHRIST, and I fear, many that
pretend to preach him, are so far advanced in the blasphemous Chair, as openly
to deny his being really, truly and properly GOD. But no one that ever was
Partaker of his Spirit, will speak thus lightly of him. No; if they are asked,
as Peter and his Brethren were, but whom say ye that I am? they will reply
without Hesitation, Thou art CHRIST the Son of the everliving GOD. For the
Confession of our Lord's Divinity, is the Rock upon which be builds his Church.
Was it possible to take this away, the Gates of Hell would quickly prevail
against it. -- My Brethren, if JESUS CHRIST be not very GOD of very GOD, I
would never preach the Gospel again. For it would not be Gospel; it would be
only a System of moral Ethics: Seneca, Cicero, or any of the Gentile
Philosophers would be as good a Savior as JESUS of Nazareth. It is the
Divinity of our LORD that gives a Sanction on to his Death, and makes him such
a High Priest as became us, viz. One who by the infinite Merits of his
Suffering could make a full, perfect, sufficient Sacrifice, Satisfaction and
Oblation to an infinitely offended Justice. And whatever Minister of the Church
of England, makes use of her Forms, and eats of her Bread, and yet holds not
this Doctrine (as I fear too many such are crept in amongst us) such a one
belongs only to the Synagogue of Satan. -- He is not a Child or Minister of
GOD: No; he is a Wolf in Sheep's Clothing, he is a Child and Minister of that
Wicked One the Devil.

Many will think these hard Sayings: But I think it no Breach of Charity to
affirm, that an Arian or Socinian cannot be a Christian. -- The one would make
us believe JESUS CHRIST is only a Created God, which is a Self-Contradiction.
And the other would have us look on him only as a Good Man, and instead of
owning his Death to be an Atonement for the Sins of the World, would persuade
us, that CHRIST died only to seal the Truth of his Doctrine with his Blood. But
if JESUS CHRIST be no more than a mere Man, if he be not truly GOD, he was the
vilest Sinner that ever appeared in the World. -- For he accepted of Divine
Adoration from the Man who had been born blind, as we read John ix. 38. And he
said, LORD I believe, and worshipped him. Besides, if CHRIST be not properly
GOD, our Faith is vain, we are yet in our Sins: -- For no created Being, though
of the highest Order, could possibly merit any thing at GOD's Hands: No, it was
our LORD's Divinity, that alone qualified him to take away the Sins of the
World; and therefore we hear St. John pronouncing so positively, that the Word,
i. e. JESUS CHRIST, was not only with GOD; but was GOD. -- For the like Reason,
St. Paul says, that he was in the Form of GOD. -- That in him dwelt all the
Fullness of the Godhead bodily. -- Nay, JESUS CHRIST himself assumes the Title
which GOD gave to himself, when he sent Moses to deliver his People Israel.
Before Abraham, was, says he, I am. -- And again, I and my Father are one.
Which last Words, though our modern Infidels would evade and wrest, as they do
the other Scriptures, to their own Damnation; yet it is evident, that the Jews
understood our LORD, when he spoke thus, as though he made himself equal with
GOD; otherwise why did they stone him as a Blasphemer? -- And now, why should
it be thought a Breach of Charity, to affirm, that th^^^ that deny the Divinity
of JESUS CHRIST, in the strictest Sense of the Word, cannot be Christians? For
they are greater Infidels than the Devils themselves. -- They confessed that
they knew who he was, even the holy One of GOD. -- They not only believe, but
which is more than the Unbelievers of this Generation do, they tremble. -- And
was it possible for Arius or Socinus, those Arch-Hereticks, to be released from
their Chains of Darkness, under which (unless they altered their Principles
before they died) they are now reserved to the Judgment of the great Day, I am
persuaded they would inform us, how Hell had convinced them of the Divinity of
JESUS CHRIST, and that they would advise their Followers to abhor their
Principles, lest they should come into the same Place, and thereby increase
each others Torments.

But, Secondly, What think you of the Manhood or Incarnation of JESUS CHRIST?
For CHRIST was not only GOD, but he was GOD and Man in one Person.....Thus runs
the Text and Context..... When the Pharisees were gathered together, JESUS
asked them, saying, What think ye of CHRIST? Whose Son is he? They say unto
him, the Son of David. -- How then, says our Divine Master, does David in
Spirit call him LORD? From which Passage it is evident, that we do not think
rightly of the Person of JESUS CHRIST, unless we believe him to be perfect GOD
and perfect Man, of a reasonable Soul and human Flesh subsisting.

For it is on this Account that he is called CHRIST, or the anointed, i. e. one
who through his own voluntary Offer was set apart by the Father, and
strengthened and qualified by the Anointing or Communication of the Holy Ghost,
to be a Mediator between him and offending Man.

The Reason or first Cause why the Son of GOD took upon him our Nature, was,
the Fall of our first Parents. -- I hope there is no one present so
atheistical, as to think that Man made himself: No, it was GOD that made us,
and not we ourselves. -- And I would willingly think, that no one would be so
blasphemous as to suppose, that if GOD did make us, he made us such Creatures
as we now find ourselves to be. For this would be giving GOD's Word the lie,
which tells us, that in the Image of GOD, not in the Image which we now bear on
our Souls, made he Man. For as GOD made Man, so GOD made him perfect. He placed
him in the Garden of Eden, and condescended to enter into a Covenant with him,
promising him eternal Life, upon Condition of an unsinning Obedience; and
threatening eternal Death, if he broke his Law, and eat the forbidden Fruit.

Man did eat; and herein acting as our Representative, thereby involved both
himself and us in that Curse, which GOD, the righteous Judge, had said should
be the Consequence of his Disobedience. -- But here begins that Mystery of
Godliness, GOD manifested in the Flesh. For (sing, O Heavens, and rejoice, O
Earth!) the eternal Father, foreseeing how Satan would bruise the Heel of Man,
had in his eternal Counsel, provided a Means whereby he might bruise that
accursed Serpent's Head. Man is permitted to fall, and become subject to Death;
but JESUS the only begotten Son of GOD, begotten of the Father before all
Worlds, God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God, offers to die to make
an Atonement for his Transgression, and to fulfill all Righteousness in his
stead. And because it was impossible for him to do this as he was GOD, and yet
since Man had offended, it was necessary it should be done in the Person of
Man, rather than we should perish; this Everlasting GOD, this Prince of Peace,
this Ancient of Days, in the Fullness of Time, had a Body prepared for him by
the Holy Ghost, and became an Infant of a Span long. -- In this Body he
performed a complete Obedience to the Law of GOD, whereby he, in our stead,
fulfilled the Covenant of Works, and at last became subject to Death, even the
Death upon the Cross; that as GOD he might satisfy, as Man he might obey and
suffer; and being GOD and Man in one Person, might once more procure a Union
between GOD and our Souls.

And now, What think you of this Love of CHRIST? Do not you think it was
wondrous great? Especially when you consider that we were CHRIST's bitter
Enemies, and that he would have been infinitely happy in himself,
notwithstanding we had perished for ever. -- Whatever you may think of it, I
know the blessed Angels, who are not so much concerned in this Mystery of
Godliness as we, think most highly of it. -- They do, they will desire to look
into and admire it, through all Eternity. -- Why, Oh why, ye Sinners, will you
not think of this Love of CHRIST? -- Surely it must melt down the most hardened
Heart. -- Whilst I am speaking, the Thoughts of this infinite and condescending
Love, fires and warms my Soul. -- I could dwell on it forever. -- But it is
expedient for you, that I should ask you another Question concerning JESUS
CHRIST.

Thirdly, What think you about being justified by CHRIST? -- I believe I can
answer for some of you. -- For many, I fear, think to be justified or looked
upon as righteous in GOD's Sight, without JESUS CHRIST. -- But such will find
themselves dreadfully mistaken: For out of CHRIST GOD is a consuming Fire. --
Others satisfy themselves with believing that CHRIST was GOD and Man, and that
he came into the World to save Sinners in general. Whereas their chief Thoughts
ought to be, how they may be assured that JESUS CHRIST came into the World to
save them in particular. -- The Life that I now live in the Flesh, says the
Apostle, is by Faith of the Son of GOD, who loved me and gave himself for me.
-- Observe, for me. For it is this immediate Application of JESUS CHRIST to our
own Hearts, that renders his Merits effectual to our eternal Salvation. An
unapplied CHRIST will do us no Service at all. -- Others there are that go
still further: For they think that JESUS CHRIST is GOD-MAN, that he is to be
applied to their Hearts, and that they can be justified in GOD's Sight only in
or through him; but then they make him only in Part a Savior. -- They are for
doing what they can themselves, and then JESUS CHRIST is to make up the
Deficiencies of their Righteousness. This is the Sum and Substance of of our
modern Divinity: And was it possible for me to know the Thoughts of most that
hear me this Day, I believe they would tell me, this was the Scheme they had
laid, and perhaps depended on for some Years, for their eternal Salvation. Is
it not then high Time my Brethren, for you to entertain quite different Tho'ts
concerning Justification by JESUS CHRIST? For if you think thus, you are in the
Case of those unhappy Jews, who went about establishing their own
Righteousness, and would not submit to, and consequently missed of that
Righteousness which is of GOD by Faith in CHRIST JESUS our LORD. What think you
then, my Brethren, if I tell you, that you are to be justified freely through
Faith in JESUS CHRIST, without any Regard to any Work, or Fitness, foreseen in
us, at all? For Salvation is the free Gift of GOD. I know no Fitness in Man,
but a Fitness to be cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone forever. Our
Righteousnesses in GOD's Sight are but as filthy Rags. He cannot away with
them. Our Holiness, if we have any, is not the Cause, but the Effect of our
Justification in GOD's Sight. -- We love GOD, because he first loved us. We
must not come to GOD as the proud Pharisee did, bringing in as it were a
Reckoning of our Services. We must come in the Temper and Language of the poor
Publican, smiting upon our Breasts and saying, GOD be merciful to me a Sinner.
For JESUS CHRIST justifies us whilst we are ungodly. -- He came not to call the
Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance. The poor in Spirit, they who are willing
to go out of themselves, and rely wholly on the Righteousness of another, are
only so blessed as to be Members of his Kingdom. The Righteousness, the whole
Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST, is to be imputed to us, instead of our own. For
we are not under the Law, but under Grace: And as many as walk after this Rule,
Peace be on them; for they, and they only are the true Israel of GOD. In the
great Work of Man's Redemption, Boasting is entirely excluded; which could not
be if only one of our Works was to be joined with the Merits of CHRIST. Our
Salvation is all of GOD from the Beginning to the End. It is not of Works, lest
any Man should boast. Man has no hand in it: It is CHRIST who is to be made to
us of GOD the Father, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and eternal
Redemption. -- His active as well as his passive Obedience, is to be applied to
poor Sinners. He has fulfilled all Righteousness in our stead, that we might
become the Righteousness of GOD in him. -- All we have to do, is to lay hold on
this Righteousness by Faith: And that very Moment we do apprehend it by a
lively Faith, that very Moment we may be assured that the Blood of Jesus Christ
has cleansed us from all Sin. -- For the Promise is to us and to our Children,
and to as many as the LORD our GOD shall call. If we and our whole Houses
believe, we shall be saved as well as the Jailer and his House: For the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ is an everlasting as well as a perfect
Righteousness. -- It is as effectual to all them that believe in him now, as
formerly; and so it will be, till Time shall be no more. Search the Scriptures
as the Bereans did, and see whether these Things are not so. Search St Paul's
Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, and there you will find this Doctrine so
plainly taught you, that unless you have Eyes and see not, he that runs may
read. Search the Eleventh Article of our Church, We are accounted righteous
before GOD, only for the Merits of our LORD and Savior Jesus Christ by Faith,
and not for our own Works or Deserving.

This Doctrine of our free Justification by Faith in Christ Jesus, however
censured and evil spoken of by our present Masters of Israel, was highly
esteemed by our wise Forefathers: For in the subsequent Words of the fore
mentioned Article, it is called a most wholesome Doctrine, and very full of
Comfort; and so it is to all that are weary and heavy laden, and are truly
willing to find Rest in Jesus Christ.

This is Gospel, this is glad Tidings of great Joy to all that feel themselves
poor, lost and undone damned Sinners. Ho every one that thirsts, come unto
the Waters of Life and drink freely; come and buy without Money and without
Price. -- Behold a Fountain opened in your Savior's Side, for Sin and for all
Uncleanness. Look unto him whom you have pierced. Look unto him by Faith, and
verily you shall be saved, though you came here only to ridicule and blaspheme,
and never thought of GOD or of Christ before.

Not that you must think GOD will save you because, or on Account of your
Faith: For Faith is a Work, and then you would be justified for your Works. But
when I tell you, we are to be justified by Faith, I mean that Faith is the
Instrument whereby the Sinner applies or brings home the Redemption of Jesus
Christ to his Heart. And to whomsoever GOD gives such a Faith (for it is the
free Gift of GOD) he may lift up his Head with Boldness, he need not fear, he
is a spiritual Son of our spiritual David, he has passed from Death to Life, he
shall never come into Condemnation. -- This is the Gospel which we preach. If
any Man or Angel preach any other Gospel, than this of our being freely
justified through Faith in Christ Jesus, we have the Authority of the greatest
Apostle to pronounce him accursed.

And now, my Brethren, What think you of this Foolishness of Preaching? To you
that have tasted the good Word of Life, and been enlightened to see the Riches
of GOD's free Grace in Christ Jesus, I am persuaded it is precious, and has
distilled like the Dew into your Souls. -- And Oh! that all were like minded!
-- But I am afraid Numbers are ready to go away contradicting and blaspheming.
Tell me, are there not many of you saying within yourselves, This is a
licentious Doctrine; this Preacher is opening a Door for Encouragement in Sin.
But this does not surprise me at all; it is a stale antiquated Objection, as
old as the Doctrine of Justification itself; and (which by the Way is not much
to the Credit of those who urge it now) it was made by an Infidel. St. Paul in
his Epistle to the Romans, after he had in the first five Chapters demonstrably
proved the Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone; in the sixth, brings in an
Unbeliever saying, shall we continue in Sin then that Grace may abound? But as
he rejected such an Inference with a God forbid, so do I: For the Faith which
we preach is not a dead speculative Faith, an assenting to Things credible as
credible, as it is commonly defined. It is not a Faith of the Head only: but a
Faith of the Heart. It is a living Principle wrought in the Soul, by the Spirit
of the Ever-living GOD, whereby the Sinner being convinced of his lost and
undone Condition by Nature, is enabled to apply or lay hold on the perfect
Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST freely offered in the Gospel, and whereby out of
a Principle of Love and Gratitude, he is afterward continually excited to
abound in every good Word and Work. This is the Sum and Substance of the
Doctrine that has been delivered. -- And if this be a licentious Doctrine judge
ye. -- No, my Brethren, this is not destroying, but teaching you how to do good
Works, from a proper Principle. -- For to use the Words of our Church in
another of her Articles, Works done before the Grace of Christ, and the
Inspiration of the Spirit, are not pleasant to God, forasmuch as they spring
not of Faith in Jesus Christ -- rather for that they are not done as God has
willed and commanded them to be done, we doubt not but they have the Nature of
Sin. So that they who bid you do, and then live, are just as wise as those who
would persuade you to build a beautiful magnificent House, without laying a
Foundation.

It Is true, the Doctrine of our free Justification by Faith in CHRIST JESUS,
like other Gospel Truths, may and will be abused by Men of corrupt Minds,
Reprobates concerning the Faith: But ^^^y who receive the Truth of GOD in the
Love of it, will always be showing their Faith by their Works. For this Reason,
St. Paul after he had been telling the Ephesians, That by Grace they were saved
through Faith, not of Works, lest any Man should boast, immediately adds, For we
are his Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus nnto good Works. And in his
Epistle to Titus, having given him Directions, Chap. 3. Ver. 7. to tell People
they were justified by Grace, directly subjoins, Ver. 8. I will that you affirm
constanly, that they which have believed in God might be careful to maintain
good Works. Agreeable to this we are told in our 12th Article, That albeit good
Works, which are the Fruits of Faith, and follow after Justification, cannot
put away our Sins, and endure the Severity of God's Judgment; yet are they
pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ; and do spring necessarily out of a
true and lively Faith, insomuch that a lively Faith may be as evidently known
by them as a Tree discerned by the Fruit.

Oh what would I give, that this Article was duly understood and preached by
all that have subscribed to it! The Ark of the Lord would not then be driven
into the Wilderness, nor so many dissent from the Church of England. -- For I
am fully persuaded, that it is not so much on account of Rites and Ceremonies,
as our not Preaching the Truth as it is in JESUS, that so many have been
obliged to go and seek for Food elsewhere. Did not we fall from our established
Doctrines, few, comparatively speaking, would fall from the established Church.
Where Christ is preached, though it be in a Church or Common, Dissenters of all
Denominations have and do most freely come. But if our Clergy will preach only
the Law, and not show the Way of Salvation by Faith in Christ Jesus, the Charge
of Schism at the Day of Judgment, I fear, will chiefly lie at their Door. The
true Sheep of Christ know the Voice of Christ's true Shepherds, Strangers they
will not hear.

Observe, my dear Brethren, the Words of the Article, good Works are the Fruits
of Faith, and follow after Justification.

How then can they precede or be any ways the Cause of it? No; our Persons must
be justified before our Performances can be accepted. God had respect to Abel
before he had respect to his Offering: And therefore the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ must be freely imputed to, and apprehended by us through Faith, before we
can offer an acceptable Sacrifice to God: For out of Christ, as I hinted
before, God is a consuming Fire; and whatsoever is not of Faith in Christ, is
Sin.

People's mistaking the Doctrine of free Justification, I believe, is partly
owing to their not rightly considering the different Persons St. Paul and St.
James wrote to in their Epistles, as also the different Kind of Justification
each of them writes about: The former asserts in Line upon Line, Argument upon
Argument, that we are justified by Faith alone. -- The latter puts this
Question, Was not Abraham justified by Works? From whence many, not considering
the different Views of these Holy Men, and the different Persons they wrote to,
have blended and joined Faith and Works in order to justify us in the Sight of
God. But this is a Mistake all over: For St. Paul was writing to the Jewish
Proselites, who sought Righteousness by the Works, not of the Ceremonial only,
but of the Moral Law. -- In Contradistinction to that, he tells them they were
to look for Justification in God's Sight, only by the perfect Righteousness of
Jesus Christ apprehended by Faith. -- St. James had a different Set of People
to deal with, viz. such who abused the Doctrines of free Justification, and
thought they should be saved (as Numbers among us do now) upon their barely
professing to believe on Jesus Christ. -- These the holy Apostle endeavors
wisely to convince, that such a Faith was only a dead and false Faith, and
therefore it behoved all who would be blessed with faithful Abraham, to show
forth their Faith by their Works as he did: -- For was not Abraham justified by
Works, says he? i. e. Did he not prove that his Faith was a true justifying
Faith by its being productive of good Works? From whence it is plain that St.
James is talking of a declarative Justification before Men: Show me,
demonstrate, evidence to me, that thou have a true Faith, by thy Works. Whereas
St. Paul is talking only of our being justified in the Sight of God; and thus
he proves that Abraham, as we also are to be, was justified before ever the
Moral or Ceremonial Law was given to the Jews: For it is written, Abraham
believed in the Lord, and it was accounted to him for Righteousness.

Take the Substance of what has been said on this Head, in the few following
Words. -- Every Man that is saved, is justified three Ways. First,
meritoriously, i. e. by the Death of Jesus Christ: It is the Blood of Jesus
Christ alone that cleanses us from all Sin. Secondly, instrumentally, viz. By
Faith; Faith is the Means or Instrument whereby the Merits of Jesus Christ are
applied to the Sinner's Heart: Ye are all the Children of God by Faith in
Christ Jesus. Thirdly, we are justified declaratively; namely, by good Works,
i. e. good Works declare and prove to the World, that our Faith is a true
saving Faith. -- Was not Abraham justified by Works? and Again, Show me thy
Faith by thy Works? --

It may not be improper to illustrate this Doctrine by an Example or two. I
suppose no one will pretend to say, that there was any Fitness for Salvation in
Zacheus the Publican, when he came to see Jesus out of no better Principle,
than that whereby perhaps Thousands are led to hear me preach, I mean
Curiosity; but Jesus Christ prevented and called him by his free Grace, and
sweetly, but irresistibly inclined him to obey that Call, as I pray God he may
influence all you that come only to see who the Preacher is. Zacheus received
our Lord joyfully into his House, and at the same Time by Faith received him
into his Heart. Zacheus was then freely justified in the Sight of God. -- But
behold the immediate Fruits of that Justification! He stands forth in the
Midst, and as before he had believed in his Heart, he now makes Confession with
his Mouth to Salvation. -- Behold, Lord, the Half of my Goods I give unto the
Poor, and if I have taken any Thing from any Man by false Accusation, I restore
him Fourfold. -- And thus it will be with thee, O Believer, as soon as ever
God's dear Son is revealed in thee by a living Faith, thou will have no Rest in
thy Spirit, till out of Love and Gratitude for what God has done for thy Soul,
thou she west forth thy Faith by thy Works.

Again, I suppose every Body will grant there was no Fitness for Salvation in
the Persecutor Saul, no more than there is in those persecuting Zealots of
these last Days, who are already breathing out Threatenings, and, if in their
Power, would breath out Slaughter also, against the Disciples of the LORD.

Now our Lord, we know, freely prevented him by his Grace (and, O that he would
thus effectually call the Persecutors of this Generation) and by a Light from
Heaven struck him to the Ground. -- At the same Time, by his Spirit, he pricked
him to the Heart, convinced him of Sin, and caused him to cry out, Who art
thou, Lord? Christ replies, I am JESUS whom thou persecute^^ Faith then was
instantaneously given him, and behold, immediately Saul cries out, Lord what
would thou have me to do? And so will every poor Soul that believes on the
Lord Jesus with his whole Heart. He will be always asking, Lord what shall I do
for thee? Lord what would thou have me to do? Not to justify himself, but
only to evidence the Sincerity of his Love and Thankfulness to his all-merciful
High Priest, for plucking him as a Firebrand out of the Fire.

Perhaps, many Self-righteous Persons amongst you, may flatter yourselves, that
you are not so wicked as either Zacheus or Saul was, and consequently there is
a greater Fitness for Salvation in you than in them. But if you think thus,
indeed you think more highly of yourselves than you ought to think: For by
Nature we are all alike, all equally fallen short of the Glory of God, all
equally dead in Trespasses and Sins, and there needs the same Almighty Power to
be exerted in converting any one of the most sober, good natured Moral Persons
here present, as there was in converting the Publican Zacheus, or that
notorious Persecutor Saul. -- And was it possible for you to ascend into the
highest Heavens, and to enquire of the Spirits of just Men made perfect, I am
persuaded they would tell you this Doctrine is from God. But we have a more
sure Word of Prophecy, to which we would do well to give heed, as unto a Light
shining in a dark Place. My Brethren, the Word is n^gh you; search the
Scripture; beg of God to make you willing to be saved in this the Day of his
Power. For it is not Flesh and Blood, but the Spirit of Jesus Christ, that
alone can reveal these Things unto you.

Fourthly and lastly, What think you of JESUS CHRIST being formed within you?
For whom Christ justifies, them he also sanctifies. Although he finds, yet he
does not leave us unholy. -- A true Christian may not so properly be said to
live, as JESUS CHRIST to live in him. For they only that are led by the Spirit
of CHRIST, who is GOD, are the true Sons of GOD.

As I observed before, so I tell you again, the Faith which we preach is not a
dead, but a lively active Faith wrought in the Soul and working a thorough
Change, by the Power of the Holy Ghost, in the whole Man -- And unless CHRIST
be thus in you, notwithstanding you may be orthodox as to the foregoing
Principles, notwithstanding you may have good Desires, and attend constantly on
the Means of Grace; yet, in St. Paul's Opinion, you are out of a State of
Salvation. Know you not, says that Apostle to the Corinthians, a Church famous
for its Gifts above any Church under Heaven, that CHRIST is in you, viz. by his
Spirit, unless you are Reprobates?

For Christ came not only to save us from the Guilt, but the Power of our Sins:
Till he has done this, however he may be a Savior to others, we can have no
Assurance, or well-grounded Hope, that he has saved us: For it is by receiving
his blessed Spirit into our Hearts, and feeling him witnessing with our
Spirits, that we are the Sons of God, that we can be certified of our being
sealed to the Day of Redemption.

This is a great Mystery, but I speak of Christ and the New Birth. -- Marvel
not at my asking you, what you think about Christ being formed within you? For
either GOD must change his Nature, or we ours. For as in Adam we all have
spiritually died, so all that are effectually saved by Christ, must in Christ
be spiritually made alive. His only End in dying and rising again, and
interceding for us now in Heaven, is to redeem us from the Misery of our fallen
Nature, and, by the Operation of his blessed Spirit, to make us meet to be
Partakers of the Heavenly Inheritance with the Saints in Light. None but those
that thus are changed by his Grace here, shall appear with him in Glory
hereafter.

Examine yourselves therefore, my Brethren, whether you are in the Faith; prove
yourselves; and think it not sufficient to say in your Creed, I believe in
Jesus Christ: For you do not believe, you are Liars, you are Reprobates, you
are yet in a State of Death. You take God's Name in vain when you call him
Father. Your Prayers are turned into Sin, unless you believe into Christ, so as
to have your Life hid with him in God, and to receive Life and Nourishment from
Him, as the Branches do from the Vine.

I know, indeed, the Men of this Generation deny there is any such Thing as
Feeling CHRIST within them; but alas! to what a dreadful Condition would such
reduce us, even to the State of the abandoned Heathens, who St. Paul tells us
were past Feeling. -- The Apostle prays that the Ephesians may abound in all
Knowledge and Spiritual Understanding, or as it might be rendered, Spiritual
Sensation. -- And in the Office for the Visitation of the Sick, the Minister
prays, that the Lord may make the sick Person know and feel, that there is no
other Name under Heaven given unto Men, in whom and through whom they may receive
Health and Salvation, but only the Name of our Lord JESUS. -- For there is a
spiritual, as well as a corporeal Feeling, and though this is not communicated to
us in a sensible Manner, as outward Objects affect our outward Senses, yet it
is as real, as any sensible or visible Sensation, and may be as truly felt and
discerned by the Soul, as any Impression from without can be felt by the Body.
-- All that are born again of God, know that I lie not.

What think you, Sirs, did Naaman feel when he was cured of his Leprosy? Did
the Woman feel Virtue coming out of Jesus Christ, when she touched the Hem of
his Garment, and was cured of her bloody Issue? So surely may thou feel, O
Believer, when Jesus Christ dwells in thy Heart. I pray God make you all know
and feel this, ever you depart hence.

Oh, my Brethren, my Heart is enlarged toward you. I trust I feel something of
that hidden, but powerful Presence of CHRIST, whilst I am preaching to you.
Indeed it is sweet, indeed it is exceeding comfortable. All the Harm I wish
you, that without Cause are my Enemies, is, that you felt the like. Believe me,
though it would be Hell to my Soul, to return to a natural State again, yet I
would willingly change States with you for a little while, that you might know
what it is to have Christ dwelling in your Hearts by Faith. Oh! Do not turn
your Backs. Do not let the Devil hurry you away. Be not afraid of Convictions.
Do not think worse of the Doctrine, because preached without the Church Walls.
-- Our Lord in the Days of his Flesh, preached on a Mount, a Ship, a Field; and
I am persuaded many have felt his gracious Presence here. -- Indeed we speak
what we know. -- Oh do not reject the Kingdom of God against yourselves. Be so
wise as to receive our Witness. -- I cannot, I will not let you go. Stay a
little, let us reason together. -- However lightly you may esteem your Souls, I
know our Lord has set an unspeakable Value on them. He thought them worthy of
his most precious Blood. -- I beseech you therefore, O Sinners, be ye
reconciled to God. I hope you do not fear being accepted in the Beloved. --
Behold he calls you. Behold he prevents and follows you with his Mercy, and
has sent forth his Servants into the Highways and Hedges, to compel you to
come in. Remember then, that at such an Hour, of such a Day, in such a Year, in
this Place, you were all told what you ought to think concerning Jesus Christ.
-- If you now perish, it will not be for lack of Knowledge. -- I am free from
the Blood of you all. -- You cannot say I have been preaching Damnation to you.
-- You cannot say I have, like legal Preachers, been requiring you to make
Brick without Straw. I have not bid you make yourselves Saints, and then come
to God. -- But I have offered you Salvation on as cheap Terms as you can
desire. -- I have offered you Christ's whole Wisdom, Christ's whole
Righteousness, Christ's whole Sanctification and Eternal Redemption, if you
will but believe on him. -- If you say you cannot believe, you say right; for
Faith as well as every other Blessing is the Gift of God: But then wait upon
God and who knows but he may have Mercy on thee. Why do we not entertain more
loving Thoughts of CHRIST? Or do you think he will have Mercy on others, and
not on you? But are you not Sinners? And did not JESUS CHRIST come into the
World to save Sinners? -- If you say you are the chief of Sinners; I answer,
that will be no Hindrance to your Salvation, indeed it will not, if you lay
hold on him by Faith. Read the Evangelists, and see how kindly he behaved to
his Disciples who fled from and denied him. Go tell my Brethren, says he. -- He
does not say, Go tell those Traitors; but, Go tell my Brethren; And Peter; as
though he had said, go tell my Brethren in general, and poor Peter in particular,
that I am risen. Oh, comfort his poor drooping Heart, tell him I am reconciled
to him. Bid him weep no more so bitterly. For though with Oaths and Curses he
has thrice denied me, yet I have died for his Sins, I am risen again for his
Justification, I freely forgive him all. -- Thus slow to Anger, and of great
Kindness, was our all-merciful High Priest. And do you think he has changed his
Nature, and forgets poor Sinners now he is exalted to the Right Hand of God?
No, he is the same Yesterday, to Day and forever, and sits there only to
make Intercession for us...... Come then, ye Harlots, come ye Publicans, come
ye most abandoned Sinners, come and believe on Jesus Christ. Though the whole
World despise you and cast you out, yet he will not disdain to take you up. Oh!
amazing, Oh! infinitely condescending Love, even you he will not be ashamed to
call his Brethren. And Oh! how will you escape if you neglect such a glorious
Offer of Salvation? What would the damned Spirits now in the Prison of Hell
give, if Christ was so freely offered to their Souls? And why are not we
lifting up our Eyes in Torment? Does any one out this great Multitude dare say,
he does not deserve Damnation? If not, why are we left and others taken away by
Death? What is this but an Instance of God's free Grace, and a Sign of his good
Will toward us? Oh then, let God's Goodness lead us to Repentance! Oh let
there be Joy in Heaven over some of you repenting! Though we are in a Field, I am
persuaded the blessed Angels are hovering now around us, and long, as the Heart
pants after the Water Brooks, to sing an Anthem at your Conversion. Blessed
be God I hope their Joy will be fulfilled. An awful Silence appears amongst us.
I have good Hope that the Words that the Lord has enabled me to speak in your
Ears this Day, have not altogether fallen to the Ground. Your Tears and deep
Attention are an Evidence, that the Lord God is amongst us of a Truth. Come ye
Pharisees, come and see, in spite of your Satanical Rage and Fury, the Lord
JESUS is getting himself the Victory. And Brethren, I speak the Truth in
CHRIST, I lie not, if one Soul of you, by the Blessing of God, be brought to
think savingly of Jesus Christ this Day, I care not if my Enemies were
permitted to carry me to Prison and put my Feet fast in the Stocks, as soon as
I have delivered this Sermon. Brethren, my Heart's Desire and Prayer to God is,
that you may be saved. For this Cause I follow my Master without the Camp. I
care not how much of his sacred Reproach I bear, so that some of you be
converted from the Error of your Ways. I rejoice, yea and I will rejoice. Ye
Men, ye Devils do your worst. The LORD who sent will support me. And when
CHRIST, who is our Life, and whom I have now been preaching, shall appear, I
also, together with his despised little Ones, shall appear with him in Glory.
-- And then, what will you think of CHRIST? -- I know what you will think of
him. You will then think him to be the Fairest among ten Thousand. You will
then think and feel him to be a just and Sin-avenging Judge. Oh then be ye
persuaded to kiss him lest he be angry, and so you be banished forever from the
Presence of the Lord. Behold I come to you, as the Angel did to Lot. My dear
Brethren, flee, flee for your Lives, haste, linger no longer in your spiritual
Sodom; for otherwise you will be eternally destroyed. Numbers, no Doubt, there
are amongst you, that may regard me no more than Lot's Sons-in-law regarded
him. I am persuaded I seem to some of you as one that mocks. -- But I speak the
Truth in CHRIST, I lie not, as sure as Fire and Brimstone rained from the Lord
out of Heaven, to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah, so surely at the great Day shall
the Vials of God's Wrath be poured on you, if you do not think seriously of and
act agreeable to the Gospel of the Lord's CHRIST. Behold I have told you
before, -- I pray GOD, all you that forget him may seriously think of what has
been said, before he pluck you away and there be none to deliver you.

Now to GOD the Father, etc.

FINIS.

