A CONTINUATION Of the Reverend Mr. Whitefield's JOURNAL, FROM A few Days after
his Arrival at Savannah, June the Fourth, TO His leaving Stanford, the last
Town in New England, October 29. 1740.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by B. FRANKLIN, M, DCC, XLI.

A CONTINUATION OF Mr. WHITEFIELD'S JOURNAL.
EBENEZER in GEORGIA. Wednesday, June 25. 1740.
WENT on Monday and returned this Evening from Ebenezer, which I have seen with
no small Satisfaction. Surely there is a Difference, even in this Life, between
those that serve the LORD and those that serve him not. -- All other Places of
the Colony seem to be like Egypt, where was Darkness; but Ebenezer, like the
Land of Goshen, wherein was great Light. For near Four Miles I walked in almost
one continued Field, with a most plentiful Crop of Corn, Pease, Potatoes, etc.
growing upon it, all the Produce of a few Months Labor. But GOD gives the
Laborers a peculiar Blessing. They are unanimous, the Strong help the Weak,
and all seem hearty for the common Good. In a few Years the Saltzburghers, I
believe, will be a flourishing People. Their Land is tolerably good and lies
very near the River. They already provide Food, and, ere long, will be capable
of providing Raiment for themselves. I shall send them up Cotton,
Spinning-Wheels and a Loom, to begin a Manufactory; and next Year, I hope,
their own Land will produce enough Flax, Cotton, etc. to carry it on. I had
sweet Communion with their Ministers. Our Sister Orphan-House there is blessed
by their Means; and Yesterday was set apart as a Day of Thanksgiving, for some
Assistances lately sent the dear Lambs from Germany and Savannah. The People
seem very grateful. They willingly received me into their little but cleanly
Huts, and seemed proud when I would accept any Thing from their Hands. Blessed
be GOD! Certainly some Blessings are in Reserve for Georgia. As I said
formerly, so I say again. They who help the Saltzburghers will do a good Work.
They want Assistance. LORD, raise them up Benefactors, for thy infinite Mercies
Sake.

SAVANNAH.
Friday, June 27. With great Comfort received Capt. Grant, who has been at
Cape-Fear to fetch a Load of Boards, and returned with the Sloop in Fourteen
Days. He was received very courteously by the Head of the Inhabitants, and
many, he tells me, were in Expectation of seeing me in North Carolina. LORD
send me whithersoever and whenever it shall seem Good to thy divine Majesty.
Amen and Amen.

Monday, June 30. For these Ten Days last past have had frequent Communications
from above, both by Way of Humiliation and Exaltation. GOD has often been
pleased, since my Return, ^o make himself known in our Sanctuary* and caused a
mighty Power to attend the Word preached both in public and private. I have
been much refreshed with a Packet of Letters from English Friends. Providence
seems to smile upon the Orphan-House, and to prosper every Thing that I take in
Hand. A wealthy, moral, civilized Planter of South Carolina came ^ately to see
us, and GOD, I believe, has been pleased to give him a true Knowledge of
himself, and a true Faith in his dear Son JESUS CHRIST. His Wife also was much
quickened, having been wrought upon, by GOD, some Time last Winter. She was a
great Admirer of Archbishop Tillotson; but having her Eyes now opened to
discern spiritual Things, can no longer take up with such Husks, fit only for
carnal, unawaken'd, unbelieving Reasoners to eat. With this happy Pair (hearing
both by Letters and otherwise, that Charlestown People were in great
Expectation of seeing me before I went to the Northward, and that GOD had been
pleased to work by my late Ministry among them) I and a dear Friend left
Savannah this Morning in a large Boat, built up one another in the Way, and
arrived at Beaufort in Port Royal about Midnight. Our Friend and his Wife went
to a Relation's House; but my Companion and I chose to continue in the Boat,
where our LORD was pleased to cause us to lie down and sleep in Peace and
Safety. Blessed, forever blessed be the Keeper of Israel, who neither
slum^ereth nor sleeps!

BEAUFORT in PORT ROYAL.
Tuesday, July 1. Felt a most sweet and humbling Sense of the divine Presence
in my Soul this Morning. Went* as soon as it was Light, to a Relation's of our
Fellow Traveller, and afterward had some close Conversation with Mr. Jones,
the Minister of the Parish, about the great Doctrines of the Gospel. He
received me with much Tenderness and Respect, but thought I went too far in
condemning Archbishop Tillotson. I think the Arguments I brought were
conclusive; and the Account which my new Convert (being one of his
Parishioners) gave of GOD's Dealing with his Soul was rational, and, as he
confessed, satisfactory: But he could not see clearly into the Doctrine of Free
Justification, without Regard to any Thing foreseen in the Creature. However,
being more noble than most of his other Brethren, he was candid and courteous;
and, notwitstanding he was in Danger of incurring the Displeasure of the
Commissary there^^; yet he read Prayers, and requested me to preach in the
Evening at his Church. I did, though to a small Auditory, there being but little
Notice given of my Preaching. After Sermon Mr. Jones returned me Thanks; and
having promised to preach again, GOD willing, in my Return to Savannah, I took
my Leave, and spent the Evening with my Fellow-Travellers at their Relation's
House. May GOD convert every one related to them, and make them all Members of
the Household of Faith! Even so, LORD JESUS! Amen.

CHARLESTOWN.
Thursday, July 3. Set out Yesterday Morning about One a Clock, and reached Mr.
Bryan's Plantation about Ten. Stayed and dined comfortably together; wrote a
few Letters; rode through extreme Heat, put in and lay at a Planter's House by
Reason of the Thunder, Lightning and Rain. Breakfasted this Morning at Mr.
Bee's at Pon-pon; prayed; talked of the Things of GOD, and was enabled to hold
out, notwithstanding the Weather was exceeding hot, till I came to
Charlestown, about Eighty Miles from Beaufort. Here again my Spirits were much
raised, and my Heart comforted by a Packet of Letters from the Northward,
giving me Account how the Word of the LORD run and was glorified in
Philadelphia and other adjacent Places: The LORD's Name be praised from the
Rising up of the Sun to the going down of the same.

Friday, July 4. Lay at a Gentlewoman's House who came last Night to give me
the Offer of her House. Was visited by many dear Friends of the Town, who were
rejoiced to see me. Received a Letter from the Commissary, which I immediately
answered. Wrote several Letters to Savannah. Dispatched some Affairs for the
Orphan-House, and preached in the Evening, in the Independent Meeting House, to
as large and attentive a Congregation as usual. Blessed be GOD for giving the
People a hearing Ear. -- LORD give them also an obedient Heart, for thy dear
Son's Sake! Amen.

Sunday, July 6. Preached twice Yesterday and twice to Day, and had great
Reason to believe our LORD got himself the Victory in many Hearts: For the Word
was attended with Power. Went to Church Morning and Evening, and heard the
Commissary preach as virulent and unorthodox, inconsistent Discourse as ever I
heard in my Life. His Heart seemed full of Choler and Resentment. Out of the
Abundance thereof, he poured forth so many bitter Words against the Methodists
(as he called them) in general, and me in particular, that several who intended
to receive the Sacrament at his Hands withdrew. Never, I believe, was such a
Preparation Sermon preached before. I could not help thinking the Preacher was
of the same Spirit with the Bishop Gardner, in Queen Mary's Days, Afer Sermon
he sent his Clerk to desire me not to come to the Sacrament till he had spoke
with me. I immediately retired to my Lodgings, rejoicing that I was accounted
worthy to suffer this further Degree of Contempt for my dear LORD's Sake.
Blessed JESUS, lay it not to the Commissary's Charge! Amen and Amen.

ASHLEY-FERRY.
Monday, July 7. Set out this Morning early, in Company with several, whose
Hearts the LORD has lately opened, and went to the House of one Mr. Chanler, a
gracious Baptist Minister, who lives about Fourteen Miles from Charlestown.
After Dinner, according to Appointment, I preached at his Meeting House, to the
Conviction of some and Comfort of others, who came to me rejoicing, that the
exploded Doctrines of the Gospel were so publicly and successfully spread
abroad. Sermon being ended and much Importunity used, I went with some
Charlestown Friends to the House of Mrs. Peter's, about Five Miles from the
Meeting House; but was obliged to lie down (as I now am generally every Day) by
Reason of the violent Heat of the Weather, and great Expense of Sweat. However,
GOD strengthened me much at Night, and so assisted me in giving an Exhortation
to the Company that came with me, that all seemed to be put under great
Concern, and three or four in particular came out, tel^^^g me how powerfully
GOD was working upon their Souls. Father, show that it is thy especial Work, by
carrying it on and perfecting it till the Day of our LORD JESUS!

Dorchester and Ashley-Ferry.
Tuesday, July 8. Left my Lodging about Eight this Morning, and hasted to
Dorchester, where I preached twice with much of the divine Presence, and to a
large Audience, in Mr. Osgood's Meeting House, a young Independent Minister.
About Four in the Afternoon we set out again, took a little Refreshment at a
Gentleman's House in the Way, and lay at Mr. Chanler's all Night. Here my
bodily Strength much failed me again, and therefore, being very weak, retired
to Bed as soon as possible, but slept very little. LORD hasten that blessed
Time, when I shall sleep no more.

Oh when shall I in endless Day,
Forever chase dark Sleep away:
And Hymns, with the supernal Choir,
Incessant sing, and never tire!
Ashley-Ferry and Charlestown.
Wednesday, July 9. Found myself still weaker than before; but was strengthened
to preach under a Tree near Mr. Chanler's Meeting House about Ten in the
Morning; The House being now too small to contain the Congregation. People
seemed to come from all Parts, and the Word (as I was told) came with a
convincing Power. Having changed my Linen, which I am obliged to do after
every Sermon, by Reason of my prodigious sweating, I hastened away for
Charlestown: But my Body was so exceeding weak, and the Sun shone so intensly
hot, that Five Miles before I reached Town, I called in at a public House, and
lay for a considerable Time almost breathless and dead. But GOD poured
ineffable Comforts into my Soul; and being thereby strengthened in the inner
Man, I once more set forward with my dear Fellow-Travellers, reached Town about
Four, and preached about Six at the usual Place and with much more Freedom and
Power than could any Way be expected, considering the great Weakness of my
Body. But I can do all Things through CHRIST'S strengthening me. I thank thee
holy Father, LORD of Heaven and Earth, that I have so often the Sentence of
Death within myself! -- Oh let me be daily taught thereby not in the least to
trust in myself, but wholly in thee the everlasting GOD!

Christ Church, Charlestown, and John's-Island.
Saturday, July 12. Went over the Water on Thursday, and read Prayers and
preached, at the Request of the Churchwardens and Vestry, at Christ Church.
Returned in the Evening to Charlestown. Preached twice there Yesterday, and
went this Morning to John's-Island, about Twenty Miles up the River, whither I
was invited by Col. Gibbs. He received me and my Friends most hospitably,
provided several Horses, Chairs, etc. for us and his Family. We rode very
pleasantly to the Church; there was a great Congregation; GOD strengthened me
to read Prayers and preach twice, with much Freedom. About Four we returned to
the Colonel's. I eat with some Appetite; was enabled to give a warm and close
Exhortation to the Rich that sat round about me, and returned to Charlestown
in the Evening with my dear Friends, praising and blessing GOD. Glory be to his
most holy Name. Dagon seems daily to fall before the Ark. A lasting Impression,
I am persuaded, is made on many Hearts; and GOD, I believe, will yet show, that
he has much People in Charlestown and the Countries round about. LORD thou
have visited them with thy Judgments, melt them down now with thy Mercies.
Stretch out the golden Scepter of thy Favor, and bruise them no more with thy
Iron Rod! Even so, LORD JESUS, Amen.

Sunday, July 13. Preached this Morning with much Power, and collected in the
Evening for my poor Orphans. Great Numbers stood without the Doors, and it
raining very hard in the Time of divine Service, many of them were driven away.
However GOD caused the other People's Hearts to devise liberal Things, Upwards
of Fifty Pounds Sterling. were collected on the Occasion. Most showed a great
Readiness to assist me, and the LORD was pleased much to enlarge my Heart to
give Praise unto his Name.

In the Morning I went to Church, and heard the Commissary preach: But had some
infernal Spirit been sent to draw my Picture, I think it scarcely possible he
could paint me in more horrid Colors. I think, if ever, then was the Time that
all Manner of Evil was spoken against me falsely for CHRIST's Sake. The
Commissary seemed to ransack Church History, for Instances of Enthusiasm and
abused Grace. He drew a Parallel between me and all the Oliverians, Ranters,
Quakers, French-Prophets, till he came down to a Family of the Dutarts, who
lived not many Years ago in South Carolina, and were guilty of the most
notorious Incests and Murders. To the Honor of GOD's Free Grace be it spoken,
whilst he was representing me thus, I felt the blessed Spirit strengthening and
refreshing my Soul. GOD at the same Time gave me to see what I was by Nature;
how I had deserved his eternal Wrath; and therefore I did not feel the least
Resentment against the Preacher. No, I pitied, I prayed for him, and wished
from my Soul, that the LORD would convert him, as he did once the Persecutor
Saul, and let him know that it is JESUS whom he persecutes. In the Evening many
came, as I was informed, to hear what I would say; but as the Commissary
hinted, that his Sermons should be printed, and as they were full of invidious
Falsehoods, I held my Tongue and made little or no Reply. Father forgive him,
for he knows not what he does!

Saturday, July 19. Preached all this Week twice every Day at Charlestown,
except on Wednesday and Thursday Evening, the last of which Days I was called
upon to appear in Court; and on the former was desired to go to James's Island,
to preach at the House of one Madam Woodard. This Gentlewoman, as she informed
me herself, was once much prejudiced against me, insomuch that she thought it
dangerous to come and hear me: But having read my Sermons, she changed her
Mind, and coming both to Town and to John's Island to hear me preach, was, with
her Daughter and another Gentlewoman, much melted down. Being given to
Hospitality, she provided Food sufficient for a great Multitude. People came
from Town and all the other neighboring Places. Her Barn was put into proper
Order, and I read Prayers and preached in it, with much of GOD's blessed Spirit
in my Soul. A lovely Melting was visible in several Parts of the Auditory.
After Sermon, GOD enabled me to speak many Gospel Truths a midst a polite Set
of People; and at the Request of Madam Woodard I stayed all Night. This gave me
an Opportunity of teaching her Family the Way of GOD more perfectly, and also
of resting my weary Body, which seems to be declining more and more every Day.
-- Blessed be GOD! If it be consistent with his Glory and the Good of Souls, I
hope it will not be long e^ Worms destroy it, and my Soul carried to see my GOD.

JESUS, to thy dear faithful Hand
My naked Soul I trust:
My Flesh awaits thy blessed Command,
To drop into my Dust.
I have purposely given a more general Account of this Week's Labors than
usual, that I might be the more particular in relating the Commissary's Dealing
with me, from whom, by the Hands of his Apparitor on Friday, July Eleven, I
received the following Citation.

You are hereby cited to appear at the Church of St. Philips, Charlestown, on
Tuesday the Fifteenth Day of this Instant July, betwixt the Hours of Nine and
Ten in the Forenoon, before the Rev. Alexander Garden, Commissary, to answer to
such Articles as shall there be objected to you.

Wm. Smith, Apparitor.


At my Request, the said Apparitor brought me the underwritten, as a Copy of my
Charge.

Locus Sigilli. Alexander Garden.

Alexander Garden, lawfully constituded Commissary of the Right Reverend Father
in CHRIST, EDMUND, by divine Permission, Lord Bishop of London, supported by
the Royal Authority underwritten. To all and singular Clerks and literate
Persons whomsoever, in and throughout the whole Province of South Carolina,
wheresoever appointed, Greeting. To you conjunctly and severally we commit,
and, strictly injoining, command, that you do cite or cause to be cited,
peremptorily George Whitefield, Clerk and Presbyter of the Church of England,
that he lawfully appear before us, in the Parish Church of St. Philips,
Charlestown, and in the judicial Place of the same, on Tuesday, the Fifteenth
Day of this Instant July, 'twixt the Hours of Nine and Ten in the Forenoon,
then and there in Justice, to answer to certain Articles, Heads or
Interrogatories, which will be objected and ministered unto him, concerning the
mere Health of his Soul, and the Reformation and Correction of his Manners and
Excesses, and chiefly for omitting to use the Form of Prayers prescribed in the
Communion Book. And further to do and receive what shall be just in that
Behalf, on Pain of Law and Contempt. And what you shall do in the Premises, you
shall duly certify us, together with these Presents.

GIVEN under our Hands and Seals of our Office, at Charlestown, this Seventh
Day of July, in the Year of our LORD, One Thousand Seven Hundred and Forty.
Copia Vera.

Tuesday, July 15. I appeared, according to the Citation, at the appointed Hour
and Place. There were very many Spectators; and the Rev. Mr. Garden,
Commissary, The Rev. Mr. Guy, The Rev. Mr. Mellichamp, The Rev. Mr. Roe, The
Rev. Mr. Orr, sat as Judges: They received me with good Manners; and after the
Clerk of the Court had taken a Minute of their Appearing, the Commissary
tendered to me a Paper, desiring my Answer to those Articles, but I refused
taking it, till I was satisfied of the Authority of the Court in Question,
adding, do you think I would in^ur a Praemunire of doing what I could not
answer? (or Words to that Effect) He then said, they would proceed to censure;
upon which, I reminded them of the Example of the Magistrates, who exceeded
their Authority, in condemning and scourging St. Paul; being a Roman, unheard.
At this one of the Clergy sneer'd; but the Commi^^ary replied, We shall not go
beyond o^ Power, or scourge you. After a short Debate the Commissary sent his
Apparitor to his House for his Commission, in order to give me Satisfaction. In
about a Quarter of an Hour he returned, with several Bundles of Papers, out of
which the Commissary first produced his Commission to act as Commissary from
the Bishop of London. I read and approved of it: But at the same Time desired
to be satisfied of the Bishop of London's Authority in this Province, not
finding the Royal Authority underwritten, as mentioned in his public Citation:
Upon this a Latin Commission without a Seal, was ordered to be read by the
Clerk of the Court. I objected, That it was in Latin contrary to our late Act,
ordering every Thing to be in English; and not well understanding the Clerk as
he read it, I desired the Perusal of it myself, which was granted. I read it
with an audible Voice; and after reading it, I objected, That though there might
be a general Power given to the Bishop, to exercise ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
in this Province; yet the Extent of that Power was to be determined by
particular Acts of Assembly. I farther urged, That a Court of this Nature was
entirely unpresidented in America: that I belonged to Georgia, a different
Province, and was here only as an Itinerate. I also added, That my Lord of
London, though I preached in the Fields for some Months, never attempted to
exercise such Authority against me. The Commissary replied, Though I belonged to
Georgia, yet I had committed Irregularities here, and therefore came under his
Cognizance; and that what he had to lay to my Charge might be Crimes of a
different Nature.

Not satisfied with my Objections, he ordered the Clerk to minute down, That I
contumaciously contemned the Authority of the Court. But I desired that
Expression might be softened, declaring from my Heart, That what I did,
proceeded from a real Scruple concerning their Authority, urging the Example of
King Charles, who, before he made Answer to his Accusers, ^^sisted on knowing
the Authority his Judges had to call him to an Account. I further objected,
That the Commissaries in Maryland and Pennsylvania were mere Ciphers, That the
Trustees, to my Knowledge, questioned the Bishop of London's having any
Jurisdiction in these Parts; and that the Governor of Maryland, acting as
Ordinary, had summoned his Clergy lately to meet him as such, which accordingly
they did. I therefore upon the whole, humbly desired, as a Favor from the
Court, that I might have till to Morrow Nine a Clock, the Time to which the
Court was adjourned, to inform myself of the Extent of their ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction in this Province, assuring them, that upon finding their Authority
valid, I would immediately answer to any Interrogatories, and would be ready to
receive any Sentence they could with Justice pass upon me. Though at my first
asking he said, He had indulged me too far already; yet, after some
Consideration, Mr. Commissary ordered the Clerk to raze out the former Minute,
and to record, That upon my scrupling the Authority of the Court I was indulged
my Request.

Our LORD was pleased to fulfill his Promise made to those that should be called
before Rulers and Governors for his Namesake. My Soul was full of Peace. I
pitied, but did not feel the least Emotion of Resentment against my Judges. The
People behaved pretty quiet; but some broke out into a Laughter, something
irregular, when I said, the Commissaries in Pennsylvania and Maryland were but
Ciphers. This I disapproved of, and checked immediately. After the Court was
adjourned and the Commissary rose from his Seat, I made my Obeisance and
returned to my Lodgings, thinking myself more highly honored, by my LORD, this
Morning than in any other Part of my Life. LORD strengthen me in all my other
impending Trials, for thy great Name's Sake. Amen and Amen.

Wednesday, July 16. Appeared this Morning at the Hour of Ten, and exhibited a
Recusatio Judicis, i. e. my Exceptions against the Commissary's being my Judge
in this Cause, having too great Reason to believe him prejudiced against me. At
first the Commissary refused to read it, insisting to know first whether I
acknowledged the Authority of the Court? Unwarily I answered, Yes. But upon the
Motion of my Advocate, Mr. Rutledge, I recalled my W^rds and said, I admitted
and submitted to an Ecclesiastical Court legally constituted. One of the Clergy
on the Bench would have insisted on my first Answer. But I told him, It was
mean-spirited and beneath a Court, consisting of those that called themselves
Ministers of JESUS CHRIST, to catch at an Expression which I immediately
corrected. Upon this, the Bench agreed to alter the Minute agreeable to my last
Declaration. The Commissary then took my Paper, read it to himself, and said,
he would not accept of it. I then stood up according to Law and said, I would
go and protest against all further Proceedings, as null and void, and
immediately left the Court. Upon Mr. Rutledge his Advice I returned and
declared, That I appealed apud acta to the Bishop of London, and then withdrew
a second Time.

We had not gone far from the Place of Judicature, but I was called back by the
Apparitor and Register. We returned, and at the Commissary's Desire gave in my
Exceptions to be read and filed.

By this Time Mr. Commissary had gotten one Mr. Graham, an Attorney, to appear
in Behalf of the Court, who insisted on having the Merits of my Exceptions
tried in Court. But, as according to Law, I had referred them to the
Examination of Six Arbitrators, three nominated by me, and three by the
Commissary, Mr. Rutledge, in my Behalf, protested against all further
Proceedings, and against my appearing at the next Court, till my Reference to
Arbitrators was complied with, it being quite improbable to imagine, that Mr.
Commissary, who must be Judge (if my Exceptions should be tried by that Court)
should allow himself prejudiced.

This Recusatio Judicis I exhibited by the Advice of my Friends, not to quibble
with or evade the Force or Rigor of any Law whatsoever, that I might justly
fall under. For when the Articles of Impeachment were read, I found myself
accused only of omitting to read the Common Prayer in the Presbyterian Meeting*
at such Times as I preached there. Oh that my Adversaries may never have any
Thing worse to lay to my Charge!

The Spectators were rather more numerous than Yesterday; they behaved quietly,
and were much rejoiced to see my Opposers reduced to such a Dilemma. Well said
the Psalmist, the Wrath of Man shall turn to thy Praise. -- Great GOD, the
Remainder of it do thou restrain; and for thy own Name Sake deliver me from the
Hands of unreasonable Men, who, out of a misguided Zeal and without Cause, are
mine Enemies!

Thursday, July 17. By Advice of Mr. Rutledge, appeared in Court at the Time of
their Meeting, to see if my Exceptions were admitted to Arbitration or
repelled. The Court being opened, Mr. Commissary asked me, If I was prepared to
answer the Articles objected against me? I replied, I could give no Answer,
till my ^onceptions ^were referred to Arbitrators. Mr. Rutledge stood up and
spoke some few^ Word's in Vindication of my Objections proving, by a Book of
Ecclesiastical Law, That my Proceedings were according to the Rules therein
prescribed

The Register was ordered to read their Reasons for repelling my Exceptions.
Mr. Graham endeavored to enforce, having first labored to prove the
Jurisdiction. of the Court, and to remove the Appehensions the Country in
general, or Dissentels in particular, might entertain concerning the ill
Consequences of such a Court's being ^reated. He held on without Interruption
for a considerable Time; but Mr. Rutledge rising up to invalidate what he had
said, was stopped. A^ ^length therefore, finding my Exceptions repelled, I
appealed to his Majesty in the High Court of Chancery, and declared all other
Proceedings in that Court against me to be null and void. This c^^sed many to
rejoice and give Thanks into GOD in my Behalf. And my dear Redeemer, to comfort
my Heart, by his good Providence, at my Return to my Lodgings, sent me several
Letters from Philadelphia,acquainting me how mightily the Word of GOD grew and
prevailed in those Parts. As also Mr. Bolten, who lately kept an
Assembly-House, and whose Daughter, not long since, was converted at Georgia,
wrote me Word, that he had near Fifty Negroes now learning to read of him: And
further, that the People of Philadelphia, at their own Expense and Accord, were
building a Place for me against Winter, One Hundred Feet long and Seventy Foot
wide. LORD, do thou fill it with thy Presence, and grant, that all that come
thither to worship, may worship thee in Spirit and in Truth!

Saturday, July 19. After Evening Meeting, was desired by the Apparitor to come
and wai^ on Mr. Commissary, who was sitting in Court* I went. He desired me to
deposite Ten Pounds Sterling. and to swear, That I would lodge my Appeal within a
Twelvemonth. My Lawyer not being present, ^ my Friends were too sollicitous
for my Noncompliance: But being to leave Town on Monday, and finding the
Commissary's printed Orders gave him Authority to require it, I took the
desired Oath, promised to leave Ten Pounds in a Friend's Hands; but withal,
moved for a Copy of the Court's Proceedings, which was readily complied with.

The Court being ended, the Commissary desired to speak with me. I asked him to
go my Lodgings. He chose to walk in a Green near the Church. His Spirit was
something calmer than usual; but after an Hour's Conversation we were as far
from agreeing as before. He charged me with speaking Blasphemy, for saying,
That if it was in my Power, I would place him at the Right Hand of GOD. Upon my
desiring to know wherein the Blasphemy consisted: He replied, Where then will
you put CHRIST? I asked him* Why he was guilty of that Fault, which he charged
me with, viz. In accusing the Methodists in general, when he only referred to
Things wrote or done by me in particular? He answered, Because we were all of
one Mind, he supposed. When I questioned him, Why he ridiculed me for making
Grimaces in the Pulpit, when he did not come to hear me? Why, says he, as I
passed by one Day, I saw you spreading out your Hands. I replied, Did not Paul
do so when he began to preach? In short, all his Discourse was so inconsistent,
and contrary to the Gospel of our LORD, that I was obliged to tell him, That I
believed him to be an unconverted Man, an Enemy to GOD, and of a like Spirit
with the Persecutor Saul. At this he smiled; and after we had walked for a long
while, we parted, and GOD gave me great Satisfaction, that I had delivered my
Soul in my Private Conversation with the Commissary. O Father, give him also
Peace and Joy in Believing through JESUS CHRIST, the Son of thy Love!

Sunday, July 20. Preached this Morning as usual; and went afterward to Church
to hear the Commissary. His Text was, Take Heed how ye hear. At first I thought
we should have a peaceable Sermon, especially since we had conversed before so
amicably: but the Gall soon began to flow from his Tongue, though not with so
much Bitterness as the last Sunday. He endeavored to apologize for his
Proceedings, condemned all that followed me, and gave all Hopes of Heaven, that
adhered to him and the Church. In the Evening (tho I went off my Bed to do it,
and was carried in a Chaise) the LORD JESUS strengthened me to take my last
Farewell of the dear People of Charlestown. My Soul was fu ll of Tenderness for
them, and many seemed to sympathize with me. Blessed be GOD for sending me once
more among them! Though the Heat of the Weather and Frequency of Preaching has
perhaps given an irrecoverable Stroke to the Health of my Body; yet I rejoice,
knowing it has been for the Conviction and I believe Conversion of many Souls.
Glory be to GOD on high! the Fields here, as well as ^lsewhere, are now white
ready unto Harv^st. Numbers are seeking after JESUS. And two or three
gracious-dissenting Ministers, by my Advice, agreed to set up a Weekly Lecture.
I advised the People, since the Gospel was not preached in the Church, to go
and hear it in the Meeting Houses. May the LORD be with both Ministers and
People, and cause them to preach and hear, as becomes the Gospel of CHRIST.
What makes the Change more remarkable in Charlestown People, is, That they
seemed to me at my first Coming, to be a People ^olly devoted to Pleasure. One
well acquainted with their Circumstances and Manners, told me, more had been
annually spent on Polite Entertainments, that the Poor's Rate came to. But now
the Jewellers and Dancing-Masters begin to cry out, That their Craft is in
Danger. A vast Alteration is discernable in the Ladies Dress: And some, whilst
I have been speaking, have been so convinced of the Sin of Wearing Jewels, that
I have seen them with Blu^^ies, put their Hands to their Ears and cover them
with their Mobs. But I hope the Reformation has went farther than Externals.
Many moral, good Sort of Men, who before were settled upon their Lees, have
been gloriously awakened to seek after JESUS CHRIST. And many a Lydia's Heart
has the LORD opened to receive the Things that were spoken. Indeed the Word
came often like a Hammer and a Fire. And a Door, I believe, will be opened for
teaching the poor Negroes. Several of them have done their usual Work in less
Time, that they might come to hear me. Many of their Owners, who have been
awakened, resolve to teach them Christianity. Had I Time and proper
Schoolmasters, I might immediately erect a Negreo-School in South Carolina as
well as Pennsylvania. Many would willingly, contribute (...) Money and Land.
Every Day almo^^ something or other was sent for my Orphans at Georgia. The
People were very follicitous about my Health, when they saw me weak; sent me
many, small Presents, and took Care to see the Lawyer who pleaded for me. I
feared sometimes they would be too hot; but I endeavored to stop their
Resentments against the Commissary, as much as possible, and recommended Peace
and Moderation to them in most of my Discour^^^* May the LORD JESUS reward them
for all their Works of Faith, and Labors which have proceeded of Love; may he
never leave them without a Teaching Priest, and may he grant, that the Seed
sown in their Hearts, may grow up into an eternal Harvest! Amen and Amen.

Ashley-Ferry and Pon-pon.
Monday, July 22. Left Charlestown very early, accompanied by many of the
Inhabitants, who I hope will prove true Followers of the Lamb. Read Prayers and
preached at Ashley-Ferry, to a large Congregation, and great Power was among
them. The Weather continuing extreme Hot, Sweating and Preaching weakened me
very much. I went in a Chariot to Madam Bellinger's, who kindly invited me and
my Friends to Dinner. I eat but little; took leave of my dear Fellow-Travellers
as well as I could; took Horse in the Evening; put in for Shelter from the Rain
at Major Smith's; and reached Mr. Bee's, of Pon-pon, near Forty Miles from
Town, about Midnight.

Here I had the Pleasure of Meeting Mr. Hugh Bryan; but Nature being quite worn
out, I went to Rest as soon as possible, not doubting but the LORD would cause
me to renew my Strength before the Morning. Why should I doubt it, since the
LORD has said, I will never leave or forsake Thee?

Tuesday, July 23. Slept pretty well; but found myself not strong enough to
engage in Family-Duty. Met with, and was civilly treated by Mr. Stobo and Mr.
Steward, two Scotch Presbyterian Ministers, and Mr. Thompson, a Church of
England Missionary, who refused to preach or sit in Judgment against me. About
Noon GOD strengthened me to ride a Mile, and preach under a great Tree, to an
attentive Auditory. Some I observed were affected; and I wo^ld willingly have
preached a second Time, but my Body was so weak, that by the Advice of Friends,
I resolved to continue where I was all Night. Surely it cannot be long 'ere
this earthly Tabernacle will be dissolved! Never did the Heart pant more eagerly
after the Waterbrooks, than my S^^l thirsts after the Enjoyment of thee my GOD!

Hoospanah Chapel and Good Hope.
Wednesday, July 24. Rose sometime before Day, and got to Hoospanah Chapel,
^ear 30 Miles from Mr. Bee's about Noon. Here I preached to a very small (...),
few People living thereabouts; but (as I was afterward informed) not without
some good Effect. Sermon being over, I went on Horseback to Good-Hope, where
Mr. Hugh Bryan lived, and several followed, hoping I would preach again in the
Evening: But here my bodily Strength so failed me, and GOD poured such
ineffable Thirstings* and Hungrings in my Soul after him, that I sometimes
hoped he was about to set my imprisoned Soul at Liberty. Surely my GOD then
placed me upon Mount Pisgah, and gave me a distant Prospect of the Heavenly
Canaan! Every Limb stretched for Immortality, and I longed for the blessed
Angels to come and carry me to Abraham's Harbor. These Words, "I know that my
Redeemer lives," with wonderful Sweetness and Power were pressed upon me; and
the Thoughts of my Savior's dying Love, and of the LORD's being my
Righteousness, melted me into Tears. My dear Friend and Companion wept over me,
answered almost Tear for Tear, and seemed willing to take his Flight with me
into the Arms of our beloved JESUS. The poor Negroes crowded round the Windows,
and by their Looks and Officiousness expressed a great Concern for me. Their
Master had acquainted them, I believe, that I was their Friend: He himself sat
by, and wept too: But alas! GOD soon showed me, that the Time of my Departure
was not yet at Hand: In a short Time I perceived my Body grew stronger, and I
was enabled to walk about. As well as I could, I joined in Family Prayer. I
begged of GOD, if I was not to die, but live, it might be to declare the Works
and loving Kindness of the LORD. Grant this, O Father, for thy dear Son's sake!
Amen and Amen.

Good-Hope and Beaufort.
Thursday, July 25. Being too weak to ride on Horseback, I went in Mr. Bryan's
Boat to Beaufort: We got thither-about Ten in the Morning; but the Heat of the
Sun almost struck me down, and took away my Senses. As soon as I put my Foot on
Shore, kind Mr. Jones courte^usly received me. In the cool of the Evening I
preached in his Church to a larger Auditory, and with more Power than when
there last. Mr. Jones thanked me for my Sermon, disapproved ^^tirely of the
Commissary's Treatment of me, and kindly entertained me and my Friends all
Night. The LORD JESUS bless his Habitation, and give him to know how it is that
we are freely redeemed by his precious Blood!

Beaufort and Savannah.
Friday, July 26. Took Boat before Day, and having ^ine Weather, and a
favorable Gale, reached Savannah, and saluted my dear Family about Five in the
Evening. My Body being weak, it could not bear up under the Joy and
Satisfaction which I felt in my Mind. However, I kneeled down, wept out a short
Prayer and Thanksgiving, and as well as I could, told my Assistants what GOD
had done for my Soul. In the Evening I expounded, and undesignedly, thinking it
was the Lesson for the Night, read the last Chapter of St. Paul's second
Epistle to Timothy, in which were these encouraging Wor^s, But watch thou in
all Things, endure Afflictions, do the Work of an Evangelist, make full Proof
of thy Ministry. Alexander the Copper-Smith, did me much Evil: The LORD reward
him according to his Works. Of whom be thou aware also: For he has greatly
withstood our Words. At my first Trial no Man stood by me: Notwithstanding the
LORD stood by me, and strengthened me, that by me the Preaching might be fully
known: And I was delivered out of the Mouth of the Lion. And the LORD shall
deliver me out of every evil Work, and will preserve me to His heavenly
Kingdom. To whom be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Thursday, August 7. Continued very weak ever since my Return from
Charlestown: But was much refreshed this Morning with the Sight of some dear
Friends, (amongst whom was one Mr. Tilly, a gracious Baptist Minister) who came
in our Sloop to see the O^phan-House. I gave them the Meeting at early Prayers;
and GOD enabled me to expound with Power. LORD, let them not depart hence
without having some Spiritual Gift imparted to them! Amen and Amen.

Sunday, August 3. Felt more than common of the Divine Presence in my Soul
since the Arrival of Charlestown Friends; Who brought the Orphans many
Presents, and blessed GOD for the Footsteps of his Goodness and Providence
plainly discernable amongst us. But last Night, through Weakness of Body, and a
prodigious Concern which lay upon my Soul on Account of some domestic Trials,
just as I began Family Prayer, I was struck, as I thought, almost for Death. I
put up a few broken Accents, and breathed out, LORD JESUS receive my Spirit.
This Morning my Master showed me why I was thus humbled: Soon after I rose, I
found that Mr. Jones, and his Wife of Port Royal, Mr. Jonathan Bryan, Brother
to Mr. Hugh Bryan, and one Mr. Bull, were come to pay us a Visit. Though
exceeding weak, and I had almost laid aside Thoughts of officiating this Day;
yet upon Mr. Jones's Intimating that Friends came expecting to hear me, I
promised, if I could, to preach, and begged him to read Prayers: He did; but I
found myself so ill that I would fain have persuaded Mr. Tilly to preach for
me: He peremptorily refused, urging that GOD would strengthen me if I begun.
Upon this I stood up, and soon found Power communicated to me from above. I
felt a sweet Melting in my Soul: And 'ere I had prayed long Mr. Bull dropped
down as though shot with a Gun. He soon got up, and sat attentively to hear the
Sermon. The Power soon spread abroad; the greatest Part of the Congregation was
under Concern: Tears trickled down apace. GOD manifested himself also much
amongst us during the Time of the Sacrament. And I went home ashamed that I was
so unwilling to preach. I stood justly reproved when Mr. Tilly after we came
home, said, Did I not tell you, GOD would strengthen you? Dearest-LORD for thy
Mercies sake never let me distrust thee again! Oh me of little Faith!

Monday, August 4. Was sent for about Noon to see Mr. Jonathan Bryan. At my
Coming I found him under great Concern and strong Convictions of Sin. Oh, how
did he reflect on his past misspent Life! How did he bless GOD* for bringing him
to Savannah! How did he desire that he might be found in CHRIST 'ere he
returned home! His Wife sat Weeping by, and Mr. Bull lay on a Bed, Groaning in
Bitterness of Soul, under a Sense of Guilt, and Crying out for an Interest in
CHRIST. I asked him what caused him to fall down Yesterday: He answered, the
Power of GOD's Word. After about half an Hour's Conversation on the Nature of
the New Birth, and the Necessity of a saving Closure with the LORD CHRIST, I
kneeled down and prayed with them, and then took my Leave, hoping the LORD
would pluck them as Firebrarnds out of the Fire. Even so, LORD JESUS. Amen and
Amen.

Sunday, August 9. Went on Tuesday with Mr. Bryan, Jones, etc. to Bethesda, and
had the Pleasure of seeing the Work of GOD much carried on in most of our
Visiters Hearts. It was but seldom I could officiate, but when I did the LORD
generally caused the Word to come with very great Power. This Morning I
expounded early, as usual, and read Part of the Prayers at Ten a Clock; but got
Mr. Tilly to preach; who though a Baptist Minister, joined with us in receiving
the Sacrament in the Church of England Way. And the King was pleased to sit at
his Table. He brought us into his Banqueting House, and caused it to be a
Feast of fat Things to our Souls. Many, I believe, fed on JESUS in their Hearts
with Thanksgiving. After the Ordinance was over, the LORD enlarged my Heart,
and I prayed as the Spirit gave me Utterance. I went home, much refreshed in
Soul, but so weak in Body, that I declined going to public Worship in the
Afternoon. In the mean while, GOD gave me a fresh supply of Strength. About the
Evening, when my Friends were sitting down together, finding the Power of the
LORD come upon me, I began to speak to them of the Things of GOD. A great
Alteration was soon discernable in most of the Company. Their Concern gradually
increased, till many burst into Floods of Tears; and one fell on the Ground.
'Ere I had done, some of my Parishioners came up, and the rest of my Family:
They also felt the Divine Power. When I had done speaking to them from GOD, I
spoke for them in Prayer to GOD: My Soul was carried as it were out of the
Body, and I was enabled to wrestle mightily with our LORD in their Behalf. He
did not let us go without a Blessing. The Room was filled with the Cries of
those around me; and many, I believe, at that Time sought JESUS Sorrowing. The
Concern continued after the Duty was over. Several were in great Agonies of
Soul; and a Cherikee Indian-Trader, who providentially was present, desired to
speak with me, saying, He never saw the like before. Mr. Jones also, of
Port Royal, who went away on Friday, but was forced back, and officiated for me
this Afternoon at Savannah, told a Friend, that Surely GOD was with us? Blessed
be His rich, sovereign and distinguishing Grace. LORD make me lowly in my own
Eyes, and cause me still to go on from Conquering to conquer! Not unto me: Not
unto me; but unto thee, my King and my GOD, be all the Glory!

Saturday, August 15. Parted with dear Mr. Bull and Mr. Bryan on Tuesday, who I
hope, could say, LORD now let thou thy Servants depart in Peace, for our
Eyes have seen, our Hearts have felt thy Salvation. Met with closer outward
Trials this Week than ever I was visited with before. Was forced, several
Times, to come out, through Concern of Soul and Weakness of Body, in the Midst of
Public Worship; and had not GOD uncommonly supported me, I must frequently
have given up the Ghost. But as Troubles abounded, Consolations abounded also.
These Words, But David strengthened himself in the LORD his GOD, were pressed
with a wonderful supporting Power upon my Soul. The Eleventh of Hebrews also
was blessed to me; I found the Benefit of being afflicted, GOD enabled me to
sanctify him in my Heart; and my greatest Grief was* that I should be so
naughty as to oblige my Heavenly Father to ^hastize and scourge me. -- LORD I
adore thy infinite condescending Goodness! Oh do not leave me to myself, but
purge, oh purge me for thy Mercies Sake, that I may bring forth more Fruit!

Correct me when I go astray,
And lead me in thy perfect Way.
Monday, August 17. Preached Yesterday Morning, and took leave of my
Parishioners. Administered the blessed Sacrament, and gave a close Exhortation
afterward. Settled every thing to Day, to the best of my Power, for the
Orphan-House (which succeeds even beyond Expectation) and was so filled with
the Love of CHRIST, in this Evening's Exposition and my private
Farewel-Discourse to my Family, that I could almost say, I was within the Veil.
My Hearers, both in private and public, were vastly affected; and a strange
Woman was so touched, that she came to me, confessing her Sins and crying out,
What shall I do to be saved? When I came to converse with her, I found GOD had
struck her the last Time I preached at Port Royal; and I hope he will now call
her effectually by his Grace. Pleased, and I hope in some Measure thankful to
the LORD of all LORDS, for setting such Seals to my Ministry just at Departure.
About Ten at Night I went on Board our Sloop with my other dear Visitors, in
order to go to Charlestown, where, by the Advice of Friends, the Captain is to
take in Freight for Boston, for the Benefit of the Orphan-House. The LORD
preserve my dear Lambs and Flock in my Absence; bring them into green Pastures,
and lead them beside the Waters of Comfort.

CHARLESTOWN
Friday, August 21. Had a comfortable Passage with my dear Friends. Found the
Sea Air improved my Health, and arrived safe at Charlestown about Fourth
Afternoon. Many came to the Whar and saluted me most kindly. I retired a soon
as possible to my old Lodgings, and spent the Evening most sweetly at the House
of Mr. Fowler, where I hope many true Disciples of the blessed JESUS were met
together. The LORD, who once came to the Eleven by Night and said, Peace be
unto you, I am persuaded by his Spirit spoke to many of them. The LORD, I
believe, has made a willing People in this Day of his Power. Praised be his
Name, from the rising up of the Sun unto the going down of the same! Amem and
Amen.

Monday, September 1. Being but weak in Body (except on Sundays) I have
preached only once every Day; but I think with greater Power than ever, and
with greater Success. I scarce know the Time wherein I did not see a
considerable Melting in some Part or other of the Congregation, and often it
spread over the whole. Several Times I was so weak before I began to preach,
that I thought it almost impossible I should go through half a Discourse; but
the LORD quickened, enlightened and supported me above measure. Out of Weakness
I became strong, and the LORD manifested himself in the Sanctuary. The
Audiences were more numerous than ever, and it was supposed not less than Four
Thousand were in and about the Meeting House when I preached my Farewel-Sermon.
The Commissary, having run his utmost Length, thought it best to say no more
himself; but he employed one Mr. Row to preach for him, who told the People,
that because of their Wickedness, GOD had sent them strong Delusion, that they
might believe a Lie. Finding when I was here last, that JESUS CHRIST was not
preached in the Church, my Conscience would not suffer me to attend on those
that preach there any more: I therefore went to the Baptist and Independent
Meeting House, where JESUS CHRIST, I hope, was preached in Sincerity. I
likewise administered the Sacrament thrice in a private House, viz. Yesterday
was seven-night, Yesterday, and this Morning. Never did I see any Thing more
solemn. The Room was ^arge, and most were dissolved into Tears ^s though they
were weeping at their SAVIOR'S Cross. Surely JESUS CHRIST was evidently set
forth before them. Many, ^t their Request, stood by that did not re^eive, but
they wept bitterly. I prayed ^or them and all with great Power; and I ^ope the
LORD will cloth them with a Wedding Garment. What was best, Baptists,
Church-Folks and Presbyterians all joined together, and received according to
the Church of England, except two, who desired to have it sitting. I willingly
complied, knowing it was a Thing quite indifferent. Many others hearing how GOD
was amongst us Yesterday, desired I would administer to them to Day. I did, and
our Lord was with us again. Having more Leisure from my private Studies, by
Reason my Weakness would not permit me to read much, I had better Opportunities
of conversing with, and confirming those that were under Convictions. Most of
them I found grown in Grace, and their Hearts softened by redeeming Love. Mr.
Jonathan Bryan and Mr. Bull came to Charlestown, I hope, much established Mr.
Hugh Bryan they left sick at Home, drinking deeply of the Cup: of GOD's
Consolations. His Wife came with them to Charlestown: A gracious Woman. By my
Advice they returned Home, with a Resolution to begin a Negroe-School for their
Slaves. A young Stage Player, convinced when I was last at New York, and who
providentially came to Georgia when Mr. Jonathan Bryan was there, is to be
their first Master. The Time would ^ail me was I to descend to every
Particular. A great, very great Alteration is made in the Life and Manners of
most of the Polite Ladies. The Rooms that were usually* employed for Balls and
Assemblies, were now turned into Society-Room^. Every Night, where I was
invited to Supper, it became customary to have the House filled with Company,
whom the LORD enabled me to pray with and exhort, with great Power; but once I
was so weak, that I was obliged to be led Home. Many came to me in private
under the deepest Convictions. Several were esteemed mad by their Relations:
One young Lady in particular, for some little Time, was turned out of Doors,
but afterward was recalled again. And one Tradesman, who was looked upon as a
very-good Man, was convinced of his Self-Righteousness in an extraordinary.
Manner, and burnt near Forty Pounds Worth of Books, written by such as Chub,
Foster, etc. The Care which People expressed of my Heath and Preservation, was
uncommon. They were generally sending me in something or another, and so loaded
our Sloop with Sea-Stores, that I was obliged to send Part of them to the
Orphan-House. How this Work will end I know not. At present ^here's a
comfortable Prospect, that the LORD will gather to himself, out of Charlestown,
a peculiar People, zealous of Good Works. Being to be absent from them for a
long Season, I exhorted them with all my Power to continue in the Grace of GOD;
I forwarned them of their Danger. and told them how they must deny themselves
and take up their daily Crosses, if they would follow JESUS CHRIST. Having our
Sloop freighted, and the Wind favoring us, after Dinner, with several
Charlestown Friends I embarked for Rhode Island, intending to go from thence by
Land to Boston. In the Evening we got over the Bar: But the Pilot would not
take any thing for his Trouble. Here I parted with all Friends except Four, Two
of which, GOD willing, intend to accompany me during this Excursion. Do thou, O
LORD, who claspest the Winds in thy Fists, and hold the Waters in the Hollow
of thy Hands, accept our Thanks for past Mercies; sanctify our Voyage, and if
it be best, carry us with Speed to the Haven where we would be. Amen and Amen.

Newport in Rhode Island.
Sunday, Sept. 14. Was sick part of the Passage, but found afterward the
Sea-Air, under GOD, much improved my Health. Arrived at Newport in Rhode Island
just after the Beginning of Evening Service. We came purposely thither first
with our Sloop. I think it the most pleasant Entrance I ever yet saw. Almost.
all the Morning the Wind was contrary; but I found a very strong Inclination to
pray* that we might arrive time enough to be present at public Worship. Once I
called the People, but something prevented their coming: At last, finding my
Impression increase upon me, I desired their Attendance immediately. They came.
With a strong Assurance that we should be heard, we prayed, that the LORD would
turn the Wind that we might give him Thanks in the great Congregation; and
also, that he would send such to us as he would have us to converse with, and
who might show us a Lodging. Though the Wind was ahead when we began; yet, when
we had done praying and come up out of the Cabin, it was quite fair. With a
gentle Gale we sailed most pleasantly into the Harbor, got into public
Worship before they had finished the Psalms, and sat, as I thought,
undiscovered After Service was over, a Gentleman asked me, whether my Name was
not Whitefield? I told him, yes: He then desired me to go to his House, and he
would take Care to provide Lodgings and Necessaries for me and my Friends. I
went; silently admiring God's Goodness in answering my Pr^yer so minutely.
Several Gentlemen of the Town soon came to pay their Respects to me, amongst
whom was one Mr. Cla^p an aged Dissenting Minister, but the most venerable Man
I ever saw in my Life: He looked like a good old Puritan, and gave me an Idea
of what Stamp those Men were, who first settled New England. His Countenance
was very heavenly: He rejoiced much in Spirit at the Sight of me, and prayed
most affectionately for a Blessing on my coming to Rhode Island. In the
Evening, with him and some more Friends, I waited on Mr. Honeyman, the Minister
of the Church of England, and desired the Use of his Pulpit. At first he seemed
a little unwilling, being desirous to know what extraordinary Call I had to
preach on Weekdays, which he said was disorderly. I answered, St Paul exhorted
Timothy to be instant in Season and out of Season; that if the Orders of the
Church were rightly complied with, our Ministers should read public Prayers
twice every Day, and then it would not be disorderly, at such Time, to give the
People a Sermon. As to an extraordinary Call, I told him I clai^^d none but
that Injunction of the Apostle, as we have Opportunity, let us do good unto all
Men. He still held out, and did not give any positive Answer; but at last,
after he had withdrawn and consulted with the Gentlemen, he said, if my
Preaching would promote the Glory of GOD and the Good of Souls, I was welcome
to his Church as often as I would, during my Stay in Town. We then agreed to
make Use of it, at Ten in the Morning and Three in the Afternoon. After this, I
went and waited on the Governor, who seemed to be a very plain Man and had a
very plain House, which much pleased me. By Profession I think, he is a
Seventh-Day Baptist; he is a Man of good Report as to his Conduct and Dealing
with the World. After a short Visit I returned to take my Leave of Mr.
Honeyman, and to fetch my Friends, who were at his House, waiting for me. We
then went to the House of Mr. Bourse, who first spoke to me when coming out of
Church. The House was soon filled with Company. I expounded and prayed with
them for about an Hour, and then retired to a Lodging the LORD in his good
Providence had provided for me. The blessed JESUS was pleased sweetly to
manifest himself to my Soul. A Consideration of his distinguishing, repeated
Mercies quite melted me down, and I called upon all that was within me to
praise his holy Name. O LORD, in the Night Season, let me arise and give Thanks
unto thee; and let my Talking be of thy loving Kindness and tender Mercies all
the Day long!

Monday, Sept. 15. Breakfasted this Morning with old Mr. Clap, and was much
edified by his Conversation. I could not but think, whilst at his Table, that I
was sitting with one of the Patriarchs. He is full of Days, a Bachelor, and
has been a Minister of a Congregation in Rhode Island upwards of Forty Years.
People of all Denominations, I find, respect him. He abounds in good Works,
gives all away, and is wonderfully tender of little Children: Many of them, of
different Persuasions, come to be instructed by him. Whenever he dies, I am
persuaded, with good old Simeon, he will be enabled to say, LORD, now let
thou thy Servant depart in Peace. At Ten in the Morning and Three in the
Afternoon, according to Appointment, I read Prayers and preached in the Church:
It Is very commodious, and, I believe, will contain 3000 People. It was more
than filled in the Afternoon. Person of all Denominations attended. GOD
assisted me much; I observed Numbers affected, and had great Reason to believe,
the Word of the LORD had been sharper than a two-edged Sword in some of the
Hearers Souls. After Evening Service I received the following Letter.

Newport, R. Island, Sept. 15. 1740. Rev. Sir, and beloved Brother,
ALthough mine Eyes never saw your Face before this Day, yet my Heart and Soul
have been united to you in Love, by the Bond of the Spirit. I have longed and
expected to see you for many Months past: Blessed be GOD, mine Eyes have seen
the joyful Day! I trust, through Grace, I have something to communicate to you,
-- that will make your Heart glad. I shall omit writing any thing, and only
hereby present my hearty Love, and let you know, that I am waiting now at the
Post of your Door for Admission: Though I am unworthy, my LORD is worthy, in
whose Name, I trust, I come,

I am your unworthy Brother, Jonathan Barber.


On reading it, I could not but think this was one of those young Ministers
whom GOD had lately made use of, in such a remarkable Manner, at the East End
of Long Island. I sent for him, and found he was the Man. My Heart rejoiced. We
walked out and took sweet Council together; and, amongst other Things, he told
me, That he came to Rhode Island under a full Conviction that he should see me
there, and had been waiting for me Eight Days: For, he said, these Words were
mightily impressed upon his Heart. Is not Aaron the Levit^ thy Brother? I know
that he can speak well; and also, behold he comes forth to meet thee, and when
he sees thee he will be glad in his Heart. And I will be with thy Mouth and
with his Mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do. What rendered this more
rema^kable, is, I had no Intention of failing into Rhode Island till about
Three Days before I left Carolina; and also, I had a great Desire to put in, if
I could, at the East End of Long Island, to see this very Person, whom the
Great GOD now brought unto me. LORD, accept our Thanks, sanctify our Meeting,
and teach us both what we shall do, for thy own Name's Sake. After a long
Conference, we took leave of each other for the present; but agreed, that we
should now be Companions in Travel, till the LORD should make our Way more
plain. In the Evening I went to venerable Mr. Clapp's and exhorted and prayed
with a great Multitude, who not only crowded into the House, but thronged every
Way about it.. The dear old Man rejoiced to see the Things which he saw, and
after my Exhortation was over, dismissed me with his Blessing. LORD JESUS, do
thou say Amen to it. Even so, LORD JESUS, Amen and Amen.

Tuesday, Sept, 16. Perceived my self a little low in the Morning; but was
enabled to read Prayers and preach with much Flame, Clearness and Power, to
still greater Auditors than Yesterday. It being Assembly - Time, the Gentlemen
adjourned in order to attend the Service: And several Invitations were given me
to come to other adjacent Places. The People were exceedingly attentive, Tears
trickled down their Cheeks; and so far prevailed with me by their Importunity,
that, by the Divine Permission, I promised to call on them in my Return from
Boston. When I came home to my Lodgings, the Woman of the House saluted me
with, Blessed art thou of the LORD. I looked round to see the Reason of such a
Salutation, and on the Couch there lay a young Woman. After a little
Conversation, I found she had had a gracious Discovery of the LORD JESUS made
to her Soul, when I was speaking those Words, Come see a Man that told me all
Things that ever I did. She said she had often grieved the Spirit of GOD; but
now she believed the LORD was calling her home effectually. The Word, added she
came with such Power, that I was obliged to go out of the Church, otherwise I
must have disturbed the Congregation. When I came from Home, contrary to my
Mother's Inclination, I insisted, I knew not why, on staying at Newport six
Weeks: She would have me stay only a Month; but at last consented for me to
stay my own Time. Tomorrow, says she, is the last Day of the Six Weeks; And Oh
the Goodness of GOD in sending you just now, before my Time was out! or Words
to that Effect. Afterward one or two more came under deep Convictions, crying
out, in the Bitterness of their Souls, after the LORD JESUS. I prayed with each
of them, and exhorted them not to rest till they found Rest in JESUS CHRIST. In
the Evening I went, as I thought, privately, to a Friend's House; but the
People were so eager after the Word, that in a short time, I believe, more than
a thousand were before the Door, besides those that were within, and filled
every Room in the House: I therefore stood upon the Threshold, and spoke for
near an Hour on these Words, Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
Righteousness, for they shall be filled. Blessed be GOD it was a very solemn
Meeting. Being Night I could not see how the Hearers were affected; but the
LORD assisted me in Speaking. Glory be to his great Name! Before I retired to
Bed, I went and took my Leave of Mr. Honyman; and had some close Talk with him
about the New Birth. The LORD give him an experimental Knowledge of it! He was
very civil, and would have had me staid with him longer; but being to go on a
Journey on the Morrow, after we had conversed about half an Hour, I took my
Leave. At my Return to my Lodgings good old Mr. Clapp went with me in a Room,
and gave me something for my Orphans, and spoke many affectionate Things to me:
Although very old, yet he followed me from one end of the Town to the other; so
that People said, I had made Mr. Clapp young again. Oh what a Crown of Glory is
the hoary Head when found in the Way of Righteousness! He was exceeding
desirous of my Coming to Rhode Island again; which I promised to do by the
Divine Permission: For Rhode Island seems to be a Place where much good may be
done: They are a very plain People for the Generality; though I observed there
were some foolish Virgins at Church, covered all over with the Pride of Life. I
find they are sadly divid^^ amongst themselves as to outward Things. I think
there are no less than four different Congregations of of Baptists, two of the
Independents, and one of the Quakers Persuasion. Dean Berkly's Name is had in
much Respect amongst them. The established Church is in good Order as to
Externals: But many of the Head-Members, I soon found, were exceeding great
Bigots; they seemed very fearful least I should preach in Mr. Clapp's
Meeting House, and glorified much in my bringing the good old Man to Church.
Nor is there less Bigotry, as far as I could find, amongst those of other
Communions: All, I fear, place the Kingdom of GOD too much in Meats and Drinks;
and have an ill Name abroad for Running of Goods. One day, when I said in my
Sermon, What will become of you who cheat the King of his Taxes? the whole
Congregation seemed surpised, and looked on one another as though they should
say, We are guilty. LORD JESUS give them to know thee and the Power of thy
Resurrection, and teach them to render unto Caesar the Things which are Caesar'
s, and to GOD the Things which are GOD's.

Newport and Bristol.
Wednesday, Sept. 17. Left Newport in Rhode Island about nine in the Morning,
and reached Bristol, a Town twelve Miles off, about Noon. Several Friends from
Rhode Island accompanied me; and before we came to the Town a Dissenting
Minister, as I found afterward, met me, and in the Name of the Court, which
was then sitting at Bristol, invited me and my Friends to dine with them, and
also to give them a Sermon: I complied. The Gentlemen received us with much
Civility: And after Dinner I preached in the Meeting House, to more People than
might be expected on such sudden Notice. My Heart was much shut up in the
Exercise. I felt and saw but little Power: However the Gentlemen seemed very
thankful. I took my Leave about Four in the Afternoon; and lay at an Inn, about
ten Miles farther on the Road. Here the LORD gave me a Spirit of Prayer. I
wrestled with GOD in Behalf of my self and Friends. Supped comfortably. Sung a
Hymn, and went to Rest. Thanks be GOD for his unspeakable Mercies!

Thursday, Sept. 18. Rose a long while before Day, and set out as soon as it
was Light. Breakfasted at a Minister's House on the Road. Found the People were
apprised of my Coming, and were sollicitous for my Preaching: But being
resolved, under GOD, if possible, to reach Boston that Night, we traveled on,
for near fifty Miles, and came to Boston about eight in the Evening. When we
were within four Miles of the Town, the Governor's Son, and several other
Gentlemen, and one or two-Ministers, waited at a Gentleman's House to give me
the Meeting. They received me with great Gladness, and told me many more would
have come, had not a large Funeral been in the Town, or if there had been more
certain Notice of my Arriving. This rejoiced me: For I think I can stand any
Thing better than this: It favors too much of human Grandeur: But I must be
tried every Way. The LORD be my Helper. After stopping a little while, we went
altogether in Company to Boston, to the House of one Mr. Staniford,
Brother-in-Law to Dr. Coleman, who long since had sent me an Invitation.
Several Ministers, and other Gentlemen came in to pay their Respects. My Heart
was but low, and my Body weak; but at the Request of one of the Ministers I
gave thanks to our gracious GOD for bringing me in Safety, and prayed that my
Coming might be in the Fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel of Peace. We then
parted. I eat a little Supper; and then retired; beseeching the LORD to raise
my Heart, and make his Power known in the Hearts of his People. Even so LORD
JESUS. Amen and Amen.

Friday, Sept. 19. Slept pretty well; and in the Morning perceived fresh
Emanations of Divine Light, break in upon and refresh my Soul. Was visited by
several Gentlemen and Ministers; and went to the Governor's with Esquire Willard,
Secretary of the Province, a Man fearing God, and with whom (though before
unknown in Person) I have corresponded for some Time. The Governor received me
with the utmost Respect. He seemed to savor the Things which were of GOD, and
desired me to come and see him as often as I could. At eleven I went to public
Worship at the Church of England; and afterward waited on the Commissary home,
who read Prayers. He received me very courteously, and it being a Day whereon
the Clergy of the established Church met, I had Opportunity of conversing with
five of them together. I think one of them first began witb me for calling that
Tennent, and his Brethren, faithful Ministers of JESUS CHRIST. I answered, I
believed they were. They then questioned me about the Validity of Presbyterian
Ordination. I replied, I believed it was valid. They then urged against me a
Passage in my first Journal, where I said that a Baptist Minister at Deal did
not give me a satisfactory Answer concerning his Mission: I answered, perhaps
my Sentiments were altered. And is Mr. Wesley altered in his Sentiments too,
said one; for he was very strenuous for the Church, and against all other Forms
of Government, when he was at Boston. I answered, he was then a great Bigot;
but GOD had since enlarged his Heart, and, I believed, he was like minded with
me, as to this Particular. I then urged, that a catholic Spirit was best; and
that a Baptist Minister had communicated with me lately at Savannah. And, I
suppose, says another Clergyman, you would do him as good a Turn and
communicate with him. I answered, Yes. I then urged, that it was best to preach
up the New Birth, and the Power of Godliness; and not to insist so much on the
Form, for People would never be brought to one Mind as to that; nor did JESUS
CHRIST ever intend it. Yes, but says Dr. Cutler, He did. How do prove it? Why
says he, our LORD prayed that all might be one, even as thou, Father and I are
one. I replied, that was spoken of the inward Union of the Souls of Believers
with JESUS CHRIST, and not of the outward Church. That cannot be, says Dr.
Cutler; for how then ^ould it be said, that the World might know, that thou
have sent me? He then (taking it for granted, that the Church of England was
the only true apostolical Church) drew a Parallel between the Jewish and our
Church, urging how GOD required all Things to be made according to the Pattern
given on the Mount. I answered, before the Parallel could be just, it must be
proved that every Thing enjoined in our Church was as much a Divine Institution
as any Rite or Ceremony under the Jewish Dispensation. I added farther, that I
saw regenerate Souls among the Baptist, among the Presbyterians, among the
Independents, and among the Church-Folks: All Children of GOD, and yet all born
again in a different Way of Worship; and who then can tell which is the most
Evangelical? What, says the Commissary, can you see Regeneration with your
Eyes? or something to that Purpose. Soon after we began to talk of the
Righteousness of CHRIST; and the Commissary said CHRIST was to make up the
Defects of our Righteousness. I asked him if Conversion was not Instantaneous?
He was unwilling to confess it; but having just before baptized an Infant at
public Worship, I asked him whether he believed that very Instant in which he
sprinkled the Child with Water, the Holy Ghost f^ll upon the Child? He
answered, Yes. Then says I, according to your own Principles Regeneration is
Instantaneous; and since you will judge of the New Birth by the Fruits, pray
watch that Child, and see if it brings forth the Fruits of the Spirit. I also
said, that if every Child was really born again in Baptism, then every baptized
Infant would be saved: And so they are, says Dr. Cutler. How do you prove that?
Why, says he, the Rubric says, that all Infants dying after Baptism, before
they commit actual Sin are undoubtedly saved. I asked what Text of Scripture
there was to prove it. Here, says he, (holding a Prayer Book in his Hand) the
Church says so. We then just hinted at Predestination. I said, I subscribed to
the 17th Article of the Church in its plain literal Sense with all my Heart. We
then talked a little about ^^^ally falling away from Grace. I said, a true of
Child of GOD, though he might fall foully yet could never fall finally. But, says
he, the Article says Men may fall away from Grace given. But then, says I,
observe what follows, and by the Grace of GOD they may rise again* Several
other Things, of less Consequence, passed between us; but being engaged to dine
at my Lodging, and finding how inconsistent they were, I took my Leave,
resolving they should not have the Opportunity of denying me their Pulpits.
However, they treated me with more Civility than any Set of our own Clergymen
have done a long while. The Commissary very kindly urged me to dine with them;
but being pre-engaged, I went to my Lodging; and in the Afternoon preached to
about 4000 People in Dr. Coleman's Meeting House; and, as afterward I was told
by several, with great Success. In the Even-I exhorted and prayed with as many
as came to my Lodging, and inwardly rejoiced at the Prospect. there was of
bringing many Souls in Boston to the saving Knowledge of the LORD JESUS CHRIST.
Grant this, O Father, for thy dear Son's sake. Amen.

Saturday, Sept. 20. Perceived myself grow more and more comfortable both in
Body and Soul Was sweetly refreshed by several Packets of Letters sent me from
different Parts in England and America, giving me an Account of the Success of
the Gospel, though was a little cast down, to find some English Friends had
thrown aside the Use of Means, and others were disputing for sinless
Perfection, and universal Redemption. I know of no such Thing asserted in the
Gospel, if explained aright. LORD, do thou cause even this to work for Good,
and give me Grace to oppose such Errors, without Respect to Persons, but with
Meekness, Humility and Love. Amen, LORD JESUS, Amen and Amen.

Preached in the Morning with much Freedom and Power, to about 6000 Hearers, in
Dr. Sewal's Meeting; afterward on the Common, to about 8000; and again at
Night, to a thronged Company at my own Lodgings; and then spent the Remainder
of the Evening with a few choice Friends, in preparing for the Sabbath. Oh that
it may be a Day of heavenly Rest sacred to divine Love! Oh that we may be
always in the Spirit on the LORD's Day!

Sunday, Sept. 21. Went this Morning to hear Dr. Colman preach. Din' with his
Colleague Mr. Cooper, and preached in the Afternoon to a very thronged Auditory,
and with great and visible Effects, at Mr. Foxcroft's Meeting; immediately
after on the Common, to about 15,000, and again at my Lodging, as usual, to a
greater Company than before. Some afterward came up into my Room. I felt much
of the divine Presence in my own Soul, and though hoarse, was enabled to speak
with much Power, and could have spoke, I believe, till Midnight. To see the
People so willing to hear makes me forget myself. Oh that it may be my Sleep,
my Meat and Drink, to do the Will of my heavenly Father! Oh that all who come
to hear the Word, may take the Kingdom of GOD by force! Amen and Amen.

Monday, Sept. 22. Preached in the Morning, at Mr. Webb's Meeting House, to
about 6000 Hearers in the House, besides great Numbers standing about the
Doors. The Presence of the LORD was amongst them. Look where I would around me,
visible Impressions were made upon the Auditory. Most wept for a considerable
Time. Some time after I received a Letter, wherein were these Words.

But what I must give the Preference to, was that gracious Season at the New
North, the Monday following, where there was more of the Presence of GOD through
the whole of the Ministration than ever I had known at one Time through the whole
Course of my Life. Justly might it have been said of that Place, it was no
other than the House of GOD and the Gate of Heaven. O how dreadfu^^ was the
Place! and yet, O how delightful! The LORD JESUS seemed to be visibly walking
in that his golden Candlestick, to try some of the many Thousands that were
th^^ present. But O! how few were prepared for so holy an Inquisition? I am
sure I know one who could not but tremble at the Tho'^^ of it, and who indeed
could help crying out, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a Man of unclean
Lips; for mine Eyes have seen the King, the LORD of Hosts. Indeed, my own Soul
was so deeply abused and overwhelmed with such unusual Meltings, that I could
have been glad of some private Corner in that House, to pour out my Soul
without Disturbance to the Audience. The Spirit of GOD indeed, seemed moveing
upon the Face of the Waters at that Time; and who knows, but that, to a great
many Souls, GOD was pleased to say, Let there be Light, and there was Light.

In the Afternoon I went to preach at Mr. Chickly's Meeting House; but GOD was
pleased to humble us by a very awful Providence: For, when the Meeting House
was filled with People, though there was no real Danger, on a sudden the People
were all in an Uproar, and so unaccountably surprised, that some threw
themselves out of the Window, others threw themselves out of the Gallery; and
others trampled upon one another, so that some were actually killed, and others
dangerously wounded. I happened to come in the Midst of the Uproar, and saw two
or three lying on the Ground in a pitiable Condition. GOD was pleased to give
me Presence of Mind, so that I gave Notice, I would immediately preach on the
Common. The Weather was wet, but about 8000 followed into the Field, to whom I
preached from these. Words, -- Go out into the Highways and Hedges, and compel
them to come in. I endeavored, as GOD enabled me, to improve what had befallen
us; and though Satan in this has bruised our Heel, yet I doubt not, but even this
will be a Means of bruising his accursed Head. LORD, thy Judgments are like the
great Deep! Thy Footsteps are not known, Just and holy art thou, O King of
Saints!

In the Evening perceived myself weak in Body, so that I could not say much at
the House where I supped; but GOD by his blessed Spirit greatly refreshed and
comforted my Soul. Blessed be GOD, I ^ind what our SAVIOR says, exceeding
true. He that believes on me as the Scripture has spoken, out of his Belly
shall flow Rivers of living Water. I drink of GOD's Pleasures as out of a
River. Oh that all were made Partakers of this living Water. They would never
thirst after the deadly Pleasures of this lower World.

Roxbury and Boston.
Tuesday, Sept. 23. Went this Morning with Dr. Colman and the Secretary, to
Roxbury, Three Miles from Boston, to see one Mr. Walter, a good old Puritan,
who, with his Predecessor Mr. Elliot, commonly called the Apostle of the
Indians, but now with GOD, have been Pastors of that Congregation 106 Years. I
had but little Conversation with him, my Stay was so very short; but I remember
he told me, He was glad to hear I said, Man was half a Devil and half a Beast.
The more People drink into GOD's Spirit, the more, I find, they are inclined to
debase the natural Man.

About Eleven were returned, and I preached in Mr. Gee's Meeting House, but not
to a very crowded Auditory, because People were in doubt where I would preach.
Dined at the Secretary's, and preached in the Afternoon at Dr. Sewal's to a
thronged Congregation; and exhorted and prayed as usual at my own Lodgings; at
neither Place without some Manifestations of a divine Power accompanying the
Word. LORD, let thy Presence always follow me, or otherwise I shall be but as a
sounding Bross or tinkling Cymbal!

Cambridge and Boston,
Wednesday, Sept. 24. Went this Morning to see and preach at Cambridge, the
chief College for training up the Sons of the Prophets in all New England. It
has one President, four Tutors and upwards of an Hundred Students. It is scarce
as big as one of our least Colleges in Oxford; and as far as I could gather
from some, who well knew the State of it, not far superior to our Universities
in Piety and true Godliness. Tutors neglect to pray with and examine the Hearts
of their (...). Discipline is at too low an Ebb. Bad Books are become
fashionable amongst them. Tillotson and Clarke are read instead of Shepperd,
Stoddard and such like Evangelical Writers; and therefore I chose to preach
from these Words: -- We are not as many who corrupt the Word of GOD, etc -- In
the Conclusion of my Sermon I made a close App^ication to Tutors and Students.
A great Number of neighboring Ministers attended, as indeed they do at all
other Times; and GOD gave me great Freedom and Boldness of Speech. The
President of the College and Minister of the Parish treated me very civilly. In
the Afternoon I preached again in the College Yard, without particular
Application to the Students. I believe there were 7000 Hearers. The holy Spirit
melted many Hearts. The Word was attended with a manifest Power, and a Minister
wrote me Word soon after, that he believed one of his Daughters was savingly
wrought upon at that Time. LORD, add daily to thy Church such as shall be saved!

Paid my Respects to the Lieutenant Governor who lives at Cambridge; returned
in the Evening to Boston, and exhorted and prayed with many People who waited
^ound the Door for a spiritual Morsel. I believe our LORD did not send them
empty away. Blessed JESUS, feed them all with the Bread of Life which comes
down from Heaven!

Thursday, Sept. 25. Preached the weekly Lecture at Mr. Foxcroft's
Meeting House; but was so oppressed with such* Sense of my bafe Ingratitude to
my dearest SAVIOR, that Satan would fain have tempted me to hold my Tongue,
and not invite poor Sinners to JESUS CHRIST, because I was so great a Sinner
myself. But GOD enabled me to withstand the Temptation; and since JESUS CHRIST
had shown such Mercy to, and did ^ot withdraw his holy Spirit from me* the
Chief of Sinners, I was enabled the more feelingly to talk of his Love; and
afterward found, that one Stranger in particular was, in all Probability,
effectually convicted by that Morning's Sermon. After public Worship I went,
at his Excellency's Invitation, and dined with the Governor. Most of the
Ministers of the Town were invited with me. Before Dinner the Governor sent for
me up into his Chamber. He wept, wished me good Luck in the Name of the LORD,
and recommended himself, Ministers and People to my Prayers. Immediately after
Dinner, at the Governor's Motion, I prayed explicitly for them all. Went in his
Coach to the End of the Town; but (...) such a Sense of my Vileness upon my
Soul, that I wondered People did not stone me. Crossed a Ferry, and preached at
Charlestown, a Town lying on the North Side of Boston. The Meeting House was
very capacious and quite filled: A gracious Melting was discernable through the
whole Congregation; and I perceived much Freedom and Sweetness in my own Soul,
though the Damp I felt in the Morning was not quite gone off. Oh when shall I be
free from indwelling Sin! O LORD, deliver me from the Body of this Death!

In the Evening I exhorted and prayed as usual at my Lodging, and, blessed be
GOD, I found a great Alteration in the Hearers. They now began to melt and weep
under the Word. Oh that the LORD may beat them down with the Hammer of his
Word, till the Heart of Stone be entirely taken away! Even so, LORD JESUS, Amen
and Amen.

Friday, Sept. 26. Preached in the Morning at Roxbury, from a little Ascent, to
many Thousands of People, with much of the divine Presence amongst us. Several,
I think, came afterward to me, telling how they were struck at that Time under
the Word; and a Minister wrote to me thus,

Reverend and Dear Sir,
AFTER my sincere Affection and very humble Service to you, I return you my
hearty Thanks for your good Services Yesterday, and especially at Roxbury, my
native Place. I cannot but admire and greatly rejoice in those extraordinary
Gifts and Graces which it has pleased the Father of Lights to conf^r upon you,
and to see how much the Intention of them is answered in your flaming Devotion,
and zealous and indefatigable Endeavors to do good to Souls, and thereby
advance the Kingdom and Interest of our dearest LORD. I think I never saw a
more attentive Audience, or more weeping Eyes, than Yesterday and Monday. The
holy Spirit, the alone Author of spiritual Life, seemed, in a very wonderful
Manner, to be moving upon the Waters of the Sanctuary; breathing upon the Dry
Bones. For my own Part I was much affected, for which I give our glorious LORD
the Praise. --


Dined at Judge Dudley's. Preached in the Afternoon from a Scaffold erected
without Mr. Byles his Meeting House, to near double the Number as in the
Morning. Snatched a few Moments to write a few Lines to Friends at England;
gave a short Exhortation to a great Crowd of People, and then spent the
Remainder of the Evening with several Ministers at Mr. H -- n's. Our
Conversation tended to the Use of Edifying. After Supper we sung Psalms; one
prayed and then we took our Leave. Oh that the LORD may answer our Requests,
and revive his Work in the Midst of the Years! We wait for thy Salvation, O
LORD! O let thy Kingdom come!

Saturday, September 27. Preached this Morning at Mr. Welsted's Meeting House.
Dined with Col. Wendell, and preached in the Afternoon on the Common, to about
15,000 People. But, Oh! how did the Word run! It rejoiced me to see such
Numbers greatly affected, so that some of them, I believe, could scarcely
abstain from crying out, That Place was no other than a Bethel and the Gate of
Heaven. After Sermon I visited and prayed with two different Persons that were
much hurt in the late Fright, and then went Home to my Lodging. The Power and
Presence of the LORD accompanied and followed me. Many now wept exceedingly,
and cried out under the Word like Persons that were really hungring and
thirsting after Righteousness. And after I left them, GOD gave me to wrestle
with him in my Chamber, in Behalf of some dear Friends then present and others
that were absent from us. The Spirit of the LORD was upon them all: It made
Intercession with Groanings that cannot be uttered. Oh let them enter into thy
Ears, O LORD of Sabba^^^!

Sunday, September 28.^ Preached in the Morning at Dr. Sewal's Meeting House to
a very crowded Auditory, and almost with as much Power and visible Appearance
of GOD among us as Yesterday in the Afternoon. Collected 555 l. for my little
Lambs. Was taken very ill after Dinner, vomited violently, but was enabled to
preach at Dr. Colman's in the Afternoon, to as great if not a greater
Congregation than in the Morning. Here also 470 l. were collected for the
Orphan-House in Georgia. In both Places all Things were carried on with great
Decency and Order. People went slowly out as though they had not a Mind to escape
giving, and Dr. Colman said, it was the most pleasant Time he ever had enjoyed
in that Meeting House through the whole Course of his Life. Blessed be GOD! After
Sermon I perceived myself somewhat ^refresh'd. Supt very early. Had the Honor
of a private Visit from the Governor, who came full of Affection to take his
Leave of me for the present. Went at their Request and preached to a great
Number of Negroes, on the Conversion of the Ethiopian, Acts the 8th (at which
the poor Creatures as well as many white People were much affected) and at my
Return gave a Word of Exhortation ^o a Crowd of People who were waiting at my
Lodging. My animal Spirits were almost exhausted, and my Legs, through Expense of
Sweat and Vomiting, almost ready to sink under me. But the LORD visited my
Soul, and I went to Bed greatly refreshed with divine Consolation. Oh what am
I, that I should thus daily be fed with heavenly Manna! LORD, thou fillest my
Soul with Marrow and Fatness! O let me praise thee with joyful Lips!

Marble-head, Salem and Ipswich.
Monday, Sept. 29. Set out about Seve^ in the Morning, got to Marblehead, a
large Town Twenty Miles from Boston, about Eleven. Preached to some Thousands
on a broad Place in the Middle of the Town, but not with much visible Effect.
Dined with Mr. Bernard, one of the Ministers of the Place. Rode to Salem, Four
Miles from Marblehead, and preached there also to about 7000 People. Here the
LORD manifested forth his Glory. One Man, I believe, was struck down by the
Power of the Word. In every Part of the Congregation might be seen Persons
under great Concern. One Mr. Clark, a good Minister, as is granted by all
Lovers of GOD, seemed to be almost in Heaven. Salem is the first settled and,
except Boston, the largest Town in all New England; but rather, as far as I
could see and hear, excels it for Politeness. Upon Enquiry I found the
Inhabitants had been sadly divided about their Minister; and GOD was pleased,
before I knew their Circumstances, to direct me to a suitable Subject. LORD
heal their Divisions, and grant, that with one Heart and one Mind they may
endeavor to glorify thy holy Name!

After the Exercise I immediately set out and got to Ipswich, another large
Town, Sixteen Miles (the Way we went) distant from Salem. Two or three
Gen^lemen came to meet me; and I and my Friends were kindly entertained at the
House of Mr. R -- rs, one of the Ministers of the Place. The LORD reward him
and all others a Thousand-fold who refresh our Bowels in the LORD!

Ipswich, Newbury and Hampton.
Tuesday, Sept. 30. Preached at Ipswich about Ten in the Morning to some
Thousands. The LORD gave me Freedom, and there was a great Melting in the
Congregation. Dined, set out, and reached Newbury, another large Town Twelve
Miles distant from Ipswich, about Three. Here again the LORD accompanied the
Word with his Power. The Meeting House was very large; many Ministers were
present, and People were greatly affected. Blessed be GOD, his divine Power
attends us more and more. Took Ferry immediately after Sermon, went with Mr.
Cotton, Minister of the Place, who came to meet me, in a Chaise to Hampton,
another great Town, Nine Miles from Newbury. The Night was both dark and rainy;
But he with whom the Darkness is no Darkness, brought us in Safety to Hampton,
where I was pleased to see more Plainness in Mr. Cotton's House than I had seen
in any Ministers House since my Arrival. His Wife was as one that serves. Oh
that all Ministers Wives were so: For there is nothing gives me more Offense,
than to see Clergymen's Wives dressed out in the Pride of Life. They bring a
Reproach upon Religion. They generally live up to the utmost of their Income,
and, being above Working, after their Husbands Decease they are of all Women
the most miserable. From such a Wife good LORD of thy infinite Mercy deliver my
Soul!

Hampton, Portsmouth and York.
Wednesday, October 1. Preached in the Morning, though with not so much Freedom
as usual, at Hampton, to some Thousands in the open Air. The Wind was almost
too high for me. Some, though not many, were affected, GOD's Spirit blows when
and where it li^^eth. After Dinner rode in Company with many to Portsmouth, a
large Town about Fourteen Miles from Hampton. Got thither in about an Hour and
an half. Preached to a Polite Auditory, but so very unconcerned that I began to
question whether I had been speaking to rational or brute Creatures. Seeing no
immediate Effects of the Word preached, I was a little dejected; but GOD, to
comfort my Heart, sent one young Man, crying out in great Anguish of Spirit,
What shall I do to be saved? -- Oh how does GOD pity the Weakness of his
Children! Why wast thou ^^east down O my Soul! -- Crossed a Ferry immediately
after Sermon, and went ever a very stony Way to York, a Town Thirteen Miles,
round the Ferry, distant from Portsmouth. Hither I came to see one Mr. Moody, a
worthy, plain and powerful Minister of JESUS CHRIST, though now much impaired by
old Age. He has l^^ed by Faith for many Years, would ^a^e no settled Salary,
and has be^^ much despised by the Haters, and as much re^pected by the true
Lovers of the blessed JESUS. He came as far as Hampton to meet me, but getting
before him in our Night Traveling, a Physician, his Neighbor, who came also
to meet me, received me into his House, and kindly entertained us. Some of our
Fellow-Travellers lost their Way, but came to us some Time after our Arrival at
York. Here we supt and prayed very comfortably together. The Air agreed
mightily with my Constitution. As I came along I was surprised to see such
Improvements made in the Space of an Hundred Years, and could not but fancy
myself in Old-England. Surely GOD is a GOD keeping Covenant. He has blessed the
present Generation for their Fathers Sake, with all temporal Blessings. LORD
with these temporal, give them spiritual Blessings, otherwise their Prosperity
will destroy them!

York and Portsmouth.
Thursday, Oct. 2. Was much comforted to hear good Mr. Moody tell me, That he
^^lieved I should preach to an Hundred New Creatures this Morning in his
Congregation: And indeed I believe I did; for when I came to preach I could
speak little or no Terror, but most Consolation. I preached both Morning and
Evening. The Hearers looked plain and simple, and Tears trickled apace down
most of their Che^ks. Indeed we saw the Outgoings of the LORD in his
Sanctuary. But one Thing put a little Damp upon my Soul, and I hope did me
good. Mr. Moody ha^ a Son, a Minister, who was once full of Faith and Joy in
the Holy Ghost, and walked in the Light of GOD's Countenance, and made a full
Proof of his Ministry: But for these Two Years last past has walked in Darkness
and saw no Light. He has an inexpressible Gloo^ myness upon his Soul, and
cannot apply any of the Promises to himself. I was informed that he was at
Meeting, but dared not see me. I was assisted to pray for him, and so much the
more earnestly, not knowing but his Case may be (...) hereafter. LORD, let me
not be high-minded, but fear. Into thy Hands I ^^^mend my Spirit. I desire to
take no Th^^ for the Morrow. Deal with me as it shall please thee. Justly
may thou take every thing from me: For I have wretchedly abused thy loving
Kindness. GOD be ^^^ciful to me a Sinner.

Left York about 4 in the Evening. Reached Portsmouth by Night, where I supped,
conversed, and sung Psalms very comfortably wi^^ my Friends. The LORD was
pleased to (...) up the Light of his blessed Countenance more and more upon my
Soul. Rightly is JESUS called EMANUEL. He is GOD not only with but in us. Oh
that I (...) ever provoke him to depart from (...).

Perismouth, Hampton and Newberry.
Friday, October. 3. Preached this Morning at Portsmouth, to a far greater
Congregation, and blessed be GOD, with much better Effect than before. Instead
of Preaching to dead Stocks, I now had Leason to believe I was Preaching to
living Men: People began to melt soon after I began to pray, and the Power
increased more and more during the whole Sermon. The Word seemed to pierce
through and through, and carry such Convictions along with it, that many, who
before had industriously spoken Evil of me, were made ashamed of themselves.
Mr. Shutliff, the Minister, when he afterward sent me 97 l. 7 s. 6 d.
collected at this Time for the Orphan-House, wrote thus, You have left Numbers
here under deep Im^^^^^ons, and I trust in GOD they (...) ^ot all wear off; but
that the (...) of some will be kept up and (...) till they have had their
desired Effect. Amen and Amen. Hastened after Dinner to Hampton. Preached to
several Thousands of People, with a good (...) of Life and Power; collected for
my little Ones, and set out directly for Newbury, which we reached about eight
at Night, (...) were kindly entertained at a Gentleman's House, with all my
Friends. My Heart was much enlarged and filled with Joy. In the Way two old
Disciples came to me acquainting me what sweet refreshing Times GOD had
vouchsafed them under my Ministry. LORD, not unto me, not unto me; but unto thy
Free Grace be all the Glory.

Newbury, Ipswich, and Salem.
Saturday, October. 4. Lay at the House of Mr. Lowel, Minister of the Place.
Preached in the Morning, to a very thronged Congregation; and saw the
Outgoings of GOD in his Sanctuary. Collected. Hasted to Ipswich. Preached to a
larger Congregation, and with as much Power as when there last. Got to Salem
about eight at Night; was most kindly received by Col. P -- r, and also was
favored with a Visit from the Minister belonging to the Church of England. Oh
that they would preach the Articles to which they have subscribed!

Sunday, October. 5. Preached at eight a Clock this Morning in the Meeting House,
at the Ministers Request. Read Prayers, and assisted at the Sacrament in the
Church of England; but thought Matters were not all carried on with Decency and
Order. Preached again in the Afternoon in the Meeting House; but saw no such
Power all the Day, as when I preached here a few Days ago. Oh that the LORD may
reach the Hearts of the Inhabitants, and make them a peculiar People zealous of
good Works!

Salem, Marblehead, Moulden and Boston.
Monday, October. 6. Spent the Sabbath-Evening very comfortably with my dear
Fellow-Travellers, in praying and singing spiritual Songs. I trust we made
Melody with Grace in our Hearts unto the LORD. Set out from Salem about nine:
Preached at Marblehead, about eleven, and with such Power, that, I trust, it
will be a Day much to be remembered by many Souls. I was upon the Mount myself,
and the LORD attended his Word with mighty Power. The two Ministers presented
me 70 l. 2 s. 6 d. for the Orphans, which they had voluntarily collected
Yesterday in their own private Meetings. Was m^st affectionately received and
entert^^^^^ (...) Col. M -- n, from whom I parted (...) with Tears. The LORD
make him (...) Faith and good Works. At the (...) of Mr. Emerson, Son-in-Law to
(...) Moody, and, I believe, a real Man o^ (...) we went to Maulden, fourteen
(...) Marblehead, where I preached, not with so much Power as in the Morning:
But one Girl came to me, crying and saying, She feared she had not true Faith
in JESUS. Oh that Thousands of others began to doubt also! Here the Secretary,
and several Friends from Boston, gave us the Meeting. With them, after Sermon,
I immediately set out, and got privately into Boston, about seven at Night.
Received comfortable Letters from Georgia and Carolina, and also, had the
Satisfaction of hearing that Brother Seward was safely arrived in England. The
LORD prosper the Work of his Hands upon him!

Perceived my Health to be much improved since I left Boston: And though I rode
178 Miles, and preached 16 Times, I trust, to the great Benefit of Thousands,
yet I was not in the least wearied or fatigued. The Spirit of the LORD was upon
me. I set up till near midnight to answer Correspondents, and settle my private
Affairs. Afterward went to Rest, full of Peace, and desiring to be thankful to
the LORD, for causing me thus to renew my Strength. Oh what a good Master is
JESUS CHRIST!

BOSTON
Tuesday, October. 7. Preached, both Morning and Evening in Dr. Coleman's Meeting
House. Both Times with much Power. People seemed greatly rejoiced at my
Arrival, it being confidently reported that I died suddenly, or was poisoned:
But I find I must not die; but live and declare the Works of the LORD. Father,
I submit! Thy Will be done. Visited, I believe, a true Disciple, who had been
s^ck for a long Season: The LORD has made his Bed in his Sickness: He has been
enabled to rejoice in Tribulation. Who would but be a Christian? Supped and
gave a Word of Exhortation to many People, at a House, which, I trust, the LORD
will visit with his Salvation. Wherever I go People will follow me; and I now
hourly almost receive Letters from Persons under Convictions, and
congratulatory Letters, and Visits from many Children of GOD, whose Souls have
been abundantly refreshed by the Ministration of the Word. Blessed be GOD, who
causes me to rejoice in the F^^icity of his Chosen, Amen and Amen.

Wednesday, Oct. 8. Went with the Governor, in his Coach, to Mr. W^^^^s
Meeting House, where I preached both Morning and Evening to very great
Auditories, both, Times, especially in the Morning, JESUS CHRIST manifested
forth his Glory. Many Hearts melted within them, and I think I never was so
drawn out to pray for and invite little Children to JESUS CHRIST as I was that
Morning. A little before I had heard of a Child who was taken sick just after
it had heard me preach, and said, He would go to Mr. Whitefield's GOD, and died
in a short Time. This encouraged me to speak to the little ones. But Oh how
were the old People affected! When I said, Little Children, if your Parents
will not come to CHRST, do you come and go to Heaven without them. There seemed
to be but few dry Eyes, look where I would. The Word smote them I believe
through and through, and my own Soul was very much carried out. Surely it was
the LORD's Passover! I have not seen a greater Commotion since my preaching at
Boston. Glory be to GOD who has not forgotten to be gracious! Went with the
Governor, who seemed more and more affected, in his Coach to my Lodgings;
snatched a few Moments to write a Letter or two; gave a Word of Exhortation to
a great Crowd of People^ and then slipped out privately at a Backdoor, and went
and supped at a Man's House whose Wife and Sister, as well as himself, I trust,
the LORD will deliver from the Guilt and Power of their Sins. Amen. Come, LORD
JESUS, come quickly!

Thursday, Oct. 9. Have been applied to, this and every Morning since my
Return, by many Souls under deep Distress; and was only grieved, that I could
not have more Time with them. Preached this Morning the Public Lecture at Dr.
Sewal's Meeting House, which was very much crowded. When I left my Lodgings I
had fixed on and folded down a particular Text, but when I came near the
Meeting House I found it much impressed upon my Heart, that I should preach
upon our LORD's Conference with Nicodemus: I acquainted a Friend with it. When
I came into the Pulpit I saw a great Number of Ministers sitting around and
before me. And when I came to these Words, Art thou a Master of Israel and
know not these Things? the LORD enabled me to open my Mouth boldly against
unconverted Ministers, to caution Tutors to take Care of their Pupils, and also
to advise Ministers part^^^larly to examine into the Experiences of Candidates
for Ordination: For I am verily persuaded, the Generality of Preachers talk of
an unknown unfelt (...). And the Reason why Congregations have been so dead,
is, because they have had dead Men preaching to them. Oh that the LORD may
quicken and revive them for his own Name sake! For how can dead Men beget
living Children? Its true ^^deed, GOD may convert People by the Devil if he
pleases, and so he may by unconverted Ministers: But I believe he seldom makes
use of either of them for this Purpose. No! the LORD will choose Vessels made
meet by the Operations of the blessed Spirit for this sacred Use. And as for my
own Part, I would not lay Hands on an unconverted Man for Ten Thousand Worlds.
Unspeakable Freedom GOD gave me while treating on this Head. After Sermon I
dined with tho. Governor, who seemed more kindly affected than ever, and
particularly told one of the Ministers, who has lately began to preach
Extempore, That he was very glad he had found out a Way to save his Eyes. Oh
that others would follow him! I believe they would find the LORD ready to help
and assist them. In the Afternoon I preached on the Common to about 15000
People, and collected for the Orphan-House upwards of 200 l. Just as I had
(...) my Sermon, a Ticket was put (...) wherein I was desired to pray for a
Person just entered upon the Ministry; but under Apprehensions that he was not
converted; GOD enabled me to pray for him with my whole Heart; and I hope that
Ticket will teach many others, not to run before they can give an Account of
their Conversion. If they do, they offer GOD strange Fire. Went to the Funeral
of one belonging to the Council; but do not like the Custom at Boston, of not
speaking at the Grave. When can Ministers Prayers and Exhortations be more
suitable, than when the Corpse before will silently as it were assist them, and
with a Kind of Dumb Oratory, bid the Spectators consider their latter End. When
the Funeral was over, I went as privately as possible to the Almshouse, and
enlarged on these Words, The Poor receive the Gospel, for near half an Hour.
Then I went to the Workhouse, where I prayed with and exhorted a great Number
of People who crowded after me, besides those belonging to the House, for an
Hour more; then, hearing there was a considerable Number waiting for me at my
Lodging (though some cried out, spare thyself) God strengthened me to go and g^ve
them a spiritual Morsel, and then I went and eat Bread comfortably at a
Friend's House, whither I was invited, and soon after retired to my Rest. Oh
how sweet is Sleep after working for JESUS! LORD strengthen me yet a little
longer, and then let me sleep in thee never to awake in this vain World again!
Still I must entreat thee, if most conducive to thy Glory and the Good of
Souls, to make no long Tarrying, O my GOD!

Charlestown and Reading.
Friday, Oct. 10. Was still busied, from the very Moment I rose till I went
out, in answering poor Souls that came to me under great Distress. About Nine
went with Mr. Cooper over Charlestown Ferry, where I preached with much
Demonstration of the Spirit, and collected 156 l. for the Orphan-House. Then I
dined at Mystic, Four Miles from Charlestown, at the House of one Esquire Royal, a
young rich Man, who has seemed much affected for some Time. Oh that he may not
lack One Thing! Immediately after Dinner, we hasted to Reading, Twelve Miles
from Charlestown, there I preached to many Thousands, and collected 51 l. 5 s.
for my little Ones, and observed a considerable Melting in the Congregation.
Returned and supped at Mr. Royal's; was weak, very weak in Body, but refreshed
to hear of a poor Girl found sitting at the Gat^ in the Cold: For, being
examined by a truly-experienced Friend, he found she was under very strong
Convictions, and had followed me from Roxbury. She said, she wanted Nothing but
CHRIST, and CHRIST she would have. Blessed are they that hunger and thirst
after Righteousness, for they shall be filled. LORD, let this Promise be
fulfilled in her Heart!

Cambridge and Boston.
Saturday, October. 11. Was but weak in Body, and perceived I had taken Cold: But
Preaching I find a constant Remedy against all slight Indispositions. Went to
Cambridge, four Miles from Mystic. Preached at the Meeting House Door, to a
great Body of People, who stood very attentively though it rained, and were at
the latter Part of the Sermon much affected. It being at the University, I
discoursed on these Words, Noah the Eighth Person, a Preacher of Righteousness;
and endeavored to show the Qualifications proper for a true Evangelical
Preacher of CHRIST's Righteousness. The LORD opened my Mouth and I spoke very
plainly to Tutors and Pupils. One Hundred Pounds were collected for the
Orphans. After Sermon the President very kindly entertained me and my Friends.
About Four we reached Boston; I preached immediately at Dr. Sewal's
Meeting House; exhorted a great Company afterward at my Lodging; and then was
employed till near Midnight in settling my private* Affairs, answering Letters,
and speaking to Souls under Convictions. One little Girl came to me, about
Eight Years old, under deep Convictions: She, as her Friends told me, had been
wrestling for CHRIST, and, whilst she was wrestling, it came to her Mind, that
JESUS being in an Agony, prayed yet so much the more earnestly, and that an
Angel was sent from Heaven to strengthen him; this encouraged her to persevere,
and her Soul soon received some Comfort. Another Minister's little Daughter has
bee^ quite restless after CHRIST, Night and Day. And a young Man, about
Fourteen, came to me crying, saying, Sir I am convicted but not converted: Oh
pray for ^e! -- I thank thee holy Father, LORD ^f Heaven and Earth, that thou
have hid ^hese Things from the wise and pru^ent, and have revealed them unto
Babes. Even so Father, for so it seems good in thy Sight

Sunday, October. 12. Perceived I was much refreshed in Body and Soul when I ^ose
in the Morning. Spoke to as many as I could, that came for spiritual Advice.
Preached with great Power and Affection at Dr. Sewal's Meeting House, which was
so exceedingly thronged, that I was obliged to get in at one of the Windows,
Dined with the Governor, who came to me after Dinner, when I was retired, and
weeping, most earnestly desired my Prayers. The LORD be with and in him for
Time and Eternity. Went and heard Dr. Sewal preach in the Afternoon; was sick
at Meeting, and also after it was over. Went with the Governor in his Coach to
the Common, where I preached my Farewell Sermon to near 30,000 People, a Sight I
have not seen since I left Black Heath, and a Sight perhaps never before seen
in all America: It being Duskish before I had done, the Sight was more solemn.
Numbers, great Numbers melted into Tears, when I talked of leaving them. I was
very particular in my Application, both to Rulers, Ministers and People,
commending what was commendable, and blaming what was blameworthy, and
exhorted them steddily to imitate the Piety of their Forefathers, that,
whether I was present or whether I was absent, I might hear of their Affairs,
that with one Heart and with one Mind they (...) striving together for the
Faith of the (...). After Sermon the Governor went with me to my Lodgings. I
stood in the Passage and spoke to a great Company, both within and without the
Doors; but they were so deeply affected, and cried out so loud, that I was
obliged to leave off praying. The Governor was highly pleased to see the Power
of GOD: He took his Leave in the most affectionate Manner, and said, He would
come and take me in his Coach to Charlestown Ferry, the Morrow Morning. The
Remainder of the Evening was almost entirely taken up in speaking to Souls
deeply wounded by the Word. The poor Girl that followed me from Roxbury, I
believe, had a saving Discovery of JESUS CHRIST this Morning: For when I had
preached on these Words, The LORD our Righteousness, she was enabled to say,
The LORD my Righteousness. Her Soul received Comfort, and she knew her Sins
were forgiven her, and was not afraid to di^. Poor Creature! I found upon
Enquiry she could not read; which shows the Sovereignty of GOD's Electing Love,
and confirms what the Apostle says, that the LORD chooses the foolish Things of
this World to confound the Wise. Many offered to go with me to Georgia, and
Charity I believe will incline me to take her; for she is cast out, in Effect,
already for CHRIST's Sake. Blessed be GOD for what he has done at Boston! I
hope a glorious Work is now begun, and that the LORD will stir up some faithful
Laborers to carry it on. Boston is a large populous Place; very wealthy; has
the Form kept up very well; but has lost much of the Power of Religion. I have
not heard of any remarkable Stir in it for these many Years. Ministers and
People are obliged to confess, that the Love of many is waxed cold. Both, for
the Generality, seemed too much conformed to the World. There Is much of the
Pride of Life to be seen in their Assemblies. Jewels, Patches and gay Apparel
are commonly worn by the female Sex. Little Boys and Girls I observed commonly
dressed up in the Pride of Life; and the little Infants that were brought to
Baptism, were wrapped in such fine Things, and so much Pains taken to dress
them, that one would think, they were brought thither to be initiated into
rather than renounce the Pomps and Vanities of this wiched World. There are
Nine Meeting Houses of the Congregational Persuasion; one Baptist; one French,
and one belonging to the Scotch Irish. There are two monthly and one weekly
Lecture, and that too but poorly attended. Several Ministers complained to me
of it. I mentioned it in my Sermon, and I trust GOD will stir up the People,
more frequently to tread the Courts of the LORD's House. One Thing Boston is
remarkable for, The external Observation of the Sabbath. Men in Civil Offices
have a Regard for Religion. The Governor encourages them; and the Ministers and
Magistrates seem to be more united than in any other Place where I have been.
Both were exceedingly civil to me during my Stay. I never saw so little
Scoffing, never had so little Opposition: But one might easily foresee, much
Opposition will hereafter arise, when I come to be more particular in my
Application to particular Persons: For I fear many, many rest in a
Head-Knowledge, are close Pharisees, having only a Name to live. It must needs
be so, when the Power of Godliness is dwindled away, and the Form only of
Religion is become fashionable amongst a People. However, no doubt there are a
few Names left in Sardis, that have not defiled their Garments. Many Letters
came to me, as far as I could judge, from truly p^ous People, in which they
heavily complained of the sad Degeneracy of their Times; and hoped that GOD was
now about to revive his Work in the Midst of the Years. Even so LORD JESUS,
Amen and Amen, say I with my whole Heart: For Boston People are dear to my
Soul. They were greatly affected by the Word, followed Night and Day, and were
very Liberal to my dear Orphans. I promised, GOD willing, to visit them again,
and intend to fulfill my Promise, when it shall please GOD to bring me again
from my Native Country. In the mean while, dear, dear Boston, Adieu. The LORD
be with thy Ministers and People, and grant that the Remnant which is yet left,
according to the Election of Grace, may ^^ke Root downwards and bear Fruit
upwards, and fill the Land!

Boston and Concord.
Monday, October. 13. Took an affectionate Leave of many dear Friends, especially
of mine Host and Hostess, who have been exceedingly kind to me and mine, and
wept over me at our Departure from them. The LORD reward them a Thousand-fold.
Went with the Governor in his Coach to Charlestown Ferry. He too^ me to the
Boat, kissed me, and, with Tears in his Ey^^, bid me farewell. bout Noon I
reached Concord, a Town 13 Miles from Boston. Here I preached twice to some
Thousands in the open Air, and comfortable Preaching it was. The Hearers were
sweetly melted down; and my Soul was as it were in Heaven: I saw him that was
invisible. Forty-five Pounds were collected for the Orphans. The Minister of
the Parish being, I believe, a true Child of GOD, I chose to stay all Night at
his House, that we might rejoice together. The LORD was with us. The Spirit of
the LORD came upon me; and GOD gave me to wrestle with him for my Friends,
especially those then with me. They all felt his Power. Brother Bliss, the
Minister, broke into Floods of Tears; and we had Reason to cry out, It was good
for us to be here. -- Oh blessed be thy Name, O LORD, for these sweet
Refreshings in our Way toward the heavenly Canaan!

Sudbury, Marlborough and Worcester.
Tuesday, Oct. 14. Preached at Sudbury, about Six Miles from Concord, about
Ten, where one Mr. Loring, a Man of GOD, presides. Preached to some Thousands
with Power, and observed a considerable Commotion in the Assembly. Got to
Marlborough, Eight Miles from (...), about Four. Preached in the Meeting House
to a large Congregation. At first my Heart was dead. and I had but little
Freedom; but before I had finished, the Word came with such a Demonstration of
the Spirit, that great Numbers were very much melted down. When I came into the
Meeting House. I turned about, and to my Surprise found Governor Belcher there.
He was affected; and though it rained and he was much advanced in Years, yet he
went in Company with us as far as Worcester, Fifteen Miles from Marlborough,
whither we got about Eight at Night: Here we were kindly entertained at the
House of Col. C -- r. We spent the Remainder of the Evening very agreeably with
the Governor, and after Prayer retired to Rest. Oh that I may approve myself a
Disciple of that Master, who, whilst tabernacling here on Earth, had not where
to lay his Head!

Worcester and Leicester.
Wednesday, Oct. 15. Perceived the Governor to be more affectionate than ever.
After Morning Prayer, he took me by myself, kissed me, wept and exhorted me to
go on in stirring up the Ministers: For says he, Reformation must begin at the
House of GOD. As we were going to Meeting, says he, Mr. Whitefield, do (...)
spare Rulers any more than Ministers, no, not the Chief of them. I preached in
the open Air to some Thousands; the Word fell with Weight indeed; it carried
all before it. After Sermon the Governor said to me, I pray GOD I may apply
what has been said to my own Heart. Pray, Mr. Whitefield, that I may hunger and
thirst after Righteousness. Dinner being ended, with Tears in his Eyes, he
kissed and took his Leave of me. Oh that we may meet in Heaven! I have
observed, that I have had greater Power than ordinary, whenever the Governor
has been at public Worship: A Sign this, I hope, that the Most High intends
effectually to bring him Home, and place him at his own Right Hand. Even so,
LORD JESUS, Amen and Amen.. Was enabled much to rejoice in Spirit. Preached in
the Afternoon at Leicester, Six Miles from W^rcester, with some, though not so
much Power as in the Morning. Got to Brookfield by Night, and was upon the
Mount indeed. My Soul was upon the Wing; and was excedingly enlarged; and I was
enabled, as it were, to take the Kingdom, of GOD by Force. Oh what precious
Hours are those, when we are thus strengthened, as it were, to lay hold on GOD!
Oh that we should ever cast ourselves down from these Frames! GOD be merciful
to me a Sinner!

Leicester and Cold-Spring.
Thursday, October. 16. Rose in great Dejection of Soul, at the Consideration of
Indwelling-Sin. Retired and wept before the LORD. Preached, not with
extraordinary Freedom at first; but at last the Word ran, and melted many down.
After Dinner, was much enlarged again, and strengthened to wrestle with GOD for
a Revival of his Work in these Parts. Reached Cold-Spring 15 Miles from
Leicester. Preached at the House of Mr. L -- d, to three or four hundred
People; but perceived little Moving except for a few Minutes. Spent this
Evening with my dear Fellow-Travellers, was somewhat cast down; but afterward
recovered Sweetness and Freedom of Soul by retiring and pouring out my
Complaints and Petitions before the dear LORD JESUS. Oh the Sovereignty and
distinguishing Freeness of GOD's Grace! If it was not for the Consideration of
that, my Soul must be continually pierced through with many Sorrows. LORD, for
thy Mercies sake, suffer me never to let this Consideration go! Amen. LORD
JESUS, Amen.

Hadley and Northampton.
Friday, October. 17. Set out as soon as it was Light, and reached Hadley, a
Place where a great Work of GOD was begun some Years ago; but lately the People
of GOD have complained of Deadness, and losing their first Love. However, as
soon as I mentioned what GOD had done for their Souls formerly, it was like
putting Fire to Tinder; the Remembrance of it quickened them and caused many of
them to weep sorely. When I had taken a little Refreshment, we crossed the
Ferry to Northampton, where no less than 300 Souls, as was supposed were
savingly brought home to the dear LORD JESUS, about 5 of 6 Years ago. Their
Pastor's Name is Edwards, Successor and Grandson to the great Stoddard, whose
Memory will be always precious to my Soul; whose Books, entitled, A Guide to
CHRIST, and Safety of appearing in CHRIST's Righteousness, I would earnestly
recommend to all. Mr. Edwards is a solid excellent Christian; but at present
weak in Body: I think I may say, I have not seen his Fellow in all New England.
When I came into his Pulpit I found my Heart drawn out to talk of scarce any
think besides the Consolations and Privileges of Saints, and the plentiful
Effussion of the Holy Ghost in the Hearts of Believers: And when I came to
remind them of their former Experiences, and how zealous and lively they were
at that Time, both Minsters and People wept much, and the Holy Ghost enabled me
to speak with a great deal of Power. In the Evening I gave a Word of
Exhortation to several that came to Mr. Edwards's House. My Body was somewhat
weak, my Appetite almost gone; but my LORD gave me Meat to eat which the World
knows nothing of. LORD, evermore give me this Bread! Amen and Amen.

Hadfield and Northampton.
Saturday, October. 18. At Mr. Edwards his Request, spoke to his little Children,
who were much affected. Preached at Hadfield, five Miles from Northampton; but
found myself straightened. Conversed profitably on the Way about the Things of
GOD with dear Mr. Edwards, and preached about four in the Afternoon to his
Congregation: I begun as it were with Fear and Trembling, feeling but little
Power in the Morning; but GOD greatly assisted me, few dry Eyes seemed to be in
the Ass^mbly for a considerable Time. I had an affecting Prospect of the
Glories of the upper World, and was enabled to speak of them feelingly to
others: I believe, many were filled as with New-Wine; it seemed as if a Time of
Refreshing was come from the Presence of the LORD. Even so come LORD JESUS,
come quickly. Amen and Amen.

NORTHAMPTON.
Sunday, October. 19. Felt wonderful Satisfaction in being at the House of Mr:
Edwards. He is a Son himself, and has also a Daughter of Abraham for his Wife.
A sweeter Couple I have not yet seen. Their Children were dressed not in Silks
and Sattins, but plain, as becomes the Children of those who in all Things
ought to be Examples of Christian Simplicity. She is a Woman adorned with a
meek and quiet Spirit, and talked so feelingly and solidly of the Things of
GOD, and seemed to be such a Help-meet for her Husband, that she caused me to
renew those Prayers which for some Months I have put up to GOD, that He would
be pleased to send me a Daughter of Abraham to be my Wife. I find, upon many
Accounts, it is my Duty to marry. LORD, I desire to have no Choice of my own:
Thou know my Circumstances: Thou know I desire to marry only in and for
thee: Thou did choose a Rebecca for Isaac; choose one for me, to be a Help-mete
for me, in Managing that great Household committed to my Charge! LORD, hear me:
LORD, let my cry come unto Thee. Preached this Morning, and perceived the
Melting to begin sooner and rise higher than before. Dear Mr. Edwards wept
almost during the whole Time of Exercise. The People were equally, if not more
affected, and my own Soul was much lifted up toward GOD. In the Afternoon the
Power increased yet more and more. Our LORD seemed to keep the good Wine till
the last. I have not seen such a gracious Melting since my Arrival. My Soul was
much knit to the dear People of GOD, and though I had not Time to converse with
them about their Experiences, yet one might see they were for the most part a
gracious and tender People; and though their former Fire might be greatly abated,
yet it i^^^diately appeared when stirred up. (...) my Soul might be refreshed
with the (...) that Northampton People have (...) their first Love, that the
LORD has revi^^d his Work in their Souls, and (...) them to return and do their
first (...)!

Westfield and Springfield.
Monday, October. 20. Left Northampton in the Evening, Rode very pleasantly 16
Miles to Westfield. Conversed with a poor Woman on her sick Bed, who gave me an
Account of some Discoveries she had of our LORD's redeeming Love. Met with a
little Book written by Dr. Cotton Mather, entitled, The Ornaments of the
Daughters of Zion, which I would recommend to all, especially the Boston
Ladies. Preached in the Morning to a considerable Congregation, and with
considerable Power at the ^atter End. Hasted to Springfield about ten Miles
from Westfield, Crossed a Ferry. Preached to a large Auditory, and then
returned and preached in the Evening by Candlelight to those who could not get
over the Ferry by Reason of the Wind. The Meeting House was full. GOD's Power
was with me both Times, especially at the last. My Soul was much carried out in
Prayer, and the LORD so strengthened me in the inner Man, that I could have
preached another Sermon after I had done. A little after I left Spring-fields,
my Horse coming over a Bridge threw me over his Head, directly upon my Nose:
The Fall stunned me for a while. My Mouth was full of Dust. I bled a little;
but, falling upon soft Sand, got not much Damage. After I recovered my self and
mounted my Horse, GOD so filled me with a Sense of his sovereign,
distinguishing Love, and my own Unworthiness, that my Eyes gushed out with
Tears; but they were all Tears of Love. Oh how did I want to sink before the
high and lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity. I felt myself less than nothing,
and yet knew that my JESUS was my ALL in ALL. The Divine Presence was strong
upon me all the Evening. We stopped at a Friend's House about four Miles from
Springfield. Took proper Refreshment, and went to Rest, desiring not to be
unmindful of the peculiar Favors conferred upon me the Night past. LORD, they
are noted in thy Book, Oh let them be also written upon the Tables of my Heart!

Suffield and Winsdor.
Tuesday, October. 21. Set out for Suffield about eight Miles from the ^lace
where I lay: Reached there, and preached about eleven to several Thousands of
People. Met with a Minister on the Way, who said it was not absolutely
necessary for a Gospel Minister that he should be converted. I insisted much in
my Discourse upon the Doctrine of the New Birth, and also the Necessity of a
Minister's being converted, before he could preach CHRIST aright. The Word came
with great Power, and a great Impression was made upon the People in all Parts
of the Assembly. Many Ministers were present. I did not spare them. Most of
them thanked me for my plain Dealing; but one was offended, and so would more
of his Stamp if I was to continue longer in New England: For unconverted
Ministers are the Bane of the Christian Church: And though I honor the Memory of
that great and good Man Mr. Stoddard, yet I think he is much to be blamed for
endeavoring to prove that unconverted Men might be admitted into the Ministry.
How he has handled the Controversy I know not. I think, no solid Arguments can
be brought to defend such a Cause: But the best of Men are permitted to err,
that we may know they were but Men. A Sermon lately published by Mr. Gilbert
Tennent, entitled, The Danger of an unconverted Ministry, I think unanswerable.
As I was Riding to Windsor, after Dinner, an old Man came up to me, saying, He
knew that what I had preached in the Morning was true; I have felt it, says he:
I was under the Spirit of Bondage 20 Years, and have received the Spirit of
Adoption 23 Years. Another came, giving me an Account of his Experiences; and
the People of GOD seemed much revived at Windsor: Where, I am informed, a true
converted Man is the Minister. I preached in the Afternoon, and with such
Freedom, that a young Minister, who had heard me several Times, told me, I had
kept the good Wine until now. As soon as Sermon was over, I rode about a Mile,
crossed a broad Ferry, walked about a Mile and a half, and preached to a
thronged Congregation, belonging to old Mr. Edwards, Father to Mr. Edwards of
Northampton, and, I believe, a true Disciple of the LORD JESUS CHRIST. My Body
being something weak, I did not speak with that Strength as last Night, neither
was I so much assisted: But it is the LORD. He knows best when to dispense, and
when to suspend his Aids. After Exercise I supped at the House of old Mr.
Edwards: His Wife, I believe, was as aged as himself, and, if she was
converted, and I know nothing to the contrary, I fancied I was sitting in the
House of a Zachary and Elizabeth. Indeed I felt great Satisfaction in my own
Soul; and parted from him and his Son (who came with me so far) with some
inward Regret. But, blessed be GOD, we shall meet again in Eternity. LORD,
grant I may always comfort myself with this Thought!

Hartford and Withersfield.
Wednesday, Oct. 22. Reached Hartford, Seven Miles from Windsor, about Ten last
Night. Preached to many Thousands, and with much Freedom and Power, in the
Morning; and to about the same Number at Withersfield, Three Miles from
Hartford* in the Afternoon. Here my Soul was refreshed by the Coming of Mr.
Wheelock and Pomeroy, two young faithful and zealous Ministers of JESUS CHRIST.
The latter, in a Letter to Mr. Edwards, writes thus, Lebanon.

Reverend and dear Sir,
MY Heart was l^^t Night refreshed with the eminent Experiences of John
Sprague, of this Place: The LORD has of late filled him almost brimfull; and
there are many Christians among us, that have of late been greatly enlightened,
and come to a full Assurance. Ah dear Sir, help a poor Worm in Praises. I think
Religion has in this Place rather gained Ground than declined for some Months.
Several have been converted of late and remain very lively. O that the LORD
would multiply that Number! There is observable among us a greater Spirit of
Seriousness than has been usual.


This Morning I intended to go and preach at both their Places, as also at
Plymouth, Rhode Island, etc. but GOD showed me this Day it was inconsistent
with my other Business upon many Accounts: And therefore, after Prayer and
consulting with my Friends, I resolved to go directly to New York. Accordingly
at Night, after writing a few Letters, I rode to Middletown, Ten Miles from
Withersfield, and was entertained at the House of Mr. Russel, the Minister of
the Place, and, I think, an Isralite indeed, and one who has been long mourning
over the Deadness of Professors. Oh that all Ministers were like-minded!

Middletown and Wallingford.
Thursday, Oct. 23. Was much pleased with the Simplicity of my Host, and the
Order wherein his Children attended on Family Devotions. Preached to about 4000
People (great Numbers of which were considerably affected.) About Eleven
o'Clock preached again in the Afternoon, at Wallingford, Fourteen Miles from
Middletown, and then rode on to New Haven, Fourteen Miles further, were I was
affectionately received by Mr. Pierpont, Brother to Mr. Edwards of Northampton.
As I came along I found wonderful Freedom in my Soul, for declining to go so
long a Circuit as was proposed. I conversed profitably with Mr. Lamb, a godly,
zealous Minister of Guilford; and when I came to New Haven, I felt GOD
strengthened my inner Man. I wrestled in Prayer in Company with my dear
Fellow-Travellers, and am persuaded the LORD did not let us go without a
Blessing. Oh that we may all sit down in the Kingdom of Heaven!

NEW HAVEN.
Friday, Oct. 24. Was refreshed with the Sight of dear Mr. Noble, of New York,
who also brought me Letters from Georgia. Blessed be GOD, the Orphan-House
Affairs go on prosperously! The LORD is with my dear Family of a Truth.
Declined preaching in the Morning because it was wet, the People had no Notice
of my Coming, and I had much private Business upon my Hands. Perceived my
Health of Body-grow better and better. Preached in the Afternoon with Power
toward the latter End of the Sermon, and observed some deeply affected. It
being the Time in which the Assembly sat, the Governor, Council and the
Gentlemen of the Lower House, were present. After Sermon, two young Ministers,
who seemed to have some Experience of divine Things, came to converse with me;
and in the Evening I expounded at my Lodging to a Room full of People. The
Power of the LORD was upon me, I spoke with much Weight and Freedom, and had
sweet Fellowship with my dear Companions. Oh who would but travel for CHRIST!

Saturday, Oct. 25. Was again refreshed this Morning by the Sight of Mr.
Jedediah Mills, a dear Man of GOD, Minister of Ripton, near Stratford. He wrote
to me some time ago. I felt his Letter, and now also felt the Man. My Soul was
much united to him. I could not but think, GOD would do great Things by his
Hands. He has had a remarkable Work in his Parish some time ago, and talked
like one that was no Novice in divine Things. With him I dined at Mr. Clap's,
Rector of New Haven College, about one third as big as that at Cambridge. It
has one Rector, three Tutors and about 100 Students. But I hear of no
remarkable Concern amongst them on Account of Religion. I preached twice, and,
I believe, much to the Consolation of GOD's People; many of which, as I have
heard, live in New Haven and the Countries round about. There were sweet
Meltings discernable both Times. I spoke very closely to the Students, and
showed the dreadful Inconveniency of an unconverted Ministry. Dear Mr. Mills
and another Minister came to my Lodgings after Sermon: They rejoiced in Spirit;
and Mr. Mills, when he took his Leave, told me of one Minister in particular,
who had been wrought upon before, but now was gone Home as full as he could
hold. O that GOD may quicken Ministers! Oh that the LORD may make them a
flaming Fire! Come LORD JESUS, come quickly. Amen and Amen.

Sunday, Oct. 26. Preached both Morning and Evening to much larger
Congregations than before, and in the Afternoon observed an especial Presence
of GOD in the Assembly. Many, I believe, were comforted and quickened by the
Holy. Ghost. The People of GOD sent me Word that they were much revived; and
one came and told me, these Words were lately pressed upon her Heart, The
Winter is gone, the Spring is at Hand, the Voice of the Turtle is heard in the
Land. Indeed I believe this will be an acceptable Year of the LORD. Before
Evening Service, the following Note was put into my Hands, by one who came to
me a Day or two ago, some Miles off, under great Distress, and though weak in
Body could not but follow after me. One self-righteous Pharisee resting in
Duties, who has a rational Belief of his damned Estate, and that he has never
felt the Pangs of the New Birth, desires Prayers to your GOD, that has said,
"Ye must be born again, After Sermon waited on the Governor, an aged, grave old
Gentleman, well reported of by good Men. I observed him to be much affected
under the Word. When I came in, he said, I am glad to see you, and heartily
glad to hear you. But his Heart was so full, that he could not speak much. The
T^ars trickled down his aged Cheeks like Drops of Rain, He was thankful to GOD,
he said, for such Refreshings in the Way to our Rest. Food does us good, added
he, when we eat it with an Appetite. And indeed I believe, he had fed upon the
Word. The LORD support him when his Strength ^aileth, and bring his gray Hairs
with Comfort to the Grave! In the Evening I expounded at my Lodging to a great
Number of People, and collected near Forty Pounds for the Orphans. My Soul was
much refreshed, to hear how the Children of GOD were revived by the Word
preached: And nothing confirms me more, that I have been taught of GOD and
preach the Truth as it is in JESUS, than to find our LORD's dear and old
Disciples feeling the Power of the Word wherever I go, and saying, it agrees
with their Experiences. My Sheep hear my Voice, says our dear Redeemer, a
Stranger will they not hear. About Eight at Night. we left New Haven. The Moon
shone bright, and after we had rode three Miles, we called at a House. which,
as Mr. Wheelock, a faithful Minister of JESUS CHRIST, told me before, was full
of GOD. I think they tell me the Mother and Three Daughters were converted
Persons. As soon as I came into the House the Spirit of the LORD came upon me.
GOD gave me to wrestle with him, and and my Friends said, at departing, they
were never in such a House before. Oh it was a sweet Time indeed ^ GOD made his
Power to be felt and known. After I had given a Word of Exhortation, that they
would adorn the Gospel of our LORD in all Things, we went forward on our
Journey, and got to Milford, Ten Miles from New Haven, about Ten a Clock at
Night. The LORD's Name be ^raised, from the rising up of the S^n to ^he going
down of the same. Amen and Amen.

Milford and Stratford.
Monday, Oct. 27. Preached this Morning at Milford, and I think with as much
Clearness, Freedom and Power as I have for a long Season. The Presence of GOD
was much in the Assembly, which was large. Many Ministers were present, and
they could not help glorifying GOD much on my Behalf. Dear Mr. Mills, who came
again to meet me this Morning, was much affected; and as I was riding out of
Town, a godly Gentleman met me, and with Tears in his Eyes, at length out of
the Abundance of his Heart, said, I never saw GOD's Presence in the Sanctuary
on this wise before. I have experienced the Words you spoke; but never heard
them so well cleared up, nor felt them so powerfully set home upon my Soul. It
has been a blessed Time to my Soul; or Words to that Effect. In the Afternoon I
preached at Stra^ford, Four Miles from Milford, but was not so much assisted as
in the Morning. Both Places, especially the latter, I found, were ill reported
of, for their leaning too much toward Arminian Principles. O LORD, convince
them of the Rottenness of such a Foundation, and bring them to know the Truth
as it is in JESUS.

Fairfield and Norwalk.
Tuesday, October. 28. Got to Fairfield, Eight Miles from Stratford, about Ten
last Night. The Weather was very cold, having snowed a great Part of the
Afternoon, but the LORD brought us in Safety. Preached to a considerable large
Congregation in the Morning, and found myself assisted very much in my Prayer
after Sermon, I scarce knew how to leave off. In the Afternoon. at Norwalk,
Twelve Miles from Fairfield, I was restrained much both in Prayer and
Preaching. It rained much, so that we had not a large Congregation. However,
some few, I observed, were affected. I believe my LORD never lets me preach in
vain. Grant this, O GOD, for thy own Name Sake.

Stanford and Rye.
Wednesday, Oct. 29. Came hither last Night in Safety, though it was very (...)
and rainy. Was visited with a great i^wa^^* Trial, so that I was pained t^ the
(...). Was somewhat dejected ^^fore ^ (...) out of my Lodgings, and somewh^t
(...) for a Text after I got up in ^he (...)* The LORD at length (...) one; but
I looked for no Power (...) being very low by my last Night's Trial.
Notwithstanding, before I had preached half an Hour, the blessed Spirit began
to move on the Hearers Hearts in a very awful Manner; young, and especially
many old People were surprizingly affected, so that I thought they would have
cried out. At Dinner the Spirit of the LORD came upon me again, and enabled me
to speak with such Vigor against sending unconverted Persons into the
Ministry, that two Ministers with Tears in their Eyes, publicly confessed,
they had laid Hands on young Men without so much as asking them, Whether they
were born again of GOD, or not? After Dinner, finding my Heart much enlarged, I
prayed, and with such Power, that most in the Room were put under Concern; and
one old Minister was so deeply con^^cted, that calling Mr. Noble and me (...),
with great Difficulty (because of his (...)) he desired our prayers: For,
(...), I have been a Scholar and have p^each'd the Doctrines of Grace for a
long T^me, ^^t I believe I have never felt the Power of them in my own Soul. --
Oh that all unconverted Ministers were (...) make the (...) Confession! I wa^
(...) affected wi^^ his Ingenuity, and (...), by Prayer, earnestly (...) him to
GOD, I took Horse, (...) exceedingly in Spirit, to see how our LORD was getting
himself the Victory, in a Place where Mr. Davenport, a Native of Stanford, a
dear Minister of the blessed JESUS, had been slighted and despised. A Prophet
is not without Honor, save in his own Country and his Father's House.

But here I think it proper to set up my Ebenezer, and before I enter into the
Province of New York, to give GOD Thanks for sending me into New England. I
have now had an Opportunity of seeing the greatest and the most populous Parts
of it; and take all together, it certainly, on many Accounts, exceeds all other
Provinces in America, and for the Establishment of Religion, perhaps all other
Parts of the World. Never, surely, was so large a Spot of Ground settled in
such a Manner in so short a Space as a hundred Years. The Towns through
Connecticut and Eastward toward York, in the Provi^^e of the Massachusetts,
near the River Side, are large and well peopled and exceeding pleasant to
travel through; every five or t^n Miles you have a Meeting House, and I
believe, there is no such Thing as a Plu^^^^st or Non-resident Minister in both
P^^^inces: Many, nay, perhaps, most that preach, I fear, do not experimentally
know CHRIST; yet I cannot see much worldly Advantage to tempt them to take upon
them the sacred Function; few Country-Ministers, as I have been informed have
sufficient allowed them in Money to maintain a Family. GOD has remarkably, in
sundry Times, and after diverse Manners, poured out his Spirit in several Parts
of both Provinces; and it often refreshed my Soul to hear of the Faith of the
good Forefathers who first settled in these Parts. Notwithstanding they had
their Fobles, surely they were a Set of righteous Men! They certainly followed
our LORD's Rule, sought first the Kingdom of GOD and its Righteousness, and
behold all other Things GOD added to them. Their Seed are now blessed in
temporal Things especially, and notwithstanding the rising Generation seem to
be settled on their Lees, yet, I believe, the LORD has left more than seven
Thousand who have not bowed the Knee to Baal. The Ministers and People of
Connecticut seemed to be more simple and serious than those that live near
Boston, especially in the Parts where I went. But, I think, ^he Ministers
Preaching, almost 1univer^all^, by Notes, is a certain Mark they have, in a
great Measure, lost the old (...) Preaching: For, though all are not to (...)
condemned that use Notes, yet it is a sad Symptom of the Decay of vital
Religion, when Reading Sermons becomes fashionable where extempore Preaching
did once almost universally prevail. When the Spirit of Prayer began to be
lost, then Forms of Prayer were invented. And, I believe, the same Observation
will hold good as to Preaching. As for the Universities, I believe, it may be
said, their Light is now become Darkness, Darkness that may be felt, and is
complained of by the most godly Ministers. I pray GOD these Fountains may be
purified, and send forth pure Streams to water the City of our GOD. The Church
of England is at a very low Ebb; and, as far as I can find, had People kept
their primitive Purity it would scarce have got Footing in New England. I have
many Evidences to prove that most of the Churches have been first set up by
immoral Men, and such as would not submit to the Discipline of their
Congregation^ or were corrupt in the Faith: But I will say no more about the
poor Church of England, most of her Sons, whether Ministers or People, I fear,
hate to be reformed. As for the Civil Government of New England, it seems to be
well regulated; and, I think, at opening all their Courts, either the Judge or
Minister begins with Prayer. Family Worship is, I believe, generally kept up.
The Negroes, I think, are better used, in respect both to Soul and Body, than
in any other Province that I have yet seen. In short, I like New England
exceeding well, and when a Spirit of Reformation revives, it certainly will
prevail more than in other Places, because they are more simple in their
Worship, less corrupt in their Principles, and consequently more easily brought
over to the Form of sound Words, into which so many of their pious Ancestors
were delivered. Send forth, O LORD, thy Light and thy Truth, and for thy
infinite Mercies sake show thou have a peculiar Delight in these habitable
Parts of the Earth. Amen. LORD JESUS, Amen.


