Mr. Chauncy's SERMON ON THE Out-pouring of the HOLY GHOST.

The out-pouring of the HOLY GHOST.

A SERMON Preached in BOSTON, May 13. 1742. On a day of prayer observed by the
first Church there, to ask of GOD the effusion of his SPIRIT.

By Charles Chauncy, A. M. Pastor of said Church.

Hos. 10.12. -- It is time to seek the LORD, till he come and rain
righteousness upon us.

Isaiah. 44.3. For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon
the dry ground: I will pour my SPIRIT upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine
Offspring.

BOSTON: Printed by T. FLEET, for D. HENCHMAN and S. ELIOT in Cornhill. 1742.

The HOLY GHOST poured out.
Acts X. 45. -- On the Gentiles also was poured out the gift of the HOLY GHOST.


WE are presented, in the foregoing verses, with an abstract of an excellent
Sermon* preached by the apostle Peter; as also an account of that Divine power
which came on the hearers, even while he was preaching it. v. 44. while Peter
yet spoke these words, the HOLY GHOST fell on all that heard the Word. It Is
observable, the HOLY GHOST fell universally upon the auditory. There was not a
person present, neither Jew nor Gentile, man nor woman, old nor young, but he
was a partaker of the HOLY GHOST. He fell on all that heard the Word. The
following verse exhibits an account of the astonishment, the believing Jews
were filled with at this event. And they of the circumcision, which believed,
were astonished. And the more special reason of their astonishment is given in
the next words; which was not, as we may be ready to imagine, so much the
descent of the HOLY GHOST, as the person on whom he felt. The former they had
often been witnesses to before, it was an event common in that day; the latter
was new and strange, what they did not expect, and were much surprised at. They
were astonished, because, says my text, on the Gentiles also was poured out the
gift of the HOLY GHOST: In which words the three following things are
observable,

I. The gift here spoken of; viz. the HOLY GHOST.

II. The person to whom he was given; and these were the Gentiles also, i. e.
the Gentiles as well as Jews; both in common; one as well as the other, without
respect of persons.

III. The manner of bestowing this gift; It was poured out.

Accordingly, these are the particulars we shall briefly consider, and then
apply to the occasions of the day.

I. The first thing observable in the text is, the gift spoken of; viz. the
HOLY GHOST.

The HOLY GHOST, or HOLY SPIRIT, as the word is elsewhere translated; -- It Is
the name of the THIRD of the SACRED THREE. He is otherwise styled sometimes, by
way of emphasis, THE SPIRIT; sometimes, the SPIRIT of GOD, the SPIRIT of
CHRIST, the SPIRIT of grace, the SPIRIT of truth, the SPIRIT of holiness;
sometimes, he is spoken of as the COMFORTER, the SANCTIFIER, and the like. That
glorious person is pointed out, under all these appellations, in whose name, as
well as in the name of the FATHER and the SON, we are baptized, and by this
instituted rite take upon us the character of Christians.

Only, let it be remembered, where the HOLY GHOST is spoken of as a gift from
GOD, we are not to understand hereby the person, but the influences of this
blessed SPIRIT. Not that the HOLY GHOST is nothing more than an emanation,
operation or influence, from the FATHER. He is often represented, in the bible,
as an agent, a person, as truly and properly so, as either the FATHER or the
SON. But though he be a real, living, active, infinitely glorious person, yet
when he is spoken of as a gift, we are to understand hereby his influences and
operations.

And these are either extraordinary or ordinary.

In the beginning of Christianity, the HOLY GHOST was given to men, in an
extraordinary manner, i. e. in miraculous gifts and powers. It does not appear,
that the HOLY GHOST, in this sense, was confined to the apostles, or their
fellow laborers in the work of the Lord. The apostles, it is true, were the
first, after our SAVIOR 's ascension up to heaven, to whom the HOLY GHOST was
thus given. It was upon them that he descended, on the day of Pentecost, in
cloven tongues like as of fire, to their being enabled to speak in various
languages; yea, and to show signs and wonders, and to work miracles, to the
astonishment and conversion of multitudes. But it should seem, as if the gift
of the HOLY GHOST, in this extraordinary manner, was not the sole privilege of
the apostles, or first ministers of the Christian religion. It rather appears
to have been a gift bestowed upon Christians in common. Some of the persons,
chosen from among the people to be Deacons, were thus miraculously endowed.
It Is particularly recorded of Stephen Acts 6.8.
, that he did great wonders and miracles among the people. And in the Church at
Corinth, there was a great diversity of these extraordinary gifts; and they
seem to have been common among the people. To one was given, by the SPIRIT, the
word of wisdom; to another, the word of knowledge by the same SPIRIT; to
another, faith; to another, the gift of healing; to another, the working of
miracles; to another, prophecy; to another, discerning of Spirits; to another,
diverse kinds of tongues; to another, the interpretation of tongues. And,
perhaps, there were few, in the first days of the gospel, but were endowed with
some extraordinary gift of the SPIRIT or another.

And it was at different seasons that the HOLY GHOST fell upon persons, in his
miraculous powers. Sometimes, he came upon them, even before they were
baptized. So it was in my context. Upon Peter's preaching to the Gentiles, the
HOLY GHOST fell upon them all. And that he fell upon them in his extraordinary
gifts, is evident from what follows: for it is observed, they were heard to
speak with tongues. i. e. with strange tongues, in languages they did not
before understand, nor could speak. But more commonly the HOLY GHOST was given
by the laying on of the hands of the apostles after baptism. An instance of
this we have, in Act. 19.5, 6. where, after a number of disciples had been
baptized, it is said, Paul laid his hands upon them, and the HOLY GHOST came on
them: And he so came on them, as that they spoke with tongues, and prophesied.
And it was the falling of the HOLY GHOST on persons, in his miraculous powers,
by the laying on of the hands of the apostles, that put Simon Magus upon making
an offer to purchase this wonderful gift with money*.

Some, perhaps, may be ready to envy these first Christians their privilege,
in being thus miraculously endowed; imagining, they were much better of it than
we, who can pretend to no such extraordinary gifts. But what says the inspired
Paul? Why, speaking to the Christians at Corinth, concerning these very
extraordinary gifts of the HOLY GHOST, he directs them to what was far more
desirable. I show unto you, says he, a more excellent way. And this way he
showed to them, was that of Charity or love. The true love of our neighbor,
springing from love to GOD, and a principle of faith in JESUS CHRIST, is a gift
far preferable to any of the miraculous gifts, the first Christians were
endowed with: And upon whomsoever GOD bestows this gift, he does more for them,
than if he enabled them to speak with the tongues of men or angels, or gave
them faith so that they could remove mountains. This, it is true, might make
them more eminent in their own as well as in the esteem of others; but the
former would render them better in themselves, and far more acceptable in the
sight of GOD.

It Is worth our particular remark, the extraordinary gifts of the HOLY GHOST
made no man the better Christian. They did not sanctify his soul, or put him in
a state of favor with GOD: And if sanctified persons were those, on whom they,
were often conferred, yet this was not always the case. It was no certain
argument of a man's being a good man, a sincere servant of JESUS CHRIST, that
the HOLY GHOST had come upon him in his extraordinary gifts. The Spirit of
prophecy fell on Balaam, who made Israel to sin, and of whom it is testified by
an apostle, that he loved the wages of unrighteousness. And Judas, as well as
the other apostles, had the power of working signs and wonders, and of casting
out Devils: Yea, our SAVIOR himself has declared, that he will, in the great
day of judgment, say unto many who have prophesied in his name, and in his name
cast out Devils, and in his name done many wonderful works, I never knew you:
Depart from me, ye that work inequity*. These miraculous gifts were rather
bestowed for the good of others, than the persons themselves who had them.
Tongues, says the apostle, are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to
them that believe not. They were intended as an open attestation to the truth
of the Christian religion; which being now settled in the world, there is no
further use of them.

I therefore go on to observe,

By the gift of the HOLY GHOST, we are to understand, not only these
extraordinary powers, but that ordinary influence, common to all ages of the
Church, whereby the work of Divine grace is begun and carried on in the souls
of men, to there being prepared in this world for the blessedness of the world
that is to come.

Some, I am sensible, are for confining the gift of the HOLY GHOST to the
apostolic age: But there is no reason for this. It Is plain from the current
strain of the whole new testament, that the gift of the HOLY GHOST is as
necessary for persons in all after ages, as it was in the first days of the
Gospel. It Is therefore declared in language extending to all times as well as
Persons John 3.5.
, except a man be born of the SPIRIT, he cannot enter into the kingdom of GOD;
and again, Romans 8.9.
If any man have not the SPIRIT of CHRIST, he is none of his; and yet again, 1
John 4.13.
Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he has given us of
his SPIRIT.

Nor by the gift of the SPIRIT, in this Sense, are we to understand barely the
objective influence of revealed truths, or any improvements of nature that are
merely moral; but that immediate presence and influence of the HOLY GHOST,
whereby a real power is communicated to the purposes of religion. This is the
true meaning of those numerous texts, wherein those who are real Christians,
are said to be born of the SPIRIT; to have the SPIRIT dwelling in their Hearts
by faith; to be strengthened with all might in the inner man by the SPIRIT; to
be led by the SPIRIT; to walk in the SPIRIT, and the like. By these phrases, is
pointed out a sort of influence beyond what is merely natural or moral: It Is
evidently their main scope to represent the holy SPIRIT as all in all in the
business of pure and undefiled religion; the beginner, the carrier on, and the
finisher of faith, yea, and of every thing else that is spiritually good, in
the hearts of sincere Christians: Nor will any thing short of this come up to
the just and full import of these expressions.

Nor is it any objection against these operations of the HOLY GHOST, that we
know not how he operates upon the humane mind. Men may, if they please, take
occasion from hence to speak contemptuously of this dispensation of GOD's
Grace; but it is, in true reason, no argument against the reality of a thing,
that the manner of it cannot be described. Who can tell how his own Spirit
operates on his own body, or his own body on his own Spirit? And yet, there is
nothing we are more sure of, than that they mutually operate on each other. And
if it be no objection against the mutual operation of soul and body upon one
another, that we know not the modus of their operation, neither is our
ignorance as to the manner of the SPIRIT's operation on the hearts of Men, any
objection against the thing it self: Nor is it at all incredible, that the GOD
who made our souls, and is perfectly acquainted with all their springs of
action, should be able to operate upon them; and this, in a way suited to their
nature, and so as not to break in, in the least, upon the just exercise of
their reasonable powers. It would argue but a low conception of the infinitely
wise GOD to suppose the contrary. He that has an immediate access to our
Spirits can certainly work upon them, and, in a reasonable way, influence them
both to will and to do of his own good pleasure: And that the Divine
ever-blessed SPIRIT does really thus operate upon them, and in thus doing acts
the part especially assigned him to the affair of man's salvation, must be
acknowledged to be the obvious sense of a great number of texts, which cannot,
without the greatest violence, bet interpreted to any other meaning. But it
will not be amiss, if we are a little particular in explaining the gift of the
HOLY GHOST, as it means this internal operation of his, which is common to all
ages of the Church. And it consists in the following things,

1. In convincing men of Sin. This is the first operation of the SPIRIT upon
the Sinner. Accordingly, this is particularly mentioned as one of the ends for
which the SPIRIT is said to be given to men, even that he might reprove, or
convince, them of sin John 16.8.
. And this he does by awakening their attention, bringing them to
consideration, and giving them such a sight of sin as they never had before.
When the SPIRIT convinces of sin, he opens the sinners eyes, so that he sees it
to be an evil and bitter thing, that he has forsaken the LORD his GOD. He has
now an apprehension of sin as what is hateful to the Divine majesty, and
dreadful in its effects and consequences; He has now a view of himself as an
object of wrath, and heir of hell, and in danger every moment of being made
miserable in that future place of torment: And from this apprehension of sin,
and of his own immanent hazard as under the guilt of it, he is filled with
uneasiness; bitterly reflects upon himself, and feels all that inward distress
which is the result of a consciousness of guilt, an actual clear view of
himself as in a state, wherein he deserves to be sent away to be made unhappy
in the place of blackness of darkness.

Some, perhaps, may think, there is no need of this perception of sin, and
uneasiness from a sense of guilt; but it is ordinarily necessary, as that
without which there can be no such thing as a real and through conversion to
GOD: To be sure, it is a matter of necessity in respect of adult persons, those
among them particularly, who instead of being restrained from sin from their
early Childhood, have given the reins to their lusts, and gone on adding
iniquity to transgression. It Is seldom, if ever, that a saving change is
effected in such, but it is preceeded with bitter reflections on their past
security and folly, and uneasy sensations from an apprehension of themselves as
obnoxious to the Divine vengeance.

Though it ought to be particularly remembered here, that the degrees of distress,
from a consciousness of sin and fear of wrath, are vastly various in different
persons. In some it is greater, in others smaller; in some it is of longer, in
others of shorter continuance; in all, that are savingly brought home to GOD in
JESUS CHRIST, the concern of soul is sufficient to put them effectually upon
the use of appointed means in order to their obtaining mercy; but in none, is
this distress excited to so great a degree as to put them beside themselves,
unless from their own weakness, or ignorance, or some faulty cause or other,
which ought not to be ascribed to the SPIRIT of GOD.

And it may be worth remembering likewise, that this conviction of sin is a
thing quite different from conversion. It Is only the first step toward it, a
preparation of mind making way for it: Nor unless it end in this blessed
change, will it signify any thing, if persons are under ever so deep distress.
This should be well considered by such as may be under convictions. You may not
from hence conclude your selves to be in a good state. The sight you have of
sin as an evil thing, the apprehension you have of your selves as objects of
wrath, and the uneasiness you may be under herefrom, are nothing more than the
tendencies toward conversion. And let me tell you, there may be the former and
not the latter. You may turn out shameful apostates from GOD after very serious
impressions, very strong convictions, yea, and great zeal in an attendance on
religious duties. O take heed, you don't make a righteousness of your
convictions, that you don't place them in the room of CHRIST, in the room of
true Gospel repentance! Don't suffer your selves to rest in convictions! If you
place your religion here, and attain no higher, they will do you no good; yea,
notwithstanding your convictions, though they have struck you to the earth, you
will certainly be excluded heaven, and be sent away to hell. Realise it, the
great design of conviction is to put you upon the use of the instituted means
of salvation. Their use is to show you your need of CHRIST, to open to you the
value of grace, and quicken you, with a becoming importunity, to seek GOD's
face and favor: And if they are not improved for these purposes, they will be
of no spiritual service to you. O fix it in your minds as a sure truth, that
you may have even the strongest convictions, and no saving good follow upon
them! And it is often thus; yea, in respect of many with whom it is thus, they
are the worse, and not the better for their convictions. Sinners who have been
surprised with fearfulness, under an apprehension of sin and guilt, have often
turned out the worst of men, the most hardened and abandoned to all that is
good. The latter end with them has been worse than the beginning. You are
therefore, at present, in a critical state; and should look well to your
selves, least, after having escaped the pollutions that are in the world
through lust, you should turn away from the holy commandment delivered to you.
But I must not enlarge,

2. Another operation, included in this gift of the HOLY GHOST, is that whereby
he produces in men true gospel faith. This faith is much celebrated in the
writings of the new testament. It Is every where represented as the grand
characteristic of a true Christian. It Is indeed that without which it is
impossible to please GOD; yea, it is by this, and this alone, that we are
justified through the LORD JESUS CHRIST, without the deeds of the law. This
faith is variously exhibited to us; sometimes in metaphorical language, but
more commonly in plain, easy words. And the thing intended by it, is not merely
an assent of the mind to gospel truths: This indeed there will be; the man who
has true faith embraces the Scripture revelation; yea, the whole Scheme of
Christian Doctrine, so far as he has an understanding of it, and he will have
an understanding of it so far as it is absolutely necessary; But then, his
faith is not a mere speculative thing, but such an inward, strong persuasion as
will operate in general agreably to the truths he professes to believe: In
particular, he is so fully persuaded of the glorious things spoken of
concerning CHRIST, his person and mediatorial undertaking for sinners, that he
acknowledges no other SAVIOR, nor has dependence upon any but him; yea, so
clearly satisfied is he of the ability and readiness of the LORD JESUS CHRIST
to be a SAVIOR to him, of the fullness of grace and merit there is in him, that
he ventures his all on him, his soul and his eternal concerns; trusting in him,
and in him alone for righteousness and eternal life. He esteems himself an
unprofitable servant, after he has done his best; and as having done no more
than it was his duty to do. He counts all things but loss for the excellency of
the knowledge of CHRIST JESUS his LORD; yea, he counts them but dung, that he
may win CHRIST, and be found in him, not having on his own righteousness,,
which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of CHRIST, the
righteousness which is of GOD by faith.

This is the true Christian faith: And it is to make us the subjects of this
faith, that the HOLY GHOST is poured out. It Is not the mere result of that
testimony of the SPIRIT, the evidence of miracles, by which the Gospel has been
confirmed, as a revelation from GOD; but is the produce of that internal work
of his upon the mind of the sinner, whereby, the eyes of his understanding
being opened, he has such a view of the suitableness of the gospel method of
salvation in general, and of the loveliness of CHRIST in particular, his
all sufficiency to be his SAVIOR, as that he is persuaded and enabled to
embrace him as such, giving himself up to him, to be instructed, governed and
saved by him. The scripture is every where full in it, that this faith is of
the operation of the SPIRIT. Hence it is particularly mentioned among the fruits
of the SPIRIT Gal. 5.22.
; and is expressly spoken of, as of the operation of GOD Col. 2.12
, and as the gift of GOD Ephesians. ^.8.
. And when Simon Peter professed his faith in CHRIST, in those words, Thou art
CHRIST the SON of the living GOD; JESUS said unto him, Flesh and blood has not
revealed it to thee, but my FATHER which is in heaven Mat. 16.16, 17.
.

3. Another operation, included in the gift of the HOLY GHOST, is the change
whereby men are made new creatures. We every where read, in the inspired
writings, of a Change, which it is necessary Sinners should pass under, as ever
they would hope, according to the tenor of the Gospel covenant, to be admitted
into the coming kingdom of GOD. This change is spoken of under a variety of
names. It Is sometimes called conversion, sometimes regeneration, sometimes it is
compared to a resurrection, and sometimes to a new creation. The same thing is
intended in all these phrases; even that change which is made in men, when they
become true Christians. Not that there is any change effected in them,
physically speaking; their natural powers and faculties are still the same: But
in the religious and moral sense, they are strangely altered. There is a change
wrought both in their hearts and lives, in all their inward principles as well
as outward behavior in the world. They are, as it were, new molded and
fashioned. They have other thoughts and sentiments, other springs of action,
other views and aims; they are so altered as to be quite other persons, they
have another temper of mind, another taste and relish, another heart and soul,
and they lead another kind of life, are pious toward GOD, righteous toward
men, and sober in respect of themselves.

This is the change we must pass under, in order to our being made meet for the
inheritance of the saints in light. And it is to effect this change, that the
HOLY GHOST is given: Nor can it be effected in any way but by his operations in
us. It is not the produce of mere reason, nor of external revelation. It is not
bro't about by the bare influence of moral motives, whether they are fetched
from the law or the Gospel: No, but it is an effect of the power of the SPIRIT,
working effectually in them that believe. And it is every where in the bible
spoken of as such. This is the just import of the metaphors, under which this
change is figured out to us. That of a new creation points our view directly to
GOD as the author of conversion. If this were an easy business, a matter within
the reach of men's own power, what they could accomplish by an act of their own
free will, it would never have been set forth under this similitude. To create
is the known prerogative of GOD: And the first thing most obviously occurring
to our minds from this resemblance is, that the new creature is the workmanship
of GOD. The same thought is suggested from the metaphor of a resurrection,
under which this change is sometimes spoken of. Raising the dead bespeaks the
agency of GOD. It Is therefore natural, and almost unavoidable, when we read of
conversion under this figure, to conclude it to be a work beyond the power of
man, and as requiring a Divine power to effect it.

But besides metaphors, there are plain texts to our purpose. Says the inspired
Paul, treating of this matter, Ephesians. 2.10.
We are HIS w^^^manship, created (...) CHRIST JESUS to good works. And we find
the (...) GOD himself bespeaking his people, by way of promise, in such terms
as those, Ezekiel. 36.26.
A new heart also will I give unto you, and a new spirit will I put within you:
and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you a
heart of flesh. The like promise we have again Ghap. 11. ver. 19.
, And I will put a new heart within you; and I will take the stony heart out of
your flesh, and give you an heart of flesh. It Is as plain, from these and many
other texts that might easily be mentioned, as words can make it, that the
change signified by conversion or the new creature, is the work of GOD; his
work by his holy SPIRIT, which he gives to men to effect this change in them.

But some, perhaps, may be so curious as to ask, how does the HOLY GHOST
produce this change in men?

And to such the answer is, this is one of those things, concerning which we
know but very little: Nor ought our ignorance, as to the manner of this
production, to be esteemed the least objection against the truth of the thing.
We know not the manner in the natural; and why should it be thought strange if
we know not the manner in the spiritual creation? The methods of operation, in
the Kingdom of grace, and in the Kingdom of nature, are both alike secret and
mysterious: And we have no more reason therefore to object against the former
than the latter. It Is no argument against the formation of children, that we
know not how the bones grow in the womb of her that is with child; neither is
it of any validity against the formation of the new man, that we know not
precisely the way and manner in which the Divine SPIRIT exerts himself in the
production of this spiritual workmanship: They are both fearful and wonderful.

Thus much indeed we know in general, that in new making men, the Divine SPIRIT
acts in, and upon them, in a way suited to their nature as Men, in a way that
agrees with their character as moral agents. He so manages the matter, as that
they are changed into new men, in a method perfectly harmonizing with their
several powers, so as that they oppose not one another, but are preserved in
due dependence and subordination to each other. Light is commanded to shine
into the understanding, the enlightened understanding directs and governs the
will, and the will the several affections of the soul and powers of the body:
But to say precisely how the HOLY GHOST enlightens the mind, and then
captivates the will, and then preserves the affections and passions in due
harmony, and conducts the life in the way of holiness; these things, I say, are
difficulties in this dispensation of grace: And as they are such, the less we
puzzle our selves or others about them, the better. The thing is certain, Men
are sometimes new made; and when they are so, it is as evident from the
Scripture, that it is GOD by his SPIRIT, that new makes them. Let us see to it,
that we be in the number of those who are new creatures, and as to the way and
manner in which it pleases GOD to bring this about, we need not be at all
concerned about it. To go on,

4. Another thing, included in this gift of the HOLY GHOST, is his exciting
sincere Christians to, and assisting them in, the practice of their duty, to
their increasing in grace, and persevering therein unto the end. There is need
of the HOLY GHOST not only to turn men from the power of sin and Satan unto
GOD, but, when they are thus changed, to stir them up to activity in the work
of GOD and their Soul's salvation, and to assist them in it. If left to
themselves, the best Christians, those that are fullest of faith and holiness,
and every other grace, would soon lose their vigor* nor without the continual
aids of the Divine SPIRIT would they be able to honor CHRIST, and adorn their
profession by a conversation becoming the Gospel. The HOLY GHOST therefore is
given to them, to excite good motions in them, to animate their resolutions, to
quicken their graces and assist them in the exercise of them, to their running
the way of GOD's commandments with strength and vigor, with cheerfulness and
delight. This is certainly the language of Scripture upon this head. Hence that
prayer of holy David, Psalm 1^9.25.
Quicken me according to thy word! and again, ver. 35
Quicken thou me in thy way! And hence also those pious acknowledgments of his,
ver. 50.
Thy word, i. e. as enlivened by thy SPIRIT, has quickened me. And again, ver.
93.
I will never forget thy precepts; for with them thou have quickened me. And
the HOLY GHOST is said to dwell in the hearts of good Christians; and they are
represented as led by the SPIRIT, and as walking in the SPIRIT. The plain
meaning of all which texts is, at least thus much, that the HOLY GHOST is given
to good men to be their excitement in duty, their continual help in the
practice of it.

And it is owing to the same presence and influence of the HOLY GHOST, that they
are enabled to grow in grace, and in a conformity to the image and example of
their Savior; to be more weaned from this world, and prepared for a better.

In one word, it is owing to the same influence still, that they are kept from
falling, and preserved through faith unto salvation. And indeed, such are their
indispositions within, and such their temptations without; such is the subtilty
of Satan, such the snares of the world, and such their own weakness, that it
could not be expected, but they should draw back to perdition, were they not
under the special and continual guidance of the HOLY GHOST: And to this it is
always attributed in Scripture, that they are preserved unto CHRIST's heavenly
kingdom. Hence the apostle speaks of them, 1 Pet. 1.5.
as those who are kept by the power of GOD, through faith, unto salvation.
Hence also that Doxology in the Epistle of Jude, ver. 24, 25.
Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding Joy, to the only wise
GOD our SAVIOR, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and ever.
Amen.

5. Another thing contained in the gift of the HOLY GHOST is support and
consolation under sufferings and afflictions. Frequent mention is made of this
in the writings of the new Testament. When the apostle Paul sought to GOD for
grace, in a time of great trial, that was the answer of GOD to him, 2 Cor. 12.9.
My grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect in weakness.
And hear how this same apostle triumphs over difficulties, and all manner of
sufferings, in the power of this grace of the SPIRIT of GOD. ver. 10.
Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in
persecutions, for CHRIST 's sake. And others also have been strengthened, with
all might, to all long-suffering, according to the glorious power of the SPIRIT
of JESUS CHRIST, which has been given to them. It was eminently thus, in the
first days of the Gospel, with the Confessors and Martyrs for the name and
cause of CHRIST. The strength of GOD was visibly perfected in many of these,
who, being weak, were yet made strong to suffer for his sake. To what else can
it be ascribed, that they were enabled to encounter so many deaths, with so
much calmness and patience, with so much cheerfulness and holy rejoicing? How
else can it be accounted for, that they should be ready to give themselves up
to be tortured, not accepting deliverance; that they should be willing to
undergo the trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover, of bonds and
imprisonment; that they should submit to be stoned, to be sawn asunder, to be
slain with the sword; that they should be content to wander about in
sheepskins and goat skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented: I say, to
what can it be attributed, that they should be willing to submit to these
sufferings, and be able to go through them with courage, and patience, and even
joy, but to this, that they were divinely assisted? The power of the SPIRIT of
JESUS CHRIST was with them, supporting, encouraging and strengthening them: And
to this it was owing, that they were both willing and able to suffer any thing
for the honor of him, who had loved them, and died for them. And the same
power of the same SPIRIT is ready to be with us, under all the trials and
sufferings, we are called to pass through, in the course of providence. The
same blessed SPIRIT, which was given to them is promised to us also; and it is
now often seen, that he is a support and comfort, in a glorious degree, to
sincere Christians, in proportion to what they are called to endure; yea, and
such is the sense they sometimes have of the consolations of GOD, that they are
able to exult, in the midst of the heaviest trials, in the language of the holy
apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 1.3, 4, 5.
Blessed be GOD, even the FATHER of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, the FATHER of
mercies, and the GOD of all comfort, who comfort us in all our tribulation.
For as the sufferings of CHRIST abound in us, so our consolation abounds by
CHRIST.

6. Another thing contained in this gift of the HOLY GHOST, is that inward joy,
which Christians are sometimes the subjects of. This Joy is therefore
particularly mentioned as one of the fruits of the SPIRIT Gal. 5.22.
. And Christians are sometimes spoken of as having Joy in GOD Romans 2.11.
, as rejoicing in hope of the glory of GOD v. 22.
, yea, as rejoicing with joy unspeakable and full of glory 1 Pet. 1.8.
. And they are represented, as praying to GOD to fill them with all joy and
peace in believing Romans 15.13.
, and as giving thanks to GOD, who causes them to triumph in CHRIST 2 Cor.
2.14.
: And the peace of GOD, which passes all understanding, is promised to them,
to keep their hearts and minds through CHRIST JESUS Phil. 4.7.
. The obvious import of all which texts is, that there is such a thing as
inward peace and pleasure, which sometimes rises to such a height in the hearts
of sincere Christians, as to cause them to exult and triumph in GOD: Nor is
this Joy the effect of mere nature; neither does it result from the sole
exercise of the mind, either upon it self, or the truths revealed in the
Gospel, but is the produce of the HOLY GHOST, which is given to them. That of
COMFORTER is therefore the Style, in which this blessed SPIRIT is sometimes
spoken of in Scripture Joh. 14.16.
. And because it is by the HOLY GHOST, that GOD comfort his people, he is
therefore called the GOD of consolation Romans 15.15.
.

But to prevent our falling into mistakes about this Joy, 'twill be necessary
to observe here, that when ever it is the genuine fruit of the SPIRIT, and not
a counterfeit, the foundation of it is laid in a faith that purifies the heart,
and purges the conscience from dead works to serve the living GOD. Hence that
of the apostle, 2 Cor. 1.12.
For our REJOICING is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity
and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of GOD, we have
our conversation in the world. And very observable to the same purpose is that
exhortation of this same apostle, Gal. 6.4.
But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in
himself. The way to true Joy is a religious and impartial examination into the
frame of our hearts, and the course of our actions, and if our Joy springs from
a clear discernment of these as conformed to the tenor of the Gospel covenant,
we may hope it is the produce of a divine influence: Whereas, if it is a sudden
flash only, and arises we know not how, nor upon what it is bottomed, it is much
to be suspected; to be sure, no great stress should be laid on it. For it is to
be remembered, there is the Joy of the hypocrite as well as of the good
Christian; there is a Joy that is the effect of nature as well as grace. Such
was the Joy of the stony ground hearers; such was the gladness, with which
Herod heard John Baptist preach; and such was the taste of the word of GOD, and
of the powers of the world to come, which the Jewish apostates were partakers
of Heb. 6.5.
. In all these persons, there was the passion of Joy, and it arose, probably,
in some of them, to a considerable height; but yet, was nothing more than a
sensitive passion, the result of the workings of mere animal nature. And this,
it may be feared, is the only Joy of many others: It certainly is, of all
those, who have Joy without faith. Men may pretend what they please, but if
they are not possessed of faith, that faith I mean, which is a living principle
of grace in the Heart, and will evidence it self to be so by its genuine
influence on the life, their Joy is only a fire of their own kindling; and though
they walk in the light of their fire, and in the sparks which they have
kindled, yet may they, notwithstanding, receive this at the hand of GOD, they
may lie down in sorrow.

And as this Joy, if it be produced by the SPIRIT of GOD, will spring from
heart-purifying faith, so will it make those who have it humble. They Will be for
exalting GOD, and abasing themselves. An illustrious example of this we have in
the great apostle of the Gentiles. No mere man, it may be, ever more abounded
in Joy than he; and yet, who more filled with humility? By the grace of GOD,
says he, 1 Cor. 15.10.
I am what I am. And again, Gal. 2.20.
I live; yet not I, but CHRIST lives in me. And comparing himself with his
fellow laborers in the work of the LORD, that is his language 1 Cor. 15.9.
, I am the least of the apostles, and not meet to be called an apostle; yea, he
speaks of himself Ephesians. 3.8.
, as less than the least of all Saints. And this humble frame of soul is ever a
concomitant of true spiritual joy and consolation in the LORD. It disposes
persons to entertain a low thought of themselves. So far are they from boasting
of their own goodness, that they wonder at the grace of GOD, in taking notice
of such unworthy creatures as they are. They are not of the Spirit of the
Pharisees in the gospel, who trusted in themselves that they were righteous,
and despised others: On the contrary, that is a just representation of their
true temper, in lowliness of mind, esteeming others better than themselves.

Moreover, this Joy, if it be of the HOLY GHOST, will observe, at least so far
as it is under his guidance, a just decorum in the way and manner of expressing
it self. It will not be ostentatious, discovering a forwardness to show it self in
such methods as are out of the way, and carry the face of a desire to be seen
of men. It will choose rather in private to vent it self in acknowledgments of
praise to GOD, than in the streets, and public places of concourse: This is too
like the Pharisees, who loved to pray in the corners of the streets, that they
might be seen of men: Nor does it seem so congruous a thing to behold this joy
operating in LAUGHTER. It Is, in its nature, a sober, rational satisfaction and
delight; and is conversant about the most serious and awful matters. A
disposition to laughter seems therefore to savor too much of levity, to be an
appendage of this Joy. It Is indeed too sensual a mode of expressing so Divine a
passion, and approaches too near to the way, in which the men of the world
express that joy, which has the things of time and sense for its proper object:
Nor does it discover that awe and reverence, that holy fear and caution, with
which this Joy ought always to be mixed, as it has to do with the infinite
majesty of heaven, and the everlasting concerns of our souls.

In fine, it deserves our further consideration here, that the passionate part
of this Joy, the sensible working of it, is widely different in different
persons, according to the different turn of their natural tempers. Some are of
a ductile make, their passions soft, and apt to carry them into transports. And
if persons of this moveable disposition are more sensibly affected, than others
of a firm and steady frame of mind, it is no other than might be expected: But,
perhaps, a settled, permanent composure and delight of soul, arising from the
testimony of a good conscience, is the most desirable sense, in which we can be
possessed of the joys of religion; at least, in ordinary cases: To be sure,
whoever have this peace of GOD, this joy of the LORD, they are blessed persons,
though they know not the meaning of those raptures some others may experience;
and the state of mind they are brought to, they may assure themselves, is an
effect of the HOLY GHOST, which has been at work in them.

7. The last thing, the time will allow me to mention, as contained in this
gift, is the witness of the SPIRIT. That is to say, that influence of the HOLY
GHOST whereby he satisfies good Christians of their adoption into GOD's family,
and interest in the promises of the Gospel covenant. The holy apostle Paul is
very express in taking notice of this instance of the SPIRIT's operation. Hence
he applies to those, who are led by the SPIRIT, and are the Sons of GOD, in
that language, Romans 8.15.
But ye have received the SPIRIT of adoption, whereby ye cry, Abba, father.
Parallel whereto are those words of his, in his Epistle to the Galatians Chap.
4. ver. 6.
, And because ye are Sons, GOD has sent forth the SPIRIT of his SON, into your
hearts, crying, Abba, father. But the most observable text to this purpose, is
that in Romans 8.16, 17. The SPIRIT it self bears witness with our Spirits,
that we are the children of GOD: And if children, then Heirs, heirs of GOD, and
joint-heirs with CHRIST.

Some, perhaps, from this text, may expect an immediate whisper from the
SPIRIT, or some secret extraordinary impulse, assuring them, they are the
children of GOD. And I deny not but the HOLY GHOST can, if he pleases, in this
way, make it evident to a man, that he is an heir to the inheritance of the
Saints in light: But this does not appear to be the way of the SPIRIT 's
witnessing; and it may be dangerous for persons to ground their hopes of heaven
upon mere impulses and impressions: Especially, will this be dangerous, if they
set up these things in the room of the written word, or depend upon them in
opposition to it. Multitudes have by degrees come to this, and dreadful have
been the delusions they have been betrayed into. They have even mistook, not
only the workings of their own imaginations, but the suggestions of Satan, for
undoubted dictates of the HOLY GHOST.

This witness of the SPIRIT is always agreeable to the Scripture, and lies
principally in two things. First, in producing in us the disposition of GOD's
children, which is done in the work of regeneration, whereby we are formed to a
Divine likeness, and made, as it were, living images of our FATHER in heaven.
And then, secondly, in helping us to see in our selves this filial frame and
temper of Soul, and so to see it as from hence to be clearly persuaded of our
interest in the rights of the Sons of GOD. The first of these is the proper
Gospel evidence to the privilege of adoption; the second, that by which it is
made evident to us that this privilege is ours; and by both is completed the
witness of the SPIRIT, that influence of his, whereby we are assured that we
are GOD's children.

Let me add here, and I may do it with the greatest boldness, that where there
is not a work of grace in the heart, it can never be witnessed to a man, that
he is a child of GOD; for he is not: And by whatever impulses, impressions, or
revelations, he is made to believe that he is, he is certainly under the
influence of a heated imagination, or a spirit of delusion. The Divine SPIRIT,
as Mr. HENRY observes, "witnesses to none, the privileges of children, that
have not the nature and disposition of children"; No, but he "testifies our
adoption, as Mr. BURKITT 's words are, by evidencing to us our sanctification
And all this, as he adds BURKITT in loc.
, is done, not by sudden impulses, and immediate inspirations, which is the
witnessing of the SPIRIT, Enthusiasts pretend to, but the SPIRIT witnesses in a
way of argumentation. Thus, whoever repents, believes and obeys the Gospel,
says the Scripture, shall be saved; but the SPIRIT helps us to see that we do
so, and accordingly enables us to infer and conclude that we shall be saved."
-- But I am sensible I have been too long in explaining to you, what we are to
understand by the gift of the HOLY GHOST. I therefore hasten, to the next
observable in the text, viz.

II. The Persons to whom the HOLY GHOST is said to have been given; and these
were the Gentiles also. i. e. both Jews and Gentiles, the one as well as the
other, without respect of persons.

The Jews were formerly the people of GOD, in distinction from all others. The
LORD was their GOD so as he was not the GOD of other nations. He had selected
them out of the rest of the world, to be instructed, conducted and blessed by
him beyond any other people: They are therefore called a chosen generation, a
peculiar people; and to them, as the apostle speaks, pertained the adoption,
and the glory, and the giving the law, and the covenant, and the promises of
GOD. And they had a high conceit of themselves, on account of this distinction,
GOD had made between them, and the other nations of the earth; encouraging a
hope, as if it would always continue: Nor could they be reconciled to the
thought of an enlargement of GOD's covenant, so as to bring others upon a level
with them in regard of the favor of GOD, and the happiness of heaven. The
apostles themselves; and this, even after the death and resurrection of CHRIST,
were too much under the influence of this Jewish Spirit. And it was, in an
extraordinary manner, by a vision from heaven, that Peter was showed not to
call any man common or unclean. And it was upon his preaching, in consequence
of this Divine revelation, in that strain, I perceive of a truth, that God is
no respecter of persons; but in every nation, he that fears God and works
righteousness is accepted of him; I say, it was upon Peter's preaching in such
language as this, that GOD owned the truth of what he delivered, by a
miraculous effusion of the HOLY GHOST, even while he was preaching, upon all
his hearers promiscuously, both Jews and Gentiles. And it was this pouring out
of the SPIRIT upon the Gentiles in common with the Jews, that was the occasion
of the astonishment we read of, in the former part of the verse, in which is
the text. The Jews could not tell what to make of it, to see that GOD took as
much notice of the Gentiles as of them: It was a mighty surprise to them; yea,
there was scarce a greater stone of stumbling to them, than the calling of the
Gentiles. This was a mystery hid in GOD from ages and generations, and not made
manifest to the Saints until now Ephesians. 3.9. Col. 1.26.
. We of the Gentiles, who were aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and
strangers from the covenant of promise, and far off from GOD, were now made
nigh by the blood of CHRIST; for he is our peace, and has made both Jews and
Gentiles one, having broken down the middle wall of partition between us, and
having preached peace to us who were afar off, as well as to them that were
nigh. And my text is a standing glorious evidence of an Equality between Jews
and Gentiles, in regard of the gift of the HOLY GHOST. For he was given to both
these sorts of persons, without distinction: Nor is there, as to this matter,
any respect of persons with GOD. He puts no difference between Jew and Greek;
but is rich to all that call upon him: And whoever the persons be that do so,
whether they be Jews or Gentiles, whether they be bond or free, male or female,
they shall, without regarding the one any more than the other, have granted to
them the gift of the HOLY GHOST. It is promised equally to all the varying
kinds of sinners, and they have all equal encouragement to apply to the father
of mercies for it. They are all one in CHRIST JESUS: He came equally to be a
SAVIOR to them all, and he is equally ready to import of his SPIRIT to them
all, to fulfill in them the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith
with power. But I must go on to the last thing taken notice of in the text, viz.

3. The manner of bestowing this gift of the HOLY GHOST. It was poured out. i.
e. GOD was pleased to bestow it largely and plentifully. He so bestowed it, as
that they were filled with the SPIRIT; as that they were all made to partake of
this gift. Like a plentiful shower of rain, the HOLY GHOST came down upon the
whole assembly, he fell upon every person present; they had each one a sensible
perception of his influences, and were enabled herefrom to speak with tongues,
and magnify GOD. The miraculous gifts of the HOLY GHOST, were those especially,
in which he was now poured out; but it is probable, he fell likewise, in a
plentiful manner, in his more ordinary influences; and that numbers were
enlightened and humbled, and put, at least, under a hopeful prospect of being
converted and saved. To be sure, the HOLY GHOST was thus poured out, in the
first days of the Gospel. i. e. in his graces as well as gifts; to the ends of
faith and sanctification, as well as to enable men to show signs and wonders.
Hence, when the apostle is speaking of regeneration, as accompanied with
justification, and a hope of eternal life, he attributes it to the HOLY GHOST
shed, or poured out, on us, abundantly, through JESUS CHRIST, our SAVIOR Tit.
3.6.
.

And this manner of giving the HOLY GHOST, the pouring him out, the bestowing
him on great numbers of persons, as well as in large and abundant measures, is
one of the things particularly prophesied of, as what should be the glory of
Gospel Times. The texts to this purpose are very observable. Says GOD himself,
Isa. 44.3. I will pour out my SPIRIT upon thy seed, and my blessing on thy
offspring. And again, Zach. 12.10. I will pour out upon the house of David, and
upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the SPIRIT of grace and of supplication; and
they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him,
as one mourns for his only Son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one
that is in bitterness for a first born. And yet again, Joel 2.28. It shall come
to pass afterward, that I will pour out my SPIRIT upon all flesh. These texts,
to be sure, the two last of them, principally look forward to Gospel times; and
they had a mavelous accomplishment in the first days of Christianity, not
only in the miraculous gifts, with which multitudes were then filled, but in
the graces of the SPIRIT, they were enabled to live in the exemplary exercise
of, to the astonishment of all beholders.

But, perhaps, these prophesies may look forward still, and point our view to
those times that are yet to come, when the little stone cut out without hands,
shall become a great mountain, and fill the whole earth; when the kingdom, and
the dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom, under the whole heaven, shall
be given to the people of the saints of the most high; when the blindness that
has happened to Israel shall be removed, and the fullness of the Gentiles come
in; and the new heavens, and the new earth be created, wherein dwells
righteousness.

For my self, I am not ashamed to own, I am one of those who look, according to
the promise of GOD, for a far more glorious state of things, both among Jews
and Gentiles, than has ever yet been seen; a state of things, wherein he that
has the key of the bottomless pit shall lay hold on the Dragon, that old
serpent, which is the devil and satan, and bind him a thousand years, and cast
him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he
should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years should be
fulfilled: The effect whereof will be that universal prevalence of faith, love,
peace, and all those christian Graces, which transform Men into a likeness to
GOD, and make them happy in the participation of the fruits of his favor.

And to this happy state of things do these prophesies, which speak of the
pouring out of the SPIRIT, finally look: Nor will they have their full
completion, till the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the LORD, as the
waters cover the seas. When the set time for this will commence, is a secret
the FATHER has kept in his own breast: And it is known only to him, what
instruments and means he will make use of in bringing to pass this great event;
but whatever the means or the instruments are, the work will be chiefly his: It
will not be accomplished by their might, but by the power of the SPIRIT of the
LORD of hosts; his SPIRIT poured out upon the world, in such abundant measures,
and upon such vast multitudes, as has been hitherto unknown. This pouring out
of the SPIRIT therefore is what we should pray for, as that only which will be
effectual to the seeting up GOD's KING upon his holy hill of Zion, so as to
have the heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for
his possession. But I must now proceed to the

APPLICATION. And,

1. Let us take occasion, from what has been offered, to examine each one of
us, whether the gift of the HOLY GHOST has been poured out upon us. This is a
matter it very nearly concerns us all to enquire into. For if any man have not
the SPIRIT of CHRIST, he is none of his. He is no disciple of CHRIST; he has no
interest in the favor of GOD, nor in the merits of the SAVIOR; he is yet in
his sins, a child of wrath, and an heir to Hell. Can you then be too
sollicitous to know, whether you have this gift, which is a matter of such
everlasting importance? You may come to a comfortable satisfaction as to this
from what has been discoursed.

You will easily collect thence, wherein this gift does not consist; that it
does not lie in visions, and revelations, and Trances. None of these things are
mentioned any where in the bible, as such evidences of the SPIRIT in us, as
will argue our belonging to CHRIST JESUS: Nay, even in the days of the
Apostles, they were no proof of a real good character. Persons, in those times,
might see visions, and show signs; yea, and cast out Devils, and do many
wonderful works, and after all be doomed to a departure from CHRIST, to dwell
with devouring fire. The gift of the HOLY GHOST, in a sense that will
denominate you the children of GOD, and Heirs to heaven lies not in things of
this nature; but in those internal operations that are common to all good
Christians, and have been so in all ages, and in all places, from the days of
CHRIST.

Would you know, my brethren, whether the HOLY GHOST has been poured out upon
you, so as that you may conclude your selves to be interested in CHRIST, and in
such a state as that you may expect the salvation of your Souls, you may, by
the help of grace, come to a good hope of this, by asking your selves such
questions as these.

What have been my perceptions of Sin? Have I ever had any sorrowful
reflections in my breast, at the thought that I am a sinner? Has a sense of sin
been grievous to me? Have I had upon my mind a consciousness of guilt? Have I
had a view of my self as exposed to the wrath of almighty GOD, and been in
concern hereat, and inquisitive how I might escape? If you cannot say thus of
your selves, you have reason to be afraid of your condition. You, to be sure,
have reason to be so, who han't been under restraints from sin, but have walked
in the way of your own hearts, and in the sight of your own eyes, adding
iniquity to transgression. Is it reasonable to think such sinners, as you are,
should be brought to a right mind, without severe and bitter reflections on
your selves? It Is not possible, you should have a just conception of your
selves, and of the real truth of your character, and not be in deep anxiety of
Soul: Nor may you imagine, you have been savingly changed from a state of sin
to a state of grace, if you have had no remorse of conscience, no uneasiness in
your breasts on account of your sins, no fear of the Divine majesty, nor of the
vengeance of the eternal world. Such, whose case this is, have upon them the
sad marks of being to this day in the gall of bitterness, and in the bonds of
iniquity. And oh! of how many, may it be feared, is this the just character!
Are there not multitudes at ease in Zion, who have upon their minds no concern
about their sins, no fear of the Divine wrath; but are going on calmly and
quietly in the broad way to death and hell? If there are any here present,
whose consciences tell them, they are the men, let me beseech you, as you love
your souls, and would not be the destroyers of them, to bethink your selves.
Whether you will believe it or not, you are, as sinners against the GOD that
made you, the proper objects of hell, and nothing keeps you out of that place
of weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth, but the patience of a provoked
GOD, which may even this day come to an end with you. And is this a condition
to be easy in? O be convinced of your danger! You are certainly in
circumstances of amazing hazard: O realize it to be so! and bow your knee to
the GOD and FATHER of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, beseeching him, with a becoming
importunity of soul, to have mercy upon you. Your help is only in GOD, through
JESUS CHRIST. O cry mightily to him! He may hear from heaven, and convert and
save you.

But if upon inquiry you should find, you have been under uneasy sensations
from a consciousness of sin and guilt, rest not satisfied with this; but go on
and inquire, how these perceptions have operated, what has been the effect of
them. In themselves, convictions are no sufficient evidence of a good state.
You may have roared out by reason of the disquietness within you, and yet be at
a distance from GOD and grace. Don't be content that you have been under
awakenings, but examine into their issue. Have you herefrom seen your need of
CHRIST? Have you repaired to him as the SAVIOR of undone sinners? Have you
been enabled to place your trust in him, and in him alone for righteousness and
eternal life? Are you become new men? Have you experienced that change, which
will denominate you the children of GOD, and born from above? Be critical in
your inquiry into this matter. Is the change you have passed under, a change
only in your affections? Is it nothing more than a little outward reformation?
Does it lie only in an attendance on sermons and lectures? Or is it indeed a
change from the power of sin and satan, a change into the likeness of GOD? Have
you, in truth, been made partakers of the Divine nature? Have you been
transformed, by the renewing of your mind, into the image of CHRIST JESUS?
Unless the Image of the Devil has been defaced in you, and* you have been
really changed into a resemblance to the blessed GOD, and his SON JESUS CHRIST,
notwithstanding all your other experiences, be they what they will, and as many
and as great as they will, you are yet in your sins; you are yet in such a
state, as that if you should go out of the world without a further change, you
would certainly miss of heaven, and be sent away to hell.

And let me tell you, if you have indeed been renewed in the spirit of your
minds, it will show it self in your lives. The change that has been wrought in
you will have an influence upon your whole outward conduct and behavior. You
will leave off former sins, and put in practice neglected duties. As the grace
of GOD teaches, you will deny ungodliness, and wordly lusts, and live soberly,
and righteously, and godlily in the world. You will attend the duties of piety,
become men of prayer, the devout worshippers of GOD, in the closet, in the
family, and in the place where he records his name. You will keep under
restraint your passions of wrath, and anger, and hatred; you will abstain from
all filthy talking and jesting: And as for the gross acts of uncleanness and
intemperance, they will not be so much as named among you. In fine, you will do
to others as you would they should do to you. You will put away lying, and
speak every man truth with his neighbor. You will be fair and equitable in
your treatment of mankind; honest in your dealings; faithful to your promises:
All clamor and evil-speaking, you will lay aside; with all slandering,
backbiting, tatling and tale-bearing: And you will (as the elect of GOD) put
on bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering;
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, as GOD for CHRIST's sake
forgiveth you. And above all these things, you will put on charity, which is
the bond of perfectness. In one word, there will be an amendment of your
carriage in all the relations you sustain. You will be better husbands and
wives; better parents and children; better masters and servants: You will be
better neighbors, better friends, better subjects; yea, you will be better in
every station, and in every condition of life: Nor otherwise may you think you
have been renewed after the image of him that created you. Let no man deceive
you; he that does righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous: He that
commits sin is of the Devil. In this the children of GOD are manifest, and
the children of the Devil: Whosoever does not righteousness is not of GOD,
neither he that loves not his brother.

Some, perhaps, may think these things of no great importance; but deceive not
your selves, impose not on your own Souls; the work of the SPIRIT, wherever
it is savingly wrought, will have an influence upon the whole man, not only the
heart, but the life: And it is a vain thing, in any man, to pretend he has the
SPIRIT, in his saving influences, if, in his outward life, he is habitually
unconformed to the Gospel. Where ever there is true faith, that faith, whereby
we are justified freely of GOD's grace, without the deeds of the law, through the
redemption that is in JESUS CHRIST, there will be a holy life; And if our faith
does not express it self this way, it is that dead faith, the apostle James
speaks of, which is of no account with GOD: And notwithstanding such a faith, a
man may perish; yea, if he has no better a faith, he certainly will perish: The
mouth of the LORD has spoken it.

These are the things, my brethren, by which you are to make trial of your
selves, whether the HOLY GHOST has been poured out upon you. And a number of
you, I trust, have reason, upon the trial, to say, it has been so with you:
Yea, the SPIRIT himself, I would hope, has witnessed with your Spirits, that
you are the children of GOD; and if children, then heirs; heirs of GOD, and
joint-heirs with CHRIST, to the inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that
fades not away, reserved in heaven for you. And if, from this testimony of the
SPIRIT, with that of your own conscience, you are filled with peace, and
enabled to rejoice in hope of the glory to be hereafter revealed, you are happy
among men! You have within you the just grounds of a holy joy, and it is no
wonder if you are glad: You, if any persons on earth, have reason to rejoice.
Rejoice in the LORD, ye righteous! and again I say, rejoice: Yet, let your joy
be mixed with a becoming caution. Rejoice with trembling! Be not high-minded,
but fear. -- Take heed, you be not elated with pride. -- O let humility, in all
the lowly expressions of it, be ever the attendant of your joy!

And let not those be too much discouraged, who have not this joy of assurance.
You may not from hence conclude that the SPIRIT has not been given to you.
Assurance, however desirable; yet, is not essential. A man may be a sincere
Christian without it: Yet, let me call upon you, not to rest satisfied while in
uncertainty about the state of your souls; but to give all diligence, as the
apostle exhorts, to make your calling and election sure. Think no pains too
much, if, by any means, you may come to know that the SPIRIT dwells in you.
'Twill be a spring of comfort to you, all along in life, through all the
varying conditions of it; and 'twill make even the thought of death pleasant to
us. But it is time that I draw toward a close; and this I shall do by only
adding in the

2. Second place, That we have reason from what has been said, to be seeking to
GOD for the out-pouring of his SPIRIT.

This is the design of this day's solemnity; nor will any one object against a
thing so reasonable as supplication to GOD for the gift of the HOLY GHOST.

This is a necessary gift; that indeed without which nothing else will be
effectual to our having that temper of mind formed in us, without which we
shall never be qualified for an admission into the coming and eternal kingdom
of GOD. We may not be sufficiently apprehensive of it, but it is a certain
truth, it is only by the SPIRIT of GOD, sin can be rooted out of our hearts, and
the dispositions of holiness implanted there. No means, nor instruments, will
of themselves be able to effect this. It can be accomplished by no power, but
that of the divine SPIRIT. And is it then a needless thing to make our prayer
to GOD for his SPIRIT? There is nothing we can go to him for, that is a matter
of greater necessity.

And prayer upon this occasion is the more proper, as it is the way we are
directed to in the bible, in order to our obtaining the SPIRIT. Our SAVIOR has
commanded us to ask this gift of our heavenly FATHER Luk 11.^.
: And GOD himself has said, he will be inquired of by his people to bestow it
upon them Ezekiel. 36.39.
.

And O what encouragement have we to pray for the holy SPIRIT! Our SAVIOR
promised, before he left the world, that his SPIRIT should abide with his
Church for ever; and has expressly declared, that if we ask Luke 11.9.
, we shall receive; if we seek, we shall find; if we knock, it shall be opened
to us: Yea, he has condescended to argue with us, to convince us of the
readiness of our heavenly FATHER, to give us his holy SPIRIT, if we suitably
seek to him herefor. If ye, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children; how much more shall your heavenly FATHER give the holy SPIRIT to them
that ask him (...) 11.13.
? We who are parents know the working of our bowels toward our children: We
feel within our selves, though we are evil and sinful, a strong propension to
hearken to their cry; and if we are sometimes unable, we are never unwilling to
bestow upon them those good things, they ask of us, which we know are needful
for them: And shall we suspect that goodness of our heavenly FATHER, in compare
with which, the tender mercies of men are cruelty? Shall earthly, selfish,
sinful parents give good gifts to their children, and shall not our FATHER in
heaven much more give his holy SPIRIT to them that ask him? It Is unreasonable,
it is base and ungrateful to harbor in our minds the least doubt or hesitation
as to this matter. For he is GOD and not man; and therefore infinitely more
kind and merciful than the most tenderhearted parents on earth.

Having therefore such strong encouragement, let us prostrate before the throne
of GOD, and pray to him for the out-pouring of his SPIRIT.

Let us pray, that he may be poured out upon the Church of CHRIST in general;
that there may be a revival of true primitive Christianity. Religion, it may
be, was never at a lower ebb, in the professing world, than at this day. It Is
indeed, in general, notwithstanding what GOD may be doing, in here and there a
particular place, in a sad, decayed, languishing, and almost dead condition. To
be sure, it is so in regard of the real power of Godliness, in the room of
which has been introduced, and taken place, mere form and external appearance,
a thousand superstitions and fopperies; and what is worse than all, a spirit of
tyranny, whereby these things have been bound upon the consciences of men, to
the eating out the very bowels of true vital Christianity: Yea, by far the
greater part of the nations, who call themselves the people of GOD, as
professing subjection to him through JESUS CHRIST, have, in a dreadful degree,
corrupted his worship, and perverted his truths; teaching for Doctrines, the
commandments of men, and bowing the knee to saints and angels together with
CHRIST, and making use of them as well as him, for mediators and intercessors:
Nor may it be expected, they should ever be in a better state, till GOD shall
work powerfully and generally upon the hearts of men, by his holy SPIRIT. We
have such a passage as that, Isa. 32.15.
Until the SPIRIT be poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness be a
fruitful field, and the fruitful field be counted for a forest. You observe,
the pouring out of the SPIRIT, and the wilderness becoming fruitful, are
connected with each other. The Church of GOD will never be recovered out of
that desolate, barren condition it is in, but by the plentiful effusion of the
SPIRIT; and when ever it shall please GOD thus to pour out his SPIRIT, it shall
revive and flourish, and be as the field which the LORD has blessed. This is
what we should pray for; and it should inspire our prayers with faith and
fervor, to consider the many promises, which seem, in their ultimate
intention, to look forward to the last days; some of which, I have already
mentioned to you.

Let us pray likewise for the pouring out of the SPIRIT upon our nation: Nor
did they ever stand more in need of prayer for this blessing, than at present.
There are, it is to be hoped, a good number still left, of whom it may be said,
they are good men, and full of faith and of the HOLY GHOST: But for the nation
in general, it never was, perhaps, in a more corrupt and degenerate state, than
at this day. The truths of GOD were never more disowned; the revelations of GOD
were never more disbelieved; and the ways of GOD were never more deserted, for
the ways of sin which lead to death and hell. The language, in which the holy
GOD addressed to his people Israel of old, may pertinently be applied to them,
Isa. 1.2, 4.
Hear, O heavens! and give ear, O earth! for the LORD has spoken: I have
nourished, and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. Ah!
sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evil doers; they have
forsaken the LORD, they have provoked the holy one of Israel to anger, they are
gone backward. We cannot more properly express our regards to them than by our
prayers to GOD, to pour out his SPIRIT on them, to their effectual humiliation
and repentance: And the more fervent we are in our supplications for this
mercy, the more shall we discover a true christian affection for them.

Let us pray also, for the out-pouring of the SPIRIT upon our land. There is
room for prayer in this respect. A concern, I am sensible, has been generally
awakened in the minds of people, in one place and another: And it has, I trust,
been of spiritual advantage to many; who, it may be hoped, have been either
savingly converted to GOD, or enlivened and quickened in the work of religion,
and their soul's everlasting salvation. There are, I doubt not, a number in
this land, upon whom GOD has graciously shed the influences of his blessed
SPIRIT; and we ought to be thankful for what of the SPIRIT, we have reason to
hope there is among us: But there is yet need of prayer; and the more so, as so
many things have arisen among us, which are a dishonor to GOD, and may have a
tendency greatly to obstruct the progress of real and substantial religion.
Alas! what unchristian heats and animosities are there in many places, to the
dividing and breaking in pieces of churches and towns? What a spirit of rash,
censorious, uncharitable judging prevails too generally all over the land? What
bitterness and wrath and clamor, what evil-speaking, reviling and slandering,
are become common; and among those too, who would be counted good christians?
How alienated are many ministers from each other, and how instrumental of
hurting rather than promoting one another's usefulness? What prejudices are
there in the minds of too many people against the standing ministry, though
perhaps as faithful a one as any part of the world is favored with? And how
general is the disposition they discover to flock after every weak and
illiterate EXHORTER, to the contempt of their pastors, who have spent, it may
be, the most of their days, in faithful services for their souls? How heated
are the imaginations of a great many, and into what excesses do they betray
them?

These and such like things, it is too evident to be disowned, are grown too
common, not in a single place only, but in most places throughout the country.
How they may appear to some others I know not; but to me, I confess, they
afford no comfortable prospect. I cannot but think it is now a special season
for prayer. Let us unite in our cries to the GOD, who dwells on high. -- --
Let us pray for a general effusion of the SPIRIT upon the land; and that he may
come down, not only as a Spirit of humiliation and sanctification, but as a
Spirit of wisdom, that so they who are zealous may be prudently and knowingly
so; and they who are pious exemplarily so, adorning the doctrine of GOD their
SAVIOR in all things, and cutting off occasion from them who might be glad of
occasion to speak evil of them.

In fine, Let us the people of GOD, who usually worship in this place, pray for
the out-pouring of the SPIRIT upon our selves more particularly. Blessed be
GOD, we are not wholly without the influences of his SPIRIT. Some, we trust,
have had experience of his operations on their souls. The LORD increase their
number! The LORD grant, that the SPIRIT may fall from on high on the whole
congregation! Let us pray that it may be so; that the HOLY GHOST may be poured
out, both upon Pastors and people, upon high and low, rich and poor, male and
female, bond and free, old and young, to the revival of the things which remain
and are ready to die.

This is the blessing we are come to ask of GOD. O let us be importunate in our
cries to him for it! Let us pray with an importunity that shall pierce even
heaven.

And let us not think it enough that we join together in the public prayers of
this day; but let us go on with our prayers. Let us each one pray to GOD by our
selves, and with our families: And let us pray, and cease not.

And while we pray for the SPIRIT, let us beware of every thing that may have a
tendency to prevent his influences being shed upon us. Let us be upon our guard
against all sin, and those sins in special, by which GOD may be provoked to
withhold from us his blessed SPIRIT. Let us take heed, that we don't harbor
prejudices in our minds against the SPIRIT, his office and work upon the hearts
of sinners: And while we are ready to give to the divine SPIRIT the honor of
those operations that are truly his, let us maintain a care that we don't
reflect disgrace upon him by making him the author of those things, which are
unworthy of him: The SPIRIT may be dishonored both these ways; and perhaps he
has been as much reproached by the latter as he has been slighted by the former.

We should also be diligent in our attendance on all means, especially the word
preached. Sabbaths must be observed. -- GOD must be waited on at his house; his
worship regarded; his word, in the ministry of it, attended to. GOD is often
present by his SPIRIT, when the word is dispensed. We read in my text of many
upon whom the HOLY GHOST fell, while they were hearing the word. And it is
observed of the Galatians, Chap. 3.2.
that they received the SPIRIT by the heareng of faith. i. e. the preaching of
the word of faith, the Gospel of CHRIST. But then, you must not think, that
hearing of Sermons is all that is necessary. You must so hear as to find time
for meditation, self-examination, and a serious self-application. And you must
come to hear without any previous biass upon your minds, without prepossessions
and prejudices against either the word, or the dispenser of it. You must come
with minds open to conviction, willing to receive the truth, as it is in JESUS;
otherwise the best preaching in the world will be of no service to you.

In a word, you must make it the great business of your lives to obtain the
influences of the holy SPIRIT. This, you must esteem, the main thing; and here
you must lay out your chief strength. This must be your continual care. You
must make it your main business; subordinating your other affairs to this which
is of the greatest importance.

And if it shall please GOD to pour out his SPIRIT upon us, then shall we
remember from whence we are fallen, and repent and do our first works; then
will the work of religion prosper among us, sinners be awakened, humbled and
converted, and saints be quickened and enlivened. Then shall we flourish like
the palm tree, and grow like the cedar in Lebanon, and being planted in the
courts of our GOD, shall bring forth fruit, even till old age, to show that the
LORD is upright: Which GOD of his infinite mercy grant for the sake of CHRIST
JESUS, to whom be glory for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

