Dr. Sewall's SERMON AT THE Thursday Lecture in Boston, January 1st. 1740,1.

All Flesh is as Grass; but the Word of the Lord endures for ever.

A SERMON Preached at the Thursday Lecture in Boston, January 1st. 1740,1.

By Joseph Sewall, D. D. Pastor to a Church of CHRIST in Boston.

Psalm. cii. 11, 12. My Days are like a Shadow that declineth: and I am withered
like Grass. But thou, O LORD, shall endure for ever, and thy Remembrance unto
all Generations.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN in Queenstreet over
against the Prison. 1741.

All Flesh is as Grass; but the Word of the Lord endures for ever.
1 PET. 1.24, 5. All Flesh is as Grass, and all the Glory of Man, as the Flower
of Grass. The Grass withers, and the Flower thereof falls away: But the
Word of the Lord endures for ever. And this is the Word which by the Gospel is
preached unto you.


HAVING obtained Help from GOD, we continue to the first Day in the New Year:
Others have their Days numbered and finished, and are sent down to the Grave
which celebrateth not God's Name, while we are still among the Living, the
living to Praise him this Day, and hear the Words of Life from him. O that this
Goodness of God may lead us to Repentance! that this Patience may be Salvation
to us! ToDay, while it is called to Day, if ye will hear God's Voice, harden
not your Hearts. And what more quickening Motive can I offer to excite you to
this Duty, than my Text affords us; the Consideration of the frailty of Man
respecting his first Birth, and as he is a Child of apostate Adam; and of the
immortal Life he is begotten to, when he receives the incorruptible Seed of
the Word of God into his Heart, of that God who lives and abides for ever.

Here then we may consider from the Words the following Observations,

I. Man is Flesh; weak and frail as the Grass. II. All the Glory of Man is as
the Flower of Grass. III. As such a fading Creature he withers and falls by
Death. IV. The Word of the Lord endures for ever. V. This is the Word which by
the Gospel is preached unto you.

I. Man is Flesh; weak and frail as the Grass. Man is called Flesh. All Flesh
has corrupted his Way upon the Earth, Genesis 6. 12. Such is his Body, and his
Soul is defiled with fleshly Lusts. That which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh,
Joh. 3.6. Indeed in his original Constitution, Man had not the Seeds of
Corruption sown in his Nature; no, Adam was made in God's Image, and after his
Likeness; a Candidate for a blessed Immortality: But when he had transgressed
his Maker's Law by eating the forbidden Fruit, that Threatening was denounced,
Dust thou art, and unto Dust thou shall return, Genesis 3. 19 As Grass Man springs
out of the Earth, being formed out of the Dust respecting his Body. It Is true,
his Body was at first, a noble Structure in which Adam appeared in excellent
Majesty as the Head over the brute Creation. And here the meaness of the
Materials out of which he was formed was a soil to the divine Power and Skill
of the Creator. Materiam s^perabat opus.
And even since the Fall has marred God's Workmanship, impaired the Strength,
and defaced the Beauty of it; still there is reason to sing the Praises of our
Maker in the Words of the royal Psalmist, I will praise thee, for I am
fearfully and wonderfully made, Psalm. 139. 14. And I may add, no less
wonderfully preserved; for as the Grass, our Life is now exceeding frail, and
liable to be blasted by every Wind. As for Man his Days are as Grass: as a
Flower of the Field, so be flourishes. For the Wind passes over it, and it is
gone; and the Place thereof shall know it no more, Psalm. 103.15, 16. And
accordingly as Grass, when Man has stood for a little time, he falls to the
Earth, and in his Dissolution returns to it. Even such as are now in their
Verdure, may say, the time of our Departure is at Hand. For what is your Life?
It is even a Vapor that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.
Surely the People is Grass, Isai. 40. 7. All Orders of Men, whether they be
high or low, rich or poor, young or old, agree in this; they are all as Grass,
frail dying Creatures. And this leads me to say,

II. All the Glory of Man is as the Flower of Grass, Verily every Man at his
best State is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39. 5. Suppose him to be flourishing in
Beauty, Health, and the most agreeable outward Circumstances of Wealth, Honor,
Friends, and the like; in all this Glory, Man is but a fading Flower, like the
Lilies of the Field. Yea, this Comparison is not too low for Solomon in all his
Glory; for our Lord assures us, he was not arrayed like one of these, Mat. 6.
29. Even these Works of God which are to Day, and to Morrow are cast into the
Oven, appear with inimitable Luster in their fine and beautiful Colors, vastly
exceeding all humane Art. But why do we set our Eyes upon that which is not?
While we behold this perishing Creature, it fades and vanishes away. Surely
Men of high Degree are a lie: to be laid in the Balance, they are altogether
lighter than vanity, Psalm. 62. 9. Which brings me to the third Head,

III. As such a frail Creature, Man withers, and falls by Death. As the
Flower of the Grass he passes away. For the Sun is no sooner risen with a
burning heat, but it withers the Grass, and the Flower thereof falls, and
the Grace of the fashion of it perishes, Jam. I. II. So do we fade away. My
Days are like a Shadow that declineth: and I am withered like Grass, Psalm. 102.
11. How feeble are we from our Birth! How brittle is our Constitution! We begin
to die as soon as we begin to live. We are continually changing and wearing
away as we pass the different Scenes of Life, and at Death that Word is
fulfilled, Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passes: thou changest
his Countenance, and sendest him away, Job 14. 20. Almost every thing we
converse with in this passing World would teach us this plain Truth.
Particularly, our daily Food. We live upon the Dead. The Flesh of brute
Creatures fed with Grass and then slain, is a considerable Part of our
Livelihood. And can a Life thus supported endure always? No surely. Every Meal
puts us in Mind of those Words, Meats for the Belly, and the Belly for Meats;
but God shall destroy both it and them, 1 Cor. 6. 13. How careful then should
we be to glorify God, whether we eat or drink? How watchful over our selves,
lest by any Excesses we should further shorten this frail Life? And how earnest
should we be in seeking the living Bread which came down from Heaven, that we
may eat and live for ever? Even the Flesh of the Son of God, which he has
Given for the Life of the World. O labor, not for the Meat which perishes,
but for that Meat which endures unto everlasting Life. But it is time I return
from this Digression. We may each one of us say with Job, Is my Strength the
Strength of Stones? or is my Flesh of Brass? No, it is much more fitly compared
to the Grass. Our Flesh is a little mouldring loose Earth, soon crumbled and
broken to Pieces. O frail Man! why do thou boast thy self in Vanity? Let the
serious Consideration of thy hastening Dissolution hide Pride from thee. You
may say to Corruption, Thou art my Father; to the Worm, Thou art my Mother, and
my Sister. Glory not then in thy Strength or Beauty, Wealth or Honor; but
rather lie down in the Dust before the Lord of Life, and bewail thy Sin which
has stained thy Glory with the Shadow of Death, and turned thy Beauty into
Corruption. Bury my Dead out of my Sight. And yet again I say to thee, Lift up
thy Head, and behold thy Savior offering to raise you to an immortal Life by
his Word and Spirit, a Life much better than that which you forfeited and lost
by the original Apostasy. O that this may be the Hour in which such as are dead
in Sins shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and live!

IV. The Word of the Lord endures for ever. Now this is here spoken in
opposition to the frail perishing Condition of Man, consider him in his
unregenerate State, and as born of the Flesh. As he proceeds from the first
Adam, he is altogether Vanity, and whatever appears excellent in him, must soon
vanish away; but then in the Word, CHRIST the second Adam is revealed and
offered to us, who has abolished Death, and brought Life and Immortality to
Light by the Gospel; and we have a new and living Way opened to Glory and
Blessedness. Sin is expiated by one perfect Offering of our great High Priest,
God-Man; and the Holy Spirit purchased to sanctity God's People, and so prepare
them for eternal Life in Heaven. Agreably we read that God's People are born
again not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the Word of God, which
lives and abides for ever. ver. 23. Context. When the Son of God who is the
essential and eternal Word is pleased to make use of the Word written, and
accompany it with the divine Influence of his Spirit; then the Word of God is
quick and powerful, it is Spirit and Life; the blessed Mean of be getting a new
and spiritual Life in God's People, and of nourishing it to eternal Life. Of
the Son, who is called the Word of God, Rev. 19. 13. it may be said in the
highest Sense, that he lives and abides for ever, respecting his Divine
Nature. This true and faithful Witness declares, I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is
to come, Rev. 1. 8. And as Mediator, God has given him Power over all Flesh,
that be should give eternal Life to as many as thou bast given him, Joh. 17. 2.
Indeed I do not say that the Word is here nextly to be understood of the Son of
God personally; but then it is to be understood of the Word of the Gospel as it
is the Word of Christ, and as it is breathed into the Hearts of his People by
his Spirit. And this Name seems to have been given to our Lord Jesus, not only
as God uttered his mighty Voice by him, and spoke the World into being. In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. The
same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him; and without
him was not any Thing made that was made, Joh 1. 1, to 3. But also as God
speaks to his People the Word of Life by him, and creates the new Heavens and
the new Earth, Wherein dwells Righteousness. Accordingly, those Words Heb. 4.
12. For the Word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged
Sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the
Joints and Marrow, and is a discerner of the Thoughts and Intent of the Heart;
are by some understood as spoken of the essential Word, our Lord Jesus Christ;
by others of the written Word. I humbly conceive that the full Sense of the
Place comprehends both Interpretations, and may well be understood of the
Gospel of Christ, as spoken to the Heart by him, when it becomes Spirit and
Life to dead Souls.

Having premised these Things, I would endeavor to confirm and illustrate the
^ead we are upon, by saying,

I. God has wonderfully preserved his Word in every Age.

From the Promise made to our first Parents, which contains a Threatening
against the old Serpent the Devil, that God would destroy this evil One with
his Works, I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed
and her Seed: it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel, Genesis 3.
15. we may date the Gospel Revelation, which we may suppose was handed down by
oral Tradition, and also further preserved and enlarged by God's appearing and
revealing himself and his Will to his People as there was occasion for it. We
are assured that God at sundry Times, and in diverse Manners, spoke in Time past
unto the Fathers by the Prophets, Heb. 1. 1. Afterward, for the better
preserving of the Word, it was by God's Direction committed unto writing. Holy
Men spoke, and they wrote the Word of God, as moved by the Holy Ghost.
Agreeably God said of his ancient People, Hos. 8. 12. I have written to him the
great Things of my Law. God himself gave unto Moses when he had made an end of
communing with him upon mount Sinai, two Tables of Testimony, Tables of Stone,
written with the Finger of God, Exodus 31. 18 However, it is not so certain,
whether the Art of Writing was not communicated to Men before Moses's Time; for
Joh who is supposed to live before him, says, O that my Words were now written!
Chap. 19. 23. But to return, after this the Word of God was written by Moses
and other inspired Penmen. Our Lord owns the Writings of the Old Testiment in
use in his Day, as authentic. They have Moses and the Prophets; let them hear
them, Luke 16. 29. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal
Life, and they are they which testify of me, Joh. 5. 39 And God has since
wonderfully preserved the sacred Writings of the old and new Testament; owned
and blessed them in every Age down to our Times, by making them the great
Instrument of convincing and converting Sinners, and of building up Believers
on their holy Faith. This Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, wherein
Christ is revealed and doctrinally exhibited as the chief Corner Stone, none
could ever remove. It abides firm, not withstanding all Attempts of Earth and
Hell. Time has eaten up other Writings, of much later Date; but the Word of
God endures through all Generations.

2. This Word of the living and eternal God, is in its Nature and by divine
Appointment, an enduring Word.

If God speaks, it must be to purpose: none of his Words shall fail, or fall to
the Ground. As God's Word in the Kingdom of Nature and Providence, so his Word
in the Kingdom of Grace shall accomplish his Will. As the Rain comes down, and
the Snow from Heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the Earth, and
makes it bring forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and Bread to
the eater: So shall my Word be that greth forth out of my Mouth: it shall not
return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall
prosper in the Thing whereto I sent it, Isai. 55. 10, 11. The true and faithful
Witness testifyeth, Verily I say unto you, Till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot
or one title shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled, Math.
5. 18. And 24th Chap. 35th ver. Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Words
shall not pass away. God's Word is settled in Heaven upon the sure Foundation
of his eternal Counsels and Decrees, and shall be fulfilled on Earth and in
Heaven, yea and I may say in Hell too, as God has ordained. Thy Word is true
from the beginning; and every one of thy righteous Judgments endures for ever,
Psalm. 119. 160. The Precepts Promises and Threatenings of God's Word shall all
have their Accomplishment. And the Prophecies shall all be fulfilled. Indeed
there are positive Institutions laid down in God's Word which were temporary,
as the Passover, which had its fulfillment in Christ our Passover sacrificed for
us. And there will be no further Occasion for the Administration of the
Sacraments of the New Testament, when all God's People shall be admitted to his
glorious Presence in Heaven. But then the moral Law is an eternal Rule of
Righteousness. The End of the Commandment is Charity, or Love, 1 Timothy 1. 5. The
great Scope and End of the divine Law is this, that God's People may be made
perfect in the Love of God and their Neighbor, which our Lord teaches us are
the two great and comprehensive Commands of the Law. Jesus said unto him, Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with
all thy Mind. This is the first and great Commandment. And the second is like
unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. On these two Commandments
hang all the Law and the Prophets, Math. 22. 37, -- 40. Now this Love which is
the fulfilling of the Law, never fails, 1 Cor. 13. 8. And in the perfect and
perpetual Exercise of this Grace first and principally upon God, and then upon
his glorified Creatures, Angels and Men, in subordination to Him, will the
Happiness of Heaven very much consist. O that we could begin this Happiness
upon Earth! by taking our greatest Delight in the blessed God, and by the
Exercise of that Love to Men, of which we have the Description, 1 Cor. 13.
Charity suffers long, and is kind; envieth not; Charity vaunteth not it self,
is not pussed up; does not behave it self unseemly, seeks not her own, is not
easily provoked, thinks no Evil, rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in
the Truth: bears all Things, believes all Things, hops all Things,
endures all Things, Ver. 4, to 7. But to proceed, The Promises of God's Word
endure, and shall all be accomplished. They are Yea and Amen in Christ Jesus,
ratified and confirmed; yea, God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs
of Promise the immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath: That by
two immutable Things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have
strong Consolation who have fled for Refuge to lay hold upon the Hope set
before us, Heb. 6. 17, 18. These great and precious Promises shall for ever be
fulfilled in that far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory, which God will
bestow on his faithful People in the heavenly Places. The Threatenings of God's
Word shall also be fulfilled. The old Serpent is ready still to tempt Sinners,
as he did the Mother of all living, Ye shall not surely die. But our Lord and
Judge assures us, that these shall go away into everlasting Punishment, Math.
25.46. It Is true, God has no Pleasure in the Death of Sinners, merely as it is
the Destruction of the Works of his Hands. But then that God who is infinite in
all divine Perfections, and has made all Things for himself, loves himself
above all, and has an higher Regard to his own Glory than to the Welfare of
his Creatures: Therefore, those miserable Creatures, who stand in Opposition to
him and his Glory in the terrible Day of the Lord, must be doomed to suffer the
Pains of eternal Death, and the Smoke of their Torments shall ascend for ever
and ever, to the Praise of God's glorious Power Truth and Justice. Shall not
the Judge of all the Earth do right? I might also say that the Scripture
Prophecies shall all be fulfilled. The Vision is yet for an appointed Time, but
in the End it shall speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it, because
it will surely come, it will not tarry, Hab. 2. 3.

3. The Word of God, as it is the incorruptible Seed of the new Birth and
spiritual Life in God's People, abides for ever.

And this relative Consideration of the Word seems to be the Truth of this
Place. The Verse foregoing is, Being born again, not of corruptible Seed, but
of incorruptible, by the Word of God which lives and abides for ever. And
then our Text is bro't in thus, For all Flesh is as Grass --. "And nothing can
make him (Man) a solid substantial Being, but the being born again of the
incorruptible Seed, the Word of God, which will transform him into a most
excellent Creature, whose Glory will not fade like a Flower, but shine like an
Angel" Contin. Mr. Henry.
. This Word is the Instrument God uses to beget his People to a new and divine
Life, and when accompanied with his Spirit, there is Power and Virtue conveyed
by it to quicken dead Souls, and raise them to spiritual and eternal Life Vitae
eternae O^g^num. Calvin.
. Accordingly the Apostle Paul declares, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ; for it is the Power of God unto Salvation, Romans 1. 16 True Believers
are said to be begotten and born of God. Of his own Will begat he us with the
Word of Truth, Jam. 1. 18. Which were born, not of Blood, nor of the will of
the Flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of God, Joh. 1. 13. And this Work is
particularly ascribed to the third Person in the Godhead, the Holy Spirit.
Except a Man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God, Joh. 3 5. Ver. 6. That which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh;
and that which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. We are saved by the washing of
Regeneration, when we are renewed by the Holy Ghost in the Spirit of our Minds.
And as the divine Author is the Spirit of God, so the Work is spiritual. In
this new Birth there are holy Inclinations, and vital Principles of Grace
wrought in the Soul. Look upon the Man in a natural or physical Sense, and he
is the same Person as before Conversion; but in a spiritual Sense, he is a new
Creature. 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature: old
Things are past away, behold, all Things are become new. There Is a new Light in
the Undestanding to discern spiritual Objects after a spiritual Manner, a new
Biass on the Will and Affections, whereby they are turned from Sin to God. And
such may fitly be said to be born of God; for there is spiritual Life
communicated, even a Power of spiritual Perceptions, Operations and Enjoyments;
and also spiritual Likeness, it is after the Image of God in Knowledge and
Holiness. The new Man, which after God is created in Righteousness and true
Holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. The new Man, which is renewed in Knowledge, after the
Image of him that created him, Col 3.10 Furthermore, as God's People are
begotten through the Gospel, (1 Cor. 4. 15.) so by the same Word is the Work
carried on till the Children of God grow up to the Stature of perfect Men in
Christ Jesus. We all with open Face, beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the
Lord, are changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, even as by the
Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. While the People of God behold the Glory of
the Lord in the clear Glass of the Gospel, they pass on from one Degree of
glorious Grace to another, till Grace is perfected in the beatific Vision.
While the outward Man decays, and the Beauties of Flesh and Blood fade, the new
Creature shines more and more to the perfect Day, till the Righteous shall
shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father, Matthew. 13. 43. When the
Seed of the Gospel is sown in the Heart, and takes Root there, being mixed with
Faith, and received in Love; it springs up, and bears Fruit to Life eternal,
not a fading Flower, but a Crown of Glory that fades not away. This Seed of
God remains in the Heart. Whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin; for
his Seed remains in him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of God, 1 John
3. 9. The Words cannot intend that God's People in this Life have no remains of
Sin in them. Scripture and sad Experience testify the contrary. But then they
are not workers of Iniquity as before Conversion, Peccato non dat operam. Beza.
and they shall not sin unto Death. No, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ has begotten such unto a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead, to an Inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that
fades not away, 1 Pet. 1. 3, 4. And this Hope shall never make them ashamed.
It Is true, their Bodies must d e because of Sin; however, as these are also
Temples of the Holy Ghost which is in them, so they shall not always lie in
Ruins; but God will raise them from the Dead at the last Day, that in Soul and
Body united, they may ever be with the Lord. But if the Spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell in you; he that raised up Christ from the
dead, shall also quicken your mortal Bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in
you, Romans 8. 11. And we read of the Bodies of God's Children, 1 Cor. 15. 42, --
44. It is sown in Corruption, it is raised in Incorruption: it is sown in
Dishonor, it is raised in Glory: it is sown in Weakness, it is raised in
Power: it is sown a natural Body, it is raised a spiritual Body. A spiritual
Body, truly a Body still; but adorned with such perfective Qualities as shall
render it a meet Companion to the Soul in all the spiritual Exercises and
heavenly Enjoyments the upper World; and raise it above all need of the
Supports of the present animal Life, as Food, Sleep, etc. Thus as God's People
have born the Image of the earthy, they shall also bear the Image of the
heavenly Adam, that blessed Man, who is the great God our Savior. For our
Conversation is in Heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ: who shall change our vile Body, that it may be fashioned like
unto his glorious Body, according to the working whereby he is able to subdue
all Things unto himself, Phil. 3. 20, 1. Nor can it be in any Measure difficult
to infinite Knowledge and Power, so to order all Events relating to the Bodies
of his People buried in the Earth, or sunk in the Sea, that every one shall
have his own Body without the least Confusion. Behold, Life and Immortality
brought to Light through the Gospel! Behold fallen Man raised to a State of
consummate Glory and Blessedness, by the Word of God! They which shall be
accounted wortby to obtain that World, and the Resurrection from the Dead,
neither marry, nor are given in marriage. Neither can they die any more; for
they are equal unto the Angels, and are the Children of God, being the Children
of the Resurrection, Luke 20 35, 6.

V. This is the Word which by the Gospel is preached unto you.

We need not inquire, as at a loss about the Way of Life, Who shall ascend into
Heaven to bring Christ down from above? No, the Word is nigh us, and this is
the Word of Faith which we preach. Sec Romans 10. 6, -- 8. The Word delivered by
the Prophet Isaiah to God's ancient People; is here confirmed by the Apostle
Peter, The Voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All Flesh is Grass,
and all the goodliness thereof is as the Flower of the Field. The Grass
withers, the Flower fades; because the Spirit of the Lord blows upon it:
surely the People is Grass. Tbe Grass withers, the Flower fades: but the
Word of our God shall stand forever, Isai. 40. 6, -- 8. The sacred Writings of
the Old and New Testament agree in this, to show vain Man his vile and
perishing Condition by the Fall, and the only Way to Glory and Immortality
through a Redeemer. And the only wise God has ordained that this Word should be
preached unto us by Men like our selves, who are formed out of the Clay, and
subject to the same natural and moral Infirmities; that the excellency of the
Power may be of God, and that we may give Him the entire Glory of the wonderful
Change wrought when Men are born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of
incorruptible, by the Word of God which lives and abides for ever. But the
Time will not allow me to enlarge on this last Head. I therefore proceed to the
APPLICATION.

USE I. Behold, and consider, the frailty and vanity of Man in his natural
State, and the necessity of the new Birth!

What are we by our first Birth? Dust and Ashes. Frail impotent Creatures, that
have deserved to be consumed in the Fire of God's Wrath. What are the Things
whereby Men seek a Name upon Earth? Job will tell us. Your Remembrances are
like unto Ashes, Job 13. 12. Yea, though sinfulMan rise ever so high in worldly
Prosperity, yet is he vile and contemptible in the Eyes of that God who is the
Fountain of all true Honor and Happiness. Surely thou did set them in
slippery Places; thou castedst them down into Destruction. How are they brought
into Desolation, as in a Moment! they are utterly consumed with Terrors. As a
Dream when one awaketh; so, O Lord, when thou awakest thou shall despise their
Image, Psalm. 73.18, -- 20. Does not their Excellency go away? Yes surely; and
their Glory fades like a Leaf. Indeed, if Men attain to the Riches and Honors
of this World, they are very prone to flatter themselves as if they had gotten
something substantial and enduring; but what say the Oracles of God in
opposition to these vain Thoughts? Their inward thought is, that their Houses
shall continue for ever, and their dwelling Places to all Generations; they
call their Lands after their own Names. Nevertheless, Man being in Honor
abides not: he is like the Beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.11, 12. O then let us
lie down in deep Abasement before the Lord, and cry to him that we may be born
again, born from above. We must be made Partakers of the divine Nature in the
Image of God restored to us, or we shall live in vain, and die without Wisdom.

2. Learn the great Sin and Folly of trusting in an Arm of (...) to the living
God.

All Flesh is Grass; and shall we depend on this frail Creature Man? If we do,
we trust in a broken Reed, and Provoke the ever living God to blast our Hopes,
and sweep away the Refuge of ^ies. Thus says the Lord, cursed be the Man that
trusts in Man, and makes Flesh (...), and whose Heart departs from the
Lord. For he shall be like the Heath in the Desert, and shall not see when Good
comes, but shall inhabit the parched Places in the Wilderness, in a salt Land
and not inhabited. Blessed is the Man that trusts in the Lord, and whose Hope
the Lord is. For he shall be as a Tree planted by the Waters, and that
spreads out her Roots by the River, and shall not see when Heat comes, out
her Leaf shall be green, and shall not be careful in the Year of Drought,
neither shall cease from yielding Fruit, Jer. 17 5, -- 8. Let us then cease
from Man whose Breath is in his Nostrils; and trust in the Lord for ever, with
whom is everlasting Strength.

3. From what has been said we may also infer the excellency of God's Word,
and how worthy it is of our high esteem and love.

It is called, the glorious Gospel of the blessed God, 1 Timothy 1.11. And well
may it be so called, seeing it reveals Jesus Christ to lost miserable Man, and
the only Way to enduring and substantial Happiness. The Glory of the divine
Attributes shine forth in the Gospel; and by beholding the Glory of the Lord
herein manifested, his People are changed into the same Image from Glory to
Glory, as we have heard; that in God's due Time they may be presented before
him a glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such Thing, Ephesians. 5.
27. And herein are we peculiarly favored who live under the New Testament
Dispensation, in which the Vail of Types and Shadows is done away, and we have
the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, more
clearly revealed. The Apostle Paul declares that this Ministration exceeds
in Glory, 2 Cor. 3. 9. Let us then highly prize the Gospel of Christ, by which
Life and Immortality are brought to Light, and Salvation with eternal Glory are
made mani fest. Let us take heed how we hear, and give the more earnest Heed to
the Things which we have heard; for how shall we escape, if we neglect so great
Salvation? Considering the frailty of this Life, let us wisely and diligently
improve all Opportunities God affords us for attending to that Word which
abides for ever. In a particular manner, let the Day which the Lord has made
for these holy Purposes, be accounted very precious, and let us never neglect
to assemble with God's People for religious Worship. On the Lord's Day, let us
wait upon him for the Blessing of his House, even Life for evermore.

4. Does the Word of the Lord endure for ever; Here is Comfort for God's People
under the Changes of this Life; particularly under sorrowful Bereavements.

Are your earthly Enjoyments withering and dying about you? Well, you have a
better Life which abides, and shall be perfected when the Comforts of this
Life are all passed away. Do you complain with Job, Changes are against me? Or
with Heman, Lover and Friend bast thou put far from me, and mine Acquaintance
into Darkness, Psalm. 88.18. Well, you may say with the Psalmist, The Lord
lives, and blessed be my Rock: and let the God of my Salvation be exalted,
Psalm. 18. 46. It is but a frail Life you have lost in this or the other
Bereavement; and we know, that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands, eternal in
the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5. 1. Be excited then to look into the Word of God, and
realize the glorious and blessed Immortality of the heavenly World, which God's
People enter into at Death. Here you sympathized with them under their various
Infirmities and Sorrows; There the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne,
shall seed them, and shall lead them unto living Fountains of Water: and God
shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, Rev. 7. 17. And the Word of God
declares, that as Jesus died, and rose again, even so them which sleep in
Jesus will God bring with him. They shall awake to Everlasting Life in the
Morning of the Resurrection. Therefore you should not Sorrow as others which
have no Hope; but comfort your selves, and one another with these Words. See 1
These. 4. In a Word, do your Souls cleave to the Dust under distressing Troubles
of a temporal or spiritual Nature? beseech the Lord to quicken you according to
his Word. Delight in God's Law, and you shall not perish in your Afflictions;
but through the Patience and Comfort of the Scriptures, you shall have Hope. Thus
you may rejoice in Christ Jesus, while you can have no Confidence in the Flesh.
And when your Flesh and Heart shall fail, God will be the Strength of your
Heart, and your Portion for ever.

5. Let us all, sensible of the frailty of this Life, be earnest with God that
we may be born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of incorruptible, by the
Word of God; and then live as the believing Expectants of the Glory to be
revealed.

Go to the Father of Lights this Day, and ask that good and perfect Gift, a new
Heart. Plead that promise, Ezekiel. 36 26, 7. A new Heart also will I give you,
and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the Honey Heart out
of your Flesh, and I will give you an Heart of Flesh. And I Will put my Spirit
within you. And now, put off the old Man which is corrupt according to the
deceitful Lusts; and be renewed in the Spirit of your Minds; and put on the new
Man which after God is created in Righteousness and true Holiness. Ephesians. 4 22,
-- 24 O let not the everlasting State of your memortal Souls hang in Suspense
upon the slender Thread of this frail Life? For what shall it profit a Man if
he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? Or what shall a Man give
in exchange for his Soul? Mar 8 36, 7 One Thing is needful; that you fit at
Jesus Feet, and hear his Word. O be not so careful and troubled about the
Things of this vain Life, as to neglect this! But now choose that good Part
which shall not be taken away from you, by taking God's Testimonies as an
Heritage forever. Accept of Christ without delay, and submit to him as your
Prince and Savior; for he has the Keys of Hell and of Death. O be persuaded
to give Glory to that God in whose Hand your Breath is, before your Feet
stumble upon the dark Mountains, and while you look for Light, He turn it into
the Shadow of Death! Turn at God's Reproof, lest you be suddenly destroyed. O
that such as are yet in their Sins, might remember the first Day of the Year by
this good Token, their beginning to live to God! And may the Children of God
have his Work revived in their Souls! For these Ends, let us Pray, Lord, make
me to know mine End, and the measure of my Days, what it is, that I may know
how frail I am, Psalm. 39. 4. So teach us to number our Days, that we may apply
our Hearts unto Wisdom, Psalm. 90. 12. Men are very prone to put away the evil
Day of Death, and so to neglect their Preparation for the eternal World. Let us
then more clostly consider the frailty and uncertainty of human Life, and then
apply it to ourselves.

It has been conjectured that there are about three hundred and twenty
Millions of People alive on the Earth at one Time; and computed from various
Observation, that in Cities about One in Thirty die in a Year. Sir Willam
P^tty's Political Arithmetic.
What vast Numbers then are passing out of this into the invisible World every
Day And who can tell, how soon his own turn shall come? It would be nothing
strange, if that Message should be brought to us, This Year thou shall die. It
is highly probable, according to the ordinary Course of God's Providence, that
a Number of us shall be in our Graves before the next Year. And shall we not
bring this Matter which so nearly concerns us all, each one of us, home to
himself? It may be I am the Man; it may be you, and you, and you. We know not
the Day of our Death. This Life may fitly be compared to a Lot. Our Days are
determined with God; but altogether uncertain as to us. O let each one of us
then say, It may be my Lot to die before the next Year. And shall I not make
ready for my Lord's coming? Am I prepared to obey his Call by resigning my Life
to the Lord of it, and by committing my Soul into the saving Hands of Christ?
And as our present Life may rather be reckoned by Days than Years; let us say
after our Savior, I must work the Works of him that sent me, while it is Day:
the Night comes when no Man can work, Joh. 9 4 And let us all be exhorted to
work out our own Salvation with fear and trembling; for there is no Work, nor
Device, nor Knowledge in the Grave, whither we are going. I designed to apply
these Things in a more particular manner; but must only hint a few Things.

Let Husbands and Wives consider that the Time is short, and live as Heirs
together of the Grace of Life, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances
of the Lord, blameless. O improve your intimate Acquaintance and dear Affection
in helping each other on in the Way toward Heaven, where the Children of God
live and converse together as the holy Angels. Let Parents seek, first for
themselves, and then for their Children, that they may be born again. The Life
which they derive from you the Fathers of their Flesh, is very frail and
defiled with Sin; so that unless they obtain a better Life, it had been good
for them, if they had not been born. O be not so much concerned then to provide
for their outward Man, that they may enjoy the Comforts of this Life; but
rather travail in Birth again until Christ be formed In them, that they may be
prepared for the Life of Heaven. Let the Aged give Diligence that while their
outward Man decays, the inward Man may be renewed Day by Day Let our young
People earnestly seek the New Birth, that you may consecrate the sprightly
Powers and growing Strength of Youth to the Lord of all your Time. O that you
may be strong to overcome the evil One, When he tempts you to delay your
Conversion to God! Now, that we hope there are many of your Age pressing into
the Kingdom of God, O take heed lest you be lest under the Power of Darkness!
Seek ye the Lord while he may be sound, call ye upon him while he is near. Do
not presume of long Life. We read of the Sun's going down at Noon, Amos 8 9.
Yea, the Shadows of Death have reached many before the Morning of Life was
past, The young Men are dead, Job 1. 19. Make haste to Christ then, lest the
Strength of Youth fail before you have laid hold on eternal Life. Let the great
Men whose Wealth and outward Glory are increasing, remember that Man being in
Honor abides not, his Glory shall not descend after him. O let not these
perishing Things then hinder you from seeking durable Riches and Righteousness
in Christ Jesus! Let not the Riches or Cares or Pleasures of this Life choke
the Word, that it should become unfruitful. For we are not redeemed from Sin
and Death with corruptible Things, as Silver and Gold; but with the precious
Blood of Christ. Lastly, Let Christ's Ministers preach the Word, and the People
hear it, under the impressive Belief of these important Truths. O consider, you
are as Grass; but the Word of the Lord endures for ever!

To Conclude,

This remarkable Year of forty one may put us in Mind of God's awful Judgments,
particularly in the bloody Massacre in Ireland, wherein about Two Hundred
Thousand Protestants were accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter by inhumane
Butchers, under the Instigation of the Whore of Babylon, whom the Apostle John
saw in Vision drunken with the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus, Rev. 17. 6. How were the People as Grass in that terrible Day
of the Lord! This horrible Rebellion began October 23.1641. See Whitlooke's
Memoirs, and Sir John Temple's History of the Irish Rebellion. The Rev. Dr.
Daniel Williams, who lived many Years in Ireland, has these Words, "Two
Hundred Thousand Protestants were destroyed by these bloody Men. Many, at the
first breaking out of this Rebellion, were invited to Feasts by the Irish, and
butchered at the Entertainment: Mere dying was a Kindness; tediousness and
barbarity must heighten their Slaughters; they stripped Multitudes, and forced
them to perish by Cold and Famine in that hard Winter Crowds were burnt
together in Barns; many driven into Rivers, and such as attempted to escape,
were forced back to perish in the Waters. Women with Child they ripped open;
poor Babes they tossed on Pikes, as pleasing Sport. Candles were made of Man's
Grease; no Entreaties of Women or Children could induce to Pity. --
Thanksgiving Sermon preached October 22. 1689. for the Protestants Deliverance
from the Irish Rebellion.
O that Great Britain! O that Ireland would hear the Voice of the Son of God,
to whom the Father has committed all Judgment; Except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish.

And the Year we now enter upon, brings our Affairs to a very difficult Crisis,
in which a Sovereign God writes Vanity on our worldly Glory. Let us then hear
the Voice of his Word and Providence, and be excited to lay up Treasures in
Heaven. Let us make sure of the Blessing's of Christ's Kingdom, Righteousness,
Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; that we may be carried well through all the
Troubles of this Life, and be prepat'd for that Inheritance which is
incorruptible, and that fades not away.

FINIS.
Page 11. Mar. r. Organum.


