Free Grace indeed! A LETTER TO THE REVEREND Mr. John Wesley, Relating to His
SERMON AGAINST Absolute Election; Published under the TITLE of Free Grace.

LONDON, Printed, PHILADELPHIA, Reprinted. BOSTON, Reprinted by ROGERS and
FOUL, for J. EDWARDS and S. ELIOT in Cornhill. 1741.

A LETTER TO THE REVEREND Mr. John Wesley, etc.
REVEREND SIR,
I Have perused your Sermon published under the plausible Title of Free Grace.
If an Enemy to the Power of Godliness, had declared himself against the
Election of Grace, by as plain Indications of implacable Hatred, as you have
done in this printed Sermon, I should not have been surpised at it; when I
remember, what Opposition that and other Doctrines founded upon it, have met
with, from the Pelagians of old, Papists, Socinians, and the Self-Righteous
Arminians of late: But to hear the Whispers of the Enemy, reviving from the
Mouth, and Pen, of the Reverend and learned Mr. Wesley, gives me Room to
apprehend, That there is none, in Time, can plead Exemption from sinning.

I am persuaded, That it was neither Enmity, or any other known or wicked
Motive, gave Rise to this Discourse against Election, but a certain
ill-grounded Persuasion, That what you have delivered, is the Truth as it is in
Jesus, and therefore found yourself obliged to declare it to the World.

However (humanum est errare) I Am far from advising you to venture your eternal
All upon this Bottom. You Will therefore pardon me, when I say that I Am
convinced, not only, That what you have delivered is not the Truth as it is in
Jesus, but also find myself obliged to declare so much to you.

And though in Justice to the well ordered and everlasting Covenant, I cannot be
of your mind, in the Point of universal Redemption; yet let us agree to put on
Bowels of Mercy, Gentleness and Long-suffering, in Meekness inquiring the Way
to Zion: That when the Day breaks, and the Shadows fly away, it may be reported
in Emanuel's Land, See how the disputing Children are come home, and lovingly
warm their Souls under the Redeemer's Wings.

You have been at some Pains, Section 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8, to put the
Calvinistical Notion of Election in a clear Light. You might have said all in
less Bounds, viz.

They hold, an eternal, absolute, personal Election, of a certain Number of
Adam's Seed to Salvation, without an antecedent Respect to any Qualification in
them, and they leave you to conjecture, how God shall deal with the rest.

You also hold an Election, which (if I mistake not) is this, 28. An eternal
unchangeable Decree to save all Men in the general, respecting this
Qualification or Condition, If they should suffer Christ to make them alive;
That God foreseeing who would and would not suffer Christ to make them alive,
did eternally and unchangeably elect those who would: And you leave them to
conjecture, how God shall deal with the rest.

I find, upon Examination, That the Difference between the two Schemes, as to
the Consequences, is not worth the half of your Sermon. Yes; you will say, The
Doctrine of absolute Election is attended with seven Consequences horrible in
their Nature, hurtful in their Tendency, uncomfortable to Man, and blasphemous
toward God, and my Election upon Foreknowledge is not. If those forced
Inconveniences have determined you against absolute Election, I hope if they
should attend your own, you will abandon that too. Let us see:

You Will admit there is a certain Disposition in one Man to embrace Christ, that
is not in another, who rejects him; for if there is no such Disposition, then,
if ever God finds out any, it must be in an absolute Way, which you will not
allow.. 3. Therefore in your own Account, they are only the Elect, who,
according to the Foreknowledge of God, would suffer Christ to make them alive;
i. e. whom he did foresee were disposed to believe. You Will admit, That the
omniscient God did, from Eternity, Foreknow the Number and Names of the Persons
so disposed, or (if you please) whom he was to dispose.

You Will grant also, That this Foreknowledge of God is eternal, unchangeable
and infallible, to exclude all Possibility of Mistake; and by Consequence the
State of those elected upon it, must be eternal, unchangeable, and infallible
also: And if so, then follows your first Consequence.. 9. Vain is our
Preaching, and vain the People's Hearing, for whether with, or without these,
God infallibly knows whom he did foresee in Heaven, and whom in Hell; these
shall unavoidably be saved, and those unavoidably damned. For it is absolutely
impossible, any thing should be otherwise than as God did foresee it; for
Instance, if of Forty Persons, God did eternally, and unchangeably foresee
Twenty disposed, and Twenty indisposed, to "suffer Christ to make-them alive,"
he as eternally and unchangeably elected these, and over-looked those; upon
which, the State of both is eternally fixed; no one single Circumstance in the
State of either can be otherwise, than as unchangeably Foreseen.

If so, your second Consequence follows,. 10. This tends to destroy Holiness,
by wholly taking away the first Motives to follow after it, viz. The Hope of
Heaven and the Fear of Hell. These can be no Motives to him to struggle for
Life, who believes God did foresee him in Heaven, or Hell; "his Lot is cast
already," upon the Foundation of God's Foreknowledge, who knows who are his:
And though he knows not whether it is Heaven, or Hell, this helps not the Matter;
for (if you judge rightly) if he knows he shall infallibly be in the one or in
the other, it is not reasonable for him to be holy, or practice any particular
Branch of Holiness; such as, Meekness or Love.. 11. Yea, if he believes,
(according to you) suspects or fears any such thing, what Comfort can he have
from all the precious Promises of God, Which is your third Consequence,. 12.

Again: If the Foundation of God's Foreknowledge stands sure; This destroys
our Zeal for Good Works, for whether with, or without them, shall unavoidably
be in Heaven or Hell; and if we happen to know that the most Part of Mankind
shall be damned, this lessens our Love to them, we believe it is the Will of
God they should die. Yea; though we should not know whether they shall be in
Heaven or Hell, only believe they shall land in the one or in the other, our
Labor is vain, etc. Which is your fourth Consequence,. 17.

Also, By this Doctrine of a Fore-known Election, the whole Christian
Revelation is destroyed, it is not necessary, for known to God are all his
Works. The limited Number of Persons whom from Eternity he did foresee in
Heaven, shall infallibly be there, and no other shall, whether Revelation or
none, which is your fifth Consequence.. 18. All I foresee you can answer is, as
God did infallibly foresee some in Heaven, so he did as infallibly foresee the
Death of Christ, the Christian Revelation, preaching, hearing and Good Works,
as the Means toward their being there. So say I on absolute Election, as God
decreed a certain Number to Salvation, so he also decreed Christ's Death, the
Christian Revelation, preaching, hearing, and Good Works, as the Means toward
that End; And where is the Difference?

Again, This Doctrine of Foreknowledge makes the Christian Revelation
contradict itself; for Instance, The Assertors of it interpret that Text, He is
not willing that any should perish, etc. as implying that God made no Man to be
damned, quite contrary to that Text, Prove. xvi. 4. The Lord made All for
himself, yea, even the Wicked for the Day of Evil; which is your sixth
Consequence.

Lastly, This Doctrine contains in it manifest Blasphemies.. 23, 24, 25; For
instance, The Lord Jesus, the omniscient God invited every individual Sinner to
him, and wept because of the Hardness of Men's Hearts, though he did foresee some
of them in Hell, as infallibly as his Knowledge was clear and uninterrupted
from Eternity, and yet (with Reverence to the Eternal, I repeat your Words)
like a Hypocrite, a Deceiver, a Man void of common Sincerity, invites to Favor
whom he knew would never come. You see that the Consequences with which you
have loaded Absolute Election, so as naturally attend your Election upon
Foreknowledge, which has made some consistent Gentlemen of your Way, say, That
God suspends his Knowledge in such a Case i. e. destroys his own being; and,
That God cannot know Contingencies, i. e. what depends upon the Will of
another. Some Men choose rather to bid an open Defiance to Heaven than hold
Predestination! I hope God will not allow you to be hurried their Length. But
perhaps you will say, That God's Foreknowledge has no causal Influence toward
the Existence, or Nonexistence of any thing. I answer, just as much as his
positive Decree; for Instance, God did Decree from Eternity I should write to
Day; he did eternally and infallibly foresee that you would read to Day; it is
therefore as eternally impossible for you not to read, as it is for me not to
write; or it was as certain from Eternity, That you should read and I write, as
it is when we have done both: And yet it is certain, you find yourself free to
read or not read, and I myself to write or not write. So that hitherto your
Doctrine of Foreknowledge, is as narrow, ungenerous and ill-natured, as
absolute Election. Let us see whether your next Account of it is more generous.

You tell us (. 3.) The Grace or Love of God is free in all to whom it is
given. You must mean Paul's Love to God, or God's Love to Paul. Paul's Love to
God, is not free: Christ bought it, the Spirit wrought it and supports it.
Therefore you must mean God's Love to Paul is free. What did constitute Paul's
(...) to that Love? Christ's Death: That has founded a Title to every
Individual of Adam's Seed, as well as to Paul; there must therefore be some
distinguishing Love to Paul, to make him differ from Simon, call it a Second
Love, or a more intense Degree of the same Love, or without Degrees, the same
Love applied or what else you please; it is plain, the first would be a Cipher
in Paul's Salvation, without the last. I ask, What did constitute his Title to
that Second Love? You answer,. 3. Not any thing he is, or has done, not his
good Purposes, Endeavors, good Desires, or Intentions, these flow from the
Grace, or Love of God, not it from them. Never Predestinarian made Grace more
absolute! It is then, in all possible Respects free, which others call
absolutely free; and since it depends on nothing in, or about Paul, it (must if
we speak Sense) be irresistible too. Thus you have got into absolute and
irresistible Grace. You Will go further, and own, That God purposed Yesterday, to
give that Grace to Paul to Day, and what he purposed Yesterday, he purposed
from Eternity; for there are no new Acts in the Will of God, but through one
Eternal Now, the same; So that God's Love to Paul is absolute, irresistible and
eternal. You Will also grant, That God from Eternity, could distinguish Paul by
Name and Person, from Simon: That as purposely, freely, knowingly, and
eternally, God dealt with Paul; so with every Peter and Paul who shall be in
Glory: And I am sure you will not deny, that God from Eternity did know their
exact Number, Names, and Persons. And as to the Decree of God, it is his
eternal, continued Thought or Purpose, (use which Term you will) knowing,
fore-knowing, seeing, discerning them, without the least Desire, Intention or
Endeavor on their Side, (as you have granted) to bribe his eternal Respect. So
that by what you have admitted, you are as absolute a Predestinarian as any in
Town.

However, let that be as it will, you will overturn all immediately: Grace must
depend, in its coming and going, on some Power in Man, though at the Expense of
God's Foreknowledge, Power, and Wisdom; yea, to the utter Confusion of all
God's Ways, and Works; and it must be confessed, you are not Singular in this
Conduct; for enquire of the Counsel of Trent, of all Papists ( excepting a few
Jansenists) of the Church of England ( excepting the Articles, and a few
serious Ministers, who are rarae aves in terris) and of all other
Universalists, whether Grace is free? You shall be answered; It is Free; and
sometimes front their Performances with Free Grace; when their plain Meaning is
free in the general, free to all, and free to none, unless they bribe it with a
good Disposition, and a few good Works to help it up, free, as it is God's, and
bought as it is ours; first by Christ for every Body, and next by every Body
for himself: Or free at a Distance, which will never come unto you, unless you
go to it; and though it should happen to come, you may resist it: Or free for the
taking, i.e. if you get Faith, God will get Grace; or if you get a Purpose, a
Disposition, God will find Faith, and more Grace after that: Free in the
Purchase, bribed in the Application: Free in the Offer, clogged in the
Enjoyment: Free in the Front, mercenary in the Body: Free in Sound, and bound
in Fact. Now, Sir, if this was your Meaning, why was you disingenuous, to write
the first Part of your Sermon? And if not, why was you injurious, to write the
last? For I defy an Angel to reconcile both together, with the Proviso he speak
Sense: However, you will attempt it.

. 4. "Grace is free for All;" What All? Every Child of the first Adam, Christ
tasted Death for All, and procured the Love of God in the general? How then
comes the Difference to be made? by God's Foreknowledge of Something in the
one, which is not in the other. What can that be? A Power to choose, or to
refuse. Every Man has that Power (you say) in virtue of Christ's Death, they
are yet on a Level: What more? Faith in the one, and not in the other. What
Faith? either the general Faith of Christ's coming to the World to save
Sinners, which Devils have as well as Men; or that which purifies the Heart,
and distinguishes from Men and Devils? You Will say the last; though the Generality
of your Way are wise, though irreligious, to hold by the first. How does he
foresee this Faith in them; as his own, or as theirs, or as his and theirs
together? Not entirely as his, for as such, he is willing every Man should have
it; not entirely as theirs, it is the Gift of God: It must be his by Giving,
and theirs by Acceptance and Enjoyment. How come they to accept of it, and not
others; It must be either by a peculiar Turn in their Constitution, or by a
certain Act of their Will? It cannot be by the first, that would argue
Partiality in the Maker, or something worse, which you will not allow; it must
then be by an Act of their Will, a Turn, a Desire, a Purpose, call it what you
will: It is very plain, that all the awful and mysterious Proceedings of God,
in relation to Man's Salvation entirely depend for Success, on a single
contingent Turn in the Will of Man. And it is as plain, that thus far the
CREATOR depends on the Creature; the Creature introduced as more absolute than
he CREATOR; and the CREATOR traduced as the weak Creature; which may appear by
the following Similitude:

An old, loving, though weak and imprudent Prince, passes an Act of Grace in
favor of a Rebellious Province, and freely justifies every one of them; so did
my God (you will say for the World is justified; the Prince gives them Arms to
fight, or not fight for him, as they found themselves disposed; so did my God
give a Power to choose, or to refuse; the Prince ordered Estates to be
purchased, and Mansion-Houses built for them, near his own Palace; so did my
God provide a Heaven and there a Mansion for every of Adam's Seed: the Prince
dispatches his Servants, inviting the Rebels to enjoy the Effects of his
Generosity; so did my God, etc. All this is (...) ^^^jected; behold the (...)!
Most part of the Rebels scorn his (...) their Enmity, employ all their Power
(...) his Designs; and they are resolved, com^ (...) come Life, never to be
reconciled.

This is reported to the Prince; (...) sorrowful and angry at the
Disappointment, and whom shall he blame? He once set his Love upon Objects he
now hates, because he was not knowing enough to foresee the Reasons of his
Hatred; or fondly loves them still, though he knows they shall never love him.
His Weapons are employed against himself; and to the Destruction of his
Subjects, because he was unwise, yea cruel in giving them; ignorant, in not
foreseeing the Abuse of them; his Treasury is exhausted, his Money lost, the
Estates unpossessed, the Houses desolate; and the poor Prince cannot help it,
or make the Rebels better minded toward him; and though he should attempt it,
they have now Power in their Hands to oppose him, and effectually to resist him
with his own Weapons: But, though he cannot reclaim them, he can destroy them.
How shall he destroy whom he is supposed to love? And how can he hate, who is
all Love? Thus the Scheme, for most part, proves ineffectual, and it is more by
Chance than good Conduct, it takes any Effect at all; for the touchy Wills of
the consenting Few, were within a Hair's Breadth of joining with the greater
Numbers, only some lucky Minute or other cast the Balance. The Application is
easy.

It Is impossible, Sir, upon your Scheme, to distinguish between the Characters
of God, and this loving, unwise, and ignorant Prince; and shall such a one be
our God, who cannot resist our Will, whose Love and Hatred are, and are not
like our own; with whom we can contend in projecting, and who cannot help
himself more then we, when disappointed? He shall be our God, who is (every
way) the same to Day, Yesterday, and for ever; who is in one Mind, and who can
turn him; and what his Soul desires, that he does; whose Counsel shall stand,
and do all his Pleasure. And as, by your Scheme, God and that Prince carry the
same Character, so your Scheme and That, are exact Parallels, plausible in the
projecting and first mentioning (which makes it take with those, whose Notions
of earthly Princes and Wisdom are uppermost, and those who spend more of their
Thoughts upon themselves than their God) he unfortunate in the Execution, and
merely accident to its Effects.

How will the ETERNAL come off without Shame, upon this universal vagrant
Scheme? Let him sit from everlasting in Consultation with his Wisdom; let him
speak an Universe to Being; let Heaven, Earth and Hell be shaken; let all
Things in the Power of the Almighty be done, even to the pledging his Glory,
easting his Honor in the Dust, and making his Soul an Offering for Sin. Where
shall all this vast Expense of eternal Knowledge, Wisdom, and Power end?
Fortune only can determine. The amazing Contrivance is entirely the Mercy of
one single fortnitous Cast in the Will of Man, and the Contriver himself said
to have cast it on this accidental Hinge, which one would think unworthy
Supereminent Wisdom. Said to have cast it! Who says so? Not Angels, they cannot
resist his Will; but Men embark in Satan's Quarrel to say it! Men! Monstrous!
Wonder, O Heavens, he horribly afraid; the Ox knows his Owner -- but my
People know not me.

How will God come off? What if one of the pettish Seed of Adam should in some
Period of Eternity, rise and attack his God thus; Now thou Lord of this higher
House, I am with thee, but I owe thee no more Thanks than my Brother in Hell.
How so? Thou did once pass an Act of Indemnity in his Favor as well as mine.
But I loved thee freely. True; and whatsoever Freedom was in thy Love toward
me, was also in thy Love to him. I elected thee, and not him. True; but why?
Because thou did foresee some Turn in my Will to choose the Good, which Thou
did not foresee in us. It was my Grace gave that turn. Not so, Lord; for that
was not thy Method, that would be a partial, arbitrary, absolute Way of
dealing. Not so Lord; Thou have given him and equal Power of Will with me: Thou
did intend the same Favor for us both; the same Father loved us equally; the
same Christ paid an equal Ransom for us; the same Spirit worked the same Grace
in us. For, give me leave to say, my Brother was once a Child of God, though not
now, so that my standing and his falling, can be owing to nothing but our Will.
Nay your standing is owing to my preserving Grace. Sure then his Fall is owing
to the Want of that Grace, which Thou might have given him, and therefore
Thou might still be an odd, absolute Being, who have Mercy on whom Thou
please only; or else, I must glory in myself. Name the Favor if thou can
or the least Circumstance of Love intended unto me peculiarly. I shall then
praise sovereign distinguishing Grace; but till then, if ever Thou should put
the Question again, who made me differ from my Brother in Hell? I shall answer,
My well-disposed Self.

Sir, would not the Heavens sweat for Anguish, if there was Room for this
Dialogue? Would not the Angels tremble and blush to hear this Language, between
the uncreated Potter and his Clay? Would not awful Majesty be over come? You Will
say, there will be no such Language in Heaven. It matters not if their will be
such Thoughts. Nor such Thoughts. If so, every one of your Way of thinking and
speaking, will change their Thoughts before they are there. Whether they shall
do this in Time, at Death, or in some middle State, I leave you to determine;
for one thing is certain, That God will be praised in Heaven, by Subjects of
eternal, unmoved, absolutely free, distinguishing and electing Grace, each in
pleasing Trances of Wonder. What moved the ETERNAL to put a Difference between
him and Judas? And if you should be there, you will be as complete an absolute
Election-Man, as they shall have among them, though you believe no such Thing to
Day. -- But, perhaps, though you cannot agree to the Notion of it in general,
you will admit the particular Propositions which make it up. You believe:

1. That no created Motive can influence an uncreated Mind, to act or not act
otherwise than he eternally thought fit to be done. Therefore it follows, that
no created Disposition, etc. can influence God to save any, but whom he
purposed from Eternity to save.

2. That there are no fresh Purposes in the Mind of God, as in that of Man, He
is not Man that he should repent, and proceed upon Reasons to Day, unknown to
him Yesterday. His Purposes, and the Reasons on which he proceeds, are as
Eternal as Himself. Therefore it follows, That if God purposes to save John to
Day, or Twenty Years hence he purposed the same from Eternity, and that upon
eternal Reasons.

3. That there is no formal, oral, judicial Decree with God, as with Men. The
uncreated constant Purpose of his Mind, is his Decree, call it Thought, Purpose
or Decree, it matters not. Therefore it follows, That God did eternally and
unchangeably decree to save John. And if the Affirmative holds the Negative
must, viz. If God did not purpose to save Judas, when he hanged himself,
neither did he (God) from Eternity.

4. That if God purposed, to Day, to save John, through Christ, preaching,
hearing, etc, He purposed the same Salvation to John, by the same Means from
Eternity, etc. Therefore, etc.

5. That if God knows John's Person and Name to Day, he knew that numerical
Person and Name from Eternity; and as truly knows the Names and Persons of
every Heir of Glory. Therefore, etc.

Now, if you deny the above Propositions, or any of them, you lose your God,
and have a Man in his Room: And if you own them, you lose universal Redemption,
and find in its Room, an eternal, unchangeable Purpose, or Decree to save through
Christ, etc. a certain Number of Adam's Seed personally, nominally, freely, and
absolutely, without Respect to any Qualification in them, more than in others.

After all, though you cannot deny the Propositions you will deny the Conclusion no
doubt, viz. Absolute Election; because of the Seven Consequences, you have
drawn from it, which induce you to believe, "it is not of God." I have made the
very same Consequences attend your Doctrine of Foreknowledge. Why then should
you believe any of them to be of God, but pursue a Third Scheme? However,
fearing you should throw away both, I shall answer your Objections, which shall
be as well to reconcile you to yourself, as reconcile you to others.

Object. 1. (. 9.) If Election holds, then vain is our Preaching, and vain the
People's Hearing, for whether, with or without them, the Elect, shall be saved,
and the Non-Elected damned. Suppose yourself with the Centurion (Acts xxvii.
24.) when Paul assured him from God, That not one of them in the Ship should be
lost. You would say, no doubt, (as now) if so, vain is our Fear to be cast on
the Rock. Ver. 29. And vain to confine our Men in the Ship. Ver. 30. For
whether with, or without such Fear and Confinement, God cannot lie. Nay, says
Paul except these Men abide in the Ship, they cannot be saved. So the Lord
decreed the Salvation of the Elect, and puts the unanswerable Question, How
shall they be saved without Faith? How shall they believe without Hearing? How
shall they hear without a Preacher? Therefore though Election holds, you may
preach on, there is to Danger, the Means are all decreed, as well as the End.

Object. 2. (. 10.) This Doctrine destroys the first Motives to Holiness in
general, viz. The Hope of Heaven, and fear of Hell; if Men are unalterably
adjudged either to Life or Death, these can be no Motives to them to struggle
for Life; and though they know not which, it is not reasonable for them to
strive, because it is not reasonable for a sick Man to take Physic at all if
he knows he shall unavoidably die, or recover, though he knows not which.

You know, you must unavoidably be in Heaven or Hell, Why then do you struggle
for Heaven? I hope you, do not set up for a Third Place. Every sick Man knows
he shall either die or recover, yet the Physician, and even the sick Man might
be tempted to think your Conclusion a very odd Piece, for who knows but the
Lord will be gracious: Yea, though the sick Man did know he was to recover and
live, it is reasonable for him to take Physic. Hezekiah was assured by Isaiah,
2 Kings xx. That the Lord would heal him, and add fifteen Years to his Life.
Why then, say you, was a Plaster of Figgs applied to him? You heard a Man both
in bodily and spiritual Sickness say, If I am ordained to Life I shall live; If
to Death I shall die; so I need not trouble myself about it. Hezekiah might
have said, If I Am ordained to Health and Life, I shall live fifteen Years, if
not, I shall die; therefore away with Medicines. What if Hezekiah had been
profane or desperate enough to say so, or others on the like Occasion, and your
Man with the rest? Are we therefore to reject the eternal Truths of God? Satan
told Christ, That God determined to care for him always, and therefore he might
throw himself down from a Pinnacle of the Temple. Was Christ to do it? No: He
commanded the T^^pter to retire. I wish your Man had done the (...).

You state this Objection more particularly,. 11. where you say, absolute
Election destroys Branches of Holiness, such as Meekness and Love, and tends to
inspire a sharpness of Temper, quite contrary to the Meekness of Christ; which
appears in the Asserters of it, toward those who oppose them on this Head

Alas, Sir! How come you to know this? Sure the Members of the established
Church, who are of your universal Way, discover more sharpness of Temper
toward you, than dissenting Calvinists. Were, or are the Papists, who are of
your Way of Thinking on this Head, more meek toward Protestants, than
Protestants toward them; Were, or are the Jesuits, more loving toward the
Jansenists, than the Jansenists toward them? Perhaps some unlucky Person
opposed you on this Head, with some Keenness, and you found yourself meek in
the interim: What then? This might arise from his natural Constitution, and
that from yours; or this from the Want of Grace in him, and from Grace in you:
He from his Doctrine supposed me a Reprabate; and you supposed him void of
"Meekness and Love;" and by Consequence a Child of the Devil, so you was not at
all behind with him. He "could not help applying his Doctrine to me;" and could
you help applying yours to him? The Enemy of Souls applied it from him. True;
and the same Enemy applied yours for you; Yea, (which is a bolder Stroke) he
applied the same Doctrine for Christ, Mat. iv. So that you or the Calvinist,
need not expect better Quarters from the Devil.

Object. 3. (. 12.) This Doctrine tends to destroy the Comforts of Religion.
This is turning the Chase! We think the Doctrine teaching a Man, though a real
Child of God to Day, may open his Eyes in Hell Tomorrow, to be the most
uncomfortable of the Two. However, you say, this is evident, as to those who
believe themselves to be reprobated. As evident, say I, as to those who believe
God did foresee them in Hell. But who can help Unbelief? None, except he who
has said, I pray that thy Faith should not fail. It is true of those who only
suspect or fear it. I am sure not true, for I suspect and fear it, and enjoy
many Rays of Comfort. No Comfort when you fear. Yes, if you believe me,
sometimes my Trembling and Mirth join so close, that I cannot distinguish the
one or the other.

. 13, 14, 15. You give Life to this Objection by observing, The Asserters of
Election have their Doubts and Fears; whereas many of those who hold it not,
have a full Assurance of Faith to exclude all Doubts and Fears. This is a new
Turn! Universalists hitherto have though it others half mad, to affirm Assurance of
Salvation, to be attainable in Time. Universalists now do affirm, the opposite
Doctrine not to be of God, because it tends to obstruct, if not destroy that
Assurance. How comes this about? The Papists, after Absolution, or any other
Sacrament, are assured they have Grace, a feeling Possession of God's Love in
their Hearts, and the Willingness of the Spirit. The English Arminians deny not
the Assurance of Grace, i. e. That they are Children of God now, though possibly
of Satan Tomorrow. The Quakers are as strongly persuaded of a feeling
Possession of God in their Hearts. You plead for Assurance with the rest; Do
you mean any Thing more than they? No: This Feeling Possession of God in the
Heart, or the witnessing of the Spirit, etc. implies a full Assurance, that
past Sins are forgiven, but not a full Assurance of our future Perseverance.
The Council of Trent, and the Popish Writers have told us this much, a Thousand
Times over. And as you are convinced many of them take fond Presumption for
Assurance; even of Grace; so it cannot at all endanger your after Salvation, to
lose your Comfort for a Time, in examining whether your Assurance be of the
same Nature with theirs. Better to work out our Salvation with Fear and
Trembling, than to enjoy a temporary one, without either.

I confess, the Salvation you contend for, is not worth much Fear and Doubts;
for when you have got it, you are only assured you have a created Love or Joy,
are Creature for your Portion. Are you certain you shall have the Creator? No:
"I take no Thought for Tomorrow." Christ intended by these Words, We should
take no Though It for the Creature. You intend, we should take no Though It for the
Creator. We feel the Creator possessing our Hearts, and his Spirit witnessing
with us. You really can never feel God in or about you. You feel only some
created Effects of an invisible unfelt Hand, such as Love and Joy, etc. And
though you are assurred of these Effects, (besides the Danger of their arising
from other Causes) you are assured of nothing material, in Time or Eternity;
and yet you fear none. No: Because the Holy Ghost supports such Assurance, and
needs not a speculative Faith to help it. Supposing he did support it, (which
notwithstanding may be a Delusion.) Yet Holy Ghost, Love, Assurance, and all
may turn away Tomorrow, and leave you in Hell; and yet you fear none. No:
Because, If I abide in Him, he shall abide with me from Hour to Hour. I am not
to believe, if his eternal. we he not engaged to keep you in Him, your created
Love cannot keep him in you. It is not unsafe therefore, to doubt a little of
your Strength to keep Him; for according to your own Account, one sinful
Thought, though on a Deathbed, is enough to lose Christ's Spirit, Grace and
Glory: and yet you fear none. No: Because I have the full Assurance of Faith,
etc. If you believe the Apostle, Faith is the Substance of Things not seen and
the Evidence of Things hoped for. Things not seen, not felt, not at hand, not
in your Possession. Whatever Assurance you have, cannot be that of Faith, but
of Sense; therefore not the chief Comfort of the Believer; (though you say it is)
because every created Grace in you is vitiated, by remaining Corruption, and
the least Imperfection in any of them, is enough to exclude the Soul from God
forever; and yet you fear none.

Real Assurance of Faith, is a full Persuasion in the Soul, that neither Life,
or Death, Things present or to come, shall separate him from the uncreated Love
of God, in Jesus Christ. This Assurance, you say, is not necessarily implied in
your full Assurance; therefore, say I, your Assurance is not good: Much like
his who said, If the blessed Virgin stands at my Bedside, I Am sure to be
saved; if not, I Am sure to be damned. But the full Assurance of the Imputation
of the Righteousness of Christ, apprehended by Faith alone, is that, which
others labor for with Doubts and Fear. And you appeal to them, to say it
between God and them, whether their Fears have not returned? You should rather
have put the Question, Whether their Fears have ever left them? For generally
they cannot presume, they are out of the Reach of Danger, till in Christ's
Arms. They cannot be Fearless in their Enemies Land.

You add on this Head, (. 16.) A Thought uncomfortable to those who have put on
Bowels of Mercy, etc. That Thousands and Millions, without any preceding
Offense of theirs, are unchangeably doomed to everlasting Burnings. Is not this
as uncomfortable a Thought? That God unchangeably foreseeing Thousands and
Millions should offend, and knowing the very Persons who would, should
notwithstanding create them merely to be damned? Does not this follow, as plain
on your Doctrine, as that upon the other? But what shall you gain at the
Almighty's Hand, to charge him foolishly, and to say, Why have thou made me
thus? His Ways are past finding out. He shall give Account of his Matters to
none.

Object. 4.. 17. This Doctrine destroys Good Works, by destroying our Love to
the Evil and Unthankful, and cutting off one of the strongest Motives to Acts
of Bodily Mercy, such as Feeding the Hungry, and Clothing the Naked, viz. The
Hope of Saving their Souls from Death. This runs upon an impossible Supposition
of knowing the Evil, i. e. Non-Elected. The Case is, Sir, I can no more know
them by others, than I can be Omniscient; therefore I take Mankind, especially
the Household of Faith, as the Objects of my Love, and Acts of Kindness, in
relation to their Souls and Bodies. Nay, it does, whether you know them, or
not, in either Case; your Labor is in vain. This is more strange! Election
must be down at any Rate, per sas aut nefas! I know not who are Elected, who
not. You know not who the Foreseen are, who not; therefore neither of us knows
who the finally saved are, who not; and yet we both know of those now on Earth,
some shall unavoidably be saved, and others unavoidably be damned, though we know
not which. Why then do we trouble ourselves about any living? (if your Argument
be good) "Our Labor is vain." Yea, why do we care for ourselves; for one Thing
is evident, You and I will infallibly be in Heaven or Hell, though we know not
which. Why then may not we throw ourselves down a Precipice? Allow me to say,
this Piece of Reasoning is a little Unbecoming.

Object. 5. This Doctrine tends to destroy the whole Christian Revelation, by
making it unnecessary, according to the Desire of the modern Unbelievers. The
Lord has chosen Men in Christ; (the great Mean) saves them by Preaching, by his
Word and Spirit. These are the Means (as said before) decreed with the End; and
till you find Men set up for an End, without Means to obtain it, I beg Leave to
think your Doctrine produces more Unbelievers. Examine the Isle of Britain
(though you go no further) you will find at a moderate Computation, Three Thousand
modern Unbelievers, i. e. Deists, c. your universal Way; I dare say, not one
absolute Election-Man among them. And that your loose and generous Doctrine,
managed by the Enemy of Souls, is the Spring of this Evil, is too plain to be
denied.

Object 6.. 19. It makes that Revelation contradict itself, by being grounded
on such Interpretations of some Texts, as flatly contradict all the other
Texts, and indeed the Scope and Tenor of Scripture. You instance in some Texts
on the Side of Election, and in some on the universal Strain. You found them
literally opposite. Have you reconciled them? No: You left them as you found
them. You say, the Election-Interpretation of some Texts, contradicts all your
Texts. And does not your Interpretations of some Texts, contradict the
Election-Texts; and where is the Difference? Have you reconciled their Texts
with your Interpretation? No: Better their Texts have no Meaning at all. Let
that be as it will, I am sure your Texts have a Meaning, though you have not hit
upon it. What Texts prove Election to be contrary to the Tenor of Scripture.

"1 John iv. 8. God is Love." -- Your Conclusion must be (if any) God does not
hate, or is not Hatred. Does he not hate Devils? Does he not hate Men, viz. The
Damned? Does he not hate wicked Men on Earth? Psalm xi. 5. But the Wicked --
his Soul hates; therefore your Argument is not good. To whom then is God's
Love? To some Men in Christ, Ver. 16. And we have known and believed the Love
that God has to us (Believers) God is Love. No Word of his Love to any other.

Psalm cxliv. 9. God is good to all, (not loving to every Man, as you have it).
And his tender Mercies over all his Works. True: Good, not only to Israel, but
to all other Nations. He gives Rain to the Just and the Unjust. He fills
their Hearts with Food and Gladness. Does this imply, that God loved the
Heathen Nations, as he did Israel? Or, that every Man is an Object of God's
Redeeming Love? If so; Beasts may come in for a Share. The Text includes them.
His Mercies are over all his Works. He gives the Beast his Food, and the young
Ravens that cry. -- Whatever Love this Text implies, suits a Raven as well as
Man.

Romans viii. 32. He that spared not his only Son, but delivered him up for us
All; how shall he not with him freely give us all Things. This Text, on which
you have grounded your Negative Discourse, is remarkably foreign to your
Purpose. The Apostle, Ver. 33. says, Who shall lay any Thing to the Charge of
God's Elect, it is God that justifies them; how then shall he not glorify
them; Yea, give them every Thing freely, since they are the Called according to
his Purpose. Ver. 28. No Word of any other.

" Acts x. 34. God is no Respecter of Persons." If you incline to have a
literal Sense of this Text, it will follow, That God respects no Person; no not
the Persons of the Trinity. Not so to be understood. How then? God does not
respect one Person or Nation above another? Not so: He respected Abel, not
Cain; Israel, not the Heathen Nations. Was it for any Good in Abel above Cain,
or in Israel above other Nations, he respected them? No: You teach,. 3. That
all Good, in or from Man, flows from Grace; Grace then must preceed, and God's
Respect preceed that; or, He respects now, because he respected them before;
therefore it was no Good in the one or the other, was the Cause of God's
Respect; so far from it, That if God had the same Respect to Tire and Sidon,
they should have repented. -- Whereas those to whom he had, were a stiff-necked
Generation.

You Will say, he respected the Jewish Nation, because of some grand Design he
had in View, viz. The Incarnation of Christ, of, and among them. True; and when
That was accomplished, He had an equal Respect to Jews and Gentiles, no Respect
of the Persons of honest Cornelius (a Gentile), and Peter (a Jew): The
Partition Wall is broke down: In every Nation, he that fears Him and works
Righteousness, is accepted of Him, i. e. such as are inwardly, and outwardly
Holy, fearing God inwardly, and working Righteousness outwardly. And this, you
grant, flows only from Grace, and Grace from Respect. Or thus; whom God
respects, he respects in every Nation; and who doubts it? It is the very
Language of Election, but far from your Scope.

You charge them, p. 19. with saying, That our being Elected, no Way depends on
the Foreknowledge of God.

Sir, this is a Mistake; What they say, is, That their being Elected, does not
depend on God's Foreknowledge of any Good in them, which you have granted,. 3.
But the Foreknowledge mentioned, Romans viii. 30, 1 Pet. i. 1, 2. which you have
brought to confute them, is the very Ground of their Election; such as God did
foreknow, or loved, or respected, them he calls, justifies, and glorifies.
What Foreknowledge do you mean in Opposition to theirs? Is it of any good
Intention, Purpose, Endeavor, etc. You say no,. 3. Is it of any Good intended
for them above others? If so, this argues eternal Respect, which is the
Foreknowledge they plead for.

Romans x. 12. The same Lord over all is rich in Mercy, to all that call upon
him. True; Yea, adds the Apostle, ibid. He who calls shall be saved, whether
Jew or Greek; and who doubts it? What do you mean by this; Is it, that every
one who shall happen to say, Lord have Mercy upon me, shall be saved? No; not
every one that says Lord, Lord, shall be saved, or enter into my Kingdom. Who
then? Those who call from Grace for Grace; from Faith for Salvation. God must
respect, and then give Grace. They shall then call, and he then will hear. What
is this to the Matter?

Jam. 1. 5. If any of you lack Wisdom, let him ask of God that gives to all
Men liberally, and upbraideth not. You take the Advantage of the Word All. All,
means every one that asks. Every one who asks, will ask in Faith, or not. If he
asks not in Faith, the Apostle tells you plainly, Ver. 7. Let not that Man
think that he shall receive any Thing of the Lord. If he asks in Faith, he must
do it from preceding Grace; and Grace from Respect. This is very true; but not
to your Purpose. You observe rightly, Page 20. They say, Christ died not for
All; i.e. every Man, whether saved, or damned. They say so. What say you?

Rem. xiv. 15. "Destroy not him with thy Meat," for whom Christ died, which you
say, is a clear Proof, that Christ died for the Damned: A very dark one, say I.
If Christ had said only, false Prophets should appear, who would deceive the
Elect; you would have concluded the Elect might be damned. But he adds, if it
were possible, to rectify your Mistake. Why should not you allow the Apostle to
forbid a Brother act the Part of a false Prophet, in doing what in his Power
lay to deceive, or destroy his Brother, for whom Christ died, if it were
possible? Does the Apostle mean any thing more. No: He knew very well that
Christ had said; none was able to pluck any Soul he died for, out of his Hands.

For further Proof of Christ's vain Ransom, you cite, Jo. iv. 42. Jo. i. 29. 1.
Jo. ii. 2. 1 Timothy iv. 10, 1 Timothy ii. 6. Heb. xi. 19. Where Christ is said to be
the Savior of the World; to take away the Sins of the World; a Propitiation
for the Sins of the World; the Savior of all Men; a Ransom for All; to taste
Death for All. This last Text is translated in our English Bibles, every Man.
You have followed the Original, tasted Death for All (Pantes)

The Force of your Argument for the above Texts, lies in the Terms, WORLD and
ALL. And if these Terms imply not every individual of Adam's Seed; yea, all the
visible Creatures of God, your Argument cannot conclude. What do do you mean,
when you write in the Preface to your Sermon, I am indispensably obliged to
declare this Truth, to all the World? Do you intend the brute and irrational
Creation? No: Men only. Generations gone off the Stage? No: but the Living.
Heathens in unknown Parts of the World? No: Fools and Madmen in known Parts?
Such as Deaf, Dumb and Blind? No: After these Limitations, you think we
understand what you mean, viz. All to whose Hands your Discourse shall come,
and are capable to understand, read, or hear it. It is then strange, That God
who suits himself to the Manner of speaking among Men, should not be allowed
the same intelligible Liberty of Speech with them, without taking him at a
Catch, to intend the Salvation of the Damned; Yea, if the Humor takes us, the
Salvation of Brutes too; for the Term World includes them. Especially when God
himself limits these Terms in Scripture, 1 Jo. v. 19. We are of God, and the
whole World lies in Wickedness. Here God's Children are excepted and a whole
World left behind, Heb. xii. 8. If you be without Chastisements, whereof ALL
are partakers, then are ye Bastards, and not Sons. Here God's Children are
called ALL, (a World) and yet all Bastards, a World lying in Wickedness, left
behind. Shall we not then do Christ the Justice to allow him to pay a Ransom
and taste Death for his own ALL, his own World; especially, that the Nature of
God, the Nature of Man, the Tenor of the Covenant of Grace, the Scope of God's
Revelation from the Beginning, till now, and the visible Course of his
Providence, will no more allow us to think that he paid a Ransom for the
Damned, than that he intended Glory for the Brutes. Which, in Reason, Religion
and Observation might be made evident, if this was the proper Place.

"2 Pet. iii. 9." The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise -- but is long
Suffering toward us, not willing that any (of us) should perish, but that all
(of us) should come to Repentance. What us? Believers, or those to whom God
gave, or was to give Faith as a Gift; and who are they? Those among the
Multitude, on whom he is pleased to confer it, from eternal Respect, not
willing any of them should perish.

" Ezekiel. xviii. 23." In the preceding Verse, God says, if the wicked turn from
all his Sins, and keep my Statutes, (that is, if renewed in Heart, and reformed
in Life) he shall live.

I hope, you will admit the renewing of the Heart, from which all Acts of new
Obedience flow, to be God's immediate Work. May we not then understand God, If
I renew a Sinner in Heart and Life, have I any pleasure in his Death? No.

" Ezekiel. xviii. 32." God says in the preceding Verse, make you a new Heart and
a new Spirit, which God himself promises to do. Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26. And then may
not God say, I shall give you a new Heart and a new Spirit, for I have no
Pleasure in your Death.

" Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11." In the preceding Verse, the People say, If our Sins be
upon us, -- how shall we live? The Lord brought them to a Sense of their Sin
and Punishment, by giving them a new Heart, therefore, says God to the Prophet,
Thus the People speak, and thus shall you speak to them, as I live, I have no
Pleasure in their Death. I will their Life, because I brought them to the Gates
of Death. I will give them Glory, because I gave them Grace.

Deuteronomy. I have set before you Life and Death. If the Life and Death here spoken
of, respect temporal Prosperity and Misery, it is not to the Purpose. If to
eternal Salvation, it is with the Qualification of circumcising their Hearts,
which the Lord absolutely promises to do. Ver. 6. And the Lord thy God will
circumcise thine Heart. And no Body doubts that Man shall choose Life, when the
Lord circumcises, or renews his Heart. What is it you mean by these Texts? Is
it that God really Wills, and has Pleasure in the Salvation of every Man? If
so, Hell shall be an empty Region, for He is in one Mind, and who can turn him?
(Not the Will of Devils or Men) and what his Soul desires, even that he does,
Job xxiii. 13. His Counsel shall stand, and he will do all his Pleasure, Isa.
xlvi. 10. When God says, What he wills, That he will do; shall we contradict
him to his Face, and say, he cannot. When He says, His Council shall stand;
shall we say, it shall not? This Language becomes the Sons of Belial, not the
Expectants of Glory.

Object. 7. Page. 22. This Doctrine is full of Blasphemy. I could wish to have
Room to turn the Chase upon you; but I am not now on the Offensive, neither
shall I charge you (as you have cautioned on this Head) with Blaspheming,
merely because you mention the pretended Blasphemy of others. No: Because, I
believe, you spoke as you thought, and did not think as you ought; therefore, I
pray, the Lord forgive you.

You say, Election represents Christ a deceiving unsincere Hypocrite, because
he invites Sinners to him, Mat. xi. 28. Wept over Jerusalem, and said, I would
-- and ye would not; -- called those whom he knew would not come, those who
were not able, whom he could make able, and will not. Your Opinion must be,
That he did not know who were able to come to him, who not. That he could not
make them able, though his Power was present. That, the Success of the whole
depended on the Will of Man. A strange ignorant weak Creature, Christ must be
in your Account! No wonder, if Universalists are Arians. A powerful Being the
Will of Man must be! No wonder if Free-Willers were vicious: They may be
otherwise, when they please. It is strange, God did not make that same Will
more like a Creature when he had it in Embryo. Well, you will say, this must be
true, or Christ insincere. Sir, neither of them is true; Christ knew what was
in Man; He knew who were able to come, who not; That none was able to come,
except the Father did draw him; He was able to draw whom he pleased, and still
a sincere God and Man. You say, it cannot be denied, he every where speaks as
if he were willing, that all should be saved; and therefore called. Soon
denied, and as soon proved; He called not the Righteous, but Sinners; not the
Whole, but the Sick; not the Easy, but the Weary; and by Consequence a small
Number. Accordingly, in your first Text, He invites the Weary and heavy laden.
Weariness supposes Conviction, Conviction Grace; Grace, Eternal Respect.
Therefore Christ says, All that the Father has given me, shall come unto me;
my Sheep hear my Voice. Christ calls them, and pray where is the Insincerity?
And can you deny the Lord to have the like Meaning, in his other gracious
Invitations, excepting where he speaks of Inflicting, or not Inflicting
temporal Judgments, as in your other Text. And as to it, you will remember, That
as the Lord sent Jonah a (Prophet) to Nineveh, (a Heathen City) to call them to
an external Humiliation, otherwise they should be overthrown; and on humbling
themselves, are spared. So Prophets are sent to Jerusalem, to call them to the
like Repentance, under the like Threatening. Christ, in the Quality of a
Prophet, comes to them last; they are Disobedient; therefore tells them the
City shall be overthrown; their Houses lest desolate. But these external Calls
and these external Judgments, have no Connection with the eternal Salvation or
Damnation of Nineveh or Jerusalem.

You may possibly object here; First, Christ's Insincerity in calling even the
Elect of Life, knowing they would not answer till quickened by his Power: And,
Secondly, In weeping over Jerusalem, which himself had doomed to Destruction.
You Will observe, That Christ is considered in Three Capacities: 1. Of an
absolute God, and as such, Whatever his Soul desires, even that he does. 2. Of
Mediator, God-Man. As such, Whatsoever he wills, the Father hears, and
gives always. 3. Of an absolute or real Man, and as such, He is touched with
the Feeling of our Infirmities, Sin excepted. He may pray and wish in Behalf of
his Brethren, and even in his own Behalf, as in the Garden; and yet say, not my
Will, but thine be done. He may call and invite, and leave the Success to God.
He may as a Preacher, cry out with a loud Voice to a dead Lazarus, Come forth;
though as God, he knows it is his Omnipotence, must give the hearing Ear. He may
preach like Ezekiel, over a Valley of dry Bones; though as God, he knows it is
his Spirit must give them Life. He may wish and weep, and pray over Jerusalem
with the Bowels of a Man, a Countryman, a Friend; and as God determine its
Overthrow; as you know he did many Hundred Years before. And if his inviting,
calling, praying, wishing, be a Mocking of his Creatures (as you say) it is a
Mocking must hold while the World stands; For it pleases God by the
Foolishness of Preaching, to save his People. Therefore it is a Matter of
Moonshine, whether it pleases you or not. But if you have any Notion at all of
your own Sincerity, as a Preacher, a Countryman, a Friend, you may entertain
the like Notion of Christ's Sincerity, in the like Capacity with you, with this
Difference only; He was not subject to Error in Judgment, and therefore not to
Sin; but you are to both, if I mistake not. From the Whole, Election secures
the Justice, Mercy, Truth, etc. of Father, Son and Spirit.

To gain the Affections, as well as inform the Judgments of your Hearers and
Readers, concerning the Blasphemies contained in Election, you entertain them
with a long Rhetorical Flourish. Pity so much ingenious Language should carry
Nothing in it. The Whole of it is this, That upon the Supposition of Election,
and that Satan knows who the Elected are, who not, he is a Fool to tempt the
one or the other; for in the one Case, his Labor is vain; and in the other
supossitions. I have already made it appear, That Satan has as much Room to act
the Fool on your Decree of Foreknowledge, as on that of Absolute Election; and
till you make the Difference appear, I beg Leave to say, You have widely
mistaken Satan's Case, in Respect to both. He is just as much in the Dark, as
to the Persons of the Elected, and Non-Elected, as you are; and therefore
tempts all in the general. And though he should know one to be a Child of God to
Day; What know we, but he may be of your Opinion, to think he may be his own
Tomorrow, and say to God, as in the Case of Job, Stretch now forth thy Hand
upon him, he shall curse Thee to thy Face; though you and he may be mistaken.
Yea, if God should point out to him the Elected by Name; Would this abate his
Rage? No: He would act the same malicious, though Foolish Part, he did to Christ,
who he knew was not only Elected, but was the Lord his God. He would create
them as much Uneasiness as lay in his Power. On the other Hand, he is equally
ignorant of the Non-Elected. For ought he knows, those over whom he triumphs to
Day, may be Tomorrow in Christ's Arms. So that this pathetic Scene of yours,
is entirely lost upon a false Supposition. A Supposition of Satan's Omniscience
to raze down Election. But unless you had made him Omnipotent too, The Election
shall obtain it. However, you venture set your Foot, and join Issue with every
(...) of it: Every Asserter! Too many for one (...) unless he had been a Saul,
to kill his Ten (...); for, No Hercules quidam contra (...) much less All. I am
glad you did not (...) Mathematical Q. E. D.

FINIS.

