A Second LETTER TO Merchant in LONDON, Concerning a late Combination in the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, to impose or force a private Currency, called
LAND BANK MONEY.
SIR,
ABove you have a Copy of mine, February 21st per Skinner. I am extremely glad,
that I can send you so soon, the Answer of the Board, as the Directors of this
Combination, or Bubble, call themselves, to that Letter.

I imagine, that when you have perused what they have printed in our
Newspapers, and in their enclosed Answer, you may be apt to think, that
without any Interposition of the Government, this Bubble would have died a
natural Death: The Managers appearing too weak, and too little acquainted with
the World, to carry on an Affair, laboring under so many Difficulties and
Disadvantages.

The Substance of the following Lines, is in it self obvious to a Gentleman of
your Discernment; but for the Benefit of the blinded and deluded Multitude, I
am obliged to be plain and particular.

Nothing is more popular than a pretended Patriotism, to cover the most
iniquitous Schemes. It grieves good People to find some who have nothing, less
at Heart than the public Good of the Province, to set up for Patriots, by
hypocritical Harangues to the Multitude upon all Occasions; such who have
formerly been very obnoxious: Witness, the mischievous and chargeable
Differences, between Governor Shute, and our Assemblies; Governor Shute's Six
Complaints against the Province, and a consequential Explanatory curtailing
Charter: Such who at present, as if resolute, in provinciae perniciem are
persuading the good People, ( naturally and ever Loyal but when debauched by
evil-minded Men) to run counter to Resolves of Parliament, to Reports of the
proper Boards, to King's Instructions, and to repeated Proclamations of our
Provincial Government: Such, who in expectation of a little ill acquired
Self-Interest, are willing to forfeit the Remains of our Charter, and all other
Privileges; having little or nothing to lose.

Can it be imagined, by any impartial sober thinking Man, if such Schemes were
for the general Good of the Country, that Gentlemen whose larges Interests here
oblige them to study and promote the Good of the Country, should so vigorously
oppose it: This in not a Difference from Humor, Caprice, or blind civil or
ecclesiastic party Rage: It is Self Preservation; that We may not be defrauded
of our Properties, by a Combination or Band of --. In short, the Struggle is
generally between the Creditor and Debtor part of the Province. The Debtors
say, in effect, We have had a Meeting, and are combined and resolved, to pay
only so much in the Pound, at a long Forbearance, by a barefaced, fraudulent
Contrivance; The Creditors to prevent this, are laudably contriving to dissolve
this Combination.

How undutifully, and unnaturally, do they expose this Country, by straining a
Point in their own Favor. Thus, the lower House of Assembly acted not against
it, therefore their Allowance of it is necessarily implied, and consequently
the Combination is just and legal; notwithstanding the most explicit Resolves
and Reports in Great Britain, and Proclamations here against it. They give a
long and particular Detail of a Transaction, which the real Well-wishers to the
Province wish buried in Oblivion. The Members of all Bodies Politic, as well
as Natural, are subject to flight Indispositions, without any Danger to the
Constitution. It is true, say they, the Governor and Council deemed the
Combination irregular and issued their Proclamations against the Currency of
their sham Money; but some thought otherwise, and took it: In short, they seem
to intimate, that since they have put their Hands to the Plough, etc --. They
give out that the Governor and Council are no Government, properly so called;
are we in a State of Nature, or Anarchy, when the General Assembly is not
sitting?

I beg Leave to produce some authentic Instances of our Provincial Governments
Vigilance, in this Affair of the greatest Consequence: The late General
Assembly in their Sessions March last, resolved, That these Notes are upon so
slender a Foundation, that the Circulation of them, among the People of this
Province, may have a great Tendency to depreciate the Bills of Credit already
circulating, and consequently to endamage his Majesty's good Subjects as to
their Properties. -- The Governor and Council, by a Proclamation, 17th July
last, Tending to defraud Men of their Substance, and to disturb the Peace and
good Order of the People, and to give great Interruption, and bring much
Confusion into their Business. -- The Governor in his Speech to our Assembly,
22d November last, This Scheme appears, to the Governor and Council, big with
so many Mischiefs to the People -- to take Notes for Money, which have no
honest or solid Foundation -- and in the End ruinous to the Possessors. -- Mr.
Belcher in his late Speech to the Assembly of his other Government, New
Hampshire, A Combination of Persons to emit a large Quantity of STAMPED PAPER,
(an Expression of good Propriety) to pass in Lieu of Money, upon a base and
fraudulent Foundation.

People may, by the by, observe, that the Scurrilities, as they call them, of
our Letter, are only the same Epithets used by the Government here, and by the
Boards at Home. The Board of Trade by way of Complaint, say, "That the Governor
had sent a Message to the House of Representatives, and they refused to pay any
Regard thereto -- The Illegality of the Scheme, and the great Confusion that
must attend it -- a pernicious Scheme of dangerous Tendency, and must create
great Interruption and Confusion in Business.

Truth is the only Author or Authority which we own. Because the Piece sent you
was wrote in an epistolary Manner, they ascribe to one Person, the joint
Sentiments of many of the most considerable Gentlemen, Merchants, and others,
of this Province, studious of its Welfare; and do in a most unmannerly, vulgar,
mean and false Way calumniate a Gentleman of his Majesty's Council here: Their
Expressions are too gross to bear a Repetition.

I. These Directors, in their Answer, cannot help exposing the Bubble. The
proper Attributes or Marks of a Bubble, are to be found in every Page.

1 In the Title Page, they call it the Manufactory Undertaking. They have set
up no Manufactory of any Kind, they have not so much as projected any, except
the manufacturing of base Bills, or Money, from Plates, Paper and Ink. In all
Nations, and their Provinces, there are three Branches of Business, viz. Trade,
the most profitable; Manufactures; and Produce; the least lucrative, but the
most necessary.

They first set out upon the Footing of Produce or Land, and called themselves
the Land Bank. Afterward upon more mature Deliberation, they called it the
Manufactory Undertaking, (the Words of the Title Page) as being a better
bubbling Name: And lately having sent some small Ventures, BILKT from the
Graziers, and Hog Drivers, to Sea, upon the Partners Risque. The Directors may
now call themselves, a Board of Trade and Navigation: Or rather the Combination
may assume this Name, The Grand Company of Massachusetts Bay in New England for
Land, for Manufacture, and for Trade and Navigation, with a Power of setting
and fixing the Rate of Interest; and letting Money at said Interest.

This is a short History of the Farce, which of it self is ridiculous and
contemptible; but their Numbers require the Circumspection of the Government,
to prevent Mutiny, Sedition and Riots.

If we could suppose their Bills to obtain a Currency, the Consequence would be
ruinous.

Their Bills are founded, as they say, upon the best Security, viz. Land
Security: But by their Articles, this Security lessens five per Cent. per Ann.
and after 20 Years entirely vanishes; the 600,000 in Bills being still current,
(for by their fraudulent, though weakly contrived Scheme, their Bills are never
to be cancelled) has lost its Land Security, and is no more a Land Bank, but a
Bank of insolvent Directors: that is, a Bankruptcy ensues, and the poor
Possessors of their Bills will be the inextricable Sufferers; for the Rich, and
Men of Experience in Business, are in no Danger of being cheated, where the
Fraud is so obvious.

The 8 per Cent. per Ann. including the 3 per Cent. at Interest, if it could be
supposed, paid in punctually by the Subscribers; the Directors in the Space of
12 or 13 Years, would have the whole or full Value of the 600,000 l. in their
own Hands, to be improved, if they please, for their own sole Benefit; because
in the Nature of the Scheme no Part of it is ever to be cancelled, but to be
improved in Trade, or by Bonds at Interest.

They frankly acknowledge their Incapacity, as to Trade, and that Banks,
legally constituted, ought not to Trade; but they being under no legal
Restrictions, the Directors think that by involving the Partnership in Trade,
they will have a greater Latitude of Ch --

N. B. These initial Letters are no designed Pun, upon the Name of One of the
Directors.

2dly, All Notes, public or private, which are not a ready-money Tender in
Law, ought to be, and are, according to the Custom of Merchants and Tradesmen,
received in pay, at a Discount, according to the Distance of Payment, or
effectual Demand in Law. These Notes are for 20 Years, therefore they are so
many Years Interest at 6 per Cent. worse than ready Money; but the Interest,
exceeding the Principal, these Land Bank Notes or Bills are in ready Money
worth nothing, with an additional Cheat. The Infatuation of receiving, and
paying away such Notes, may obtain among the Deluded for a short time; but in
the Nature of Things cannot subsist long: And the Possessors will suffer the
entire Loss, exceptting what may be recovered from the small Estates of the
Signers: Then the Projectors and Managers, who at this Time excite the Populace
against their Well-wishers and best Friends, will themselves become the Objects
of the popular Rage.

The Signers are not capable to make good to the Possessors but a very small
Part of the Value. As to the main pretended Security of Covenants and JUGGLES
among the Partnership and Directors, they may indulge or release one another at
Pleasure: Actions of Covenant broken, can only be among the GANG, without
Regard to the Possessor. There is nothing, in the Face of the Bill, ascertained
to the Possessor, but Goods of an arbitrary Assortment and Price; not
effectually demandable till after Twenty Years.

We have a fresh and publicly well vouched Instance in Mr. Samuel Allen of
Manchester, a Partner, refusing to accept in Payment their own Bank Bills. The
Directors, by a public Advertisement, do not deny the Fact; but with a Quibble
or Evasion do affirm, That a few of the Partners refusing it, is not properly
the Partnership refusing it. Every Individual of them being under Covenant to
receive it, and their not publishing at the same time their Intention of suing
him for Covenant broken, is a notorious Instance of their indulging or
releasing one another at Pleasure. In these Times of a Scarcity of Medium, good
Money is readily embraced by every Body. Where a Person by Quibbles refuses
Money, saying, I choose not to receive it now, but at another Time; I will not
receive it by the Hands of such a one, but by the Hands of such a one; though
both equally authentic: I will not receive it in such a Manner, but after some
other Manner, etc. Such Triflings in the common Way of Dealing would
necessarily infer, that the Money, or this Sort of Pay, was not agreeable or
good. Not only private Persons of the Partnership, but their Board of Directors
refuse their own Bills. The most essential Clause in the Face of their Bills,
to procure them a current Credit is, That they shall be received for any Stock
in their Treasury. There are to be found there at present, a few Things
ENVEIGLED from some weak, unthinking Persons. When People bring their own Bank
Bills to purchase any of these Commodities, they refuse these Bills by sundry
flat, barefaced Evasions: Such as, We are not at Leisure, We have no such
Goods. If Provisions, for Instance, are called for, their Answer is, that they
are to be shipped off, but not to be sold here: Deal Boards being demanded, they
say, that they are to be sold for Rum, Molasses, Sugar, etc. as having Occasion
for such Things; but not for Land Bank Money, not having Occasion for any Money
at present, etc, etc, etc.

3. The Partners to expect Dividends of 3 per Cent. per Aun. on the Principal;
whereas the Charge of Management will sink 2 per Cent. of this, the Directors
giving 1 per Cent more than the Market Price, for Produce and Manufactures, and
selling 1 per Cent under the Market Price, is in all 4 per Cent. that is,
instead of a Dividend there must be a Call or Loss of one per Cent amongst the
Partners.

4. Having chalkt out a Phantom, or built a Castle in the Air, they endeavor
to persuade the Credulous, that the Scheme is real, good, and in every Respect
will finished. The first Year there will be a vast Stock of 46,000 l, in their
Treasury. If they expected their Bubble to live longer than one Year, they
should have carried so gross a Deception further forward. Of the Principal 5
per Cent. paid in is 30,000 l. one Years Interest of 600,000 l. at 3 per Cent.
is 18,000 l. in all 48,000 l out of this 4 per Cent. on the Principal of
600,000 l. is sunk, as above, remains 24,000 l. from this deduct Deficiencies
of a generally insolvent Partnership ( if they pay their former Debts) there
will remain a very small Stock to circulate a large Sum of 600,000 l. a slender
Foundation for so large a Structure; but Castles in the Air require no
Foundation.

We shall increase our Produce (this would have been Banter from any but
themselves) in a short Time, so as to Balance all Accounts with Europe,
consequently there will be no demand for Silver; Silver, that irreconcilable
Enemy to Paper Money and Bubbles. When poor People can have present Money (though
only nominal) on so easy Terms, and not effectually payable until after 20
Years, can it be supposed that they will be assiduous in Labor to increase our
Produce and Manufacture? No, they will become Idlers and Extravagant, that is,
they will increase our Imports, (it is the Consumers finally, not the Venders
or Merchants who increase our Imposts; and in fact, where sumptuary Laws take
Place, they are levelled against the Consumers or Wearers) and entail their
Debts upon Posterity.

5. In their Treasury will be Choice of Variety of Goods; therefore their Bills
are better than Cash Notes or Bonds, which are restricted to one Specie, viz
Silver. This is an Argument scarce to be used with a Fool or a Child; it is in
favor of Shop Notes, which Tradesmen and Artificers well know to their Sorrow
to be 25 to 50 per Cent. worse than Cash; and at present their Bills suffer a
greater Discount than do Shop Notes. The Nova Scotia Wheat, the beginning of
January last; and the Directors Logwood, the beginning of this current March,
bought and sold by the Directors, at a great Discount upon their Land Bank
Bills, is notorious.

6. They value themselves upon their Bills being a Currency which will not be
hoarded up. This Argument holds also good in the Case of Counterfeits and
refuse Bills; if a worse or less valuable Currency could be contrived, they
also would be hoarded; but in this Respect they are safe. Where there are
several concomitant Currencies, that which is generally commercial, viz.
Silver, will be shipped off; and of the local, or provincial Currencies, the most
valuable will be hoarded up; and the baser only, if in sufficient Quantities,
will be SHUFFLED from Hand to Hand, as a common Currency. Thus if this bubbling
Money should take place, public Bills will be hoarded,

7. In General they say, It has many good Effects of a Currency, and
particularly mention, only its paying off small Debts, in an Instance of ten
Actions in all to the Value of 20 l prevented thereby. No Person ventures to
take it for large Debts, a few Instances of Collusion excepted. A parallel Case
happened in the Province of Main, about two Years since, some Thousands of
Pounds, in Webb's Counterfeit five Pound Rhode Island Bills, were paid away and
received for a considerable Time, notwithstanding they were generally known to
be Counterfeits.

I cannot avoid, by the by, mentioning their Indiscretion in bringing the late
New Hampshire Paper Money Bubble upon the Stage, which tho upon a better
Footing, died a natural Death in its Infancy; the Signers and Undertakers
refusing to take it in Payments. Our present Bubble languishes in the same
Malady, some of the Directors, and others of the Partnership, refusing it, as
may be seen in our News Papers.

8. To prevent the apprehended Confusions, they modestly propose, that
Authority should give this Undertaking a Sanction. An Act of Indemnity is more
than they may expect. This would be giving a Sanction to Confusion, to prevent
Confusion; to establish Robbery to prevent the Crime of Robbery; to establish
Iniquity by Law, for the Benefit of a few evil-minded Men, to the great Damage
of this Country, and of the British Merchants trading to New England, and to
entail Misery upon our Posterity.

The most odious and obnoxious Qualification of a Combination, is the
Formidableness of their Number: Instead of using any Policy to palliate their
Numbers, they boldly assert, that they are ten times more than we imagine, with
a vast Number of Military Officers, and Gospel Ministers. The Directors,
perhaps little acquainted with the Propriety of Words, and Decency of Things,
assume the Style of the King in Council, and other Boards in Great Britain,
viz. At a Board, etc. Present, R. A. etc.

II. Their specific Answers to sundry Particulars in our Letter, are silly,
weak Quibbles, Subterfuges Evasions, or designed (I shall not use the gross
vulgar Word Falsities) Mistakes.

They say, 1st, Our various Paper Currencies occasion no more Confusion here,
than Variety of Coins do in Europe; not considering, that the various expressed
Values in the Faces of the Bills, differ by various fluctuating Discounts, from
their actual current Values. As to the new Projections of private Currencies,
if every Person were to be in a State of Nature as to Currencies, to receive
and pay away at what Rate he pleases, and should have no Reason to complain,
because it is his own free Act; what inexpressible Confusion would this make in
a Community.

If our Townships are such independent lawless Corporations, to vote Land-Bank
Bubbles, Tobacco-Papers, or any Thing they please for Town-Rates; an Act of
Assembly would be very seasonable for their better Regulation.

2dly, It was not the Merchants, but the Officers and Servants of the
Government, who gave the public Treasury Notes a Currency. It was the
Merchants, Tradesmen, and Ar^^^^cers, who received them from the Servants of
the Government, made them current. The Partners in this Combination, receiving
their Quotas of Land-Bank Bills from the Directors, is not giving them a
Currency, (for thus there would be no Doubt of their Currency) It is the People
who receive them from the Partners that give them a Currency.

3dly, Too great a Proportion of our Land* Men going to Sea, is the Reason why
our Country is so poor. In Great Britain and Holland, many going to Sea, is the
Reason of these Countries being so rich: Hands in Trade earn more than by
common Labor. It is one of their Paradoxes, That too many Hands are employed
at Sea: Trade in all Countries is more profitable than Produce: Moreover, a
Nursery of Seamen is what the British Government are obliged to have always at
Heart.

4thly, Regiments of veteran Officers resigning rather than obey the
Governor's Proclamations, is a public Calamity. Where Officers, civil or
military, deny the Orders of their Constituents, their Superiors in discharge
of their Duty, and Trust, cannot avoid suspending or dismissing of them. I
shall not play the Pedant, by observing, That Veteran is applicable to Troops,
not to Officers; the proper Expression is, old experienced Officers, which is
never applied to militia Officers. Their whole Piece is full of Improprieties
in Diction.

The Managers spiriting the People to Mutiny, Sedition and Riots; they call
some Strokes on the Merchant, by Abuse extorted.

5thly, In answer to the Vastness of the unlimited Sum of their Bills, They
say, All Statesmen agree, That Money can never be too plenty, while it does not
rent under Six per Cent. per Annum; but we have made a Rule, not to let it
under Six per Cent. therefore we can never make too much of it. This from a
visionary Bedlamite would deserve Compassion, but from a BAREFACED CHEAT, the
highest Indignation: As if they could procure an Act of Assembly, that no Money
shall be let at Interest but by this Combination, and with the above imaginary
engrossing of Produce, Manufactures, Trade and Navigation; would persuade the
Populace, That they have also engrossed the Affair of letting Money at Interest.

6thly, The large Quantity of their Land-Bank Bills cannot depreciate our
Province Bills, because after one Year there will be none of these existant.
This is an unpardonable Evasion in some of the Directors, who must know that
there are considerably more than 100,000 l. of Province Bills extant, not
assessed in the Emission Acts, and may, as formerly be postponed at Pleasure.

They (though inconsistently with themselves) well observe in another Place, That
the large and frequent Emissions of Paper Money, sick their own Credit, and
increase the Necessity of making more, by continued increasing Quantities to
make good the continued depreciating Qualities of the same: And thus by a
continued Progression, render the Quantity vastly great, and the Quality or
Value contemptibly small; This is the unanswerable Argument against increasing
Paper Currencies.

7thly, The Objection of their emitting any enormous Quantity of these Bills,
and of more MONEYMAKING Companies setting up, so as to render them too plenty,
and consequently a Drug, or too cheap; they say that a Law may be made to
prevent this Licentiousness. This Answer implies, a Condemnation from their own
Mouths, viz. That until such a Law is made, their Combination is irregular and
mischievous.

8thly, The wicked corrupt Principle alleged, must be in the Projectors, J. C.
and Others, but not in the present Managers, the Directors, the Constitution
being settled before their Management commenced. A bad Memory is of bad
Implication: In another Place they tell us, It is not the same Scheme with the
first projected, which was found Fault with by the former General Assembly; but
a new Model contrived by the present Directors, without any general Meeting.

9thly, The Managers had not given proper Security for their good Management
and Quota of Bills, because very busy: They cannot be more particular in an
Answer to the alleged Irregularities and other Difficulties in their Scheme,
because their Leisure does not permit. This feigned Hurry of Mind, is no good
Symptom in their Favor. It is a most flagrant, ABANDONED Imposition, to tell
the World, that Securities for most of the Quotas of the Directors, are to be
found upon Record, 21st February last, the Date of our Letter. In the County of
Suffolk are Five of the Nine Directors: Upon Enquiry, None of their Mortgages
were then upon P^^^ord; but being alarmed, Samuel Watts enters his Mortgages
23d February, Peter Chardon 5th of March, and Samuel Adams 7th of March; the
others, viz. Judge Auchmuty's (CHAIRMAN) and William Stoddard's not yet entered.

10thly, The Directors are not in Pepetuity, because removable for Misdemeanor:
And when thus turned out, they have no Part in the Negative; therefore the
Directors have no Negative in Resolves of a general Meeting. Such silly
Quibbles are an Argument against the Undertaking with Men of Sense. A Patentee
in Office, though liable to be turned out for Misdemeanour, is notwithstanding
called a Patentee for Life. Can the Governor of a Province be said to have no
Negative in their General Assemblies, because he may be supersed or dismissed?
Such childish Quibbles are unbecoming a BOARD.

11thly, That the Bills bear no Interest to the Possessors is notoriously
false; because the Mortgagers pay to the Partnership, that is, to themselves, 3
per Cent. per Ann. This is trifling to an unpardonable Degree. The Possessors
of the Bills have no Benefit from this: The Partnership itself, notwithstanding
of this 3 per Cent, run yearly One per Cent. in Debt, as is before demonstrated.

12thly, The Partners have received a valuable Consideration for their
Mortgages, because the Signers, as I said, may perhaps be able to pay Two
Shillings in the Pound, which they, in their blundering Manner, call Two per
Cent; they mean, that in an Acquittance, these Words, Five Shillings in full of
all Accounts, is as good as Five hundred Pounds, or Five thousand Pounds, in
Balance of all Accounts: such silly Evasions require no serious Answer.

Of a Piece with this is their Assertion, That the original South Sea Allowance
of one twelfth of one per Cent. of their principal Stock, is proportionably
four Times as much as two per Cent. per Annum of the Principal of this Bubble.
By adducing such Blunders, they sufficiently expose themselves, without any
further Notice of ours.

13thly, As for the Oppulency of the Signers of the Silver-Money Notes, and of
the Signers of the Land-Bank Notes; they dare venture the Issue of the Case
upon it. A particular Answer would give room to expose the mean Circumstances
of most of the Signers or Directors; but this we choose to avoid.

I shall conclude with this Observation, concerning the Cause of Paper-Money,
public, or private, depreciating from Time to Time. It is a received, but
artful Prejudice, instilled by designing Men, into the Minds of the Vulgar;
That Merchants, and moneyed Men, giving an advanced Price for Silver is the
Occasion of it: If we reflect seriously, Can it be supposed, that these Men in
general would thus depreciate their own outstanding Book-Debts and Bonds, which
at all Times are of vastly greater Sums than the Silver they may purchase from
Time to Time: This would also rise the Price of all other Returns upon
themselves.

Merchants Notes equal to Silver, at a determined Value, paid away, received,
or bonded, they call Usury. I am no Friend to private Currencies of any Kind;
but upon this Occasion, must remind the Land-Bank Abettors, that to serve their
Cause, they allow of Inconsistencies in themselves, viz. not long since they
told us, that seeing Specialties, are not forbid in the Law; private People
must blame themselves, Orphans must blame their Guardians, and Widows their
Advisers, if they lose by Contracts made in depreciating Bills.

Writing upon this Subject, Sir, by setting the Affair in a clear Light, may be
of some Use to the proper Persons at Home; I wish it could have the same good
Effect upon the deluded Multitude in this Province who receive it for no other
Reason, but that they can pass it again. People of clear Estates and who value
themselves upon the Character of honest Men, despise and abhor it as a
barefaced popular Fraud. Insolvent Debtors catch hold of any Thing for a
present Reprieve. Some Solvents, void of Honesty readily embrace Bubbles to
decoy and make a Prey of the weak unthinking Multitude, such will no more
hearken to Reason than an incorrigible Thief will to the eighth Commandment.

I am, Your most humble Servant.
Boston, March 31, 1741.

