A LETTER From the Reverend Mr. WHITEFIELD, To some Church Members of the
Presbyterian Persuasion, in Answer to certain Scruples and Queries relating to
some Passages in his printed Sermons and other Writings.

To which is added, Two LETTERS from Nathanael Love-Truth, to the Rev. Mr.
Whitefield, containing some Exceptions to his 'foresaid Letter.

The Third EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA Printed, SOUTH CAROLINA, Charlestown Reprinted, by PETER
TIMOTHY, MDCCXLI.

A LETTER, etc.
NEW YORK, Nov. 1, 1740. My dear Friends,
LAST Night and this Morning I read your Queries and Scruples. Whether they
were compiled by Church Members or Ministers of the Presbyterian Persuasion, I
shall not take upon me to determine. I think I may say, with David on another
Occasion, Joab's Hand is in this If your Ministers were really the Authors, and
you only their Representatives, they have not acted simply. They had better
have spoken out. I should as readily have answered them as you. Solomon says,
He that hates Reproof, is Brutish: And if I know any thing of my own Heart, I
should think myself obliged to any one that convinces me of any Error, either
in Principle or Practice. I therefore assure you, that I do not find the least
Resentment stirring in my Soul against those (whoever they be) that proposed
the Queries, or against the Rev. Presbytery that advised you to send them to me
in a Public Manner: No, I rejoice in it; because it gives me an Opportunity of
doing what my Friends know I have for some time proposed, viz. To correct some
Passages in my printed Sermons. I think it no Dishonor to retract some
Expressions that have formerly dropped from my Pen, before God was pleased to
give me a more clear Knowledge of the Doctrines of Grace. St. Austin I think,
did so before me. The Lord's Dealing with me was something out of the common
Way. I can say, to the Honor of rich free distinguishing Grace, that I
received the Spirit of Adoption before I had conversed with one Man, or read a
single Book, on the Doctrine of Free Justification by the imputed Righteousness
of JESUS CHRIST. No Wonder then, that I was not so clear in some Points at my
first Setting out in the Ministry. Our LORD was pleased to enlighten me by
Degrees; and I desire your Prayers, that his Grace may shine more and more in
my Heart, till it breaks forth into perfect Day.

But to come to the exceptionable Passages in my Sermons. You blame me for
saying,

Page 17. Vol. 2d. That Adam was adorned with all the Perfections of the Deity.
I acknowledge this is not sufficiently explained. It should have been expressed
thus, "All the moral communicable Perfections of the Deity." though perhaps not
one of my Readers really thought I meant any others. Again, Man was the
Perfection of the moral and material World. Let it stand thus, "The Perfection
of the visible World"

P. 22. and 23. Vol. 2 d. where speaking of a godly Man's rising by Repentance
after a Fall into Sin, I say, Washes the Guilt of Sin away by the Tears of a
sincere Repentance joined with Faith in the Blood of JESUS CHRIST." -- This is
false Divinity; -- I would now alter it thus, -- Recovers his former Peace, by
renewing his Acts of Faith on the perfect Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST.

P. 79. Vol 1, where speaking of making the Glory of God our End, I say, And
which alone can render any of our Actions acceptable in God's Sight" -- It
should be -- And without which any of our Actions cannot be acceptable in God's
Sight.

P. 16, Vol. 1. where I speak of some Who vainly depend on their own
Righteousness, and not on the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, imputed to and
inherent in them, as necessary to their eternal Salvation." -- To avoid all
Mistakes, I would express myself in this Manner, -- Who have neither Christ's
Righteousness imputed to them for their Justification in the Sight of God, nor
Holiness wrought in their Souls as the Consequence of that, in order to make
them meet for the Enjoyment of God.

Vol. 1, p. 7. where it stands thus, We must be new Creatures in order to
qualify us for being savingly in Christ, read, "to qualify us for living
eternally with Christ."

The seeming Contradiction in my Sermon, Vol. 2, p. 128, compared with Vol. 2,
p. 137, I think may be reconciled by that Passage of the Apostle, After you
believed you were sealed by the Spirit of Promise Your arguing on this, Page
20, Sect 7, I think is not quite so clear. Might you not have as reasonably
blamed Jesus Christ for saying to a dead Man, Lazarus come forth? However,
instead of quickening Spirit," Vol. 2. p. 137, Let it be read, "sanctifying
Spirit."

Vol. 2. P. 33. where it is now read, The Man Christ Jesus is spiritually
formed in your Hearts. -- I would alter it thus, "That Christ is formed within
you."

Vol. 1. p 53, The many Souls that are nourished weekly by the spiritual Body
and Blood of Jesus Christ by your Means. -- Let it be altered for these Words,
Nourished weekly at the Lord's Supper by your Means.

I see no reason to alter my Explanation of the Words, Baptizing them into the
Nature of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and, Christ spiritually conceived in
the Heart of Eve. -- I mean no more by these Expressions than the Apostle, when
he says, Know you not that Christ is in you, unless you be Reprobates? And
again, We are made Partakers of the Divine Nature.

Vol. 2, p. 128, These Words [In the Lord's Prayer] may be left out. Though if
the Word Name signifies God's Attributes according to your own Confession, why
may it not signify his Essence? What are God's Attributes but GOD himself?

Vol. 1 p. 14 After essential ones too, insert, "if Persons are capable of
performing them" And by essential is meant necessary in that Order of Means
which God has appointed.

THESE, if I mistake not, are all the Passages in my Sermons which you object
against. -- And now to convince you that I am not ashamed to own my Faults, I
can inform you of other Passages as justly exceptionable. -- In my Sermon on
Justification, I seem to assert Universal Redemption, which I now absolutely
deny. -- In my Almost Christian, I talk of Works procuring us so high a Crown.
-- In my Sermon on the Marks of the New Birth, I say, We shall endure to the
End, if we continue etc. -- These and perhaps some other Passages, though capable
of a candid Interpretation, I now mislike, and in the next Edition of my
Sermons, God willing, I propose to alter them. -- In the mean while I shall be
thankful to any that will point out my Errors, and I promise, by divine
Assistance, they shall have no Reason to say, that I am one who hates to be
reformed -- Let the Righteous smite me, it shall be a Kindness; and let him
reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not break my Head: for
yet my Prayer also shall be in their Calamities.

As for your Insinuating that I countenance Mr. Wesly in his Errors, it is no
such Thing. -- I prefaced Halyburton's Memoirs before I saw what Mr. Wesly
wrote. And since I have seen it have more than once said, If I had known what
Mr. Wesley had wrote I would not have prefaced the Book at all. -- I do not
understand Mr. Wesly in his Interpretation of those Words, He that is born
again of God sins not; and therefore have torn that Part of his Preface out
of several of those Books which I have given away lately, and have acquainted
him wherein I think he errs in this particular, in sundry of my Letters.

You wrong me if you think I am an Antinomian. -- For when I say, God made no
second Covenant with Adam, I mean no more than this, -- God made no second
Covenant with Adam in his own Person in behalf of his Posterity. Nor did Man's
Acceptance in the Sight of God after the Fall, depend either wholly or in part
on his Works, as before the Fall. -- Whoever reads the Author of The Whole Duty
of Man, will find he thinks otherwise; and I believe your Friends in Scotland
will not thank you for defending The Whole Duty of Man, as you seemingly have
done in your late Queries.

Your Objection concerning my favorable Opinion of some particular Quakers I
conversed with, and also about some particular Promises which I think have been
made me, you may see satisfied in my Answer to the Bishop of London's last
pastoral Letter, and in a Letter sent to the Bishop of Gloucester, and
published in one part of my Journals.

I am no Friend to casting Lots; but I believe, on extraordinary Occasions,
when Things can be determined no other way, God, if appealed to and waited on
by Prayer and Fasting, will answer by Lot now as well as formerly.

You condemn me for preaching extempore, and saying I am helped often
immediately in that Exercise: But thousands as well as myself are thankful for
the special Assistances which God has afforded me in that Exercise. -- You
likewise censure me as one that would lay aside Reading; but I am of Bishop
Sanderson's Mind, Study without Prayer is Atheism; Prayer without Study,
Presumption. -- Blame me not for the Warmth of some of my Adherents, as you
call them. One of your Ministers knows, how sharply I rebuked one of them for
his Warmth at Fog's Manor. I am for loving as Brethren, and wish all would
copy after the lowly JESUS. -- But then I cannot discommend those (supposing
they do it in the Spirit of Meekness) who exclaim against dry sapless
unconverted Ministers -- Such surely are the Bane of the Christian Church.

But my other Affairs will not permit me to enlarge. Some of the latter part of
your Queries, for your own and not my Sake, I shall not mention. -- I hope I
cansay with more Sincerity than Hazael, Is your Servant a Dog that he should do
what you suggest? -- But I pray God forgive you. -- He knows my Heart. -- My
one Design is to bring poor Souls to Jesus Christ. -- I desire to avoid
Extremes, so as not to be a Bigot on the one Hand, or confound Order and
Decency on the other. -- And I could heartily wish the Reverend Presbytery when
they advised you to publish your Queries, had also cautioned you against
dipping your Pen in so much Gall. -- Surely your Insinuations are contrary to
that Charity that hops and believes all Things for the best. And I appeal to
your own Hearts, whether it was right, especially since you heard the constant
Tenor of my preaching in America has been Calvinistical, to censure me as a
Papist or Arminian, because a few unguarded Expressions dropped from my Pen
just as I came out of the University of Oxford? -- Could Archbishop Tillotson,
or the Author of The whole Duty of Man, say so? -- But I have done -- The LORD
be with you -- I am a poor frail Creature: And as such, I beseech you to pray
for

Your affectionate Friend and Servant, GEORGE WHITEFIELD.

Two LETTERS To the Rev. Mr. Whitefield.
Nov. 11. 1740. Reverend Sir,
I HAVE seen your printed Answer to certain Queries lately published, and
observe with great Satisfaction, the Evidence you there give of a truly
Christian Humility. And it is this emboldens me to tell you, that in my Opinion
you have not in all Points set Things right; but some of your Corrections are
as liable to Exceptions as the Passages you have corrected, I will give you a
Specimen: Instead of, Adam was adorned with all the Perfections of the Deity,
you correct it, All the moral communicable Perfections of the Deity. -- Was not
Man created a little lower than the Angels? And if so, were there not some
moral Perfections communicated to them, which were not communicated to him? For
otherwise in what Sense could he be said to be inferior to them? And it would
be absurd to say, that any Thing could be communicated that was not
communicable. -- I hope I have a true Sense of the Power and Usefulness of your
Ministry, and wish it, from my Soul and Spirit, all the Success it deserves:
But at the same time sincerely wish, that all Errors may be removed, and every
Let and Hindrance taken away. I therefore beg, that you will furnish me with
the Means of Answering what may be objected to the above Passage, by leaving a
Letter at Mr. Franklin's, directed to

Your Humble Friend and Servant NATHANAEL LOVE-TRUTH.

Reverend Sir,
IN your Answer to the Queries you say, That To the Honor of free
distinguishing Grace, you received the Spirit of Adoption, before you had
conversed with one Man, or read a single Book, on the Doctrine of Free
Justification by the imputed Righteousness of JESUS CHRIST; and, therefore, no
Wonder that you was not so clear in some Points at your first Setting out in
the Ministry. -- This Declaration to me seems clearly to imply, That the Spirit
of Adoption alone, without the Aid of human Conversation or Books, is not
sufficient fully to accomplish a Christian Minister, but that human
Conversation and Books are absolutely necessary, in order further to enlighten
him. -- As I understood you in this Sense, and further, That it is not yet
perfect Day Day with you I concluded you would readily retract any of your
Errors, even now, since you are not yet fully enlightened; and more especially,
as you say in your Answer to the Queries, That you shall be thankful to any
that will point out your Errors; and promise, by Divine Assistance, they shall
have no Reason to say, that you are one who hates to be reformed. -- It was
upon the Strength of this Conclusion, that I thought it proper, not only to
pray that God's Grace might shine more and more in your Heart, but also to
trouble you with my Letter of the 11th Instant.

The high Opinion I had entertained of your great Candor, Sincerity, and Zeal
for Truth, induced me to expect an Answer; and I would still gladly receive
that Satisfaction. But as I find you have hitherto declined it, and for which I
am at a Loss for a good Reason; I therefore take this Occasion to let you know,
That if you any longer decline doing what every Christian Enquirer has a Right
to demand of you upon such Occasions. I will immediately call upon you in a
public Manner, by printing both this and my former Letter.

I am Reverend Sir, Yours. NATHANAEL LOVETRUTH.
Nov. 13, 1740.

