A Choice Drop of Honey, FROM THE Rock CHRIST. OR, A short Word of Advice to
all Christians, of what Persuasion so^^^^, in order to a thorough Reformation.

By T. W. late Preacher of the Gospel.

The Seventh Edition.

Deuteronomy. 32.31. For their Rock is not as our Rock, even our Enemies themselves
being Judges.

BOSTON, Printed by G. ROGERS, for N. PROCTER at the Bible and Dove in
Fish-street. 1741.

A short Word of Advice to all Christians, etc.
A Word of Advice to my own Heart and thine; thou professes Baptism,
Church Fellowship; thou do well, they are glorious Ordinances: But if thou
have not the Blood of Christ at the Root of thy Profession, it will wither and
prove but painted Pegeantry to go to Hell in.

If thou retain Guilt, Self-righteousness under it, those Vipers will eat out
all the Vitals of it at length. Try and examine with greatest strictness every
day, what bottom thy Profession and Hope of Glory is build upon, whether it was
laid by the Hand of Christ; if not, it will never be able to endure the storm
that must come against it. Satan will throw it all down, and great shall be the
Fall thereof, Mat. 7.27.

Glorious Professor, thou shall be winnowed: Every Vein of thy Profession will
be tried to purpose: Terrible to have it all come tumbling down, and to find
nothing but it to bottom upon.

Soaring Professor, see to thy waxen Wings betimes, which will melt with the
heat of Temptations. What a Misery to trade much and break at length, and have
no Stock, no Foundation laid for Eternity, in thy Soul?

Gifted Professor, look there be not a Worm at the Root that will spoil all thy
fine Goard, and make it die about thee in a day of scorchings. Look over thy
soul daily, and ask, where is the Blood of Christ to be seen upon my soul? What
righteousness is it that I stand upon to be saved by? Have I got off all my
self-righteousness? Many eminent Professors have come at length to cry out, in
the sights of the ruin of all their duties, Undone, undone to all Eternity.

The greatest sins may be hid under the greatest duties, and the greatest
terrors: see the Wound that sin has made in thy soul, be perfectly cured by
the Blood of Christ, not skinned over with duties, humblings, enlargements,
etc. Apply what thou will besides the Blood of Christ it will poison the sore.
Thou will find that sin was never mortified truly; that thou have not seen
Christ bearing it for thee upon the cross: nothing can kill it but the
beholdings of Christ's Righteousness.

Nature can afford no balsam fit for soul-cure. Healing from duty, and not from
Christ, is the most desperate disease. Poor ragged nature, with all its highest
improvements, can never spin a garment fine enough (without spot) large enough
(without patches) to cover the soul's nakedness. Nothing can fit the soul for
that use but Christ's perfect righteousness. Whatever is of nature's spinning
must be all unravelled before the righteousness of Christ can be put on.
Whatsoever is of nature's putting on, Satan will come and plunder every rag
away and leave the soul naked and open to the Wrath of God. All that nature can
do will never make up the least dram of grace that can mortify sin, or look
Christ in the face one day.

Thou art a professor, art baptized, goes on hearing, and praying, and
receiving, yet miserable may thou be. Look about thee, did thou ever yet
see Christ to this day in distinction from all other excellencies and
righteousness in the World, and all of them falling before his Majesty and
Grace, Isaiah 2.17.

If thou have seen Christ truly, thou have seen pure grace, pure righteousness
in him, every way infinite, far exceeding all sin and misery. If thou have seen
Christ thou can trample upon all the righteousness of men and angels, so as
to bring thee into acceptance with God. If thou have seen Christ, thou would
not do a duty without him for ten thousand Worlds, 1 Cor. 2.2. If ever thou
did see Christ, thou did see him a Rock higher than self-righteousness,
satan, sin, Ps. 61.2. and that Rock does follow thee, 1 Cor. 10.4. And there
will be continual drops of honey and grace out of that Rock to satisfy thee,
Ps. 81.16. Examine if ever thou beheld Christ as the only begotten of the
Father, full of grace and truth, Joh. 1.14, 16, 17. Be sure thou art come to
Christ, that thou stand upon the Rock of Ages, have answered his call to thy
soul, have closed with him for Justification.

Men talk bravely of believing (whilst whole and sound) few know it. Christ is
the mystery of the scripture; grace the mystery of Christ. Believing is the
most wonderful thing in the world. Put any thing of thine own to it, and thou
spoilest it; Christ will not so much as look at it for believing. When thou
believe, and comes to Christ, thou must leave behind thee thy own
righteousness, bring nothing but thy sin. O that is hard, leave behind all thy
holiness, sanctifications, duties, humblings, etc. and bring nothing but thy
wants and miseries, else Christ is not for thee, nor thou for Christ. Christ
will be a pure Redeemer and Mediator, and thou must be a pure sinner, or Christ
and thou will never agree: It Is the hardest thing in the world to take Christ
alone for righteousness; that is, to acknowledge him Christ: Join any thing to
him of thy own and thou Un-christ's him.

Whatever comes in when thou go to God for acceptance, (besides Christ)
call it Antichrist, bid it be gone; make only Christ's righteousness
triumphant; all besides that is Babylon, which must fall, if Christ stand, and
thou shall rejoice in the fall thereof, Is. 1.10 -- 12. Christ alone did tread
the wine press, and there was none with him, Is. 63.3. If thou join to any
thing but Christ, Christ will trample upon it in fury and anger, and stain his
raiment with the blood thereof. Thou think it easy to believe; was ever thy
faith tried with an hour of Temptations, and a through sight of sin? was it ever
put to grapple with satan, and the wrath of God lying upon the Conscience: When
thou wast in the mouth of hell and the grave, then did God show thee Christ a
ransom, a righteousness, etc. Then could thou say, O I see grace enough in
Christ; thou may say that which is the biggest word in the world: Thou
believe. Untried faith is uncertain faith.

To believing there must be a clear conviction of sin, and of the merits of the
blood of Christ, and of Christ's willingness to save upon this consideration
merely, that thou art a sinner; things all harder than to make a world. All the
power in nature cannot get up so high in a storm of sin and guilt as really to
believe there is any grace, any willingness in Christ to save. When satan
charge sin upon the conscience, then the soul to charge it upon Christ, that
is gospel-like, that is to make him Christ, he serves for that use. To accept
Christ's righteousness alone, his blood alone for salvation. That is the sum of
the gospel, when the soul in all duties can say, nothing but Christ, Christ
alone for righteousness, justification, sanctification, redemption, 1 Cor.
1.30. Not humblings, not duties, not graces, etc. That soul has got above the
reach of the billows.

For all temptations, satan's advantages, our complainings are laid in
self-righteousness, and self-excellency, God pursues these, by setting satan
upon thee, as Laban did Jacob for his Images which Rachel hid, Genesis 31. These
must be torn from thee, be as willing as thou will, these hinder Christ from
coming in, and till Christ come in, guilt will not go out, and where guilt is,
there is hardness of heart, and therefore much guilt argues little, if any
thing of Christ's blood, that will tend to hardening. Make Christ thy Peace,
Ephesians. 2.14. not thy duties, thy tears, etc. Christ thy righteousness, not thy
graces, etc. Thou may destroy Christ by duties, as well as by sins. Look at
Christ, and do as much as thou will. Stand with all thy weight upon Christ's
righteousness; take heed of having one foot on thy own righteousness, another
on Christ's. 'Till Christ come and sit on high upon a throne of grace, in the
conscience, there is nothing but guilt, terrors, secret suspicions, the soul
hanging between hope and fear, which is an un-gospel like state.

He that fears to see sin's utmost vileness, the utmost hell of his own heart,
he suspects the merits of Christ. Be thou never so great a sinner, 1 John 2.1.
try Christ to make him thy advocate, and thou shall find him Jesus Christ the
righteous. In all doubtings, fears, storms of conscience, look at Christ
continually. Do not argue it with satan, (he desires no better) bid him go to
Christ, and he will answer him, it is his office as he is our advocate, 1 John
2.1. His office to answer the law as our surety, Heb. 7.22. His office to
answer justice, as our mediator, Gal. 3.20. 1 Timothy 2.5. and he is sworn to that
office, Heb. 7.20. Put Christ upon it; if thou will do any thing thy self, as
to satisfaction for sin, thou renounceth Christ the righteous, who was made sin
for thee, 2 Cor. 2.21.

Satan may allege and corrupt scripture, but he cannot answer scripture. It Is
Christ's word of mighty authority, Christ foiled satan with it, Mat. 4. In all
the scripture there is not an ill word against a poor sinner stripped of
self-righteousness; nay, it plentifully points out this man to be the subject
of the grace of the gospel, and none else. Believe but Christ's willingness,
and that will make thee willing. If thou find thou can not believe,
remember it is Christ's work to make thee believe; put him upon it, he works to
will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 2.13. Mourn for thy unbelief, which
is a setting up guilt in the conscience above Christ, and undervaluing the
merits of Christ, accounting his blood an unholy, a common, and unsatisfying
thing.

Thou complainest much of thy self; does thy sin make thee look more at Christ,
less at self? That Is right, else complaining is but hypocrisy. To be looking at
duties, graces, enlargements, when thou should be looking at Christ; that is
pitiful: Looking at them will but make thee proud, looking at Christ's grace
will make thee humble. By grace you are ^^^^d, Ephesians. v. 5. In all thy
temptations be not discouraged, Jam. 1.2. those surges may not be to break
thee, but to heave thee off thy self on the Rock Christ

Thou may be bro't low, even to the brink of hell, ready to tumble in; thou
can not he bro't lower than to the belly of hell, many saints have been
there, even dowced in hell, yet there may thou cry, there may thou look
toward the holy temple, Jonah 2.4. Into that temple none might enter but
purified ones, and with an offering too, Acts 21.26. But now Christ is our
temple and sacrifice, altar, high priest, to whom none must come but sinners,
and that without any offering, but his own blood once offered, Heb. 7.27.
Remember all the patterns of grace that are in heaven. Thou think, O what a
monument of grace would thou be: there are many thousands as rich monuments
as thou be. The greatest sinner did never oppose the grace of Christ, do not
despair: Hope still, when the cloud's at blackest, even then look toward
Christ, the standing pillar or the Father's love and grace, set up in heaven,
for all sinners to gaze upon continually. Whatsoever satan or conscience says,
do not conclude against thy self. Christ shall have the last word, he is the
judge of quick and dead, and must pronounce the final sentence, his blood
speaks reconciliation. Col. 1.20. cleansing, 1 John 1.7. purchase, Acts 20.28.
redemption, 1 Pet. 1.19. purging, Heb. 9.13, 14. remission, v. 20. liberty,
Heb. 10.10. justification, Romans 5.9. highness to God. Ephesians. 2.13. Not a drop of
this blood shall be lost. Stand and hearken what God will say; for he will
speak peace to his people, that they return no more to folly, Psalm. 85.8. He
speaks grace, mercy and peace, 2 Timothy 1.2. That Is the language of the Father
and of Christ. Wait for Christ's appearing, as the morning star, Rev. 22.19. He
shall come as certainly as the morning, as refreshingly as the rain, Hos. 6.3.

The sun may as well be hindered from rising as Christ the sun of
righteousness, Mal. 4.2. Look not a moment off Christ. Look not upon sin; but
look upon Christ first: When thou mournest for sin, if thou do not see
Christ, away with it, Zech. 12.10. In every duty, look at Christ before duty,
to pardon. In duty, to assist. After duty, to accept; without this, it is but
carnal careless duty. Do not legalize the Gospel, as if part did remain to thee
to do, and suffer, and Christ were but an half Mediator; and thou must bear
part of thy own sin; make part satisfaction. Let sin break thy heart, but not
hope in the gospel.

Look more at justification than sanctification. In the highest commands
consider Christ, not as an exacter to require, but a debtor, an undertaker, to
work. If thou have looked at workings, duties, qualifications, and such like,
more than at the merits of Christ, it will cost thee dear; no wonder thou go
complaining. Graces may be evidences, the merits of Christ (only without them)
must be the foundation of thy hope to bottom on. Christ only can be the hope of
glory, Col. 1.27.

When we come to God, we must bring nothing but Christ with us. Any ingredients
of our own qualifications, will poison and corrupt faith; he that builds upon
duties, graces, and the like, knows not the merits of Christ. This makes
believing so hard, so far above nature; if thou believe thou must renounce
(as dung and dross, Phil. 3.7.8.) thy Privileges, thy obedience, thy baptism,
thy sanctification, thy duties, thy graces, thy tears, meltings, thy humblings,
and nothing but Christ must be held up: Every day thy workings, thy
self-sufficiency, must be destroyed. Thou must take all out of God's hand,
Christ he is the gift of God, Joh. 4.10. Faith the gift of God, Ephesians. 3.8.
Pardon a free gift, Romans 5.16. Ah how nature storms, frets, rages at this,
that all is of gift and it can purchase nothing with its actings and tears, and
duties, that all its workings are excluded, and of no value in heaven.

If nature had been to contrive the way of salvation, it would rather have put
it into the hands of saints or angels to sell it, than of Christ (who gives
freely) whom therefore it suspects; it would have set up a way to purchase by
doing; therefore it obminates the merits of Christ as the most destructive
thing to it, would do any thing to be saved, rather than go to Christ, or close
with Christ. Christ will have nothing, the soul will force somewhat of his own
upon Christ. Here is the great controversy. Consider, did thou ever see the
merits of Christ, and the infinite satisfaction made by his death? did thou see
this in a time when the burden of sin, and the wrath of God lay heavy upon thy
conscience. That is grace. The greatness of Christ's merits is not known, but
to a poor soul at the greatest loss. Slight convictions, will but have slight
low prizings of Christ's blood and merits. Despairing sinner; thou art looking
on thy right hand, and thy left, saying, Who will show us any good? Thou are
tumbling over all thy duties and professions, to patch up a righteousness to
save thee. Miserable comforters are all those to thee. Look at Christ now. Look
to him, and be saved, all the ends of the earth, Isai. 45.22. There is none
else. He is a Savior, and there is none besides him, ver. 21. look any where
else, Christ is lifted up on high (as the brazen serpent in the wilderness)
that the ends of the earth, sinners at the greatest distance, may see him, and
look toward him. The least sight of him will be saving, the least touch
healing to thee, and God intends thou should look on him for he has set him
upon a high throne of glory, in the open view of all poor sinners. Thou have
infinite reason to look on him, no reason at all to look off him. For he is
meek and lowly of heart, Matthew. 11.29. He will do that himself which he
requires of his creature, bear with infirmities, To. 15.1. not pleasing
himself, not standing upon points of low ver. 2. he will restore with the
spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1. And bare thy burdens, ver. 22. He will forgive,
not only until seven times, but seventy times seven, Mat. 18.21, 22. It put the
faith of the appostles to it, to believe this, Luke 17.4.5. Because we are hard
to forgive, we think Christ is hard. We see sin great, we think Christ does so
too, and measure infinite love with our line, infinite merits with our sins,
which is the greatest pride and blasphemy, Ps. 103.11, 12. Isa. 40.15. Hear
what he says, I have found a ransom, Job 33.24. In him I am well pleased, Mat.
3.17. God will have nothing else; nothing else will do thee good, or satisfy
conscience, but Christ who satisfied the Father, God does all upon the account
of Christ, thy deserts are hell, wrath, rejections. Christ's deserts, are life,
pardon, and acceptance. He will not only show thee the one, but he will give
thee the other. It Is Christ's own glory and happiness to pardon. Consider,
whilst Christ was upon earth, he was more among publicans and sinners, than
scribes and pharisees, his professed adversaries; for they were righteous ones.
It is not so as thou imaginst, that his state in glory, makes him neglectful,
scornful to poor sinners; no he has the same heart now in heaven, he is God,
and changes not; He is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world,
John 1.29. He has gone through all thy temptations, dejections, sorrows,
desertions, rejections, Mat. 4.3, to 12. Mark 15.14, Luke 22.44. Mat. 26.38.
And has drunk the bitterest of the cup, and left thee the sweet; the
condemnation is out, Christ drunk up all the Father's wrath at one draught, and
nothing but salvation is left for thee; thou say, thou can not believe,
thou can not repent, fitter to repent, fitter for Christ if thou have nothing
but sin and misery, go to Christ with all thy impenitency, and unbelief, to get
faith and repentance from him; that is glorious. Tell Christ, Lord, I have
brought no righteousness, no grace to be accepted in, justified by; I am come
for thine, and must have it. We would be bringing to Christ, and that must not
be; not a penny of nature's highest improvement will pass in heaven. Grace will
not stand with works Tit. 3.5, Romans 11.6. That is a terrible point to nature;
which cannot think of being stripped of all, not having a rag of duty, or
righteousness left to look at. Self-righteousness, self-sufficiency, are the
darlings of nature, which she preserves as her life; that makes Christ such an
ugly thing to nature, nature cannot desire him; he is just directly opposite to
all nature's glorious interests. Let nature but make a gospel, and it would
make it contrary to Christ. It would be to the just, the innocent, the holy,
the righteous, etc. Christ has made a gospel for thee, that is, to needy
sinners, the ungodly, the unrighteous, the unjust, the accursed. Nature cannot
endure to think the gospel is only for sinners, it will rather choose to
despair, than to go to Christ upon such terms. When nature is but put to it by
guilt or wrath, it will to its old haunts of self-righteousness self-goodness,
etc. And infinite power must cast down those strong holds. None but the
self-justiciary stands excluded out of the gospel: Christ will look at the most
abominable sinner, before him, because to such an one Christ cannot be made
justification: He is no sinner. To say in complement, I am a sinner, is easy;
but to pray with the publican indeed, Lord be merciful to me a sinner, is the
hardest prayer in the world. It is easy to say, I believe in Christ; but to see
Christ full of grace and truth, of whose fullness thou may receive grace for
grace. That is saving. It Is easy to profess Christ with the mouth; but to
confess him with the heart, as Peter (to be the Christ, the Son of the living
God, the alone Mediator) that is above flesh and blood. Many call Christ
Savior, few know him so. To see grace and salvation in Christ, is the greatest
sight in the world; none can do that, but at the same time they shall see that
grace to be theirs. Sights will cause applications. I may be ashamed to think,
that in the midst of so much profession, yet I have known little of the blood
of Christ, which is the main thing of the gospel. A Christless, formal
profession will be the blackest sight next to hell that can be. Thou may
have many good things, and yet one thing be wanting, that may make thee go away
sorrowful from Christ. Thou have never sold all thou have, never parted with
all thine own righteousness, etc. Thou may be high in duty, yet a perfect
enemy and advarsary to Christ in every prayer, in every ordinance. Labor after
sanctification to thy utmost, but make not a Christ of it to save thee; if so,
it must come down one way or other. Christ's infinite satisfaction not thy
sanctification, must be thy justification before God. When the Lord shall
appear terrible out of his holy places, fre shall consume all that as hay and
stubble.

This will be sound religion only, to bottom all upon the everlasting mountains
of God's love and grace in Christ, to live continually in the sight of Christ's
infinite righteousness and merits (they are sanctifying, without them the heart
is carnal) and in those sights to see the full vileness, yet littleness of sin,
and to see all pardoned; in those sights, to pray, hear, be baptized, etc.
Seeing thy polluted self, and all thy weak performances continually; in those
sights to trample upon all thy self-glories, righteousnesses, privileges as
abominable, and be found continually in the righteousness of Christ only,
rejoicing in the ruins of all thy own righteousness, the spoiling of all thy
own excellencies, that Christ alone, as mediator, may be exalted in his throne,
mourning over all thy duties (how glorious soever) that thou have not performed
in the sight and sense of Christ's love. Without the blood of Christ on the
Consciences all are dead services, Heb. 9.14.

That opinion of Free Will so cried up will be easily confuted, as it is by the
scripture in thy heart who has had any spiritual dealings with Christ, as to
the application of his merits, and subjection to his righteousness. Christ is
every way too magnificent a person for poor nature to close withal or
apprehend. Christ is so infinitely holy, nature durst never look at him; so
infinitely good, nature can never believe him to be such, when it lies under
full sights of sin. Christ is too high and glorious for nature so much as to
touch. There must be a divine love first put into the soul to make it lay hold
on him, he lays so infinitely beyond the sight or reach of nature.

That Christ that natural free will can apprehend, is but a natural Christ of
man's own making, not the Father's Christ, not Jesus the Son of the living God,
to whom none can come without the Father's drawing, John 6.44, 46. Finally,
Search the scriptures daily, as mines of Gold, wherein the heart of Christ is
laid. Watch against constitution sins, see them in their vileness, and they
will never break out into act. Keep always an humble, empty, broken frame of
heart; sensible of any spiritual miscarriage, observant of all inward workings,
fit for the highest communications. Keep not guilt in the conscience, but apply
the blood of Christ immediately. God charge sin and guilt upon thee to make
thee look to Christ the brazen serpent.

Judge not Christ's love by evidences, but by promises. Bless God for shaking
off false foundations, for any way whereby he keeps the soul awakened, and
looking after Christ: better sickness, temptations, than security and
slightness.

A slighty spirit will turn a profane spirit, and will sin and pray too.
Slightiness is the bane of profession, if it be not rooted out of the heart, by
constant and serious dealings with and beholding of Christ in duties, it will
grow more strong and more deadly, by being under Church Ordinances. Measure not
thy graces by others seize, but by Scripture-trials. Be serious, exact in
duty, having the weight of it upon the Heart; but be as much afraid of taking
comfort from duties, as from sins, comfort from any hand but Christ is deadly.
Be much in prayer, or you will never keep up much communion with God. As you
are in closet-prayer, so you will be in all other Ordinances.

Reckon not duties by high Expression, but by low frames, and the beholdings of
Christ. Tremble at duties and gifts. In was the saying of a Saint, he was more
afraid of his duties, than his sins; the one often made him proud, the other
always made him humble. Treasure up manifestations, they make the heart low for
Christ, too high for sin. Slight not the lowest, meanest evidences of Grace.
God may put thee to make use of the lowest, as thou think; even that, 1 John
3.14. That may be worth a thousand worlds to thee. Be true to truth, but not
turbulent and scornful. Restore such as are fallen. Help them up again with all
the bowels of Christ. Set the broken dis-jointed bones with the grace of the
Gospel. High Professors, despise not weak Saints. Thou may come to wish to be
in the condition of the meanest of them. Be faithful to others infirmities, but
sensible of thy own. Visit sick beds, and deserted Souls much; they are
excellent schools of experiences. Abide in your calling, be dutiful to all
relations, as to the Lord, be content with little of the world: little will
serve. Think every little of earth much, because unworthy of the least. Think
much of heaven too little, because Christ is so rich and free. Think every one
better than thy self, and carry ever self-loathing about thee, as one fit to be
trampled upon by all the saints. See the vanity of the world, and the
consumption that is upon all things, and love nothing but Christ. Mourn to see
so little of Christ in the world, so few needing him. Trifles pleases them
better. To a secure soul, Christ is but a fable, the Scriptures but a story.
Mourn to think, how many under baptism, church order, that are not under grace,
looking much after duty, obedience, little after Christ, little versed in
Grace. Prepare for the cross, welcome it, bear it triumphantly like Christ's
cross, whether scoffs, mockings, jeers, contempts, imprisonments, etc. But see
it be Christ's cross, not thine own. Sin will hinder from glorying in the cross
of Christ. Omitting little truths against light may breed hell in the
conscience, as well as omitting the greatest Sin against light. If thou have
been taken out of the belly of hell, into Christ's bosom, and made to sit among
Princes in the household of God: O how should thou live as a pattern of Mercy;
redeemed, restored soul, what infinite sums do thou owe Christ? with what
singular frames must thou walk in, and do every duty? sabbaths, what praising
days, singing of hallelujahs should they be to thee? church fellowship, what a
Heaven, a being with Christ, and Angels, and Saints? Baptism, what a drowning
the soul in eternal love, as a burial with Christ, dying to all things besides
him: every time thou think on Christ be astonished, and wonder; and when
thou see sin, look at Christ's Grace, that did pardon it; and when thou art
proud, look at Christ's Grace, that shall humble and strike thee down in the
dust. Remember Christ's time of love when thou wast naked, Ezekiel. 16.8, 9. and
then he chose thee. Can thou ever have a proud thought; remember whose arms
supported thee from sinking, and delivered thee from the lowest hell, ( Psalm.
86.13.) and shout in the ears of angels and men, Psalm. 148. sing praise for
every grace. Daily repent, and believe and pray; and walk in the sight of grace
as one that has the anointings of grace upon thee. Remember thy sins, Christ's
pardoning; thy deserts, his merits; thy weakness, Christ's strength, thy pride,
Christ's humility; thy many infirmities, Christ's restorings; thy guilt,
Christ's new applications of his blood; thy failings, Christ's raisings up; thy
slightiness, Christ's sufferings; thy want, Christ's fullness; thy temptations,
Christ's tenderness; thy vileness, Christ's righteousness.

Blessed Soul! whom God shall find not having on his own righteousness, but
having his robes washed and made white in the blood of the Lamb. Woeful,
miserable Professor! that has not the gospel within, rest not in church trial,
thou may pass that and be a castaway in Christ's day of trial. Thou may
come to baptism, and never come to Jesus, and the blood of sprinkling. Whatever
workings or seize come not up to clear distinct apprehensions of Christ's
blood, merits, righteousness, (the main object of the gospel) falls short of of
the gospel, and leaves the soul in a condition of doubtings and questionings,
and doubtings (if not looked unto betimes) will turn to slightiness of spirit,
one of the most dangerous frames. Trifle not with ordinances. Be much in
meditation and prayer. Wait diligently on all hearing opportunities. We had
need of doctrine, reproof, exhortation, consolation, as the tender herbs and
the grass has of the rain, the dew, the small rain, and the showers. Do all
thou do as soul-work, as unto Christ. As immediately dealing with Christ
Jesus, as if he were looking on thee, and thou on him, and fetch all thy
strength from him.

Observe what holy motions you find in your soul to duties. Prize the least
motion that is from a sight of Christ, the least good thought thou have of
Christ, the least good word thou speak of them, sincerely from the heart, is
rich mercy, O bless God from it. Observe of every day you have the dayspring
from on high (with his morning dews of mourning for Sin) constantly visiting,
the bright morning star (with fresh influences of grace and peace) constantly
arising, and Christ sweetly greeting the soul in all duties. What duty makes
not more spiritual, will make more carnal, what does not quicken and humble,
will deaden and harden,

Judas may have the Sop, the outward privilege of baptism, supper,
church fellowship, etc. But John leaned on Christ's bosom. That Is the gospel
ordinance posture, in which we should pray, and hear, and perform all duties.
Nothing but lying in that bosom, will dissolve hardness of heart, and make thee
to mourn kindly for sin, and cure slightiness and ordinariness of spirit,(that
gangreen in profession) that will humble indeed, and make the soul cordial to
Christ, and sin vile to the soul, yea, transform the ugliest piece of hell,
into the glory of Christ. Never think thou art right as thou should be, a
christian of any glorious attainment, until thou come to this, always to see
and feel, thyself lying in the bosom of Christ, who is the bosom of of the
Father. Come and move the Father for Sights of Christ, and you shall be sure to
speed: You can come with no request that pleases him better. He gave him out
of his own bosom for that very end, to be held up before the eyes of all
sinners, as the everlasting monument of his Father's love.

Looking at the natural sun, weakeneth the eye. The more you look at Christ the
sun of righteousness, the stronger and clearer will the eye of faith be. Look
but at Christ, you will love him and live on him. Think on him continually,
keep the eye constantly upon Christ's blood, or every blast of temptation will
shake you. If you will see sin's sinfulness, to have it and mourn, do not stand
looking upon sin, but look upon Christ first, as suffering and satisfying. If
you would see your Graces, your sanctifications, do not stand gazing upon them,
but look at Christ's righteousness in the first place (see the Son and you see
all) then look at your Graces in the second.

When you act faith, what you first look at, that you expect settlement from,
and make it the bottom of your Hope. Go to Christ in sights of thy sin and
misery, not of thy grace and holiness. Have nothing to do with thy graces and
sanctification, they will but vail Christ, till thou have seen Christ first. He
that looks upon Christ through his graces, is like one that sees the sun in
water, which wavereth and moves as the water does. Look upon Christ only as
shining in the firmament of the Father's love and grace, you will not see him
but in his own glory which is unspeakable. Pride and unbelief will put you upon
seeing somewhat in your self first; but faith will have to do with none but
Christ, who is unexpressibly glorious, and must swallow up thy sanctification,
as well as thy sin; for God made him both for us, and we must make him both. He
that sets up his sanctification to look at, to comfort him, he sets up the
greatest idol which will strengthen his doubts and fears. Do but look off
Christ, and presently (like Peter) you sin.

A christian never wants comfort but by breaking the order and method of the
gospel, looking on his own, and looking off Christ's perfect righteousness,
which is to choose to live rather by candle light, than by the light of the sun.
The honey that you suck from your own righteousness, will turn into to perfect
gall, and the light that you take from that to walk in, will turn into black
night upon the soul. Satan is tempting thee by putting thee to plod about thy
own graces, to get comfort from them, then the Father comes, and points thee to
Christ's grace, as rich and glorious, infinitely pleasing him, and bids thee
study Christ's righteousness (and his biddings are enablings) that is a blessed
motion, a sweet whispering, checking thy unbelief, follow the least hint, close
with much prayer, prize it as an unvaluable jewel: It Is an earnest of more to
come. Again, if you would pray and (...), and so are discouraged, see Christ
praying for you, using his interest with the Father for you. What can you want?
If you be trobled, see Christ your peace, leaving you peace, when he went up to
heaven, again and again charging you not to be troubled, no not in the least
si^fully troubled, so as to obstruct thy comfort, or thy believing. Her is now
upon the throne, having spoiled upon his cross, in the lowest state of his
humiliation, all whatsoever can hurt or annoy thee. He has born all thy sins,
sorrows, fears, disgraces, sicknesses, troubles, temptations, and is gone to
prepare mansions for thee. Thou who have seen Christ all, and self nothing, who
makes Christ thy life, and art dead to all righteousness besides, thou art the
christian who has found favor with God. Favorite of heaven, do Christ this
favor for all his love, love his saints and churches, the meanest, the
weakest, notwithstanding difference in judgment, they are engraven on his
heart, as the names of the children of Israel, on Aaron's breast plate. Let
them be so on thine. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that
love her.

FINIS.

