SOME ACCOUNT OF THE TRIAL OF Samuel Goodere, Esquire Late Commander of the Ruby
Man of War, Matthew Mahony, and Charles White, Who were tried on March 26,
before the Right Worshipful Henry Comb, Esquire Mayor of Bristol, and the
Worshipful Michael Foster, Esquire Sergeant at Law, Recorder of the said City, etc.

For the Murder of Sir John Dinely Goodere, Bart.

On board the Ruby, in King-Road, Bristol.

BOSTON: Pri^^ed and Sold at the Printing House in Queen Street, ^^er against
the Prison. 1741.

The TRIAL, etc.
AFTER the Counsel for the King had opened the Indictment, the first Witness
that was called, was Mr. Jarret Smith, Attorney at Law.

Court. Mr. Smith, where do you live?


Smith. On College Green. The Sunday before this Murd^^ was committed, the
Deceased, by my Invitation, was to di^^ at my House the Sunday following, of
which the Priso^^r being apprized, came into the Neighborhood, and sent for
me, and earnestly interceeded with me, to admit him, t^^ Prisoner, into the
Company of his Brother, the Dece^^^^ under Pretense, as the Prisoner said, to
accommodat^ (...) reconcile their Differences in an amicable Manner.


Court. Where was the Prisoner when h^ (...) for you? Did you go to him?


Smith. He was at College Green Coffe House, and I went to him, and I was so
pleased with the Proposal of the Prisoner, and the Hopes of their
Accommoda^ion, that, without the least Hesitation, I immediat^^y introduced the
Prisoner into the Company of his Brot^er the Deceased: And in such a Manner did
the Prisoner (...) have, that, seemingly, the Deceased and he were as good
Friends as ever: After Dinner I withdrew, and left then by themselves, for the
Space of an Hour, till I was call^^ in, and after we had smoked a Pipe
together, Mr. Go^^ere took his Leave of Sir John Dinely, in the most friendly
and affectionate Manner imaginable


Court. What Time of the Day was it that the Deceased went from your House?


Smith. It was dark, and I believe it might be near Six o'Clock in the E^ening


Couns. Pray, Mr. Smith, acquaint my Lord and the Jury, what happened after.


Smith. My Lord, I accidentally heard, the Sunday Evening that they were at my
House, that a Person who had the Appearance of a Gentleman, was hurried in a
violent Manner over College Green, and that a Gentleman who was concerned in
hurrying the Person away, answered the Disc^iption of Capt. Goodere; and
knowing his Ship was to sail the first fair Wind, and remembering that they went
out of my House near together, it came directly into my Head, that the Captain
had taken him on board, to distress him to concede to his Terms, and perhaps
might destroy him, when they came on the high Seas. And this Suspicion being
strengthened by other Circumstances, it made such a deep Impression on my Mind,
that I was not easy all Night; but considering how long it would be before I
could obtain his Majesty's Writ, De homine replegiando, I went the next Morning
to Mr Mayor, for a Warrant, and an Officer to go on board the Ruby Man of War,
to search her before she was sailed out of the Liberty of the City; and
accordingly his Worship sent the Water-Bailiff, with proper Assistance, and
full Power and Instructions to search the Ship for Sir John Dinely.


Another Witness, whose Name is not mentioned declared as follows. My Lord, I
was passing along College Green, and I saw six Men hurrying the Deceased along
toward the Hot Well, when the Deceased, as he was carried along, cried out,
Murder! Murder! I am Sir John Dinely Goodere, and the Prisoner stopped his
Mouth with his Cloak; upon which some People, who did not know his Name, asked
what was the Matter, when Mr. Goodere, the Prisoner at the Bar, said, it was
only a Thief and a Deserter, and that they were going to carry him on board the
King's Ship to try him. And, my Lord, not knowing what might be the Consequence
of interposing in Matters of this Nature, having lately seen the sad Effects of
opposing the Authority of a Press-Gang, I went home and thought no more of the
Matter, till the Monday Night, when there was a Report of the Murder; and
therefore next Day, I went before the Worshipful Mayor, and Aldermen, and
discovered what I knew of this Transaction, in the same Manner as I have to
your Lordship.


Court. Would the Prisoners ask this Witness any Questions?


Pris. No, my Lord.


A Sailor sworn. Sailor. May it please your Honor, my Lord, I was ordered to
watch in the Boat, whilst our noble Captain and the other Boat's Crew were on
Shore, and about six o'Clock on Sunday, the 18th of January last, our Boat's
Crew bro't the Deceased into the Boat, among whom was our Captain, Matt Mahony
and Charles White.


Couns. Pray what passed there between the Prisoners and the Deceased?


Sailor. Nothing as I know of, an please your Worship.


Couns. Was there no Dialogue between the two Brothers?


Sailor. Dialogue!


Couns. Ay, Dialogue!


Sailor. If you call it a Dialogue, it was a very odd one, such as I had never
heard between two Brothers


Couns. Tell the Court what you heard them say to each other.


Sailor. An please your Honor, Sir John Dinely said to our noble Captain:
Brother, I know you have an Intention to murder me; I beg that if you are
resolved to do it, that you would do it here, and not give yourself the Trouble
of taking me down to your Ship


Couns. Pray did not your noble Captain, as you call him, say any Thing?


Sailor. Yes; Capt Goodere said to Sir John Dinely, Brother, I am going to
prevent your rotting upon Land; but however Brother, I would have you make your
Peace with God this Night.


Couns. Do you know any Thing more?


Sailor. I don't remember any more, only that when he came along-side our Ship,
the Sailors helped the Deceased on board, and it was my Station to stay behind
and stow the Boat.


Court. Prisoners, would you ask this Witness any Questions?


Pris. No, my Lord.


The Master of the Ship sworn. Couns Sir, if my Instructions are right, you are
Master of his Majesty's Ship the Ruby Man of War?


Master. Yes, Sir, instead of a better


Couns Then pray, Sir, I desire that you would be so good as to give the Court
an Account of what you know relating to the unhappy Death of Sir John Dinely
Goodere?


Master. My Lord, on Sunday the 18th of Janury --


Couns Sir, I must crave the Favor, that you will raise your Voice, so that
the Jury may hear what you say.


Master. My Lord, on Sunday the 18th of January last, about six o'Clock in the
Evening, my Servant came into my Cabin, and told me, the Captain was in the
Boat, which was near the Ship, and accordingly I went on the Quarter Deck in
order to receive the Captain, (which was my Duty in the Absence of the
Lieutenant;) and when the Side was manned, the Captain (whom I am heartily
sorry to see here in the Shape that he appears) orders some Hands into the
Boat, to help his Brother on board; accordingly the Boat-Twain pip'd and
ordered all Hands upon Deck, and some of the briskest Hands stepped into the
Pinnace, and, in a Manner, hoisted the Deceased into the Ship; when he cried
out that his Brother was going to murder him, and the Captain told me, not to
mind him nor his Noise, because he was mad, and that he had brought him aboard,
on Purpose to prevent his making himself away; and then the Deceased was
conveyed away into the Cabin, which is all that I know of the Matter.


Couns. Pray, Sir, do you know any Thing of the Murder?


Master. No, until it was discovered by the Cooper.


Court. Would the Prisoners ask this Evidence any Questions?


Pris. No, my Lord.


The Boatswain sworn. Couns. Pray, Sir, acquaint the Court of what you know,
relating to this unhappy Affair?


Boats My Lord, on Sunday the 18th of January last --


A Juryman I cannot hear one Word, my Lord.


Couns. Pray raise your Voice.


Boats. My Lord, on Sunday --


Couns. I cannot hear what you say, Sir.


Court. You must speak so, that the Gentlemen of the Jury may hear you.


Boats. My Lord, on Sunday the 18th Day of January last --


Couns. It Is a strange Thing, Sir, that you will not speak out, I don't understand
one Word you say; you can be loud enough on board, and make the Ship's Company
hear you at the Main top mast head in a Storm, and you cannot speak loud enough
here to be heard in Court.


Boats. My Lord. Grief overcomes me, to see so worthy and so gallant a
Commander, as ever went between Stem and Stern of a Ship, appear in the Manner
as the Captain does On Sunday the 18th of January last, about Nine o Clock in
the Morning, I had Orders from the Captain at the Bar, (for whom my Heart
bleeds!) to direct that the Pinnace might be got ready; and accordingly I
ordered the Boat's Crew to be in Readiness; and in about half an Hour the
Captain went ashore, and about 7 o'Clock in the Evening, it being very dark,
one of the Ship's Crew came into my Cabin, which is at the Bulk head of the
Steerage, to acquaint me that the Pinnace was along Side, with the Captain in
it; upon which I piped all Hands upon Deck, and ordered the Seamen to man the
Side, when the Capt. ordered a brisk Hand or two to step into the Pinnace, to
help his Brother in; and when the Deceased came into the Ship, he cried out,
they were going to murder him; but the Captain said, That we need not mind him,
because he was mad, and that he was brought on board on Purpose to prevent his
making himself away; and after Sir John came on board, he was conducted into
the Cabin; and as it was my Duty to obey the Command of my Superiors, so I
thought it would be imprudent in me to interpose in any D^fference between the
Captain and his Brother; otherwise I would have exerted myself, to have
prevented the sad Effects, which afterward happend.


Court. Would the Prisoners ask this Witness any Questions?


Goodere. My Lord, I would ask the Evidence, if he believes I would have been
guilty of the Murder of my own Brother.


Boats. No, for never did a more worthy Gentleman bear a Commission under his
Majesty than Capt. Goodere, nor no Man ever carried better Command than he did,
nor treated those who were under him, with more Humanity and kind Usage than
the Captain did.


Couns Set this Witness down, and call Bryant.


Charles Bryant. I was one of the six Men, hired by Capt. Goodere, the Prisoner
at the Bar, to seize the Deceased, and forcibly to run him aboard the Ruby Man
of War, then lying in King Road. We met, by the Prisoner's Directions, at the
White-Hart on College Green, where we had a handsome Dinner, and we were placed
in the Balcony that we might be ready to receive the Signal and obey the Word
of Command, without giving the least Suspicion to the People of the House. The
Room we dined in, was opposite to Mr. Smith's House, so that we had Notice in a
Minute when it was proper to seize Sir John About six o'Clock in the Evening
the Signal was given, and we left the White Heart, and overtook the Deceased
just before he came to College Green Coffee House, where I and five others,
seized him at the Word and Command of the Prisoner Goodere: We then immediately
rushed on the Deceased, and dragged him along toward the Roap Walk, where was
a Gang of twelve more of us, who were there ready to assist us, according to
the Prisoner's Instructions. We hurried the Deceased along toward the Hot
Well, where a Boat waited purposely to receive him.


Court. Was the Prisoner Goodere with you all the while you dragged the
Deceased from College Green down to the Water Side, and put him aboard the Boat?


Bryant. Yes; the Prisoner was with us, directing, aiding and assisting all the
Time, and when the Deceased cried out, Murder! Murder! I am Sir John Dinely
Goodere, the Prisoner stopped the Deceased's Mouth with his Cloak, so that the
People not knowing his Name, only asked, What was the Matter? The Answer the
Prisoner and we gave, was, That he (the Deceased) was a Thief and a Murderer,
had made his Escape from the Ship, and that we were going to take him on board
to secure him, in order for his Trial; the Prisoner still stopping the
Deceased's Mouth to prevent his crying out.


Court. Did you go with the Deceased in the Boat to the Ship?


Bryant. Yes; I did, and the Deceased had a little more Liberty than before,
and he made use of it to speak to the Prisoner to this Effect: Brother, I know
you have an Intention to murder me; I beg that if you are resolved to do it
that you would do it here, and not give yourself the Trouble of taking me down
to your Ship. To which the Prisoner repl^ed after this Manner. No, Brother, I
am going to prevent your rotting upon Land; but, however, would have you make
your Peace with God this Night. And so without more ado, the Prisoner hurried
the Deceased on board his Ship.


Court Did you go on board the Ruby Man of War with the Prisoner and the
Deceased?


Bryant. I went on Board and assisted the Prisoner The Deceased loudly cried
for Help, and made a great Noise, but the Prisoner took the Precau^ion to tell
the Crew, That they need not mind his Noise, because he was mad and that they
had brought him on board on Purpose to prevent his making himself away And
after we had c^ove^'d him away into the P^r^er's Cabin, we were all ordered,
except Mahony and White, by the Prisoner, ashore, with Directions to conceal
ourselves, and keep out of the Way of Enquiry.


Court. You say, when you left the Ship, Mahony and White staid behind; was it
by the Prisoners Goodere's Order.


Bryant. Mahony and White were called into the Cabin, and the rest of us were
immediately sent ashore: This is all I know of the Matter, till I was
apprehended.


Court. You say, you was hired by the Prisoner to (...) the Deceased aboard the
Ship, What did the Prison^^ (...) you? How much Money each?


Bryant. We were treated, and had a little Present of Money given us, and
promised a large Reward after the Business was done; but we have not received
it to this Day.


Court. What was the Sum you received? And who did you receive it from?


Briant. I had a Guinea given me by the Captain himself.


Goodere. When did I give you the Guinea? And was it not for Wages due to you?


Bryant. It was within a Day or two before we hurried the Deceased aboard: The
Prisoner never owed me Wages, for I never was in the Prisoner's Service. I am a
Sailor belonging to the Vernon Schooner, and an Irishman: He, the Prisoner,
came, and hired me and five others, and gave each of us a Guinea, to do the
Business, which we afterward did, of hurrying the Deceased aboard the
Prisoner's Ship.


Mr. Jones, Cooper of the Ruby, sworn. Jones. Sunday, Jan. 18, about Seven at
Night, the Captain brought his Brother, Sir. John. on board, and conveyed him
down to the Purser's Cabin, by Force: When he was down, the Captain asked
Whether the Cabin was clear (for that the Thursday before the Murder, the
Captain had ordered me to get the Purser's Cabin ready for a Gentleman who was
coming on board:) I answered, Yes, Sir: Then he opened the Door, and the People
of the Ship forced Sir John in, he groaning, all the while. When he was in, the
Captain called for his Steward, and told him to bring a Bottle of Rum and a
Glass: The Captain asked Sir John, How he did? Sir John complained of Pains,
especially in his Thigh: The Captain asked him, If he would drink a Dram? Sir
J^hn said, He had drank nothing but Water these two Years, The Captain then
asked him, If he would have any Rum to bathe his Thigh? Sir John answered No:
Then the Captain ordered a Dram for Mohony and Elisha Cole (who was the Person
at first designed to have done the Murder, but that he was drunk:) After they
had a Dram, they all came out of the Cabin. Then Cole desired Leave to speak to
the Gentleman (Sir John) thinking he was the Captain of the Ship he was pressed
out of: Cole went in, and told Sir John, he did his Duty on board the Charles
as well as another Man, and swore he would have his Wages: Sir John told him,
He did not know him, nor any thing of the Charles: On which he again swore, he
would have his Wages before he went out of the Ship; for that if he was not the
Captain, he was the Owner. Shortly after Cole went out; when the Captain called
one of the Carpenter's to put two strong Bolts on the Purser's Cabin Door;
which was accordingly done. About this Time Sir John asked, If he could speak
with any one of the Officers on board: The Carpenter made Answer, I am the
Carpenter: Sir John asked if he could speak a Word with him? He replied, a
Hundred if he pleased. Then the Carpenter opening the Door, in order to clench
the Staples, Sir John asked him, What his Brother Sam. was going to do with
him? What, is he going to murder me? The Carpenter replied No, He is willing to
have your Company, Sir; he does it for your Good: Sir John said, But what will
become of all my Servants and Estate all this Time? On this the Carpenter
retired: And presently after the Captain came down again, and ordered the
Doctor's first Mate to go to feel his Pulse, saying, We must patch him up as
well as we can, he is a crazy old Man: Go, in, says he, and feel his Pulse:
Accordingly the Docter went in, and when he came to Sir John, he asked him,
Where his Pains were? He answered, He lately came from Bath, and had a Pain in
his Head; and complained of many other Pains, occasioned by the rough Usage in
bringing him on board. Says the Captain, Doctor, feel his Pulse, and com^ out:
So accordingly the Doctor came out, and the Cabi^ Door was shut. After this, I
heard him begging and prayi^^ for God to be comfortable to him in his
Affliction, for that he believed he was going to he murdered; and hoped it
would be brought to Light, for that it was impossible it could be done without
somebody hearing or seeing it. About Nine at Night I h^^^^ him knocking and
calling out Ho! Ho! Brother Sailors I have almost forgot my Sea Terms, let me
have a Bucket to Piss in, and ease myself, for it will be a Shame to do it in
the Cabin. Upon this I looked out at the Cabin Door, and called out to the
Centry to get something for the Gentleman to ease himself in: And presently
afterward Mahony came with a Bucket; when Sir John told him of his Exploits,
and that he had been Captain of an India Man, etc. About Two or Three in the
Morning my Wife waked me: And I heard a vast Struggling at first, and the old
Gentleman to cry, Twenty Guineas! Take it! Take it! Must I die! Must I die! And
very soon after, all was quiet. Then a Candle was handed into the Cabin: And I
saw, through the Crevace of the Partition, Mahony holding the Candle in his Hand,
and White plundered his Pockets, turning his Body in order to come at it, and
took out of his Pocket his Watch and Money. But White not getting the Watch out
of Sir John's Pocket easily, Mahony said to him, D -- n it, lay hold of the
Chain: It was some Time before they could get the Watch out of his Pocket,
being forced at last to unbutton his Breeches. White put his Hand into one
Pocket, and found nothing but Silver, and putting his Hand into the other,
said, Here it is: Then he put his Hand in another Pocket, and found a Piece of
Paper, which he was going to read; but Mahony damned him, and bid him put it in
his Pocket, and not stand to read it now. In about a Minute after, I saw a
white Hand on the Throat of the Deceased, which I took to be the Captain's
Presently they all went out of the Cabin, and left the Deceased alone Then I
went to the Doctor's Mate and the Centry; and, by their Opinion, they took: the
Gentleman to be dead: Then I went to the Lieutenant and told him what I had
heard and seen, and that Mahony and White had murdered the Gentleman, and that
I believed the Captain was concerned. The Lieutenant was very dubious of the
Truth at first, telling me, he did not think the Captain would be guilty of any
such Thing; but, on my giving him such plain Demonstrations of the Thing, he
began to think there was something in it. While they were talking, the
Midshipman came to acquaint the Lieutenant, that the Captain had ordered White
and Mahony ashore: He swore they should not go ashore, for that they were the
two Persons that had killed the Gentleman; but the Midshipman returning to the
Captain, he ordered they should be put ashore immediately; and accordingly they
were. About Nine or Ten in the Morning, the Lieutenant and Gunner contrived a
Method, that I should go in and complain I had lost six Guineas out of my
Chest: Accordingly going with this Complaint, I seized the Captain as he was
walking with his Hands behind him: And the rest who were at Hand rushed in
after me. Upon the Captain's being thus seized, he cried out, Hay! Hay! what
have I done! what have I done! I replied, Sir, you are my Prisoner* you was the
Cause of your Brother's Death last Night. The C^^^ain said, If there is Murder
done in the Ship, I know nothing of it: Accordingly he was secured, and the
Barge ordered out for Four of the Crew to pursue White and Mahony. They took
White at the Bell in Marsh-street, swearing and damning his Mother for sending
him so much Money; he was very much in Liquor, but was soon conquered and bro't
before a Magistrate; when he was so drunk, that his Confession was not taken
till next Morning. About Twelve at Night they took Mahony at a private House
opposite the Ship on St Michael's-Hill-Steps, and conveyed him before a
Magistrate, and when he was sober he also made his Confession of the Murder.


Anne Jones, the Cooper's Wife. On Sunday the 18th of January, 1740 1, somebody
came down, when the Captain asked if the Cabin was clean? And bid them, Bring
the old mad F^llow in: Then he called for the Doctor, and told him, That he had
got an old mad Fellow there, and that he must doctor him as well as he could:
Then they went into the Cabin, when the Captain asked his Brother, How he did
now? Sir John told him, He had a great Pain in his Arms and Thighs by the Men
hawling him down to the Boat: Then the Captain a^^'d him, If he would drink a
Dram? Sir John told him, No; for he had drank nothing but Water these two
Years: Then the Captain told him, He should have something to anoint his
Thighs, and called for the Steward to bring a Bottle of Rum; when the Captain
asked his Brother again, If he would drink; who answered him No; on which the
Captain said, It is so much the better for you: At this Time I perceived there
was in the Cabin one Elisha Cole, whom the Captain ordered a Dram for, and bid
him sit down: Sir John still complaining of his Legs and Arms, the Captain
ordered Mahony to pull his Stockings off; on which Sir John replied, Don't
strip me before I am dead: and the Captain made Answer, Don't mind him, for he
is crazy. Says Sir John to his Brother, Brother Sam. what do you bring me here
for? You cannot murder me without letting some body know of it; telling him
several Times, He would rot in a Jail for it: Then the Captain went to the
Doctor's Mate, and sent him to feel his Pulse, but charged him not to talk to
him much; and in Obedience to the Captain's Command the Doctor went in to Sir
John, and felt his Pulse; when Sir John told him he had a great Pain in his
Head; that he had been a Week from Bath,since which his Head was worse than
ever: Then the Captain went up to Supper; mean while the Carpenter came to put
on two Bolts to the Cabin Door; when Sir John asked Mahony (who was constantly
to and fro) if he could speak with one of the Officers? Mahony told him, they
were all on shore, unless, it was the Carpenter, and he was nailing on the
Bolts: On which Sir John asked, if he was going to be nailed in? Replies
Mahony, No, Sir: Then, says Sir John, I desire to speak with the Carpenter: On
this Mahony went out of the Cabin, but neglected to acquaint the Carpenter of
it; so that Sir John called the Carpenter himself, and asked him, if he pleased
to hear him speak one Word? The Capenter replied, Ay, Twenty, if you please
Sir: Then he asked the Carpenter, What his Brother meant by bringing him there?
The Carpenter replied, That he hoped it was for his Good: Sir John made Answer:
But what will my Servants and my Estates do the while? I suppose my Brother
tells you I am a Madman; but I am not, though he is enough to drive me mad: On
which the Carpenter went out: About Ten o'Clock the Captain came down again
with a Pair of Stockings in his Hand, and asked his Brother if he would put
them on? Sir John told him, No; he would bid as he was: At this Time Sir John
did not talk much, but told his Brother, He would rot in a Jail: On this the
Captain bid Mahony see if he had any Knife about him; When Sir John took a
little Knife out of his Pocket, and gave it to Mahony, and went and laid
himself upon the Bed directly: Then the Captain went out, saying to his
Brother, He would go and see for some Sheets for him; and as the Captain went
out, he spoke aloud, and charged (I suppose the Centry) that no one should come
near him; for that by and- by he would kick and tear, and make a Noise, as though he
would tear the Cabin down; for that he was a Madman: Then the Captain went out
and sat in the Doctor's Birth, saying to Mr. Marsh the Midshipman, You must go
ashore in the Morning between three and four o'Clock, and also ordered him to
go to the Post Office for the Letters: That if any Body made Enquiry about the
Old mad Fellow, he should tell them, That he had brought him on board to
prevent his rotting in Jail: In short, (continued he) the World has blamed me,
that I have not done it before: About Twelve, Sir John asked Mahony for the
Knife; for what does my Brother think I am going to make away with my self? God
forbid, the World is wicked enough to do that: Telling Mahony it was his Son's
Knife that was dead; and that he would have it again. And after he had talked
to him some Time, he bid him go out, for that he could bide by himself: Mahony
said to him; Sir, I must bide and take Care of you, and immediately put the
Candle out: Sir John still kept talking with Mahony, praying to God to give him
Patience; and Mahony told him, he must have Patience; Sir John replied,
sighing, I had as good. Still Sir John kept on talking to Mahony* telling him*
If a great many Gentlemen of Bristol did but know how he was used, they would
fetch him from thence: Then Mahony told him, that he should go ashore in the
Morning, and that then he would convey any Letters to the Post Office, if he
pleased: I fell asleep, and something after Two, I happened to awake, when I
heard Mahony persuading Sir John to go to sleep: Sir John and Mahony kept on
talking for some Time, when on a sudden I heard a great Struggling, and two
People whispering in the Cabin, and Sir John groaning and making a lamentable
Noise, muttering out, Murder! Help, for God's Sake! giving several Kecks with
his Troat: Then somebody offering to open the Door, one of those that were of
the Inside said, Keep out, you Negar, or, Keep the Door to you Negar: And while
that Person was at the Door, Sir John said, Here Is Twenty Guineas for you, Take
it! Take it! speaking in a very inward Manner, Must I die! Must I die! And
between the Words he gave several Kecks for Breath, and spoke very inwardly,
Oh! my Life! which were the last Words he spoke.


Duncan Buchanan. Jan. 13. 1740, the Captain ordered the Barge and Yawl up, (in
each of which was a Midshipman) and ordered a Midshipman and six of the
Bargemen to go to the Sign of the White-Hart, the Foot of the College-Green:
When we came there I saw the Captain, Mahony, and five of the Privateer's Men,
who were drinking hot Flip by themselves, while myself and the five Bargemen
were sitting in the public Kitchen drinking of Ale: Shortly after, I saw Sir
John come from Mr. Smith's opposite the White-Hart, where his Man was waiting
for him, with Pistols to each of their Horses: Then the five Privateer's Men
seeing him, they rushed out together, and were for seizing Sir John then; but
the Capt. ordered them not to touch him at that Time, but to follow him, and
see which Way he went: Then they followed him round the Corner, and the Captain
after them: But the Captain returned to the White Heart again in about an Hour,
and ordered the Boat down. --

The Sunday following, the 18th of January, the same Gentleman I saw on the
Green, was brought on board the Ruby; and as he was bringing on board, the
Captain bid the People mind not what he said, for that he was a Madman, and he
would bring him to his Senses by and by. I saw no more of him for this Time.
But at 12 o'Clock I was called to go Centry over Sir John in the Cockpit at
the Purser's Cabin-door; a little after 12, the Captain sent his Man for me: I
gave the Centry at the Gun-Room Charge, that no Body should come down the
Ladder till I had spoke with the Captain: When I went into the Captain's Cabin,
I saw the Captain and Mahony with a Bottle of Rum and Glass before them, out of
which I had a Dram. Then the Captain asked me, If his Brother made any Noise?
On which I told him, that he made a little Moan for the Time that I was there.
The Captain replied, I know the Reason of that, he is wet, he wants to be
shifted; I will come down and shift him with dry Stockings presently: When I
went out, the Captain told me to let no body into the Purser's Cabin to Sir
John, but Mahony. -- Says Mahony, You may let another go in because -- here he
went no further. About Two the Captain came down to the Cock Pit, and asked me,
if his Brother made any Noise? and listened himself at the Cabin Door, to hear
if he made any Noise.

Sir John made a little Moan: And the Captain said to me, Centry, give me the
Sword, and you go upon Deck, because I want to talk to my Brother privately by
himself: Accordingly I gave him the Sword, and went up into the Gun Room, and
there walked: A little after, down came Mahony, and the Centry asked where he
was going? He said, D -- n you, you Dog, what is that to you? D -- n you, how
busy you make yourself! Then Mahony went down (where the Captain wa^ standing
with a drawn Sword in his Hand) into the Cockpit, and so into the Purser's
Cabin, where Sir John was lying: A little after I heard Sir John mutter out,
Murder: And then every Thing was quiet for a little while; and the Captain took
the Lanthorn that was hanging up, and gave it into the Cabin himself: Then
seeing the Candle given it into the Cabin, I thought it not proper for the
Captain to stand without a Light; and therefore I lighted a Candle at the Gun
Room, and was going down into the Cockpit, where the Captain was standing with
a Sword in his Hand; at my Approach the Captain held his Sword to my Breast,
and told me to keep back, saying, Stay where you are: Accordingly I went back,
and walked for a small Space of Time in the Gun Room: The Captain came to the
Foot of the Ladder with the Candle out and gave it to me, telling me to light
it and come down: Accordingly I lighted the Candle and went down, when he gave
me the Sword, and bid me take his Post, locking and bolting the Purser's
Cabin-Door, putting the Key in his Pocket, (which before the Murder, was left
in the Cabin-Door) telling me, If I heard his Brother make any more Noise, to
send to him, and let him know of it.


William Mac. Gennis swore, That he saw the Captain stand at the Purser's Cabin
Door at the Time of the Murder, with a drawn Sword in his Hand; and that when
he offered to draw near him, the Captain held up his Sword, and bid him keep
back.

The Captain in his Defense pleaded the utmost Innocence; alleging, That could
it be thought he could be guilty of the Murder of his Brother Sir John,
whereas, by his Death, he lost at least 40,000 l? That the Sickness and
Disorder in the House, debarred him of his Lawyers and Friends conversing with
him: That he applied to the Captain of the Ruby as soon as he was allowed Pen,
Ink, and Paper, for Evidences on Shipboard (which were Lieutenant Perry, the
Doctor, Mr. Robert Haythorn, Mr. Richard Wilson, and Mr. Hugh Driscal:) That he
had applied to the Lords of the Admiralty, who sent him an Order, but the said
Ship sailed the Day before it arrived; which debarred him of justifying
himself, they being material Evidences: -- In Vindication of his causing Sir
John to be seized in the Manner he was, he urged, That he was a Lunatic, and
therefore, he did it to take care of him: That his being taken in the Daytime
on board, was plain, there was no secret Design, or that he was to have any
Harm come to him: And that even when he parted with him at Mr Smith's, he
behaved in a very mad Manner and took no Leave. -- That the People on board
knew of his coming a Week before he came; therefore he intimated that he must
be very silly to bring a Person to 300 Evidences to commit a vile Act, where
nothing can be a secret above 4 Hours. The Persons Mr. Goodere brought to prove
Sir John a Lunatic were two young Women, one of whom believed him to be a
Lunatic, or mad, because he would get up in the Middle of the Night, and
disturb all the Servants; that sometimes he would busy himself in hanging on
the Pot, etc. etc.

Another Person was called to prove Sir John had made his Will several Months
before, etc. And being asked concerning the Disposition of Sir John, he
replied, That he was a good Friend, a loving Neighbor, and a kind Landlord;
that he was so far from being a Lunatic, as to be capable to negociate his own
Affairs with his Tenants, etc.

Another Gentleman was called by Mr. Goodere, to his Character; but being asked
whether he knew Sir John to be any Ways mad, or the like? He declared, That he
was so far from being a Lunatic, that he had more Sense than all the whole
Family. Sir John was also proved by Mr. Smith to be in his perfect Senses when
he left his House.

The Evidence for the King, being clear and full, after a Trial of nine Hours,
the Jury brought in their Verdict, Guilty, against the Captain and Mahony, in
less than 15 Minutes.

Charles White was tried the next Day for the said Murder, and for robbing Sir
John of 8 Guineas and a Gold Watch, and was found Guilty on both Indictments;
and the Day after, they all three received Sentence of Death.

The Examination of Charles White, belonging to the Ruby Man of War, taken and
acknowledged before the Right Worshipful Henry Comb, Esquire Mayor of the City of
Bristol, Jan. 20, 1740, 1.
THIS Examinant voluntarily confesses, and says, That he has been a Sailor
on board said Ship for about 17 Months last past: That about one of the Clock
in the Night of Sunday last, the 18th Instant, he was asleep in his Hammock on
board the said Ship, and was called out by one Matthew Mahony, another Sailor
on board the said Ship, who told him, That the Captain (meaning Capt. Samuel
Goodere, Commander of the said Ship) wanted to speak with him in his Cabin; and
accordingly he went to him, and when he came to him, the Captain asked him to
sit down, and then gave him a Wine Glass of Rum, and after that four or five
more; and asked him, If he could kill a Spaniard? And this Examinant answered
him, That he never did; upon which the Captain told him, he had got a Job for
him to do, if he would undertake it; and this Examinant asked him, What Job it
was? And the Capt. told him, 'twas to make away with his Brother, whose Name
(as this Examinant is informed) was Sir John Dinely Goodere, Bart. who was in
the Purser's Cabin on board the said Ship: And the said Matthew Mahony told
this Examinant, that he must go with him to help do it; whereupon the said
Captain went out of the Cabin first, Mahony followed him, and this Examinant
went next; and when he came to the Purser's Cabin Door, where Sir John Dinely
was, the Captain was standing Sentinel himself at the Door with a Cutlass in
his Hand, and Mahony had entered the Cabin, and this Examinant entered
likewise, where Mahony was talking with the said Sir John, and had a Piece of
Rope, called three Quarter of an Inch Rope, in his Hand, about six Foot in
Length; and Sir John, was lying on the Bed: and particularly Mahony asked Sir
John, how his Head was, and what he had got about it? and at last told him, it
did not signify talking about it any longer; and then fell on him on the Bed,
took hold of his Throat with his Hand (his Stock being on) and so strangled him
with his Stock, and afterward put the said Rope about his Neck (which was
prepared for the Purpose, with a Noose in it, before it was brought out of the
Captain's Cabin) And then Mahony hawl'd the Rope tight about his Neck And upon
this Examinant asking him, what he did that for? He said, for fear he should
not be dead enough: And this Examinant took a Knife out of his Pocket and cut
it off his Neck, and threw if overboard; during all which Time the Captain
stood Sentinel at the Door, as aforesaid; and as soon as this Examinant had so
cut the Rope off, the Captain handed a Candle to Mahony, who gave it to him,
and Mahony took the Watch and Money out of Sir John's Pockets; and then the
Captain asked them, Have ye done? Meaning (as this Informant apprehended)
murdered the said Sir John, and then came in himself; and this Examinant went
through the Hold, and came upon Deck, where he walked for about the Space of half
a Quarter of an Hour, and the Captain and Mahony went into the Captain's Cabin
together, and then this Examinant went into the Steerage, and Mahony called
this Examinant into the Cabin, where the Captain had undressed himself in order
to go to Bed, and there the Captain gave him five Guineas; and this Examinant
had received of the said Captain a six and thirty Shilling Piece of Gold before
the said Sir John was murdered: And further this Examinant says, That Mahony
showed the Captain the Watch he had taken out of Sir John's Pocket, and the
Captain gave Mahony his own Watch, and kept Sir John's himself; and Mahony
likewise showed the Captain the Money he had taken out of Sir John's Pocket,
who bid him keep it, and Mahony gave it to this Examinant, who put it into his
Pocket; and he and Mahony shared the Money on the Forecastle, and this
Examinant had two Pieces to one, in Consideration that Mahony had the Watch;
and this Examinant believes they shared about 30 Pounds between them; and
further this Examinant says, That the said Captain told him and Mahony, that
they might go any where for three Weeks, and he would send them their Tickets;
and lastly, this Examinant says, That between four and five o'Clock the same
Morning the Man of War's Yawl was going to this City, and he and Mahony landed
at the Gibb here.

CHARLES WHITE.

The Examination of Matthew Mahony, Jan. 20. 1740, 1.
THIS Examinant confesses and says, That about 16 or 17 Days ago, and several
Times since, he was desired by Mr. Goodere, Captain of the Ruby Man of War, now
lying in King-Road in the County and City of Bristol, to seize his, that
Captain's Brother, Sir John Dinely Goodere, Bart. and bring him on board the
said Man of War; and that on Tuesday last this Examinant and the Crew belonging
to the Man of War's Barge, and Edward Mac Daniel and John Mac Graree, and
William Hammond, Privateer's Men, were placed by the said Captain at the White
Heart Alehouse, opposite St. Augustine's Church, in order to seize Sir John
Dinely Goodere that Day; but so it happened, the Captain forbid them to do it
then; and that on Sunday last this Examinant, the said Barge's Crew, or the
greatest Part of them, and George Best, Cockstern of the Barge, the said Edward
Mac Daniel, John Mac Graree, William Hammond, and one Charles Bryant,
Privateer's Men, as aforesaid, were again placed at the White Heart aforesaid,
to seize the said Sir John Dinely Goodere, and waited there for some Time; and
he coming out of Mr. Jarrit Smith's House, and coming under St. Augustine's
Churchyard Wall, this Examinant and his Comrades pursued him, and near the
Pump they came up with him, and told him there was a Gentleman wanted to speak
with him; and he asking where the Gentleman was? was answered, A little Ways
off, and he went quietly a little Way; but no one appearing, he resisted and
refused to go, whereupon this Examinant and Comrades sometimes forcibly hawl'd
and pushed, and at other Time carried over St. Augustine's Butts, Capt. Day's
Rope Walk, and along the Road to the Hot Well (Capt. Goodere being sometimes a
little behind, and sometimes amongst the Crowd all the Way) till they came to
the Slip where the Barge lay; but Sir John was very unwilling to go, made the
utmost Resistance, and cried out Murder a great many Times; and when he was put
into the Barge, called out and desired somebody would go to Mr. Jarrit Smith,
and tell him of his ill Usage, and that his Name was Sir John Dinely; whereupon
the Captain clapped his Hands on Sir John's Mouth to stop his speaking, and told
him, Not to make such a Noise, he had got him out of the Lion's Mouth, meaning
the Lawyer's Hands, and would take Care he should not spend his Estate, and bid
the Bargemen row away, which they did, and in their Passage to the Man of War
the two Brothers bicker'd all the Way: But when they came to the Man of War,
Sir John went on board as well as he could, and the Captain took him down into
the Purser's Cabin, and staid a little while with him, and treated him with a
Dram of Rum, and then left him for a considerable Time; and in the Interim sent
for this Examinant into his the Captain's Cabin, and there told this Examinant,
He must murder his Brother, for that he was mad, and should not live till Four
o'Clock in the Morning; and this Examinant reasoning with him, and telling him
he would not be concerned, and that he thought he had bro't him there with an
Intent only to bring him to Reason, and take Care that he should not spend his
Estate in Law, and to have a perfect Reconciliation; but the Captain still
insisting that as this Examinant had taken him, he should do it; and that
Examinant then saying, He was not able to do it of himself, the Captain
replied, If this Examinant could got no Body else, he and this Examinant must
do it themselves; and then ordered him to call one Elisha Cole, and he being
too drunk to undertake such an Affair, bid this Examinant call one Charles
White, a very stout lusty Fellow, and the Captain gave him a Dram, and bid him
sit down, and soon gave him other Drams, and asked him if he could fight? and
told him, Here Is a Madman, and he must be murdered, and thou shall have a
handsome Reward; and this Examinant, the said Charles White, and the Captain
being all agreed to murder the said Sir John Dinely Goodere, too Captain then
proposed the Method, and produced the Piece of half Inch Rope of about nine
Foot long, and Charles White having made a Noose in the Rope, the Captain said,
applying himself to this Examinant, and the said Charles White, You must
strangle him with this Rope; and, at the same Time, gave the Handkerchief now
produced, that, in case, he made a Noise, to stop his Mouth; and said, I will
stand Sentinel over the Door whilst you do it; and accordingly, instantly went
out of his own Cabin, and turned the Sentinel from the Purser's Cabin Door, and
let this Examinant and Charles White into the Purser's Cabin, where Sir John
Dinely Goodere was lying in his Clothes on a Bed; the Captain having pulled to
the Door, and standing Centry himself, the said White first strangled Sir John
with his Hands, and then put the Rope about Sir John's Neck, and hawl'd it
tight, and Sir John struggled and endeavored to cry out, but could not; and
this Examinant confesses, That whilst White was strangling Sir John, this
Examinant took Care to keep him on the Bed, and when one End of the Rope was
loose, this Examinant drew and held it tight, and thus each bore a Part till
Sir John was dead; they having rifled the Deceased of his Watch and Money,
knocked at the Door to be let out, and the Captain called out, Have you done?
They replying Yes; he opened the Door and asked again, Is he dead? And being
answered in the Affirmative, and having a Light, swore by G -- d he would be sure
he was dead, and then went in himself, and returning locked the Door, and put
the Key in his Pocket; and they all went together to the Captain's Cabin again,
and there this Examinant gave the Captain Sir John's Watch, and the Captain
gave this Examinant his own Watch in Lieu of it; and then the Captain gave them
both some Money, and White afterward gave this Examinant eight Guineas, as
Part of the Money he took out of the Deceased's Pocket; and then the Captain
ordered them to be put on Shore in his own Boat; and further this Examinant
confesses and says, That before the Murder was committed, the Captain, Charles
White, and this Examinant consulted what to do with the Corpse, and the Captain
proposed to keep it two or three Days in the Ship, and as he expected to go to
Sea, could sew it up in a Hammock, or something else, and threw it over board;
and that before this Examinant, his Comrades were sent to seize Sir John as is
before set forth, they were ordered by Capt. Goodere, That if they met with any
Ressistance, they should repel Force by Force, and were prepared with short
heavy Sticks or Bludgeons, for that Purpose,

MATTHEW MAHONY.

Bristol, April 15. 1741.
THIS Day, between 11 and 12 in the Forenoon, Capt. Samuel Goodere, Matthew
Mahony, and Charles White, were executed here, on St. Michael's Hill Gallows.
The Captain did not deny his being concerned with Mahony and White, but said he
never designed to murder his Brother till about 2 a Clock in the Morning that
it was perpetrated. His Wife and Child took Leave of him on Monday, under the
greatest Affliction imaginable. He was conveyed to the Place of Execution in a
Mourning Coach, attended by the Rev. Mr. Penrose; and the 2 others in a Carr,
with Halters about their Necks. The Captain could not shed a Tear, to the last;
neither did Mahony or White; but looked seemingly not under that Concern as,
could be expected. Only White spoke to the People, and desired 'em to take
Warning by him, not to be drawn into a Snare as he had been; for that he was
ensnared out of his Life through the Intrigues of the Captain; and when the
Executioner was about to fasten the Halters to the Gallows, White fl^ng the End
of his over himself. They all kissed each other, and the Captain dropping his
Handkerchief as a Signal, the Cart drew away. Their Bodies were all brought
back to Newgate; the Captain's was carried away the next Day, to be buried
among his Relations in Worcestershire; Mahony was hanged in Chains at the
River's Mouth; White was got into the Surgeon's Clutches, but after demanded by
the Sheriffs, and buried.

Three of the Ruffians who seized Sir John Dinely, were each of them sentenced
to pay a Fine of 40 s. to suffer 12 Months Imprisonment, and to find Securities
for their good Behavior for 12 Months more.


