The EXPERIENCES OF Mrs. Elizabeth White.

THE EXPERIENCES OF GOD's gracious Dealing WITH Mrs. Elizabeth White.

As they were written under her own Hand, and found in her Closet after her
Decease, December 5. 1669.

Psalm. 66. 16. Come and hear all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he
has done for my Soul. BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in
Queenstreet 1741.

The Experiences of GOD's gracious Dealing with Mrs. Elizabeth White.
FROM my Childhood the LORD has inclined my Heart to seek after the best
Things, and my Father's chiefest Care was to bring me up in the N^^ure and
Admonition of the Lord: My Nature being somewhat more Mild than the rest of my
Sisters, I was ready to think my self some Body, and with the proud Pharisee,
to thank God that I was not as others, not considering that I was but like a
Wolf chained up, which keeps its Nature still, as I by the Goodness of God have
seen, since the Lord was pleased to lay his Eye Salve upon me. I was a great
lover of Histories, and other foolish Books, and did often spared my sleeping
Time in reading of them, and sometimes I should think I did not do well in so
doing, but I was so bewitched by them, that I could not forbear; and hearing of
a Friend of mine, which was esteemed a very holy Woman, that did delight in
Histories, I then concluded it was no Sin, and gave my self wholly then to this
kind of Folly, when I had any spare Time, for two or three Years. I had
sometimes slight Thoughts of Repentance, but was loath to set about it, and so
I should put the Lord off from Time to Time with delays, thinking still I
should find a fitter Time than the present. I remember about a Month before I
was married, my Father would have me receive the Sacrament of the LORD's
Supper, and I was very willing to it; until I considered what was requisite to
be in those which did partake thereof, and then I began to doubt that I had not
those Things which were requisite wrought in me, as Knowledge, Faith, Love,
Repentance, etc. And then this Scripture came into my Mind, He that doubts is
damned if he eat, for whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin: When I had considered
those Things I was filled with Sorrow, and could not tell what to do, I was
loath to disobey my Father, and more loath to eat and drink my own Damnation;
in this Perplexity I set my self to seek the Lord for his Grace, being at that
Time somewhat sensible of the want of it; when I had thus done, I began to be
comforted, verily thinking, now I had repented, and could believe in Christ
Jesus: And having some notional Knowledge of Things, I was indifferently well
satisfied, thinking that when I was married, I should have more leisure to
serve God; and then going to the Minister of the Parish, to be Examined before
I was admitted, and finding my self able to Answer him, I thought all was well
with me then, and so unworthy! went to the Lord's Table, not questioning but
that I was in as good a Condition as any of the rest which (...) ^^ceive. But
blessed for ever be the Lord, which broke my false Confidence, and swept away
my refuge of Lies, which I then trusted in, and showed me my sad Condition I
was in by Nature and Practice more clearly than ever before; and this was about
a Quarter of a Year after I was married, in the Year, 1657. The Minister being
upon this Subject, Prove. 1. 23. Turn ye at my Reproof, etc. Being upon the Use
of Trial, whether indeed we had turned to God or no? He bid us examine our
selves by some Marks which he then gave, and it was at this Time that God did
begin to manifest his Love to me, as I trust, in my effectual Vocation; here
the Lord was pleased to open my Heart, as he did the Heart of Lydia; so that I
attended to the Things that were spoken, and I perceived my Heart was not right
in the Sight of God, and that my Hope was but like that of the Hypocrite which
perishes; when I came home I besought the Lord to turn me, if I were not yet
turned to him, but yet I had not that through Sense of Sin, as I had afterward:
About three Weeks after, the Minister coming to our House, my Husband and I was
speaking that we would desire him to pray with us in our Chamber, but that Time
he could not stay, the next Day he came and asked for me, telling me that my
Husband told him that I would speak with him. O how was I surprised! I could
not tell what to say upon the sudden, I was so hurried in my Thoughts. O how
loath was I to acquaint him with my sad State! I was ashamed to tell him that I
was yet a Stranger to God and all Goodness, till it was forced from me, which
when he heard he did not go about to Comfort me, but he asked me, if ever I was
convinced before? And I told him, Yes; and he repeated the first Verse of the
29th Chapter of the Proverbs. He that being often reproved, hardens his Neck,
shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without Remedy: When I heard this I was
wonderfully troubled; then there came many Sins to my Remembrance, which I had
taken no notice of before, counting them small Sins; now the Time which was
t^en in reading Histories, I remembered with bitter Grief, and I thought that
there was no Mercy for me, but he preswaded me there was Hope of Mercy for such
as I, and that the Lord waited to be gracious to poor Sinners, and then I was a
little satisfied for the present; but then I was troubled with Blasphemous
Thoughts, which were very grievous to me: I thought I had a Heart worse than
the Devil, and wondered that I was not consumed in some strange Manner. When I
have seen a Spider, which of all Things is most loathsome to me, I have been
ready to wish my self such a one, esteeming of it to be in a far happie^
Condition than I was; I was afraid to be in the Dark, lest I should meet the
Devil; I doubted whether I was Elected, I had read, that it was not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of GOD that shows Mercy: Then I thought
if I were not Elected, is was to no Purpose to strive, for what GOD has
decreed must be, but yet I was unwilling to perish, I could not be so
satisfied, although I had but little Hope to obtain Mercy, yet I could not but
ask it: I was also very fervent in hearing the Word preached and read, not
daring to let slip an Opportunity, but not without many Tears, lest it should
increase my Condemnation; In this Condition I remained a great while, but not
without some secret Supports from the LORD, sometimes by a Word cast in upon my
Spirit, sometimes I was refreshed I could not tell how, but I should be ready
to think this was a Delusion: I remember the Scriptures were these, Isa. 51.
10. Who is among you that fears the LORD, that obeys the Voice of his
Servant, that walks in Darkness, and has no Light? Let him trust in the Name
of the Lord, and stay upon his God. John 15 16. Ye have not chosen me, but I
have chosen you, and ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth much
Fruit, and that your Fruit should remain, etc. Lamen. 3. 25. The Lord is good
unto the Soul that waits for him, and to them that seek him: It is good that a
Man should both hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord etc. These
Words did support me very much, therefore, I writ them out and laid them in my
Closet, that they might still be in my Eye, that I might when I looked upon
them be encouraged to hope in, and wait upon the Lord; but these Comforts were
but transient, but yet while they lasted they were very sweet Supports, but
when gone I sell to doubting, thinking all was Delusions, and thus I
dishonored God by my Unbelief; I doubted much of my Sincerity, often saying, I
was an Hyprocrite, but if at any Time I was asked in what I was one, I could
not tell; but had this Scripture very often in my Mind, There is a Way which
seems right unto a Man, but the End thereof is Death: And so I thought I was
but seemingly right, and therefore must needs perish: And in this Condition I
continued a long Time, till I heard that a Hypocrite seldom or never doubted
his Condition, and that is was a Sign of Sincerity, to desire a sincere Heart;
and this I durst not deny, knowing that I did desire it rather than the whole
World.

Thus being better satisfied, I resolved to set about my Duty, but all this
while I did not set such a high Price upon the LORD JESUS as I should, but
still I thought that I must do something to merit Salvation, not daring to
venture my Soul with all its Concernments upon Christ, therefore I should tie
my self to pray six times a Day, and then I should be satisfied, and think all
was well with me then. But if I at any Time failed of my Number, then I was
dissatisfied, and so in other Duties; so that my Comforts did not flow from the
Blood and Righteousness of JESUS, but from my own Duties; but blessed be the
LORD, who likewise shook this Foundation, even because he had a Favor to me:
For being in Discourse with a Friend, he desired me to read Sheperd's sincere
Convert; which I did; and here did I see as in a Glass my folly, for there were
Signs given whereby I might try my self, whether I did rest in Duties. One I
remember was this, if I never saw I rested in Duties, then it was a sure Sign
that I did; another was this, if I prized the bare performance of Duties so, as
to think when I prayed with some Life, that I had done very well; and again if
I saw but little of my vile Heart by Duties, then it was a Sign I rested in
them, and that I was yet in the Way to Hell, though in the cleanliest Way, and
should certainly perish if I rested here. Now this I plainly saw was my
Condition, but how to get out of it I knew not, for now I was in a worse
Condition that at the beginning, finding it abundantly more hard to deny
righteous Self than sinful Self. I thought it wonderful Strange, that I must be
saved by the Righteousness of another, if ever I were saved; O this my proud
Heart was unwilling to yield to, and yet I was very desirous of Salvation: But
when the Lord had led me into my own Heart, and showed me the Vileness of that
more, and that if the Lord should leave me to myself, I should commit all kind
of Sin, and that with greediness, such was the Vileness of my Nature, and that
if it were possible I should now live holily, yet I could not satisfy the
Justice of God for what was past, therefore I resolved to cast my self upon
Christ Jesus that sure Foundation, which GOD had laid and not Man, and if I
perished, to perish here; but much Opposition did I meet with from Satan and my
own Heart, before I could really do it. I could seal to the Truth of that
Scripture, Ephesians. 1. 19. That GOD did put forth his mighty Power, when a Soul was
made to believe; but yet I was not at quiet, but had many Fears and Doubts that
all was false, because I had been so often deceived, and now I began to see
mine own Vileness more then ever, and found mine Heart ran out to the LORD
JESUS in Love, but doubted very much of his Love to me, yet sometimes I should
have some Persuasions of my Interest in CHRIST, and that his Love was toward
me; and whilst this Persuasion lasted I should be very comfortable, and be
ready to think, I should never be moved, as David did: But when GOD hid his
Face, I was troubled and fell to doubting all again, nor having learned that
Heavenly Skill of living by Faith, but yet I did not wholly cast off my
Confidence, but had some Pin-hole of Hope in the worst Condition. I remember
the Consideration of this Scripture, John 3. 8. He that is born of GOD does not
commit Sin, filled me with many Fears, knowing how apt I was to commit Sin,
notwithstanding my striving against it: But a little while after I was
satisfied, understanding the Place better, that it was not meant of Sins of
Infirmity, but of making Sin one's Trade, etc. And this I was confident I did
not, but rather trembled at the Thoughts of it; but when this was over, Satan
and my own unbelieving Heart would still be presenting something whereby to
occasion Doubts, so that for the space of one Year and a Half, I had scarcely
any settled Peace, now and then a good Word thrown in which would revive me for
the present, but the Comfort would be soon gone; as Ezekiel. 30. 26. A new Heart
will I give, and a new Spirit will I put in you, and I will take away the
stony* Heart out of your Flesh, and I will give you a Heart of Flesh, and will
put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, etc This
Promise I did often plead with God very sensibly, and with much Confidence.
Another was, John 11 25. I am the Resurrection and the Life, he that believes
on me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: And whosoever lives and
believes in me shall never die. This I remember was very sweet to me; once
when I was in great Fear least my Heart should grow dead, and when I was with
Child, I was much dejected, having a Sense of my approaching Danger, and
wanting an Assurance of my everlasting Happiness; but whilst I was considering
of these Things, I had this Scripture set home with abundance of Sweetness,
Psalm. 53. 15. Call upon me in the Day of Trouble, and I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me: And in the Time of Extremity this Word was set home upon
my Heart again, and my good GOD made me to Experience the Truth of it in a
wonderful Manner, for I had speedy Deliverance beyond my Expectation, which
filled my Heart and Mouth with Praises to the LORD; about three Days after a
Friend coming to visit me, I related to her how good the LORD had been unto me,
and how sweetly my Heart was established, but no sooner was my Friend gone, but
I was tempted to think my Faith was false, but I labored what I could to
encourage my self in the LORD my GOD.

But as I lay in my Bed, I thought I saw three Men before me, and it was
presently suggested to me that these were the three Persons in the Trinity; O
then I was very much troubled, but I knew I was under a Temptation, and
therefore cried to the LORD for Help, but was not presently delivered from it;
but I had this Scripture brought to my Mind, No Man shall see my Face and live,
Exodus 33. 20. But not being yet freed, I began to consider what I had heard and
read as Means to help against such Temptations, at last I remembered, that Mr.
Bolton in his Book of Instructions for right comforting of afflicted
Consciences, gave this Direction, after the Party had prayed for Help against
the Tempter, and done what they could in repelling him by the Word of GOD, that
if they were yet followed by Satan, that then they should set about some honest
Employment; but now I was in Bed, and knew not what to set about for the
present, at last I resolved to try to Suckle my Child, which I did, and then
lay down again, and found that I was pretty well freed from that Temptation,
and finding my self much distempered in my Head, I desired the Lord to give me
Rest, and went about to compose my self to Sleep; but as I lay, I thought Satan
stood before me, asking where I could find a Promise for Sleep, at present I
could not think of any, but after some study this was brought into my Mind, The
Lord will give his Beloved Sleep: This Word comforted me, but yet I could not
all that Night get any Sleep, but still thought I saw Satan laughing at me,
because I had no Sleep, and yet trusted in his Word; thus all the Night I
continued weak in Body, and comfortless in Mind, so that in the Morning I
expected nothing but Death, then beginning to think more seriously of my
Change, Satan as I then thought, asked me where was my Assurance of my
everlasting Happiness? At this I was very much troubled, knowing I had not full
Assurance, but yet some good Hope through the Goodness of GOD I had, therefore
my Heart made Answer, it is true, I have no Assurance, but I have cast my self
wholly upon the Lord Christ, and in him only is my Hope, and here will I Rest,
and if I perish, I perish, but sure I am such shall not perish, for Christ has
promised them eternal Lief. Thus being assisted by the Lord, I vanquished Satan
for that Time: And being thus at Peace, I quickly fell asleep, and dreamed
there was a Ladder set upon the Earth, whose top reached to Heaven, and I
thought I was to go up, I was pulled do^n again, which caused me to shed
abundance of Tears, fearing that I should never get up, and I though it something
from above drew me by the Arms, but I could not see what, but at last I thought
I was in Heaven, where all Tears were wiped from mine Eyes, and I was filled
with Rejoicing, but when I had been there a little while, I thought I was to go
back again to the Earth, and this very much troubled me: But then I thought I
heard a Voice saying, it would be but for a little while, and that I should die
in Childbed, Which accordingly came to pass about twelve Years after her
Marriage.
and that the Night before I died, I should have full Assurance; this very much
rejoiced me, (and I was very desirous to know of what Child I should die) but
that was denied me upon this Account, because I should be always prepared, but
when I did awake I was filled with inexpressible joy, earnestly longing to be
Dissolved, and to be with Christ, which was best of all, and yet willing, if
the Lord pleased to suffer any Thing which might be inflicted on me. Then I
remembered how Satan when I was about to turn to GOD, would present the
Sufferings of GOD's People to me, thinking by that Means to turn me back again,
and how I should be discouraged by them, but being filled with the Joys of
God's Spirit, I thought I could suffer any Thing, not wondering, as I had done,
how the Saints of old could bear up so bravely under their Sufferings. But
after I began to amend, my Joys were not so full, as they had been, but I had a
more settled Peace than formerly I had, blessed be the Lord; I had many various
Changes in my spiritual State, but once having a great Sense of a hard Heart,
and being desirous to have it modified, I was tempted to do some great Evil, as
the only Means to break it; and that it might be the readier entertained, Satan
put it into my Heart, to consider the Condition of Nathaniel Butler, whose
Heart was unbroken till the Commission of that horrid Sin of Murder, and then
this great Evil brought him to a Sight and Sense of all Sin. This Temptation
was very strong upon me, but yet stronger was he that was with me, than he that
was against me: for at that very Instant did the Lord cast into my Heart that
happy Word, Romans 8.3 Let us do Evil, that Good may come, whose Damnation is
just This Word proved a happy Means to repel the Temptation; but yet this Mercy
I had forgot, till the Lord revived it upon my Heart, almost two Years after as
I was reading the Chapter.

And since my Child was weaned, I was in such a State of Deadness and Darkness,
that I thought if I was ever raised out of it, I should never question my
Condition again; I was tempted to think that the Scripture was not the Word of
GOD? I had let out my Affection in a wonderful Measure to my Child, and yet my
Lord forsook me not, but dispelled my Darkness, and filled me with Rejoicing; O
what shall I render to Him? After this I grew into another Damp and was raised
again, and I trust the Lord will keep me, notwithstanding all the mist which
shall be raised in my Heart by Sin and Satan, even by his Power through Faith
unto Salvation. These Scriptures revived me at several Times, when I was in
Heaviness for want of the Presence of God at the Ordinance of the LORD's
Supper, Prove 8.34 Blessed are they that watch daily at my Gates, waiting at the
Posts of my Doors Math. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with
my own This checked me and made me wi^^ing to wait at that Time; But this is my
Comfort, God is Unchangeable, who I trust will carry me through all the
Difficulties I shall meet with here below, and I trust will ere long bring me
to the Enjoyment of himself, where I shall be past Sinning and Sorrowing. And
as a further Testimony of my Interest in Christ, by the Effects of my Faith, I
have these Evidences.

First, My Love to GOD, which is greater then to any Thing in the World
besides, and my GOD has left it upon Record, that he Loves them that Love him,
Prove. 8.17. I know my Love is not so great as it should be; but I am sure my
greatest Grief is that I can Love him no better, and in this Case GOD will
accept the Will for the Deed.

Secondly, I know my Love is sincere by this, because I love the Children of
GOD, for as it is, 1 John 5. 1 Every one that loves him that begat, loves him
also that is begotten of him; And by this I know that I love the Children of
GOD, because I love GOD; so that this is another Evidence, that I am passed
from Death to Life, even because I love the Brethren. 1 John 3. 14;

Thirdly,, I can appeal to the LORD, who is the searcher of Hearts, that the
Breathings of my Soul are chiefly after Holiness, that I might be more like
unto the LORD JESUS; my Desire is to serve GOD in all Things, and to have a
real and hearty respect unto all GOD'S Commandments, and I desire (if it were
possible.) that I might never Sin more, but rather that I might behave my self
in all Holy Conversation, as one that has indeed and in Truth experienced how
good and gracious the LORD is: I bless GOD I can truly say, that my hottest
Conflicts are against those Sins which are obvious only to the Eye of GOD, even
my sinful Thoughts, though they come not into Action; O many a sad Heart have I
had when I have considered the Vileness of my Thoughts, and yet have been
unblameable in my Conversation and this is still my daily Sorrow, and therefore
I trust they shall never be my Ruin, but that the LORD will shortly rejoice the
Heart of his poor Servant, in giving me the Victory over these and all my other
inbred Corruptions, which have so often made a separation between my dear Lord
and my poor Soul.

Fourthly, I find a great Change in my Heart as touching the Word of GOD, for
whereas heretofore like a Wretch as I was, I esteemed a Play-Book before it,
now, blessed be the LORD, I prize it before all other, and good Reason have I
for it, for by it has the LORD quickened me, and therefore as long as I live I
will give up my self to walk according to the Rule of it, begging the Spirit of
GOD to open the Mystery of it to me, that so I might not only have the Letter,
but the very Mind of CHRIST.

Fifthly, I see nothing in my self that makes me more worthy of Salvation than
another. I know that I have deserved to lie in Flames, as well as any that are
now in the Place of Torments, and that nothing but Mercy has stepped between my
Soul and everlasting Burnings, and therefore I heartily wish that I might
always be admiring of this free Grace of GOD in choosing me before the
Foundation of the World was laid, so unworthy a Creature as I am, to set his
Love upon me and let go so many Thousands, that were more capable to bring
Glory to his Name than I am: O the height and depth, and breadth, and length of
this Love of GOD in CHRIST JESUS, which has abounded to me a poor and unworth^
Creature! It is indeed such a Love as passes Knowledge, and therefore I can
never sufficiently admire it, while I am here in the Body, which makes me long
to be dissolved, that so I might know it more clearly, and be swallowed up in
the eternal Admiration of it. Amen.

And these are my Principles, which I trust I shall hold fast even to my Death.
I Believe that the Scriptures contained in the Old and New Testament, are the
Word of God, written by the Prophets and Holy Men, as they were inspired by
God, to be the Rule of Faith and Life to his People; I believe all that God in
his Word wills me to believe, being persuaded by the Spirit of God concerning
the Truth of it: I believe that there is one only eternal God, who has his
Being from himself, and given a Being to all his Creatures, both in Heaven and
Earth, and under the Earth, and from Eternity to Eternity does whatsoever he
will: I believe that this eternal Godhead, is distinguished into three
Persons, the Father begetting, the Son begotten, and the Holy, Ghost proceeding
from them both: I believe that God created Man in his own Image, in
Righteousness, and Holiness, giving him Dominion over all the Creatures, and
likewise gave him Liberty to continue in this happy Condition if he would, but
he having Liberty to stand or to fall in his own Hand, quickly lost that
Happiness which God had instated him in, by yiedling to the Inticements of
Satan, so that breaking the Commands of God, he brought a Curse upon himself,
and all his Posterity, so that all Mankind by Nature are now in a miserable
Condition, Children of Wrath, Heirs of Hell, etc. And I do believe, that God
from Eternity knew what Man would do when he had created him, so that Adam's
Fall did but usher in, as it were, as greater Blessedness: For I do believe
there has been an eternal Covenant between the Father and the Son, in the
electing some to Life even before the Foundation of the Earth was laid; So that
no sooner had Man fallen, but God promised a Savior, even the Lord Jesus
Christ, who in his Divine Nature is in all Things equal with God the Father,
and that such was his exceeding Love and Pity to poor lost Creatures that had
broken his Commands, and made themselves liable to the Curse, that rather than
they should perish, he has laid aside the Robes of his Glory and took upon him
the Nature of Man, but without Sins; and that he was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, born of a Virgin, and while he was on Earth, was loaded ^ich Reproaches
and Scorns, and did at last suffer upon the Cross for the Sins of his Elect,
where he bore the Weight of God's Wrath in his Soul, by his Heaviness in his
Agony, and satisfied the Justice of God in his Body, which was crucified till
he died; and I believe that he was buried, and that the third Day he rose again
from the Dead, having conquered Sin, Death and Hell, for Believers, and that he
was seen of his Disciples, and others, forty Days after his Resurrection, and
in their Sight did ascend into Heaven, with the same Body which was crucified
upon the Cross, where he is set down at the right Hand of the Majesty on High,
and is become a glorious Mediator between God and Man, being anointed of God to
be an eternal King, Priest, and Prophet to the Saints, whose Peace he has
purchased by the Blood of his Cross: And I believe, that at the last and great
Day, the Lord Jesus when all his Elect are gathered in, will rend the Heavens
and come down to Judge the World in Righteousness, when all Nations shall be
gathered before him, even they that Sleep in the Dust of the Earth shall awake,
some to everlasting Life, and some to Shame and everlasting Contempt: and I
believe that those which are alive at the coming of the Lord, shall be caught
up into the Clouds, together with those that were asleep in Jesus, to meet the
Lord in the Air, where they shall sit with Christ upon Thrones to Judge all the
Hypocrites and Unbelievers, to eternal Damnation both of Soul and Body into
Hell, where the Worm dies not, and the Fire never shall be quenched; and the
Wicked being gone into everlasting Punishment: I believe that the Righteous
shall enter into Life eternal, where they shall for ever be Singing of Praises,
and Hallelujahs to him who loved them, and washed them from their Sins in his
own Blood.

These are my Principles, and I trust the LORD will so fix me in them, that I
may never be tossed too and fro with contrary Winds of Doctrine, as too many in
these latter Days are; nay I am even at this Time persuaded by the LORD that I
shall not be^^ed away by the Errors of the Wicked, because the LORD has not
only rightly informed my Judgment concerning these Things, but has also given
me good Hope through Grace, that he is my Father, the LORD JESUS having died
for my Sins, and risen again for my Justification, and this is that which
brings Comfort to my Soul* and makes me to rejoice, though ^ot seeing, yet
believing, even with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory; so I doubt not but the
LORD JESUS my dear Redeemer, will so support me by his Grace that whatsoever my
Condition has been or shall be here in this little Moment of Time, yet that I
shall not fail of Salvation through Christ in Heaven for ever, for in him only
is my Hope, and I will make mention of his Righteousness, and of his only, who
is the LORD my Righteness; and therefore to him be all the Glory given now and
for evermore, Amen.

This Confession of my Faith and my Experiences was written in a Time of sweet
Peace: my Reasons why I write them were these.

1. Because formerly when I had enjoyed the sweet Presence of GOD, and been for
the Time filled with Rejoicing, yet when GOD had withdrawn the Light of his
Countenance from me, I presently fell to questioning all the Dealings of GOD
with me, and so dishonored GOD by my Unbelief; so that now being under the
Sense of Love, and being desirous for the Time to come to glorify GOD more in
the great Work of believing, I write down my Experiences, hoping they may be
sweet Supports to me in a Time of Darkness.

2. My desire to treasure up the Experiences which I have had of God's Goodness
to me, was another Reason why I write them, knowing how apt I am to let slip
out of my Remembrance that which i^ good.

3. I have been often called upon to see that my Principles be right, and to
make sure my Evidences for Heaven; and therefore that I may testify my
Obedience to GOD and his Word, and that I might increase my Joy in the LORD, by
believing more firmly what the LORD had done for my Soul, I set about the Work
of Heart-searching, to see what I could find in me that brought me within the
compass of everlasting Blessedness; and some Things I found, blessed be the
LORD, which I thought was worthy to be recorded, which was his own Work in me
and for me, and therefore I write them down, and heartily desire that that GOD
may have the Glory of his own Grace: For I know he only has wrought all my
Works in me, for of my self I am not able to think a good Thought, speak a good
Word, or do a good Action. And I trust that the LORD will perfect that which
concerns me, and not forsake the Work of his own Hands, that so I may be to the
Praise of the Glory of his Grace all the Days of my Life.

AMEN.
FINIS.

