THE HOLY SPIRIT Convincing the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of
Judgment, considered in Four SERMONS: The two former delivered at the
Tuesday-Evening Lecture in Brattle-Street, January 20th and March 3: The other
at the Old-South-Church in BOSTON, April 17 and 26, 1741.

By Joseph Sewall, D. D.

Romans viii. 15. Ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear; but
ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father.

BOSTON: Printed by J. DRAPER, for D. HEHCHMAN in Cornhil. 1741.

PREFACE.
IT has pleased the sovereign and gracious God, in whose Hand our Times are,
to ordain that we should live under some peculiar Advantages for our precious
Souls. For to the ordinary Means, we have super-added the Manifestation of the
Spirit, in extraordinary Works of Grace. We have lately heard glad Tidings from
one Place and another, that many are enquiring the Way to Zion, with their
Faces thitherward; and some are declaring what God has done for their Souls.
Yea, God has brought this Work home to our own Doors, and we hear many crying
out, What must we do to be saved. And There are a Number hopefully rejoicing in
God's Salvation. Of such a Season as this it may well be said, I have heard
thee in a Time accepted, and in the Day of Salvation have I succored thee:
behold, Now is the accepted Time; Behold, Now is the Day of Salvation, I hope
God's People are reaping the Fruit of their Prayers, particularly on
extraordinary Days of Fasting observed with an especial View to this great
Blessing, the plentiful Effusion of the holy Spirit And shall we not prize and
improve this rich Gift? Shall we not redeem this precious Time in working out
our own Salvation? considering that God who alone can work in us to will and to
do, says to us, Seek ye the Lord, while he may be found, call upon him while he
is near. To Day, if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts. Certainly
we must be very criminal if we sleep or loiter away such a Day of Grace. They
who are guilty of such a presumptuous Sin, run a dreadful Hazard of swift
Destruction, double Damnation. O there is great Reason to fear that another like
Season will never, never return upon you. O Sleeper! Awake, and hearken,
there is a Noise, and a Shaking among the dry Bones. Some it may be of your own
Acquaintance, secure like you a little while ago, are now in deep Concern, and
can no longer relish those carnal Pleasures in which you were Companions. Now,
Destruction from God is a Terror to them, and they are fleeing from the Wrath
to come. What a Reproof does God give to your Stupidity in the Awakenings of
others? Now then hear God's Voice, Turn ye at my Reproof; behold, I will pour
out my Spirit unto you. Or, if you are still deaf to God's Calls, let the
Thunder of those amazing Words make your Ears to tingle; Because I have called,
and ye have refused, -- I also will laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your
fear comes. When your Fear comes as Desolation, and your Destruction as a
Whirlwind. And tremble least you should be suddenly destroyed, and that without
Remedy. But then, Let awakened Sinners be encouraged to press into the Kingdom
of Heaven. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate; for many will seek to enter
in, and shall not be able. Improve the Five Talents now put into your Hands,
remembering what our Lord has said, Unto whom much is given, of him shall much
be required. O look diligently, lest any Man fail of the Grace of God! Continue
seeking till Christ be revealed to you as the Lord your Righteousness, and as
the God of Judgment: That you may glory in this, that you understand, and know
the Lord, who exercises Loving Kindness, Judgment and Righteousness in the
Earth. And here, among you with whom the Spirit is striving at this Day, we
behold many of our young People. O our Children! God is drawing nigh to you in
a distinguishing manner, and will not you from this Time cry unto him My
Father, thou art the Guide of my Youth? Shall any of you be prosane as Esau,
who for one Morsel of Meat sold his Birthright; and then, when he would have
inherited the Blessing, was rejected? God forbid. May you all thirst for God,
and seek him early, till that Promise shall be more abundantly fulfilled in
you, I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed and my Blessing on thine Offspring.
And is it possible for Parents and elder Persons to behold these Things, and
not be moved? Can you see your Children in Pain, and travailing till Christ be
formed in them, and you be unconcerned about the New Birth? Are they taken, and
can you bear to be left behind; left to perish in your Sins, as far distant as
Heaven and Hell? Is the eleventh Hour running, and you not effectually called?
What a sad Token is this! The Lord have Mercy upon you! But there are
considerable Numbers of elder as well as younger Persons, of whom I am
persuaded better Things, and Things that accompany Salvation. And to you our
ascended Savior speaks, Hold fast till I come. Be not ashamed or afraid, to
confess Christ before Men; and to stand up for him. And here the Providence of
God gives me Advantage to press upon you that Exhortation; If ye are risen with
Christ, seek those Things which are above; set your Affection on things above,
not on things on the Earth. For as it was with God's ancient People, a Day of
Darkness and Gloominess, and then God comforted his People with that gracious
Promise, I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh. Joel 2
So it pleases God to send down the Comforter from Heaven into the Hearts of
his People, while it is a dark Day with us upon temporal Accounts. May the
Spirit of Judgment sanctify the Frowns of God upon us to rebuke our Pride, our
Covetousness, our Luxury; and all those foolish and hurtful Lusts, whereby we
have been conformed to this World. And now we behold, the Curse devouring the
Earth, may we all unite in seeking the Blessings of the heavenly Paradise,
where Satan and the Curse can never enter. That we may even now say with the
Prophet, Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom -- and the Fields shall yield no
Meat, the Flock shall be cut off from the Fold, and there shall be no Herd in
the Stalls: yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
Salvation.

But I forbear, and would only further say, that the remarkable Work of Grace
begun and going on among us, gave Encouragement to me to study and preach the
following Sermons. At first, I designed to publish only upon the Head of
Conviction of Sin, the Discourses upon which Subject it pleased God to own and
bless much beyond my Expectation. May the Praise be given to that God who has
chosen the weak Things of the World, that no Flesh should glory in his
Presence. Since that, I have been prevailed upon to go on with the Subject, and
also to publish the other Discourses; that we may see in some measure how the
Spirit of God carries on his good Work in the Hearts of his People from legal
Conviction to saving Conversion, and then sends forth Judgment to Victory, not
withstanding all Opposition from the Enemies of our Salvation. Sensible of the
Defects which attend this Performance, I humbly commend it to God for His
Blessing, beseeching him to teach us to Profit by all the Means of Grace which
he gives us richly to enjoy.

Joseph Sewall

THE Holy SPIRIT convinces of Sin.
JOHN xvi. 8. AND when He is come, He will reprove the World of Sin, and of
Righteousness and of Judgment.


IN my last Turn at this Lecture, I considered our Lord JESUS CHRIST as exalted
to be a Prince, and a Savior, to give Repentance to Israel and Forgiveness of
Sins; from Acts 5.31. I now proceed to show you the great and comprehensive
Gift which our Lord received of the Father, when he ascended on high, the Gift
of the HOLY SPIRIT, by whom He works Faith and Repentance in the Hearts of his
People, and so prepares them for all the Blessings of the Gospel. And here our
Lord assures us that his Disciples, and so his Churches would be great Gainers
by his withdraw from them on Earth, to his exalted State in Heaven; for then,
and not till then, should the Spirit be given in a more plentiful and extensive
manner, in virtue of CHRIST'S Intercession at the Father's Right Hand; and that
to make Application of the Redemption purchased by Him, and to communicate all
spiritual Blessings to his People, Ver. 7 Nevertheless, I tell you the Truth,
It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away, the Comforter
will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him into you. Accordingly
we also read, that the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was
not, yet glorified. And we have the fulfillment of our Saviors Promise, Acts
2.4. v. They were all filled with the Holy Ghost, in miraculous Gifts,
particularly the Gift of Tongues, whereby the Apostle, were qualified to preach
the Gospel to other Nations. And the Spirit of GOD was also poured out in an
extraordinary manner as a Spirit of Grace and Consolation, 41, 42, v. Then they
that gladly received his Word were baptized: and the same Day there were added
unto them about three thousand Souls. And they continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread and in Prayers. But
I return to the Text, in which we have the Errand on which the Holy Ghost is
sent, and the Work he should perform in virtue of his Mission, described. For
though the Three Persons in the adorable Trinity are One in the essential
Perfections of the divine Nature, yet in the Covenant of Redemption, the Son
voluntarily agrees to fulfill the Father's Will by taking our Nature in the
fullness of Time, and purchasing eternal Salvation for his People; and the Holy
Spirit engages that the saving Benefits of this Redemption shall be applied to
all whom the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, has chosen in him before
the Foundation of the World, that they should be holy, and without blame before
him in love. Agreably it is here said, And when he is come, he will reprove,
etc. When he is come, i. e. In the peculiar Manifestations of his gracious
Presence; for in his divine Essence, the Spirit is immense and omnipresent.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, Psalm. 139.7. He will reprove the World of
Sin, -- Not only Jews but Gentiles. Possibly some may be stumbled that the
Spirit is called the Comforter, and then it is said that he should Reprove. But
now, the Word is of a larger Signification, it signifies Advocate, and is thus
translated by Beza. We have the same Word applied to Christ, 1 John 2.1. And
accordingly, the Spirit is called another Comforter or Advocate, Joh. 14.16.
When our Lord ascended to appear in the Presence of God for his People, and
transact their Affairs in the Court of Heaven as their Advocate with the
Father; He sent his holy Spirit to manage the Affairs of the Kingdom of Grace
here upon Earth. And this Work of convincing Men of Sin well suits with this
Character of an Advocate. As such the Spirit of God shows Sinners that the
Charge laid against them in God's Word is just, that the World may become
guilty before God and that Sinners self-condemned may seek Justification by the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, and so be prepared for the Joy of God's
Salvation. And this agrees also with the Word here translated Reprove, which
signifies to convince by evident Argument and solid Reason. "I will convince
them of their Sins, and after reprove, admonish and check them for the same"
And there is then a particular Sin mentioned, Cont. v. 9 Of Sin, because they
believe not in me. The heinous Sin of the Jews in that Day was that they
rejected Jesus Christ the Messiah promised to their Fathers and sent to them as
the only Name whereby they could be saved. He came unto his own, and his own
received him not, Joh. 1.11. Saving a Remnant according to the Election of
Grace. Because of unbelief, they were broken off, Romans 11.20. Accordingly when
the Spirit of God was poured out and Peter preached to them, Acts 2. He charged
them home with the great Sin of rejecting and crucifying the Lord of Glory;
upon which many are pricked to the Heart, and say in deep Concern, Men and
Brethren, What shall we do? 37. v. And does not this Sin of Unbelief much
prevail in this Age? Many seem to be insensible how great the Evil of this Sin
is, though the Word of God declares, that He who believes not God, has made
him a liar, because he believes not the Record that God gave of his Son, 1 John
5.10. It Is to be feared that there are many under the Gospel, who satisfy
themselves with an outward Attendance on religious Duties, while they refuse to
submit to Christ, and neglect his great Salvation. But now, when the Spirit of
God convinces Men of Sin, He will show them the great Evil of an Heart of
Unbelief, and make them sensible of this, that he who believes not the Son,
shall not see Life; but the Wrath of God abides on him. Again, The Spirit
reproves of Righteousness. He will convince Men that Jesus who suffered an
accursed Death as if he had been the vilest Malefactor, being crucified between
two Thieves, is indeed the just One; and suffered the Just for the Unjust, that
he is the Lord our Righteousness. He will convince Sinners that they cannot be
justified but by the Righteousness of Christ received by Faith. Now his going
to the Father was a Demonstration of this, that he was Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and had fulfilled all Righteousness. -- And of Judgment. That all
Judgment is committed to the Son as Lord and Christ, and that he has Power as
Mediator and in virtue of His Obedience unto Death, to cast down Satan from his
usurped Throne, and deliver poor Sinners from his destoying Power. Agreably
where our Savior speaks of his being litted up upon the Cross, He says, Now is
the Judgment of this World: Now shall the Prince of this World be cast out,
Joh. 12.31.

Having thus explained the Words of my Text, I return to consider that Part
which I purpose more particularly to speak to; the Work of the Spirit in
reproving Men of Sin.

DOCTRINE.
IT is the Work of the Holy Spirit, to convince and reprove Men of Sin. The
Spirit of God is the great Dispenser of common and saving Grace. There is a
saving Conviction of Sin, which the Spirit of God works in the Hearts of Men
when he enlightens them to discern spiritual Things after a spiritual manner.
When God gives them the Light of the Knowledge of his Glory, they see that Evil
in Sin as it is contrary to him, his Nature and revealed Will, which causes
them to mourn for it with that godly Sorrow which works Repentance to
Salvation. Now mine Eye sees thee. Wherefore I abbor my self, and repent in
Dust and Ashes, Job 42.5, 6. They look unto Jesus as pierced by their Sins and
mourn, Zech. 12.10. Thus it is when the Spirit of Grace converts Men, and turns
them from Sin to God, by working a saving Change in their Hearts. And there is
a legal Conviction which the Spirit of God works in the Hearts of Men before
Conversion, whereby they are awakened out of their carnal Security in Sin, and
bro't under deep Concern about Deliverance from it as a destroying Evil. Now it
is a matter of the greatest Importance to such as are under this Work, that it
be carried on till it issue in a saving Conversion to God. For the divine
Spirit, who acts with sovereign Liberty, may be provoked to depart, and leave
Men to perish in their Sins. Thus the Spirit of God strove with the Sinners of
the old World, whose departed Spirits are called Spirits in Prison, 1 Pet. 3,
19. Their Bodies were destroyed by the Flood, and their Souls are now shut up
in Hell, Where they are kept in durance to the Judgment of the great Day. And
indeed it is plain from Scripture that these lower Workings of the Spirit, if I
may so call them, have been in some preparatory to saving Conversion, while
others have stifled them. I shall give you an Instance of each from the Word of
God, to awaken your Hopes and Fears, the great Springs of human Endeavors. The
rough and hardy Jailer came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas,
saying, Sirs, What must I to be saved? They answer, Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be save And it seems the Spirit soon converted him even
that same Night; yea gave him the Joy of God's Salvation. He rejoiced,
believing in God with all his House, Acts 16 29, -- 34. O that this may be the
happy Case of the many now under Convictions! Felix also trembled, as Paul
reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come Acts 24.25. Behold
the Judge quaking for Fear before his Prisoner! We may well suppose a greater
than Paul was there, even the Judge of all the Earth, reproving this Man for
his Crimes by the Spirit accompanying Paul's faithful Ministry: But then he
unhappily endeavored to put off his Convictions by saying to Paul, Go thy way
for this Time; when I have a convenient Season, I will call for thee. And for
ought any thing that appears, the Spirit ceased striving with him. We read
indeed that Felix sent for Paul again; but not to hear the Word of God, and
inquire how he should improve his Convictions; but because he hoped that Money
should have been given him of Paul, that he might loose him, v. 26. A base
Thing indeed! And after two Years, to show the Jews a Pleasure, he left Paul
bound, v. 27, Upon the whole, it is highly probable, that the convenient
Season, he pretended to wait for, never came. O it is a dangerous Thing to
resist the Spirit of God striving with us, and as it were bid him depart from
us!

I would now speak particularly to the Doctrine under these following Heads;

I. The Holy Spirit is the Author of this Work of Conviction, II. We may
consider the Means he uses to convince Men of Sin. III. Offer some Description
of this Work of Conviction.

I. THE Holy Spirit is the Author of this Work of Conviction.

That there is such a Work going before and preparatory to saving Conversion in
God's chosen People, is evident from Scripture and Experience. The Son of Man
is come to seek and save that which was lost; and the Prodigal Son is
represented as sensible of his perishing Condition, before he resolves to
arise and go to his Father, -- Luke 15.17, 18. And our compassionate Redeemer
inviteth them that labor and are heavy laden to come to him for rest, Matthew.
11.28. And we find from Examples upon Record in Scripture, as well as of later
Date down to our own Times, that God takes this Course with Men, convincing
them of Sin and bringing them under a deep Concern about their Souls before he
grants them the Joy of his Salvation. Now whatever Instruments may be used in
this Work, we must acknowledge that the Spirit of God is the great Efficient.
He striveth with Men, Genesis 6.3. And accordingly Stephen charged his Hearers
with the great Sin of resisting the Holy Ghost, Act. 7.51. How sharp were his
Arrows in their Hearts who heard Peter's Sermon upon occasion of the wonderful
Effusion of the Holy Ghost in the Day of Pentecost: Act. 2. They were pricked
in their Heart, 37. v. And in a little Time seem to have been subdued to the
Obedience of Faith. Agreably, the Spirit of God is called a Spirit of Bondage,
Romans 8.15. Ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear. Indeed the
holy Spirit cannot be the Author of Sin whereby Men are brought into Bondage;
but then He makes Sinners sensible of this cruel Bondage, and brings them to
groan after Deliverance.

II. We proceed to consider the Means which the Spirit of God uses to convince
Men of Sin.

I. THE great Instrument is the Word of God.

And accordingly the Word is called the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. All
Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, 2 Timothy 3.16. But then the same Spirit that moved those
holy Men who wrote the Scriptures, must accompany them with his divine
Influence; or there will be sad Occasion to take up that Lamentation, Who has
believed our Report? and to whom is the Arm of the Lord revealed? Isa. 58.1.
When the Spirit is withdrawn, we find that the Ministry of the Word has little
or no good Effect upon the Hearts of Sinners. They are unmoved as the Seats
they sit upon: Their Ears are heavy and their Eyes shut, Isa. 6.10. But when
this almighty Spirit is pleased to take his Word into his own Hand, and wound
the Sinners Conscience with it, he can no longer make light of the Commands or
Threatenings; they come home to him, and reach his very Heart: He is convinced
of all, he is judged of all, 1 Cor. 14.23. He is convinced of the Sins whereby
he has transgressed God's holy Law, and his Heart condemns him for them. Now
the Word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any two edged Sword,
piercing even to t^^ dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and
Marrow, and is a Discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart, Heb. 4.12.
The Law of God is called a fiery Law, Deuteronomy. 33.2. And it may well be so called,
not only as it was delivered out of the midst of the Fire, from the burning
Mountain; but also, as in it we have God's burning Wrath, and fiery Indignation
against Sinners revealed from Heaven. Accordingly when the Word of God is
accompanied with the Spirit, and so comes with Power upon the Hearts of
Sinners, they feel Pain and Anguish, and are sensible of the deadly Wounds Sin
has given them. Is not my Word like as a Fire, says the Lord: and like a
Hammer that breaks the Rock in Pieces? Jer. 23.29. When the Spirit takes it
into his Hand, he breaks the Sinners carnal Confidences. By the Law is the
Knowledge of Sin, and by it the Spirit reproves Men for their Sins, and
convinces them of their lost perishing Condition as Transgressors of God's
Law. So sharp and cutting were God's Reproofs of his ancient People by his Word
in the Mouth of his holy Prophets, that he says, Therefore have I hewed them by
the Prophets: I have slain them by the Words of my Mouth, Hos. 6.5.

2. The Holy Spirit convinces and reproves Men of Sin by God's providential
Dispensations, particularly by afflictive Providence.

Sometimes the Holy Spirit makes use of the divine Goodness to lead Sinners to
Repentance, Rom, 2.4. And draws them as with the Cords of a Man, and Bands of
Love. Agreably it is promised that the Children of Israel, should fear the
Lord, and his Goodness in the latter Days, Hos 3.5. But I am now considering
the Reproof given by Afflictions. When Sinners resist the Spirit speaking to
them in and by his Word, he sometimes takes the Rod, and teaches them as
Gideon taught the Men of Succoth with Briars and Thorns of the Wilderness. And
when they are thus torn and wounded, they are bro't to consider what an evil
Thing Sin is, and their need of a Savior to deliver them from it. Thus God
said to his ancient People by the Prophet Jeremiah. Thine own Wickedness shall
correct thee, and thy Backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore and see,
that it is an evil Thing and bitter that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God,
and that my Fear is not in thee, says the Lord God of hosts. Chap. 2.9.
Outward Prosperity is apt to make Men careless and secure; to say with the
Church of the Laodiceans, I am rich, and increased with Goods, and have need of
nothing. But now, When God brings Men into Straits and under Difficulties, He
sometimes awakeneth them to a serious Reflection upon their spiritual Poverty,
Misery and Wretchedness, I spoke unto thee in thy Prosperity, but thou said,
I will not hear: this has been thy manner from thy Youth, that thou obeyedst
not my Voice. The Wind shall eat up all thy Pastors, and thy Lovers shall go
into Captivity, surely then shall thou be ashamed and confounded for all thy
Wickedness, Jer. 22.21, 2. And thus it was with Ephraim when he bore the
Reproach of the Sins of his Youth under God's Chastisements, Jer. 31.18. I have
surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, Thou have chastised me, and I was
chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke: turn thou me and I shall be
turned; for thou art the Lord my God. Though these Words nextly refer to God's
People, they may be fitly applied to particular Persons. When God corrects Men,
and by his Spirit opens their Ears to Discipline, he shaws them the Necessity
of their turning to God, and makes them concerned to obtain converting Grace.
Turn thou me --. O that this may be the happy Case of the many young People who
are under Convictions at this Time! Dear Children! Ask the Spirit of Grace as a
Spirit of Regeneration and Adoption, that you may have your weary Souls revived
with that good Word which follows, v. 20. Is Ephraim a dear Son? is he a
pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him
still: therefore my Bowels are troubled for him: I will surely have Mercy upon
him, says the Lord. But to return, When Persons are secure, God comes upon
them, takes away their Health, and brings them seriously to consider their
latter End. God shakes me over the Grave, says the awakened Sinner, and what
will become of me, if I die in my Sins, if I die out of Christ? Again, God
comes and takes away their earthly Goods, and so convinces them of the Evil
of trusting in uncertain Riches, and awakens them to seek that good Part which
cannot be taken away. Again, God bereaveth Men of their near and dear Friends,
and so quickens them to seek the Favor and Friendship of the eternal God,
making them taste the Bitterness of Sin as it has brought Death into the
World, and showing them the Vanity of Creatures. We read of those Sinners,
Psalm. 78.34, 5. When he slew them, then they sought him: and they returned and
enquired early after God. And they remembered that God was their Rock, and the
high God their Redeemer. And was it not thus with this People in the Time of
the EARTHQUAKE, when God threatened to send us down quick into the Pit? Did not
Multitudes tremble as the Jailor, and inquire with great Concern, what must we
do to be saved? How did People flock to God's House, and with what aw did they
attend to his Word, while the Foundations of the Earth were shaken under us!
Yea, I humbly apprehend that there is Reason to believe that the mighty Voice
uttered from the deep Places of the Earth, together with the still Voice of
God's Word, was sanctified not only for the Conviction, but also for the
Convension of Numbers of People, by the Spirit of God. So far as we can judge,
there were a Number, whom the Terrors of that dreadful Night awakened, whom the
Spirit effectually called. While it is to be feared that the Impressions made
on a far greater Number wore off, and dyed away. I the rather mention this
remarkable Providence, because I apprehend that the Time of it was a Season in
which God was pleased in a general and extraordinary manner to strive with this
People. Since that we have been visited with a very mortal Sickness, in which
God has cut off many of our Children; but I cannot learn that People have been
awakened in any Proportion to the exceeding Awfulness of the Judgment.

3. The holy Spirit makes use of His Works of Grace to convince and awaken
Sinners.

At sometimes the Spirit is awfully restrained, and then Conversions are rare
and doubtful. At other Seasons, God is pleased to pour out His Spirit upon his
People, and then his Works of Grace, are as the Light which goes forth. Many
ask the Way to Zion, with their Faces thitherward, and not a few declare God's
Works of Grace toward them with rejoicing. Convictions and Conversions become
more frequent and apparent, so far as our Judgment reaches. It is true, the
saving Conversion of others cannot be certainly known by us in the ordinary Way,
because we are not able to look directly into the Heart, but must judge by
outward Appearances. And therefore we ought to exercise Judgment with Charity.
But then there are sometimes Fruits of the Spirit so evident, that they cannot
be concealed or denied. There is the Manifestation of the Spirit in his divine
Operations. 1 Cor. 12.7. Persons that were before quiet in their Sins and
unconcerned, are so awakened that they cannot stifle their Convictions, nor
conceal their Distress; but are made to cry out, What shall we do? How shall we
escape the Wrath to come? And when a Son or Daughter, or any other in a Family
are thus wrought upon, the House is alarmed with it, and thus their Friends and
Acquaintants are happily pressed with Concern about their own Souls by the
Convictions of others, when the Spirit of God is pleased to use them as Means
for this End. And when such a Work of Grace spreads and increases through the
good Hand of God upon his People, it will be still more observable, and such as
are considerate, will be ready to say admiring, What has God wrought! Yea, all
that behold it, must now see, if they will open their Eyes, that there is more
in Religion than a lifeless Formality, and outward Attendance on Ordinances.
When the Work of God is thus revived among a People, the Form of Godliness will
be animated with the inward Life and Power of it. God's own Children will be
quickened to arise and trim their Lamps, that their Light may shine before
others. And such as were Strangers to Religion before, will now press into the
Kingdom of Heaven. That Description well agrees to such a Season. The Kingdom
of Heaven suffers Violence, and the Violent take it by Force, Matthew. 11 12.
The Ministers of Christ will be encouraged and enlivened in their Work, and
such as are under Convictions will be awakened to a more diligent Attendance on
the Word and Ordinances. Now such things as these, under the Influence of the
blessed Spirit, must have an happy tendency to rouse the sleepy secure Sinner,
and reprove him for his criminal Indifferency in the great Concerns of his
Soul. And thus the holy Spirit makes use of the Works of his Grace to convince
Men of their Sin and Danger, while they behold a great Alteration in others for
the better; but have not felt the like in themselves. That God who forms the
Spirit of Man within him, has fashioned their Hearts alike; so that as in
Water, Face answers to Face; so the Heart of Man to Man. Psalm, 33.15. Prove.
27.29. Whence arises a kind of Sympathy and Affection respecting each other;
so that what touches the one; affects the other. And this is in an especial
manner observable in such as are near and dear to each other. When the Child is
in Distress, the tender Parent is presently touched with the feeling of it is
Sorrow: When the Brother cries out in Anguish of Soul, the kind Sister cannot
forbear to condole with him. Accordingly, When it pleases the holy Spirit to
use these Inclinations and Affections in Men as Means, good impression, by the
divine Blessing, wonderfully propagate and multiply. This I find observed by a
Reverend and dear Brother, in his Narrative of the surprising Work of God in
the Conversion of many hundred Souls in Northhampton, and the neighboring
Towns, etc. "There is no one Thing that I know of that God has made such a
Means of promoting His Work amongst us, as the News of others Conversion; in
the awakening Sinners, and engaging them earnestly to seek the same Blessing,
and in the quickening of Saints." See Mr. Edward's Narrative, P. 39.
And as more lately, we have received good News of this kind from more distant
Places upon this Continent; so I cannot but hope that God's sending one and
another of his Servants among us who had been personally acquainted with these
later wonderful Works of Grace, together with their very laborious and fervent
Preaching, and the Ministry of others his Servants; has been bles'd to convince
many of their Sins, and awaken them to a serious Concern about their Souls.
Yea, It is hopeful that there are a Number converted, and brought home to
Christ. Let us give the Praise to the God of all Grace: And let Pastors and
Parents, and other Christians in their several Places use their best Endeavors
to forward this good Work; for though the Work is the Lord's, and he alone can
carry it on with victorious Success; yet he delights to use his People as
Instruments, and expects that in the way of Duty they ask His Blessing in the
more plentiful and extensive Effusions of his Spirit. Thus when God had
promised to give his People a new Heart; to put his Spirit within them, and
cause them to walk in his Statutes: He adds, I will yet for this be enquired of
by the House of Israel, to do it for them, Ezekiel. 36.37.

III. The 3d Head is to give some Description of this Work of the Spirit in
Conviction.

I shall at present, only observe a few Things in general relating to it,

This Work of the Spirit is by Divines commonly called Preparatory, as it goes
before saving Conversion, and is wrought in order to it, respecting such as are
afterward effectually called by the Spirit. By this Work, says the excellent
Mr. Norton, "We understand certain inherent Qualifications, coming between the
carnal Rest of the Soul in the State of Sin, and Conversion wrought in the
Ministry both of the Law and Gospel, by the common Work of the Spirit
concurring; whereby the Soul is put into a ministerial Capacity of believing
immediately, i. e. of immediate receiving the Lord Jesus Christ." This is the
order in which God proceeds in the Work of his Grace on the Souls of such as
are grown to Years of Understanding: He makes them sensible of their Sin and
Misery, and so brings them to seek Jesus who saves his People from their Sins,
and to submit to him. Indeed this Work is neither the efficient nor meretorious
Cause of their saving Conversion; however in this Way God awakeneth his People
to a diligent Attendance on the Means of Grace, till he shall work in them to
will and to do, and make them his willing People, in the Day of his Power. And
here, we may observe that we must not presume to limit and restrain the
infinite Spirit of God in this matter, who is called the free Spirit, Psalm.
51.12. No doubt there may be great Variety as to Degrees of Terror, as to the
Time Persons are kept under it, and the like. And we must take heed that in
this respect we do not make our particular Experiences general Rules to judge
of the State of Men God opened the Heart of Lydia, and the Jailor came
trembling with the utmost Consternation. And it has been observed that some
have been kept under a Spirit of Bondage for a considerable Time, while other
convinced Sinners have been in a short Time surprised with a Visit from the
holy Spirit of God as a Spirit of Adoption, which supposes the New Birth.
Again, as to outward Expressions of deep Concern in Tears, wringing the Hands,
etc. Persons under like inward deep Concern of Mind may considerably differ
according to different Constitutions and Tempers. Again, Some may have been
more heinous Transgressors than others, and God may impress their Minds with
terrible Fears in some Proportion. Again, It Is no improbable Supposition, that
some have been converted in early Childhood before they were capable of giving
a distinct Account of this Work. Nor need it seem strange, if such as have been
favored with a pious Education and good Impressions from their Childhood,
should be more at a loss in this Matter, than such as have been suddenly
surprised as Saul, while going on in open Rebellion against God, and so knocked
down under the fearful Apprehensions of his Wrath, and then raised with the
wonderful Manifestations of the free Grace of God in Jesus Christ
super-abounding where Sin had abounded. Therefore such as find upon strict and
impartial Examination, that they abhor themselves for Sin as it is contrary to
the declarative Glory and revealed Will of God, and so turn from all Sin unto
God, as their chief Good and highest End; that they are willing to submit to
Christ as their Prince and Savior, trusting only to his Righteousness for
their Justification before God, and taking his Yoke upon them: I say, these
Persons ought not to distress themselves, because they cannot give such a
distinct Account of the Time and Manner of this Work of Conviction, as some
others can; nor yet have experienced so great Terrors as others hay felt
before they were born of the Spirit. Such as have been made sensible of their
lost and perishing Condition by the Fall, and then made willing to receive
Jesus Christ in all his Offices as their only Savior; have the Things found in
them which go before, and accompany Salvation; and should be encouraged to
trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon their God. However, It is happy
for such as are able to give a more clear and distinct Account of the peculiar
Season and Manner of this Work of the Spirit; for this has a tendency to bring
their Minds to a better Settlement as to their Assurance of the saving Work of
Grace wrought after it. On the other hand, Persons who have been under great
Terrors, and now receive the Word with Joy, must rejoice with holy Fear, and
look to it that they have that contrite and humble Spirit with which the high
and lofty One dwells, to revive the Spirit of the humble, and the Heart of the
contrite One; For there is a Joy which is no true Sign of saving Conversion.
The stony-ground Hearers we have described by our Lord, who searches the
Heart, Matthew. 13.20. He that received the Seed into stony Places, the same is
he that hears the Word, and anon with Joy receives it: The stony Heart was
not taken away, nor was there any Root of saving Grace; and accordingly in Time
of Trial they withered. And then there is no saving Virtue in legal Terrors to
convert Men; this Change is wrought according to the exceeding greatness of
God's Power. However, neither do I speak these Things to damp their Joy who
upon their Conversion may have received the Spirit of God to witness with their
Spirits, that they are the Children of God. And I make no doubt but this is the
happy Case of many, when the Spirit is poured out plentifully. When there were
Three Thousand Souls added, we read that they gladly received the Word, Acts
2.41. But then, I am concerned that we may all obey that Word, and obtain the
Benefit of it. Let every Man prove his own Work, and then shall he have
rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another, Gal. 6.4.

I would only further say at present, that when the Spirit of God convinces
Men of Sin, he shows them the guilt and derstroying Power of their Sins; makes
them sensible of their Misery and Danger as they lie exposed to the Curses of
the Law, and brings them to seek Deliverance with earnestness and deep Concern.
And thus the Spirit prepares them to hearken to the gracious Invitations and
Offers of the Gospel, while he also shows them their utter Inability to come up
to the Terms of the Gospel in their own Strength, and their great Unworthiness
that God should work in them to will and to do. And therefore, that if they are
saved, it must be from the free sovereign Grace of God, who has Mercy on whom
he will have Mercy. And as to such whom the Spirit of God converts, he changes
their Hearts, renews them in the Spirit of their Minds respecting every Power
of the Soul; and so persuades and enableth them to Trust in Jesus Christ as
the only Name given among Men wherely we must be saved; taking their
Encouragement from the Grace of God, the Merits of Christ, and free Offers of
the Gospel. When Christ is thus formed in the Heart, the poor Creature so
highly savored, is ready to cry out, Lord this Salvation is too great and good
for me; but thou art worthy to be believed and obeyed, and nothing is too great
or wonderful for thee. Be it unto me according to thy Word.

APPLICATION.
USE 1. Let us pay divine Honor to the holy Spirit, and give Him the Glory of
His Works of Grace.

His Presence with God's People is better to them, even then the bodily
Presence of Christ upon Earth; for our Savior assured his Disciples that it
was expedient for them that he should go away, that the Comforter might come
unto them. And He is the Dispenser of all Grace. The Love of God is shed abroad
in the Heart, and the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ bro't home to the Soul, by
the Communion of the Holy Ghost. We are blessed in His Name; common and saving
Grace are communicated by him to perishing Sinners: and therefore we ought to
ascribe Blessing and Glory and Honor to him, who is called God, Act 5.3, 4.
There are Three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost: and these Three are One, 1 John 5 7. Let us then fall down and worship
that God who is the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost. And let us be
sensible that the Application of the Redemption purchased by Christ is from the
Holy Spirit. When we behold many convinced of Sin, and some in a judgment of
Charity converted; let us look above Men and Means, and say, Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be the Glory. We have in a public and
solemn manner sought the Lord for this great Gift, and now we should bless God
for it, and beseech Him to give his Spirit more abundantly.

2. Is it the Spirit of God who reproves Men of Sin? Learn the dangerous State
of such as are secure in Sin, or stifle their Convictions.

It Is a dreadful Thing for Men to be suffered to have an accursed quiet false
Peace in the Ways of Sin, Luke 11.21. When a strong Man armed keeps his
Palace, his Goods are in Peace. Alas! Satan rules in the Hearts of these
miserable Creatures without control, and they are led Captive by him at his
Will. They hug their Chains, and are unconcerned about Deliverance, while they
are permitted to enjoy the Pleasure's of Sin without remorse of Conscience.
They sport themselves with their own Deceivings, 2 Pet. 2.13. And God threatens
to bring sudden and irrecoverable Ruin upon them. When they shall say, Peace
and safety; then sudden Destruction comes upon them, as travail upon a Woman
with Child, and they shall not escape, 1 These 5.3. And it is a very dangerous
Sign when Persons are continued under the Means of Grace, and yet are sleeping
in carnal Security: They sleep as on the Top of a Mast, and are in Danger every
Moment of falling, and of being drowned in eternal Perdition. O hear God's
Voice then without Delay, lest you lift up your Eyes in Torments, and in utter
Despair behold a vast Gulf fixed between you and the Seat of the Blessed!
Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
Life, Ephesians. 5, 14. O cry to God for his Spirit to convince and convert you! For
surely, it is better to endure some present Pain and Distress, while yet there
is Hope; than to be shut out into outer Darkness, where is weeping and gnashing
of Teeth forever. O let me not seem to you, while thus warnning you to flee
from the Wrath to come, as Lot to his Sons-in-law, as one that mocketh! Lot
went out, and spoke unto his Sons in law, which married his Daughters, and
said, Up, get ye out of this Place; for the Lord will destroy this City: but he
seemed as one that mocked unto his Sons in law, Genesis 19.14. Thus we may suppose
they slept securely that Night; but what came in the Morning? The Lord rained
upon Sodom and upon Gomorrha Brimstone and Fire from the Lord out of Heaven, 24
v. And when the Fire from Heaven had destroyed their Bodies, their miserable
Souls were cast into Hell. Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the Cities about
them, in like manner giving themselves over to Fornication, and going after
strange Flesh, are set forth for an Example, suffering the Vengeance of eternal
Fire Jude v 7. O escape for your Lives then this Night, lest by to Morrow you
be consumed! Or have you been favored with Convictions, but have stifled and
lost them? Can you remember when the Spirit of God moved on your Hearts,
exciting you to pray, and attend to the preaching of the Word; to put away Sin,
and to reform your Lives? But now these good Motions cease, and the Spirit is
departed from you. Is this your unhappy State? Know it, Your Case is very
hazardous, yet not desperate. Fear then, lest God should punish you with the
Men that are settled on their Lees. Justify God in this Matter, and confess
that you have greatly sinned by vexing his good Spirit. At the same Time, take
heed and beware of going on desperately in your Sins, as if there was no Hope.
Even such as you have found Mercy. Seek to God then the more earnestly to
revive his Work in your Souls. Be the more sensible from this of the deep
Corruption of your Hearts, and of the Enmity of your carnal Minds against God;
and deprecate that dreadful Judgment of judicial Blindness and hardness of
Heart. Bemoan your selves, and say, O that it was with me, as in Months past
And let that be your earnest and continued Prayer, Cast me not away from thy
Presence; and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

3. Let such as are under the Convictions of the Spirit, bless God for them;
and in the use of all Proper Means seek the Lord that these may end in a saving
Conversion.

Has God sent his Spirit to convince you of Sin, and show to you your need of
a Savior? Be encouraged to ask the holy Spirit to reveal Christ unto you, as
the Lord your Righteousness; that you may embrace Him as he is freely offered
in the Gospel. Are you brought to attend God's Word with Fear and Concern? O
seek the inward and effectual Call of the Spirit! that you may now say, Speak
Lord, for thy Servant hears. Hear the Words of our Savior, and let them
strengthen the Hands which hang down and confirm the feeble Knees, when you may
be ready to faint and wax weary in yoar Minds. Luke 11.9. Ask, and it shall be
given you: Seek, and ye shall find: Knock, and it shall be opened unto you. v.
11. If a Son shall ask Bread of any of you that is a Father, will he give him a
Stone? or if he ask a Fish, will he for a Fish give him a Serpent? v. 13. If ye
then being evil, know how to give good Gifts to your Children: how much more
shall your heavenly Father give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? Now your
Conversion is hopeful. You are not far from the Kingdom of God, O strive to
enter then, looking to God to work in you, both to will and to do of his good
Pleasure! And take heed you do not quench the Spirit by returning to your Sins,
or to your sinful Companions. Now follow hard after God by a constant and
diligent Attendance to the Means of Grace. Be frequent and servent in Secret
Prayer, confessing your Sins and crying for Mercy in the Name of Jesus Christ.
Get alone, think upon your Ways and meditate upon divine Things. Study the Word
of God, which is perfect, converting the Soul; and take heed how you hear it.
For Faith comes by hearing, and hearing hy the Word of God, Romans 10.17. Wait
at the Posts of Wisdom's Doors, and labor to be found in those Ways in which
Christ walks. And yet take heed and beware of depending on your religious
Duties and outward Reformations. Say with your self, An Interest in Christ I
must have; and accordingly while you use the Means, seek Rest to your Souls in
Him. Be willing to bear the Spirit's Reproofs, though sharp and pungent; but if
Terrors be overbearing, beseech the Lord that he would not lay more upon you,
than he shall enable you to bear. Indeed there may be some few ready to
complain with Heman, While I suffer thy Terrors, I am distracted. But blessed
be God! This is not the ordinary Case. And where the regular use of Reason has
been disturbed, I am satisfied it was not so much from any direct Impressions
of the good Spirit of God, as from natural Disorders of Body, or moral
Distempers of mind. Our gracious God would not have, no not the incestuous
Corinthian, swallowen up with overmuch Sorrow, 2 Cor. 2.7. However, Pray God
to show you the plague of your own Heart, and be sensible that the Wound Sin
has given you is incurable unless it will please the great God our Savior to
be the Physician. Accordingly, despairing in your self, Look to Jesus, and say,
Lord, if thou will, thou can make me whole. Thy Blood cleanses from all Sin,
and thy divine Spirit is able to apply it. Heal my Soul, for I have sinned
against Thee. If Satan tempt you to return to your carnal Security, or to
despair as if your Sins were so great that God would not pardon them; resist
him, and cry to God to bruise him under your Feet. And labor to be furnished
with pertinent Texts of Scripture whereby you may answer and confute such evil
Suggestions. Thus if you are tempted by Satan or your own Lusts, to return to
your Evil Courses; answer, It is written, If any Man draw back, my Soul shall
have no Pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. Or if tempted to say, mine Iniquity is
greater than that it may be forgiven; answer, It is written, Come now and let
us reason together, says the Lord: though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be
as white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool, Isa.
1.18. And instead of yielding to the Temptation, Plead with God in the Words of
David, For thy Names sake, O Lord, pardon mine Iniquity: for it is great. Psalm.
25 12. And do not perplex your self as if you had committed the Sin against the
Holy Ghost, which is unto Death. The good Impressions you now receive from the
Spirit striving with you, make it evident that this is not your Case. Again, If
you seem to grow worse and worse after considerable Labor and Striving, be not
discouraged as if it was in vain for you to strive any Longer. The Spirit of
God rather discovers to you more and more the deep Corruption of your Hearts,
which is an hopeful Symptom, and should be improved to convince you more
thoroughly of your need of the infinite. Power and Grace of God to save you. And
then, If you are continued for a considerable Time under this Work, and cant
find Rest; do not grow impatient, and say it is in vain to wait for the Lord
any longer: But rather resolve that by his Help you will hope and wait for the
Salvation of God. I pray consider, how long God has waited upon you, it may be
Ten, Twenty, or Thirty Years; and will you think it hard to wait upon God a few
Months or Years? O be not so unrreasonable and undutiful! It is of the Lord's
Mercies you are not consumed, and it must be of his free undeserved Mercy, if
you are saved. Certainly then you are well-treated, and have a rich Reward of
all your Pains, if God shall come at the last and save you, even when this
frail short Life is just expiring. Or, If others awakened after you, obtain
Grace and Comfort before you, let not your Eye be evil, because God is good. Is
it not lawful for Him to do what He will with his own? O take heed then and
beware of entertaining hard Tho'ts of God! Lie down at the Foot of sovereign
Grace, and wait God's Time without Murmuring and Complaint. Again, Are
blasphemous Thoughts injected? Cast them out with Abhorrence, and be not
dismayed. The evil One who casts these fiery Darts, must bear the Blame and
Punishment. In a Word, Do not perplex yourselves with anxious Inquiries about
your Election. This is absord and preposterous at this Time. Hear that Word
then, The secret Things belong unto the Lord our God; but those Things which
are revealed belong unto us, and to our Children forever, that we may do all
the Words of this Law, Deuteronomy. 29.29. Your Duty is plainly revealed; Give
Diligence to make your Calling and Election sure: for if ye do these Things, ye
shall never fall. 2 Pet. 1.10. Make sure of the effectual Call of the Spirit,
and then you may safely conclude that God has loved you with an everlasting
Love, and so drawn you to himself. Let this great Work then be regarded as the
One Thing needful: however, let not your particular Calling be neglected in the
Season for it. Wherein you are called abide with God, attending this Business
also in Obedience to him. The Work of your Salvation will be most likely to
prosper, when every Duty is attended in it is Place and Time. Upon the whole, Do
not conceal the Distress of your Souls; but be willing to ask and receive
Advice in a Matter of such great Importance. Seek the Help of your Pastors, and
other experienced Christians. But then, in the diligent use of Means, let your
Eye and Cry be to the God of all Grace from whom your Help must come. And
encourage your selves in this, that you are in the Hands of a God in finitely
good and gracious, who has sent the Lord Jesus to bind up the broken hearted.
Behold the Son of God stands at the Door and knocks, saying, If any Man hear my
Voice, and open the Door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and be with
me, Rev. ^.20. Lift up your Heads, O ye Gates, and be ye lift up, ye
everlasting Doors, and the king of Glory shall come in. "O glorious Lord, do
thou speak to them by the inward Call of thy Spirit, and they will hear and
obey thy Voice! Do thou who have the Key of David, who openest, and no Man
shuts; Open their Hearts, and make them thy willing People in the Day of thy
Power. Thy Words are Works. Speak the Word, and their Souls shall live. Say to
one and another that tremble at thy World; Son, Daughter, be of good Comfort
your Sins are forgiven, go in Peace." And may you now hear that Word of your
Compassionate Redeemer, Come unto me, all ye that labor, and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest. Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly in Heart, and ye shall find rest unto your Souls, Matthew. 11.28, 9.
And dutifully answer, We come unto thee; for thou art the Lord our God.

SERMON II.
JOHN xvi. 8. AND when he is come, he will reprove the World of Sin, and of
Righteousness, and of Judgment.


DOCTRINE.
IT is the Work of the Holy Spirit to convince and reprove Men of Sin. I. The
Holy Spirit is the Author of this Work of Conviction.

II. We considered the Means which the Spirit of God uses to convince Men of
Sin.

I proceed,

III. To give some brief Description of the Work of the Spirit in convincing
and reproving Men of Sin. Wherein I shall also consider some of the Fruits of
the these Convictions.

Before I speak particularly to this Head, I would observe to you, that the
infinite Spirit of God has the nearest Access to our Spirits which are his
Creatures, and can make Impressions upon them as he pleases: And he convinces
Sinners by an inward Application to the Powers of the Soul, the Understanding,
Conscience, etc. before a saving Change is wrought in the Heart.

1. In this Work of Conviction the Spirit of God brings Home the Sense of Sin
and the Guilt to the Heart and Conscience of the Sinner. And then his Spirit is
wounded, and his Heart moved with Fear. Though Men will generally acknowledge
that they are Sinners, yet alas! there are many unconverted Persons who flatter
themselves in their evil Ways as if Sin had not Dominion over them, and they
were not walking in the Path of the Destroyer. Many are in a lamentable manner
ignorant of the Strictness and Purity of God's Law, and at the same Time very
much Strangers to their own deceitful Hearts. It seems that Paul, while
Pharisee, was not sensible that the first Motions of evil Concupiscence were
Sin. Romans 7.7. And Ephraim says, In all my Labors they shall find none
Iniquity in me that is Sin: Though the Balances of Deceit were in his Hand, and
he loved to oppress. Hos. 12.7, 8. How many false Pleas and vain Excuses do Men
frame to blind and bribe their Consciences? whereby they are laid asleep in
carnal Security. There is a Way which seems right unto a Man; but the End
thereof are the Ways of Death, Prove. 14.12. So deceitful and desperately wicked
are the Hearts of Men. But when the Spirit of God comes with the Word to show
Men their Iniquity, he detects and lays open this Deceit, and makes the Sinner
know that he has offended the holy, heart-searching God, and stands condemned
by His righteous Law. Conscience is awakened to do it is Office, and as it were
says to the Sinner, Thou are the Man: And now, he beholds his Sin in it is
heinous Nature and Aggravations; and self-judged, makes that Confession before
the Lord, Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this Evil in they
Sight, Psalm. 51.4. When the Spirit of God reproves Men of Sin, they dare not
deny the Fact, nor excuse the Fault or Crime cleaving to it. But rather
deprecate God's entering into Judgment with them, saying with the Psalmist, If
thou Lord, should mark Iniquities: O Lord, who shall stand Psalm 130.3. Surely
none can stand in the Judgment, says the convinced Sinner; and as for me, I am
now sensible that I must fall under the condemning Sentence of the Law, vile
Wretch that I am. And tho; this may be at first from Conviction of some
particular Sin, as here of the Sin of Unbelief; yet the Spirit of God leads Men
up to the Consideration of their guiltiness and vileness as Children of
Apostate Adam; shows them that they sinned in him and fell with him, and that
as they proceed from him they bring a corrupt Nature into the World with them,
empty of Grace, and bent unto Sin. And now they are ready to subscribe that
Confession, Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in Iniquity: and in Sin did my
Mother conceive me. Now God's Word is set home upon their Hearts, in which it
is declared, that all are under Sin; there is none Righteous, no not one. Their
Mouths are stopped, and they become guilty before God, Romans 3.19. And they are
ready to acknowledge that they were exposed to the Wrath and Curse of God as a
Generation of Vipers, even from their early Childhood. And whatever have been
their outward Attendance on religious Duties, and blameless Behavior before
Men; they now find that they are Children of Wrath, even as others. This was
the Case of Saul, afterward called Paul, though he had lived as a strict
Pharisee, a blameless Life according to his understanding of the Law. I was
alive without the Law once; but when the Commandment came, Sin revived, and I
died, Romans 7.9. While a Pharisee, though he had the Law in the Letter of it, yet
he was wihtout the Law, being dreadfully ignorant of the spiritual Meaning and
Use of it, as also of ^^s Purity and extensive Obligation and so he though it
himself alive, in a good Condition; and that he was in a fair Way to obtain
Life by the Deeds of the Law: But when the Commandment was set home upon his
Conscience, and the Spirit of God convinced him of his Sin by the Law, his vain
Hopes died away, and he found himself in a State of spiritual Death, dead in
Trespasses and Sins. And this is the Case of the closest Hypocrites and most
specious Formalists, when the Spirit of God is pleased to convince and reprove
them of Sin: When he thus by his Word of Providence shows them their Work,
and their Transgressions, that they have exceeded; they can no longer cover
their Sins, nor flatter themselves in their evil Ways. Their own Hearts condemn
them, and they see themselves exposed to the Judgment of that God* who is
greater than their Hearts, and knows all Things. And accordingly they are
ready to fall down before God and confess with them, We are all as an unclean
Thing, and all our Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags, and we all do fade as a
Leaf, and our Iniquities like the Wind, have taken us away, Isa. 64.6. Whence
follows deep Concern, and sometimes almost overwhelming Anguish and Distress
of Soul. Which leads me to say,

2. In this Work the Spirit of God makes Men sensible of the deadly Evil of
Sin, and of their miserable State (...) the Guilt, and Dominion of it. As the
Spirit of God shows Sinners the Guilt and Power of their Sins, so he declares
to them the dreadful Punishment which they lie exposed to as Transgressors of
the Law; that the Wages of Sin is Death, not only temporal, but eternal Death.
Is not Destruction to the Wicked? and a strange Punishment to the Workers of
Iniquity? Job 31.3. Yes surely, and when the Spirit of God pleases, he can
make the stoutest Sinner sensible of it. Such is the Folly and Madness bound up
in the Hearts of Men, that they are ready to make a mock of Sin. While asleep
in carnal Security, they dream of enjoying the Pleasures of Sin, without
enduring the Punishment. He flattereth himself in his own Eyes, until his
Iniquity be found to be hateful. Ps. 36.2. Thus it is said of the Young Man,
void of Understanding, when enticed by the Adulteress, He goes after her
straightway, as an Ox goes to the slaughter, or as a Fool to the correction of
the stocks: Till a Dart strike through his Liver, as a Bird hastes to the
Snare, and knows not that it is for his Life, Prove. 7.22, 23. Men do not
know, they will not consider the End of Sin, though faithfully warned in God's
Word; and so they often go on in the Ways which lead to Death, till they are
suddenly destroyed. The simple passon, and are punished, Prove. 22.3. And the
Old Serpent the Devil, is still ready to tempt us as he (...) Eve, Ye shall not
surely die: This subtle Tempter seeks to allure Men, by setting before them the
carnal Pleasures and Profits of Sin; and at the same Time labors to divert
their Minds from all serious Consideration of the Punishment. Alas, how
successfully! It is supposed that there might be found among God's People, Man
or Woman, that would say, I shall have Peace, though I walk in the Imagination of
my Heart, to add Drunkenness to Thirst: But the Lord threatens, That he will
not spare him, but the Anger of the Lord and his Jealousy shall smoke against
that Man, and all the Curses written in this Book shall lie upon him, Deuteronomy.
29.18, 20. And accordingly, when the Spirit of God shoots the Arrows of
Conviction into the Sinners Heart, he shows him the daring Presumption of
this, and makes him know that Sin is an evil Thing, and will be bitterness in
the End. The Spirit makes Men feel the Plague of their own Hearts, and the
deadly Wounds Sin hat given them. Now they find that Description agrees to
them; The whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart is faint. From the sole of
the Foot even unto the Head, there is no soundness in it; but Wounds and
Bruises and putrefying Sores, Isa. 1.5, 6. When the Word of God is thus
impressed upon the Sinner's Heart, it is like Fire, respecting the Light it
gives to discern the Evil of Sin, and the Pain and Misery inflicted on the Soul
consequent upon this. Thus the Spirit of God shows Men the great Evil of an
Heart of Unbelief whereby they depart from the living God, and reject the only
Savior, by such a Word as that, He that believes not, shall be damned, Mark
16.16. The great Evil of an hard and impenitent Heart, whereby Men treasure up
Wrath against the Day of Warth, by such a Word as that, Except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish, Luke 1 3 3. And their Consciences are inflamed with
painful Apprehensions of the burning Wrath of God due to them for their Sins.
Now that Word comes home to them, Thou have destroyed thy self, Hos. 13.9. And
sensible of their miserable State, they cry out with the Prodigal, I perish.
Luke 15.17. They no longer dream that the Pleasures of Sin can be separated
from the Punishment; but now find they have to do with an holy heart-searching
jealous God, that will by no means clear the guilty. God speaks to them by his
Word, together with the inward Impressions of his Spirit, as Psalm. 50.21, 21.
These Things have thou done and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as they self: but I will reprove thee, and let them in
order before thine Eyes. Now consider this, ye that forget God, least I tear
you in Pieces, and there be none to deliver. And while the Spirit of God is
thus a spirit of Bondage, the Sinner trembles for Fear of God, and is afraid
of his Judgments. Thus We read The Sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has
surised the Hypocrites: who among us shall dwell with the devouring Fire? Who
amongst us shall dwell with everlasting Burnings? Isa. 33.14. They now know the
Terrors of the Lord, and find that he is of purer Eyes than to behold Evil, and
cannot look on Iniquity without Abhorrence. They are in Anguish while their Sins
lie heavy upon them, and the iron Yoke galls their Consciences. And are ready
to complain that their Iniquities are gone over their Heads, as an heavy Burden
too heavy for them to bear. Yea, now the Sinner is sometimes almost dismayed
with Fear lest God should take him away with a Stroke, and cast him into Hell.

3. When the Spirit of God reproves of Sin, He brings the Sinner to humble
himself before God. When the Arrows of Conviction are sharp in the Hearts of
the King's Enemies, the People fall down under him, Psalm. 45.5 Thus it is when
our Lord rides forth on the Word of Truth accompanied with the holy Spirit, the
Sinner lies prostrate at his Feet, sensible that it is a dreadful Thing to
fall into the Hands of the living God, as an Avenger of Sin. Now there is a
Work of Humiliation wrought, in which the Haughtiness of the Sinner's Spirit is
quelled, and he is cast down convinced that he cannot resist God, and prosper.
He is made sensible that God can break him in Pieces, and that none is able to
deliver out of his Hand. Such a Word as that is set home upon his Conscience.
See now that I, even I am he, and there is no god with me: I kill, and I make
alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can deliver out of my
Hand. For I lift up my Hand to Heaven, and say, I live for ever. If I whet my
glittering Sword, and mine hand take hold on Judgment; I will render Vengeance
to mine Enemies, and will reward them that hate me. And when the convinced
Sinner finds himself thus in the Hands of that God, who is able to save or
destroy forever; he lies down in the Dust before him. Now the lofty Looks of
Men are humbled, and God is exalted. Thus when God denounced dreadful
Threatenings against Ahah, by the Prophet Elijah, it is said, And it came to
pass when Ahah heard those Words, that he rent his Clothes, and put Sackcloth
upon his Flesh, and fasted, and lay in Sacrcloth, and went softly, 1 Kings
21.27. Yea, such was his Humiliation, though here was no true saving
Repentance, that God was pleased to take a gracious Notice of it, and mitigate
the Judgment threatened, 29th ver. See thou how Ahah humbles himself before
me? because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the Evil in his
Days. In like manner, the cruel hardy Jailor fell down before Paul and Silas,
as the Servants of the most high God, humbly to entreat them to show him the
Way of Salvation, Acts 16.29, 30. Had he done this to worship them, they would
have rejected it with Abhorrence. He did it, as a judicous Expositor supposes,
"being moved by the Fear of God's Judgments thus to humble himself" Calvin.
When Men are thus convinced, their haughty and stubborn Spirits are bro't down,
they are forced to quit their carnal Confidences as Refuges of Lies, and are
bro't before God, as the Servants of Benhadad came in his Name, before the King
of Israel, with Ropes upon their Heads; and with that submissive Request, I
pray thee let me live. To allude to those Words, 1 Kings 20.31, 32. For they
now find that they lie at God's Mercy, and have a dread of his fiery
Indignation lest it should consume them. We read, that The Wicked, through the
Pride of his Countenance, will not seek after God, Psalm. 10.4. But when God
comes upon the Sinner by his Spirit to show him his Sin and Misery, and the
Danger he is in of being broken to Pieces in the Day of his Wrath; then you
shall hear him cry, Mercy Lord, Mercy for a miserable Sinner, or I perish!

4. When the Spirit does thus convince of Sin, He makes the Sinner confess his
Sin, and exciteth him to reform his Life. Though in this Work there is not a
Principle of saving Grace infused in Opposition to Sin, yet Sin is made bitter
from the Fruits of it; so that while the Spirit of God does in this manner
strive with the Sinner, and impresseth on his Mind a dread of God's Wrath, he
dare, not go on in his evil Courses, and cannot, relish the Pleasures of Sin, as
when he lived in carnal Security, fearing lest that Threatening should be
fulfilled upon him; How much she has glorified herself, and lived deliciously,
so much Torment and Sorrow give her, Rev. 18.7. His Case is like that expressed
Job 20.12 -- 14. Though Wickedness be sweet in his Mouth, though he hide it
under his Tongue; Though he spare it, and forsake it not; but keep it still
within his Mouth: Yet his Meat in his Bowels is turned, it is the Gall of Asps
within him. And now the Burden of Sin lies so heavy upon the Consciences of
Men, that they are compelled as it were to seek Relief, by confessing their Sins
before God; and they find themselves constrained to cry out of their sad and
wretched State before Men. When Samuel reproved Saul for not utterly destroying
Amalek, though at first he endeavored to excuse himself, yet when the Prophet
declared to him that because he had rejected the Word of the Lord, God had also
rejected him from being King; being convicted in his Conscience, he said, I
have sinned, 2 Samuel 15.24. And now the Sinner is sick of his Sin, and casts it
up. He cannot now drink down Iniquity like Water with greediness and delight, as
he did before; but rather abstains from the outward Commission of it, and
forms Resolutions against it. If tempted, while the Spirit is thus striving
with him, it is as if you should offer pleasant Drink to a Man, and at the same
Time assure him that there is Poison in the Cup He for the present at lest,
puts away Sin for Fear of Wrath, and turns from his wicked Companions. You may
observe a visible Alteration in him. While these strong Convictions of the
Spirit are upon him, he is restrained from the Commission of Sin; but then if
he is lest to quench these good Motions, and the Spirit is provoked to depart
from him, and cease striving; we have his dismal Case described, 2 Pet. 2.20,
-- 22. -- If after they have escaped the Pollutions of the World through the
Knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled
therein, and overcome; the latter End is worse with them than the beginning.
For it had been better for them not to have known the way of Righteousness,
than after they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment delivered unto
them. But it is happened unto them according to the true Proverb, The Dog is
turned to his own Vomit again; and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in
the Mire O it is a dreadful Thing to Sin against such Light, and stifle such
Convictions of the Spirit! Let such as are favored with them take heed
therefore, and beware of this most dangerous and provoking Evil.

5. In this Work the Spirit of God shows Men the utter Insufficiency of
Creature Comforts to afford Relief to their troubled Minds. While Men are
secure in Sin, they are very prone to Promise themselves Satisfaction in their
outward Enjoyments, and so to be unconcerned about obtaining the Favor of God.
They spend their Days in Wealth, and in a Moment go down to the Grave.
Therefore they say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the Knowledge of
thy Ways, Job 21.13, 14 The Riches and Pleasures of this Life often divert
Men's Minds from a serious Attention to the Calls of the Gospel. When invited
to partake of the rich Provision God had made for perishing Sinners; They make
Light of it, and go their Ways, one to his Farm, another to his Merchandise,
Matthew. 22.^ They are ready to say with the rich Man Soul, thou have much Goods
laid up for many Years; take, thine Ease, eat, drink and be merry, Luke 12.19.
But now when the Spirit of God convinces the Sinner of the perishing Condition
of his Soul, he says to him, The Fool, this Night thy Soul may be required of
thee; you hang over the bottomless Pit by the slender Thread of a frail Life,
and may before to Morrow lift up your Eyes in Torments. And when thus reproved
of their Sin and Folly, their carnal Confidence and Satisfaction in Creatures
are blasted, and their Mirth is turned into Heaviness. None of their worldly
Enjoyments appear to them as they did before; they have lost their Relish for
them. For now they are convinced that these Things cannot profit in the Day of
Wrath, nor redeem them from Destruction. Yea, If they have gotten their earthly
Possessions by unrighteous Practices, the Spirit of God shows them that they
have been treasuring up Wrath against the Day of Wrath. And now they are ready
to say, What shall it profit us, though we gain the whole World, and lose our
Souls? What good will these Things do us, if we must sink down under the Weight
of God's Wrath, and perish forever in Hell? Alas! we shall be the more
miserable upon the Account of them, in the terrible Day of the Lord. And thus
are they brought to realise it, that if they would find rest for their Souls,
they must seek better Things. And are convinced of the great Evil of seeking
their Happiness in Creatures, in opposition to God.

Which leads me to say,

6. When the Spirit of God convinces Men of Sin, He exciteth them to seek
Deliverance in the diligent use of the Means of Grace and Salvation. Now they
find that nothing can give them Ease, while the Burden of Sin lies heavy upon
them, and accordingly they are concerned to seek the Lord in the Ways of his
own Appointment, if happily they may find him who alone is able to save them from
Sin and Death. Before they might cast; off Fear, and restrain Prayer; but now
they cry for Mercy. Indeed the Force of Education and Custom may prevail with
Men to attend religious Duties, but then this is done in formality, and with
little Concern about their Souls. Whereas when the holy Spirit comes upon Men
to convince them of their Sin and Danger, his Voice is like that Jonah 1.6.
What meanest thou, O Sleeper? arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will
think upon us, that we perish not. And when these Convictions are strong upon
them, they are ready to make that Inquiry with great Seriousness, What must I
do to be saved? Acts 16.30. And to say with them who were pricked in their
Heart, Men and Brethren, What shall we do? And now it may be said of them as of
Saul. Behold, he prays, Acts 9.11 No doubt Saul having been a Pharisee, had
made many Prayers before this; but now in anguish of Spirit we may suppose he
was ready to say with the Publican, Lord be merciful to me a Sinner. The Whole
need not the Physician; but when Sinners are made to feel the Smart of those
deadly Wounds which Sin has given them, and at the same Time hear of a
Savior; they are pressed in Spirit to seek to him, saying, Lord save me, or I
perish. Now they also attend to the preaching of the Word after another manner
than before, finding that the Threatenings and Reproofs of God's Word belong to
them, and being concerned to flee from the Wrath to come. Their Fears urge them
to mind the Duties of Religion, and to strive to enter in at the strait Gate,
lest their Day of Grace should end before they have obtained an Interest in
Jesus Christ. For now they dread the Damnation of Hell.

7. The Spirit of God beats Men off from a carnal Dependence on their religious
Duties, and shows them that their Salvation must come from God alone.

It is to be feared that many who have been under Convictions, and so turned
from open Impiety to some outward Reformation and Attendance on religious
Duties, stop here, and never go out to Christ for Salvation. Our Lord assures
us that there are foolish Virgins in the visible Church, that content
themselves with an outward Prosession, without being concerne'd to obtain the
Oil of saving Grace in their Hearts; and then fall asleep in carnal Security,
until they are awaked by the Midnight Cry, Go ye out to meet him. And then they
are wholly at a loss, finding the Door of Mercy shut against them. They cry,
Lord, Lord, open to us; but He answers, I know you not, Matthew. 25. And
therefore, when the Spirit of God is pleased to carry on his Work, he
convinces Men of the great Evil and Danger of their resting here, without a
saving Conversion to God, and Union with Christ by Faith. He shows them more
and more the Vileness of their own Hearts, and the absolute Necessity of their
being renewed in the Spirit of their Minds after the Image of God; that except
they are born again, they cannot see the Kingdom of God. And convinces them
that if they are saved after all, it must not be according to Works which they
have done, but according to the free Grace and Mercy of God, through the Merits
of Jesus Christ. The Promise is not made to them that labor, and are heavy
laden; but to them who being heavy laden with the Burden of their Sins, Go to
Christ upon his most gracious Call and Invitation; Come unto me, all ye that
labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Matthew. 11.28. And our
Lord declares, Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6.37.
Now we go to Christ in the Exercise of Faith. He that comes to me shall never
hunger; and he that believes on me, shall never thirst. 35. v. Nor is the
Promise made to them that attend religious Duties merely from a slavish Fear
and dread of Wrath, and without any sincere Regard to the Glory of God. Indeed,
It is not Sin for Persons while Unconverted, to pray to God, hear his Word,
etc. No, Such Duties as these God requires of them, and they are to be
exhorted and encouraged to seek the Lord in these Ways of his Appointment,
forasmuch as God has been often found of Men while in the diligent use of
Means; but then they must be made sensible that they fail in the manner of
their attending upon these religious Duties. Without Faith it is impossible to
please God, Heb. 11.6. And therefore, if Men depend on the Discharge of these
religious Duties, instead of using them as Means to lead them to Christ that
they may be justified and saved by Faith in him, they rest on a sandy
Foundation which will certainly fail them. Accordingly when the Spirit of God
carries on his Work, he reproves this Pharisaic Pride, and convinces Men of
the great Evil of it: So that they dare not stand before God, as the Pharisee
did, saying, God, I thank thee, that I am not as other Men are, Extortioners,
Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican. I fast twice in the Week, I give
Tithes of all I possess, Luke 18.12. No, but rather with the Publican, cry for
Mercy, after all the Pains they have taken to seek the Lord in the Way of Duty.
The Spirit of God shows Men that except their Righteousness shall exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, they shall in no case enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. See Matthew. 5.20. And makes them sensible that
notwithstanding all their Labors in Duty and outward Reformations, God might
damn them, should he deal with them in a Way of strict Justice; and that if
they are saved, their Salvation must come from the Lord. And thus is the Way of
the Lord prepared by the Spirit, that the Son of God may come into the Hearts
of his chosen People, and give rest to their weary Souls. Indeed this Work has
not a causal Virtue to produce saving Grace, as has been hinted. After all,
there must be a saving Change wrought in all the Powers of the Soul by the
Spirit of God, that we may receive Jesus Christ upon the gracious Offer and
Command of the Gospel. We must have Jesus Christ revealed to us, and have that
Faith wrought in us by the Spirit, whereby we may close with him on
Gospel-Terms; and that Repentance whereby we may turn from all Sin unto God.
There must be such Conviction of our Need of Righteousness, and of the
Perfection of Christ's Righteousness, as that we may depend on him entirely for
Justification before God. And there must be such a Conviction of Judgment, as
that we may submit to the Son of God as our Lord and Judge, saying, O Lord our
God, other lords besides thee have had dominion over us: but by thee only will
we make mention of thy Name. Isa. 26.13. O that this may be the happy Issue of
the Spirit's striving with elder and younger Persons! And may none be left to
resist and quench his good Motions! Come, O Breath, and breathe upon these
slain, that they may live!

APPLICATION.
USE 1. Let us Inquire into the State of our Souls; particularly, Whether we
have had the Experience of this Work of the Spirit. Has the Holy Spirit
convinced us of our Sin and Misery by the Fall, so that we have been made
sensible of our lost perishing State as we are the Children of the first Adam,
in whom all die? It Is true, there may be considerable Variety as to the Degree
of the Spirit's Operation. Some may have greater Terror, and of longer
Continuance than others, as we before observed. But then, We have Reason to
conclude that the Spirit of God is a Spirit of Bondage unto Fear, to every
unconverted Person grown to Years of Understanding and Judgment, before He is a
Spirit of Regeneration and Adoption. And therefore such as are confident of
their being in a State of Salvation, without a Conviction of Sin, and painful
Sense of the defiling and destroying Evil of it is; have just Reason to fear
that they deceive themselves. Our Savior declares to the Laodiceans, who were
puffed up with a proud and false Conceit of themselves, that they were
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; before He counsels
them to come to him for Gold tried in the Fire, that they might be enriched
with saving Grace more precious than Gold, etc. Rev. 3.17, 18. Let us then
examine and try ourselves, whether we have ever felt the Burden of our Sins too
heavy for us to bear, and been made sensible of the vile Corruption of our
Hearts; so as to cry to God for Deliverance, being convinced that nothing short
of his Almighty Power and Grace can save us. And here, supposing the Case, that
some of you were converted while very Young, yet it is incumbent on you to
inquire, whether you have such a spiritual Sight of the Evil of Sin, as to be
in bitterness upon the Account of it, and to be excited to work out your own
Salvation with fear and trembling. This is plain, That the best of Men in this
imperfect State have reason to cry out, Lord, Help our Unbelief! And to groan
out that Complaint, O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the
Body of this Death! Romans 7.24. And when they have indulged themselves for any
Time in carnal Security, or fallen into scandalous Sins, the Spirit of God has
so withdrawn from them, that they have been brought into great Perplexity, and
could have no solid Peace till renewed to Repentance. This was David's Case,
Psalm 51. And Peter's, Luke 22.61, 62. Agreably, our Savior said to him, When
thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren, Luke 22.32. Indeed that God who
has begun a good Work in true Converts, will perform it until the Day of Jesus
Christ. However, even these may need a further and more through Conversion from
particular Ways of sinning, that they may be in a next Disposition to attend
the Duties and enjoy the Blessings of Christ's Kingdom, after a comfortable
manner, Matthew. 18.3. Surely then, there is weighty Reason why we should all of
us look into the State of our Souls, and inquire what Convictions we have
experienced, and what has been the Issue of them. And after all, we should
make that Prayer, Search me O God, and know my Heart: try me, and know my
thoughts. And see if there be any wicked Way in me, and lead me in the Way
everlasting, Psalm. 139.23, 24.

USE 2. Are the Convictions of the Spirit so sharp and pungent sometimes? How
dreadful must it be then to fall under the vindictive Wrath of God in Hell
forever?

Do Sinners now while there is Hope, fear and tremble before the Lord when he
thus reproves them for Sin? Are they pricked to the Heart, and sometimes ready
to cry out under the heavy Load of Sin, A wounded Spirit who can bear?
Certainly then the Torments of Hell will be altogether intolerable; where the
Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched. Hell is a bottomless Pit, in
which the damned sink down in everlasting Despair, without the least gleam of
Hope, while the Wrath of God is poured out upon them to the uttermost. The
Childreen of the Kingdom shall be cast out into outer Darkness: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Matthew. 8.12 Can you not bear the Spirit's
Convictions, when he sets home the Threatenings of God's Word upon your
Consciences? How will you then be able to hear that Sentence pronounced by your
Lord and Judge; Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels; and then to have it executed upon you. O you will be
utterly consumed with Terror!

USE 3. Let such as have their Hearts hardened from the Fear of God, ask the
Holy Spirit to convince them of their Sin and Danger, before it be too late.

O let the Terrors of the Lord rouse you! Open your Eyes, consider your heinous
Iniquity in hardening your Hearts against God at such a Time as this, and behold
your extreme Danger of perishing in your Sins. For who has hardened himself
against God, and has prospered? O let that awful Word sink down into your
Ears, and into your Hearts! He that being often reproved, hardneth his Neck,
shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without Remedy. Prove. 29.1. Amazing
Stupidity! You cannot but hear others complaining of an hard Heart, and desiring
Prayers that God would take away the stony Heart and give an Heart of Flesh,
tender and quick to receive the Impressions of God's Word and Spirit. And are
you still unconcerned? How dangerous a Symptom is this? What a deadly Lethargy
has seized your Souls? And how great is the Danger that you will never awake,
till you lift up your Eyes in Torments? Are you not nigh to that dreadful
Curse? He which is Filthy, let him be filt by still. Do not conclude that God
will, but be greatly afraid lest he should utterly forsake you. Deprecate that
fearful Judgment, and cry to God to deliver you from it; acknowledging that God
would be justified should he thus speak against you, and be clear should he
thus judge you. God has given them the Spirit of Slumber, Eyes that they
should not see, and Ears they should not hear, Romans 11.8 And let your sad
Experience teach you that it is not in Men nor outward Means to convince you of
Sin and awaken you out of your carnal Security, unless the Spirit accompany
these Means, and apply them to your Souls. And accordingly, Mourn bitterly
because you have resisted and vexed the good Spirit of God, and take heed you
proceed no further, to do despite to the Spirit of Grace; and so live only to
fill up the measure of your Sins, and to ripen for a much sorer Punishment,
than many others who perish, shall endure. O thou infinitely powerful and
gracious God! with whom all Things are possible, do thou awaken them, and pluck
them as Brands out of the Fire.

USE 4. Let such as have received the Spirit of God as a Spirit of Conviction,
cherish His Motions, and cry to God more earnestly for His Spirit, as a Spirit
of Regeneration and Adoption.

Though I have spoken to you more largely in the former Discourse; yet I cannot
forbear farther to advise and direct you. Do not rest here, but be encouraged
the more earnestly to seek the Things which accompany Salvation. It is hopeful
that this Work is brought nigh to the Birth; cry to God for Strength, that it
may be brought forth with the Shouting of Grace unto it. And if your Distress
should now increase, do not faint but rather cry with the Psalmist, The
Troubles of my Heart are enlarged: O bring thou me out of my Distresses, Psalm.
25.17 It may be the New Birth will quickly follow, to your unspeakable Joy. But
then you must be sensible that this cannot be by any Might or Power of your own;
but only by the Spirit of the Lord of hosts. Look above your self then and all
Creatures unto the Lord, that you may be saved. And let it encourage you, that
this Work is in the Hands of the good Spirit of God, who delights in
Holiness; and may be called the Holy Spirit in Scripture, partly because it is
his Work to renew God's People in the Spirit of their Minds, after the Image of
God which consists in Knowledge, Righteousness and Holiness: That it is in the
Hands of the Almighty Spirit of God, who can convert you more easily than you
can speak a Word. Surely nothing is to be despaired of, while this divine
Spirit is working upon your Hearts. O seek the more earnestly then to that God
who is able to do for you above all you can ask or think! And now strive even
as in an Agony, that you may enter in at the strait Gate of a saving
Conversion. Why may it not be this Night? Why may there not be a saving Union
between Christ and your Souls even Now? Come, All Things are ready. O God! Do
thou draw them; for there is no Man can come to the Son, except the Father draw
him. We wait for thee, more than they that Watch for the Morning. May the Power
of the Lord be present to heal the broken in Heart, and bind up their Wounds!
May there be Joy in Heaven over many repenting Sinners! And may the Mourners in
Zion have the Oil of Joy given them for Mourning, and the Garment of Praise for
the Spirit of Heaviness.

USE 5. Let such as have receive'd the holy Spirit, as a Spirit of Adoption,
Praise the God of all Grace, and walk humbly with him.

Has God revealed his Son in and to you, by giving you his Spirit to convince
you of his Righteonsness, and to enable you to believe in him to the saving of
your Souls? Is the Love of God thus shed abroad in your Hearts, by the Holy
Ghost? Is Christ thus formed in you? Hail, you are highly favored, the Lord is
with you, and you are blessed. Flesh and Blood have not revealed the Son of God
unto you, but the Father which is in Heaven. Let your Souls then magnify the
Lord, and your Spirits rejoice in God your Savior. Give Glory to God, and say
each one of you after Christ, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth,
because thou have hid these Things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed
them unto Babes. Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight, Matthew,
11.25, 26. And then look to the Foundation of your Joy, that it be laid in deep
Repentance. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Look to
it that your Joy be an humble holy Joy, and such as shall be your Strength in
running the Way of God's Commandments. Of true Joy it is said, The Joy of the
Lord is your Strength. Neh 8.10. Let it be as Oil to the Wheels of your
Obedience, and let your Hearts be lift up in the Ways of God, while you happily
find that the Ways of Wisdom are Ways of pleasantness, and all her Paths Peace.
Say with the Apostle Paul, Our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our
Conscience, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom,
but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation in the World, 2 Cor.
1.12. O take heed, beware of Pride and carnal Security! Serve the Lord with
Fear, and rejoice with trembling. And when God has spoken Peace, turn not
again to Folly. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed to the
Day of Redemption; but walk in him, and you shall not fulfill the Lusts of the
Flesh. Do not boast as if your Work was done, and your Warfare accomplished;
but rather expect to meet with Temptations, and put on the whole Armor of God,
that you may be able to stand against the Wiles of the Devil. Think it not
strange, if God should hide his Face, after you have had the Light of his
Countenance lifted up upon you. This is no other Trial than what many of God's
Children have endured. Be encouraged then to hear and obey that Word, Isa
50.10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the Voice of his
Servant, that walks in Darkness, and has no Light? let him trust in the Name
of the Lord, and stay upon his God. Hope in God, and wait patiently for him,
till he shall cause light to arise again unto you. And let none of these Things
move you, neither count your Lives dear, that you may finish your Course with
Joy.

To conclude, Let us with humble Thankfulness behold that remarkable Work of
Grace which I trust God is carrying on in this Town, and other Places; and be
encouraged to seek the Lord more earnestly, that His Kingdom may come with
Power by the more plentiful Effusions of his Holy Spirit; and that the Lord
would rebuke Satan in all his Attempts to hinder or reproach this Work, and
bruise him under our Feet. Let us bless God for His Spirit and Grace manifested
in and with His Servants that have preached the Gospel among us, and for the
great Success which has attended their painful Labors. However, Let us not
have Men's Persons in Admiration because of Advantage; but remember that Word,
So then neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that waters: but
God that gives the increase, 1 Cor. 3.7. And accordingly, Let the Glory be
given to the God of all Grace. And my Brethren, I apprehend we should reflect
upon it as a Fault and Infirmity, that though you had such repeated Opportunities
of hearing those worthy Persons, that yet one and another Assembly has been
crowded in such a manner, as even to make Disturbance on the Lord's Day, while
others have been in a considerable Degree left destitute. Finally Brethren,
pray for us, that the Word of the Lord may have free Course and be glorified.
And let the stated Provision of God's House be duly valued by you. Let your
Zeal for the Ordinances continue, and be manifested in your constant and
diligent Attendance on the public Worship, in an especial Manner on the
Lord's Day. And when you wait upon God in the use of the Means of Grace, always
bear in Mind those Words, I am the Lord thy God which teaches thee to Profit,
Isa. 58.17. And let that Apostolical Exhortation be duly regarded by you, We
beseech you Brethren, to know them that labor among you, and are over you in
the Lord, and admonish you; And to esteem them very highly in Love for their
Works sake. And be at Peace among your selves. 1 These. 5.12, 13. The more there
is of mutual Esteem and Love between Ministers and their People, the fairer
Prospect is there of the Success of their Ministry. And the more concerned we
are to study the Things which make for Peace, the more likely shall we be to
edify one another. When Brethren dwell together in unity, God commands the
Blessing on Zion, See Psalm. 133. Let us then avoid all unchristian Heats and
Animosities, all rash judging and censuring one another: And in opposition to
this, let all unite their best Endeavors, in their several Places, to promote
the great Interest of pure and undefiled Religion; that Christ may increase,
and his Kingdom flourish among us. And may it please the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ to bless you and all his People by fulfilling that good Word,
Ezekiel. 39.29. Neither will I hide my Face any more from them: for I have poured
out my Spirit upon the House of Israel, says the Lord God. And blessed be his
glorious Name forever, and let the whole Earth be filled with his Glory; Amen,
and Amen!

SERMON III.
Preached at the Opening of a Friday EVENING-LECTURE in the Old-South
Meeting House, BOSTON, April 17. 1741.
JOHN xvi. 8. AND when he is come, he will reprove the World of Sin, and of
Righteousness, and of Judgment.


DOCTRINE, I.
It is the Work of the Holy Spirit to convince and reprove Men of Sin. THIS
Doctrine has been spoken to at the Tuesday Evening Lecture in Brattle-Street,
where I am persuaded God has blessed the Labors of his Servants for spiritual
Good to many. May it please our glorious Lord to grant his gracious Presence
with us also at this Lecture, and to command his Blessing on the Ministry of
the Word and Prayer, that Sinners may be convinced and converted, and the
children of God grow in Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ!
Lord we wait upon thee for the more abundant Effusions of thy Spirit, humbly
acknowledging that neither is be that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters, but God that gives the Increase.

Having considered the work of the Holy Spirit in convincing and reproving Men
of Sin, by which they are bro't to despair in themselves, and made sensible of
their need of a Savior to deliver them from Sin and Wrath: We now proceed to
show that by the same Spirit the humbled Sinner is convinced that JESUS is the
just One, who has bro't in an everlasting Righteousness for the Justification
of Sinners before God. Now the Medium or Argument which the Spirit is said to
use for this End, we have in the 10th v. Of righteousness, because I go to my
Father, and ye see me no more. An undeniable Evidence that he came forth from
God, and had finished the Work which the Father gave him to do upon Earth.
Behold our Savior appearing in Heaven for his People as a Lamb that had been
slain, and ever living to make Intercession for them; and let awakened Sinners
be encouraged to look off from themselves and all mere Creatures, and to look
up unto JESUS as able to save even to the uttermost. Hear his Voice from the
excellent Glory. Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of the earth.
Isaiah 45.22. May the God or Salvation look down in his tender Mercy upon us,
and cause his Word to come into our Hearts in demonstration of the Spirit, and
of Power!

DOCTRINE II.
It is the Work of the Holy Spirit, to convince Men of Righteousness. Under
this Doctrine and for the confirmation of it, we may consider the following
particulars.

1. What is here intended by Righteousness.

2. Show that it is the Spirit who convinces of Righteousness.

3. Consider the Means which the Spirit uses to convince Men of Righteousness.

4. Offer some Description of this Work of the Spirit.

1. What is here intended by Righteousness.

I answer, the Righteousness of Jesus Christ. In this I think Expositours are
generally agreed, and the 10th v. applies it to Christ.

More particularly,

1. The Spirit of God convinces Men that Jesus of Nazareth is Christ the
Righteous; the true Messiah, and no Impostor.

Thus the Words are understood by foam as especially intending Christ's own
personal Righteousness. Jesus is the Son of God, and one with the Father in the
essential Perfections and Rectitude of the divine Nature. I and my Father are
one. John 10.30. And to him those Words, Psalm, 45.6, 7. are applied, Heb. 1.8,
9. But unto the Son he says, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; a
scepter of righteousness is the scepter of thy kingdom: Thou have loved
righteousness, and hated iniquity. And in his humane Nature taken into personal
Union with his divine, he was perfectly free from all even the least Sin from
his Conception and Birth, and throughout his whole Life. Thus it was said to the
blessed Virgin. The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be
born of thee, shall be called the Son of God Luke 1.35. And as to his Life,
none could ever convince him of Evil; for he did none, nor was Guile found in
his Mouth. Yea, his holy Father who sees in secret, saw no Defect or Blemish
in him. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased Matthew. 3.17. Such an
high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners,
Heb, 7.26. Indeed He was accused as a Deceiver a Blasphemer, a Friend of
Publicans and Sinners. But even then, Wisdom was justified of her Children, and
there were some who beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the
Father. The Characters given of the Messiah unite in him, and the Apostle Peter
declares concerning Him, Ye Men of Israel, hear these Words; Jesus of
Nazareth, a Man approved of God among you, by Miracles, and Wonders and Signs,
which God did by him in the midst of you, Act 2.2 2. And though he was numbered
with the Transgressors, yet we must remember that he suffered the Just for the
Unjust. The Messiah was cut off, but not for himself. Accordingly we find in
the sacred History that Pilate his Judge pronounced him innocent; and Judas who
had the greatest Advantages to know his Master's Life and Conversation, in
great Horror confessed that he had betrayed the innocent Blood. And when Peter
charged the Jews with this horrible Crime, of denying the holy One and the
Just, and desiring a Murderer to be granted unto them, great Numbers were
convinced of their hanious Sin in crucifying the Lord of Glory, and brought to
trust in him as the true Messiah and only Savior, Acts 2, 3.

2. That there is in Christ a mediatorial Righteousness to be imputed to his
People for their Justification before God.

And this is supposed by worthy Expositors to be principally intended in the
Words. One of the glorious Titles given to our Lord Jesus is that, The Lord our
Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. It was prophesied of the Messiah, that he should
finish the Transgression, make an end of Sins, make Reconciliation for
Iniquity, and bring in everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. And it is no small
Part of the Glory of the Gospel, that in it the Righteousness of God is
revealed from Faith to Faith, Romans 1.16, 17. Here it is declared that the Son
of God in our Nature was made Sin for his People, the Iniquities of God's
People being laid upon him; that they might he made the Righteousness of God in
him, having his perfect Righteousness imputed to them for their Justification,
when they receive him by Faith. Indeed this great Doctrine was to the carnal
Jews a Stumbling Block. For they being ignorant of God's Righteousness and
going about to establish their own Righteousness, have not submitted themselves
unto the Righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. And it was to the Greeks Foolishness.
They imagined it was an absurd Thing to trust in Christ for Righteousness, who
was crucified as if he had been the vilest Malefactor. But now, when the Spirit
of God has convinced his People of their Sin, and made them sensible that they
must go out of themselves for Righteousness, he reveals the Son to them, in
whom God is reconciling the World to himself, not imputing their Iniquities;
and makes manifest the Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ
unto all, and upon all them that believe, Romans 3.21, 22. This divine Spirit
shows them the Fullness, the Sufficiency of this Righteousness for their
Justification; and enableth them, even when they have the deepest Sense of the
greatness of their Sins, to rely upon Christ, that they may be accepted as
Righteous with God. Thus it was with the Apostle Paul after Christ was revealed
unto him. Though he had some of the strongest Temptations to indulge Confidence
in the Flesh, yet he counted all loss for Christ. But what Things were gain to
me, those I counted loss for Christ. Yea doubtless, and I count all Things but
loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I
have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win
Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the
law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is
of God by faith. Phil. 3.7, -- 9.

3. This Righteousness may intend the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ
communicated to his People for their Sanctification; and to make them meet for
the Inheritance of the Saints in Light

Christ is of God made unto his People Righteousness, also Sanctification. 1
Cor. 1.30. As they have His perfect Righteousness imputed to them for their
Justification before God; so they derive inherent Righteousness from him when
they are renewed after the Image of God. Our Lord Jesus is the Head of all
gracious Influences, and with him is the Spring of our spiritual Life. It
pleased the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell. Col. 1.19. And of his
fullness we receive, and Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.16. Now when the Spirit of God
has convinced Men that they are by Nature empty of Grace, and utterly impotent
to spiritual Good, he shows them also that Christ has purchased abundance of
Grace and of the Gift of Righteousness to communicate to his People; and that
there is a Fountain opened in him to cleanse not only from the Guilt; but also
from the Defilements of Sin, till Believers shall be presented Faultless before
him. The holy Spirit convinces Men that Christ must be the Author and Finisher
of Faith, and other Graces in them; and that though of themselves they can do
nothing, yet that through Christ strengthening them, they may do all Things
necessary to Salvation.

II. We proceed to show, That it is the Work of the Spirit to convince Men of
this Righteousness.

Here I may say, that it is the holy Spirit who makes the effectual
Application of the Redemption purchased by Christ to the Souls of Men. We are
saved by the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, shed
on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, Tit. 3.5, 6. The Grace of our
Lord Jesus, and the Love of God are brought home to his chosen People, by the
Communion of the Holy Ghost. And in particular, the saving Evidence and
Conviction of the great Doctrines of the Gospel respecting Christ's Person as
God-Man, and respecting his Mediation, are from the same Spirit. Agreably, our
Savior declared to his Disciples, ver. 1.3. Cont. When He the Spirit of Truth
come, he will guide you into all Truth. The Word is emphatical, and signifies
not only that the Spirit would discover these Truths in the Notion of them; but
also that he would lead his Disciples into an experimental Acquaintance with
them, so that they should live and act under the governing Influence of them.
It follows, 14. v. He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall
show it unto you. And therefore the Apostle Paul prays to the God of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, to give to the christian Ephesians, the
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, in the Knowledge of him, the Eyes of their
Understanding being enlightened; that they might know what is the exceeding
greatness of his Power to them that believe, according to the working of his
mighty Power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead,
Ephesians. 1.16, -- 20. And the same Apostle speaking of Christ and him crucified,
declares that these Things are revealed by the Spirit: for the Spirit
searches all Things, yea, the deep Things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10. As the Spirit
moved on the Face of the Waters, when Darkness was on the Face of the Deep, and
created the Light; so in the new Creation, he moves on the Hearts of his
People, and gives them the Light of the Knowledge of Christ and his
Righteousness. The Spirit of God then is the Author of this Conviction. It is
he that renews his People in Knowledge, when he forms the new Man in them.
Agreably we read of the Demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.4. And when the
Apostle John had said that Christ came by Water and Blood, that he might save
us both from the Guilt and Defilement of Sin; he further observes in the same
Verse; It is the Spirit that bears Witness, because the Spirit is Truth, 1 John 5.6. It is the divine Spirit then who declares to Men that we have
Redemption through the Blood of Jesus, the Forgiveness of Sins.

III. We may consider the Means which the Spirit of God uses to convince Men
of Christ's Righteousness.

1. The Spirit of God makes use of his Word to convince Men of the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Our Savior declares that the Scriptures testify of him, John 5.39. And if we
diligently consult the Prophecies, Types and Promises of the Old Testament
relating to the Messiah, and then compare them with the Revelation and History
of the New Testament, we shall find a wonderful Harmony and Agreement between
them, and be obliged to acknowledge that in sending Jesus to save his People
from their Sins, God has performed the Mercy promised to the Fathers, and
remembered his holy Covenant. Now Prophesy came not in old Time by the Will of
Man: but holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet.
1.21. Accordingly it is said of them who prophesied of the Grace which should
come unto us; that they searched diligently what manner of Time the Spirit of
Christ, which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the
Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should follow, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. If we
read, Psalm, 22. Isa, 7.14.53. Dan. 9. and many other Prophecies and Promises of
the Old Testament, we shall see that the Spirit of God in and by his inspired
Word did testify of Christ, and particularly of the perfect Righteousness which
he was to bring in for the Justification of Sinners. By his Knowledge, by the
Knowledge of himself shall my righteous Servant justify many: for he shall bear
their Iniquities. Isa ^^ 11. Dan. 9.24. Our Savior while in the Exercise of
his Ministry upon Earth, applied to himself the famous Prophecy we have
recorded, Isa. 61.1, -- 3. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me to preach the Gospel to the Poor, he has sent me to heal the
broken hearted, to preach Deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of sight
to the Blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable
Year of the Lord, Luke 4 18, 19. ver 21, 2. This Day is this Scripture
fulfilled in your Ears. And ail bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious
Words which proceeded out of his Mouth. And after his Resurrection, when he had
rebuked two of his Disciples for being so slow of Heart to believe all that the
Prophets had spoken, it is said, Beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he
expounded to them in all the Scriptures, the Things concerning himself, Luke
24.27. And it is plain our Lord accompanied his Word with the Light and Heat of
his divine Spirit; for they said one to another, Did not our Heart burn within
us, while he talked with us by the Way, and while he opened to us the
Scriptures? Ver. 32. And after Christ's Ascension into Heaven, when the Spirit
of God was poured out from on High, the Apostles and other Ministers of Christ
did evidently prove from the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ, to the
saving Conviction of great Numbers, and the Confusion of his implacable
Enemies. Thus it was when the preaching of the Word was attended with the Power
of the Holy Ghost. Many believed, and turned to the Lord. The full Evidence of
Scripture, when thus impressed on the Mind, cannot be gainsayed. We read of
Apollos who was mighty in the Scriptures, and fervent in the Spirit, that he
mightily convinced the Jews, and that publicly, showing by the Scriptures,
that Jesus was Christ. Acts 18 28. The Apostle Paul tells us that there was a
Vail over the Hearts of the Jews in reading of the Old Testament; which is done
away in Christ, 2 Cor. 3.14. He then adds, ver. 18. We all with open Face,
beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image
from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. So clear and powerful
is the Reflection of the Glory of Christ from the Word of God, when the Spirit
removes the Vail of spiritual Blindness. Now the Light of the glorious Gospel
of Christ shines into the Heart, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the
Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ.

2. The Spirit of God convinces Men of the Righteousness of Christ, by his
Resurrection from the dead.

We read of Christ, that he was delivered for our Offenses, and was raised
again for our Justification, Romans 4.25. "By the Merit of his Death, he paid our
Debt, in his Resurrection he took out our Acquittance" When he suffered on the
Cross, the Sins of his People were laid upon him as their Surety, and had he
not given full Satisfaction to divine Justice for them, he must have been held
in the Prison of the Grave, he could never have risen from the dead. But Jesus
is risen according to his Word and Promise, Destroy this Temple, and in three
Days I will raise it up. Joh. 2.19. We have incontestible Proof of this
important Fact in the holy Scriptures, particularly from many faithful
Witnesses who sealed their Testimony with their Blood. Now this great Work of
Christ's Resurrection is ascribed to the Father, to the Son himself; and he is
also said to be quickened by the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.18. And he is said to be
declared to be the Son of God with Power, according to the Spirit of Holiness,
by the Resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.4. And indeed this is a strong Proof
that our Savior was the Person he professed himself to be, the Son of God by
eternal Generation. Thus an Expositour observes on the Place, "The Sign of the
Prophet Jonas, (...) Christ's Resurrection, was intended for the last
Conviction, Matthew. 12.39, 40. Those that would not be convinced by that, would
be convinced by nothing". Cont. Mr. Henry.
Accordingly when the Apostle Peter would convince the Jews that Jesus whom
they crucified, was the Christ, he declares his Resurrection from the dead. He
seeing this before, spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not
left in hell, neither his flesh did see corruption. This Jesus has God raised
up, whereof we all are witnesses, Acts 2.31, 32. And the Spirit of God being
then given to set home the Word on their Hearts, many were convinced, and bro't
to repent and believe in Christ unto Salvation, 37 to 41. Ver. Yea, of such
great Moment is the Doctrine of the Resurrection of Christ, that the Evidence
of the Truth of the Christian Religion very much depends upon it. If Christ be
not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your faith is also vain. 1 Cor.
15.14. And he repeateth it, Ver. 17. If Christ be not raised, then is your
faith vain; ye are yet in your sins. And therefore the Apostle sets himself to
prove this Doctrine in this Chapter. And in the 8th to the Romans he lays the
greatest Stress upon it. Who is he that condemns? It is, Christ that died,
yea rather, that is risen again? ver. 34. Here we see then that the Spirit of
God in his inspired Word, makes great use of Christ's Resurrection as an
Evidence of his being the true Messiah, and the only Name given under Heaven
among Men, whereby we must be saved; and when he pleases to set home this
Argument on the Hearts of Men, they conclude that in Christ, and him only
there is a perfect Righteousness for their Justification before God.

3. The Spirit convinces Men of the Righteousness of Christ, by his Ascension
into Heaven, and Session at the Right Hand of God.

-- Of Righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more.

When our Lord had through the Holy Ghost given Commandments unto the Apostles,
and showed himself alive unto them after his ^assion, by many infallible
Proofs, being seen of them Forty Days; He was taken up, and a Cloud received
him out of their sight, Acts 1.9. And the Word of God declares that he is set
down at the Right Hand of the Majesty on high, and must reign till all Enemies
are put under his Feet. Thus we see Jesus for the suffering of Death crowned
with Glory and Honor, and exalted to be a Prince and a Savior. Now he could
never have been received to the glorious Rest of Heaven, had He not finished
his Work on Earth Accordingly we re^^, By his own Blood he entered in once into
the holy Place, having obtained eternal Redemption for us, Heb. 9.12. Had not
his precious Blood been of Value to make Atonement for Sin, and purchase the
Justification of Life for his People, the Man Christ Jesus could never have
gone to Heaven, powerfully to interceed for his People, and prepare a Place for
them. He asks for nothing in the behalf of his People but what he has
purchased, and bought by a valuable Price. Agreably, we have those two Parts of
his Priestly-Office, his Obedience to Death, and the prevailing Power of his
Intercession put together, as indeed they are dependent on each other. If any
man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous: And
he is the Propitiation for our Sins: and not for ours only, but also for the
Sins of the whole World, 1 John 2.1, 2. And thus while the Father hears the
Son, and distributeth Pardon and Grace to his People; Righteousness and Peace
kiss each other. This is then an undeniable Evidence that Christ is approved
and accepted of God in the great Work of our Redemption. Our Lord adds, And
ye see me no more; upon which a learned Divine observes, If He had ascended
without fulfilling all Righteousness for the Church, he should have been sent
down, and seen again; but now, says he, you see me no more, for by once dying,
and by once appearing in the End of the World, I have put away Sin by the
Sacrifice of myself. Dr. Edward Reynolds 110 Psalm.
And this is farther evident, in that the great Promise of the Holy Ghost was
received by him, and the Spirit came down after his Departure, as sent from the
Father in his Name, Job 14.26. Yea as sent by our ascended Savior. If I
depart, I will send him unto you, 7th Ver. Cont. And this brings me to the last
Particular under this Head,

4. The Spirit of God convinces Men of the Righteousness of Christ by his
Descent on the Apostles; by the miraculous Gifts he bestowed on them, and the
wonderful Works he wrought by them.

God gives not the Spirit by measure to his Son, Job. 3.34. After his Baptism
the Heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like
a Dove, and lighting upon him. By the Spirit of God he cast out Devils, Matthew.
12.28. and did other wonderful Works. However there was an extraordinary
Dispensation of the Holy Ghost which was not given till Jesus was glorified:
And it is this which seems to be here especially intended as that which should
give the highest Evidence and strongest Conviction concerning our Lord Jesus
Christ, and his Righteousness. And here it may be observed that though the Holy
Spirit, being God, is in his Nature invisible; yet there were given sensible
Tokens of his Presence in this wonderful Descent. And suddenly there (...) a
sound from Heaven, as of a rushing mighty Wind, and it filled all the House
where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven Tongues, like as
of Fire, and it sat upon each of them: And they were all filled with the holy
Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance. Acts 2.2. -- 4. And while many of different Languages were amazed to
hear the Apostles speak the wonderful Works of God in their own Tongues, and
others mocked. The Apostle Peter declared that this was the Work of the Holy
Ghost given by our ascended Savior. Therefore being by the right Hand of God
exalted, and having received of the Father the Promise of the Holy Ghost, he
has shed forth this, which ye now see and hear. 33. Ver. Thus they received
Power from on high to publish the Gospel to to Nations whose Languages they
knew not, till they were thus miraculously taught of God by his Spirit. And no
doubt, with extraordinary Gifts, there was also given to the Apostles by the
same Spirit, a great Increase of spiritual Knowledge and Faith, Zeal and
Courage, Humility and Patience, Love to God and Man, and other Graces, to carry
them well through their Services and Sufferings for the Name of Jesus. Our
Savior promised his Disciples, that he would give them a Mouth and Wisdom
which all their Adversaries should not be able to gainsay, orresist, Luke
21.15. And required them not to be anxiously concerned how or what they should
speak when brought before Governors and Kings for his sake; for says our Lord,
It is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which is in you, Matthew.
10.20. Accordingly when Peter and John had wrought a wonderful Miracle in
restoring a Man lame from his Mother's Womb, and Peter filled with the Holy
Ghost, had declared that it was by the Name of Jesus, that the Man stood before
them whole, and then that there was no other Name under Heaven given among Men,
whereby we must be saved: It is observed, Acts 4.13. Now when they saw the
boldness of Peter and John, and perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant
Men, they marvelled, and they took knowledge of them, that they had been with
Jesus. Yea, these Enemies of Christ were convicted by their own Consciences
that a notable Miracle had been done, ver. 16. And no less wonderful was the
Success of their Ministry, while the A postles went about thus miraculously
furnished, and preached a crucified Savior. Behold a Number of poor Fishermen
subduing the People of every Tongue and Language where they came; I say,
subduing them to the Obedience of Faith! What Prejudices of Education were
overcome! What violent Lusts and Passions conquered! How did great Numbers
forsake all, yea Life it self, that they might win Christ, and enjoy the
Blessedness of the invisible World where He is! Such was the wonderful Success
of the Gospel when preached with the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven.
Accordingly, the Apostle Paul observes, That God has chosen the foolish
Things of this World, to confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak Things
of the World to confound the mighty; And base Things of the World, and Things
which are despised, has God chosen, yea, and Things which are not, to bring to
naught Things which are. 1 Cor. 1.27, 28 Here those Words may be well applied,
Not by Mighty, nor by Power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of hosts, Zoch.
4.6 Now surely the Spirit of Truth and Holiness would never have wrought such
Works of Grace by the preaching of the Name of Jesus, had not He been Christ
the Righteous. 1 Timothy 3.16. Without controversy, great is the mystery of
godliness: God was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit.

IV. I would offer some brief Description of this Work of the Spirit, in
convincing Men of Righteousness.

Now in this Work the Spirit of God does not only give external Evidence in the
Revelation of God's Word; but also applies himself inwardly to the Heart, and
opens the Understanding to discern these spiritual Things concerning Christ and
his Righteteousness, after a spiritual manner. So that such as are thus
favored, see the Son, and believe on him as the true Messiah and only Savior,
with that Faith which is the Evidence of Things not seen, Heb. 11.1. The Spirit
of God enlightens the Minds of his People with the saving Knowledge of Christ
and his Righteousness. Agreeably the Apostle John declares, 1 John 2.30. Ye
have an Unction from the holy One, and ye know all Things, i.e. All Things
concerning Christ and the christiain Religion necessary to Salvation. The
Spirit of God may be compared to Oil, as this was used for Light, and in
Medicine. The Spirit heals the visive Faculty of the Soul, and removes
spiritual Blindness. He renews his People in Knowledge, Col. 3.10. Therefore
when our Lord had declared to the Laodiceans that they were blind, he counsels
them to anoint their Eyes with Eye Salve, that they might see, Rev. 3.18. And
when this Work is wrought by the Illumination of the Spirit, the
Gospel-Revelation concerning Christ and his Righteousness, appears in a new
Light. The Sun of Righteousness arises upon the convinced Sinner, with healing
in his Wings "or in his Beams". The Doctrine of God our Savior appears in
it is Reality, Importance and Excellency.

And accordingly,

1. The Work of the Spirit in this Conviction, is a saving Work.

Indeed there may be some Persuasion of these Things from Education, there may
be a notional Knowledge and historical Faith; yea we may have the common
Illumination of the Spirit, and receive the Revelations of the Gospel with a
transient Joy; and yet not see the glorious Beauty and divine Glory of our Lord
Jesus Christ, so as to count all Things but loss for the Excellency of the
Knowledge of him. But when the Spirit convinces Men of Righteousness in the
Sense in which I now consider the Words, there is a Renovation of the Soul in
all it is Powers by vital Principles and Habits of Grace infused; so that Men
are called out of Darkness, into God's mavelous Light. However, I do not
suppose by this, that in passive Conversion the Spirit of God first gives the
Light of this saving Conviction of Christ, and then this Light works an
habitual Change in the Will and Affections. No, I humbly conceive that in
passive Conversion there is the habitual Change of all the Faculties of the
Soul wrought at once, by the divine Operation of the Holy Spirit: And then the
Understanding, now savingly enlightened, beholds Jesus Christ, in order of
Nature before the Will and Affections are drawn to close with him and cleave
unto him; yea so as to incline them to act agreeable to the Discovery made of
this glorious Object. This is then a saving Work of the Spirit of God. When
Peter therefore had made that Confession of his Faith, Thou art Christ the Son
of the living God. Our Lord pronounced him Happy, Blessed art thou Simon
Bar-jona: for Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father
which is in Heaven, Matthew. 16.16, 17. Thus;to know Christ is the beginning of
eternal Life, Joh. 17.3.

2. In this Work the Spirit of God gives the convinced Sinner satisfying
Evidence of Christ's Ability and readiness to justify and save all that come to
God by him.

He convinces them that how many and great soever their Sins have been, yet in
Christ they may have a Righteousness every way sufficient for their
Justification before God, and to give them a sure Title to eternal Life,
according to the new and everlasting Covenant. While Men entertain slighty
Tho'ts of the Evil of Sin, and of the Punishment due to them for it; they may
also entertain law unworthy Apprehensions of Christ, and yet nourish a carnal
Confidence that He is both able and ready to save them: But when Men are
convinced of the heinous Evil of Sin as it is an Offense against the infinitely
glorious God, and so deserves eternal Punishment; now they may be ready to
say, Can this Man save us? Who is able to deliver us? Surely none but the
Almighry God can redeem us. Unless the Arm of the Lord be revealed, all our
Hope of Deliverance is perished. But now, in this Article of Extremity, the
Spirit of God reveals Christ as Jehovah our Righteousness, as the God of
Salvation, to whom belong the Issues from Death; and then the convinced Sinner
is able to say, In the Lord have I Righteousness, and Strength. Now He sees
that He who is God has purchased the Church with his own Blood, and given his
Life a Ransom for many. And this makes it manifest that God may be just and
yet justify the Sinner that believes in Jesus; yea, that through Faith in his
Blood God declares his Righteousness for the Remission of Sins, Romans 3 25. And
we have the Virtue of the Blood of Christ further declared by a Comparison from
the legal Sacrifices. For if the Blood of Bulls, and of Goats, and the Ashes of
an Heifer sprinkling the Unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the Flesh;
How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit,
offered himself without Spot to God, purge your Conscience from dead Works to
serve the living God, Heb. 9.13, 14. If we understand the eternal Spirit here,
of the Godhead of our Lord, this gave the highest Virtue and Value to his
Offering. And then the Holy Ghost sanctified the Man Christ Jesus in an
extraordinary manner to this great Work, and strengthened him to the most
perfect Exercise of Grace in the discharge of it. Accordingly such as are
convinced of Righteousness, behold a Fountain of Merit and Grace opened in
Christ to wash away their Sins: They see that this divine Person is worthy to
receive the Gift of the Ho^^ Ghost, in virtue of his Obedience unto Death, that
all the glorious Ends of His Mediation may be accomplished. Yea, the Spirit of
God shows these Things in such an agreeable as well as convincing Light, that
the enlightened Mind is satisfied in this Way of obtaining the Justification of
Life. This Light is sweet to the Soul, and the Believer determines with the
Apostle to know nothing save Jesus Christ, and him crucified See 1 Cor. 2.2.
And then the Spirit of God convinces Men of Christ's readiness to save all
that go to God by him. And now, they receive the Calls of the Gospel, not as
the Word of Men, but of God, though Men may be the Instruments. Now they know
Christ's Voice when He says, Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy
laden and I will give you rest. All that the Father gives me, shall come to
me; and him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6.37. They
are convinced that they have a divine Warrant to bear them out in this
important Act of trusting in Christ for Righteousness, and a divine Promise of
eternal Life, upon their obeying the Gospel Call.

Which leads me to say,

3. Thus the Spirit of God makes Men freely willing to receive and suhmit to
Christ upon the Call and Offer of the Gospel.

Now the Call is effectual. God's People are willing in the Day of His Power.
They have the great Truths of the Gospel concerning Christ and his
Righteousness demonstrated, and their Objections drawn from their own great
Sinfulness, answered. And thus our Savior takes Possession of the Hearts of
Men, not by Violence; but by a sweet, and yet powerful divine Influence whereby
they are persuaded to embrace Him as the Lord their Righteousness. Being thus
drawn by the Spirit, they freely go out to Christ renouncing their own
Righteousness as filthy Rags, and putting on this best Robe of Christ's
Righteousness as every Way sufficient to cover their Nakedness. It is written
in the Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every Man therefore that
has heard and learned of the Father comes unto me, Joh. 6.45. The enlightened
Mind beholds our Lord Jesus as a most suitable and sufficient Savior, the
renewed Will makes choice of him, and the uniting Affections cleave to him.

APPLICATION.
USE 1. From what has been said We may learn the Divinity of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

The Old and New Testament agree in bearing Witness to Jesus Christ as the Son
of God, the great God our Savior. And when our Lord ascended on high, he
received of the Father the Gift of the Holy Ghost, and sent him to convince Men
of their great Sin in rejecting him by Unbelief, and then to show them the
perfect Righteousness which He had wro't out for the Justification of Sinners
before God, which must be the Righteousness of One who is God-Man; for had he
been a mere Creature though the most excellent, his Obedience had been due to God
by the Law of Creation, and it would have been impossible for him to purchase
eternal Salvation for us. But the Word of God declares, that being in the Form
of God, he thought it not robbery to be equal with God: But made himself of no
Reputation, and took upon him the Form of a Servant, and was made in the
likeness of Men: And being found in Fashion as a Man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross, Phil. 2.6, -- 8. And
this being the Case, his Obedience is strictly and properly meretorious; yea
there is infinite Merit in it to purchase eternal Redemption for us. And this
is one of the deep Things of God revealed in the Gospel, and by the Holy
Spirit. Our Lord was put to Death in the Flesh, but quickened by the Spirit, and
declared to be the Son of God, the Lord our Righteousness, by wonderful
Operations of this divine Spirit sent in his Name after his Ascension into
Heaven. Let us then obey that Command of God, He is thy Lord, and worship thou
him, Psalm. 45.11 And let us join the heavenly Host, saying, Worthy is the Lamb
that was slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and
Honor, and Glory and Blessing, Rev. 5.12.

USE 2. Learn the heinous Sin and most dangerous Evil of rejecting Jesus
Christ, and neglecting His great Salvation under the Gospel Revelation.

We have the strongest Evidence that Jesus is the Christ the only Savior, in
the Word of God. The Doctrines therein delivered concerning Christ, the History
of wonderful Miracles and Works of Grace wrought by the Spirit in the Name of
Jesus, put this beyond all reasonable Doubt. How great then is the Evil of
rejecting Christ! Surely such as put the Gospel from them, judge themselves
unworthy of everlasting Life. How shall we escape if we neglect so great
Salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed
unto us by them that heard him; God also bearing them witness, both with Signs
and Wonders, and with diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the holy Ghost, according
to his own Will, Heb. 2.3, 4. And still the Sin and Danger of this is greater,
when we have had the Spirit of God striving with us. When this is done against
the Light and Conviction of our Consciences, it is highly provoking unto God;
and when there is added over and above a malicious Opposition to the Holy Ghost
in his divine Operations; this seems to contain in it the Malignity of that Sin
which is unto Death, and shall not be forgiven. When our Lord therefore had
cast out a Devil by the Spirit of God, and the Pharisees blasphemed, saying,
This Fellow does not cast out Devils, but by Beelzebuh the Prince of the
Devils; he declares to them, that the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall
not be forgiven unto Men, Matthew. 12.31. And we have that awful Word for our
Warning; It is impossible for them who were once enlightened, and have tasted of
the heavenly Gift, and were made Partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted
the good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come; If they shall fall
away, to renew them again unto Repentance: seeing they crucify to themselves
the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame. Heb. 6.4, -- 6. This
falling away seems to refer to a total and wilful Apostasy joined with a
malicious Opposition to the Christian Religion after we have been convinced
that it is of God, and have made a Profession of it. And therefore, Peter's
Fall in denying his Lord, and other heinous Transgressions of God's Children,
do not come under this Head. How dreadful then must be the Condition of such
Apostates! How aggravated their Sin and Punishment! Of how much sorer
Punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under Foot
the Son of God, and has counted the Blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was
sanctified, an unholy Thing, and has done despite to the Spirit of Grace, Heb.
10.29. O let us then take heed and beware of all Approaches toward this great
Sin! Let us not indulge an Evil Heart of Unbelief, nor resist the Spirit of God
striving with us. But let not any that are seeking the Lord with trembling,
imagine that this is their Case, and so discourage themselves, as if there was
no Hope for them: But rather,

USE 3. Let such as are sensible of their Sin and Guilt, cry to God for his
Spirit to give them the saving Knowledge of Christ, and his Righteousness; and
to enable them to receive. Him as their only Savior.

Has the Spirit of God convinced you of your lost and perishing Condition?
Pray to the Father then to open your Eyes to behold his Son, who is come to
seek and save that which was lost: He who is mighty to save inviteth you to
come unto him, and promises he will in no wise cast out them that come unto
him. Do not say then, that your Hope is lost, and that you are utterly cut off;
but rather resolve that you will look and wait for God's Salvation. Do not
Attempt to patch up a Righteousness of your own; but cast away your filthy
Rags, and go out unto Christ for white Raiment, that you may be clothed, and
that the Shame of your Nakedness may not appear. Seek of God that fine Linen,
clean and white, which is the Righteousness of Saints, whereby they stand and
are accepted as Righteous before God, even the Righteousness of Christ imputed,
and received by Faith. Put on Christ, and the holy God, looking on you as
united to Him by a true and living Faith, will behold no Iniquiquity in you so
as to enter into Judgment, and condemn you for it. There is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus; who walk not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit. Romans 8.1. Go to Christ then and say, Lord, I am guilty, I cannot conceal
it. My own Heart condemns me, and thou art greater than my Heart, and know
all Things. But now I humbly and thankfully accept thine offer to be my Surety
and Advocate with the Father. I put my Cause into thine Hand, O plead it, and
answer for me! Let the Handwriting which is against me be found canceled in
virtue of thy precious Blood, and let me be found justified through the
Redemption which is Christ Jesus. Lord I believe that there is Virtue enough in
thy precious Blood to wash away all my Sins, though they have been as Scarlet,
and Red like Crimson: Help thou mine Unbelief! Thus do by God's Grace, and you
may have Confidence toward God now, and shall not be ashamed before him at his
Coming. No, If you appear clothed with the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, you
shall be openly acquitted in the Day of Judgment. But then remember that to
whom Christ is made of God Righteousness, he is also made Sanctification; and
look to it that your Faith be that living Faith which purifieth the Heart, and
works by Love. For that Faith which has not Works is dead, being alone,
James 2.17. And will leave you in a State of Death, and Damnation. That Faith
by which God's Children depend entirely upon the meritorious Righteousness of
Christ for Justification before God, is also a vital Principle of new
Obedience. Look unto Jesuus then, not only as to the Lord your Righteousness;
but also as to your Head of Influence, of whose Fullness his People receive and
Grace for Grace. When you go forth to meet the Bridegroom, look to it that you
have the Oil of saving Grace in your Hearts. Thus stand with your Lights
burning, like unto Men that wait for their Lord; so shall you be found of your
Judge in Peace, without Spot, and Blameless.

SERMON IV.
Preached at the Old-South-Meeting-House in BOSTON, Lord's Day, April 26. 1741.
JOHN xvi. 8. AND when He is come, he will reprove the world of Sin, and of
Righteousness, and of Judgment.


DOCTRINE I.
It is the Work of the Holy Spirit, to convince and reprove Men of Sin.
DOCTRINE II.
It is the Work of the Holy Spirit, to convince Men of Righteousness. I Have
considered these two Doctrines, and shall now speak briefly to the 3d and last.

DOCTRINE III.
IT is the Work of the Holy Spirit to convince Men of Judgment. Under this
Doctrine we may consider,

1. What are we to understand by Judgment.

2. The Means which the Spirit uses to convince Men of this Judgment.

3. I shall give some brief Description of this Work of the Spirit in
convincing Men of Judgment.

I. What are we to understand by Judgment?

Ans. 1. We may understand it of that unjust Judgment which Men passed on Jesus
Christ, as if he suffered for his own Crimes, and his Disciples ought to suffer
for confessing his Name before Men.

We read of Jesus, that in his Humiliation, his Judgment was taken away, Acts
8.33. Though Pilate declared, having examined him before his Accusers, that he
found no fault in him touching those Things whereof they accused him; yet the
Voices of the Multitude, and of the High Priests prevailed; so that Pilate gave
Sentence it should be as they requested, Luke 23.34. Many were ignorant of the
Gospel Revelation concerning Jesus Christ. Which none of the Princes of this
World knew: For had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
Glory, 1 Cor. 2.8. And the christian Religion is mentioned as a Sect or Heresy
every where spoken against, Acts 28.22. Thus was the holy Jesus set for a Sign
which should be spoken against, Luke 2.34. But when the Spirit of God came to
discharge his Office as an Advocate in behalf of our ascended Savior, he
convinced many of the great Wrong they had done in this Matter, and rebuked
them sharply; so that they were brought to judge and condemn themselves. Thus
after our Lord had appeared to Saul, saying by a Voice from Heaven, I am Jesus
whom thou persecutest, and the Spirit of God had wrought a thorough Change in
him; he freely acknowledged that he had been a blasphemer, and a persecutor,
and injurious, 1 Timothy 1.13.

2. By Judgment we may understand the Power given to our Lord Jesus Christ to
govern the World, and to execute Judgment upon Satan, that grand Usurper, and
all that adhere to him, in Opposition to the Kingdom of God. Agreeably it is
said, II ver. Of Judgment, because the Prince of this World is judged. After
our Lord's Resurrection he said to his Disciples, All Power is given into me in
Heaven and in Earth, Matthew. 28.18. When he ascended on High, he led Captivity
Captive, and broke the Power of the Enemies of our Salvation; so that they
shall not be able to destroy so much as one of those little Ones who put their
Trust in him. Here then it may be proper to observe, that the apostate Spirits
who left their first Habitation are represented in Scripture as united under
one Head against Christ and his Kingdom. The Devil that old Serpent, beguiled
Eve, and prevailed upon her to eat of the forbidden Fruit, and then by her
enticed her Husband. We read, She took of the Fruit thereof, and did eat, and
gave also unto her Husband, with her, and he did eat, Genesis 3 6. And thus
were our first Parents drawn into a Rebellion against the Lord their Maker and
great Benefactor, which must have been destructive to them and their sinful
Progeny, had not God sent his Son to destroy the Works of the Devil. The first
Promise of this was given to Adam and Eve before they were cast out of the
earthly Paradise, And I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between
thy Seed and her Seed: it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his
Heel, Genesis 3.15. Here Is a Sentence of Condemnation denounced against the Devil,
and in the same Words a precious Promise of Deliverance made to God's People.
This Seed is the Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, who was to be
born of a Woman being a Virgin, by the Operation of the Holy Ghost, to
dispossess the Devil, through the Merit of his Death, and the Power of his
Spirit, of all his Force. Dutch Annotations.
Accordingly, When the Falness of Time was come, God sent forth his Son made of
a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, Gal. 4.4,
5. And as our Lord was sent to save the lost Sons and Daughters of Adam, so to
confound the accursed Plots and Devices of Satan, whereby he fought to ensnare
and ruin them forever. For as much then as the Children are Partakers of Flesh
and Blood, be also himself likewise took part of the same: that through Death he
might destroy him that had the Power of Death, that is, the Devil, Heb 2.14.
Satan, by the divine Permission, has the Power of Death as an Executioner. He
is a Murderer, and a Destroyer. But now, the Son of God, having taken on him
not the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham, he died on the Cross that he
might condemn Sin in the Flesh, which is the Sting of Death, bear the Curse of
that Law which is the Strength of Sin; and so purchase Reconciliation with God
for his People, and the Gift of the Holy Ghost, to turn Sinners from the Power
of Satan unto God. And thus Satan's Kingdom, which is founded on Sin, falls to
the Ground, and his destroying Power over Man, is taken away. And therefore
when the Time of our Lord's Death drew nigh, he said, Now is the Judgment of
this World: Now shall the Prince of this Word he cast out, John 12.31. That is,
My Death will be the Devil's Overthrow; will bring down Sin, and deliver the
World from the Tyranny and Dominion of Satan. Mr. Burkitt.
Our mighty Redeemer spoiled Principalities and Powers, and triumphed over them
on the Cross, Col. 2.15. He has purchased a glorious Victory over Satan, and
all our spiritual Enemies, Sin, this present evil World as under the Power the
Devil, and Death. Agreably, our Lord said to his Disciples, In the World ye
shall have Tribulation: but be of good cheer, I have overcome the World, John
16.33. We read, I will ransom them from the Power of the Grave: I will redeem
them from Death: O Death, I will be thy Plagues; O Grave, I will be thy
Destruction, Hos. 13.14. And then the Word of God declares, That our Lord must
reign 'till all Enemies are put under his Feet, Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said unto
my Lord, Sit thou at my right Hand, until I make thine Enemies thy Footstool.
And now the Father has committed all Judgment to the Son. He is the Judge,
Lawgiver, and King of his People; and as the Lord strong and mighty will he go
on conquering and to conquer his and his People's Enemies, 'till they shall be
all put under him; and his People also shall have Dominion over them, in the
great Day of Judgment.

Which leads me to say,

3. We may understand it of the last and general Judgment, when our Lord Jesus
Christ shall appear in the Glory of his Father, to judge the World in
Righteousness.

We read, He bath appointed a Day, in the which he will judge the World in
Righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained; whereof he has given
Assurance unto all Men, in that he has raised him from the Dead, Acts 17.31.
While our Lord was upon Earth, he spoke of this Judgment, When the Son of Man
shall come in his Glory, and all the holy Angels with him, then shall be sit
upon the Throne of his Glory. And before him shall be gathered all Nations; --
Mat. 25.31, 32. And now he is risen and ascended, the Heaven must contain him
until the Time of Restitution of all Things, when there shall be an End put to
the Disorder and Confusion bro't into the World by Sin, and all shall be
obliged to say, Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous; Verily he is a God
that judges in the Earth. And we have an Earnest of this in our Lord's Power
to cast out Satan, and in the wonderful Reformation wrought, when after his
Ascension, He sent the Rod of his Strength out of Zion, his Word accompanied
with his Spirit, and so ruled in the midst of his Enemies See Psalm. 110. But we
do not as yet see all Things put under him, as they shall be in the great Day.
Satan is still obeyed as the God of this World, and works in the Hearts of the
Children of Disobedience. Antichrist's Reign has not a Period put unto it. And
to this Day, the dark Places of the Earth, are full of the Habitations of
cruelty. So that even in the last Days, there are Scoffers who say in Derision,
Where is the Promise of his Coming? But God by his Word and Spirit says to us,
Behold, the Lord comes! Jude 14, 1 5. v. And Enoch also, the seventh from
Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands of
his Saints, To execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly
among them, of all their ungodly Deeds which they have ungodly committed, and
of all their hard Speeches, which ungodly Sinners have spoken against him. And
in that great and terrible Day of the Lord, the Devil must be cast into the
Lake of Fire and Brimstone, to be tormented forever and ever. This the Devils
believe, and tremble. And then shall wicked Men have that dreadful Sentence
pronounced and executed upon them, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25.41. Sinners have
sometimes such a Conviction of this Judgment as makes them also tremble. As
Paul reasoned of Judgment to come, Felix trembled, Acts 24.25. And then shall
the Saints have their Judgment brought forth as the Light, and their
Righteousness as the Noonday, when the King shall say unto them on his right
Hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from
the Foundation of the World, Matthew. 25.34. God's People shall have a complete
Victory over Satan, this present evil World, and the last Enemy Death. And all
the Fruits of Sin and the Curse respecting them, shall be fully taken away,
when Christ shall appear a second Time without Sin unto Salvation. And the
Spirit of God now gives them such a Conviction of this Judgment, that they
look for that blessed Hope, and the glorious Appearing of the great God, and
our Savior Jesus Christ.

II. I would consider some of the Means which the Holy Spirit uses to convince
Men of Judgment.

I. The Spirit of God convinces Men of Judgment by the miraculous Power given
to the Apostles to cast out Devils in the Name of Jesus.

While our Lord was on Earth, he exercised this Power. He went about doing
good, and healing all that were oppressed of the Devil, Acts 10.38. He cast
down Satan, and healed many that were under a bodily Possession. Thus our Lord
cast many Devils out of a miserable Man in the Country of the Gaderenes, Luke
8.30. Jesus asked him, saying, What is thy Name? And he said Legion: because
many Devils were entered into him. But at Christ's Command they were
dispossessed, 33 v. Then went the Devils out of the Man. And when the Seventy
returned, they said, Lord even the Devils are subject to us through thy Name.
Upon which our Lord says, I beheld Satan as Lightning fall from Heaven. Luke
10.18. And after our Savior Christ was exalted, this Power was wonderfully
manifested by the Hands of the Apostles in the Name of Jesus. They bro't them
which were vexed with unclean Spirits, and they were healed every one, Acts
5.16. Paul said to the evil Spirit that had possessed a Person as a Spirit of
Divination; I command thee in the Name of Jesus to come out of her. And he came
out the same Hour, Act. 16.18. Now the great Agent in this miraculous Work was
the Spirit of God, Matthew. 12.28. And by it he convinced Men of the Dominion of
our Lord Jesus over the Powers of Darkness.

2. The Spirit of God convinces Men of Judgment by the Light of the glorious
Gospel, and the Works of Grace wrought by it.

The Evil Spirits are called the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, Ephesians,
6.12. Satan's Kingdom is founded on the Darkness of Sin, and supporred by
Ignorance and Error. Accordingly, The Holy Spirit uses the Light of his Word
to subdue him. Thus our Lord said to Paul, I have appeared unto thee for this
Purpose, to make thee a Minister and a Witness both of these Things which thou
have seen, and of those Things in the which I will appear unto thee; delivering
thee from the People, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send thee, To open
their Eyes, and to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of
Satan unto God, Acts 26.16, -- 18. Now it is the Spirit of God who furnishes
and sends forth these Ministers of Christ to show Men the miserable Bondage
they are under to Satan, and to invite them to come over to Christ, whom God
has set for an Ensign of the People, Isa. 11.10. Our Lord while on Earth was
anointed by the Spirit to preach Deliverance to the Captives. And after his
Ascension he sent forth his Apostles, and others to publish the glad Tidings of
the Gospel. And by his Word accompanied with his Spirit, He broke in Pieces the
Power of the Enemy. The Weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God to the pulling down of strong Holds: Casting down Imaginations, and every
(...) Thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, and bringing
into captivity every Thought to the obedience of Christ. The Instruments indeed
were the weak Things of the World, that the Glory of the Victory might be given
to Christ. We have this Treasure in earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the
Power may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.7. Some suppose that here is an
(...) to Gideon's little Army that marched against the mighty Host of Midian,
with Trumpets, Lamps and Pitchers: They blew the Trumpets, brake the Pitchera,
and held up the Lamps, crying, The Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon. And the
God of Armies routed their formidable Enemies, Judges 7. Thus Christ's
Ministers who are as their Brethren, formed out of the Clay, hold up the Light
of the Gospel, and cry aloud as they are directed; and when the almighty Spirit
is pleased to work with and by them, the Powers of Darkness flee before them,
as the Shades of Night are chased away before the springing Day, and rising
Sun. Thus was Satan cast out of the Gentile World. His Oracles were struck
Dumb, his Temples and Altars were deserted, and many turned to God from Idols,
to serve the living and true God, and to wait for his Son from Heaven. We read
that many who used curious Arts, "the study of Magic and Divination", burned
their Books, when the Word of God prevailed; though the Price of them was
counted, and found to be 50,000 Pieces of Silver, Acts 19.19, 26. And by the
way, when the Word of God prevails among you, the Spirit will convince you of
the Evil of reading Romances, Plays and other lewd Books. To return. When Satan
was cast out of Rome-Pagan, he gave his Power to the Beast, to Antichrist and
so set himself again in Opposition to Christ, and his Kingdom. But our Lord has
in a good measure consumed him with the Spirit of his Mouth, the Sword of the
Spirit going out of his Mouth, in his preached Gospel. The Apostle John saw in
Vision an Angel fly in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospel to
preach unto them that dwell on the Earth, Rev. 14 6 By which we may understand
"the faithful Witnesses of Christ and Teachers of the Gospel" who publish the
pure Doctrines of God's Word in Opsition to the Errors and Heresies of Rome.
The Angels of the Churches, and Messengers of Christ. And after this, another
Angel cries, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, 8 v. Thus does the Spirit of God by
his Word plead the Cause of Christ against his Enemies, and convince the
Obstinate to their Confusion, that our Lord is above them, even in those Things
wherein they deal most proudly: And thus does He give his People an evident
Demonstration of the Authority of Christ to execute Judgment against the great
Enemy of their Souls. Now it appears that Christ is stronger than the strong
One, while the Devil is thus cast down from his usurped Throne in the Hearts of
Men. When a strong Man armed keeps his Palace, his Goods are in Peace. But
when a stronger than he shall come upon him, and overcome him, he takes from
him all his Armor wherein he trusted, and divides his Spoils. Luke 11.21.22.
The Words may be fitly applied to the Destruction of Satan's Power both
respecting the Bodies and Souls of Men.

3. The Spirit of God convinces Men of this Judgment by judicial Dispensations
of Providence.

God is known by the Judgments which he executes. And it has pleased the
Father to commit this Judgment to the Son, the Power of punishing his and his
People's implacable Enemies, and of correcting his Vovenant People. The Apostle
Paul's says, respecting God's own People, When we are judged, we are chastened
of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the World, 1 Cor. 11.32. Now
by these providential Dispensations the Spirit of God pleads the Cause of
Christ, as the Judge of the World, and as the Lord and Lawgiver of his Church;
and convinces Men of the Necessity of submitting to his golden Scepter, left
they be broken to Pieces with his iron Rod. When Judgment begins at the House
of God, There Is a loud Call to the Wicked to consider, What shall be the End of
them that Obey not the Gospel of God? Where shall the Ungodly and the Sinner
appear? See 1 Pet. 4.17, 18. And thus are Sinners sometimes brought to make
Supplication to their Judge, sensible that it must be a fearful Thing to fall
into his Hand as an Avenger of Sin. And when the Children of God behold how the
Lord puts away the Wicked like Dross, they cry out with the Psalmist, My Flesh
trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. Now they are
quickened to serve the Lord with Reverence, and concerned to make it evident to
themselves that they are not of those who must be led forth with the Workers of
Iniquity in the great Day of Judgment.

III. I proceed in the last Place to give some brief Description of this Work
of the Spirit in convincing Men of Judgment.

The Holy Spirit the divine Author of this Work, is called the Spirit of
Judgment, Isa 4.4. And he may be so called in part as he convinces of
Judgment. And in this Work the holy Spirit brings home the Evidence of this
Judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ by an inward Application to the Heart and
Conscience, in legal or saving Conviction.

I. In this Work the Spirit of God shows the Sinner that while he refuses to
submit to Christ as his Lord Redeemer, he is under the Power of Satan, who is
leading him Captive to Hell.

The Devil is called the Prince of the Power of the Air, the Spirit that now
works in the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. He is here described as one
having others under him, the Prince of Devils, as having been we may suppose
the Arch-Traitour and Leader of Rebellion to the Apostate Spiris. His Power is
confined to this lower World, and is exercised over such as continue in
Disobedience toward their rightful Lord. He may tempt God's Children; but he
reigns only in the Hearts of rebellious Sinners: These he leads Captive at his
Will; but alas! They are very insensible of it. The most do not know, will not
consider, that this old Serpent seeks to beguile and cheat them of their
precious Souls by his Temptations from the Pleasures, Riches and Honors of
this World; and that while he gratifieth the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the
Eye, and the Pride of Life, he holds them fast by these vile Lusts, as in
Chains of Darkness. But when the Holy Spirit comes on Men to deliver them from
the destroying Power of this unclean Spirit, he opens their Eyes, and shows
them this evil One in his own Colors. And now they are made sensible that as a
roaring Lion, he seeks to devour them; and that none can deliver them but the
Lord Jesus, who is called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Now they feel that
this fiery Serpent has injected his deadly Poison into their Souls, and that
with the stung Israelites they must perish, unless they look to the Son of God,
who was lifted up on the Cross.

Which leads me to say,

2. The Holy Spirit reveals Jesus Christ to Sinners as their only and
Almighty Redeemer. The Spirit of God convinces them of the Truth of that Word,
For as much then as the Children were Partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also
himself likewise took Part of the same: that through Death he might destroy him
that had the Power of Death, that is, the Devil; And deliver them who through
Fear of Death were all their Lifetime subject to Bondage, Heb. 2.14, 15. And
that Christ is able to bring forth Judgment to Victory, by rescuing miserable
Sinners, and so taking the Prey out of the Hand of the Mighty.

3. The Spirit of God enableth his People to submit to Christ as their Prince
and Savior, renouncing the Devil and all his Works.

They can say, though this cruel Lord has had the Dominion over us, yet now will
we make mention of the Name of Christ, as our only rightful Lord and Master.
And they are willing that those Lusts whereby Satan held them, should all be
slain before the Lord; because these also are Enemies to Christ. Thus they go
over to Christ, to list under his Banner, whom God has given to be a Leader
and Commander to the People, to bring many Sons to Glory, as the Captain of
their Salvation. They are willing in the Day of God's Power, Psalm. 110.3. In
this respect, they are not as pressed Men; but as Volunteers freely offer
themselves, and so come to the help of the Lord, against the Mighty. By the
Evidence of the Spirit they discern clearly that the Service of Satan is vile
Slavery, and the Wages Death; and accordingly they desert him with an holy
Indignation, and a a Desire of taking an holy Revenge of him: They also see
that the Service of Christ is glorious Liberty, and the gracious Reward,
eternal Life; and accordingly they willingly subscribe their Hand to the Lord,
and enter into an Oath that they will be for him and for no other. And thus are
they delivered from the Power of Darhness, and translated into the Kingdom of
God's dear Son, Col. 1.13. Satan is cast down, and cast out of their Hearts; so
that though he may tempt, he shall never again usurp Dominion over them. The Son
of God in Opposition to this Usurper, comes into their Souls, and takes
Possession of them as his own. And they are enabled to open the everlasting
Doors of their Hearts, that the King of Glory may come in. They say to the Son
and Lord of David, something as Amasai to King David, when the Spirit came upon
him; Thine are we David, and on thy side: Peace, Peace be unto thee, and Peace
be to thine Helpers; for thy God helps thee. Nor does the Noise of War
discourage them; for now the Spirit gives them a View of Christ as the Lord
strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in Battle. They realise it that there can be
no true Safety, no Victory, no Triumph; but in abiding loyal to Christ, and
standing firm on his side.

4. The Spirit of God convinces his People of this Judgment, by bruising Satan
under their Feet more and more, and by giving them the lively Hope of a
complete Victory over him, and all their Enemies, at the Day of Judgment.

God's People under this Conviction of the Spirit, behold Satan as a conquered
Enemy, and believe that God will fulfill his Word by bruising him under their
Feet. And they happily find that he that has begun the good Work is carrying it
on toward Perfection against all Opposition from their spiritual Enemies. The
Spirit of God inspireth them with Courage and Skill to resist the Devil
steadfastly. He teaches them to Fight the Battles of the Lord, looking to Jesus
Christ that they may be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might. He
enableth them to use their spiritual Weapons with Dexterity and Success. He
enableth them to put on the whole Armor of God, that they may be able to stand
against the Wiles of the Devil. To take the Shield of Faith, wherewith they
quench the fiery Darts of the Wicked; and the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God. The Spirit of God also is in his People a Spirit of Supplication,
helping their Infirmities, and exciting them to cry to the Lord for Grace and
Strength to help them, while they are wrestling against the Rulers of the
Darkness of this World. And thus do they receive fresh Supplies and Succors
from the Lord, in their times of Need. Agreeably, the Apostle Paul declares,
That God's People are more than Conquerors, through Him that loved them. For I am
persuaded, says he, that neither Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor
Things present, nor Things to come, shall be able to separate us from the Love
of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And the same Apostle gives Thanks to
God, who always caused them to triumph in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.14. Our Jesus, our
Joshua, even now causes his People to put their Feet upon the Necks of their
spiritual Enemies, and gives them the Assurance of a complete Victory and
Triumph, when they shall sit on Thrones, judging the World. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. Do
ye not know that the Saints shall judge the World? Know ye not that we shall
judge Angels? "They may first be acquitted, says an Expositor on the Place, and
then advanced to the Bench, to approve and applaud the righteous Judgment of
Christ, both on Men and Angels."

APPLICATION.
USE 1. Does the Spirit of God convince Men of their unjust Judgment concerning
Christ? Let us then ask the Spirit to give us a right and sound Judgment
concerning our Lord Jesus Christ, his Person, Offices and Works.

Since the Fall, Men are alienated from the Life of God, through the Ignorance
that is in them, because of the Blindness of their Heart, Ephesians. 4.18. And in a
particular manner, they are prone to entertain strong Prejudices against
Christ, and the Way of Salvation by him. And Satan, if God permit, will be
active in tempting them to entertain false Opinions concerning the only
Savior, that if possible he may hinder them from believing in him to the
Salvation of their Souls. In whom the God of this World has blinded the Minds
of them which believe not, lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who
is the Image of God, should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.4. O let us then beseech
the Lord to grant us the Light and Influence of his good Spirit, that we may
have right Apprehensions of the Son of God, and not have our Minds corrupted
with any false Doctrines relating to the Union of his divine and humane Nature
in one Person, or the great End of his Death, or his Ability and Readiness to
save even the Chief of Sinners. Lest that should come upon us which is spoken
of in the Prophets, and was fulfilled in many of God's ancient People, Behold,
ye Despisers, and wonder, and perish: For I work a Work in your Days, a Work
which you shall in no wise believe, though a Man declare it unto you.

USE 2. Let what has been said awaken secure Sinners, who are going on in Acts
of Rebellion against the Lord Jesus Christ.

How great is your Sin and Danger, while you stand in Opposition to the Lord
Jesus, to whom the Father has committed all Judgment! What is this, but to set
Briars and Thorns against consuming Fire? And who is it you are confederate
with, in this accursed Rebellion? With Satan, the sworn Enemy of God and Man;
who is also a conquered Enemy, reserved in everlasting Chains of Darkness, unto
the Judgment of the great Day. O, awake then, and cry for Mercy! Agree with
your Adversary quickly, while you are in the Way with him, and before he shall
enter into Judgment with you. He will overcome when he judges. There lies no
Appeal from his Sentence, nor can any deliver out of his Hand. Now then, while
he is seated on a Throne of Grace, make Peace with him, and accept of Pardon
upon Gospel Terms; lest you have Judgment without Mercy in the terrible Day of
the Lord, and with Amazement say to the Mountains and Rocks, Fall on us, and
hide us from the Face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the Wrath of
the Lamb: For the great Day of his Wrath is come; and who shall he able to
stand? Rev. 6.16, 17. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and you perish from the
Way, when his Wrath is kindled but a little: Blessed are all they that put
their Trust in him.

USE 3. Learn that the faithful People of God have strong Encouragement and
Consolation in Christ Jesus, under all the Trials and Temptations of this Life.

You are engaged in a Warfare with powerful Enemies, Sin, Satan, and this
present evil World; and if you look: no higher than your selves, you may be
ready to say, I shall one Day fall by the Hands of these Enemies. But then, if
you look to Jesus the Captain of your Salvation, you may encourage your selves
with those Words, Fear not: for they that be with us are more than (...) he
that be with them, 2 Kings 6.16. The Son of God in our Nature, has encountered
and overcome the Tempter; and it is declared of him, A bruised Reed shall be
not break, and smoking Flax shall be not quench, till he send forth Judgment
unto Victory, Matthew. 12.20. He himself has suffered being tempted, and
therefore is able to succor you under your Temptations. O Child of God! Be not
discouraged, either at the Number, or Power and Policy of your spiritual
Enemies. Stronger is he that is in you, than he that is in the World. Be strong
in the Lord then, and in the Power of his Might. Go forth against these Enemies
in the Name of the Lord; through Him shall you do valiantly, and tread them under
that rise up against you. Let this then animate you to fight the good Fight of
Faith, and endure Hardness as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ. His Arm, and the
Light of his Countenance will give you the Victory. And let God's People under
the present dark Aspects of divine Providence, behold all Judgment committed to
the Son, and realise it that He governs all Affairs even those which appear
most intricate and perplexed, with unerring Wisdom, irresistible Power, and
with a tender Concern for the Salvation of his People; so that in the End, Zion
shall arise and shine, with the Glory of the Lord risen upon her; and her
Enemies shall lick the Dust. Trust in the Lord therefore at all Times, ye
People, pour out your Heart before him And hear that Word, Psalm. 27.14. Wait on
the Lord: be of good Courage, and he shall strengthen thine Heart: wait, I say,
on the Lord.

USE 4. Let such as are under a preparatory Work of Conviction, Look unto Jesus
to bruise Satan under their Feet.

Be not dismayed if you should find a violent Struggle, when our Lord is coming
by his Spirit to deliver you from the destroying Power of Satan. But encourage
your selves to seek the Lord more earnestly that He would rebuke the Tempter,
and not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able to bear. Do not listen
to the Suggestions of this evil One; but look to Jesus to execute Judgment upon
him. If he tempt you to hurt your Bodies, hearken to that Word, Do thy self no
Harm. Or if he should tempt you to destroy your Souls by Presumption or
Despair, reject his evil Motions with Abhorrence, and labor to cherish the
Motions of the good Spirit of God in Opposition to him. Be not afraid to
Worship God in Secret, lest he should appear to you; but consider, our Savior
holds him as in a Chain, and can control him at his Pleasure. Say to the Lord,
Rule thou over us, and let this Usurper be cast out of our Hearts. And pray God
to subdue every Lust, that there may be none retained whereby the Devil shall
keep Possession of your Souls.

USE 5. Let us all be exhorted to submit to Christ as our rightful Lord, and to
stand on his side against the Devil and his Angels. There are two Kingdoms
which divide the whole World, the Kingdom of God's dear Son, and the Kingdom of
Darkness. And we must belong to the one, or the other. Here none may presume
that they can stand Neuter. If you refuse to stand on Christ's Side, you must
expect to be treated as Enemies to him. Here then, I set before you Life and
Death, Blessing and Cursing. If you continue under the Power of Satan, you must
finally perish with him in Hell. But if you now submit to Christ, you shall
obtain the Blessings of the Kingdom of Grace, and in due Time be advanced to
the Kingdom of Glory, where there is neither Adversary, nor Evil occurrent. Be
persuaded then to stand on this Side, and you will have the best Cause, the
best Leader, and certain victory in God's Time. The Reward of which is not a
fading Laurel; but a Crown of Glory which fades not away.

And here give me leave to direct the Exhortation,

To Children. Submit to Christ, and list under his Banner. Dear Children, Your
tender Years need not discourage you from engaging in this War; for our Lord
ordains Strength out of the Mouth of Babes, that he may still the Enemy, and
the Avenger, The Power and Grace of our Savior are magnified, while he
perfecteth Praise out of your Mouths, and makes you victorious over the sinful
Follies and Vanities of Childhood.

To young Men. Do you also submit to Christ, and list under his Banner. Obey
that Word, Thou therefore, my Son, be strong in the Grace that is in Christ
Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.1. Flee youthful Lusts which War against the Soul; and while
you strive for the Mastery, be temperate in all Thing. When Satan tempts you to
walk in the Ways of your Heart, and after the Sight of your Eyes, realise it
that for these Things God will bring you into Judgment; and then say, How can I
do this Wickedness, and Sin against God? How shall I be able to lift up my
Head, when I must appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ? Thus resist the
Devil, and he shall flee from you. O how lovely a Sight is it, to behold our
Youth denying the Solicitations of Satan, when he urges them to gratify their
carnal Appetites, in this Age of Pleasure! I have written unto you, Fathers,
because ye have known him that is from the Beginning. I write unto you, young
Men, because ye are strong, and the Word of God abides in you, and ye have
overcome the wicked One, 1 John 2.14.

Again, Let the weaker Sex willingly offer themselves among the People, and
engage in this holy War. Arise with Deborah, a Mother in Israel; go forth
against the Enemy, and you shall have occasion to sing with her, O my Soul,
thou have trodden down Strength. You need not fear, having such a Leader to go
before you. And for your further Encouragement, I may observe to you, That in
the holy Army of Martyrs who overcame by the Blood of the Lamb, we have some
heroic Examples of Courage and Firmness of Mind even among Women, and that when
called to resist unto Blood, striving against Sin.

Let our Aged go forth against the Enemy, and fight the Lord's Battles. There Is
no Discharge in this War. No, you must be faithful to Death. And if any, we may
well expect, that old Disciples, who have for a long time followed Christ,
should resist the Devil with holy Courage and Skill, as not being ignorant of
his Devices. A few Contests more, and you shall be able to say with Paul the
Aged, I have fought a good Fight, I have finished my Course, I have kept the
Faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that Day, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.

Nor shall I forbear to exhort our Indians and Negroes to submit to Christ, and
stand on his Side. Your Names indeed are not reckoned in our Muster-Rolls; but
though our Lord needs none, he alone is able to subdue the Enemy, and whatever
Instruments are used by him, his is the Power and the Victory; yet I say, He
condescendeth to accept the Service of the meanest, who are willing heartily to
espouse his Cause. Now then, that God has bro't you out from the dark Places of
the Earth, where Satan had his Seat, to a Land of Gospel Light, where it is
declared that the Son of God was manifest in the Flesh, and has redeemed a
People to God by his Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and
Nation; seeing this is the happy State of Things, despise the Slavery of the
Devil, shake off the Chains of Darkness in which you have been bound, and cry
to your Savior, that you may be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, into
the glorious Liberty of the Children of God. Come over to Christ, and you shall
also overcome, and sit down with him on his Throne.

Let Parents and Masters of Families, submit to Christ, and train up their
Children, and all under their Care for his Service.

And Let the Pastors of the Churches be exhorted to lead forth their Flocks in
Opposition to the Powers of Darkness; and do your utmost by Purity of Doctrine,
by the Exercise of an holy Discipline, and by your good Conversation, that
Satan's Kingdom may fall, and Christ's Kingdom may be more and more set up upon
the Ruins of it.

In a Word and to conclude, In this remarkable Season, let us be earnest with
God for the more plentiful Effusions of his Spirit, that there may stand up an
exceeding great Army to fight the Battles of the Lord, and take the Kingdom of
Heaven with an holy Violence. Gird thy Sword upon thy Thigh, O most Mighty:
with thy Glory and thy Majesty. And in thy Majesty ride prosperously, because
of Truth, Meekness and Righteousness: And thy right Hand shall teach thee
terrible Things. Let thine Arrows be sharp in the Heart of the Kings Enemies,
and the People fall under thee. Rule thou in the mids of thine Enemies, and
make thy People willing in the Day of thy Power. And let us avoid every Thing
that has a Tendency to quench the Spirit, and so to hinder the Success of the
Gospel. Let us remember that true Godliness has its Influence on the whole
Conversation. And accordingly, let us seek first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, and then look well to the Ways of our Households, and take Care
that we, our Children and Servants, be well employed in the particular Business
to which God calls us. Let Children be well governed. Let them duly attend the
School, and be in subjection to their Parents, and all over them in the Lord.
Let every thing that is good in them be cherished and encouraged, and at the
same Time prudent Methods be used that the Good be not evil spoken of, through
their Weakness and Infirmity. And let us all watch and pray, lest we enter into
Temptation. Let us try the Spirits, and not give place to the Devil, though he
should be transformed into an Angel of Light. We may well expect that this
malicious and subtle Adversary will be busy at such a Time as this; and should
accordingly be upon our Guard, that we may not be caught in his Snare. Let none
be lifted up with Pride, lest they fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. Do
not say in vain boasting, Stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am
holier than thou. Where God makes the Difference, give him the Glory; and
behave with great Modesty and Humility. Let not your Zeal be furious and
disorderly, censorious And uncharitable; but according to Knowledge, and a
found Judgment. Be zealous therefore, and repent, remember the first Love, and
do the first Works. Consider, the Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long
suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, And they that are Christ's, have
crucified the Flesh, with the Affections and Lusts. Let the Children of God
quicken their Pace in the Way toward Heaven, saying with the Apostle, I count
not my self to have apprehended: But this one thing I do, forgetting those
things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before,
I press toward the Mark, for the Prize of the high Calling of God in Christ
Jesus, Phil. 3.13, 14. And let such as are under good Impressions from the
Spirit, take heed to themselves, and beware of Apostasy. O ponder those awful
Words! If any Man draw back, my Soul shall have no Pleasure in him, Heb 10.38.
But if there should come a falling away respecting some that have promised
fair, let us not be shaken in Mind as if the main Work was not of God; nor take
up an evil Report against it. Scripture and Experience warn us to fear and
prepare for such a Trial. But O thou God of all Grace, keep us from falling!
Let thy Work appear more and more to thy Servants, and thy Glory unto their
Children: Confirm, increase and perfect it to the Praise of thy glorious Grace.

And may our Lord utterly destroy Antichrist by the Brightness of his Coming!
May He bind Satan, and cast him into the bottomless Pit! And may that Voice be
heard, saying, The Kingdoms of this World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord,
and of his Christ, and he shall reign forever and ever. Amen, Even so, Come
LORD JESUS.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 18. line 6. read, Acquaintance. l. 7. r. impressed. P. 19. l. 30. r.
Impressions. P. 58. l. 5. dele is. P. 104. l. 34 r. govern: P. 113. l. 13. r.
Pitchers.

