Some Thoughts Concerning the present Revival of Religion IN NEW ENGLAND, And
the Way in which it ought to be acknowledged and promoted, Humbly offered to
the Public, in a TREATISE on that Subject.

In Five PARTS;

PART I. Showing that the Work that has of late been going on in this Land, is
a glorious Work of GOD.

PART II. Showing the Obligations that all are under, to acknowledge, rejoice in
and promote this Work, and the great Danger of the contrary.

PART III. Showing in many Instances, wherein the Subjects, or zealous
Promoters (...) Work have been injuriously blamed.

PART IV. Showing what Things are to be corrected or avoided, in promoting this
Work, or in our Behavior under it.

PART V. Showing positively what ought to be done to promote this Work.

By JONATHAN EDWARDS, A. M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST at Northampton.

Isai. 40. 3. Prepare ye the Way of the Lord, make strait in the Desert a
Highway for our God.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. Kneeland, and T. Green in Queen Street, 1742.

THE PREFACE.
IN the ensuing Treatise, I condemn Ministers assuming, or taking too much upon
them, and appearing as though they supposed that they were the Persons, to whom
it especially belonged to dictate, direct and determine; but perhaps shall be
thought to be very guilty of it my self: And some when they read this Treatise,
may be ready to say that I condemn this in others, that I may have the Monopoly
of it. -- I confess that I have taken a great deal of Liberty freely to express
my Thoughts, concerning almost every Thing appertaining to the wonderful Work
of GOD that has of late been carried on in the Land, and to declare what has
appeared to me to be the Mind of GOD, concerning the Duty and Obligations of
all Sorts of Persons, and even those that are my Superiors and Fathers,
Ministers of the Gospel, and Civil Rulers: But yet I hope the Liberty I have
taken is not greater than can be justified. In a free Nation, such Liberty of
the Press is allowed, that every Author takes Leave without Offense, freely to
speak his Opinion concerning the Management of public Affairs, and the Duty of
the Legislature, and those that are at the Head of the Administration, though
vastly his Superiors. As now at this Day, private Subjects offer their
Sentiments to the Public, from the Press, concerning the Management of the War
with Spain; freely declaring what they think to be the Duty of the Parliament,
and the principal Ministers of State, etc. We (...) New England are at this Day
engaged in (...) important War: And I Am sure, if we consider the sad Jangling
and Confusion that has attended it, we shall confess that it is highly
requisite that some Body should speak his Mind, concerning the Way in which it
ought to be managed: And that not only a few of the many Particulars, that are
the Matter of Strife in the Land, should be debated, on the one Side and the
other, in Pamphlets; ( as has of late been done, with Heat and Fierceness
enough;) which don't tend to bring the Contention in general to an End, but
rather to inflame it, and increase the Uproar: But that something should be
published, to bring the Affair in general, and the many Things that attend it,
that are the Subjects of Debate, under a particular Consideration. And
certainly it is high Time that this was done. If private Persons may speak
their Minds without Arrogance; much more may a Minister of the Kingdom of
CHRIST speak freely about Things of this Nature, which do so nearly concern the
Interest of the Kingdom of his Lord and Master, at so important a Juncture. If
some elder Minister had undertaken this, I acknowledge it would have been more
proper; but I have heard of no such Thing a doing, or like to be done. I hope
therefore I shall be excused for undertaking such a Piece of Work. I think that
nothing that I have said can justly be interpreted, as though I would impose my
Thoughts upon any, or did not suppose that others have equal Right to think for
themselves, with my self. We are not accountable one to another for our
Thoughts; but we must all give an Account to him who searches our Hearts, and
has doubtless his Eye especially upon us at such an extraordinary Season as
this. If I have well confirmed my Opinion concerning this Work, and the Way in
which it should be acknowledged and promoted, with Scripture and Reason, I hope
others that read it will receive it, as a Manifestation of the Mind and Will of
GOD. If others would hold forth further Light to me in any of these
Particulars, I hope I should thankfully receive it. I think I have been made in
some Measure sensible, and much more of late than formerly, of my Need of more
Wisdom than I have. I make it my Rule to lay hold of Light and embrace it,
wherever I see it, though held forth by a Child or an Enemy. If I have assumed
too much in the following Discourse, and have spoken in a Manner that savours
of a Spirit of Pride, no Wonder that others can better discern it than I my
self. If it be so I ask Pordon, and beg the Prayers of every Christian Reader,
that I may have more Light, Humility and Zeal; and that I may be favored with
such Measures of the Divine Spirit, as a Minister of the Gospel stands in Need
of, at such an extraordinary Season

PART I.
Showing that the extraordinary WORK that has of late been going on in this
Land, is a glorious WORK OF GOD.
THE Error of those who have had ill Thoughts of the great religious Operation
on the Minds of Men, that has been carried on of late in New England, (so far
as the Ground of such an Error has been in the Understanding, and not in the
Disposition,) seems fundamentally to lie in three Things; First, in judging of
this Work a priori. Secondly, in not taking the Holy Scriptures as an whole
Rule whereby to judge of such Operations. Thirdly, in not justly separating and
distinguishing the good from the bad.

I. They have greatly erred in the Way in which they have gone about to try
this Work, whether it be a Work of the Spirit of GOD or no, viz. in judging of
it a priori; from the Way that it began, the Instruments that have been
employed, the Means that have been made Use of, and the Methods that have been
taken and succeeded, in carrying it on. Whereas, if we duly consider the
Matter, it will evidently appear that such a Work is not to be judged of a
priori, but a posteriori: We are to observe the Effect wrought; and if, upon
Examination of that, it be found to be agreeable to the Word of GOD, we are
bound without more ado to rest in it as GOD's Work; and shall be like to be
rebuked for our Arrogance, if we refuse so to do 'till GOD shall explain to us
how he has brought this Effect to pass, or why he has made Use of such and such
Means in doing of it. Those Texts are enough to cause us with trembling to
forbear such a Way of proceeding in judging of a Work of GOD's Spirit, Isai.
40. 13, 14. Who has directed the Spirit of the LORD, or being his Counselor
has taught him? With whom took he Counsel? and who instructed him, and who
taught him in the Path of Judgment, and taught him Knowledge, and showed to him
the Way of Understanding? Joh. 3. 8. The Wind blows where it lists; and
thou hear the Sound thereof; but can not tell whence it comes, and
whether it goes. We hear the sound, we perceive the Effect, and from thence we
judge that the Wind does indeed blow; without waiting, before we pass this
Judgment, first to be satisfied what should be the Cause of the Wind's blowing
from such a Part of the Heavens, and how it should come to pass that it should
blow in such a Manner, at such a Time. To judge a priori, is a wrong Way of
judging of any of the Works of GOD. We are not to resolve that we will first be
satisfied how GOD brought this or the other Effect to pass, and why he has
made it thus, or why it has pleased him to take such a Course, and to use such
and such Means, before we will acknowledge his Work, and give him the Glory of
it. This is too much for the Clay to take upon it with respect to the Potter.
GOD gives not Account of his Matters: His Judgments are a great Deep: He has
his Way in the Sea, and his Path in the great Waters, and his Footsteps are not
known; and who shall teach GOD Knowledge, or enjoin him his Way, or say unto
him what do thou? We know not what is the Way of the Spirit, nor how the
Bones do grow in the Womb of her that is with Child; even so we know not the
Works of GOD who makes all. No wonder therefore if those that go this
forbidden Way to work, in judging of the present wonderful Operation, are
perplexed and confounded. We ought to take heed that we don't expose our selves
to the Calamity of those who pried into the Ark of GOD, when GOD mercifully
returned it to Israel, after it had departed from them.

Indeed GOD has not taken that Course, nor made Use of those Means, to begin
and carry on this great Work, which Men in their Wisdom, would have thought
most advisable, if he had asked their Counsel; but quite the contrary. But it
appears to me that the great GOD has wrought like Himself, in the Manner of his
carrying on this Work; so as very much to show his own Glory, and exalt his own
Sovereignty, Power and All Sufficiency, and pour Contempt on all that human
Strength, Wisdom, Prudence and Sufficiency, that Men have been will not to trust,
and to glory in; and so as greatly to cross, rebuke and chastize the Pride and
other Corruptions of Men; in a Fulfillment of that Isai. 2. 17. And the
Loftiness of Man shall be bowed down, and the Haughtiness of Men shall be made
low, and the LORD alone shall be exalted in that Day. GOD does thus, in
intermingling in his Providence so many Stumbling Blocks with this Work; in
suffering so much of human Weakness and Infirmity to appear; and in ordering so
many Things that are mysterious to Men's Wisdom: in pouring out his Spirit
chiefly on the common People, and bestowing his greatest and highest Favors
upon them, admitting them nearer to himself than the great, the honorable, the
rich and the learned, agreeable to that Prophecy, Zech. 12. 7. The LORD also
shall save the Tents of Judah first, that the Glory of the House of David, and
the Glory of the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, do not magnify themselves against
Judah. Those that dwelt in the Tents of Judah were the common People, that
dwelt in the Country, and were of inferior Rank. The Inhabitants of Jerusalem
were their Citizens, their Men of Wealth and Figure: And Jerusalem also was the
chief Place of the Habitation or Resort of their Priests, and Levites, and
their Officers and Judges; there sat the great Sanhedrim. The House of David
were the highest Rank of all, the Royal Family, and the great Men that were
round about the King. -- It Is evident by the Context, that this Prophecy has
Respect to something further than the saving the People out of the Babylonish
Captivity.

GOD in this Work has begun at the lower End, and he has made Use of the weak
and foolish Things of the World to carry on his Work. The Ministers that have
been chiefly improved, some of them have been mere Babes in Age and Standing,
and some of them such as have not been so high in Reputation among their
Fellows as many others; and GOD has suffered their Infirmities to appear in the
Sight of others, so as much to displease them; and at the same Time it has
pleased GOD to improve them, and greatly to succeed them, while he has not so
succeeded others that are generally reputed vastly their Superiors. Yea, there
is Reason to think that it has pleased GOD to make Use of the Infirmities and
Sins of some that he has improved and succeeded; as particularly their
imprudent and rash Zeal and censorious Spirit, to chastize the Deadness,
Negligence, Earthly-mindedness and Vanity, that have been found among
Ministers, in the late Times of general Declension and Deadness, wherein wise
Virgins and foolish, Ministers and People have sunk into such a deep Sleep.
These Things in Ministers of the Gospel, that go forth as the Ambassadors of
CHRIST, and have the Care of immortal Souls, are extremely abominable to GOD;
vastly more hateful in his Sight than all the Imprudence, and intemperate
Heats, Wildness and Distraction (as some call it) of these zealous Preachers. A
supine Carelessness, and a vain, carnal, worldly Spirit, in a Minister of the
Gospel, is the worst Madness and Distraction in the Sight of GOD. GOD may also
make Use at this Day, of the unchristian Censoriousness of some Preachers, the
more to humble and purify some of his own Children and true Servants, that have
been wrongfully censured, to sit them for more eminent Service, and future
Honor that he designs them for.

II. Another Foundation-Error of those that don't acknowledge the Divinity of
this Work, is not taking the Holy Scriptures as an whole, and in it self a
sufficient Rule to judge of such Things by. They that have one certain
consistent Rule to judge by, are like to come to some clear Determination; but
they that have half a Dozen different Rules to make the Thing they would judge
of agree to, no Wonder that instead of justly and clearly determining, they do
but perplex and darken themselves and others. They that would learn the true
Measure of any Thing, and will have many different Measures to try it by, and
find in it a Conformity to, have a Task that they will not accomplish.

Those that I am speaking of, will indeed make some Use of Scripture, so far as
they think it serves their Turn; but don't make Use of it alone, as a Rule
sufficient by it self, but make as much, and a great deal more Use of other
Things, diverse and wide from it, to judge of this Work by. As particularly,

1. Some make Philosophy instead of the Holy Scriptures, their Rule of judging
of this Work; particularly the Philosophical Notions they entertain of the
Nature of the Soul, its Faculties and Affections. Some are ready to say, There
is but little sober solid Religion in this Work: it is little else but Flash
and Noise. Religion Nowadays all runs out into Transports and high Flights of
the Passions and Affections. In their Philosophy, the Affections of the Soul
are something diverse from the Will, and not appertaining to the noblest Part
of the Soul, but the meanest Principles that it has, that belong to Men as
partaking of animal Nature, and what he has in common with the Brute Creation,
rather than any Thing whereby he is conformed to Angels and pure Spirits. And
though they acknowledge that there is a good Use may be made of the Affections in
Religion, yet they suppose that the substantial Part of Religion don't consist
in them, but that they are rather to be looked upon as something adventitious
and accidental in Christianity.

But I cannot but think that these Gentlemen labor under great Mistakes, both
in their Philosophy and Divinity. It Is true, Distinction must be made in the
Affections or Passions. There Is a great deal of Difference in high and raised
Affections, which must be distinguished by the Skill of the Observer. Some are
much more solid than others. There are many Exercises of the Affections that
are very flashy, and little to be depended on; and oftentimes there is a great
deal that appertains to them, or rather that is the Effect of them, that has
its Seat in animal Nature, and is very much owing to the Constitution and Frame
of the Body; and that which sometimes more especially obtains the Name of
Passion, is nothing solid or substantial. But it is false Philosophy to suppose
this to be the Case with all Exercises of Affection in the Soul, or with all
great and high Affections; and false Divinity to suppose that religious
Affections don't appertain to the Substance and Essence of Christianity: On the
contrary, it seems to me that the very Life and Soul of all true Religion
consists in them.

I humbly conceive that the Affections of the Soul are not properly
distinguished from the Will, as though they were two Faculties in the Soul. All
Acts of the Affections of the Soul are in some Sense Acts of the Will, and all
Acts of the Will are Acts of the Affections. All Exercises of the Will are in
some Degree or other, Exercises of the Soul's Appetition or Aversion; or which
is the same Thing, of its Love or Hatred. The Soul wills one Thing rather than
another, or chooses one Thing rather than another, no otherwise than as it loves
one Thing more than another; but Love and Hatred are Affections of the Soul:
and therefore all Acts of the Will are truly Acts of the Affections; though the
Exercises of the Will don't obtain the Name of Passions, unless the Will,
either in its Aversion or Opposition, be exercised in a high Degree, or in a
vigorous and lively Manner.

All will allow that true Virtue or Holiness has its Seat chiefly in the Heart,
rather than in the Head: It therefore follows from what has been said already,
that it consists chiefly in holy Affections. The Things of Religion take Place
in Men's Hearts, no further than they are affected with them. The informing of
the Understanding is all vain, any farther than it affects the Heart; or, which
is the same Thing, has Influence on the Affections.

Those Gentlemen that make light of these raised Affections in Religion, will
doubtless allow that true Religion and Holiness, as it has its Seat in the
Heart, is capable of very high Degrees, and high Exercises in the Soul. As for
Instance; They will doubtless allow that the Holiness of the Heart or Will, is
capable of being raised to an hundred Times as great a Degree of Strength as it
is in the most eminent Saint on Earth, or to be exerted in an hundred Times so
strong and vigorous Exercises of the Heart; and yet be true Religion or
Holiness still, but only in an high Degree. Now therefore I would ask them,
(...) what Name they will call these high and (...) Exercises of the Will or
Heart? Ben't (...) high Affections? What can they consist in, but in high Acts
of Love; strong and vigorous Exercises of Benevolence and Complacence; high,
exalting and admiring Thoughts of GOD and his Perfections; strong Desires after
GOD, etc. --? And now what are we come to but high and raised Affections? Yea,
those very same high and raised Affections that before they objected against,
or made light of, as worthy of little Regard?

I suppose furthermore that all will allow that there is nothing but solid
Religion in Heaven: But that there, Religion and Holiness of Heart is raised to
an exceeding great Height, to strong, high, exalted Exercises of Heart. Now
what other Kinds of such exceeding strong and high Exercises of the Heart, or
of Holiness as it has its Seat in their Hearts, can we devise for them, but
only holy Affections, high Degrees of Actings of Love to GOD, rejoicing in GOD,
admiring of GOD, etc. --? Therefore these Things in the Saints and Angels in
Heaven, are not to be despised and cashiered by the Name of great Heats and
Transports of the Passions.

And it will doubtless be yet further allowed, that the more eminent the Saints
are on Earth, and the stronger their Grace is, and the higher its Exercises
are, the more they are like the Saints in Heaven. i. e. (by what has been just
now observed,) the more they have of high or raised Affections in Religion.

Though there are false Affections in Religion, and Affections that in some
Respects are raised high, that are flashy, yet undoubtedly there are also true,
holy and solid Affections; and the higher these are raised, the better: and if
they are raised to an exceeding great Height, they are not to be thought meanly
of or suspected, merely because of their great Degree, but on the contrary to
be esteemed and rejoiced in. Charity, or divine Love, is in Scripture
represented as the Sum of all the Religion of the Heart; but this is nothing
but an holy Affection: And therefore in Proportion as this is firmly fixed in
the Soul, and raised to a great Height, the more eminent a Person is in
Holiness. Divine Love or Charity is represented as the Sum of all the Religion
of Heaven, and that wherein mainly the Religion of the Church in its more
perfect State on Earth shall consist, when Knowledge, and Tongues, and
Prophesyings shall cease; and therefore the higher this holy Affection is
raised in the Church of GOD, or in a gracious Soul, the more excellent and
perfect is the State of the Church, or a particular Soul.

If we take the Scriptures for our Rule, then the greater and higher are the
Exercises of Love to GOD, Delight and Complacence in GOD, Desires and Longings
after GOD, Delight in the Children of GOD, Love to Mankind, Brokenness of
Heart, Abhorrence of Sin, and Self-abhorrence for Sin; and the Peace of GOD
which passes all Understanding, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Joy unspeakable and
full of Glory; admiring Thoughts of GOD, exulting and glorying in GOD; so much
the higher is CHRIST's Religion, or that Virtue which he and his Apostles
taught, raised in the Soul.

It is a Stumbling to some that religious Affections should seem to be so
powerful, or that they should be so violent (as they express it,) in some
Persons: They are therefore ready to doubt whether it can be the Spirit of GOD,
or whether this Vehemence ben't rather a Sign of the Operation of an evil
Spirit. But why should such a Doubt arise from no other Ground than this? What
is represented in Scripture, as more powerful in its Effects, than the Spirit
of GOD? which is therefore called the Power of the highest, Luke 1. 35. And its
saving Effect in the Soul called the Power of Godliness. So we read of the
Demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power, 1 Cor. 2. 4. And it is said to
operate in the Minds of Men with the exceeding Greatness of Divine Power, and
according to the working of GOD's mighty Power, Ephesians. 1. 19. So we read of the
effectual working of his Power, Ephesians. 3. 7. And of the Power that works in
Christians, v. 20. And of the Glorious Power of GOD in the Operations of the
Spirit, Col. 1. 11. And of the Work of Faith, its being wrought with Power, 2
These. 1. 11. and in 2 Timothy 1. 7. The Spirit of GOD is called the Spirit of
Power, and Love, and of a sound Mind. So the Spirit is represented by a mighty
Wind, and by Fire, Things most powerful in their Operation.

2. Many are guilty of not taking the holy Scriptures as a sufficient and whole
Rule, whereby to judge of this Work, whether it be the Work of GOD, in that
they judge by those Things which the Scripture don't give as any Signs or Marks
whereby to judge one Way or the other, and therefore do in no wise belong to
the Scripture-Rule of judging, viz. The Effects that religious Exercises and
Affections of Mind have upon the Body. Scripture Rules respect the State of the
Mind, and Persons moral Conduct, and voluntary Behavior, and not the physical
State of the Body. The Design of the Scripture is to teach us Divinity, and not
Physic and Anatomy. Ministers are made the Watchmen of Men's Souls, and not
their Bodies; and therefore the great Rule which GOD has committed into their
Hands, is to make them Divines, and not Physicians. CHRIST knew what
Instructions and Rules his Church would stand in Need of better than we do; and
if he had seen it needful in order to the Churches Safety, he doubtless would
have given Ministers Rules to judge of Bodily Effects, and would have told 'em
how the Pulse should beat under such and such religious Exercises of Mind; when
Men should look pale, and when they should shed Tears; when they should
tremble, and whether or no they should ever be faint or cry out; or whether the
Body should ever be put into Convulsions: He probably would have put some Book
into their Hands, that should have tended to make them excellent Anatomists and
Physicians: But he has not done it, because he did not see it to be needful. He
judged, that if Ministers thoroughly did their Duty as Watchmen and Overseers
of the State and Frame of Men's Souls, and of their voluntary Conduct,
according to the Rules he had given, his Church would be well provided for, as
to its Safety in these Matters. And therefore those Ministers of CHRIST and
Overseers of Souls, that busy themselves, and are full of Concern about the
involuntary Motions of the Fluids and Solids of Men's Bodies, and from thence
full of Doubts and Suspicions of the Cause, when nothing appears but that the
State and Frame of their Minds, and their voluntary Behavior is good, and
agreeable to GOD's Word; I say, such Ministers go out of the Place that CHRIST
has set them in, and leave their proper Business, as much as if they should
undertake to tell who are under the Influence of the Spirit by their Looks, or
their Gate. I cannot see which Way we are in Danger, or how the Devil is like to
get any notable Advantage against us, if we do but thoroughly do our Duty with
Respect to those two Things, viz. The State of Persons Minds, and their moral
Conduct, seeing to it that they be maintained in an Agreeableness to the Rules
that CHRIST has given us. If Things are but kept right in these Respects, our
Fears and Suspicions arising from extraordinary bodily Effects seem wholly
groundless.

The most specious Thing that is alleged against these extraordinary Effects
on the Body, is that the Body is impaired and Health wronged; and that it is
hard to think that GOD, in the merciful Influences of his Spirit on Men, would
wound their Bodies, and impair their Health. But if it were so pretty commonly
or in multiplied Instances, (which I don't suppose it is,) that Persons
received a lafting Wound to their Health by extraordinary religious Impressions
made upon their Minds, yet it is too much for us to determine that GOD shall
never bring an outward Calamity, in bestowing a vastly greater spiritual and
eternal Good. Jacob in doing his Duty in wrestling with GOD for the Blessing,
and while GOD was striving with him, at the same Time that he received the
Blessing from GOD, suffered a great outward Calamity from his Hand; GOD
impaired his Body so that he never got over it as long as he lived: He gave him
the Blessing, but sent him away halting on his Thigh, and he went lame all his
Life after. And yet this is not mentioned as if it were any Diminution of the
great Mercy of GOD to him, when GOD blessed him, and he received his Name
Israel, because as a Prince he had Power with GOD, and had prevailed.

But, say some, The Operations of the Spirit of GOD are of a benign Nature;
nothing is of a more kind Influence on human Nature than the merciful
Breathings of GOD's own Spirit. But it has been a Thing generally supposed and
allowed in the Church of GOD, till now, that there is such a Thing as being
sick of Love to CHRIST, or having the bodily Strength weak'ned by strong and
vigorous Exercises of Love to him. And however kind to human Nature the
Influences of the Spirit of GOD are, yet no Body doubts but that divine and
eternal Things, as they may be discovered, would overpower the Nature of Man in
its present weak State; and that therefore the Body in its present Weakness, is
not fitted for the Views and Pleasures and Employments of Heaven: and that if
GOD did discover but a little of that which is seen by the Saints and Angels in
Heaven, our frail Natures would sink under it. Indeed I know not what Persons
may deny now, to defend themselves in a Cause they have had their Spirits long
engaged in; but I know these Things don't use to be denied, or doubted of. --
Let us rationally consider what we profess to believe of the infinite Greatness
of the Things of GOD, the divine Wrath, the divine Glory, and the divine
infinite Love and Grace in JESUS CHRIST, and the Vastness and infinite
Importance of the Things of Eternity; and how reasonable is it to suppose that
if it pleases GOD a little to withdraw the Vail, and let in Light into the
Soul, and give something of a View of the great Things of another World in
their transcendent and infinite Greatness, That human Nature, that is as the
Grass, a shaking Leaf, a weak withering Flower, should totter under such a
Discovery? Such a Bubble is too weak to bear the Weight of a View of Things
that are so vast. Alas! What is such Dust and Ashes, that it should support it
self under the View of the awful Wrath or infinite Glory and Love of JEHOVAH!
No Wonder therefore that it is said, No Man can see me and live, and Flesh and
Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of GOD. That external Glory and Majesty of
CHRIST which Daniel saw, when there remained no Strength in him, and his
Comeliness was turned in him into Corruption, Dan. 10. 6, 7, 8. And which the
Apostle John saw, when he fell at his Feet as dead; was but an Image or Shadow
of that spiritual Glory and Majesty of CHRIST, which will be manifested in the
Souls of the Saints in another World, and which is sometimes, in some Degree,
manifested to the Soul in this World, by the Influences of the Spirit of GOD.
And if the beholding the Image, and external Representation of this spiritual
Majesty and Glory, did so overpower human Nature, is it unreasonable to suppose
that a Sight of the spiritual Glory it self, which is the Substance, of which
that was but the Shadow, should have as powerful an Effect? The Prophet
Habakkuk, speaking of the awful Manifestations GOD made of his Majesty and
Wrath, at the Red Sea, and in the Wilderness, and at Mount Sinai, where he gave
the Law; and of the merciful Influence, and strong Impression GOD caused it to
have upon him, to the End that he might be saved from that Wrath, and rest in
the Day of Trouble; says, Hab. 3. 16. When I heard my Belly trembled, my Lips
quivered at the Voice, Rottenness entered into my Bones, I trembled in my self,
that I might rest in the Day of Trouble. Which is much such an Effect as the
Discovery of the same Majesty and Wrath, in the same awful Voice from Mount
Sinai, has had upon many in these Days; and to the same Purposes, viz. to give
'em Rest in the Day of Trouble, and save 'em from that Wrath. The Psalmist also
speaks of very much such an Effect as I have often seen on Persons under
religious Affections of late, Psalm. 119. 131. I opened my Mouth and panted, for
I longed for thy Commandments.

GOD is pleased sometimes in dealing forth spiritual Blessings to his People,
in some Respect to exceed the Capacity of the Vessel, in its present
Scantiness, so that he don't only fill it full, but he makes their Cup to run
over; agreeable to Psalm. 23. 5. And pours out a Blessing, sometimes, in such a
Manner and Measure that there is not Room enough to receive it, Mal. 3. 10. and
gives 'em Riches more than they can carry away; as he did to Jehoshaphat, and
his People in a Time of great Favor, by the Word of his Prophet Jehaziel in
Answer to earnest Prayer, when the People blessed the Lord in the Valley of
Berachah, 2 Chronicles. 20. 25, 26. It has been with the Disciples of CHRIST, for a
long Time, a Time of great Emptiness upon spiritual Accounts; They have gone
hungry, and have been toiling in vain, during a dark Season, a Time of Night
with the Church of GOD; as it was with the Disciples of old, when they had
toiled all Night for something to eat and caught nothing, Luke 5. 5. and Joh.
21. 3. But now, the Morning being come, JESUS appears to his Disciples, and
takes a compassionate Notice of their Wants, and says to 'em, Children have ye
any Meat? And gives some of them such abundance of Food, that they are not able
to draw their Net; yea, so that their Net breaks, and their Vessel is
overloaded, and begins to sink; as it was with the Disciples of old, Luke 5. 6,
7. and Joh. 21. 6.

We cannot determine that GOD never shall give any Person so much of a Discovery
of himself, not only as to weaken their Bodies, but to take away their Lives.
It Is supposed by very learned and judicious Divines, that Moses's Life was
taken away after this Manner; and this has also been supposed to be the Case
with some other Saints. Yea, I don't see any solid sure Grounds any have to
determine, that GOD shall never make such strong Impressions on the Mind by his
Spirit, that shall be an Occasion of so impairing the Frame of the Body, and
particularly that Part of the Body, the Brain, that Persons shall be deprived
of the Use of Reason. As I said before, it is too much for us to determine,
that GOD will not bring an outward Calamity in bestowing spiritual and eternal
Blessings: so it is too much for us to determine, how great an outward Calamity
he will bring. If GOD gives a great Increase of Discoveries of himself, and of
Love to him, the Benefit is infinitely greater than the Calamity, though the Life
should presently after be taken away; yea though the Soul should not immediately
be taken to Heaven, but should lie some Years in a deep Sleep, and then be
taken to Heaven: Or, which is much the same Thing, if it be deprived of the Use
of its Faculties, and be unactive and unserviceable, as if it lay in a deep
Sleep for some Years, and then should pass into Glory. We cannot determine how
great a Calamity Distraction is, when considered with all its Consequences, and
all that might have been consequent, if the Distraction had not happened; nor
indeed whether, (thus considered) it be any Calamity at all, or whether it be
not a Mercy, by preventing some great Sin, or some more dreadful Thing, if it
had not been. It Is a great Fault in us to limit a sovereign all-wise GOD, whose
Judgments are a great Deep, and his Ways past finding out, where he has not
limited himself, and in Things, concerning which, he has not told us what his
Way shall be. -- It Is remarkable, considering in what Multitudes of Instances,
and to how great a Degree, the Frame of the Body has been overpowered of late,
that Persons Lives have notwithstanding been preserved, and that the Instances
of those that have been deprived of Reason have been so very few, and those,
perhaps, all of them, Persons under the peculiar Disadvantage of a weak,
vapoury Habit of Body. A merciful and careful divine Hand is very manifest in
it, that in so many Instances where the Ship has begun to sink, yet it has been
upheld, and has not totally sunk. -- The Instances of such as have been
deprived of Reason are so few, that certainly they are not enough to cause us
to be in any Fright, as though this Work that has been carried on in the Country,
was like to be of baneful Influence; unless we are disposed to gather up all
that we can to darken it, and set it forth in frightful Colors.

There is one particular Kind of Exercise and Concern of Mind, that many have
been overpowered by, that has been especially stumbling to some; and that is
the deep Concern and Distress that they have been in for the Souls of others. I
am sorry that any put us to the Trouble of doing that which seems so needless,
as defending such a Thing as this. It seems like mere trifling in so plain a
Case, to enter into a formal and particular Debate, in order to determine
whether there be any thing in the Greatness and Importance of the Case that
will answer, and bear a Proportion to the Greatness of the Concern that some
have manifested. Men may be allowed, from no higher a Principle than common
Ingenuity and Humanity, to be very deeply concerned, and greatly exercised in
Mind, at the seeing others in great Danger, of no greater a Calamity than
drowning, or being burnt up in an House on Fire. And if so, then doubtless it
will be allowed to be equally reasonable, if they saw them in Danger of a
Calamity ten Times greater, to be still much more concerned; and so much more
still, if the Calamity was still vastly greater. And why then should it be
thought unreasonable, and looked upon with a very suspicious Eye, as if it must
come from some bad Cause, when Persons are extremely concerned at seeing others
in very great Danger of suffering the Fierceness and Wrath of Almighty GOD, to
all Eternity? And besides it will doubtless be allowed that those that have
very great Degrees of the Spirit of GOD, that is a Spirit of Love, may well be
supposed to have vastly more of Love and Compassion to their Fellow Creatures,
than those that are influenced only by common Humanity. Why should it be
thought strange that those that are full of the Spirit of CHRIST, should be
proportionably, in their Love to Souls, like to CHRIST? who had so strong a
Love to them and Concern for them, as to be willing to drink the Dregs of the
Cup of GOD's Fury for them; and at the same Time that he offered up his Blood
for Souls, offered up also, as their High Priest, strong Crying and Tears, with
an extreme Agony, wherein the Soul of CHRIST was as it were in Travail for the
Souls of the Elect; and therefore in saving them he is said to see of the
Travail of his Soul. As such a Spirit of Love to, and Concern for Souls was the
Spirit of CHRIST, so it is the Spirit of the Church; and therefore the Church,
in desiring and seeking that CHRIST might be brought forth in the World, and in
the Souls of Men, is represented, Rev. 12. as a Woman crying, travailing in
Birth, and pained to be delivered. The Spirit of those that have been in
Distress for the Souls of others, so far as I can discern, seems not to be
different from that of the Apostle, who travailed for Souls, and was ready to
wish himself accursed from CHRIST for others. And that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
119. 53. Horror has taken hold upon me, because of the Wicked that forsake thy
Law. And v. 136. Rivers of Waters run down mine Eyes, because they keep not thy
Law. And that of the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 4. 19. My Bowels! my Bowels! I am
pained at my very Heart! My Heart makes a Noise in me! I cannot hold my Peace!
Because thou have heard, O my Soul, the Sound of the Trumpet, the Alarm of War!
And so Chap. 9. 1. and 13. 17. and 14. 17. and Isa. 22. 4. We read of Mordecai,
when he saw his People in Danger of being destroyed with a temporal
Destruction, Esth. 4. 1. That he rent his Clothes, and put on Sackcloth with
Ashes, and went out into the midst of the City, and cried with a loud and
bitter Cry. And why then should Persons be thought to be distracted, when they
cannot forbear crying out, at the Consideration of the Misery of those that are
going to eternal Destruction?

3. Another Thing that some make their Rule to judge of this Work by, instead
of the Holy Scriptures, is History, or former Observation. Herein they err two
Ways; First, If there be any Thing new and extraordinary in the Circumstances
of this Work, that was not observed in former Times, that is a Rule with them
to reject this Work as not the Work of GOD. Herein they make that their Rule,
that GOD has not given them for their Rule; and limit GOD, where he has not
limited himself. And this is especially unreasonable in this Case: For
whosoever has well weighed the wonderful and mysterious Methods of Divine
Wisdom, in carrying on the Work of the New Creation, or in the Progress of the
Work of Redemption, from the first Promise of the Seed of the Woman to this
Time, may easily observe that it has all along been GOD's Manner to open new
Scenes, and to bring forth to View Things new and wonderful, such as Eye had
not seen, nor Ear heard, nor entered into the Heart of Man or Angels, to the
Astonishment of Heaven and Earth, not only in the Revelations he makes of his
Mind and Will, but also in the Works of his Hands. As the old Creation was
carried on through six Days, and appeared all complete, settled in a State of
Rest on the seventh; so the New Creation, which is immensely the greatest and
most glorious Work, is carried on in a gradual Progress, from the Fall of Man,
to the Consummation of all Things, at the End of the World. And as in the
Progress of the Old Creation, there were still new Things accomplished; new
Wonders appeared every Day in the Sight of the Angels, the Spectators of that
Work; while those Morning Stars sang together, new Scenes were opened or Things
that they had not seen before, 'till the whole was finished; so it is in the
Progress of the New Creation. So that that Promise, Isa. 64. 4. For since the
beginning of the World, Men have not heard, nor perceived by the Ear, neither
has the Eye seen, O GOD, besides thee, what he has prepared for him that
waits for him. Though it had a glorious Fulfillment in the Days of CHRIST and
the Apostles, as the Words are applied, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Yet it always remains to
be fulfilled, in Things that are yet behind, 'till the New Creation is
finished, at CHRIST's delivering up the Kingdom to the Father. And we live in
those latter Days, wherein we may be especially warranted to expect that Things
will be accomplished, concerning which it will be said, Who has heard such a
Thing? Who has seen such Things?

And besides those Things in this Work that have been chiefly complained of as
new, are not so new as has been generally imagined: Though they have been much
more frequent lately, in Proportion to the uncommon Degree, Extent and
Swiftness, and other extraordinary Circumstances of the Work, yet they are not
new in their Kind; but are Things of the same Nature as have been found and
well approved of in the Church of GOD before, from Time to Time.

We have a remarkable Instance in Mr. Bolton, that noted Minister of the Church
of England, who being awakened by the preaching of the famous Mr. Perkins,
Minister of CHRIST in the University of Cambridge, was subject to such Terrors
as threw him to the Ground, and caused him to roar with Anguish; and the Pangs
of the New Birth in him were such, that he lay pale and without Sense, like one
dead; as we have an Account in the Fulfilling of the Scripture, the 5th
Edition, p. 103, 104. We have an Account in the same Page of another, whose
Comforts under the Sunshine of GOD's Presence were so great, that he could not
forbear crying out in a Transport, and expressing in Exclamations, the great
Sense he had of forgiving Mercy and his Assurance of GOD's Love. And we have a
remarkable Instance in the Life of Mr. George Trosse, written by himself (who,
of a notoriously vicious profligate Liver, became an eminent Saint and Minister
of the Gospel,) of Terrors occasioned by Awakenings of Conscience, so
overpowering the Body, as to deprive, for some Time, of the Use of Reason.

Yea, such extraordinary external Effects of inward Impressions have not only
been to be found in here and there a single Person, but there have also before
now been Times wherein many have been thus affected, in some particular Parts
of the Church of GOD, and such Effects have appeared in Congregations, in many
at once. So it was in the Year 1625, in the West of Scotland, in a Time of
great Out-pouring of the Spirit of GOD. It was then a frequent Thing for many
to be so extraordinarily seized with Terror in the hearing of the Word, by the
Spirit of GOD convincing them of Sin, that they fell down, and were carried out
of the Church, who afterward proved most solid and lively Christians; as the
Author of the Fulfilling of the Scripture informs us, p. 185. The same Author
in the preceding Page, informs of many in France that were so wonderfully
affected with the Preaching of the Gospel, in the Time of those famous Divines
Farel and Viret, that for a Time, they could not follow their secular Business.
And p. 186. of many in Ireland, in a Time of great Outpouring of the Spirit
there, in the Year 1628, that were so filled with Divine Comforts, and a Sense
of GOD, that they made but little Use of either Meat, Drink or Sleep, and
professed that they did not feel the Need thereof. The same Author gives an
Account of very much such Things in Mrs. Catherine Brettergh of Lancashire in
England, (p. 391. 392.) as have been cried out of, here amongst us, as wild and
distracted: how that after great Distress, which very much affected her Body,
the Sweat sometimes bursting out upon her, GOD did so break in upon her Mind
with Light and Discoveries of himself, that she was forced to burst out,
crying, O the Joys, the Joys, the Joys, that I feel in my Soul! O they be
wonderful, they be wonderful! The Place where I now am is sweet and pleasant!
How comfortable is the Sweetness I feel, that delights my Soul! The Taste is
precious; do you not feel it? Oh so sweet as it is! And at other Times, O my
sweet Savior, shall I be one with thee, as thou art one with the Father? And
do thou so love me that am but Dust, to make me Partaker of Glory with
CHRIST? O how wonderful is thy Love! And Oh that my Tongue and Heart were able
to sound forth thy Praises as I ought. At another Time she burst forth thus;
Yea Lord, I feel thy Mercy, and I am assured of thy Love! And so certain am I
thereof, as thou art that GOD of Truth: even so certainly do I know my self to
be thine, O LORD my GOD; and this my Soul knows right well! Which last Words
she again doubled. To a grave Minister, one Mr. Harrison, then with her, she
said, My Soul has been compassed with the Terrors of Death, the Sorrows of
Hell were upon me, and a Wilderness of Woe was in me; but blessed, blessed,
blessed be the LORD my GOD! he has brought me to a Place of Rest, even to the
sweet running Waters of Life. The Way I now go in is a sweet and easy Way,
strowed with Flowers; he has brought me into a Place more sweet than the
Garden of Eden. O the Joy, the Joy, the Delights and Joy that I feel! O how
wonderful!

Great Outcries under Awakenings were more frequently heard of in former Times
in the Country than they have been of late, as some aged Persons now living do
testify: Particularly I think fit here to insert a Testimony of my honored
Father, of what he remembers formerly to have heard.

I well remember that one Mr. Alexander Allyn, a Scots Gentleman of good
Credit, that dwelt formerly in this Town, showed me a Letter that came from
Scotland, that gave an Account of a Sermon preached in the City of Edinburgh,
(as I remember) in the Time of the sitting of the general Assembly of Divines
in that Kingdom, that so affected the People, that there was a great and loud
Cry made throughout the Assembly. I have also been credibly informed, and how
often I cannot now say, that it was a common Thing, when the famous Mr. John
Rogers of Dedham in England was preaching, for some of his Hearers to cry out;
and by what I have heard, I conclude that it was usual for many that heard that
very awakening and rousing Preacher of GOD's Word, to make a great Cry in the
Congregation.

Windsor, May 5, 1742. TIMOTHY EDWARDS.

Mr. Flavel gives a remarkable Instance of a Man that he knew, that was
wonderfully overcome with divine Comforts; which it is supposed he knew, as the
Apostle Paul knew the Man that was caught up to the Third Heaven. He relates,

That As the Person was traveling alone, with his Thoughts closely fixed on
the great and astonishing Things of another World, his Thoughts began to swell
higher and higher, like the Water in Ezekiel's Vision, 'till at last they
became an overflowing Flood: Such was the Intenseness of his Mind, such the
ravishing Tastes of heavenly Joys, and such his full Assurance of his Interest
therein, that he utterly lost all Sight and Sense of this World, and the
Concernments thereof; and for some Hours, knew not where he was, nor what he
was about: But having lost a great Quantity of Blood at the Nose, he found
himself so faint, that it brought him a little more to himself. And after he
had washed himself at a Spring, and drank of the Water for his Refreshment, he
continued to the End of his Journey, which was Thirty Miles; and all this while
was scarce sensible: And says he had several Trances of considerable
Continuance. The same blessed Frame was preserved all that Night, and in a
lower Degree, great Part of the next Day: The Night passed without one Wink of
Sleep; and yet he declares he never had a sweeter Night's Rest in all his Life.
Still adds the Story, The Joy of the Lord over-flowed him, and he seemed to be
an Inhabitant of another World. And he used for many Years after to call that
Day one of the Days of Heaven; and professed that he understood more of the
Life of Heaven by it, than by all the Books he ever read, or Discourses he ever
entertained about it.

There have been Instances before now, of Persons crying out in Transports of
divine Joy in New England. We have an Instance in Capt. Clap's Memoirs,
published by the Rev. Mr. Prince, not of a silly Woman or Child, but a Man of
solid Understanding, that in a high Transport of spiritual Joy, was made to cry
out aloud on his Bed. His Words p. 9. are, GOD's holy Spirit did witness, (I do
believe) together with my Spirit; that I was a Child of GOD, and did fill my
Heart and Soul with such full Assurance that CHRIST was mine, that it did so
transport me, as to make me cry out upon my Bed, with a loud Voice, He is come,
He is come!

There has, before now, been both crying out and falling down, in this Town,
under Awakenings of Conscience, and in the Pangs of the New Birth, and also in
some of the Neighbor Towns. In one of them, more than seven Years ago, was a
great Number together that cried out and fell down, under Convictions; in most
of which, by good Information, was a hopeful and abiding good Issue. And the
Rev. Mr. Williams of Deerfield gave me an Account of an aged Man in that Town,
many Years before that, that being awakened by his Preaching, cried out aloud
in the Congregation. There have been many Instances in this and some Neighbor
Towns, before now, of Persons fainting with joyful Discoveries made to their
Souls: once several together in this Town. And there also formerly have been
several Instances here, of Person's Flesh waxing cold and benummb'd, and their
Hands clinch'd, yea their Bodies being set into Convulsions, being overpowered
with a strong Sense of the astonishingly great and excellent Things of GOD and
the Eternal World.

Secondly, Another Way that some err in making History and former Observation
their Rule to judge of this Work, instead of the Holy Scripture, is in
comparing some external, accidental Circumstances of this Work, with what has
appeared sometimes in Enthusiasts; and as they find an Agreement in some such
Things, so they reject the whole Work, or at least the Substance of it,
concluding it to be Enthusiasm. So, great Use has been made to this Purpose of
many Things that are found amongst the Quakers; however totally and essentially
different in its Nature this Work is, and the Principles it is built upon, from
the whole Religion of the Quakers. So, to the same Purpose, some external
Appearances that were found amongst the French Prophets, and some other
Enthusiasts in former Times, have been of late trump'd up with great Assurance
and Triumph.

4. I would propose it to be considered, Whether or no, some instead of making
the Scriptures their only Rule to judge of this Work, don't make their own
Experience the Rule, and reject such and such Things as are now professed and
experienced, because they never felt 'em themselves. Are there not many, that
chiefly on this Ground, have entertained and vented Suspicions, if not
peremptory Condemnations of those extreme Terrors, and those great, sudden
andextraordinary Discoveries of the glorious Perfections of GOD, and of the
Beauty and Love of CHRIST; and such vehement Affections, such high Transports
of Love and Joy, such Pity and Distress for the Souls of others, and Exercises
of Mind that have such great Effects on Persons Bodies, merely, or chiefly,
because they knew nothing about 'em by Experience? Persons are very ready to be
suspicious of what they have not felt themselves. It Is to be feared many good Men
have been guilty of this Error; which yet don't make it the less unreasonable.
And perhaps there are some that upon this Ground don't only reject these
extraordinary Things, but all such Conviction of Sin, and such Discoveries of
the Glory of GOD, and Excellency of CHRIST, and inward Conviction of the Truth
of the Gospel, by the immediate Influence of the Spirit of GOD, that are now
supposed to be necessary to Salvation.

These Persons that thus make their own Experiences their Rule of Judgment,
instead of bowing to the Wisdom of GOD, and yielding to his Word as an
infallible Rule, are guilty of casting a great Reflection upon the
Understanding of the most High.

III. Another Foundation-Error of those that reject this Work, is their not
duly distinguishing the Good from the Bad, and very unjustly judging of the
Whole by a Part; and so rejecting the Work in general, or in the main Substance
of it, for the sake of some Things that are accidental to it, that are evil.
They look for more in Men that are divinely influenced, because subject to the
Operations of a good Spirit, than is justly to be expected from them for that
Reason, in this imperfect State, and dark World, where so much Blindness and
Corruption remains in the best. When any profess to have received Light and
Influence and Comforts from Heaven, and to have had sensible Communion with
GOD, many are ready to expect that now they appear like Angels, and not still
like poor, feeble, blind and sinful Worms of the Dust. There being so much
Corruption left in the Hearts of GOD's own Children, and its prevailing as it
sometimes does, is indeed a mysterious Thing, and always was a Stumbling Block
to the World; but will not be so much wondered at by those that are well versed in,
and duly mindful of, two Things, viz. First, the Word of GOD, which teaches us
the State of true Christians in this World, and Secondly, their own Hearts, at
least if they have any Grace, and have Experience of its Conflicts with
Corruption. They that are true Saints are most inexcuseable in making a great
Difficulty of a great deal of Blindness, and many sinful Errors in those that
profess Godliness. If all our Conduct, both open and secret, should be known,
and our Hearts laid open to the World, how should we be even ready to fly from
the Light of the Sun, and hide our selves from the View of Mankind! And what
great Allowances would it be found that we should need, that others should make
for us? perhaps much greater than we are willing to make for others.

The great Weakness of the bigger Part of Mankind, in any Affair that is new
and uncommon, appears in not distinguishing, but either approving or condemning
all in the Lump. They that highly approve of the Affair in general, cannot bear
to have any Thing at all found Fault with; and on the other Hand, those that
fasten their Eyes upon some Things in the Affair that are amiss, and appear
very disagreeable to them, at once reject the whole. Both which Errors
oftentimes arise from want of Persons due Acquaintance with themselves. It is
rash and unjust when we proceed thus in judging either of a particular Person,
or a People, or of such an Affair as the present wonderful Influence on the
Minds of the People of this Land. Many if they see any Thing very ill in a
particular Person, a Minister or private Professor, will at once brand him as
an Hypocrite. And if there be two or three of a People or Society that behave
themselves very irregularly, the whole must bear the Blame of it. And if there
be a few, though it may be not above One in an Hundred, that professed, and had a
Show of being the happy Partakers of what are called the saving Benefits of
this Work, that prove naught, and give the World just Grounds to suspect 'em,
the whole Work must be rejected on their Account; and those in general, that
make the like Profession must be condemned for their Sakes.

So careful are some Persons lest this Work should be defended, that now they
will hardly allow that the Influences of the Spirit of GOD on the Heart, can so
much as indirectly, and accidentally, be the Occasion of the Exercise of
Corruption, and Commission of Sin. -- Thus far is true, That the Influence of
the Spirit of GOD in his saving Operations, will not be an Occasion of the
Increase of the Corruption of the Heart in general, but on the contrary, of the
weakening of it: But yet there is nothing unreasonable in supposing, that at
the same Time that it weakens Corruption in general, it may be an Occasion of
the turning what is left into a new Channel, and so of there being more of some
certain Kinds of the Exercise of Corruption than there was before; as that
which tends to hinder and stop the Course of a Stream, if it don't do it
wholly, may give a new Course to so much of the Water as gets by the Obstacle.
The Influences of the Spirit, for Instance, may be an Occasion of new Ways of
the Exercise of Pride, as has been acknowledged by orthodox Divines in general.
That spiritual Discoveries and Comforts may, through the Corruption of the
Heart, be an Occasion of the Exercises of spiritual Pride, don't use to be
doubted of, 'till now it is found to be needful to maintain the War against
this Work.

They that will harldly allow that a Work of the Spirit of GOD can be a remote
Occasion of any sinful Behavior or unchristian Conduct, I suppose will allow
that the truly gracious Influences of the Spirit of GOD, yea and an high Degree
of Love to GOD, is consistent with these two Things, viz. A considerable Degree
of remaining Corruption, and also many Errors in Judgment in Matters of
Religion, and in Matters of Practice. And this is all that need to be allowed,
in order to its being most demonstratively evident, that a high Degree of Love
to GOD may accidentally move a Person to that which is very wrong, and contrary
to the Mind and Will of GOD. For a high Degree of Love to GOD will strongly
move a Person to do that which he believes to be agreeable to GOD's Will; and
therefore, if he be mistaken, and be persuaded that That is agreeable to the
Will of GOD, which indeed is very contrary to it, then his Love will
accidentally, but strongly, incline him to that, which is indeed very contrary
to the Will of GOD.

They that are studied in Logic have learned that the Nature of the Cause is
not to be judged of by the Nature of the Effect, nor the Nature of the Effect
from the Nature of the Cause, when the Cause is only Causa sine qua non, or an
occasional Cause; yea, that in such a Case, oftentimes the Nature of the Effect
is quite contrary to the Nature of the Cause.

True Disciples of CHRIST may have a great deal of false Zeal, such as the
Disciples had of old, when they would have Fire called for from Heaven to come
down on the Samaritans, because they did not receive them. And even so
eminently holy, and great, and divine a Saint as Moses, who conversed with GOD
from Time to Time, as a Man speaks with his Friend, and concerning whom GOD
gives his Testimony, that he was very meek, above any Man upon the Face of the
Earth, yet may be rash and sinful in his Zeal, when his Spirit is stirred by
the Hard-heartedness and Opposition of others, so as to speak very unadvisedly
with his Lips, and greatly to offend GOD, and shut himself out from the
Possession of the good Things, that GOD is about to accomplish for his Church
on Earth; as Moses was excluded Canaan, though he had brought the People out of
Egypt, Psalm. 106. 32, 33. And Men, even in those very Things wherein they are
influenced by a truly pious Principle, yet, through Error and want of due
Consideration and Caution, may be very rash with their Zeal. It was a truly
good Spirit that animated that excellent Generation of Israel that was in
Joshua's Time, in that Affair that we have an Account of in the 22d Chapter of
Joshua; and yet they were rash and heady with their Zeal, to go about to gather
all Israel together to go up so furiously to War with their Brethren of the two
Tribes and half, about their building the Altar Ed, without first, enquiring
into the Matter, or so much as sending a Messenger to be informed. So the
Christians that were of the Circumcision, with Warmth and Contention condemned
Peter for receiving Cornelius, as we have Account, Act. 11. This their Heat and
Censure was unjust, and Peter was wronged in it; but there is all Appearance in
the Story that they acted from a real Zeal and Concern for the Will and Honor
of GOD. So the primitive Christians, from their Zeal for, and against unclean
Meats, censured and condemned one another: This was a bad Effect, and yet the
Apostle bears them Witness, or at least expresses his Charity toward them,
that both Sides acted from a good Principle, and true Respect to the Lord, Romans
14. 6. The Zeal of the Corinthians with Respect to the incestuous Man, though the
Apostle highly commends it, yet at the same Time saw that they needed a
Caution, lest they should carry it too far, to an undue Severity, and so as to
fail of Christian Meekness and Forgiveness, 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. and
Chap. 7. 11. to the End. -- Luther that great Reformer had a great deal of
Bitterness with his Zeal.

It surely cannot be wondered at by considerate Persons, that at a Time when
Multitudes all over the Land have their Affections greatly moved, that great
Numbers should run into many Errors and Mistakes with Respect to their Duty,
and consequently into many Acts and Practices that are imprudent and irregular.
I question whether there be a Man in New England, of the strongest Reason and
greatest Learning, but what would be put to it to keep Master of himself,
thoroughly to weigh his Words, and consider all the Consequences of his
Behavior, so as to behave himself in all Respects prudently, if he were so
strongly impressed with a Sense of divine and eternal Things, and his
Affections so exceedingly moved, as has been frequent of late among the common
People. -- How little do they consider Human Nature, who look upon it so
insuperable a Stumbling Block, when such Multitudes of all Kinds of Capacities,
natural Tempers, Educations, Customs and Manners of Life, are so greatly and
variously affected, that Imprudences and Irregularities of Conduct should
abound; especially in a State of Things so uncommon, and when the Degree,
Extent, Swiftness and Power of the Operation is so very extraordinary, and so
new, that there has not been Time and Experience enough to give Birth to Rules
for People's Conduct, and so unusual in Times past, that the Writings of
Divines don't afford Rules to direct us in such a State of Things?

A great deal of Noise and Tumult, Confusion and Uproar, and Darkness mixed
with Light, and Evil with Good, is always to be expected in the beginning of
something very extraordinary, and very glorious in the State of Things in human
Society, or the Church of GOD. As after Nature has long been shut up in a cold
dead State, in Time of Winter, when the Sun returns in the Spring, there is,
together with the Increase of the Light and Heat of the Sun, very dirty and
tempestuous Weather, before all is settled calm and serene, and all Nature
rejoices in its Bloom and Beauty. It is in the New Creation as it was in the
Old, the Spirit of GOD first moved upon the Face of the Waters, which was an
Occasion of great Uproar and Tumult, and Things were gradually brought to a
settled State, 'till at length all stood forth in that beautiful, peaceful
Order, when the Heavens and the Earth were finished, and GOD saw every Thing
that he had made, and behold it was very good. When GOD is about to bring to
pass something great and glorious in the World, Nature is in a Ferment and
Struggle, and the World as it were in Travail. As when GOD was about to
introduce the Messiah into the World, and that new and glorious Dispensation
that he set up, he shook the Heavens and the Earth, and shook all Nations.
There is nothing that the Church of GOD is in Scripture more frequently
represented by than Vegetables; as a Tree, a Vine, Corn, etc. -- which
gradually bring forth their Fruit, and are first green before they are ripe. A
great Revival of Religion is expressly compared to this gradual Production of
Vegetables, Isa. 61. 11. As the Earth brings forth her Bud, and as the Garden
causes the Things that are sown in it to spring forth; so the Lord God will
cause Righteousness and Praise to spring forth before all the Nations. The
Church is in a special Manner compared to a Palm Tree, Cant. 7. 7, 8. Exodus 15.
27. 1 King. 6. 29. Psalm. 92. 12. Of which Tree this peculiar Thing is observed,
That the Fruit of it, though it be very sweet and good when it is ripe, yet,
before it has had Time to ripen, has a Mixture of Poison.

The Weakness of human Nature has always appeared in Times of great Revival of
Religion, by a Disposition to run to Extremes and get into Confusion; and
especially in these three Things, Enthusiasm, Superstition, and intemperate
Zeal. So it appeared in the Time of the Reformation, very remarkably; and also
in the Days of the Apostles; many were then exceedingly disposed to lay Weight
on those Things that were very Notional and Chimerical, giving Heed to Fables
and Whimsies, as appears by 1 Timothy 1. 4. and 4. 7. 2 Timothy 2. 10. and v. 23. and
Tit. 1. 14. and 3. 9. Many, as Ecclesiastical History informs us, fell off into
the most wild Enthusiasm, and extravagant Notions of Spirituality, and
extraordinary Illumination from Heaven beyond others; and many were prone to
Superstition, Will Worship and a voluntary Humility, giving Heed to the
Commandments of Men, being fond of an unprofitable bodily Exercise, as appears
by many Passages in the Apostles Writings: And what a Proneness then appeared
among Professors to swerve from the Path of Duty, and the Spirit of the Gospel,
in the Exercises of a rash indiscreet Zeal, censuring and condemning Ministers
and People; one saying, I am of Paul, another I of Apollos, another I of
Cephas; judging one another for Differences of Opinion about smaller Matters,
unclean Meats, holy Days and holy Places, and their different Opinions and
Practices respecting civil Intercourse and Communication with their Heathen
Neighbors? And how much did vain Jangling and Disputing and Confusion prevail
through undue Heat of Spirit, under the Name of a religious Zeal? 2 Timothy 6. 4,
5. 2 Timothy 2. 16. and Tit. 3. 9. And what a Task had the Apostles to keep them
within Bounds, and maintain good Order in the Churches? How often are they
mentioning their Irregularities? The prevailing of such like Disorders seems to
have been the special Occasion of writing many of their Epistles. The Church in
that great Effusion of the Spirit that was then, and the strong Impressions
that GOD's People were then under, was under the Care of infallible Guides,
that watched over them Day and Night; but yet so prone were they, through the
Weakness and Corruption of human Nature, to get out of the Way, that
Irregularity and Confusion rose in some Churches, where there was an
extraordinary Out-pouring of the Spirit, to a very great Height, even in the
Apostles Lifetime, and under their Eye. And though some of the Apostles lived
long to settle the State of Things, yet presently after they were dead, the
Christian Church ran into many Superstitions and childish Notions and
Practices, and in some Respects into a great Severity in their Zeal. And let
any wise Person that han't, in the midst of the Disputes of the present Day,
got beyond the Calmness of Consideration, impartially consider to what Lengths,
we may reasonably suppose, many of the primitive Christians, in their Heat of
Zeal, and under their extraordinary Impressions, would soon have gone, if they
had had no inspired Guides; and whether or no it is not probable that the Church
of Corinth in particular, by an Increase of their Irregularities and
Contentions, would not in a little Time have broke to Pieces, and dissolved in
a State of the utmost Confusion? and yet this would have been no Evidence that
there had not been a most glorious and remarkable Out-pouring of the Spirit in
that City. But as for us, we have no infallible Apostle to guide and direct us,
to rectify Disorders, and reclaim us when we are wandering; but every one does
what is right in his own Eyes; and they that err in Judgment, and are got into
a wrong Path, continue to wander, till Experience of the mischievous Issue
convinces them of their Error.

If we look over this Affair, and seriously weigh it in its Circumstances, it
will appear a Matter of no great Difficulty to account for the Errors that have
been gone into, supposing the Work in general to be from a very great
Out-pouring of the Spirit of GOD. It may easily be accounted for, that many
have run into great Errors, and into just such Errors as they have. It is
known, that some that have been improved as great Instruments to promote this
Work, have been very young; and how natural is it for such as are themselves
newly 'waked out of Sleep, and bro't out of that State of Darkness,
Insensibility and spiritual Death, which they had been in ever since they were
born; and have a new and wonderful Scene opened to them; and have in View the
Reality, the Vastness, and infinite Importance, and Nearness of spiritual and
eternal Things; and at the same Time are surprised to see the World asleep
about them; and han't the Advantage of Age and Experience, and have had but
little Opportunity to study Divinity, or to converse with aged experienced
Christians and Divines; I say, how natural is it for such to fall into many
Errors with Respect to the State of Mankind, with which they are so surprised,
and with Respect to the Means, and Methods of their Relief? Is it any Wonder
that they have not at once learned how to make all the Allowances that are to be
made, and that they don't at once find out that Method of dealing with the
World, that is adapted to the mysterious State and Nature of Mankind? Is it any
Wonder that they cannot at once foresee what the Consequences of Things will be,
what Evils are to be guarded against, and what Difficulties are like to arise,
that are to be provided for?

We have long been in a strange Stupor; the Influences of the Spirit of GOD
upon the Heart have been but little felt, and the Nature of them but little
tought; so that they are in many Respects new to great Numbers of those that
have lately fallen under them. And is it any Wonder that they that never before
had Experience of the supernatural Influence of the Divine Spirit upon their
Souls, and never were instructed in the Nature of these Influences, don't so
well know how to distinguish one extraordinary new Impression from another, and
so (to themselves insensibly) run into Enthusiasm, taking every strong Impulse
or Impression to be divine? How natural is it to suppose, that among the
Multitudes of illiterate People (most of which are in their Youth) that find
themselves so wonderfully changed, and brought into such new, and before (to
them) almost unheard of Circumstances, that many should pass wrong, and very
strange Judgments of both Persons and Things that are about them; and that now
they behold them in such a new Light, they in their Surprise should go further
from the Judgment that they were wont to make of them than they ought, and in
their great Change of Sentiments, should pass from one Extreme to another? And
why should it be thought strange, that those that scarce ever heard of any such
Thing as an Out-pouring of the Spirit of GOD before; or if they did, had no
Notion of it; don't know how to behave themselves in such a new and strange
State of Things? And is it any Wonder that they are ready to hearken to those
that have instructed them, that have been the Means of delivering them from
such a State of Death and Misery as they were in before, or have a Name for
being the happy Instruments of promoting the same Work among others? Is it
unaccountable that Persons in these Circumstances are ready to receive every
Thing they say, and to drink down Error as well as Truth from them? And why
should there be all Indiguation and no Compassion toward those that are thus
misled?

When these Persons are extraordinarily affected with a new Sense, and recent
Discovery they have received, of the Greatness and Excellency of the divine
Being, the Certainty and infinite Importance of eternal Things, the
Preciousness of Souls, and the dreadful Danger and Madness of Mankind, together
with a great Sense of GOD's distinguishing Kindness and Love to them; no Wonder
that now they think they must exert themselves, and do something extraordinary
for the Honor of GOD and the Good of the Souls of their Fellow Creatures, and
know not how to sit still, and forbear speaking and acting with uncommon
Earnestness and Vigor. And in these Circumstances, if they ben't Persons of
more than common Steadiness and Discretion, or han't some Person of Wisdom to
direct them, it is a Wonder if they don't proceed without due Caution, and do
Things that are irregular, and that will, in the Issue, do much more Hurt than
Good.

Censuring others is the worst Disease with which this Affair has been
attended: But yet such a Time as this is indeed a Time of great Temptation to
this sinful Error. When there has been such a Time of great and long continued
Deadness, and many are brought out of a State of Nature into a State of Grace,
in so extraordinary a Manner, and filled with such uncommon Degrees of Light,
it is natural for such to form their Notions of a State of Grace wholly from
what they experience; many of them know no other Way; for they never have been
taught much about a State of Grace, and the different Degrees of Grace, and the
Degrees of Darkness and Corruption that Grace is consistent with, nor
concerning the Manner of the Influences of the Spirit in converting a Soul, and
the Variety of the Manner of his Operations: They therefore forming their Idea
of a State of Grace only by their own Experience, no Wonder that it appears an
insuperable Difficulty to them to reconcile such a State, of which they have
this Idea, with what they observe in Professors that are about them. It Is
indeed in it self a very great Mystery, that Grace should be consistent with so
much and such Kind of Corruption as sometimes prevails in the truly godly; and
no Wonder that it especially appears so to uninstructed new Converts, that have
been converted in an extraordinary Manner.

Though Censoriousness be a Thing that is very sinful, and is most commonly found
in Hypocrites and Persons of a pharisaical Spirit, yet it is not so
inconsistent with true Godliness as some imagine. We have remarkable Instances
of it in those holy Men that we have an Account of in the Book of Job: Not only
were Job's three Friends, that seem to have been eminently holy Men, guilty of
it, in very unreasonably censuring the best Man on Earth, very positively
determining that he was an unconverted Man; But Job himself, that was not only
a Man of true Piety, but excelled all Men in Piety, and particularly excelled
in a humble, meek and patient Spirit, was guilty of bitterly censuring his
three Friends, as wicked, vile Hypocrites. Job 16. 9, 10. 11. He teareth me in
his Wrath who hates me, he gnasheth upon me with his Teeth; mine Enemy
sharpeneth his Eyes upon me: They have gaped upon me with their Mouth. -- GOD
has delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over into the Hands of the
Wicked. So he is very positive in it that they are Hypocrites, and shall be
miserably destroyed as such, in the next Chapter, v. 2, 3, 4. Are there not
Mockers with me? And does not mine Eye continue in their Provocation? Lay down
now, put me in Surety with thee; who is he that will strike Hands with me? For
thou have hid their Heart from Understanding: therefore shall thou not exalt
them. And again, v. 8, 9, 10. Upright Men shall be astonished at this, and the
Innocent shall stir up himself against the Hypocrite: The Righteous also shall
hold on his Way, and he that has clean Hands shall be stronger and stronger.
But as for you all, do you return and come now: for I cannot find one wise Man
(i. e. one good Man) among you.

Thus I think the Errors and Irregularities that attend this Work, may be
accounted for, from the Consideration of the Infirmity and Weakness and common
Corruption of Mankind, together with the Circumstances of the Work, though we
should suppose it to be the Work of GOD. And it would not be a just Objection
in any to say, if these powerful Impressions and great Affections are from the
Spirit of GOD, why don't the same Spirit give Strength of Understanding and
Capacity in Proportion, to those Persons that are the Subjects of them; so that
strong Affections may not, through their Error, drive them to an irregular and
sinful Conduct? For I don't know that GOD has any where obliged himself to do
it. The End of the Influences of GOD's Spirit is to make Men spiritually
knowing, wise to Salvation, which is the most excellent Wisdom; and he has also
appointed Means for our gaining such Degrees of other Knowledge as we need, to
conduct our selves regularly, which Means should be carefully used: But the End
of the Influence of the Spirit of GOD is not to increase Men's natural
Capacities, nor has GOD obliged himself immediately to increase civil Prudence
in Proportion to the Degrees of spiritual Light.

If we consider the Errors that attend this Work, not only as from Man, and his
Infirmity, but also as from GOD, and by his Permission and Disposal, they are
not strange, upon the Supposition of its being, as to the Substance of it, a
Work of GOD. If GOD intends this great Revival of Religion to be the dawning,
or a Forerunner of an happy State of his Church on Earth, it may be an Instance
of the divine Wisdom, in the beginning of it, to suffer so many Irregularities
and Errors in Conduct, to which he knew Men, in their present weak State, were
most exposed, under great religious Affections, and when animated with great
Zeal. For it will be very likely to be of excellent Benefit to his Church, in
the Continuance and Progress of the Work afterward: Their Experience in the
first setting out, of the mischievous Consequences of these Errors, and
smarting for them in the Beginning, may be an happy Defense to them afterward,
for many Generations, from these Errors, which otherwise they might continually
be exposed to. As when David and all Israel went about to bring back the Ark
into the midst of the Land, after it had been long absent, first in the Land of
the Philistines, and then in Kirjathjearim, in the utmost Borders of the Land;
they at first sought not the LORD after the due Order, and they smarted for
their Error; but this put them upon studying the Law, and more thoroughly
acquainting themselves with the Mind and Will of GOD, and seeking and serving
him with greater Circumspection; and the Consequence was glorious, viz. their
seeking GOD in such a Manner as was accepted of him; and the Ark of GOD's
ascending into the (...) of Zion, with those great and extraordinary Rejoicings
of the King and all the People, without any Frown or Rebuke from GOD
intermixed; and GOD's dwelling thenceforward in the midst of the People, to
those glorious Purposes that are expressed in the 68th Psalm.

And it is very analogous to the Manner of GOD dealing with his People, to
permit a great deal of Error, and suffer the Infirmity of his People much to
appear, in the beginning of a glorious Work of his Grace for their Felicity, to
teach them what they be, to humble them, and fit them for that glorious
Prosperity he is about to advance them to, and the more to secure to himself
the Honor of such a glorious Work: For by Man's exceeding Weakness appearing
in the beginning of it, it is evident that GOD don't lay the Foundation of it in
Man's Strength or Wisdom.

And as we need not wonder at the Errors that attend this Work, if we look at
the Hand of Men that are guilty of them, and the Hand of GOD in permitting
them, so neither shall we see Cause to wonder at them, if we consider them with
Regard to the Hand that Satan has in them. For as the Work is much greater than
any other Out-pouring of the Spirit that ever has been in New England, so no
Wonder that the Devil is more alarmed and enraged, and exerts himself more
vigorously against it, and does more powerfully endeavor to tempt and mislead
those that are the Subjects of it, or are its Promoters.

Whatever Imprudences there have been, and whatever sinful Irregularities;
whatever Vehemence of the Passions, and Heats of the Imaginations, Transports
and Extacies; and whatever Error in Judgment, and indiscreet Zeal; and whatever
Outcries, and Faintings, and Agitations of Body; yet it is manifest and
notorious, that there has been of late a very uncommon Influence upon the Minds
of a very great Part of the Inhabitants of New England, from one End of the
Land to the other, that has been attended with the following Effects; viz. a
great Increase of a Spirit of Seriousness, and sober Consideration of the
Things of the eternal World; a Disposition to hearken to any Thing that is said
of Things of this Nature, with Attention and Affection; a Disposition to treat
Matters of Religion with Solemnity, and as Matters of great Importance; a
Disposition to make these Things the Subject of Conversation; and a great
Disposition to hear the Word of GOD preached, and to take all Opportunities in
order to it; and to attend on the public Worship of GOD, and all external
Duties of Religion in a more solemn and decent Manner; so that there is a
remarkable and general Alteration in the Face of New England in these Respects:
Multitudes in all Parts of the Land, of vain, thoughtless, regardless Persons
are quite changed, and become serious and considerate: There is a vast Increase
of Concern for the Salvation of the precious Soul, and of that Inquiry, What
shall I do to be saved? The Hearts of Multitudes have been greatly taken off
from the Things of the World, its Profits, Pleasures and Honors; and there has
been a great Increase of Sensibleness and Tendercess of Conscience: Multitudes
in all Parts have had their Consciences awakened, and have been made sensible
of the pernicious Nature and Consequences of Sin, and what a dreadful Thing it
is to lie under Guilt and the Displeasure of GOD, and to live without Peace and
Reconciliation with him: They have also been awakened to a Sense of the
Shortness and Uncertainty of Life, and the Reality of another World and future
Judgment, and of the Necessity of an Interest in CHRIST: They are more afraid
of Sin, more careful and inquisitive that they may know what is contrary to the
Mind and Will of GOD, that they may avoid it, and what he requires of them,
that they may do it; more careful to guard against Temptations, more watchful
over their own Hearts, earnestly desirous of being informed what are the Means
that GOD has directed to, for their Salvation, and diligent in the Use of the
Means that GOD has appointed in his Word, in order to it. Many very stupid,
senseless Sinners, and Persons of a vain Mind, have been greatly awakened.
There is a strange Alteration almost all over New England amongst young People:
By a powerful, invisible Influence on their Minds, they have been brought to
forsake those Things in a general Way, as it were at once, that they were
extremely fond of, and greatly addicted to, and that they seemed to place the
Happiness of their Lives in, and that nothing before could induce them to
forsake; as their Frolicking, vain Company-keeping, Night-walking, their Mirth
and Jollity, their impure Language, and lewd Songs: In vain did Ministers
preach against those Things before, and in vain were Laws made to restrain
them, and in vain was all the Vigilance of Magistrates and Civil Officers; but
now they have almost every where dropped them as it were of themselves. And
there is a great Alteration amongst Old and Young as to Drinking,
Tavern-haunting, profane speaking, and Extravagance in Apparel. Many
notoriously vicious Persons have been reformed, and become externally quite
New-Creatures: Some that are wealthy, and of a fashionable, gay Education; some
great Beaus and fine Ladies, that seemed to have their Minds swallowed up with
nothing but the vain Shows and Pleasures of the World, have been wonderfully
altered, and have relinquished these Vanities, and are become serious,
mortified and humble in their Conversation. It Is astonishing to see the
Alteration that is in some Towns, where before was but little Appearance of
Religion, or any Thing but Vice and Vanity: and so remote was all that was to
be seen or heard amongst them from any Thing that savored of vital Piety or
serious Religion, or that had any Relation to it, that one would have thought,
if they had judged only by what appeared in them, that they had been some other
Species from the serious and religious, that had no Concern with another World,
and whose Natures were not made capable of those Things that appertain to
Christian Experience, and pious Conversation; especially was it thus among
young Persons: And now they are transformed into another for of People; their
former vain, worldly and vicious Conversation and Dispositions seem to be
forsaken, and they are as it were, gone over to a new World: Their Thoughts,
and their Talk and their Concern, Affections and Enquiries are now about the
Favor of GOD, an Interest in CHRIST, a renewed sanctified Heart, and a
spiritual Blessedness, and Acceptance and Happiness in a future World. And
through the greater Part of New England, the Holy Bible is in much greater
Esteem and Use than it used to be; The great Things that are contained in it
are much more regarded, as Things of the greatest Consequence, and are much
more the Subjects of Meditation and Conversation; and other Books of Piety that
have long been of established Reputation, as the most excellent, and most
tending to promote true Godliness, have been abundantly more in Use: The
Lord's Day is more religiously and strictly observed: And abundance has been
lately done at making up Differences, and confessing Faults one to another, and
making Restitution; probably more within this two Years, than was done in
Thirty Years before: It has been so undoubtedly in many Places. And surprising
has been the Power of that Spirit that has been poured out on the Land, in many
Instances, to destroy old Grudges, and make up long continued Breaches, and to
bring those that seemed to be in a confirmed irreconcilable Alienation, to
embrace each other in a sincere and entire Amity. Great Numbers under this
Influence have been brought to a deep Sense of their own Sinfulness and
Vileness; the Sinfulness of their Lives, the Heinousness of their Disregard of
the Authority of the great GOD, and the Heinousness of their living in Contempt
of a Savior: they have lamented their former Negligence of their Souls, and
neglecting and losing precious Time. Their Sins of Life have been
extraordinarily set before them: and they have also had a great Sense of their
Sins of Heart; their hardness of Heart, and Enmity against that which is Good,
and Proneness to all Evil; and also of the Worthlessness of their own religious
Performances, how unworthy their Prayers, Praises, and all that they did in
Religion, was to be regarded of GOD: And it has been a common Thing that
Persons have had such a Sense of their own Sinfulness, that they have thought
themselves to be the worst of all, and that none ever was so vile as they: And
many seem to have been greatly convinced that they were utterly unworthy of any
Mercy at the Hands of GOD, however miserable they were, and though they stood in
extreme Necessity of Mercy; and that they deserved nothing but eternal
Burnings: and have been sensible that GOD would be altogether just and
righteous in inflicting endless Damnation upon them, at the same Time that they
have had an exceeding affecting Sense of the Dreadfulness of such endless
Torments, and have apprehended themselves to be greatly in Danger of it. And
many have been deeply affected with a Sense of their own Ignorance and
Blindness, and exceeding Helplessness, and so of their extreme Need of the
divine Pity and Help. And so far as we are worthy to be credited one by
another, in what we say, (and Persons of good Understanding and sound Mind, and
known and experienced Probity, have a Right to be believed by their Neighbors,
when they speak of Things that fall under their Observation and Experience,)
Multitudes in New England have lately been brought to a new and great
Conviction of the Truth and Certainty of the Things of the Gospel; to a firm
Persuasion that CHRIST JESUS is the Son of GOD, and the great and only Savior
of the World; and that the great Doctrines of the Gospel touching
Reconciliation by his Blood, and Acceptance in his Righteousness, and eternal
Life and Salvation through him, are Matters of undoubted Truth; together with a
most affecting Sense of the Excellency and Sufficiency of this Savior, and the
glorious Wisdom and Grace of GOD shining in this Way of Salvation; and of the
Wonders of CHRIST'S dying Love, and the Sincerity of CHRIST in the Invitations
of the Gospel, and a consequent Affiance and sweet Rest of Soul in CHRIST, as a
glorious Savior, a strong Rock and high Tower, accompanied with an admiring
and exalting Apprehension of the Glory of the divine Perfections, GOD's
Majesty, Holiness, sovereign Grace, etc. --;with a sensible, strong and sweet
Love to GOD, and Delight in him, far surpassing all temporal Delights, or
earthly Pleasures; and a Rest of Soul in him as a Portion and the Fountain of
all Good, attended with an Abhorrence of Sin, and Self-loathing for it, and
earnest longings of Soul after more Holiness and Conformity to GOD, with a
Sense of the great Need of GOD's Help in order to Holiness of Life; together
with a most dear Love to all that are supposed to be the Children of GOD, and a
Love to Mankind in general, and a most sensible and tender Compassion for the
Souls of Sinners, and earnest Desires of the Advancement of CHRIST'S Kingdom in
the World. And these Things have appeared to be in many of them abiding now for
many Months, yea, more than a Year and half; with an abiding Concern to live an
holy Life, and great Complaints of remaining Corruption, longing to be more
free from the Body of Sin and Death. And not only do these Effects appear in
new Converts, but great Numbers of those that were formerly esteemed the most
sober and pious People, have, under the Influence of this Work, been greatly
quickened, and their Hearts renewed with greater Degrees of Light, renewed
Repentance and Humiliation, and more lively Exercises of Faith, Love and Joy in
the LORD. Many as I am well knowing, have of late been remarkably engaged to
watch, and strive, and fight against Sin, and cast out every Idol, and sell all
for CHRIST, and give up themselves entirely to GOD, and make a Sacrifice of
every worldly and carnal Thing to the Welfare and Prosperity of their Souls.
And there has of late appeared in some Places an unusual Disposition to bind
themselves to it in a solemn Covenant with GOD. And now instead of Meetings at
Taverns and drinking Houses, and Meetings of young People in Frolicks and vain
Company, the Country is full of Meetings of all Sorts and Ages of Persons,
Young and Old, Men, Women and little Children, to read and pray, and sing
Praises, and to converse of the Things of GOD and another World. In very many
Places the main of the Conversation in all Companies turns on Religion, and
Things of a spiritual Nature. Instead of vain Mirth amongst young People, there
is now either mourning under a Sense of the Guilt of Sin, or holy rejoicing in
CHRIST JESUS; and instead of their lewd Songs, are now to be heard from them
Songs of Praise to GOD, and the Lamb that was slain to redeem them by his
Blood. And there has been this Alteration abiding on Multitudes all over the
Land, for a Year and half, without any Appearance of a Disposition to return to
former Vice and Vanity. And under the Influences of this Work, there have been
many of the Remains of those wretched People and Dregs of Mankind, the poor
Indians, that seemed to be next to a State of Brutality, and with whom, till
now, it seemed to be to little more Purpose to use Endeavors for their
Instruction and Awakening, than with the Beasts; whose Minds have now been
strangely opened to receive Instruction, and have been deeply affected with the
Concerns of their precious Souls, and have reformed their Lives, and forsaken
their former stupid, barbarous and brutish Way of living; and particularly that
Sin to which they have been so exceedingly addicted, their Drunkenness; and are
become devout and serious Persons; and many of them to Appearance bro't truly
and greatly to delight in the Things of GOD, and to have their Souls very much
engaged and entertained with the great Things of the Gospel. And many of the
poor Negroes also have been in like Manner wrought upon and changed. And the
Souls of very many little Children have been remarkably enlightened, and their
Hearts wonderfully affected and enlarged, and their Mouths opened, expressing
themselves in a Manner far beyond their Years, and to the just Astonishment of
those that have heard them; and some of them from Time to Time, for many
Months, greatly and delightfully affected with the Glory of divine Things, and
the Excellency and Love of the Redeemer, with their Hearts greatly filled (...)
to and Joy in him, and have continued to be serious and pious in their
Behavior.

The divine Power of this Work has marvellously appeared in some Instances I
have been acquainted with, in supporting and fortifying the Heart under great
Trials, such as the Death of (...) and extreme Pain of Body; wonderfully
maintaining the Serenity, Calmness and Joy of the Soul, in an immovable Rest
in GOD, and sweet Resignation to him. There also have been Instances of some
that have been the Subjects of this Work, that under the blessed Influences of
it have, in such a calm, bright and joyful Frame of Mind, been carried through
the Valley of the Shadow of Death.

And now let us consider --; Is it not strange that in a Christian, orthodox
Country, and such a Land of Light as this is, there should be many at a Loss
whose Work this is, whether the Work of GOD or the Work of the Devil? Is it not
a Shame to New England that such a Work should be much doubted of here? Need we
look over the Histories of all past Times, to see if there ben't some
Circumstances and external Appearances that attend this Work, that have been
formerly found amongst Enthusiasts? Whether the Montanists had not great
Transports of Joy, and whether the French Prophets had not Agitations of Body?
Blessed be GOD! He don't put us to the Toil of such Inquiries. We need not say,
Who shall ascend into Heaven, to bring us down something whereby to judge of
this Work? Nor does GOD send us beyond the Seas, nor into past Ages, to obtain
a Rule that shall determine and satisfy us. But we have a Rule near at Hand, a
sacred Book that GOD himself has put into our Hands, with clear and infallible
Marks, sufficient to resolve us in Things of this Nature; which Book I think we
must reject, not only in some particular Passages, but in the Substance of it,
if we reject such a Work as has now been described, as not being the Work of
GOD. The whole Tenor of the Gospel proves it; all the Notion of Religion that
the Scripture gives us confirms it.

I suppose there is scarcely a Minister in this Land, but from Sabbath to
Sabbath used to pray that GOD would pour out his Spirit, and work a Reformation
and Revival of Religion in the Country, and turn us from our Intemperance,
Profaneness, Uncleanness, Worldliness and other Sins; and we have kept from
Year to Year Days of public Fasting and Prayer to GOD, to acknowledge our
Backslidings, and humble our selves for our Sins, and to seek of GOD
Forgiveness and Reformation: and now when so great and extensive a Reformation
is so suddenly and wonderfully accomplished, in those very Things that we have
sought to GOD for, shall we not acknowledge it? Or when we do, do it, with
great Coldness, Caution and Reserve, and scarcely take any Notice of it in our
public Prayers and Praises, or mention it but slightly and cursorily, and in
such a Manner as carries an Appearance as though we would contrive to say as
little of it as ever we could, and were glad to pass from it? And that because,
(although indeed there be such a Work attended with all these glorious Effects,
yet) The Work is attended with a Mixture of Error, Imprudences, Darkness and
Sin; because some Persons are carried away with Impressions, and are
indiscreet, and too censorious with their Zeal; and because there are high
Transports of religious Affection; and because of some Effects on Persons
Bodies that we don't understand the Reason of?

I have been particularly acquainted with many Persons that have been the
Subjects of the high and extraordinary Transports of the present Day; and in
the highest Transports of any of the Instances that I have been acquainted
with, and where the Affections of Admiration, Love and Joy, so far as another
could judge, have been raised to a higher Pitch than in any other Instances I
have observed or been informed of, the following Things have been united, viz.
a very frequent dwelling, for some considerable Time together, in such Views of
the Glory of the divine Perfections, and CHRIST's Excellencies, that the Soul
in the mean Time has been as it were perfectly overwhelmed, and swallowed up
with Light and Love and a sweet Solace, Rest and Joy of Soul, that was
altogether unspeakeable; and more than once continuing for five or six Hours
together, without any Interruption, in that clear and lively View or Sense of
the infinite Beauty and Amiableness of CHRIST's Person, and the heavenly
Sweetness of his excellent and transcendent Love; so that (to use the Person's
own Expressions) the Soul remained in a kind of heavenly Elysium, and did as it
were swim in the Rays of CHRIST's Love, like a little Mote swimming in the
Beams of the Sun, or Streams of his Light that come in at a Window; and the
Heart was swallowed up in a kind of Glow of CHRIST's Love, coming down from
CHRIST's Heart in Heaven, as a constant Stream of sweet Light, at the same Time
the Soul all flowing out in Love to him; so that there seemed to be a constant
flowing and reflowing from Heart to Heart: The Soul dwelt on high, and was lost
in GOD, and seemed almost to leave the Body; dwelling in a pure Delight that
fed and satisfied the Soul; enjoying Pleasure without the least Sting, or any
Interruption; a Sweetness that the Soul was lost in; so that (so far as the
Judgment, and Word of a Person of Discretion may be taken, speaking upon the
most deliberate Consideration,) what was enjoyed in each single Minute of the
whole Space, which was many Hours, was undoubtedly worth more than all the
outward Comfort and Pleasure of the whole Life put together; and this without
being in any Trance, or being at all deprived of the Exercise of the Bodily
Senses: And the like heavenly Delight and unspeakable Joy of Soul, enjoyed from
Time to Time, for Years together; though not frequently so long together, to such
an height: Extraordinary Views of divine Things, and religious Affections,
being frequently attended with very great Effects on the Body, Nature often
sinking under the Weight of divine Discoveries, the Strength of the Body taken
away, so as to deprive of all Ability to stand or speak; sometimes the Hands
clinch'd, and the Flesh cold, but Senses still remaining; animal Nature often
in a great Emotion and Agitation, and the Soul very often, of late, so overcome
with great Admiration, and a kind of omnipotent Joy, as to cause the Person
(wholly unavoidably,) to leap with all the Might, with Joy and mighty
Exultation of Soul; the Soul at the same Time being so strongly drawn toward
GOD and CHRIST in Heaven, that it seemed to the Person as though Soul and Body
would, as it were of themselves, of Necessity mount up, leave the Earth and
ascend thither. These Effect on the Body did not begin now in this wonderful
Season, that they should be owing to the Influence of the Example of the Times,
but about seven Years ago; and began in a much higher Degree, and greater
Frequency, near three Years ago, when there was no such enthusiastical Season,
as many account this, but it was a very dead Time through the Land: They arose
from no Distemper catched from Mr. Whitefield, or Mr. Tennent, because they
began before either of them came into the Country; They began as I said, (...)
three Years ago, in a great Increase, upon an extraordinary Self-Dedication,
and Renunciation of the World, and Resignation of all to GOD, made in a great
View of GOD's Excellency, and high Exercise of Love to him, and Rest and Joy in
him; since which Time they have been very frequent; and began in a yet higher
Degree, and greater Frequency, about a Year and half ago, upon another new
Resignation of all to GOD, with a yet greater Fervency and Delight of Soul;
since which Time the Body has been very often fainting, with the Love of
CHRIST; and began in a much higher Degree still, the last Winter, upon another
Resignation and Acceptance of GOD, as the only Portion and Happiness of the
Soul, wherein the whole World, with the dearest Enjoyments in it, were
renounced as Dirt and Dung, and all that is pleasant and glorious, and all that
is terrible in this World, seemed perfectly to vanish into nothing, and nothing
to be left but GOD, in whom the Soul was perfectly swallowed up, as in an
infinite Ocean of Blessedness: Since which Time there have often been great
Agitations of Body, and an unavoidable leaping for Joy; and the Soul as it were
dwelling almost without Interruption, in a kind of Paradise; and very often, in
high Transports, disposed to speak of those great and glorious Things of GOD
and CHRIST, and the eternal World, that are in View, to others that are
present, in a most earnest Manner, and with a loud Voice, so that it is next to
impossible to avoid it: These Effects on the Body not arising from any bodily
Distemper or Weakness, because the greatest of all have been in a good State of
Health. This great Rejoicing has been a rejoicing with trembling, i. e.
attended with a deep and lively Sense of the Greatness and Majesty of GOD, and
the Person's own exceeding Littleness and Vileness: Spiritual Joys in this
Person never were attended, either formerly or lately, with the least
Appearance of any Laughter or Lightness of Countenance, or Manner of speaking;
but with a peculiar Abhorrence of such Appearances in spiritual Rejoicings,
especially since Joys have been greatest of all: These high Transports when
they have been past, have had abiding Effects in the Increase of the Sweetness,
Rest and Humility that they have left upon the Soul; and a new Engagedness of
Heart to live to GOD's Honor, and watch and fight against Sin. And these
Things not in one that is in the giddy age of Youth, nor in a new Convert, and
unexperienced Christian, but in one that was converted above Twenty-seven Years
ago; and neither converted, nor educate in that enthusiastical Town of
Northampton, (as some may be ready to call it,) but in a Town and Family that
none that I know of suspected of Enthusiasm; and in a Christian that has been
long, in an uncommon Manner, growing in Grace, and rising, by very sensible
Degrees, to higher Love to GOD, and Weanedness from the World, and Mastery over
Sin and Temptation, through great Trials and Conflicts, and long continued
struggling and fighting with Sin, and earnest and constant Prayer and Labor in
Religion, and Engagedness of Mind in the Use of all Means, attended with a
great Exactness of Life: Which Growth has been attended, not only with a great
Increase of religious Affections, but with a wonderful Alteration of outward
Behavior, in many Things, visible to those who are most intimately acquainted,
so as lately to have become as it were a new Person; and particularly in living
so much more above the World, and in a greater Degree of Stedfastness and
Strength in the Way of Duty and Self-denial, maintaining the Christian Conflict
against Temptations, and conquering from Time to Time under great Trials;
persisting in an unmoved, untouched Calm and Rest, under the Changes and
Accidents of Time. The Person had formerly in lower Degrees of Grace, been
subject to Unsteadiness, and many ups and downs, in the Frame of Mind; The Mind
being under great Disadvantages, through a vapoury Habit of Body, and often
subject to Melancholy, and at Times almost overborn with it, it having been so
even from early Youth: but Strength of Grace, and divine Light has of a long
Time, wholly conquered these Disadvantages, and carried the Mind in a constant
Manner, quite above all such Effects of Vapors. Since that Resignation spoken
of before, made near three Years ago, every Thing of that Nature seems to be
overcome and crushed by the Power of Faith and Trust in GOD, and Resignation to
him; the Person has remained in a constant uninterrupted Rest, and humble Joy
in GOD, and Assurance of his Favor, without one Hour's Melancholy or Darkness,
from that Day to this; Vapors have had great Effects on the Body, such as they
used to have before, but the Soul has been always out of their Reach. And this
Stedfastness and Constancy has remained through great outward Changes and Trials;
such as Times of the most extreme Pain, and apparent Hazard of immediate Death.
What has been felt in late great Transports is known to be nothing new in Kind,
but to be of the same Nature with what was felt formerly, when a little Child
of about five or six Years of Age; but only in a vastly higher Degree. These
transporting Views and rapturous Affections are not attended with any
enthusiastic Disposition, to follow Impulses, or any supposed prophetical
Revelations; nor have they been observed to be attended with any Appearance of
spiritual Pride, but very much of a contrary Disposition, an Increase of a
Spirit of Humility and Meekness, and a Disposition in Honor to prefer others:
And it is worthy to be remarked, that at a Time remarkably distinguished from
all others, wherein Discoveries and holy Affections were evidently at the
greatest Height that ever happened, the Greatness and Clearness of divine Light
being overwhelming, and the Strength and Sweetness of divine Love altogether
over-pouring, which began early in the Morning of the holy Sabbath, and lasted
for Days together, melting all down in the deepest Humility and Poverty of
Spirit, Reverence and Resignation, and the sweetest Meekness, and universal
Benevolence; I say, it is worthy to be observed, that there were these two
Things in a remarkable Manner felt at that Time, viz. a peculiar sensible
Aversion to a judging others that were professing Christians of good standing
in the visible Church, that they were not converted, or with respect to their
Degrees of Grace; or at all intermeddling with that Matter, so much as to
determine against and condemn others in the Thought of the Heart; it appearing
hateful, as not agreeing with that Lamb-like Humility, Meekness, Gentleness and
Charity, which the Soul then, above other Times, saw the Beauty of, and felt a
Disposition to. The Disposition that was then felt was, on the contrary, to
prefer others to Self, and to hope that they saw more of GOD and loved him
better; though before, under smaller Discoveries, and feebler Exercises of divine
Affection, there had been felt a Disposition to censure and condemn others. And
another Thing that was felt at that Time, was a very great Sense of the
Importance of moral social Duties, and how great a Part of Religion lay in
them: There was such a new Sense and Conviction of this, beyond what had been
before, that it seemed to be as it were a clear Discovery then made to the
Soul: But in general, there has been a very great Increase of a Sense of these
two Things, as divine Views and divine Love have increased.

The Things already mentioned have been attended also with the following
Things, viz. an extraordinary Sense of the awful Majesty and Greatness of GOD,
so as oftentimes to take away the bodily Strength; a Sense of the Holiness of
GOD, as of a Flame infinitely pure and bright, so as sometimes to overwhelm
Soul and Body; a Sense of the piercing all-seeing Eye of GOD, so as sometimes
to take away the bodily Strength; and an extraordinary View of the infinite
Terribleness of the Wrath of GOD, which has very frequently been strongly
impressed on the Mind, together with a Sense of the ineffable Misery of Sinners
that are exposed to this Wrath, that has been over-bearing: Sometimes the
exceeding Pollution of the Person's own Heart, as a Sink of all manner of
Abomination, and a Nest of Vipers, and the Dreadfulness of an eternal Hell of
GOD's Wrath, opened to View both together; with a clear View of a Desert of
that Misery, without the least Degree of divine Pity, and that by the Pollution
of the best Duties; yea, only by the Pollution and Irreverence, and want of
Humility that attended once speaking of the holy Name of GOD, when done in the
best Manner that ever it was done; the Strength of the Body very often taken
away with a deep mourning for Sin, as committed against so holy and good a GOD,
sometimes with an affecting Sense of actual Sin, sometimes especially
indwelling Sin, sometimes the Consideration of the Sin of the Heart as
appearing in a particular Thing, as for Instance, in that there was no greater
Forwardness and Readiness to Self-denial for GOD and CHRIST, that had so denied
himself for us; yea, sometimes the Consideration of Sin that was in only
speaking one Word concerning the infinitely great and holy GOD, has been so
affecting as to overcome' the Strength of Nature: A very great Sense of the
certain Truth of the great Things revealed in the Gospel; an overwhelming
Sense of the Glory of the Work of Redemption, and the Way of Salvation by JESUS
CHRIST; the glorious Harmony of the divine Attributes appearing therein, as
that wherein Mercy and Truth are met together, and Righteousness and Peace have
kissed each other; a Sight of the Fullness and glorious Sufficiency of CHRIST,
that has been so affecting as to overcome the Body: A constant immovable Trust
in GOD through CHRIST, with a great Sense of his Strength and Faithfulness, the
Sureness of his Covenant, and the Immutability of his Promises, so that the
everlasting Mountains and perpetual Hills have appeared as mere Shadows to
these Things: Sometimes the Sufficiency and Faithfulness of GOD as the Covenant
GOD of his People, appearing in these Words, I AM THAT I AM, in so affecting a
Manner as to overcome the Body: A Sense of the glorious, unsearchable, unerring
Wisdom of GOD in his Works, both of Creation and Providence, so as to swallow
up the Soul, and overcome the Strength of the Body: A sweet rejoicing of Soul
at the Thoughts of GOD's being infinitely and unchangeably happy, and an
exulting gladness of Heart that GOD is Self-sufficient, and infinitely above
all Dependence, and reigns over all, and does his Will with absolute and
uncontrollable Power and Sovereignty; a Sense of the Glory of the Holy Spirit,
as the great Comforter, so as to overwhelm both Soul and Body; only mentioning
the Word the COMFORTER, has immediately taken away all Strength; that Word, as
the Person expressed it, seemed great enough to fill Heaven and Earth: A most
vehement and passionate Desire of the Honor and Glory of GOD's Name; a
sensible, clear and constant Preference of it not only to the Person's own
temporal Interest, but spiritual Comfort in this World; and a Willingness to
suffer the hidings of GOD's Face, and to live and die in Darkness and Horror if
GOD's Honor should require it, and to have no other Reward for it but that
GOD's Name should be glorified, although so much of the Sweetness of the Light of
GOD's Countenance had been experienced: A great lamonting of Ingratitude, and
the lowness of the Degree of Love to GOD, so as to deprive of bodily Strength;
and very often vehement Longings and Faintings after more Love to Christ, and
greater Conformity to him; especially longing after these two Things, viz. To
be more perfect in Humility, and Adoration; the Flesh and Heart, seems often to
cry out for a lying low before GOD, and adoring him with greater Love and
Humility: The Thoughts of the perfect Humility with which the Saints in Heaven
worship GOD, and fall down before his Throne, have often overcome the Body, and
set it into a great Agitation. A great Delight in singing Praises to GOD and
JESUS CHRIST, and longing that this present Life may be, as it were, one
continued Song of Praise to GOD; longing, as the Person expressed it, to sit
and sing this Life away; and an overcoming Pleasure in the Thoughts of spending
an Eternity in that Exercise: A living by Faith to a great Degree; a constant
and extraordinary Distrust of own Strength and Wisdom; a great Dependence on
GOD for his Help, in order to the Performance of any Thing to GOD's Acceptance,
and being restrained from the most horrid Sins, and running upon GOD, even on
his Neck, and on the thick Bosses of his Bucklers: Such a Sense of the black
Ingratitude of true Saints Coldness and Deadness in Religion, and their setting
their Hearts on the Things of this World, as to overcome the bodily Frame: A
great longing that all the Children of GOD might be lively in Religion, servent
in their Love, and active in the Service of GOD; and when there have been
Appearances of it in others, rejoicing so in beholding the pleasing Sight, that
the Joy of Soul has been too great for the Body: Taking Pleasure in the
Thoughts of watching and striving against Sin, and fighting through the Way to
Heaven, and filling up this Life with hard Labor, and bearing the Cross for
CHRIST, as an Opportunity to give GOD Honor; not desiring to rest from Labors
'till arrived in Heaven, but abhorring the Thoughts of it, and seeming
astonished that GOD's own Children should be backward to strive and deny
themselves for GOD: Earnest Longings that all GOD's People might be clothed
with Humility and Meekness, like the Lamb of GOD, and feel nothing in their
Hearts but Love and Compassion to all Mankind; and great Grief when any Thing
to the contrary seems to appear in any of the Children of GOD, as any
Bitterness, or fierceness of Zeal, or Censoriousness, or reflecting
uncharitably on others, or disputing with any Appearance of Heat of Spirit; a
deep Concern for the Good of others Souls; a melting Compassion to those that
looked on themselves as in a State of Nature, and to Saints under Darkness, so
as to cause the Body to saint: An universal Benevolence to Mankind, with a
longing as it were to embrace the whole World in the Arms of Pity and Love;
Ideas of suffering from Enemies, the utmost conceiveable Rage and Cruelty, with
a Disposition felt to servent Love and Pity in such a Case, so far as it could
be realized in Thought; Fainting with Pity to the World that lies in Ignorance
and Wickedness; sometimes a Disposition felt to a Life given up to mourning
alone in a Wilderness over a lost and miserable World; Compassion toward them
being often to that Degree, that would allow of no Support or Rest, but in
going to GOD, and pouring out the Soul in Prayer for them; earnest Desires that
the Work of GOD, that it now in the Land, may be carried on, and that with
greater Purity, and Freedom from all bitter Zeal, Censoriousness, spiritual
Pride, hot Disputes, etc --; a vehement and constant Desire for the setting up
of CHRIST's Kingdom through the Earth, as a Kingdom of Holiness, Purity, Love,
Peace and Happiness to Mankind: The Soul often entertained with unspeakable
Delight, and bodily Strength overborn, at the Thoughts of Heaven, as a World of
Love, where Love shall be the Saints eternal Food, and they shaldwell in the
Light of Love, and swim in a Ocean of Love, and where the very Air and Breath
will be nothing but Love; Love to the People of GOD, or GOD's true Saints, as
such that have the Image of CHRIST, and as those that will in a very little
Time shine in his perfect Image, that has been attended with that Endearment
and Oneness of Heart, and that Sweetness and Ravishment of Soul, that has been
altogether inexpressible; The Strength very often taken away with Longings that
others might love GOD more, and serve GOD better, and have more of his
comfortable Presence, than the Person that was the Subject of these Longings,
desering to follow the whole World to Heaven, or that every one should go
before, and be higher in Grace and Happiness, not by this Person's Diminution,
but by others Increase: A Delight in conversing of Things of Religion, and in
seeing Christians together, talking of the most spiritual and heavenly Things
in Religion, in a lively and feeling Manner, and very frequently overcome with
the Pleasure of such Conversation: A great Sense often expressed, of the
Importance of the Duty of Charity to the Poor, and how much the generality of
Christians come short in the Practice of it: A great Sense of the Need GOD's
Ministers have of much of the Spirit of GOD, at this Day especially; and most
earnest Longings and Wrestlings with GOD for them, so as to take away the
bodily Strength: The greatest, fullest, longest continued, and most constant
Assurance of the Favor of GOD, and of a Title to future Glory, that ever I saw
any Appearance of in any Person, enjoying, especially of late, (to use the
Person's own Expression) The Riches of full Assurance: Formerly longing to die
with something of Impatience, but lately, since that Resignation forementioned
about three Years ago, an uninterrupted entire Resignation to GOD with Respect
to Life or Death, Sickness or Health, Ease or Pain, which has remained
unchanged and unshaken, when actually under extreme and violent Pains, and in
Times of Threatenings of immediate Death; But though there be this Patience and
Submission, yet the Thoughts of Death and the Day of Judgment are always
exceeding sweet to the Soul: This Resignation is also attended with a constant
Resignation of the Lives of dearest earthly Friends, and sometimes when some of
their Lives have been imminently threatened; often expressing the Sweetness of
the Liberty of having wholly left the World, and renounced all for GOD, and
having nothing but GOD, in whom is an infinite Fullness. These Things have been
attended with a constant sweet Peace and Calm and Serenity of Soul, without any
Cloud to interrupt it; a continual rejoicing in all the Works of GOD's Hands,
the Works of Nature, and GOD's daily Works of Providence, all appearing with a
sweet Smile upon them; a wonderful Access to GOD by Prayer, as it were seeing
him, and sensibly immediately conversing with him, as much oftentimes, (to use
the Person's own Expressions,) as if Christ were here on Earth, sitting on a
visible Throne, to be approached to and conversed with; frequent, plain,
sensible, and immediate Answers (...) Prayer; all Tears wiped away, all former
Troubles and Sorrows of Life forgotten, and all Sorrow and Sighing fled away,
excepting Grief for past Sins, and for remaining Corruption, and that CHRIST is
loved no more, and that GOD is no more honored in the World, and a
compassionate Grief toward Fellow Creatures; a daily sensible doing and
suffering every Thing for GOD, for a long Time past, eating for GOD, and
working for GOD, and sleeping for GOD, and bearing Pain and Trouble for GOD,
and doing all as the Service of Love, and so doing it with a continual,
uninterrupted Cheerfulness, Peace and Joy. Oh how good, find the Person once,
is it to work for GOD in the Daytime, and at Night to lie down under his
Smiles! High Experiences and religious Affections in this Person have not been
attended with any Disposition at all to neglect the necessary Business of a
secular Calling, to spend the Time in Reading and Prayer, and other Exercises
of Devotion: but worldly Business has been attended with great Alacrity, as
Part of the Service of GOD: The Person declaring that it being done thus, it is
found to be as good as Prayer. These Things have been accompanied with an
exceeding Concern and Zeal for moral Duties, and that all Professors may with
them adorn the Doctrine of GOD their Savior; and an uncommon Care to perform
relative and social Duties, and a noted Eminence in them; a great
Inoffensiveness of Life and Conversation in the Sight of others; a great
Meekness, Gentleness and Benevolence of Spirit and Behavior; and a great
Alteration in those Things that formerly used to be the Person's Failings;
seeming to be much overcome and swallowed up by the late great Increase of
Grace, to the Observation of those that are most conversant and most intimately
acquainted: In Times of the brightest Light and highest Flights of Love and
Joy, finding no Disposition to any Opinion of being now perfectly free from
Sin, (agreeable to the Notion of the Wesleys and their Followers, and some other
high Pretenders to Spirituality in these Days;) but exceedingly the contrary:
at such Times especially, seeing how loathsome and polluted the Soul is, Soul
and Body and every Act and Word appearing like Rotenness and Corruption in that
pure and holy Light of GOD's Glory: not slighting Instruction or Means of Grace
any more for having had great Discoveries; on the contrary, never more sensible
of the Need of Instruction than now. And one Thing more may be added, viz. That
these Things have been attended with a particular Dislike (...) placing
Religion much in Dress, and spending much Zeal about those Things that in
themselves are Matters of Indifference, or an affecting to show Humility and
Devotion by a mean Habit, or a demure and melanchely Countenance, or any Thing
singular and superstitious.

Now if such Things are Enthusiasm, and the Fruits of a distempered Brain, Let
my Brain be evermore possessed of that happy Distemper! If this be Distraction,
I pray GOD that the World of Mankind may be all seized with this (...) meek,
beneficent, beatifical, glorious Distraction. If Agitations of Body were found
in the French Prophets, and Ten Thousand Prophets more, it is little to their
Purpose who bring it as an Objection against such a Work as this, unless their
Purpose be to disprove the whole of the Christian Religion. The great
Affections and high Transports that others have lately been under, are in
general of the same Kind with those in the Instance that has been given, though
not to so high a Degree, and many of them, not so pure and unmixed, and so well
regulated. I have had Opportunity to observe many Instances here and elsewhere;
and though there are some Instances of great Affections in which there has been a
great Mixture of Nature with Grace, and in some, a sad degenerating of
religious Affections; yet there is that Uniformity observable, that it is easy
to be seen that in general it is the same Spirit from whence the Work in all
Parts of the Land has originated. And what Notions have they of Religion, that
reject what has been described as not true Religion? What shall we find to
answer those Expressions in Scripture, The Peace of GOD that passes all
Understanding; -- Rejoicing with Joy unspeakeable and full of Glory, in
believing in and loving an unseen Savior; -- All Joy and Peace in believing;
-- GOD's shining into our Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the
Glory of GOD, in the Face of Jesus Christ; with open Face, beholding as in a
Glass, the Glory of the Lord, and being changed into the same Image, from Glory
to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord; -- Having the Love of GOD shed
abroad in our Hearts, by the Holy Ghost given to us; -- Having the Spirit of
GOD, and of Glory rest upon us; -- A being called out of Darkness into
mavelous Light; and having the Day Star arise in our Hearts: -- I say, if
those Things that have been mentioned, don't answer these Expressions, what
else can we find out that does answer them? Those that don't think such Things
as these to be the Fruits of the true Spirit, would do well to consider what
Kind of Spirit they are waiting and praying for, and what Sort of Fruits they
expect he should produce when he comes. I suppose it will generally be allowed
that there is such a Things as a glorious Out-pouring of the Spirit of GOD to
be expected, to introduce very joyful and glorious Times upon religious
Accounts; Times wherein holy Love and Joy will be raised to a great Height in
true Christians: But if those Things that have been mentioned be rejected, what
is left that we can find wherewith to patch up a Notion, or form an Idea, of
the high, blessed, joyful Religion of these Times? What is that any have a
Notion of, that is very sweet, excellent and joyful, of a religious Nature,
that is entirely of a different Nature from these Things?

Those that are waiting for the Fruits in order to determine whether this be
the Work of GOD or no, would do well to consider two Things; 1. What they are
waiting for: Whether it ben't this; To have this wonderful religious Influence
that is on the Minds of People over and past, and then to see how they will
behave themselves' That is, to have Grace subside, and the Acting of it in a
great Measure to cease, and to have Persons grow cold and dead, and then to see
whether after that, they will behave themselves with that Exactness and
Brightness of Conversation, that is to be expected of lively Christians, or
those that are in the vigorous Exercises of Grace. There are many that will not
be satisfied with any Exactness or Laboriousness in Religion now, while Persons
have their Minds much moved, and their Affections are high; for they lay it to
their Flash of Affections, and Heat of Zeal, as they call it; they are waiting
to see whether they will carry themselves as well when these Affections are
over: That is, they are waiting to have Persons sicken and lose their Strength,
that they may see whether they will then behave themselves like healthy strong
Men. I would desire that they would also consider whether they ben't waiting
for more than is reasonably to be expected, supposing this to be really a great
Work of GOD, and much more than has been found in former great Out-pourings of
the Spirit of GOD, that have been universally acknowledged in the Christian
Church? Don't they expect fewer Instances of Apostasy, and Evidences of
Hypocrisy in Professors, and those that for the present seem to be under the
Influences of the Spirit, than were after that great Out-pouring of the Spirit
in the Apostles Days, or that which was in the Time of the Reformation? And
don't they stand prepared to make a mighty Argument of it against this Work, if
there should be half so many? And 2. They would do well to consider how long
they will wait to see the good Fruit of this Work, before they will determine
in Favor of it. Is not their Waiting unlimited? The visible Fruit that is to
be expected of a pouring out of the Spirit of GOD on a Country, is a visible
Reformation in that Country: What Reformation has lately been brought to pass
in New England, by this Work, has been before observed: And has it not
continued long enough already, to give reasonable Satisfaction? If GOD cannot
work on the Hearts of a People after such a Manner, as to show his Hand so
plainly, as reasonably to expect it should be acknowledged in a Year and half,
or two Years Time; yet surely it is unreasonable, that our Expectations and
Demands should be unlimited, and our Waiting without any Bounds.

As there is the clearest Evidence, from those Things that have been observed,
that this is the Work of GOD, so it is evident that it is a very great and
wonderful, and exceeding glorious Work of GOD. This is certain that it is a
great and wonderful Event, a strange Revolution, an unexpected, surprising
Overturning of Things, suddenly brought to pass; such as never has been seen in
New England, and scarce ever has been heard of in any Land. Who that saw the
State of Things in New England a few Years ago, the State that it was settled
in, and the Way that we had been so long going on in, would have thought that
in so little a Time there would be such a Change? This is undoubtedly either a
very great Work of GOD, or a great Work of the Devil, as to the main Substance
of it. For though undoubtedly, GOD and the Devil may work together at the same
Time, and in the same Land; and when GOD is at work, especially if he be very
remarkably at Work, Satan will to his utmost endeavor to intrude, and by
intermingling his Work, to darken and hinder GOD's Work; yet GOD and the Devil
don't work together in producing the same Event, and in effecting the same
Change in the Hearts and Lives of Men: But it is apparent that there are some
Things wherein the main Substance of this Work consists, a certain Effect that
is produced, and Alteration that is made in the Apprehensions, Affections,
Dispositions and Behavior of Men, in which there is a Likeness and Agreement
every where: Now this I say, is either a wonderful Work of GOD, or a mighty
Work of the Devil; and so is either a most happy Event, greatly to be admired
and rejoiced in, or a most awful Calamity. Therefore if what has been said
before, be sufficient to determine it to be as to the Main, the Work of GOD,
then it must be acknowledged to be a very wonderful and glorious Work of GOD.

Such a Work is in its Nature and Kind, the most glorious of any Work of GOD
whatsoever; and is always so spoken of in Scripture. It is the Work of
Redemption, (The great End of all other Works of GOD, and of which the Work of
Creation was but a Shadow,) in the Event, Success and End of it: It is the Work
of New Creation, that is infinitely more glorious than the Old. I am bold to
say, that the Work of GOD in the Conversion of one Soul, considered together
with the Source, Foundation and Purchase of it, and also the Benefit, End and
eternal Issue of it, is a more glorious Work of GOD than the Creation of the
whole material Universe: It is the most glorious of GOD's Works, as it above
all others manifests the Glory of GOD: It is spoken of in Scripture as that
which shows the exceeding Greatness of GOD's Power, and the Glory and Riches of
divine Grace, and wherein CHRIST has the most glorious Triumph over his
Enemies, and wherein GOD is mightily exalted: And it is a Work above all others
glorious, a it concerns the Happiness of Mankind; more Happiness, and a greater
Benefit to Man, is the Fruit of each single Drop of such a Shower, than all the
temporal Good of the most happy Revolution in a Land or Nation amounts to, or
all that a People could gain by the Conquest of the World.

And as this Work is very glorious in its Nature, so it is in its Degree and
Circumstances. It will appear very glorious if we consider the Unworthiness of
the People that are the Subjects of it; what Obligations GOD has laid us under
by the special Privileges we have enjoyed for our Souls Good, and the great
Things GOD did for us at our first Settlement in the Land; and how he has
followed us with his Goodness to this Day, and how we have abused his Goodness;
how long we have been revolting more and more, (as all confess,) and how very
corrupt we were become at last; in how great a Degree we had cast off GOD, and
forsaken the Fountain of living Waters: how obstinate we have been under all
Manner of Means that GOD has used with us to reclaim us; how often we have
mocked GOD with hypocritical Pretenses of Humiliation, as in our annual Days of
public Fasting, and other Things, while instead of reforming, we only grew
worse and worse; how dead a Time it was every where before this Work began: If
we consider these Things, we shall be most stupidly ungrateful, if we don't
acknowledge GOD's visiting of us as he has done, as an Instance of the glorious
Triumph of free and sovereign Grace.

The Work is very glorious if we consider the Extent of it; being in this
Respect vastly beyond any former Out-pouring of the Spirit that ever was known
in New England. There has formerly sometimes been a remarkable Awakening and
Success of the Means of Grace, in some particular Congregation; and this used
to be much taken Notice of, and acknowledged to be glorious, though the Towns and
Congregations round about continued dead: But now GOD has bro't to pass a new
Thing, he has wrought a great Work of this Nature, that has extended from one
End of the Land to the other, besides what has been wrought in other British
Colonies in America.

The Work is very glorious in the great Numbers that have to Appearence, been
turned from Sin to GOD, and so delivered from a wretched Captivity to Sin and
Satan, saved from everlasting Burnings, and made Heirs of eternal Glory. How
high an Honor, and great Reward of their Labors, have some eminent Persons,
of Note in the Church of GOD, signified that they should esteem it, if they
should be made the Instruments of the Conversion and eternal Salvation of but
one Soul? And no greater Event than that is though it worthy of great Notice in
Heaven, among the Hosts of glorious Angels, who rejoice and sing on such an
Occasion: and when there are many Thousands of Souls thus converted and saved,
shall it be esteemed worth but little Notice, and be mentioned with Coldness
and Indifference here on Earth, by those among whom such a Work is wrought?

The Work has been very glorious and wonderful in many Circumstances and Events
of it, that have been extraordinary, wherein GOD has in an uncommon Manner made
his Hand visible, and his Power conspicuous; as in the extraordinary Degrees of
Awakening, the Suddenness of Conversions in innumerable Instances, in whom though
the Work was quick, yet the Thing wro't is manifestly durable. How common a
Thing has it been for great Part of a Congregation to be at once moved, by a
mighty invisible Power; and for fix, eight or ten Souls to be converted to GOD,
(to all Appearance,) in an Exercise, in whom the visible Change still
continues? How great an Alteration has been made in some Towns; yea, some
populous Towns; the Change still abiding: And how many very vicious Persons
have been wrought upon, so as to become visibly New-Creatures? GOD has also
made his Hand very visible, and his Work glorious, in the Multitudes of little
Children that have been wrought upon: I suppose there have been some Hundreds
of Instances of this Nature of late, any one of which formers would have been
looked upon so remarkable, (...) to be worthy to be recorded, and published
through the Land. The Work is very glorious in its Influences and Effects on many
that have been very ignorant and barbarous, as I before observed of the Indians
and Negroes.

The Work is also exceeding glorious in the high Seize of Christians, in
the extraordinary Degrees of Light, Love and spiritual Joy, that GOD has
bestowed upon great Multitudes. In this Respect also, The Land in all Parts has
abounded with such Instances, any one of which, if they had happened formerly,
would have been thought worthy to be taken Notice of by GOD's People,
throughout the British Dominions. The New-Jerusalem in this Respect has begun
to come down from Heaven, and perhaps never were more of the Prelibations of
Heaven's Glory given upon Earth.

There being a great many Errors and sinful Irregularities mixed with this Work
of GOD, arising from our Weakness, Darkness and Corruption, don't hinder this
Work of GOD's Power and Grace from being very glorious. Our Follies and Sins
that we mix, do in some Respects manifest the Glory of it: The Glory of divine
Power and Grace is set off with the greater Luster, by what appears at the same
Time of the Weakness of the earthen Vessel. It Is GOD's Pleasure that there
should be something remarkably to manifest the Weakness and Unworthiness of the
Subject, at the same Time that he displays the Excellency of his Power and
Riches of his Grace. And I doubt not but some of those Things that make some of
us here on Earth to be out of Humor, and to look on this Work with a sour
displeased Countenance, do heighten the Songs of the Angels, when they praise
GOD and the Lamb for what they see of the Glory of GOD's All Sufficiency, and
the Efficacy of CHRIST's Redemption. And how unreasonable is it that we should
be backward to acknowledge the Glory of what GOD has done, because withal, the
Devil, and we in hearkening to him, have done a great deal of Mischief.

PART II.
Showing the Obligations that all are under, to acknowledge, rejoice in, and
promote this WORK, and the great Danger of the contrary.
THERE are many Things in the Word of GOD, that show that when GOD remarkably
appears in any great Work for his Church, and against his Enemies, it is a most
dangerous Thing, and highly provoking to GOD, to be slow and backward to
acknowledge and honor GOD in the Work, and to lie still and not to put to an
helping Hand. CHRIST's People are in Scripture represented as his Army; he is
the LORD OF HOSTS or Armies: He is the Captain of the Host of the Lord, as he
called himself when he appeared to Joshua, with a Sword drawn in his Hand,
Joshua 5. 13, 14, 15. He is the Captain of his People's Salvation; and
therefore it may well be highly resented if they don't resort to him when he
orders his Banner to be displayed; or if they refuse to follow him when he
blows the Trumpet, and gloriously appears going forth against his Enemies. GOD
expects that every living Soul should have his Attention roused on such an
Occasion, and should most cheerfully yield to the Call, and heedfully and
diligently obey it; Isai. 18. 3. All ye Inhabitants of the World, and Dwellers
on the Earth, see ye when he lifts up an Ensign on the Mountains; And when he
blows the Trumpet, hear ye. Especially should all Israel be gathered after
their Captain, as we read they were after Ehud, when he blew the Trumpet in
Mount Ephraim, when he had slain Eglon King of Moab, Judge. 3. 27, 28. How
severe is the martial Law in such a Case, when any of an Army refuses to obey
the Sound of the Trumpet, and follow his General to the Battle? GOD at such a
Time appears in peculiar Manifestations of his Glory, and therefore not to be
affected and animated, and to lie still, and refuse to follow God, will be
resented as an high Contempt of him. If a Subject should stand by, and be a
Spectator of the solemnity of his Prince's Coronation, and should appear silent
and fullen, when all the Multitude were testifying their Loyalty and Joy, with
loud Acclamations; how greatly would he expose himself to be treated as a
Rebel, and quickly to perish by the Authority of the Prince that he refuses to
honor?

At a Time when GOD manifests himself in such a great Work for his Church,
there is no such Thing as being Neuters; there is a Necessity of being either
for or against the King that then gloriously appears: As when a King is
crowned, and there are public Manifestations of Joy on that Occasion, there is
no such Thing as standing by as an indifferent Spectator; all must appear as
loyal Subjects, and express their Joy on that Occasion, or be accounted
Enemies: So it always is when GOD, in any great Dispensation of his Providence,
does remarkably set his King on his holy Hill of Zion, and Christ in an
extraordinary Manne comes down from Heaven to the Earth, and appears in his
visible Church in a great Work of Salvation for his People: So it was when
Christ came down from Heaven in his Incarnation, and appeared on Earth in his
human Presence; there was no such Thing as being Neuters, neither on his Side
nor against him: those that sat still and said nothing, and did not declare for
him, and come and join with him, after he, by his Word and Works, had given
sufficient Evidence who he was, were justly looked upon as his Enemies; as
CHRIST says, Math. 12. 30. He that is (...) with me is against me; and he that
gathers not with me, scatters abroad. So it is in a time when CHRIST is
remarkably spritually present, as well as when he is bodily present; and when
he comes to carry on the Work of Redemption in the Application of it, as well
as in the Revelation and Purchase. If a King should come into one of his
Provinces, that had been oppressed by it is Foes, where some of his Subjects had
fallen off to the Enemy, and joined with them against their lawful Sovereign
and his loyal Subjects; I say, if the lawful Sovereign himself should come into
the Province, and should ride forth there against his Enemies, and should call
upon all that were on his Side to come and gather themselves to him; there
would be no such Thing, in such a Case, as standing neuter: they that lay still
and staid at a Distance would undoubtedly be looked upon and treated as Rebels.
So in the Day of Battle, when two Armies join, there is no such Thing for any
present as being of neither Party, all must be on one Side or the other; and
they that ben't found with the Conqueror in such a Case, must expect to have
his Weapons turned against them, and to fall with the rest of his Enemies.

When God manifests himself with such glorious Power in a Work of this Nature,
he appears especially determined to put Honor upon his Son, and to fulfill his
Oath that he has sworn to him, that he would make every Knee to bow, and every
Tongue to confess to him. God has had it much on his Heart, from all Eternity,
to glorify his dear and only begotten Son; and there are some special Seasons
that he appoints to that End, wherein he comes forth with omnipotent Power to
fulfill his Promise and Oath to him: And these Times are Times of remarkable
pouring out of his Spirit, to advance his Kingdom; such a Day is a Day of his
Power, wherein his People shall be made willing, and he shall rule in the midst
of his Enemies; these especially are the Times wherein God declares his firm
Decree that his Son shall Reign on his holy Hill of Zion: and therefore those
that at such a Time don't kiss the Son, as he then manifests himself, and
appears in the Glory of his Majesty and Grace, expose themselves to perish from
the Way, and to be dashed in Pieces with a Rod of Iron.

As such a Time is a Time wherein God eminently sets his King on his holy Hill
of Zion, so it is a Time wherein he remarkably fulfils that in Isai. 28. 16.
Therefore thus faith the Lord God, behold, I lay in Zion for a Foundation, a
Stone, a tried Stone, a precious Corner Stone, a sure Foundation. Which the two
Apostles Peter and Paul, (1 Pet. 2. 6, 7, 8. and Romans 9. 33.) join with that
Prophecy, Isai. 8. 14, 15. And he shall be for a Sanctuary; but for a Stone of
Stumbling, and for a Rock of Offense to both the Houses of Israel, for a Gin
and for a Snare to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem: and many among them shall
stumble and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and taken. As signifying that
both are fulfilled together. Yea both are joined together by the Prophet Isaiah
himself; as you may see in the Context of that formention'd, Isai. 28. 16. In
Ver. 13. preceding it is said, But the Word of the Lord (...) unto them
Precept upon Precept, Precept upon Precept; Line upon Line, Line upon Line;
here a little and there a little, that they might go, and fall backward, and be
broken, and snared and taken. And accordingly it always is so, that when Christ
is in a peculiar and ominent Manner manifested and magnified, by a glorious
Work of God in his Church, as a Foundation and a Sanctuary for some, he is
remarkably a Stone of Stumbling and a Rock of Offense, a Gin and a Snare to
others. They that continue long to stumble, and be offended and ensnared in
their Minds, at such a great and glorious Work of Christ, in God's Account,
stumble at Christ, and are offended in him; for the Work is that by which he
makes Christ manifest, and shows his Glory, and by which he makes the Stone
that the Builders refused, to become the Head of the Corner. This shows how
dangerous it is to continue always stumbling at such a Work, for ever doubting
of it, and forbearing fully to acknowledge it, and give God the Glory of it:
Such Persons are in Danger to go, and fall backward, and be broken, and snared
and taken, and to have Christ a Stone of Stumbling to them, that shall be an
Occasion of their Ruin; while he is to others, a Sanctuary, and a sure
Foundation.

The Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 29. 14. speaks of God's Proceeding to do a
mavelous Work and a Wonder, which should stumble and confound the Wisdom of
the wise and prudent; which the Apostle in Acts 13. 41. applies to the glorious
Work of Salvation wrought in those Days by the Redemption of Christ, and that
glorious Out-pouring of the Spirit to apply it that followed; the Prophet in
the Context of that Place in Isai. 29. speaking of the same Thing, and of the
Prophets and Rulers and Seers, those wise and prudent whose Eyes God had
closed, says to them, Verses 9. Stay your selves and wonder. In the Original it
is, be ye slow and wonder. I leave it to others to consider whether it ben't
natural to interpret it thus, wonder at this mavelous Work; let it be a
strange Thing, a great Mystery that you know not what to make of, and that you
are very slow and backward to acknowledge, long delaying to come to a
Determination concerning it. And what Persons are in Danger of, that wonder,
and are thus slow to acknowledge God in such a Work, we learn by that of the
Apostle in that forementioned Acts 13. 41. Behold ye Despisers, and wonder and
perish; for I work a Work in your Days, a Work which you shall in no wise
believe, though a Man declare it unto you.

The Church of Christ is called upon greatly to rejoice, when at any Time
Christ remarkably appears, coming to his Church, to carry on the Work of
Salvation, to enlarge his own Kingdom, and to deliver poor Souls out of the Pit
wherein there is no Water, in Zech. 9. 9, 10, 11. Rejoice greatly O Daughter of
Zion, shout O Daughter of Jerusalem; behold thy King comes unto thee; he is
just and having Salvation, -- His Dominion shall be from Sea to Sea, -- as for
thee also, by the Blood of thy Covenant, I have sent forth thy Prisoners out of
the Pit wherein is no Water. Christ was pleased to give a notable typical or
symbolical Representation of such a great Event as is spoken of in that
Prophecy, in his solemn Entry into the literal Jerusalem, which was a Type of
the Church or Daughter of Zion, there spoken of; probably intending it as a
Figue and Prelude of that great actual Fulfillment of this Prophecy, that was
to be after his Ascension, by the pouring out of the Spirit in the Days of the
Apostles, and that more full Accomplishment that should be in the latter Ages
of the Christian Church. We have an Account, that when Christ made this his
solemn Entry into Jerusalem, and the whole Multitude of the Disciples were
rejoicing and praising God, with loud Voices, for all the mighty Works that
they had seen, the Pharisees from among the Multitude said to Christ, Master,
rebuke thy Disciples; but we are told, Luke 19. 39, 40. Christ answered and
said unto them, I tell you, that if these should hold their Peace, the Stones
would immediately cry out. Signifying that if Christ's professing Disciples
should be unaffected on such an Occasion, and should not appear openly to
acknowledge and rejoice in the Glory of God therein appearing, it would
manifest such fearful Hardness of Heart, so exceeding that of the Stones, that
the very Stones would condemn them. Should not this make those consider, who
have held their Peace so long, since Christ has come to our Zion having
Salvation, and so wonderfully manifested his Glory in this mighty Work of his
Spirit, and so many of his Disciples have been rejoicing and praising God with
loud Voices?

It must be acknowledged that so great and wonderful a Work of God's Spirit, is
a Work wherein God's Hand is remarkably lifted up, and wherein he displays his
Majesty, and shows great Favor and Mercy to Sinners, in the glorious
Opportunity he gives them; and by which he makes our Land to become much more a
Land of Uprightness: therefore that Place, Isai. 26. 10, 11. shows the great
Danger of not seeing God's Hand, and acknowledging his Glory and Majesty in
such a Work: Let Favor be showed to the Wicked, yet will be not learn
Righteousness; In the Land of Uprightness he will deal unjustly, and will not
behold the Majesty of the Lord. Lord, when thy Hand is lifted up, they will not
see; but they shall see, and be ashamed for their Envy at the People; yea the
Fire of thine Enemies shall devour them.

It Is not unlikely that this Work of God's Spirit, that is so extraordinary and
wonderful, is the dawning, or, at least, a Prelude of that glorious Work of
God, so often foretold in Scripture, which in the Progress and Issue of it,
shall renew the World of Mankind. If we consider how long since, the Things
foretold, as what should preceed this great Event, have been accomplished; and
how long this Event has been expected by the Church of God, and thought to be
nigh by the most eminent Men of God in the Church: and withal consider what the
State of Things now is, and has for a considerable Time been, in the Church
God, and World of Mankind, we cannot reasonably think otherwise, than that the
Beginning of this great Work of God must be near. And there are many Things
that make it probable that this Work will begin in America. It Is signified that
it shall begin in some very remote Part of the World, that the rest of the
World have no Communication with but by Navigation, in Isai. 60. 9. Surely the
Isles shall wait for me, and the Ships of Tarshish first, to bring my Sons from
far. It is exceeding manifest that this Chapter is a Prophecy of the Prosperity
of the Church, in its most glorious State on Earth, in the latter Days; and I
cannot think that any Thing else can be here intended but America by the Isles
that are far off, from whence the Firstborn Sons of that glorious Day shall be
brought. Indeed, By the Isles, in Prophecies of Gospel Times, is very often
meant Europe: It is so in Prophecies of that great spreading of the Gospel that
should be soon after Christ's Time, because it was far separated from that Part
of the World where the Church of GOD had 'till then been, by the Sea. But this
Prophecy cannot have Respect to the Conversion of Europe, in the Time of that
great Work of GOD, in the primitive Ages of the Christian Church; for it was
not fulfilled then: The Isles and Ships of Tarshish, thus understood, did not
wait for GOD first; that glorious Work did not begin in Europe, but in
Jerusalem, and had for a considerable Time, been very wonderfully carried on in
Asia, before it reached Europe. And as it is not that Work of GOD that is
chiefly intended in this Chapter, but that more glorious Work that should be in
the latter Ages of the Christian Church, therefore some other Part of the World
is here intended by the Isles, that should be as Europe then was, far separated
from that Part of the World where the Church had before been, by the Sea, and
with which it can have no Communication but by the Ships of Tarshish. And what
is chiefly intended is not the British Isles, nor any Isles near the other
Continent; for they are spoken of as at a great Distance from that Part of the
World where the Church had 'till then been. This Prophecy therefore seems
plainly to point out America, as the first Fruits of that glorious Day.

GOD has made as it were two Worlds here below, The old and the new, (according
to the Names they are now called by,) two great habitable Continents, far
separated one from the other; The latter is but newly discovered, it was
formerly wholly unknown, from Age to Age, and is as it were now but newly
created: It has been, 'till of late, wholly the Possession of Satan, the Church
of GOD having never been in it, as it has been in the other Continent, from the
beginning of the World. This new World is probably now discovered, that the new
and most glorious State of GOD's Church on Earth might commence there; That GOD
might in it begin a new World in a spiritual Respect, when he creates the new
Heavens and new Earth.

GOD has already put that Honor upon the other Continent, that CHRIST was born
there literally, and there made the Purchase of Redemtion: So, as Providence
observes a Kind of equal Distribution of Things, it is not unlikely that the
great spiritual Birth of CHRIST, and the most glorious Application of
Redemption is to begin in this: As the elder Sister brought forth Judah, of
whom came CHRIST, and so she was the Mother of CHRIST; But the younger Sister,
after long Barenness, brought forth Joseph and Benjamin, the beloved Children.
Joseph, that had the most glorious Apparel, the Coat of many Colors, who was
separated from his Brethren, and was exalted to such Glory out of a dark
Dungeon, and fed and saved the World, when ready to perish with Famine, and was
as a fruitful Bough by a Well, whose Branches ran over the Wall, and was
blessed with all Manner of Blessings and precious Things, of Heaven and Earth,
through the good Will of him that dwelt in the Bush; and was, as by the Horns
of a Unicorn, to push the People together, to the Ends of the Earth, i. e.
conquer the World. See Genesis 49. 22, etc. and Deuteronomy. 33. 13, etc. And Benjamin,
whose Mess was five Times so great as that of any of his Brethren, and to whom
Joseph, that Type of Christ, gave Wealth and Raiment far beyond all the rest.
Genesis 45. 22.

The other Continent has slain Christ, and has from Age to Age shed the Blood
of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, and has often been as it were deluged with
the Churches Blood: GOD has therefore probably reserved the Honor of building
the glorious Temple to the Daughter, that has not shed so much Blood, when
those Times of the Peace and Prosperity and Glory of the Church shall commence,
that were typified by the Reign of Solomon.

The Gentiles first received the true Religion from the Jews: GOD's Church of
ancient Times, had been among them, and Christ was of them: but that there
might be a Kind of Equality in the Dispensations of Providence, GOD has so
ordered it, that when the Jews come to be admitted to the Benefits of the
evangelical Dispensation, and to receive their highest Privileges of all, they
should receive the Gospel from the Gentiles: Though CHRIST was of them, yet they
have been guilty of crucifying him; it is therefore the Will of GOD, that that
People should not have the Honor of communicating the Blessings of the Kingdom
of GOD in its most glorious State, to the Gentiles, but on the contrary they
shall receive the Gospel in the Beginning of that glorious Day, from the
Gentiles. In some Analogy to this, I apprehend GOD's Dealings will be with the
two Continents. America has received the true Religion of the old Continent;
the Church of ancient Times has been there, and CHRIST is from thence: but that
there may be an Equality, and inasmuch as that Continent has crucified CHRIST,
they shall not have the Honor of communicating Religion in its most glorious
State to us, but we to them.

The old Continent has been the Source and Original of Mankind, in several
Respects. The first Parents of Mankind dwelt there; and there dwelt Noah and
his Sons; and there the second Adam was born, and was crucified and rose again:
and it is probable that, in some Measure to balance these Things, the most
glorious Renovation of the World shall originate from the new Continent, and
the Church of GOD in that Respect be from hence. And so it is probable that that
will come to pass in Spirituals, that has in Temporals, with Respect to
America; that whereas, 'till of late, the World was supplied with its Silver
and Gold and earthly Treasures from the old Continent, now it is supplied
chiefly from the new, so the Course of Things in spiritual Respects will be in
like Manner turned.

And it is worthy to be noted that America was discovered about the Time of the
Reformation, or but little before: Which Reformation was the first Thing that
GOD did toward the glorious Renovation of the World, after it had sunk into
the Depths of Darkness and Ruin, under the great Antichristian Apostasy. So
that as soon as this new World is (as it were) created, and stands forth in
View, GOD presently goes about doing some great Thing to make Way for the
Introduction of the Churches Latter-Day Glory, that is to have its first Seat
in, and is to take its Rise from that new World.

It is agreeable to GOD's Manner of Working, when he accomplishes any glorious
Work in the World, to introduce a new and more excellent State of his Church,
to begin his Work where his Church had not been till then, and where was no
Foundation already laid, that the Power of GOD might be the more conspicuous;
that the Work might appear to be entirely GOD's, and be more manifestly a
Creation out of nothing; agreeable to Hos. 1. 10. And it shall come to pass that
in the Place where it was said unto them, ye are not my People, there it shall
be said unto them, ye are the Sons of the living God. When GOD (...) about to
turn the Earth into a Paradise, he don't begin his Work where there is some
good Growth already, but in a Wilderness, where nothing grows, and nothing is
to be seen but dry Sand and barren Rocks; that the Light may shine out of
Darkness, and the World be replenished from Emptiness, and the Earth watered by
Springs from a droughty Desert; agreeable to many Prophecies of Scripture, as
Isai. 32. 15. Until the Spirit be poured from on high, and the Wilderness
become a fruitful Field. And Chap. 18. 19. I will open Rivers in high Places,
and Fountains in the Midst of the Valleys; I will make the Wilderness a Pool of
Water, and the dry Land Springs of Water: I will plant in the Wilderness the
Cedar, the Shittah Tree, and the Myrtle and Oil Tree: I will set in the Desert
the Fir Tree, and the Pine, and the Box Tree together; and Chapter 43. 20. I will
give Waters in the Wilderness, and Rivers in the Desert, to give Drink to my
People, my Chosen. And many other parrallel Scriptures might be mentioned.

I observed before, that when GOD is about to do some great Work for his
Church, his Manner is to begin at the lower End; so when he is about to renew
the whole habitual Earth, it is probable that he will begin in this utmost,
meanest, youngest and weakest Part of it, where the Church of GOD has been
planted last of all; and so the First shall be last, and the Last first; and
that will be fulfilled in an eminent Manner in Isai. 24. 19. From the uttermost
Part of the Earth have we heard Songs, even Glory to the Righteous.

There are several Things that seem to me to argue, that when the Sun of
Righteousness, the Sun of the new Heavens and new Earth, comes to rise, and
comes forth as the Bridegroom of his Church, rejoicing as a strong Man to run
his Race, having his going forth from the End of Heaven, and his Circuit to the
End of it, that nothing may be hid from the Light and Heat of it. It Is evident
that the Holy Spirit in those Expressions in Psalm 19. 4, 5, and6 Verses, has
Respect to something else besides the natural Sun; and that an Eye is had to
the Sun of Righteousness, that by his Light converts the Soul, makes wise the
Simple, insightens the Eyes, and rejoices the Heart; and by his preached Gospel
enlightens and warms the World of Mankind. By the Psalmist's own Application in
ver. 7. and the Apostles Application of ver. 4. in Romans 10. 13.
That the Sun shall rise in the West, contrary to the Course of this World, or
the Course of Things in the old Heavens and Earth. The Course of God's
Providence shall in that Day be so wonderfully altered in many Respects, that
God will as it were change the Course of Nature, in answer to the Prayers of
his Church; as God changed the Course of Nature, and caused the Sun to go from
the West to the East, when Hezekiah was healed, and God promised to do such
great Things for his Church, to deliver it out of the Hand of the King of
Assyria, by that mighty Slaughter by the Angel; which is often used by the
Prophet Isaiah, as a Type of the glorious Deliverance of the Church from her
Enemies in the latter Days: The Resurrection of Hezekiah, the King and Captain
of the Church, (as he is called 2 Kin. 20. 5.) as it were from the Dead, is
given as an Earnest of the Churches Resurrection and Salvation, Isai. 38. 6.
and is a Type of the Resurrection of Christ. At the same Time there is a
Resurrection of the Sun, or coming back and rising again from the West, whether
it had gone down; which is also a Type of the Sun of Righteousness. The Sun was
bro't back ten Degrees; which probably brought it to the Meridian. The Sun of
Righteousness has long been going down from East to West; and probably when the
Time comes of the (...) from her Enemies, so often typified by the Assyrians,
the Light will rise in the West, 'till it shines through the World, like the
Sun in (...) meridian Brightness.

The same seems also to be represented by the Course of the Waters of the
Sanctuary, Ezekiel. 4. which was from West to East; which Water undoubtedly
represent the Holy Spirit, in the Progress of his saving Influences, in the
latter Ages of the World: for it is manifest that the whole of those last
Chapters of Ezekiel, are concerning the glorious State of the Church that shall
then be.

And if we may suppose that this glorious Work of God shall begin in any Part
of America, I think, if we consider the Circumstances of the Settlement of
New England, it must needs appear the most likely of all American Colonies, to
be the Place whence this Work shall principally take it is Rise.

And if these Things are so, it gives us more abundant Reason to hope that what
is now seen in America, and especially in New England, may prove the Dawn of
that glorious Day: And the very uncommon and wonderful Circumstances and Events
of this Work, seem to me strongly to argue that God intends it as the Beginning
or Forerunner of some Thing vastly great.

I have thus long insisted on this Point, because if these Things are so, it
greatly manifests how much it behooves us to encourage and promote this Work,
and how dangerous it will be to forbear so so so.

It is very dangerous for God's professing People to lie still, and not to come
to the Help of the Lord, whenever he remarkably pours out his Spirit, to carry
on the Work of Redemption in the Application of it; but above all, when he
comes forth in that last and greatest Out-pouring of his Spirit, to introduce
that happy Day of GOD's Power and Salvation, so often spoken of. That is
especially the appointed Season of the Application of the Redemption of CHRIST:
It Is the proper Time of the Kingdom of Heaven upon Earth, the appointed Time of
CHRIST's Reign: The Reign of Satan as God of this World lasts 'till then: This
is the proper Time of actual Redemption, or new Creation, as is evident by
Isai. 65. 17, 18. and 66. 12. and Rev. 21. 1. All the Out-pourings of the
Spirit of GOD that are before this, are as it were by Way of Anticipation.

There was indeed a glorious Season of the Application of Redemption, in the
first Ages of the Christian Church, that began at Jerusalem, on the Day of
Pentecost; but that was not the proper Time of Ingathering; it was only as it
were the Feast of the first Fruits; the Ingathering is at the End of the Year,
or in the last Ages of the Christian Church, as is represented, Rev. 14. 14,
15, 16. and will probably as much exceed what was in the first Ages of the
Christian Church, though that filled the Roman Empire, as that exceeded all that
had been before, under the old Testament, confined only to the Land of Judea.

The great Danger of not appearing openly to acknowledge, rejoice in, and
promote that great Work of GOD, in bringing in that glorious Harvest, is
represented in Zech. 14. 16, 17, 18, 19. And it shall come to pass, that every
one that is left, of all the Nations, which come against Jerusalem, shall even
go up, from Year to Year, to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, and to keep
the Feast of Tabernacles. And it shall be, that whosoever will not come up, of all
the Families of the Earth, unto Jerusalem, to worship the King, the Lord of
Hosts, even upon them shall be no Rain. And if the Family of Egypt go not up,
and come not, that have no Rain, there shall be the Plague wherewith the Lord
will finite the Heathen, that come not up to keep the Feast of Tabernacles.
This shall be the Punishment of Egypt, and the Punishment of all Nations that
come not up to keep the Feast of Tabernacles. It Is evident by all the Context,
that the glorious Day of the Church of God in the latter Ages of the World, is
the Time spoken of: The Feast of Tabernacles here seems to signify that
glorious spiritual Feast, which GOD shall then make for his Church, the same
that is spoken of Isai. 25. 6. and the great spiritual Rejoycings of GOD's
People at that Time. There were three great Feasts in Israel, at which all the
Males were appointed to go up to Jerusalem; the Feast of the Passover; and the
Feast of the first Fruits, or the Feast of Pentecost; and the Feast of
Ingathering, at the End of the Year, or the Feast of Tabernacles. In the first
of these, viz. The Feast of the Passover, was represented the Purchase of
Redemption by Jesus Christ, the Paschan Lamb, that was slain at the Time of
that Feast. The other two that followed it, were to represent the two great
Seasons of the Application of the purchased Redemption: In the former of them,
viz. the Feast of the first Fruits, which was called the Feast of Pentecost,
was represented that Time of the Out-pouring of the Spirit, that was in the
first Ages of the Christian Church, for the bringing in the first Fruits of
Christ's Redemption, which began at Jerusalem, on the Day of Pentecost: The
other, which was the Feast of Ingathering, at the End of the Year, which the
Children of Israel were appointed to keep on Occasion of their gathering in
their Corn and their Wine, and all the Fruit of their Land, and was called the
Feast of Tabernacles, represented the other more joyful and glorious Season of
the Application of Christ's Redemption, which is to be in the latter Days; the
great Day of Ingathering of the Elect, the proper and appointed Time of
gathering in God's Fruits, when the Angel of the Covenant shall thrust in his
Sickle, and gather the Harvest of the Earth; and the Clusters of the Vine of
the Earth shall also be gathered. This was upon many Accounts the greatest
Feast of the three: There were much greater Tokens of Rejoicing in this Feast,
than any other: The People then dwelt in Booths of green Boughs, and were
commanded to take Boughs of goodly Trees, Branches of Palm Trees, and the
Boughs of thick Trees, and Willows of the Brook, and to rejoice before the Lord
their GOD: Which represents the flourishing, beautiful, pleasant State the
Church shall be in, rejoicing in GOD's Grace and Love, triumphing over all her
Enemies, at the Time typified by this Feast. The Tabernacle of GOD was first
set up among the Children of Israel, at the Time of the Feast of Tabernacles;
but in that glorious Time of the Christian Church, GOD will above all other
Times set up his Tabernacle amongst Men. Rev. 21. 3. And I heard a great Voice
out of Heaven, saying, The Tabernacle of God is with Men, and he will dwell
with them, and they shall be his People, and God himself shall be with them,
and be their God. The World is supposed to have been created about the Time of
Year wherein the Feast of Tabernacles was appointed; so in that glorious Time,
God will create a new Heaven, and a new Earth. The Temple of Solomon was
dedicated at the Time of the Feast of Tabernacles, when GOD descended in a
Pillar of Cloud, and dwelt in the Temple; so at this happy Time, the Temple of
GOD shall be gloriously built up in the World, and GOD shall in a wonderful
Manner come down from Heaven to dwell with his Church. Christ is supposed to
have been born at the Feast of Tabernacles; so at the Commencement of that
glorious Day, Christ shall be born; then above all other Times shall the Woman
clothed with the Sun, with the Moon under her Feet, that is in Travail, and
pained to be delivered, bring forth her Son, to Rule all Nations, Rev. 12. at
the Beginning. The Feast of Tabernacles, was the last Feast that Israel had in
the whole Year, before the Face of the Earth was destroyed by the Winter;
presently after the Rejoycings of that Feast were past, a tempestuous Season
began. Act. 27. 9. Sailing was now dangerous, because the Feast was now already
past. So this great Feast of the Christian Church will be the last Feast she
shall have on Earth: soon after it is past, this lower World will be destroyed.
At the Feast of Tabernacles, Israel left their Houses to dwell in Booths or
green Tents, which signifies the great Weanedness of GOD's People from the
World, as Pilgrims and Strangers on the Earth, and their great Joy therein.
Israel were prepared for the Feast of Tabernacles, by the Feast of Trumpets,
and the Day of Atonement both on the same Month; so Way shall be made for the
Joy of the Church of GOD, in its glorious State on Earth, by the extraordinary
preaching of the Gospel, and deep Repentance and Humiliation for past Sins, and
the great and long continued Deadness and Carnality of the visible Church.
Christ at the great Feast of Tabernacles, stood in Jerusalem, and cried,
saying, If any Man thirst, let him come unto me and drink: He that believes on
me, as the Scripture has said, out of his Belly small slow Rivers of living
Waters: Signifying the extraordinary Freedom and Riches of divine Grace toward
Sinners, at that Day, and the extraordinary Measures of the Holy Spirit that
shall be then given; agreeable to Rev. 21. 6. and 22. 17.

It is threatened here in this 14th Chap. of Zech. that those who at that Time
shall not come to keep this Feast; i. e. that shall not acknowledge GOD's
glorious Works, and praise his Name, and rejoice with his People, but should
stand at a Distance, as unbelieving and disaffected; upon them shall be no
Rain; and that this shall be the Plague wherewith they shall all be smitten:
that is, they shall have no Share in that Shower of divine Blessing that shall
then descend on the Earth, that spiritual Rain spoken of, Isai. 44. 3. But God
would give them over to Hardness of Heart and Blindness of Mind.

The Curse is yet in a more awful Manner denounced against such as shall appear
as Opposers at that Time, Ver. 12. And this shall be the Plague, wherewith the
Lord shall smite all the People that have fought against Jerusalem, Their Flesh
shall consume away while they stand upon their Feet, and their Eyes shall
consume away in their Holes, and their Tongue shall consume away in their
Mouth. Here also in all probability it is a spiritual Judgment, or a Plague and
Curse from GOD upon the Soul, rather than upon the Body, that is intended; that
such Persons, who at that Time shall oppose GOD's People in his Work, shall in
an extraordinary Manner be given over to a State of spiritual Death and Ruin,
that they shall remarkably appear dead while alive, and shall be as walking
rotten Corpses, while they go about amongst Men.

The great Danger of not joining with GOD's People at that glorious Day is also
represented, Isai. 60. 12. For the Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee
shall perish; yea, those Nations shall be utterly wasted.

Most of the great temporal Deliverances that were wro't for Israel of old, as
Divines and Expositors observe, were typical of the great spiritual Works of
GOD for the Salvation of Men's Souls, and the Deliverance and Prosperity of his
Church, in the Days of the Gospel; and especially did they represent that
greatest of all Deliverances of GOD's Church, and Chief of GOD's Works of
actual Salvation, that shall be in the latter Days; which as has been observed
is above all others, the appointed Time, and proper Season of actual Redemption
of Men's Souls. But it may be observed that if any appeared to oppose GOD's
Work in those great temporal Deliverances; or if there were any of his
professing People, that on such Occasions lay still, and stood at a Distance,
and did not arise and acknowledge GOD in his Work, and appear to promote it; it
was what in a remarkable Manner incensed GOD's Anger, and brought his Curse
upon such Persons.

So when GOD wrought that great Work of bringing the Children of Israel out of
Egypt, (which was a Type of GOD's delivering his Church out of the spiritual
Egypt, at the Time of the Fall of Antichrist, as is evident by Rev. 11. 8. and
15. 3.) How highly did GOD resent it, when the Amalekites appeared as Opposers
in that Affair? and how dreadfully did he curse them for it? Exodus 17. 14, 15,
16. And the Lord said unto Moses, Write this for a Memorial in a Book, and
rehearse it in the Ears of Joshua; for I will utterly put out the Remembrance
of Amalek from under Heaven. And Moses built an Altar, and called the Name of
it Jehovah-Nissi; For he said, because the Lord will have War with Amalek, from
Generation to Generation. And accordingly we find that God remembered it a long
Time after, 1 Samuel 15. 3. And how highly did GOD resent it in the Moabites and
Ammonites, that they did not lend an helping Hand, and encourage and promote
the Affair? Deuteronomy. 23. 3, 4. An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter into the
Congregation of the Lord; even to their tenth Generation, shall they not enter
into the Congregation of the Lord forever; because they met you not with Bread
and with Water, in the Way when ye came forth out of Egypt. And how were the
Children of Reuben, and the Children of Gad, and the half Tribe of Manasseh
threatened, if they did not go and help their Brethren in their Wars against the
Canaanites, Deuteronomy. 32. 20, 21, 22, 23. And Moses said unto them, If ye will do
this Thing, if ye will go armed before the Lord to War, and will go all of you
armed over Jordan, before the Lord, until be has driven out his Enemies from
before him, and the Land be subdued before the Lord, then afterward ye shall
return and be guiltless before the Lord, and before Israel, and this Land shall
be your Possession before the Lord: But if ye will not do so, behold ye have
sinned against the Lord, and be sure your Sin will find you out.

That was a glorious Work of GOD that he wro't for Israel, when he delivered
them from the Canaanites, by the Hand of Deborah and Barak: almost every Thing
about it showed a remarkable Hand of GOD. It was a Prophetess, one immediately
inspired by GOD, that called the People to the Battle, and conducted them in
the whole Affair: The People seem to have been miraculously animated and
encouraged in the Matter, when they willingly offered themselves, and gathered
together to the Battle; they jeoparded their Lives in the high Places of the
Field, without being pressed or hired; when one would have thought they should
have but little Courage for such an Undertaking; for what could a Number of
poor, weak, defenseless Slaves do, without a Shield or Spear to be seen among
forty Thousand of 'em, to go against a great Prince, with his mighty Host, and
nine Hundred Chariots of Iron. And the Success did wonderfully show the Hand of
GOD; which makes Deborab exultingly to say, Judge. 5. 21. O my Soul, thou have
trodden down Strength! CHRIST with his heavenly Host was engaged in that
Battle; and therefore it is said, Ver. 20. They fought from Heaven, the Stars in
their Courses fought against Sisera. The Work of GOD therefore in this Victory
and Deliverance that CHRIST and his Host wrought for Israel, was a Type of that
Victory and Deliverance which he will accomplish for his Church in that great
Battle, that last Conflict that the Church shall have with her open Enemies,
that shall introduce the Churches Latter-Day Glory; as appears by Rev. 16. 16.
(speaking of that great Battle,) And he gathered them together into a Place,
called in the Hebrew Tongue, Armageddon, i. e. the Mountain of Megiddo;
alluding, as is supposed by Expositors, to the Place where the Battle was
fought with the Host of Sisera, Judge. 5. 19. The Kings came and fought, the
Kings of Canaan, in Taanach, by the Waters of Megiddo. Which can signify
nothing else, than that this Battle, which Christ and his Church shall have
with their Enemies, is the Antitype of the Battle that was fought there. But
what a dreadful Curse from Christ, did some of GOD's professing People Israel,
bring upon themselves, by lying still at that Time, and not putting to an
helping Hand? Judge. 5. 23. Curse ye Meroz, said the Angel of the Lord, curse ye
bitterly the Inhabitants thereof, because they (...) not to the Help of the
Lord, to the Help of the Lord against the Mighty. The Angel of the Lord was the
Captain of the Host; he that had led Israel, and fought for them in that
Battle, who is very often called the Angel of the Lord, in Scripture; the same
that appeared to Joshua with a Sword drawn in his Hand, and told him that he
was come as the Captain of the Host of the Lord; and the same glorious Captain
that we have an Account of, as leading forth his Hosts to that Battle, of which
this was the Type, Rev. 19. 11, etc. It seems the Inhabitants of Meroz were
unbelieving concerning this great Work, nor would they hearken to Deborah's
Pretenses, nor did it enter into them that such a poor defenseless Company,
should ever prevail against those that were so Mighty; they did not acknowledge
the Hand of GOD, and therefore stood at a Distance, and did nothing to promote
the Work: but what a bitter Curse from GOD, did they bring upon themselves by
it!

It Is very probable that one great Reason why the Inhabitants of Meroz were so
unbelieving concerning this Work, was that they argued a Priori; they did not
like the Beginning of it, it being a Woman that first led the Way, and had the
chief Conduct in the Affair; nor could they believe that such despicable
Instruments, as a Company of unarmed Slaves, were ever like to effect so great
a Thing; and Pride and Unbelief wro't together, in not being willing to follow
Deborah to the Battle.

It was another glorious Work of GOD that he wro't for Israel, in the Victory
that was obtained by Gideon over the Midianites and Amalekites, and the
Children of the East, when they came up against Israel like Grasshoppers, a
Multitude that could not be numbered. This also was a remarkable Type of the
Victory of CHRIST and his Church over his Enemies, by the pouring out of the
SPIRIT with the preached Gospel, as is evident by the Manner of it, which
Gideon was immediately directed to of GOD; which was not by human Sword or Bow,
but only by blowing of Trumpets, and by Lights in earthen Vessels. We read that
on this Occasion, Gideon called the People together to help in this great
Affair; and that accordingly, great Numbers resorted to him, and came to the
Help of the LORD, Judge. 7. 23, 24. But there were some also at that Time, that
were unbelieving, and would not acknowledge the Hand of GOD in that Work, though
it was so great and wonderful, nor would they join to promote it; and they were
the Inhabitants of Succoth and Penuel: Gideon desired their Help, when he was
pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna; but they despised his Pretenses, and his
Confidence of the LORD's being on his Side, to deliver those two great Princes
into the Hands of such a despicable Company, as he and his three Hundren Men,
and would not own the Work of GOD, nor afford Gideon any Assistance: GOD
proceeded in this Work in a Way that was exceeding cross to their Pride. And
they also refused to own the Work, because they argued a Priori; they could not
believe that GOD would do such great Things by such a despicable Instrument;
one of such a poor, mean Family in Manasseh, and he the least in his Father's
House; and the Company that was with him appeared very wretched, being but
three Hundred Men, and they weak and faint: But we see how they suffered for
their Folly, in not acknowleging, and appearing to promote this Work of GOD.
Gideon when he returned from the Victory, took them, and taught them with the
Briers and Thorns of the Wilderness, and beat down the Tower of Penuel, (he
brought down their Pride, and their false Confidence,) and slew the Men of the
City, Judge. Chap. 8. This in all probability Gideon did, as moved and directed
by the Angel of the LORD, that is CHRIST, that first called him, and sent him
forth in this Battle, and instructed and directed him, in the whole Affair.

The Return of the Ark of GOD to dwell in Zion, in the midst of the Land of
Israel, after it had been long absent, first in the Land of the Philistines,
and then in Kirjath-jearim, in the utmost Borders of the Land, did livelily
represent the Return of GOD to a professing People, in the spiritual Tokens of
his Presence, after long Absence from them; as well as the Ark's ascending up
into a Mountain, typified CHRIST's Ascension into Heaven. It Is evident by the
Psalms that were penned on that Occasion, especially the 68th Psalm, that the
exceeding Rejoycings of Israel on that Occasion, represented the Joy of the
Church of CHRIST, on his returning to it, after it has been in a low and dark
State, to revive his Work, bringing his People back, as it were from Bashan,
and from the Depth of the Sea, scattering their spiritual Enemies, and causing
that though they had lien among the Pots, yet they should be as the Wings of a
Dove, covered with Silver, and her Feathers with yellow Gold; and giving the
blessed Tokens of his Presence in his House, that his People may see the Goings
of God their King in his Sanctuary; and that the Gifts which David, with such
royal Bounty, distributed amongst the People on that Occasion ( 2 Samuel 6. 18,
19. and 1 Chronicles. 16. 2, 3.) represent spiritual Blessings, that CHRIST
liberally sends down on his Church, by the Out-pourings of his Spirit. See
Psalm. 68. 1, 3, 13, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. And we have an Account how that
all the People, from Shihor of Egypt, even unto the entering in of Hemath,
gathered together, and appeared to join and assist in that great Affair; and
that all Israel brought up the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, with Shouting,
and with sound of the Cornet, and with Trumpets, and with Cymbals, making a
Noise with Psalteries and Harps, 1 Chronicles. 13. 2, 5. and 15. 28. And not only
the Men, but the Women of Israel, the Daughters of Zion appeared as publicly
joining in the Praises and Rejoycings that were on that Occasion, 2 Samuel 6. 19.
But we read of one of David's Wives, even Michal, Readiness Daughter, whose Heart
was not engaged in the Affair, and did not appear with others to rejoice and
Praise GOD on this Occasion, but kept away, and stood at a Distance, as
disaffected, and disliking the Mamagements; she despised and ridiculed the
Transports, and extraordinary Manifestations of Joy that then were; and the
Curse that she brought upon herself by it, was that, of being barren to the Day
of her Death. -- Let this be a Warning to us: Let us take Heed, in this Day of
the bringing up of the Ark of GOD, that while we are in Visibility and
Profession the Spouse of the spiritual David, we don't show our selves to be
indeed the Children of false-hearted and rebellious Saul, by our standing
aloof, and not joining in the Joy and Praises of the Day, and disliking and
despising the Joys and Affections of GOD's People, because they are to so high
a Degree, and so bring the Curse of perpetual Barrenness upon our Souls.

Let us take Heed that we ben't like the Son of the Bondwoman, that was born
after the Flesh, that persecuted him that was born after the Flesh, that
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, and mocked at the Feasting and
Rejoicings that were made for Isaac when he was weaned; left we should be cast
out of the Family of Abraham, as he was. Genesis 21. 8, 9. That Affair contained
spiritual Mysteries, and was typical of Things that come to pass in these Days
of the Gospel; as is evident by the Apostles Testimony, Gal. 4. 22. to the End.
And particularly it seems to have been typical of two Things. 1. The Weaning of
the Church from it is Milk of carnal Ordinances, Ceremonies, Shadows, and
beggarly Elements, upon the Coming of CHRIST, and pouring out of the Spirit in
the Days of the Apostles. The Church of CHRIST, in the Times of the
Old Testament, was in it is Minority, and was a Babe; and the Apostle tells us
that Babes must be fed with Milk, and not with strong Meat; but when GOD weaned
his Church from these carnal Ordinances, on the ceasing of the legal
Dispensation, a glorious Gospel Feast was provided for Souls, and GOD fed his
People with spiritual Dainties, and filled them with the Spirit, and gave 'em
Joy in the Holy Ghost. Ishmael, in mocking at the Time of Isaac's Feast, by the
Apostles Testimony, represented the carnal Jews, the Children of the literal
Jerusalem, who when they beheld the Rejoicings of Christians, in their
spiritual and evangelical Privileges, were filled with Envy, deriding,
contradicting and blaspheming. Act. 2. 13. and Chap. 13. 45. and 18. 6. And
therefore were cast out of the Family of Abraham, and out of the Land of
Canaan, to wander through the Earth. 2. This Weaning of Isaac's seems also to
represent the Conversion of Sinners, which is several Times represented in
Scripture by the weaning of a Child; as in Psalm. 131. and Isai. 28. 9. Because
in Conversion, the Soul is weaned from the Enjoyments of the World, which are
as it were the Breast of our Mother Earth; and is also weaned from the Covenant
of our first Parents, which we as naturally hang upon, as a Child on it is
Mother's Breasts: And the great Feast that Abraham made on that Occasion,
represents the spiritual Feast, the heavenly Privileges, and holy Joys and
Comforts, which GOD gives Souls as their Conversion. Now is a Time when GOD is
in a remarkable Manner bestowing the Blessings of such a Feast. Let every one
take Heed that he don't now show himself to be the Son of the Bondwoman, and
born after the Flesh, by standing and deriding, with mocking Ishmael; lest they
be cast out as he was, and it be said concerning them, these Sons of the
Bondwoman, shall not be Heirs with the Sons of the Freewoman. Don't let us
stumble at the Things that have been, because they are so great and
extraordinary; for if we have run with the Footmen, and they have wearied us,
how shall we contend with Horses? There is doubtless a Time coming when GOD
will accomplish Things vastly greater and more extraordinary then these.

And that we may be warned not to continue doubting and unbelieving, concerning
this Work, because of the extraordinary Degree of it, and the Suddenness and
Swiftness of the Accomplishment of the great Things that pertain to it. Let us
consider the Example of the unbelieving Lord in Samaria; who could not believe
so extraordinary a Work of GOD to be accomplished so suddenly as was declared
to him: The Prophet Elisha foretold that the great Famine in Samaria should
very suddenly, even in one Day, be turned into an extraordinary Plenty; but the
Work was too great, and too sudden for him to believe; says he, If the Lord
should make Windows in Heaven, might this Thing be? And the Curse that he
brought upon himself by it, was that he saw it with his Eyes, and did not eat
thereof, but miserably perished, and was trodden down as the Mire of the
Streets. when others were feasting and rejoicing. 2 Kings, Chap. 7.

When GOD redeemed his People from their Babylonish Captivity, and they rebuilt
Jerusalem, it was, as is universally owned, a remarkable Type of the spiritual
Redemption of GOD's Church; and particularly, was an eminent Type of the great
Deliverance of the Christian Church from spiritual Babylon, and their
re-building the spiritual Jerusalem, in the latter Days; and therefore they are
often spoken of under one by the Prophets: and this probably was the main
Reason that it was so ordered in Providence, and particularly noted in
Scripture, that the Children of Israel, on that Occasion, kept the greatest
Feast of Tabernacles, that ever had been kept in Israel, since the Days of
Joshua, when the People were first settled in Canaan; ( Neh. 8. 16, 17.) because
at that Time happened that Restoration of Israel, that had the greatest
Resemblance of that great Restoration of the Church of GOD, of which the Feast
of Tabernacles was the Type, of any that had been since Joshua first bro't the
People out of the Wilderness, and settled them in the good Land. But we read of
some that opposed the Jews in that Affair, and weakened their Hands, and
ridiculed GOD's People, and the Instruments that were improved in that Work,
and despised their Hope, and made as though their Confidence was little more than
a Shadow, and would utterly fail 'em: What do these feeble Jews? (say they,)
Will they fortify themselves? Will they sacrifice? Will they make an End in a
Day? Will they revive the Stones out of the Heaps of the Rubbish which are
burned? Even that which they build, if a Fox go up, he shall even break down
their Stone Wall. Let not us be in any Measure like them, lest it be said to
us, as Nehemiah said to them, Neh. 2. 20. We his Servants will arise and build;
but you have no Portion, nor Right, nor Memorial in Jerusalem. And least we
bring Nehemiah's Imprecation upon us, Chap. 4. 5. Cover not their Iniquity, and
let not their Sin be blotted out from before thee; for they have provoked thee
to Anger, before the Builders.

As Persons will greatly expose themselves to the Curse of GOD, by opposing, or
standing at a Distance, and keeping Silence at such a Time as this; so for
Persons to arise, and readily to acknowledge GOD, and honor him in such a
Work, and cheerfully and vigorously to exert themselves to promote it, will be
to put themselves much in the Way of the divine Blessing. What a Mark of Honor
does GOD put upon those in Israel, that willingly offered themselves, and came
to the Help of the Lord against the Mighty, when the Angel of the Lord led
forth his Armies, and they fought from Heaven against Siscra? Judge. 5. 2, 9,
14, 15, 17, 18. And what a great Blessing is pronounced on Jael, the Wise of
Heber, the Kenite, for her appearing on the Lord's Side, and for what she did
to promote this Work? Ver. 24. Which was no less than the Curse pronounced in
the preceding Verse, against Meroz, for lying still: Blessed above Women,
shall Jael, the Wife of Heber, the Kenite be, blessed shall she be above Women,
in the Tent. And what a Blessing is pronounced on those which shall have any
Hand in the Destruction of Babylon, which was the Head City of the Kingdom of
Satan, and of the Enemies of the Church of GOD? Psalm. 137. 9, Happy shall be
be, that takes, and dasheth thy little ones against the Stones. What a
particular and honorable Notice is taken, in the Records of God's Word, of
those that arose, and appeared as David's Helpers, to introduce him into the
Kingdom of Israel, in the 12 Chap. of 1 Chronicles. The Host of those that thus came
to the Help of the Lord, in that Work of his, and glorious Revolution in
Israel, by which the Kingdom of that great Type of the Messiah was set up in
Israel, is compared to the Host of God, Ver. 22. At that Time, Day by Day,
there came to David, to help him, until it was a great Host, like the Host of
God. And doubtless it was intended to be a Type of that Host of God, that shall
appear with the spiritual David, as his Helpers, when he shall come to set up
his Kingdom in the World; the same Host that we read of, Rev. 19. 14. The
Spirit of GOD then pronounced a special Blessing on David's Helpers, as those
that were Co-workers with God, Ver. 18. Then the Spirit came upon Amasai, who
was chief of the Captains, and he said, Thine are we David, and on thy Side,
thou Son of Jesse; Peace, Peace be unto thee, and Peace be to thine Helpers,
for thy God helps thee. So we may conclude that God will much more give his
Blessing to such as come to the Help of the Lord, when he sets his own dear Son
as King on his holy Hill of Zion; and they shall be received by CHRIST, and he
will put peculiar Honor upon them, as David did on those his Helpers; as we
have an Account, in the following Words, Ver. 18. Then David received them, and
made them Captains of the Band. It Is particularly noted of those that came to
David to Hebron, ready armed to the War, to turn the Kingdom of Saul to him,
according to the Word of the Lord, that they were Men that had understanding of
the Times, to know what Israel ought to do. Ver. 23. and 32. Herein they
differed from the Pharisees and other Jews, that did not come to the Help of
the Lord, at the Time that the great Son of David appeared to set up his
Kingdom in the World, whom CHRIST condems, that they had not Understanding of
those Times, Luke 12. 56. Ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the Face of the Sky,
and of the Earth; but how is it, that ye do not discern these Times? So it
always will be, when CHRIST remarkably appears on Earth, on a Design of setting
up his Kingdom here, there will be many that will not understand the Times, nor
what Israel ought to do, and so will not come to turn about the Kingdom to
David.

The favorable Notice that GOD will take of such as appear to promote the Work
of GOD, at such a Time as this, may also be argued from such a very particular
Notice being taken in the sacred Records, of those that helped in rebuilding
the Wall of Jerusalem, upon the Return from the Babylonish Captivity. Nehem.
Chap. 3.

At such a Time as this, when GOD is setting his King on his holy Hill of Zion,
or establishing his Dominion, or showing forth his regal Glory from thence, he
expects that his visible People, without Exception, should openly appear to
acknowledge him in such a Work, and bow before him, and join with him. But
especially does he expect this of civil Rulers: GOD's Eye is especially upon
them, to see how they behave themselves on such an Occasion. If a new King
comes to the Throne, when he comes from Abroad, and enters into his Kingdom,
and makes his solemn Entry into the royal City, it is expected that all Sorts
should acknowledge him; but above all others is it expected that the great Men,
and public Officers of the Nation should then make their Appearance, and attend
on their Sovereign, with suitable Congratulations, and Manifestations of
Respect and Loyalty: If such as these stand at a Distance, at such a Time, it
will be much more taken Notice of, and will awaken the Princes Jealousy and
Displeasure much more, than such a Behavior in the common People. And thus it
is, when that eternal Son of GOD, and Heir of the World, by whom Kings reign,
and Princes decree Justice, whom his Father has appointed to be King of Kings,
comes as it were from far, and in the spiritual Tokens of his Presence, enters
into the royal City Zion; GOD has his Eye at such a Time, especially upon those
Princes, Nobles and Judges of the Earth, spoken of Prove. 8. 16. to see how they
behave themselves, whether they bow to him, that he has made the Head of all
Principality and Power. This is evident by the 2d. Psalm. Ver. 6, 7, 10, 11, 12.
Yet have I set my King, upon my holy Hill of Zion. I will declare the Decree
the Lord has said unto me, thou art my Son, this Day have I begotton thee. --
Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be instructed ye Judges of the Earth; serve
the Lord with Fear, and rejoice with Trembling; kiss the Son, lest he be angry,
and ye perish from the Way, when his Wrath is kindled but a little. There seems
to be in the Words, an Allusion to a new King's coming to the Throne, and
making his solemn Entry into the royal City; (as Zion was the royal City in
Israel,) when it is expected that all, especially Men in public Office and
Authority, should manifest their Loyalty, by some open and visible Token of
Respect, by the Way, as he passes along; and those that refuse or neglect it
are in Danger of being immediately struck down, and perishing from the Way, by
which the King goes in solemn Procession.

The Day wherein God does in an eminent Manner send forth the Rod of CHRIST's
Strength out of Zion, that he may rule in the midst of his Enemies, the Day of
his Power wherein his People shall be made willing, is also eminently a Day of
his Wrath, especially to such Rulers as oppose him, or will not how to him; a Day
wherein he shall strike through Kings, and fill the Places with the dead
Bodies, and wound the Heads over many Countries. Psalm. 110. And thus it is,
that when the Son of God girds his Sword upon his Thigh, with his Glory and his
Majesty, and in his Majesty rides prosperously, because of Truth, Meekness and
Righteousness, his right Hand teaches him terrible Things. It was the Princes
of Succoth especially, that suffered Punishment, when the Inhabitants of that
City refused to come to the Help of the Lord, when Gideon was pursuing after
Zebah and Zalmunna; we read that Gideon took the Elders of the City, and Thorns
of the Wilderness, and Briers, and with them he taught the Men of Succoth. It Is
especially taken Notice of that the Rulers, and chief Men of Israel, were
called upon to assist in the Affair of bringing up the Ark of GOD; they were
chiefly consulted, and were principal in the Management of the Affair. 1 Chro.
13. 1. And David consulted with the Captains of Thousands and Hundreds, and
with every Leader. And Chap. 15. 25. So David and the Elders of Israel, and the
Captains over Thousands, went to bring up the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord,
out of the House of Obed-Edom, with Joy. So 2 Samuel 6. 1. And so it was when the
Ark was brought into the Temple, 1 King. 8. 1, 3. and 2 Chro. 5. 2, 4.

And as Rulers, by neglecting their Duty at such a Time, will especially expose
themselves to GOD's great Displeasure, so by fully acknowledging GOD in such a
Work, and by cheerfully and vigorously exerting themselves to promote it, they
will especially be in the Way of receiving peculiar Honors and Rewards at
GOD's Hands. It Is noted of the Princes of Israel, that they especially appeared
to honor GOD with their princely Offering, on Occasion of the setting up the
Tabernacle of GOD, in the Congregation of Israel: (which I have observed
already was done at the Time of the Feast of Tabernacles, and was a Type of the
Tabernacle of GOD's being with Men, and his dwelling with Men in the latter
Days,) and with what abundant particularity, is it noted of each Prince, how
much he offered to GOD on that Occasion, for their everlasting Honor, in the
7th Chap. of Numb? And so with how much Favor and Honor does the Spirit of
GOD take Notice of those Princes in Israel, that came to the Help of the Lord,
in the War against Sisera? Judge. 5. 9. My Heart is toward the Governors of
Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the People. And Ver. 14. Out of
Machir came down Governors. Ver. 15. And the Princes of Issachar were with
Deborah. And in the Account that we have of the re-building the Wall of
Jerusalem, in the 3d Chap. of Nehem. It is particularly noted, what an Hand one
and another of the Rulers had in this Affair; we have an Account that such a
Part of the Wall was repaired by the Ruler of the half Part of Jerusalem, and
such a Part by the Ruler of the other Half Part of Jerusalem, and such a Part
by the Ruler of Part of Beth-haccerem, and such a Party by the Ruler of Part of
Mizpah, and such a Part by the Ruler of the Half Part of Beth-zur; and such a
Part by the Ruler of Mizpah, Ver. 9, 12, 14, 15, 16, 19. And there it is
particularly noted of the Rulers of one of the Cities, that they put not their
Necks to the Work of the Lord, though the common People did; and they are
stigmatized for it, in the sacred Records, to their everlasting Reproach, Ver.
5. And next unto them, the Tekoites repaired; but their Nobles put not their
Necks to the Work of the Lord. So the Spirit of GOD, with special Honor, takes
Notice of Princes and Rulers of several Tribes, that assisted in bringing up
the Ark, Psalm. 68. 27.

And I humbly desire that it may be considered, Whether we have not Reason to fear
that GOD is provoked with this Land, that no more Notice has been taken of this
glorious Work of the Lord, that has been lately carried on, by the civil
Authority; that there has no more been done by them, as a public Acknowledgment
of GOD in this Work, and no more Improvement of their Authority to promote it,
either by appointing a Day of public Thanksgiving to GOD, for so unspeakable a
Mercy, or a Day of Fasting and Prayer, to humble ourselves before GOD, for our
past Deadness and Unprofitableness under the Means of Grace, and to seek the
Continuance and Increase of the Tokens of his Presence; or so much as to enter
upon any public Consultation, what should be done to advance the present
Revival of Religion, and great Reformation that is begun in the Land. Is there
not Danger that such a Behavior, at such a Time, will be interpreted by GOD,
as a Denial of Christ? If but a new Governor comes into a Province, how much
is there done, especially by those that are in Authority, to put Honor upon
him, to arise, and appear publicly, and go forth to meet him, to address and
congratulate him, and with great Expense to attend upon him, and aid him? If
the Authority of the Province, on such an Occasion, should all set still, and
say and do nothing, and take no Notice of the Arrival of their new Governor,
would there not be Danger of its being interpreted by him, and his Prince that
sent him, as a Denial of his Authority, or a refusing to receive him, and
honor him as their Governor? And shall the Head of the Angels, and Lord of
the Universe, come down from Heaven, in so wonderful a Manner, into the Land,
and shall all stand at a Distance, and be silent and unactive on such an
Occasion? I would humbly recommend it to our Rulers, to consider whether GOD
don't now say to them, Be wise now ye Rulers, be instructed ye Judges of
New England; Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the Way.

It Is prophesied Zech. 12. 8. That in the glorious Day of the Christian Church,
the House of David, or the Rulers in GOD's Israel, shall be as GOD, as the
Angel of the LORD, before his People. But how can such Rulers expect to have
any Share in this glorious Promise, that don't so much as openly acknowledge
GOD in the Work of that Spirit, by which the Glory of that Day is to be
accomplished? The Days are coming, so often spoken of, when the Saints shall
reign on Earth, and all Dominion and Authority shall be given into their Hands:
But if our Rulers would partake of this Honor, they ought at such a Day as
this, to bring their Glory and Honor into the spiritual Jerusalem, agreeable to
Rev. 21. 24.

But above all others, is GOD's Eye upon Ministers of the Gospel, as expecting
of them, that they should arise, and acknowledge, and honor him in such a Work
as this, and do their utmost to encourage and promote it: For to promote such a
Work, is the very Business which they are called and devoted to; it is the
Office to which they are appointed, as Co-workers with Christ, and as his
Ambassadors and Instruments, to awaken and convert Sinners, and establish,
build up and comfort Saints; it is the Business they have been solemnly charged
with, before GOD, Angels and Men, and that they have given up themselves to, by
the most sacred Vows. These especially, are the Officers of CHRIST's Kingdom,
that above all other Men upon Earth, do represent his Person, into whose Hands
CHRIST has committed the sacred Oracles, and holy Ordinances, and all his
appointed Means of Grace, to be administered by them; they are the Stewards of
his Household, into whose Hands he has committed its Provision; the immortal
Souls of Men are committed to them, as a Flock of Sheep are committed to the
Care of a Shepherd, or as a Master commits a Treasure to the Care of a Servant,
of which he must give an Account: It Is expected of them, above all others, that
they should have Understanding of the Times, and know what Israel ought to do;
for it is their Business to acquaint themselves with Things pertaining to the
Kingdom of GOD, and to teach and enlighten others in Things of this Nature. We
that are employed in the sacred Work of the Gospel Ministry, are the Watchmen
over the City, to whom GOD has committed the Keys of the Gates of Zion; and if
when the rightful King of Zion comes, to deliver his People from the Enemy that
opposes them, we refuse to open the Gates to him, how greatly shall we expose
our selves to his Wrath? We are appointed to be the Captains of the Host in
this War: And if a General will highly resent it in a private Soldier, if he
refuses to follow him when his Banner is displayed, and his Trumpet blown; how
much more will he resent it in the Officers of his Army? The Work of the
Gospel Ministry, consisting in the Administration of GOD's Word and Ordinances,
is the principal Means that GOD has appointed, for carrying on his Work on the
Souls of Men; and it is his revealed Will, that when ever that glorious Revival
of Religion, and Reformation of the World, so often spoken of in his Word, is
accomplished, it should be principally by the Labors of his Ministers; and
therefore how heinous will it be in the Sight of GOD, if when a Work of that
Nature is begun, we appear unbelieving, slow, backward and disaffected? There
was no sort of Persons among the Jews that was in any Measure treated with such
Manifestations of GOD's great Displeasure, and severe Indignation, for not
acknowledging CHRIST, and the Work of his Spirit, in the Days of Christ and his
Apostles, as the Ministers of Religion: See how CHRIST deals with them for it,
in the 23d Chapter of Matthew; with what Gentleness did CHRIST treat Publicans
and Harlots, in Comparison of them?

When the Tabernacle was erected in the Camp of Israel, and GOD came down from
Heaven to dwell in it, the Priests were above all others concerned, and busily
employed in the solemn Transactions of that Occasion, Levit. Chap. 8. and 9.
And so it was at the Time of the Dedication of the Temple of Solomon, 1 King.
Chap. 8. and 2 Chronicles. Chap. 5. and 6. and 7. which was at the Time of the Feast
of Tabernacles, at the same Time that the Tabernacle was erected in the
Wilderness: And the Levites were primarily, and most immediately concerned in
bringing up the Ark into Mount Zion; the Business properly belonged to them,
and the Ark was carried upon their Shoulders. 1 Chronicles. 15. 2. Then David said,
None ought to carry the Ark of GOD but the Levites; for them has the LORD
chosen to carry the Ark of GOD, and to minister unto him for ever. And v. 11,
12. And David called for Zadok and Abiathar the Priests, and for the Levites,
for Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, and Eliel, and Aminadab, and said unto
them, Ye are the chief of the Fathers of the Levites; sanctify your selves,
both ye, and your Brethren, that you may bring up the Ark of the Lord God of
Israel, unto the Place that I have prepared for it. So we have an Account that
the Priests led the Way, in rebuilding the Wall of Jerusalem, after the
Babylonish Captivity, Neh. 3. at the beginning.

If Ministers preach never so good Doctrine, and are never so painful and
laborious in their Work, yet, if at such a Day as this, they show to their
People, that they are not well affected to this Work, but are very doubtful and
suspicious of it, they will be very likely to do their People a great deal more
Hurt than Good: For the very Fame of such a great and extraordinary Work of
GOD, if their People were suffered to believe it to be his Work, and the
Example of other Towns, together with what Preaching they might hear
occasionally, would be likely to have a much greater Influence upon the Minds
of their People, to awaken them and animate them in Religion, than all their
Labors with them: And besides their Ministers Opinion will not only beget in them
a Suspicion of the Work they hear of abroad, whereby the mighty Hand of GOD
that appears in it, loses its Influence upon their Minds, but it will also tend
to create a Suspicion of every Thing of the like Nature, that shall appear
among themselves, as being something of the same Distemper that is become so
Epidemical in the Land; and that is, in Effect, to create a Suspicion of all
vital Religion, and to put the People upon talking against it, and discouraging
it, wherever it appears, and knocking it in the Head, as fast as it rises.
And we that are Ministers, by looking on this Work, from Year to Year, with a
displeased Countenance, shall effectually keep the Sheep from their Pasture,
instead of doing the Part of Shepherds to them, by feeding them; and our People
had a great deal better be without any settled Minister at all, at such a Day
as this.

We that are in this sacred Office, had Need to take Heed what we do, and how
we behave our selves at this Time: A less Thing in a Minister will hinder the
Work of GOD, than in others. If we are very silent, or say but little about the
Work, in our public Prayers and Preaching, or seem carefully to avoid speaking
of it in our Conversation, it will, and justly may be interpreted by our
People, that we who are their Guides, to whom they are to have their Eye for
spiritual Instruction, are suspicious of it; and this will tend to raise the
same Suspicions in them; and so the forementioned Consequences will follow.
And if we really hinder, and stand in the Way of the Work of GOD, whose
Business above all others it is to promote it, how can we expect to partake of
the glorious Benefits of it? And by keeping others from the Benefit of it, we
shall keep them out of Heaven; therefore those awful Words of CHRIST to the
Jewish Fathers, should be considered by us, Matthew. 23. 13. Woe unto you, for you
shut up the Kingdom of Heaven; -- for ye neither go in your selves, neither
suffer ye them that are entering, to go in. If we keep the Sheep from their
Pasture, how shall we answer it to the great Shepherd, that has bought the
Flock with his precious Blood, and has committed the Care of them to us? I
would humbly desire of every Minister that has thus long remained disaffected
to this Work, and has had contemptible Thoughts of it, to consider whether he
has not hither to been like Michal, without any Child, or at least in a great
Measure barren and unsuccessful in his Work: I pray GOD it may not be a
perpetual Barrenness as here is was.

The Times of CHRIST's remarkably appearing, in Behalf of his Church, and to
revive Religion, and advance his Kingdom in the World, are often spoken in the
Prophecies of Scripture, as Times wherein he will remarkably execute Judgments
on such Ministers or Shepherds, as don't feed the Flock, but hinder their being
fed, and so deliver his Flock from them, as Jer. 23. throughout, and Ezekiel. 34.
throughout, and Zech. 10. 3. and Isai. 56. 7, 8, 9, etc. I observed before that
CHRIST's solemn, magnificent Entry into Jerusalem, seems to be designed, as a
Representation of his glorious coming into his Church, the spiritual Jerusalem;
and therefore it is worthy to be noted, to our present Purpose, that CHRIST at
that Time, cast out all them that sold and bought in the Temple, and overthrew
the Tables of the Money Changers, and the Seats of them that sold Doves;
signifying that when he should come to set up his Kingdom on Earth, he would
cast out those out of his House, who, instead of being faithful Ministers,
officiated there only for worldly Gain: Not that I determine that all Ministers
that are suspicious of this Work, do so; but I mention these Things to show
that it is to be expected, that a Time of a glorious Out-pouring of the Spirit
of GOD to revive Religion, will be a Time of remarkable. Judgments on those
Ministers that don't serve the End of their Ministry.

The Example of the unbelieving Lord in Samaria, should especially be for the
Warning of Ministers and Rulers: At the Time when GOD turned an extreme Famine
into a great Plenty, by a wonderful Work of his, the King appointed this Lord
to have the Charge of the Gate of the City; where he saw the common People, in
Multitudes, entering with great Joy and Gladness, laden with Provision, to feed
and feast their almost famished Bodies; but he himself, though he saw it with his
Eyes, never had one Taste of it, but being weak with Famine, sunk down in the
Crowd, and was trodden to Death, as a Punishment of GOD, for his not giving
Credit to that great and wonderful Work of GOD, when sufficiently manifested to
him, to require his Belief. -- Ministers are those, that the King of the Church
has appointed to have the Charge of the Gate, at which his People enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, there to be entertained and satisfied with an eternal
Feast; Ministers have the Charge of the House of GOD, which is the Gate of
Heaven.

Ministers should especially take Heed of a Spirit of Envy toward other
Ministers, that GOD is pleased to make more Use of to carry on this Work, than
they; and that they don't, from such a Spirit, reproach some Preachers, that
have the true Spirit, as though they were influenced by a false Spirit, or were
berest of Reason, and were mad, and were proud, false Pretenders, and deserved
to be put in Prison or the Stocks, as Disturbers of the Peace; left they expose
themselves to the Curse of Shemaiah, the Nehelamite, who envied the Prophet
Jeremiah, and in this Manner reviled him, in his Letter to Zephaniah the
Priest, Jer. 29. 26, 27. The Lord has made thee Priest, in the Stead of
Jeholada the Priest, that ye should be Officers in the House of the LORD, for
every Man that is mad, and makes himself a Prophet, that thou should put him
in Prison, and in the Stocks. Now therefore, Why have thou not reproved
Jeremiah of Anathoth, which makes himself a Prophet to you? His Curse is
denounced in the 32d v. Therefore, thus faith the LORD, Behold, I will punish
Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and his Seed; He shall not have a Man to dwell among
his People, neither shall be behold the Good that I will do for my People,
says the LORD, because he has taught Rebellion against the LORD. All those
that are others Superiors or Elders, should take Heed, that at this Day they
ben't like the elder Brother, who could not bear it, that the Prodigal should
be made so much of, and should be so sumptuously entertained, and would not
join in the Joy of the Feast; was like Michal, Readiness Daughter, offended at the
Music and Dancing that he heard; the Transports of Joy displeased him; it
seemed to him to be an unseemly and unseasonable Noise and Ado, that was made;
and therefore stood at a Distance, sullen, and much offended, and full of
Invectives against the young Prodigal.

It Is our wisest and best Way, fully, and without Reluctance, to bow to the
great GOD in this Work, and to be entirely resigned to him, with Respect to the
Manner in which he carries it on, and the Instruments he is pleased to make Use
of, and not to show our selves out of Humor, and sullenly to refuse to
acknowledge the Work, in the full Glory of it, because we have not had so great a
Hand in promoting it, or han't shared so largely in the Blessings of it, as
some others; and not to refuse to give all that Honor, that belongs to others,
as Instruments, because they are young, or are upon other Accounts, much
inferior to our selves, and many others, and may appear to us very unworthy,
that GOD should put so much Honor upon them. When GOD comes to accomplish any
great Work for his Church, and for the Advancement of the Kingdom of his Son,
he always fulfills that Scripture, Isai. 2. 17. And the Loftiness of Man shall
be bowed down, and the Haughtiness of Men shall be made low, and the Lord alone
shall be exalted in that Day. If GOD has a Design of carrying on this Work,
every one, whether he be great or small, must either bow to it, or be broken
before it: It may be expected that GOD's Hand will be upon every Thing that is
high, and stiff, and strong in Opposition, as in Isai. 2. 12, 13, 14, 15. For
the Day of the Lord of Hosts, shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty,
and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low; and upon all
the Cedars of Lebanon, that are high and lifted up, and upon all the Oaks of
Bashan, and upon all the high Mountains, and upon all the Hills that are lifted
up, and upon every high Tower, and upon every senced Wall.

Not only Magistrates and Ministers, but every living Soul, is now obliged to
arise, and acknowledge GOD in this Work, and put to his Hand to promote it, as
they would not expose themselves to GOD's Curse. All Sorts of Persons,
throughout the whole Congregation of Israel, Great and Small, Rich and Poor,
Men and Women, helped to build the Tabernacle in the Wilderness; some in one
Way, others in another; each one according to his Capacity: Every one whose
Heart stirred him up, and every one whom his Spirit made willing; all Sorts
contributed, and all Sorts were employed in that Affair, in Labors of their
Hands, both Men and Women: Some brought Gold and Silver, others Blue, Purple
and Scarlet, and fine Linen; others offered an Offering of Brass; others, with
whom was found Shittim Wood, brought it an Offering to the LORD: The Rulers
brought Onyx Stones, and Spice, and Oil; and some brought Goats Hair; and some
Rams Skins, and others Badgers Skins. See Exodus 35, 20, etc. And we are told
Ver. 29. The Children of Israel brought a willing Offering unto the Lord, every
Man and Woman, whose Heart made them willing. And thus it ought to be in this
Day of building the Tabernacle of GOD; with such a willing and cheerful Heart,
ought every Man, Woman, and Child, to do something to promote this Work: Those
that have not Onyx Stones, or are not able to bring Gold or Silver, yet may
bring Goats Hair.

As all Sorts of Persons were employed in building the Tabernacle in the
Wilderness, so the whole Congregation of Israel were called together to set up
the Tabernable in Shiloh, after they came into Canaan, Josh. 18. 1. And so
again, the whole Congregation of Israel were gathered together, to bring up the
Ark of GOD, from Kirjath-jearim; and again, they were all assembled to bring it
up, out of the House of Obed-Edom into Mount Zion; so again, all Israel met
together to assist in the great Affair of the Dedication of the Temple, and
bringing the Ark into it: So we have an Account, how that all Sorts assisted in
the Re-building the Wall of Jerusalem, not only the proper Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, but those that dwelt in other Parts of the Land; not only the
Priests and Rulers, but the Nethinims and Merchants, Husbandmen and Mechanics,
and Women. Neh. 3. 5, 12, 26, 31, 32. And we have an Account of one and
another, that he repaired over against his House, Ver. 10. and 23, 28. and of
one that repaired over against his Chamber, Ver. 30. So now, at this Time of
the Re-building the Walls of Jerusalem, every one ought to promote the Work of
GOD within his own Sphere, and by doing what belongs to him, in the Place in
which GOD has set him: Men in a private Capacity, may repair over against their
Houses: and even those that have not the Government of Families, and have but
Part of an House belonging to them, should repair, each one over against his
Chamber: And every one should be engaged to do the utmost that lies in his
Power, laboring with the utmost Watchfulness, Care and Diligence, with united
Hearts, and united Strength, and the greatest Readiness, to assist one another
in this Work: as GOD's People rebuilt the Wall of Jerusalem; who were so
diligent in the Work, that they wro't from break of Day, 'till the Stars
appeared, and did not so much as put off their Clothes in the Night; and
wrought with that Care and Watchfulness, that with one Hand they wrought in the
Work, and with the other Hand held a Weapon; besides the Guard they set to
defend them; and were so well united in it, that they took Care, that one
should stand ready, with a Trumpet in his Hand, that if any were assaulted in
one Part, those in the other Parts, at the sound of the Trumpet, might resort
to 'em, and help 'em, Neh. 4. at the latter End.

Great Care should be taken that the Press should be improved to no Purpose
contrary to the Interest of this Work. We read that when GOD fought against
Sisera, for the Deliverance of his oppressed Church, They that handle the Pen
of the Writer came to the Help of the LORD in that Affair, Jud. 5. 14. Whatever
Sort of Men in Israel they were that were intended, yet as the Words were
Indicted by a Spirit, that had a perfect View of all Events to the End of the
World, and had a special Eye on this Song, to that great Event of the
Deliverance of GOD's Church, in the latter Days, of which this Deliverance of
Israel was a Type, it is not unlikely that they have Respect to Authors, those
that should fight against the Kingdom of Satan, with their Pens. Those
therefore that publish Pamphlets, to the Disadvantage of this Work, and tending
either directly or indirectly to bring it under Suspicion, and to discourage or
hinder it, would do well thoroughly to consider whether this be not indeed the
Work of GOD; and whether if it be, it is not likely that GOD will go forth as
Fire, to consume all that stands in his Way, and so burn up those Pamphlets;
and whether there be not Danger that the Fire that is kindled in them, will
scorch the Authors.

When a People oppose CHRIST in the Work of his Holy SPIRIT, it is because it
touches 'em, in something that is dear to their carnal Minds; and because they
see the Tendency of it is to cross their Pride, and deprive them of the Objects
of their Lusts. We should take Heed that at this Day we be not like the
Gadarenes, who when CHRIST came into their Country, in the Exercise of his
glorious Power and Grace, triumphing over a Legion of Devils, and delivering a
miserable Creature, that had long been their Captive, were all alarmed, because
they lost their Swine by it, and the whole Multitude of the Country came, and
besought him to depart out of their Coasts: they loved their filthy Swine,
better than Jesus Christ; and had rather have a Legion of Devils in their
Country, with their Herd of Swine, than JESUS CHRIST without them.

This Work may be opposed, not only by directly speaking against the whole of
it: Persons may say that they believe there is a good Work carried on the
Country; and may sometimes bless GOD, in their public Prayers, in general
Terms, for any Awakenings or Revivals of Religion, there have lately been in
any Parts of the Land; and may pray that GOD would carry on his own Work, and
pour out his Spirit more and more; and yet, as I apprehend, be in the Sight of
GOD, great Opposers of his Work: Some will express themselves after this
Manner, that are so far from acknowledging and rejoicing in the infinite Mercy,
and glorious Grace of GOD, in causing so happy a Change in the Land, that they
look upon the religious State of the Country, take it in the Whole of it, much
more sorrowful than it was ten Years ago; and whose Conversation, to those that
are well acquainted with 'em, evidently shows, that they are more out of Humor
with the State of Things, and enjoy themselves loss, than they did before ever
this Work began. If it be manifestly thus with us, and our Talk and Behavior
with Respect to this Work, be such as has, (though but) an indirect Tendency, to
beget ill Thoughts and Suspicions in others concerning it, we are Opposers of
the Work of God.

Instead of coming to the Help of the Lord, we shall actually fight against
him, if we are abundant in insisting on, and setting forth the Blemishes of the
Work, so as to manifest that we rather choose, and are more forward to take
Notice of what is amiss, than what is good and glorious in the Work. Not but
that the Errors that are committed, ought to be observed and lamented, and a
proper Testimony born against them, and the most probable Means should be used
to have 'em amended; but an insisting much upon 'em, as though it were a pleasing
Theme, or speaking of them with more Appearance of Heat of Spirit, or with
Ridicule, or an Air of Contempt, than Grief for them, has no Tendency to
correct the Errors; but has a Tendency to darken the Glory of GOD's Power and
Grace, appearing in the Substance of the Work, and to beget Jealousies and ill
Thoughts in the Minds of others, concerning the whole of it. Whatever Errors
many zealous Persons have ran into, yet if the Work, in the Substance of it, be
the Work of GOD, then it is a joyful Day indeed; it is so in Heaven, and ought
to be so, among GOD's People on Earth, especially in that Part of the Earth,
where this glorious Work is carried on. It Is a Day of great Rejoicing with
Christ himself, the good Shepherd, when he finds his Sheep that was lost, lays
it on his Shoulders rejoicing, and calls together his Friends and Neighbors,
saying rejoice with me: If we therefore are CHRIST's Friends, now it should be
a Day of great Rejoicing with us. If we viewed Things in a just Light, so great
an Event as the Conversion of such a Multitude of Sinners, would draw and
engage our Attention, much more than all the Imprudences and Irregularities
that have been; our Hearts would be swallowed up with the Glory of this Event,
and we should have no great Disposition to attend to any Thing else. The
Imprudences and Errors of poor feeble Worms, don't hinder or prevent great
Rejoicing, in the Presence of the Angels of GOD, over so many poor Sinners that
have repented; and it will be an Argument of something very ill in us, if they
prevent our Rejoicing.

Who loves in a Day of great Joy and Gladness, to be much insisting on those
Things that are uncomfortable? Would it not be very improper, on a King's
Coronation Day, to be much in taking Notice of the Blemishes of the Royal
Family? Or would it be agreeable to the Bridegroom, on the Day of his
Espousals, the Day of the Gladness of his Heart, to be much insisting on the
Blemishes of his Bride? We have an Account, how that at the Time of that joyful
Dispensation of Providence, the Restoration of the Church of Israel, after the
Babylonish Captivity, and at the Time of the Feast of Tabernacles, many wept at
the Faults that were found among the People, but were reproved for taking so
much Notice of the Blemishes of that Affair, as to overlook the Cause of
Rejoicing. Neh. 8. 9, 10, 11, 12. And Nehemiah, which is the Tirshatha, and
Ezra the Priest, the Scribe, and the Levites, that taught the People, said unto
all the People, This Day is holy unto the Lord your GOD, mourn not nor weep;
for all the People wept, when they heard the Words of the Law. Then he said
unto them, Go your Way, eat the Fat, and drink the Sweet, and send Partions
unto them, for whom nothing is prepared; for this Day is holy unto our Lord;
neither be you sorry, for the Joy of the Lord is your Strength. So the Levites
stilled all the People, saying, Hold your Peace, for the Day is holy, neither
be ye grieved. And all the People went their Way, to eat, and to drink, and to
send Portions, and to make great Mirth, because they had understood the Words
that were declared unto them.

GOD doubtless now expects, that all Sorts of Persons in New England, Rulers,
Ministers and People, high and low, rich and poor, old and young, should take
great Notice of his Hand, in this mighty Work of his Grace, and should appear
to acknowledge his Glory in it, and greatly to rejoice in it, every one doing
his utmost, in the Place that GOD has set them in, to promote it. And GOD,
according to his wonderful Patience, seems to be still waiting, to give us
Opportunity, thus to acknowledge and honor him. But if we finally refuse,
there is not the least Reason to expect any other, than that his awful Curse
will pursue us, and that the Pourings out of his Wrath will be proportionable
to the despised Out-pourings of his Spirit and Grace.

PART III.
Showing, in many Instances, where in the Subjects, or zealous Promoters of
this WORK, have been injuriously blamed.
THIS Work that has lately been carried on in the Land, is the Work of GOD, and
not the Work of Man. It Is beginning has not been of Man's Power or Device, and
it is being carried on, depends not on our Strength or Wisdom; but yet GOD
expects of all, that they should use their utmost Endeavors to promote it, and
that the Hearts of all should be greatly engaged in this Affair, and that we
should improve our utmost Strength in it, however vain human Strength is
without the Power of GOD; and so he no less requires that we should improve our
utmost Care, Wisdom and Prudence, though human Wisdom, of it self, be as vain as
human Strength. Though GOD is will not to carry on such a Work, in such a Manner, as
many Ways, to show the Weakness and Vanity of Means and human Endeavors, in
themselves; yet at the same Time, he carries it on in such a Manner, as to
encourage Diligence and Vigilance, in the Use of proper Means and Endeavors,
and to punish the Neglect of them. Therefore in our Endeavors to promote this
great Work, we ought to use the utmost Caution, Vigilance and Skill, in the
Measures we take in order to it. A great Affair should be managed with great
Prudence: This is the most important Affair that ever New England was called to
be concerned in. When a People are engaged in War with a powerful and crafty
Nation, it concerns them to manage an Affair of such Consequence with the
utmost Discretion. Of what vast Importance then must it be, that we should be
vigilant and prudent, in the Management of this great War that New England now
has, with so great a Host of such subtle and cruel Enemies, wherein we must
either conquer or be conquered, and the Consequence of the Victory, on one
Side, will be our eternal Destruction, in both Soul and Body in Hell, and on
the other Side, our obtaining the Kingdom of Heaven, and reigning in it in
eternal Glory? We had Need always to stand on our Watch, and to be well versed
in the Art of War, and not to be ignorant of the Devices of our Enemies, and to
take Heed lest by any Means we be beguiled through their Subtilty.

Though the Devil be strong, yet in such a War as this, he depends more on his
Craft than his Strength: And the Course he has chiefly taken, from Time to
Time, to clog, hinder and overthrow Revivals of Religion in the Church of GOD,
has been by his subtle, deceitful Management, to beguile and mislead those that
have been engaged therein; and in such a Course GOD has been pleased, in his
holy and sovereign Providence, to suffer him to succeed, oftentimes, in a great
Measure, to overthrow that, which in its Beginning appeared most hopeful and
glorious. The Work that is now begun in New England, is, as I have shown,
eminently glorious, and if it should go on and prevail, would make New England
a kind of Heaven upon Earth: Is it not therefore a thousand Pities, that it
should be overthrown, through wrong and improper Management, that we are led
into by our subtle Adversary, in our Endeavors to promote it?

In treating of the Methods that ought to be taken to promote this Work, I
would, I. Take Notice, in some Instances, wherein Fault has been found with the
Conduct of those that have appeared to be the Subjects of it, or have been
zealous to promote it, (as I apprehend,) beyond just Cause. II. I would show
what Things ought to be corrected or avoided. III. I would show positively,
what ought to be done to promote this glorious Work of GOD.

I. I would take Notice of some Things, at which Offense has been taken
without, or beyond just Cause.

One Thing that has been complained of, is Ministers addressing themselves,
rather to the Affections of their Hearers, than to their Understandings, and
striving to raise their Passions to the utmost Height, rather by a very
affectionate Manner of speaking, and a great Appearance of Earnestness, in
Voice and Gesture, than by clear Reasoning, and informing their Judgment: By
which Means, it is objected, that the Affections are moved, without a
proportionable enlightening of the Understanding.

To which I would say, I am far from thinking that it is not very profitable,
for Ministers in their Preaching, to endeavor clearly and distinctly to
explain the Doctrines of Religion, and unravel the Difficulties that attend
them, and to confirm them with Strength of Reason and Argumentation, and also
to observe some easy and clear Method and Order, in their Discourses, for the
Help of the Understanding and Memory; and it is very probable that these Things
have been of late, too much neglected, by many Ministers; yet, I believe that
the Objection that is made, of Affections raised without enlightening the
Understanding, is in a great Measure built on a Mistake, and confused Notions
that some have about the Nature and Cause of the Affections, and the Manner in
which they depend on the Understanding. All Affections are raised either by
Light in the Understanding, or by some Error and Delusion in the Understanding;
for all Affections do certainly arise from some Apprehension in the
Understanding; and that Apprehension must either be agreeable to Truth, or else
be some Mistake or Delusion; if it be an Apprehension or Notion that is
agreeable to Truth, then it is Light in the Understanding. Therefore the Thing
to be enquired into is, Whether the Apprehensions or Notions of divine and
eternal Things, that are raised in Peoples Minds, by these affectionate
Preachers, whence their Affections are excited, be Apprehensions that are
agreeable to Truth, or whether they are Mistakes. If the former, then the
Affections are raised the Way they should be, viz. By informing the Mind, or
conveying Light to the Understanding. They go away with a wrong Notion, that
think that those Preachers cannot affect their Hearers, by enlightening their
Understandings, that don't do it by such a distinct, and learned handling of
the doctrinal Points of Religion, as depends on human Discipline, or the
Strength of natural Reason, and tends to enlarge their Hearers Learning, and
speculative Knowledge in Divinity. The Manner of Preaching without this, may be
such as shall tend very much to set divine and eternal Things, in a right View,
and to give the Hearers such Ideas and Apprehensions of them as are agreeable
to Truth, and such Impressions on their Hearts, as are answerable to the real
Nature of Things: And not only the Words that are spoken, but the Manner of
speaking, is one Thing that has a great Tendency to this. I think an exceeding
affectionate Way of Preaching about the great Things of Religion, has in it
self no Tendency to beget false Apprehensions of them; but on the contrary a
much greater Tendency to beget true Apprehensions of them, than a moderate,
dull, indifferent Way of speaking of 'em. An Appearance of Affection and
Earnestness, in the Manner of Delivery, if it be very great indeed, yet if it
be agreeable to the Nature of the Subject, and ben't beyond a Proportion to its
Importance, and Worthiness of Affection, and there be no Appearance of its
being feigned or forced, has so much the greater Tendency to beget true Ideas
or Apprehensions in the Minds of the Hearers, of the Subject spoken of, and so
to enlighten the Understanding: And that for this Reason, That such a Way or
Manner of speaking of these Things, does in Fact, more truly represent them,
than a more cold and indifferent Way of speaking of them. If the Subject be in
its own Nature, worthy of very great Affection, then a speaking of it with very
great Affection, is most agreeable to the Nature of that Subject, or is the
truest Representation of it, and therefore has most of a Tendency to beget true
Ideas of it, in the Minds of those, to whom the Representation is made. And I
don't think Ministers are to be blamed, for raising the Affections of their
Hearers too high, if that which they are affected with, be only that which is
worthy of Affection, and their Affections are not raised beyond a Proportion to
their Importance, or Worthiness of Affection. I should think my self in the Way
of my Duty, to raise the Affections of my Hearers as high as possibly I can,
provided that they are affected with nothing but Truth, and with Affections
that are not disagreeable to the Nature of what they are affected with. I know
it has long been fashionable to despise a very earnest and pathetical Way of
Preaching; And they, and they only have been valued as Preachers, that have
shown the greatest Extent of Learning, and Strength of Reason, and Correctness
of Method and Language: but I humbly conceive it has been for want of
Understanding, or duly considering human Nature, that such Preaching has been
though it to have the greatest Tendency to answer the Ends of Preaching; and the
Experience of the present and past Ages abundently confirms the same. Though, as
I said before, Clearness of Distinction and Illustration, and Strength of
Reason, and a good Method, in the doctrinal Handling of the Truths of Religion,
is many Ways needful and profitable, and not to be neglected, yet an Increase
in speculative Knowledge in Divinity, is not what is so much needed by our
People, as something else. Men may abound in this Sort of Light and have no
Heat: How much has there been of this Sort of Knowledge, in the Christian
World, in this Age? Was there ever an Age, wherein Strength and Penetration of
Reason, Extent of Learning, Exactness of Distinction, Correctness of Style, and
Clearness of Expression, did so abound? And yet was there ever an Age, wherein
there has been so little Sense of the Evil of Sin, so little Love to GOD,
heavenly Mindedness, and Holiness of Life, among the Professors of the true
Religion? Our People don't so much need to have their Heads stored, as to have
their Hearts touched; and they stand in the greatest Need of that Sort of
Preaching, that has the greatest Tendency to do this.

Those Texts, Isai, 58. 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy Voice like a
Trumpet, and show my People their Transgression, and the House of Jacob their
Sins. And Ezekiel. 6. 11. Thus faith the Lord God, smite with thine Hand, and
stamp with thy Foot, and say, alas, for all the evil Abomination of the House
of Israel! I say these Texts, (however the Use that some have made of them has
been laughed at,) will fully justify, a great Degree of Pathos, and
Manifestation of Zeal and Fervency in preaching the Word of GOD: They may
indeed be abused, to justify that which would be odd and unnatural, amongst us,
not making due Allowance for Difference of Manners and Custom, in different
Ages and Nations; but let us interpret them how we will, they at least imply,
that a most affectionate and earnest Manner of Delivery, in many Cases, becomes
a Preacher of GOD's Word.

Preaching of the Word of God, is commonly spoken of in Scriptrue, in such
Expressions, as seem to import a loud and earnest Speaking; as in Isai. 40. 2.
Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her Iniquity is
pardoned. And Ver. 3. The Voice of him that cries in the Wilderness, prepare
ye the Way of the Lord, -- Verse 6. The Voice said Cry: And he said, what shall
I cry? All Flesh is Grass, and all the Goodliness thereof, as the Flower of the
Field. Jer. 2. 2. Go and cry in the Ears of Jerusalem, saying, thus faith the
Lord, etc. Jonah 1. 2. Arise, go to Ninevah, that great City, and cry against
it. Isai. 61. 1, 2. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord
has anointed me, to preach good Tidings to the Meek, -- to proclaim Liberty to
the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them that are bound, to proclaim
the acceptable Year of the Lord, and the Year of Vengeance of our God. Isai.
62. 11. Behold, the Lord has proclaimed unto the End of the World, say ye to
the Daughter of Zion, behold thy Salvation comes etc. Romans 10. 18. Their Sound
went into all the Earth, and their Words to the End of the World. Jer. 11. 6.
Proclaim all these Words in the Cities of Judah, and in the Streets of
Jerusalem, saying, Hear ye the Words of this Covenant, and do them. So Chap.
19. 2. and 7. 2. Prove. 8. 1. Does not Wisdom cry, and Understanding put forth
her Voice? Ver. 3, 4. She cries at the Gates, at the Entry of the City, at the
coming in at the Doors; unto you, O Men, I call, and my Voice is to the Sons of
Men! And Chap. 1. 20. Wisdom cries without, she utters her Voice in the
Streets. Chap. 9. 3. She has sent forth her Maidens, she cries upon the high
Places of the City. John 7. 37. In the last Day, that great Day of the Feast,
Jesus stood and cried, saying, if any Man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink.

It seems to be foretold, that the Gospel should be especially preached in a
loud and earnest Manner, at the Introduction of the prosperous State of
Religion, in the latter Days. Isai. 40. 9. O Zion, that brings good Tidings,
get thee up into the high Mountain! O Jerusalem, that brings good Tidings,
lift up thy Voice with Strength! lift up, and be not afraid! Say unto the
Cities of Judah, Behold your God! Isai. 52. 7, 8. How beautiful upon the
Mountains, are the Feet of him that brings good Tidings! -- Thy Watchmen
shall lift up the Voice. -- Isai. 27. 13 And it shall come to pass, in that
Day, that the great Trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were
ready to perish. -- And this will be one Way, that the Church of God will cry
at that Time, like a travailing Women, when CHRIST mystical is going to be
brought forth; as Rev. 12. at the Beginning. It will be by Ministers, that are
her Mouth: And it will be this Way, that CHRIST will then cry like a travailing
Woman, as in Isai. 42. 14. I have long Time holden my Peace: I have been still,
and refrained my self; now will I cry, like a travailing Woman. CHRIST cries by
his Ministers, and the Church cries by her Officers. And it is worthy to be
noted, that the Word commonly used in the New Testament, that we translate
preach, properly signifies to proclaim aloud like a Crier.

Another Thing that some Ministers have been greatly blamed for, and I think
unjustly, is speaking Terror to them, that are already under great Terrors,
instead of comforting them. Indeed, if Ministers in such a Case, go about to
terrify Persons with that which is not true, or to affright 'em by representing
their Case worse than it is, or in any respect otherwise than it is, they are
to be condemned; but if they terrify 'em only by still holding forth more Light
to them, and giving them to understand more of the Truth of their Case, they
are altogether to be justified. When Sinners Consciences are greatly awakened
by the Spirit of GOD, it is by Light imparted to the Conscience, enabling them
to see their Case to be, in some Measure, as it is; and if more Light be let
in, it will terrify 'em still more: but Ministers are not therefore to be
blamed that they endeavor to hold forth more Light to the Conscience, and
don't rather alleviate the Pain they are under, by intercepting and obstructing
that Light that shines already. To say any Thing to those who have never
believed in the LORD JESUS CHRIST, to represent their Case any otherwise than
exceeding terrible, is not to preach the Word of GOD to 'em; for the Word of
GOD reveals nothing but Truth, but this is to delude them. Why should we be
afraid to let Persons, that are in an infinitely miserable Condition, know the
Truth, or bring 'em into the Light, for fear it should terrify them? It Is Light
that must convert them, if ever they are converted. The more we bring Sinners
into the Light, while they are miserable, and the Light is terrible to them,
the more likely it is, that by and by, the Light will be joyful to them. The
Ease, Peace and Comfort, that natural Men enjoy, have their Foundation in
Darkness and Blindness; therefore as that Darkness vanishes, and Light comes
in, their Peace vanishes, and they are terrified: but that is no good Argument,
why we should endeavor to hold their Darkness, that we may be hold their
Comfort. The Truth is, that as long as Men, reject CHRIST, and don't savingly
believe in him, however they may be awakened, and however strict, and
conscientious, and laborious they may be in Religion, they have the Wrath of
GOD abiding on them, they are his Enemies, and the Children of the Devil so (as
the Scripture calls all that ben't savingly converted, Mat. 13. 38. 1 John 3.
10.) and it is uncertain whether they shall ever obtain Mercy: GOD is under no
Obligation to show 'em Mercy, nor will he be, if they fast and pray and cry
never so much; and they are then especially provoking GOD, under those Terrors,
that they stand it out against CHRIST, and will not accept of an offered SAVIOR,
though they see so much Need of him: And seeing this is the Truth, they should be
told so, that they may be sensible what their Case indeed is.

To blame a Minister, for thus declaring the Truth to those who are under
Awakenings, and not immediately administering Comfort to them, is like blaming a
Surgeon, because when he has begun to thrust in his Lance, whereby he has
already put his Patient to great Pain, and he shrinks and cries out with
Anguish, he is so cruel that he will not stay his Hand, but goes on, to thrust it
in further, 'till he comes to the Core of the Wound. Such a compassionate
Physician, who as soon as his Patient began to slinch, should withdraw his
Hand, and go about immediately to apply a Plaster, to skin over the Wound, and
leave the Core untouched, would be one that would heal the Hurt slightly,
crying Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace.

Indeed something else besides Terror, is to be preached to them, whose
Consciences are awakened: The Gospel is to be preached to them: They are to be
told that there is a SAVIOR provided, that is excellent and glorious, who has
shed his precious Blood for Sinners, and is every Way sufficient to save 'em,
that stands ready to receive 'em, if they will heartily embrace him; for this
is also the Truth, as well as that they now are in an infinitely dreadful
Condition: This is the Word of GOD. Sinners at the same Time that they are told
how miserable their Case is, should be earnestly invited to come and accept of
a SAVIOR, and yield their Hearts unto him, with all the winning, encouraging
Arguments, for 'em so to do, that the Gospel affords; but this is to induce 'em
to escape from the Misery of the Condition that they are now in: but not to
make 'em think their present Condition less miserable than it is, or at all to
abate their Uneasiness and Distress, while they are in it; that would be the
Way to quiet them, and fasten them in it, and not to excite 'em to fly from it.
Comfort, in one Sense, is to be held forth, to Sinners under Awakenings of
Conscience, i. e. Comfort is to be offered to 'em in CHRIST, on Condition of
their flying from their present miserable State, to Him: but Comfort is not to
be administered to 'em, in their present State, as any Thing that they have now
any Title to, or while out of CHRIST. No Comfort is to be administered to 'em,
from any Thing in them, any of their Qualifications, Prayers or other
Performances, past, present or future; but Ministers should, in such Cases,
strive to their utmost to take all such Comforts from 'em, though it greatly
increases their Terror. A Person that sees himself ready to sink into Hell, is
ready to strive, some Way or other, to lay GOD under some Obligation to him;
but he is to be beat off from every Thing of that Nature, though it greatly
increases his Terror, to see himself wholly destitute, on every Side, of any
Refuge, or any Thing of his own to lay hold of; as a Man that sees himself in
Danger of drowning, is in Terror, and endeavors to catch hold on every Twig
within his Reach, and he that pulls away those Twigs from him, increases his
Terror; yet if they are insufficient to save him, and by being in his Way,
prevent his looking to that which will save him, to pull them away, is
necessary to save his Life.

If Sinners are in any Distress, from any Error that they embrace, or Mistake
they are under, that is to be removed: For Instance, if they are in Terror,
from an Apprehension that they have committed the unpardonable Sin, or that
those Things have happened to 'em that are certain Signs of Reprobation, or any
other Delusion, such Terrors have no Tendency to do them any Good; for these
Terrors are from Temptation, and not from Conviction: But that Terror which
arises from Conviction: But that Terror which arises from Conviction, or a
Sight of Truth, is to be increased; for those that are most awakened, have
great remaining Stupidity, they have a Sense of but little of that which is;
and it is from remaining Blindness and Darkness, that they see no more; and that
remaining Blindness is a Disease, that we ought to endeavor to remove. I am
not afraid to tell Sinners, that are most sensible of their Misery, that their
Case is indeed as miserable as they think it to be, and a thousand Times more
so; for this is the Truth. Some may be ready to say that though it be the Truth;
yet the Truth is not to be spoken at all Times, and seems not to be seasonable
then: But it seems to me, such Truth is never more seasonable than at such a
Time, when Christ is beginning to open the Eyes of Conscience. Ministers ought
to act as Co-Workers with him; to take that Opportunity, and to the utmost to
improve that Advantage, and strike while the Iron is hot, and when the Light
has begun to shine then to remove all Obstacles, and use all proper Means, that
it may come in more selly, and the Work be done thoroughly then. And Experience
abundanly shows, that to take this Course, is not of an hurtful Tender (...),
but very much the contrary: I have seen, in very many Instances, the happy
Effects of a, and oftentimes a very speedy happy Issue, and never knew any ill
Consequence, in Case of real Conviction, and when Distress has been only from
thence.

I know of but one Case, wherein the Truth ought to be witheld from Sinners in
Distress of Conscience, and that is the Case of Melancholy: And it is not to be
witheld from them then, because the Truth tend to do 'em hurt, but because if
we speak the Truth to them, sometimes they will be deceived, and led into Error
by it, through that strange Disposition there is in them, to take Things wrong.
So that, that which as it is spoken, is Truth, as it is heard and received, and
applied by them, is Falsehood; as it will be, unless the Truth be spoken with
Abundance of Caution and Prudence, and Consideration of their Disposition and
Circumstances. But the most awful Truths of GOD's Word, ought not to be witheld
from public Congregations, because it may happen that some such melancholic
Persons may be in it many more, than the Bible is to be witheld from the
Christian World, because it is manifest that there are a great many
melancholic Persons in Christendom, that exceedingly abuse the awful Things
contained in the Scripture, to their own wounding. Nor do I think that to be of
Weight, which is made use of by some, as a great and dreadful Objection against
the terrifying Preaching that has of late been in New England, viz. That there
have been some Instances of melancholic Persons that have so abused it, that
the Issue has been the Murder of themselves. The Objection from hence is no
stronger against awakening Preaching, than it is against the Bible it self:
There are Hundreds, and probably Thousands of Instances, might be produced, of
Persons that have murdered themselves, under religious Melancholy: These
Murders, probably never would have been, if it had not been for the Bible, or
if the World had remained in a State of heathenish Darkness. The Bible has not
only been the Occasion of these sad Effects, but of Thousands, and I suppose
Millions, of other cruel Murders, that have been committed, in the Persecutions
that have been raised, that never would have been, if it had not been for the
Bible: Many whole Countries have been, as it were deluged with innocent Blood,
which would not have been, if the Gospel never had been preached in the World.
It Is not a good Objection against any Kind of Preaching, that some Men abuse it
greatly to their Hurt. It has been acknowledged by all Divines, as a Thing
common in all Ages, and all Christian Countries, that a very great Part of those
that set under the Gospel, do so abuse it, that it only proves an Occasion of
their far more aggravated Damnation, and so of Men's eternally murdering their
Souls; which is an Effect infinitely more terrible than the Murder of their
Bodies. It Is as unjust to lay the Blame of these Self-Murders, to those
Ministers who have declared the awful Truths of God's Word, in the most lively
and affecting Manner they were capable of, as it would be to lay the Blame of
hardening Men's Hearts, and blinding their Eyes, and their more dreadful
eternal Damnation, to the Prophet Isaiah, or JESUS CHRIST, because this was the
Consequence of their Preaching, with respect to many of their Hearers. Isai. 6.
10. Job. 9. 39. Math. 13. 14. Though a very few have abused the awakening
Preaching that has lately been, to so sad an Effect as to be the Cause of their
own temporal Death; yet it may be, to one such Instance, there have been
Hundreds, yea Thousands, that have been saved, by this Means, from eternal
Death.

What has more especially given Offense to many, and raised a loud Cry against
some Preachers, as though their Conduct were intolerable, is their frighting poor
innocent Children, with talk of Hellfire, and eternal Damnation. But if those
that complain so loudly of this, really believe, what is the general Profession
of the Country, viz. That all are by Nature the Children of Wrath, and Heirs of
Hell; and that every one that has not been born again, whether he be young or
old, is exposed, every Moment, to eternal Destruction, under the Wrath of
Almighty God; I say, if they really believe this, then such a Complaint and Cry
as this, bewrays a great deal of Weakness and Inconsideration. As innocent as
Children seem to be to us, yet, if they are out of Christ, they are not so in
GOD's Sight, but are young Vipers, and are infinitely more hateful than Vipers,
and are in a most miserable Condition, as well as grown Persons; and they are
naturally very senseless and stupid, being born as the wild Asses Colt, and
need much to awaken them. Why should we conceal the Truth from them? Will those
Children that have been dealt tenderly with, in this Respect, and lived and
died insensible of their Misery, 'till they come to feel it in Hell, ever thank
Parents, and others, for their Tenderness, in not letting them know what they
were in Danger of. If Parents Love toward their Children was not blind, it
would affect 'em much more to see their Children, every Day, exposed to eternal
Burnings, and yet senseless, than to see 'em suffer the Distress of that
Awakening, that is necessary in Order to their Escape from them, and that tends
to their being eternally happy, as the Children of GOD. A Child that has a
dangerous Wound, may need the painful Lance, as well as grown Persons; and that
would be a foolish Pity, in such a Case, that should hold back the Lance, and
throw away the Life. -- I have seen the happy Effects of dealing plainly, and
thoroughly with Children, in the Concerns of their Souls, without sparing them
at all, in many Instances; and never knew any ill Consequence of it, in any one
Instance.

Another Thing, that a great deal has been said against, is having so frequent
religious Meetings, and spending so much Time in Religion. And indeed, there
are none of the Externals of Religion, but what are capable of Excess: And I
believe it is true, that there has not been a due Proportion observed in
Religion of late. We have placed Religion too much in the external Duties of
the first Table; we have abounded in religious Meetings, and in praying,
reading, hearing, singing, and religious Conference; and there has not been a
proportionable Increase of Zeal for Deeds of Charity, and other Duties of the
second Table; (though it must be acknowledged that they are also much increased.)
But yet it appears to me, that this Objection of Persons spending too much Time
in Religion, has been in the general groundless. Though worldly Business must be
done, and Persons ought not to neglect the Business of their particular
Callings, yet it is to the Honor of GOD, that a People should be so much in
outward Acts of Religion, as to carry in it, a visible, public Appearance, of
a great Engagedness of Mind in it, as the main Business of Life: And especially
is it fit, that at such an extraordinary Time, when GOD appears unusually
present with a People, in wonderful Works of Power and Mercy, that they should
spend more Time than usual in religious Exercises, to put Honor upon that GOD
that is then extraordinarily present, and to seek his Face; as it was with the
Christian Church in Jerusalem, on Occasion of that extraordinary pouring out of
the Spirit, soon after CHRIST's Ascension. Act. 2. 46. And they continued
daily, with one Accord, in the Temple, and breaking Bread, from House to House.
And so it was at Ephesus, at a Time of great Out-pouring of the Spirit there;
the Christians there attended public religious Exercises, every Day, for two
Years together, Act. 19. 8, 9, 10. And he went into the Synagogue, and spoke
boldly, for the Space of three Months, disputing and persuading the Things
concerning the Kingdom of God: But when diverse were hardened, and believed not;
but spoke Evil of that Way, before the Multitude, he departed from them, and
separated the Disciples, disputing daily, in the School of one Tyrannus; and
this continued, by the Space of two Years; so that all they which dwelt in
Asia, heard the Word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks. And as to the grand
Objection, of six Days shall thou Labor, all that can be understood by it, and
all that the very Objectors themselves understand by it, is that we may follow
our secular Labors in those six Days, that are not the Sabbath, and ought to
be diligont in them: Not but that sometimes, we may turn from them, even within
those six Days, to keep a Day of Fasting, or Thanksgiving, or to attend a
Lecture; and that more frequently or rarely, as GOD's Providence, and the State
of Things, shall call us, according to the best Judgment of our Discretion.

Though secular Business, as I said before, ought not to be neglected, yet I
cannot see how it can be maintained, that Religion ought not to be attended, so
as in the least to injure our temporal Affairs, on any other Principles than
those of Infidelity. None objects against injuring one temporal Affair for the
Sake of another temporal Affair of much greater Importance; and therefore, if
eternal Things are as real as temporal Things, and are indeed of infinitely
greater Importance; then why may we not voluntarily suffer, in some Measure, in
our temporal Concerns, while we are seeking eternal Riches, and immortal Glory?
It Is looked upon no Way improper for a whole Nation, to spend considerable
Time, and much of their outward Substance, on some extraordinary temporal
Occasions, for the Sake only of the Ceremonies of a public Rejoicing; and it
would be thought dishonorable to be very exact, about what we spend, or
careful lest we injure our Estates, on such an Occasion: and why should we be
exact only with Almighty GOD, so that it should be a Crime to be otherwise than
scrupulously careful, lest we injure ourselves in our temporal Interest, to put
Honor upon Him, and seek our own eternal Happiness? We should take Heed that
none of us be in any wise like Judas, who greatly complained of needless
Expense, and Waste of outward Substance, to put Honor upon Christ, when Mary
broke her Box, and poured the precious Ointment on his Head: He had Indignation
within himself on that Account, and cries out, Why was this Waste of the
Ointment made? For it might have been sold for more than three Hundred Pence,
and have been given to the Poor. Mark 14. 3, 4, 5, etc. And Joh. 12. 4, 5, etc.

And besides, if the Matter be justly considered and examined, I believe it
will be found, that the Country has lost no Time from their temporal Affairs,
by the late Revival of Religion, but have rather gained Time; and that more
Time has been saved from Frolicking, and Tavern-haunting, Idleness,
unprofitable Visits, vain Talk, fruitless Pastimes, and needless Diversions,
that has lately been spent in extraordinary Religion; and probably five Times
as much has been saved in Persons Estates, at the Tavern, and in their Apparel,
as has been spent by religious Meetings.

The great Complaint that is made against so much Time spent in Religion, cannot
be in general from a real Concern that GOD may be honored, and his Will done,
and the best Good of Men promoted; as is very manifest from this, that now
there is a much more earnest and zealons Outcry made in the Country, against
this extraordinary Religion, than was before, against so much Time spent in
Tavern-haunting, vain Company-keeping, Night-walking, and other Things, which
wasted both our Time and Substance, and injured our moral Virtue.

The frequent Preaching that has lately been, has in a particular Manner been
objected against as unprofitable and prejudicial. It Is objected that when
Sermons are heard so very often, one Sermon tends to thrust out another; so
that Persons loose the Benefit of all: They say, two or three Sermons in a Week
is as much as they can remember and digest. Such Objections against frequent
Preaching, if they ben't from an Enmity against Religion, are for Want of duly
considering the Way that Sermons usually profit an Auditory. The main Benefit
that is obtained by Preaching, is by Impression made upon the Mind in the Time
of it, and not by any Effect that arises afterward by a Remembrance of what
was delivered. And though an after Remembrance of what was heard in a Sermon, is
oftentimes very profitable; yet, for the most Part, that Remembrance is from an
Impression the Words made on the Heart in the Time of it; and the Memory
profits, as it renews and increases that Impression; and a frequent inculcating
the more important Things of Religion in preaching, has no Tendency to raze out
such Impressions, but to increase them, and fix them deeper and deeper in the
Mind, as is found by Experience. It never used to be objected against, that
Persons, upon the Sabbath, after they have heard two Sermons that Day, should
go home, and spend the remaining Part of the Sabbath in reading the Scriptures,
and printed Sermons; which, in Proportion as it has a Tendency to affect the
Mind at all, has as much of a Tendency to drive out what they have heard, as if
they heard another Sermon preached. It seems to have been the Practice of the
Apostles to preach every Day, in Places where they went; yea though sometimes
they continued long in one Place, Acts 2. 42. and 46. Acts 19. 8, 9, 10. They
did not avoid preaching one Day, for Fear they should thrust out of the Minds
of their Hearers what they had delivered the Day before; nor did Christians
avoid going every Day to hear, for Fear of any such bad Effect, as is evident
by Acts 2. 42, 46.

There are some Things in Scripture that seem to signify as much, as that there
should be Preaching in an extraordinary Frequency, at the Time when God should
be about to introduce that flourishing State of Religion that should be in the
latter Days; as that in Isai. 62. at the Beginning: For Zion's Sake will I not
hold my Peace, for Jerusalem's Sake, I will not rest; until the Righteousness
thereof go forth as Brightness, and the Salvation thereof, as a Lamp that
burns: And the Gentiles shall see thy Righteousness, and all Kings thy Glory.
And Ver. 5, 6. For as a young Man marries a Virgin, so shall thy Sons marry
thee; and as the Bridegroom rejoiceth over the Bride, so shall thy God rejoice
over thee. I have set Watchmen upon thy Walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never
hold their Peace, Day nor Night. The Destruction of the City of Jericho, is
evidently, in all its Circumstances, intended by GOD, as a great Type of the
Overthrow of Satan's Kingdom; the Priests blowing with Trumpets at that Time,
represents Ministers preaching the Gospel; the People compassed the City seven
Days, the Priests blowing the Trumpets; but when the Day was come that the
Walls of the City were to fall, the Priests were more frequent and abundant in
blowing their Trumpets; there was as much done in one Day then, as had been
done in seven Days before; they compassed the City seven Times that Day,
blowing their Trumpets, 'till at Length it come to one long and perpetual
Blast, and then the Walls of the City fell down flat. The extraordinary
Preaching that shall be at the Beginning of that glorious Jubilee of the
Church, is represented by the extraordinary Sounding of Trumpets, throughout
the Land of Canaan, at the Beginning of the Year of Jubilee; and by the reading
of the Law, before all Israel, in the Year of Release, at the Feast of
Tabernacles. And the Crowing of the Cock, at break of Day, which brought Peter
to Repentance, seems to me to be intended to signify, the Awakening of GOD's
Church out of their Lethergy, wherein they had denied their Lord, by the
extraordinary Preaching of the Gospel, that shall be at the Dawning of the Day
of the Churches Light and Glory. And there seems at this Day to be an uncommon
Hand of divine Providence, in animating, enabling, and upholding some
Ministers, in such abundant Labors.

Another Thing, wherein I think some Ministers have been injured, is in being
very much blamed for making so much of Outcries, Faintings, and other bodily
Effects; speaking of them as Tokens of the Presence of GOD, and Arguments of
the Success of Preaching; seeming to strive to their utmost to bring a
Congregation to that pass, and seeming to rejoice in it, yea even blessing GOD
for it, when they see these Effects.

Concerning this I would observe, in the first Place, That there are many
Things, with Respect to Cryings out, Falling down etc. that are charged on
Ministers, that they are not guilty of. Some would have it, that they speak of
these Things as certain Evidences of a Work of the SPIRIT of GOD on the Hearts
of their Hearers, or that they esteem these bodily Effects themselves to be the
Work of GOD, as though the Spirit of GOD took hold of, and agitated the Bodies of
Men; and some are charged with making these Things essential, and supposing
that Persons cannot be converted without them; whereas I never yet could see the
Person that held either of these Things.

But for speaking of such Effects as probable Tokens of GOD's Presence, and
Arguments of the Success of Preaching, it seems to me they are not to be
blamed; because I think they are so indeed: and therefore when I see them
excited by preaching the important Truths of GOD's Word, urged and enforced by
proper Arguments and Motives, or are consequent on other Means that are good, I
don't scruple to speak of them, and to rejoice in them, and bless GOD for them
as such; and that for this, (as I think) good Reason, viz. That from Time to
Time, upon proper Inquiry and Examination, and Observation of the Consequence
and Fruits, I have found that there are all Evidences that the Persons in whom
these Effects appear, are under the Influences of GOD's Spirit, in such Cases.
Cryings out, in such a Manner, and with such Circumstances, as I have seen them
from Time to Time, is as much an Evidence to me, of the general Cause it
proceeds from, as Language: I have learned the Meaning of it, the same Way that
Persons learn the Meaning of Language, viz. by Use and Experience. I confess
that when I see a great Crying out in a Congregation, in the Manner that I have
seen it, when those Things are held forth to 'em that are worthy of their being
greatly affected by, I rejoice in it, much more than merely in an Appearance of
solemn Attention, and a Show of Affection by Weeping; and that because when
there have been those Outcries, I have found from Time to Time, a much greater
and more excellent Effect. To rejoice that the Work of GOD is carried on
calmly, without much ado, is in Effect to rejoice that it is carried on with
less Power, or that there is not so much of the Influence of GOD's Spirit: for
though the Degree of the Influence of the Spirit of GOD, on particular Persons,
is by no Means to be judged of by the Degree of external Appearances, because
of the different Constitution, Tempers, and Circumstances of Men; yet if there
be a very powerful Influence of the Spirit of GOD on a mixed Multitude, it will
cause some Way or other, a great visible Commotion.

And as to Ministers aiming at such Effects, and striving by all Means to bring
a Congregation to that Pass, that there should be such an Uproar among them; I
suppose none aim at it any otherwise, than as they strive to raise the
Affections of their Hearers to such an Height, as very often appears in these
Effects; and if it be so, that those Affections are commonly good, and it be
found by Experience that such a Degree of them commonly has a good Effect, I
think they are to be justified in so doing.

Again, some Ministers have been blamed for keeping Persons together, that have
been under great Affections, which have appeared in such extraordinary outward
Manifestations. Many think this promotes Confusion, that Persons in such
Circumstances do but discompose each others Minds, and disturb the Minds of
others; and that therefore it is best they should be dispersed, and that when
any in a Congregation are strongly seized, (...). they cannot forbear outward
Manifestations of it, they should be removed that others Minds may not be
diverted.

But I cannot but think that those that thus object go upon quite wrong Notions
of Things: For though Persons ought to take Heed that they don't make an Ado
without Necessity; for this will be the Way in Time, to have such Appearances
lose all their Effect; yet the unavoidable Manifestations of strong religious
Affections tend to an happy Influence on the Minds of Bystanders, and are
found by Experience to have an excellent and durable Effect; and so to contrive
and order Things, that others may have Opportunity and Advantage to observe
them, has been found to be blessed, as a great Means to promote the Work of
GOD; and to prevent their being in the Way of Observation, is to prevent the
Effect of that, which God makes use of, as a principal Means of carrying on his
Work, at such an extraordinary Time, viz. Example; which is often spoken of in
Scripture, as one of the chief Means by which GOD would carry on his Work, in
the Time of the Prosperity of Religion in the latter Days: I have mentioned
some Texts already to this Purpose, in what I published before, of the Marks of
a Work of the true Spirit; but would here mention some others. In Zech. 9. 15,
16. Those that in the latter Days should be filled, in an extraordinary Manner
with the Holy Spirit, so as to appear in outward Manifestations, and making a
Noise, are spoken of as those that GOD, in these uncommon circumstances, will
set up to the View of others, as a Prize or Ensign, by their Example and the
Excellency of their Seize, to animate and draw others, as Men gather
about an Ensign, and run for a Prize, a Crown and precious Jewels, set up in
their View. The Words are; And they shall drink, and make a Noise, as through
Wine; and they shall be filled like Bowls, and as the Corners of the Altar: and
the Lord their God shall save them, in that Day, as the Flock of his People;
for they shall be as the Stones of a Crown, lifted up as an Ensign upon his
Land. (But I shall have Occasion to say something more of this Scripture
afterward.) Those that make the Objection I am upon, instead of suffering this
Prize or Ensign to be in public View, are for having it removed, and hid in
some Corner. To the like Purpose is that, Isai. 62. 3. Thou shall be a Crown of
Glory, in the Hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem, in the Hand of thy God.
Here it is observable, that it is not said, thou shall be a Crown upon the Head,
but in the Hand of the Lord. i. e. held forth, in thy Beauty and Excellency, as
a Prize, to be bestowed upon others that shall behold thee, and be animated by
the Brightness and Luster which GOD shall endow thee with. The great Influence
of the Example of GOD's People, in their bright and excellent Seize, to
propagate Religion, in those Days, is further signified, in Isai. 60. 3. And
the Gentiles shall come to thy Light, and Kings to the Brightness of thy
rising. With Ver. 22. A little One shall become a Thousand, and a small One a
strong Nation. And Zech. 10. 8, 9. And they shall increase, as they have
increased; and I will sow them among the People. And Hos. 2. 23. And I will sow
her unto me in the Earth. So Jer. 31. 27.

Another Thing that gives great Disgust to many, is the Disposition that
Persons show, under great Affections, to speak so much, and, with such
Earnestness and Vehemence, to be setting forth the Greatness and Wonderfulness
and Importance of divine and eternal Things; and to be so passionately warning,
inviting and entreating others.

Concerning which I would say, That I am far from thinking that such a
Disposition should be wholly without any Limits or Regulation, (as I shall more
particularly show afterward;) and I believe some have erred, in setting no
Bounds, and indulging and encouraging this Disposition without any kind of
Restraint or Direction: But yet, it seems to me, that such a Disposition in
general, is what both Reason and Scripture will justify. Those that are
offended at such Things, as though they were unreasonable, are not just: upon
Examination it will probably be found, that they have one Rule of reasoning
about temporal Things, and another about spiritual Things. They will not at all
wonder, if a Person on some very great and affecting Occasion, of extraordinary
Danger or great Joy, that eminently and immediately concerns him and others, is
disposed to speak much, and with great Earnestness, especially to those to whom
he is united, in the Bonds of dear Affection, and great Concern for their Good.
And therefore, if they were just, why would not they allow it in spiritual
Things? and much more in them, agreeably to the vastly greater Importance, and
more affecting Nature of spiritual Things, and the Concern which true Religion
causes in Men's Minds for the Good of others, and the Disposition it gives and
excites to speak GOD's Praises, to show forth his infinite Glory, and talk of
all his glorious Perfections and Works?

That a very great Sense, of the right Kind, of the Importance of the Things of
Religion, and the Danger Sinners are in, should sometimes cause an almost
insuperable Disposition to speak and warn others, is agreeable to Jer. 6. 10,
11. To whom shall I speak, and give Warning, that they may hear? Behold, their
Ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken: behold the Word of the Lord is
unto them, a Reproach; they have no Delight in it. Therefore I am full of the
Fury of the Lord; I am weary with holding in; I will pour it out upon the
Children abroad, and upon the Assembly of the young Men together; for even the
Husband with the Wise shall be taken, the aged, with him that is full of Days.
And that true Christians, when they come to be as it were waked out of Sleep,
and to be filled with a sweet and joyful Sense of the excellent Things of
Religion, by the preaching of the Gospel, or by other Means of Grace, should be
disposed to be much in speaking of divine Things, though before they were dumb,
is agreeable to what CHRIST says to his Church, Cant. 7. 9. And the Roof of thy
Mouth is like the best Wine, for my Beloved, that goes down sweetly, causing
the Lips of those that are asleep to speak. The Roof of the Churches Mouth, is
the Officers in the Church, that preach the Gospel; their Word is to CHRIST's
Beloved, like the best Wine, that goes down sweetly; extraordinarily refreshing
and enlivening the Saints, causing them to speak, though before they were mute
and asleep. It Is said by some, that the People that are the Subjects of this
Work, when they get together, talking loud and earnestly, in their pretended
great Joys, several in a Room, talking at the same Time, make a Noise just like
a Company of drunken Persons. On which I would observe, that it is foretold
that GOD's People should do so, in that forementioned Place, Zech. 9. 15, 16,
17. which I shall now take more particular Notice of: the Words are as follows;
The Lord of Hosts shall defend them; and they shall devour and subdue with
sling Stones; and they shall drink, and make a Noise, as through Wine, and they
shall be filled like Bowls, and as the Corners of the Altar: And the Lord their
God shall save them in that Day, as the Flock of his People; for they shall be
as the Stones of a Crown, lifted up, as an Ensign, upon his Land: For how great
is his Goodness! and how great is his Beauty! Corn shall make the young Men
cheerful, and new Wine the Maids. The Words are very remarkable: Here it is
foretold, that at the Time when CHRIST shall set up an universal Kingdom upon
Earth, ( Ver. 20.) The Children of Zion shall drink, 'till they are filled like
the Vessels of the Sanctuary: and if we would know what they shall be thus
filled with, the Prophecy does, in Effect, explain it self: They shall be
filled, as the Vessels of the Sanctuary that contained the Drink Offering,
which was Wine; and yet the Words imply, that it shall not literally be Wine
that they shall drink, and be filled with, because it is said, They shall
drink, and make a Noise, as through Wine, as if they had drank Wine: which
implies that they had not literally done it; and therefore we must understand
the Words, that they shall drink into that, and be filled with that, which the
Wine of the Drink Offering represented, or was a Type of, which is the Holy
SPIRIT, as well as the Blood of CHRIST, that new Wine that is drank in our
heavenly Father's Kingdom: They shall be filled with the Spirit, which the
Apostle sets in Opposition to a being drunk with Wine, Ephesians. 5. 18. This is the
new Wine spoken of, Ver. 17. It Is the same with that best Wine, spoken of in
Canticles, that goes down sweetly, causing the Lips of those that are asleep to
speak. It Is here foretold, that the Children of Zion, in the latter Days,
should be filled with that which should make 'em cheerful, and cause 'em to
make a Noise as through Wine, and by which these joyful happy Persons that are
thus filled, shall be as the Stones of a Crown, lifted up as an Ensign upon
GOD's Land, being made joyful, in the extraordinary Manifestations of the
Beauty and Love of CHRIST: as it follows, How great is his Goodness! And how
great is his Beauty! And it is further remarkable that it is here foretold, that
it should be thus especially amongst young People; Corn shall make the young
Men cheerful, and new Wine the Maids. It would be ridiculous to understand this
of literal Bread and Wine: without doubt, the same spiritual Blessings are
signified by Bread and Wine here, which were represented by Melchizedeck's
Bread and Wine, and are signified by the Bread and Wine in the Lord's Supper.
One of the marginal Readings is, shall make the young Men to speak; which is
agreeable to that in Canticles, of the best Wine's causing the Lips of those
that are asleep to speak.

We ought not to be, in any Measure, like the unbelieving Jews, in CHRIST's
Time, who were disgusted both with crying out with Distress, and with Joy. When
the poor blind Man cried out, before all the Multitude, JESUS, thou Son of
David, have Mercy on me! and continued instantly thus doing, the Multitude
rebuked him, and charged him that he should hold his Tongue, Mark 10. 46, 47,
48. and Luke 18. 38, 39. They looked upon it to be a very indecent Noise that
he made; a Thing very ill becoming him to cause his Voice to be heard, so much,
and so loud, among the Multitude. And when CHRIST made his solemn and
triumphant Entry into Jerusalem, (which, I have before observed, was a Type of
the Glory and Triumph of the latter Days,) the whole Multitude of the
Disciples, of all Sorts, especially young People, began to rejoice and praise
GOD, with a loud Voice, for all the mighty Works that they had seen, saying,
Blessed be the King that comes in the Name of the LORD! Peace in Heaven, and
Glory in the highest! The Pharisees said to CHRIST, Master, Rebuke thy
Disciples. They did not understand such great Transports of Joy; it seemed to
them a very unsuitable and indecent Noise and Clamor that they made, a
confused Uproar, many crying out together, as though they were out of their Wits;
they wondered that CHRIST would tolerate it. But what says CHRIST? I tell you,
that if these should hold their Peace, the Stones would immediately cry out.
The Words seem to intimate as much, as that there was Cause enough to constrain
those whose Hearts were not harder than the very Stones, to cry out, and make a
Noise; which is something like that other Expression, of causing the Lips of
those that are asleep to speak.

When many under great religious Affections, are earnestly speaking together,
of divine Wonders, in various Parts of a Company, to those that are next to
'em; some attending to what one says, and others to another, there is something
very beautiful in it, provided they don't speak so many as to drown each others
Voices, that none can hear what any say; there is a greater and more affecting
Appearance of a joint Engagedness of Heart, in the Love and Praises of GOD. And
I had rather see it, than to see one speaking alone, and all attending to what
he says; it has more of the Appearance of Conversation. When a Multitude meets
on any Occasion of temporal Rejoicing, freely and cheerfully to converse
together, they ben't will not to observe the Ceremony, of but one speaking at a
Time, while all the Rest, in a formal Manner, set themselves to attend to what
he says; that would spoil all Conversation, and turn it into the Formality of
set Speeches, and the solemnity of Preaching. It is better for Lay-Persons,
when they speak one to another of the Things of GOD, when they meet together,
to speak after the Manner of Christian Conversation, than to observe the
Formality of, but one speaking at a Time, the whole Multitude silently and
solemnly attending to what he says; which would carry in it too much of the
Air, of the Authority and Solemnity of Preaching. What the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
14. 29, 30, 31. Let the Prophecy speak, two, or three, and let the other judge:
if any Thing be revealed to another that sits by, be the first hold his
Peace: for ye may all prophecy, on, by one, that all may learn, and all may be
comforted, I say, this don't reach this Case; because what the Apostle is
speaking of, is the solemnity of their religious Exercises, in public Worship,
and Persons speaking in the Church, by immediate Inspiration, and in the Use of
the Gift of Prophecy, or some Gift of Inspiration, in the Exercise of which,
they acted as extraordinary Ministers of CHRIST.

Another Thing that some have found Fault with, is abounding so much in
singing, in religious Meetings. Objecting against such a Thing as this, seems
to arise from a Suspicion already established of this Work: They doubt of the
pretended extraordinary Love and Joys that attend this Work, and so find Fault
with the Manifestations of them. If they thought Persons were truly the
Subjects of an extraordinary Degree of divine Love, and heavenly rejoicing in
GOD, I suppose they would not wonder at their having a Disposition to be much
in Praise. They will not object against the Saints and Angels in Heaven singing
Praises and Hallelujahs to GOD, without ceasing, Day or Night; and therefore
doubtless will allow that the more the Saints on Earth are like 'em in their
Dispositions, the more they will he disposed to do like 'em. They will readily
own that the generality of Christians have great Reason to be ashamed that they
have so little Thankfulness, and are no more in praising GOD, whom they have
such infinite Cause to Praise. And why therefore, should Christians be found
Fault with, for showing a Disposition to be much in praising GOD, and
manifesting a Delight in that heavenly Exercise? To complain of this, is to be
too much like the Pharisees, who were disgusted when the Multitude of the
Disciples began to rejoice, and, with loud Voices, to praise GOD, and cry
Hosanna, when CHRIST was entering into Jerusalem.

There are many Things in Scripture, that seem to intimate that praising GOD,
both in Speeches and Songs, will be what the Church of GOD will very much
abound in, in the approaching glorious Day. So on the seventh Day of compassing
the Walls of Jericho, when the Priests blew with the Trumpets, in an
extraordinary Manner, the People shouted with a great Shout, and the Wall of
the City fell down flat. So the Ark was brought back from its Banishment, with
extraordinary shouting and singing of the whole Congregation of Israel. And the
Places in the Prophecies of Scripture, that signify that the Church of GOD, in
that glorious Jubilee that is foretold, shall greatly abound in singing and
shouting forth the Praises of GOD, are too many to be mentioned. And there will
be Cause enough for it: I believe it will be a Time wherein both Heaven and
Earth, will be much more full of Joy and Praise, than ever they were before.

But what is more especially found Fault with in the singing that is now
practiced, is making use of Hymns of humane Composure. And I am far from
thinking that the Book of Psalms should be thrown by in our public Worship,
but that it should always be used in the Christian Church, to the End of the
World: But I know of no Obligation we are under to consine our selves to it. I
can find no Command or Rule of GOD's Word, that does any more consine us to the
Words of the Scripture in our singing, than it does in our praying; we speak to
GOD in both: and I can see no Reason why we should limit our selves to such
particular Forms of Words, that we find in the Bible, in speaking to him by Way
of Praise, in Meter, and with Music, than when we speak to him in Prose, by
Way of Prayer and Supplication. And it is really needful that we should have
some other Songs besides the Psalms of David: It Is unreasonable to suppose that
the Christian Church, should for ever, and even in Times of her greatest Light
in her Praises of GOD and the Lamb, be consined only to the Words of the old
Testament, wherein all the greatest and most glorious Things of the Gospel,
that are infinitely the greatest Subjects of her Praise, are spoken of under a
Veil, and not so much as the Name of our glorious Redeemer, ever mentioned, but
in some dark Figure, or as hid under the Name of some Type. And as to our
making use of the Words of others, and not those that are conceived by our
selves, it is no more than we do in all our public Prayers; the whole
worshipping Assembly, excepting one only, makes use of the Words that are
conceived by him that speaks for the rest.

Another Thing that many have disliked, is the religious Meetings of Children,
to read and pray together, and perform religious Exercises by themselves. What
is objected is Childrens want of that Knowledge and Discretion, that is
requisite, in order to a decent and profitable Management of religious
Exercises. But it appears to me the Objection is not sufficient: Children, as
they have the Nature of Men, are inclined to Society; and those of them that
are capable of Society one with another, are capable of the Influences of the
Spirit of GOD, in its active Fruits; and if they are inclined by a religious
Disposition, that they have from the Spirit of GOD, to improve their Society
one with another, in a religious Manner, and to religious Purposes, who should
forbid them? If they have not Discretion to observe Method in their religious
Performances, or to speak Sense in all that they say in Prayer, they may
notwithstanding have a good Meaning, and GOD understands 'em, and it don't
spoil or interrupt their Devotion one for another. We that are grown Persons,
have Defects in our Prayers, that are a thousand Times worse in the Sight of
GOD, and are a greater Confusion, and more absurd Nonsense in his Eyes, than
their childish Indiscretions. There is not so much Difference before GOD,
between Children and grown Persons, as we are ready to imagine; we are all
poor, ignorant, foolish Babes, in his Sight: Our adult Age don't bring us so
much nearer to GOD, as we are apt to think. GOD in this Work has shown a
remarkable Regard to little Children; never was there such a glorious Work
amongst Persons in their Childhood, as has been of late, in New England: He has
been pleased in a wonderful Manner to perfect Praise out of the Mouths of Babes
and Sucklings; and many of them have more of that Knowledge and Wisdom, that
pleases him, and renders their religious Worship acceptable, than many of the
great and learned Men of the World: It Is they, in the Sight of GOD, are the
ignorant and foolish Children: These are grown Men, and an hundred Years old,
in Comparison with them; and it is to be hoped that the Days are coming,
prophesyed of Isai. 65. 20. when the Child shall die an hundred Years old.

I have seen many happy Effects of Childrens religious Meetings; and GOD has
seemed often remarkably to own them in their Meetings, and really descended
from Heaven to be amongst them: I have known several probable Instances of
Childrens being converted at such Meetings. I should therefore think, that if
Children appear to be really moved to it, by a religious Disposition, and not
merely from a childish Affectation of imitating grown Persons, they ought by no
Means to be discouraged or discountenanced: but yet it is fit that Care should
be taken of them, by their Parents, and Pastors, to instruct and direct them,
and to correct imprudent Conduct and Irregularities, if they are perceived; or
any Thing by which the Devil may pervert and destroy the Design of their
Meetings. All should take Heed that they don't find Fault with, and despise the
Religion of Children, from an evil Principle, left they should be like the
chief Priests and Scribes, who were fore displeased at the religious Worship
and Praises of little Children, and the Honor they gave CHRIST in the Temple.
We have an Account of it, and of what CHRIST said upon it, in Mat. 21. 15, 16.
And when the chief Priests and Scribes saw the wonderful Things that he did,
and the Children crying in the Temple, and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David,
they were fore displeased, and said unto him, Hear thou what these say? And
JESUS faith unto them, yea; have ye never read, Out of the Mouths of Babes and
Sucklings, thou have perfected Praise?

PART IV.
Showing what Things are to be corrected or avoided, in promoting this WORK, or
in our Behavior under it.
HAVING thus observed, in some Instances, wherein the Conduct of those that
have appeared to be the Subjects of this Work, or have been zealous to promote
it, has been objected against or complained of, without or beyond just Cause, I
proceed now in the

II. Place, to show what Things ought to be corrected or avoided.

Many that are zealous for this glorious WORK of GOD, are heartily sick of the
great Noise there is in the Country, about Imprudences and Disorders; they have
heard it so often from the Mouths of Opposers that they are prejudiced against
the Sound; and they look upon it that That which is called a being prudent and
regular, which is so much insisted on, is no other than being asleep, or cold
and dead in Religion, and that the great Imprudence that is so much cried out
of, is only a being alive, and engaged in the Things of GOD: and they are
therefore rather confirmed in any Practice, than brought off from it, by the
Clamor they hear against it, as imprudent and irregular. And to tell the
Truth, the Cry of Irragularity and Imprudence has been much more in the Mouths
of those that have been Enemies to the Main of the Work than others; for they
have watched for the Halting of the Zealous, and eagerly catched at any Thing
that has been wrong, and have greatly insisted on it, made the most of it, and
magnified it; especially have they watched for Errors in zealous Preachers,
that are much in reproving and condemning the Wickedness of the Times: They
would therefore do well to consider that Scripture, Isai. 29. 20, 21. The
Scorner is consumed, and all that watch for Iniquity are cut off, that make a
Man an Offender for a Word, and lay a Snare for him that reproves in the Gate,
and turn aside the Just for a Thing of naught. They have not only too much
insisted on, and magnified real Errors, but have very injuriously charged them
as guilty, in Things wherein they have been innocent, and have done their Duty.
This has so prejudiced the Minds of some, that they have been ready to think
that all that has been said about Errors and Imprudences, was injurious and
from an ill Spirit; and has confirmed them in it, that there is no such Thing
as any prevailing Imprudences; and it has made 'em less cautious and suspicious
of themselves, left they should err. Herein the Devil has had an Advantage put
into his Hands, and has taken the Advantage; and, doubtless, has been too
subtle for some of the true Friends of Religion. That would be a strange Thing
indeed, if in so great a Commotion and Revolution, and such a new State of
Things, wherein so many have been engaged, none have been guilty of any
Imprudence; it would be such a Revival of Religion, as never was yet, if among
so many Men, not guided by infallible Inspiration, there had not been
prevailing a pretty many notable Errors in Judgment and Conduct; our young
Preachers, and young Converts, must in general vastly exceed Luther, the Head
of the Reformation, who was guilty of a great many Excesses, in that great
Affair, in which GOD made him the chief Instrument.

If we look back into the History of the Church of GOD in past Ages, we may
observe that it has been a common Device of the Devil, to overset a Revival of
Religion, when he finds he can keep Men quiet and secure no longer, then to
drive 'em to Excesses and Extravagances. He holds them back as long as he can,
but when he can do it no longer, then he will push 'em on, and if possible, run
'em upon their Heads. And it has been by this Means chiefly, that he has been
successful, in several Instances, to overthrow most hopeful and promising
Beginnings: yea, the principal Means by which the Devil was successful, by
Degrees, to overset that grand religious Revival of the World, that was in the
primitive Ages of Christianity, and in a Manner, to overthrow the Christian
Church through the Earth, and to make Way for, and bring on the great
antichristian Apostasy, that Masterpiece of all the Devil's Work, was to
improve the indiscreet Zeal of Christians, to drive them into those three
Extremes, of Enthusiasm, Superstition, and Severity toward Opposers; which
should be enough for an everlasting Warning to the Christian Church.

Though the Devil will do his Diligence to stir up the open Enemies of Religion,
yet he knows what is for his Interest so well, that in a Time of Revival of
Religion, his main Strength shall be tried with the Friends of it, and he will
chiefly exert himself in his Attempts upon them, to mislead them. One truly
zealous Person, in the Time of such an Event, that seems to have a great Hand
in the Affair, and draws the Eyes of many upon him, may do more, (through Satan's
being too subtle for him,) to hinder the Work, than an hundred great, and
strong, and open Opposers.

In the Time of a great Work of CHRIST, his Hand with which he works, are often
wounded in the House of his Friends; and his Work hindered chiefly by them: So
that if any one inquires, as in Zech. 13. 6. What are those Wounds in thine
Hands? He may answer, Those, with which I was wounded in the House of my
Friends.

The Errors of the Friends of the Work of God, and especially of the great
Promoters of it, give vast Advantage to the Enemies of such a Work. Indeed
there are many Things that are no Errors, but are only Duties faithfully and
thoroughly done, that wound the Minds of such Persons more, and are more cross
to 'em, than real Errors: but yet one real Error gives Opposers as much
Advantage, and hinders and clogs the Work, as much as (...) that are only
supposed ones. Real Errors don't (...) and gaul the Enemies of Religion so much
as those Things that are strictly right, (...) encourage 'em more; they give
'em Liberty, and open a Gap for 'em; so that some that before kept their Enmity
burning in their own Bowels, and durst not show themselves, will on such an
Occasion take Courage, and give themselves Vent, and their Rage will be like
that of an Enemy let loose; and those that lay still before, having nothing to
say, but what they would be ashamed of, (agreeable to Tit. 2. 8.) when they
have such a Weapon put into their Hands, will fight with all Violence. And
indeed the Enemies of Religion would not know what to do for Weapons to fight
with, were it not for the Errors of the Friends of it; and so must soon fall
before them. And besides, in real Errors, Things that are truly disagreeable to
the Rules of GOD's Word, we cannot expect the divine Protection, and that GOD
will appear on our Side, as if our Errors were only supposed ones.

Since therefore the Errors of the Friends and Promoters of such a glorious
Work of GOD, are of such dreadful Consequence; and seeing the Devil, being
sensible of this, is so assiduous, and watchful and subtle in his Attempts with
them, and has thereby been so successful to overthrow Religion heretofore,
certainly such Persons ought to be exceeding circumspect and vigilant,
diffident and jealous of themselves, and humbly dependent on the Guidance of
the good Shepherd. 1 Pet. 4. 7. Be sober, and watch unto Prayer. And Chap. 5.
8. Be sober, be vigilant; because your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion,
walks about, -- For Persons to go on resolutely, in a Kind of Heat and
Vehemence, despising Admonition and Correction, being confident that they must
be in the Right, because they are full of the Spirit, is directly contrary to
the Import of these Words, be sober, be vigilant.

It Is a Mistake, I have observed in some, by which they have been greatly
exposed, to their Wounding, that they think they are in no Danger of going
astray, or being misled by the Devil, because they are near to GOD; and so have
no jealous Eye upon themselves, and neglect Vigilance and Circumspection, as
needless in their Case. They say, they don't think that GOD will leave them to
dishonor him, and wound Religion, as long as they keep near to him: And I
believe so too, as long as they keep near to GOD in that Respect, that they
maintain an universal and diligent Watch, and Care to do their Duty, and avoid
Sin and Snares, with Diffidence in themselves, and humble Dependence and
Prayerfulness: but not merely because they are near to GOD, in that Respect,
that they now are receiving blessed Communications from GOD, in refreshing
Views of him; if at the same Time they let down their Watch, and are not
jealous over their own Hearts, by Reason of it is remaining Blindness and
Corruption, and a subtle Adversary. It Is a grand Error, for Persons to think
they are out of Danger of the Devil, and a corrupt, deceitful Heart, even in
their highest Flights, and most raised Frames of spiritual Joy. For Persons in
such a Confidence, to cease to be jealous of themselves, and to neglect
Watchfulness and Care, is a Presumption by which I have known many woefully
ensnared. However highly we may be favored with divine Discoveries and
Comforts, yet as long as we are in the World, we are in the Enemies Country;
and therefore that Direction of CHRIST to his Disciples is never out of Date in
this World, Luke 21. 36. Watch and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy
to escape all these Things, and to stand before the Son of Man. It was not out
of Date with the Disciples, to whom it was given, after they came to be filled
so full of the Holy Ghost and out of their Bellies flowed Rivers of living
Water, by that great Effusion of the Spirit upon them, that began on the Day of
Pentecost. And though GOD stands ready to protect his People, especially those
that are near to him, yet he expects great Care and Labor of all; and that we
should put on the whole Armor of GOD, that we may stand in the evil Day: and
whatever spiritual Privileges we are raised to, we have no Warrant to expect
Protection in any other Way; for GOD has appointed this whole Life, as a State
of Labor, to be all, as a Race or a Battle; the State of Rest, wherein we
shall be so out of Danger, as to have no Need of Watching and Fighting, is
reserved for another World. I have known it in Abundance of Instances, that the
Devil has come in very remarkably, even in the midst of the most exalted, and
(...) some Accounts excellent Frames: It may seem a great Mystery that it
should be so; but it is no greater (...), than that CHRIST should be taken
Captian by the Devil, and carried into the Wilderness, immediately after the
Heavens had been opened to him, and the Holy Ghost descended like a Dove upon
him, and he heard that comfortable, joyful Voice from the Father, saying, This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. In like Manner Christ in the
Heart of a Christian, is oftentimes as it were taken by the Devil, and carried
Captive into a Wilderness, presently after Heaven has been, as it were opened
to the Soul, and the Holy Ghost has descended upon it like a Dove, and GOD has
been sweetly owning the Believer, and testifying his Favor to him as his
beloved Child.

It Is therefore a great Error, and Sin in some Persons, at this Day, that they
are fixed in their Way, in some Things that others account Errors, and will not
hearken to Admonition and Counsel, but are confident that they are in the right
of it, in those Practices that they find themselves disposed to, because GOD is
much with them, and they have great Degrees of the Spirit of GOD. There were
some such in the Apostles Days: The Apostle Paul, writing to the Corinthians,
was sensible that some of them would not be easily convinced that they had been
in any Error, because they looked upon themselves Spiritual, or full of the
Spirit of GOD. 1 Cor. 14. 37, 38. If any Man think himself to be a Prophet, or
spiritual, let him acknowledge that the Things that I write unto you, are the
Commandment of the Lord; but if any Man be ignorant, let him be ignorant.

And although those that are spiritual amongst us, have no infallible Apostle to
admonish them, yet let me entreat them, by the Love of CHRIST, calmly and
impartially to weigh what may be said to them, by One that is their hearty and
servent Friend, (though an inferior Worm) in giving his humble Opinion,
concerning the Errors that have been committed, or that we may be exposed to,
in Methods or Practices that have been, or may be fallen into, by the zealous
Friends or Promoters of this great Work of GOD.

In speaking of the Errors that have been, or that we are in Danger of, I would
in the

First Place, take Notice of the Causes whence the Errors that attend a great
Revival of Religion usually arise; and as I go along, take Notice of some
particular Errors that arise from each of those Causes.

Secondly, Observe some Errors, that some have lately gone into, that have been
owing to the Influence of several of those Causes conjunctly.

As to the first of these, the Errors that attend a great Revival of Religion,
usually arise from these three Things. 1. Undiscerned spiritual Pride. 2. Wrong
Principles. 3. Ignorance of Satan's Advantages and Devices.

The first, and the worst Cause of Errors, that prevail in such a State of
Things, is spiritual Pride. This is the main Door, by which the Devil comes
into the Hearts of those that are zealous for the Advancement of Religion. It Is
the chief Inler of Smoke from the bottomless Pit, to darken the Mind, and
mislead the Judgment: This is the main Handle by which the Devil has hold of
religious Persons, and the chief Scource of all the Mischief that he
introduces, to clog and hinder a Work of GOD. This Cause of Error is the main
Spring, or at least the main Support of all the rest. 'Till this Disease is
cured, Medicines are in vain applied to heal other Diseases. It Is by this that
the Mind defends it self in other Errors, and guards it self against Light, by
which it might be corrected and reclaimed. The spiritually proud Man is full of
Light already, he don't need Instruction, and is ready to despise the Offer of
it. But if this Disease be healed, other Things are easily rectified. The
humble Person is like a little Child, he easily receives Instruction; he is
jealous over himself, sensible how liable he is to go astray; and therefore if
it be suggested to him that he does so, he is ready most norrowly and
impartially to enquire. Nothing sets a Person so much out of the Devil's reach,
as Humility, and so prepares the Mind for true divine Light, without Darkness,
and so clears the Eye to look on Things, as they truly are. Psalm. 25. 9. The
Meek will be guide in Judgment, and the Meek he will teach his Way. Therefore
we should fight, neither with small nor with great, but with the King of
Israel: Our first Care should be to rectify the Heart, and pull the Beam out of
our Eye, and then we shall see clearly.

I know that a great many Things at this Day, are very injuriously laid to the
Pride of those that are zealous in the Cause of GOD. When any Person appears,
in any Respect, remarkably distinguished in Religion from others, if he
professes those spiritual Comforts and Joys that are greater than ordinary, or
if he appears distinguishingly zealous in Religion, if he exerts himself more
than others do, in the Cause of Religion, or if he seems to be distinguished
with Success, ten to one, but it will immediately awaken the Jealousy of those
that are about him; and they will suspect, (whether they have Cause or no) that
he is very proud of his Goodness, and that he affects to have it thought that
no Body is so good as he; and all his Talk is heard, and all his Behavior
beheld, with this Prejudice. Those that are themselves cold and dead, and
especially such as never had any Experience of the Power of Godliness on their
own Hearts, are ready to entertain such Thoughts of the best Christians; which
arises from a secret Enmity against vital and servent Piety.

But then those that are zealous Christians should take heed that this
Injuriousness of those that are cold in Religion, don't prove a Snare to them,
and the Devil don't take Advantage from it, to blind their Eyes from beholding
what there is indeed of this Nature in their Hearts, and make 'em think,
because they are charged with Pride wrongfully, and from an ill Spirit, in many
Things, that therefore it is so in every Thing. Alas, how much Pride have the
best of us in our Hearts! It Is the worst Part of the Body of Sin and Death:
It Is the first Sin that ever entered into the Universe, and the last that is
rooted out; It Is God's most stubborn Enemy!

The Corruption of Nature may all be resolved into two Things, Pride and
Worldly-mindedness, the Devil and the Beast, or Self and the World. These are
the two Pillars of Dagon's Temple, on which the whole House leans. But the
former of these is every Way, the worst Part of the Corruption of Nature; it is
the first born Son of the Devil, and his Image in the Heart of Man chiefly
consists in it; it is the last Thing in a Sinner that is overborn by
Conviction, in order to Conversion; and here is the Saints hardest Conflict;
it is the last Thing that he obtains a good Degree of Conquest over, and Liberty
from; it is that which most directly militates against God, and is most contrary
to the Spirit of the Lamb of God; and it is most like the Devil its Father, in a
serpentine Deceitfulness and Secrecy; it lies deepest, and is most active, is
most ready secretly to mix it self with every Thing.

And of all Kinds of Pride, spiritual Pride is upon many Accounts the most
hateful; it is most like the Devil; it is most like the Sin that he committed in
an Heaven of Light and Glory, where he was exalted high in divine Knowledge,
Honor, Beauty and Happiness. Pride is much more difficultly discerned than any
other Corruption, for that Reason, that the Nature of it does very much consist
in a Person's having too high a Thought of himself: but no Wonder that he that
has too high a Thought of himself, don't know it; for he necessarily thinks
that the Opinion he has of himself, is what he has just Grounds for, and
therefore not too high; if he thought such an Opinion of himself was without
just Grounds, he would therein cease to have it. But of all Kinds of Pride,
spiritual Pride is the most hidden, and difficultly discovered; and that for
this Reason, Because those that are spiritually proud, their Pride consists,
much in an high Conceit of those two Things, viz. Their Light, and their
Humility; both which are a strong Prejudice against a Discovery of their Pride.
Being proud of their Light, that makes 'em not jealous of themselves; he that
thinks a clear Light shines around him, is not suspicious of an Enemy lurking
near him, unseen: And then being proud of their Humility, that makes 'em least
of all jealous of themselves in that Particular, viz. as being under the
Prevalence of Pride. There are many Sins of the Heart that are very secret in
their Nature, and difficultly discerned. The Psalmist says, Psalm. 19. 12. Who
can understand his Errors? Cleanse thou me from secret Faults. But spiritual
Pride is the most secret of all Sins. The Heart is so deceitful and
unsearchable in nothing in the World, as it is in this Matter, and there is no
Sin in the World, that Men are so confident in, and so difficultly convinced
of: The very Nature of it is to work Self-Confidence, and drive away
Self-Diffidence, and Jealousy of any Evil of that Kind. There is no Sin so much
like the Devil, as this, for Secrecy and Subtilty, and appearing in a great
many Shapes, undiscerned and unsuspected, and appearing as an Angel of Light:
It takes Occasion to arise from every Thing; it perverts and abuses every
Thing, and even the Exercises of real Grace, and real Humility, as an Occasion
to exert it self: It is a Sin that has, as it were many Lives; if you kill it,
it will live still; if you mortify and suppress it in one Shape, it rises in
another; if you think it is all gone, yet it is there still: There are a great
many Kinds of it, that lie in different Forms and Shapes, one under another,
and encompass the Heart like the Coats of an Onion; if you pull off one there
is another underneath. We had need therefore to have the greatest Watch
imaginable, over our Hearts, with respect to this Matter, and to cry most
earnestly to the great Searcher of Hearts for his help. He that trusts his own
Heart is a level.

God's own People should be the more jealous of themselves, with respect to
this Particular, at this Day, because the Temptations that many have to this
Sin are exceeding great: The great and distinguishing Privileges to which God
admits many of his Saints, and the high Honors that he puts on some Ministers,
are great Trials of Persons in this Respect. It Is true that great Degrees of
the spiritual Presence of God tends greatly to mortify Pride and all
Corruption; but yet, though in the Experience of such Favors there be much to
restrain Pride one Way, there is much to tempt and provoke it another; and we
shall be in great Danger thereby without great Watchfulness and Prayerfulness.
There was much in the Circumstances that the Angels that fell, were in, in
Heaven, in their great Honors and high Privileges, in beholding the Face of
GOD, and View of his infinite Glory, to cause in them Exercises of Humility,
and to keep 'em from Pride; yet through want of Watchfulness in them, their
great Honor and heavenly Privilege proved to be to them, an undoing
Temptation to Pride, though they had no Principle of Pride in their Hearts to
expose 'em. Let no Saint therefore, however eminent, and however near to GOD,
think himself out of Danger of this: He that thinks himself most out of Danger,
is indeed most in Danger. The Apostle Paul, who doubtless was as eminent a
Saint as any are now, was not out of Danger, even just after he was admitted to
see GOD in the third Heavens, by the Information he himself gives us, 2 Cor.
12. Chap. And yet doubtless, what he saw in Heaven of the ineffable Glory of
the divine Being, had a direct Tendency to make him appear exceeding little and
vile in his own Eyes.

Spiritual Pride in its own Nature is so secret, that it is not so well
discerned by immediate Intuition on the Thing it self, as by the Effects and
Fruits of it; some of which, I would mention, together with the contrary Fruits
of pure Christian Humility.

Spiritual Pride disposes to speak of other Persons Sins, their Enmity against
GOD and his People, the miserable Delusion of Hypocrites and their Enmity
against vital Piety, and the Deadness of some Saints, with Bitterness, or with
Laughter and Levity, and an Air of Contempt; whereas pure Christian Humility
rather disposes, either to be silent about 'em, or to speak of them with Grief
and Pity.

Spiritual Pride is very apt to suspect others; whereas an humble Saint is most
jealous of himself, he is so suspicious of nothing in the World as he is of his
own Heart. The spiritually proud Person is apt to find Fault with other Saints,
that they are low in Grace, and to be much in observing how cold and dead they
be, and crying out of them for it, and to be quick to discern and take Notice
of their Deficiences: But the eminently humble Christian has so much to do at
Home, and sees so much Evil in his own Heart, and is so concerned about it,
that he is not apt to be very busy with others Hearts; he complains most of
himself, and cries out of his own Coldness and Lowness in Grace, and is apt to
esteem others better than himself, and is ready to hope that there is no Body
but what has more Love and Thankfulness to GOD than he, and cannot bare to think
that others should bring forth no more Fruit to GOD's Honor than he. Some that
have spiritual Pride mixed with high Discoveries and great Transports of Joy,
that dispose 'em in an earnest Manner to talk to others, are apt, in such
Frames, to be calling upon other Christians that are about them, and sharply
reproving them for their being so cold and lifeless. And there are some others
that behave themselves very differently from these, who in their Raptures are
overwhelmed with a Sense of their own Vileness; and when they have
extraordinary Discoveries of GOD's Glory, are all taken up about their own
Sinfulness; and though they also are disposed to speak much and very earnestly,
yet it is very much in Crying out of themselves, and exhorting Fellow
Christians, but in a charitable and humble Manner. Pure Christian Humility
disposes a Person to take Notice of every Thing that is in any Respect good in
others, and to make the best of it, and to diminish their Failings; but to have
his Eye chiefly on those Things that are bad in himself, and to take much
Notice of every Thing that aggravates them.

In a Contrariety to this, it has been the Manner in some Places, or at least
the Manner of some Persons, to speak of almost every Thing that they see amiss
in others, in the most harsh, severe and terrible Languge. It Is frequent with
them to say of others Opinions or Conduct or Advice, or of their Coldness,
their Silence, their Caution, their Moderation, and their Prudence, and many
other Things that appear in them, that they are from the Devil, or from Hell;
that such a Thing is devilish or hellish or cursed, and that such Persons are
serving the Devil or the Devil is in them, that they are Soul-Murtherers and
the like; so that the Words Devil and Hell are almost continually in their
Mouths. And such Kind of Language they will commonly use, not only toward
wicked Men, but toward them that they themselves allow to be the true Children
of GOD, and also toward Ministers of the Gospel and others that are very much
their Superiors. And they look upon it a Virtue and high Attainment thus to
behave themselves. Oh, say they, we must be plain hearted and bold for Christ,
we must declare War against Sin wherever we see it, we must not mince the
Matter in the Cause of God and when speaking for Christ. And to make any
Distinction in Persons, or to speak the more tenderly, because that which is
amiss is seen in a Superior, they look upon as very mean for a Follower of
CHRIST when speaking in the Cause of his Master.

What a strange Device of the Devil is here, to overthrow all Christian
Meekness and Gentleness, and even all Show and Appearance of it, and to defile
the Mouths of the Children of God, and to introduce the Language of common
Sailors among the Followers of CHRIST, under a Cloak of high Sanctity and Zeal
and Boldness for CHRIST! And it is a remarkable Instance of the Weakness of the
human Mind, and how much too cunning the Devil is for us!

The grand Defense of this Way of Talking is, that they say no more than what
is true; they only speak the Truth without mincing the Matter; and that true
Christians that have a great Sight of the Evil of Sin, and Acquaintance with
their own Hearts know it to be true, and therefore will not be offended to hear
such harsh Expressions made Use of concerning them and their Sins; it is only
(say they) Hypocrites, or cold and dead Christians, that are provoked and feel
their Enmity rise on such an Occasion.

But it is a grand Mistake to think that we may commonly use concerning one
another all such Language as represents the worst of each other, according to
strict Truth. It Is really true, that every Kind of Sin, and every Degree of it,
is devilish and from Hell, and is cursed, hellish, and condemned or damned: And
if Persons had a full Sight of their Hearts they would think no Terms too had
for them; they would look like Beasts, like Serpents and like Devils to
themselves; they would be at a loss for Language to express what they see in
themselves, the worst Terms they could think of would seem as it were faint to
represent what they see in themselves. But shall a Child therefore, from Time
to Time, use such Language concerning an excellent and eminently holy Father or
Mother, as that the Devil is in them, that they have such and such devilish,
cursed Dispositions, that they commit every Day Hundreds of hellish, damned
Acts, and that they are cursed Dogs, Hell Hounds and Devils? And shall the
meanest of the People be justified, in commonly using such Language concerning
the most excellent Magistrates, or their most eminent Ministers? I hope no Body
has gone to this Height: but the same Pretenses of Boldness, Plain-heartedness,
and declared War against Sin, will as well justify these Things as the Things
they are actually made Use of to justify. If we proceed in such a Manner, on
such Principles as these, what a Face will be introduced upon the Church of
CHRIST, the little beloved Flock of that gentle Shepherd the Lamb of GOD? What
a Sound shall we bring into the House of GOD, into the Family of his dear
little Children? How far off shall we soon banish that lovely Appearance of
Humility, Sweetness, Gentleness, mutual Honor, Benevolence, Complacence, and
an Esteem of others above themselves, which ought to clothe the Children of GOD
all over? Not but that Christians should watch over one another, and in any
wise reprove one another, and be much in it and do it plainly and faithfully;
but it don't thence follow that dear Brethren in the Family of GOD, in rebuking
one another, should use worse Language than Michael the Archangel durst use
when rebuking the Devil himself.

Christians that are but Fellow-Worms ought at least to treat one another with
as much Humility and Gentleness as CHRIST that is infinitely above them treats
them. But how did CHRIST treat his Disciples when they were so cold toward him
and so regardless of him, at the Time when his Soul was exceeding sorrowful
even unto Death, and he in a dismal Agony was crying and sweating Blood for
them, and they would not watch with him and allow him the Comfort of their
Company one Hour in his great Distress, though he once and again desired it of
them: One would think that then was a proper Time if ever to have reproved 'em
for a devilish, hellish, cursed and damned Slothfulness and Deadness. But after
what Manner does CHRIST reprove them? Behold his astonishing Gentleness! Says
he, What, could ye not watch with me one Hour? The Spirit indeed is willing,
but the Flesh is weak. And how did he treat Peter when he was ashamed of his
Master, while he was made a Mocking-Stock and a Spitting-Stock for him? Why he
looked upon him with a Look of Love, and melted his Heart.

And though we read that CHRIST once turned and said unto Peter, on a certain
Occasion, get thee behind me Satan; and this may seem like an Instance of
Harshness and Severity in reproving Peter; yet I humbly conceive that this is
by many taken wrong, and that this is indeed no Instance of CHRIST's Severity
in his Treatment of Peter, but on the contrary, of his wonderful Gentleness and
Grace, distinguishing between Peter and the Devil in him, not laying the Blame
of what Peter had then said, or imputing it to him, but to the Devil that
influenced him. CHRIST saw the Devil then present, secretly influencing Peter
to do the Part of a Tempter to his Master; and therefore CHRIST turned him
about to Peter, in whom the Devil then was, and spoke to the Devil, and rebuked
him. Thus the Grace of CHRIST don't behold Iniquity in his People, imputes not
what is amiss in 'em to them, but to Sin that dwells in them, and to Satan that
influences them.

But to return,

Spiritual Pride often disposes Persons to Singularity in external Appearance,
to affect a singular Way of Speaking, to use a different Sort of Dialect from
others, or to be singular in Voice, or Air of Countenance or Behavior: but he
that is an eminently humble Christian, though he will be firm to his Duty,
however singular he is in it; he will go in the Way that leads to Heaven alone,
though all the World forsakes him; yet he delights not in Singularity for
Singularity's Sake, he don't affect to set up himself to be viewed and observed
as one distinguished, as desiring to be accounted better than others, or
dispising their Company, or an Union and Conformity to them; but on the
contrary is disposed to become all Things to all Men, and to yield to others,
and conform to them and please 'em, in every Thing but Sin. Spiritual Pride
commonly occasions a certain Stiffness and Inflexibility in Persons, in their
own Judgment and their own Ways; whereas the eminently humble Person, though he
be inflexible in his Duty, and in those Things wherein GOD's Honor is
concerned; and with Regard to Temptation to those Things he apprehends to be
sinful, though in never so small a Degree, he is not at all of a yieldable
Spirit, but is like a Brazen Wall; yet in other Things he is of a pliable
Disposition, not disposed to set up his own Opinion, or his own Will; he is
ready to pay Deference to others Opinions, and loves to comply with their
Inclinations, and has a Heart that is tender and flexible, like a little Child.

Spiritual Pride disposes Persons to affect Separation, to stand at a Distance
from others, as better than they, and loves the Show and Appearance of the
Distinction: But on the contrary the eminently humble Christian is ready to
look upon himself as not worthy that others should be united to him, to think
himself more brutish than any Man, and worthy to be cast out of human Society,
and especially unworthy of the Society of GOD's Children; and though he will not
be a Companion with one that is visibly CHRIST's Enemy, and delights most in
the Company of lively Christians, will choose such for his Companions, and will
be most intimate with them, and don't at all delight to spend away much Time in
the Company of those that seem to relish no Conversation but about worldly
Things; yet he don't love the Appearance of an open Separation from visible
Christians, as being a Kind of distinct Company from them, that are one visible
Company with him by CHRIST Appointment, and will as much as possible shun all
Appearances of a Superiority, or distinguishing himself as better than others:
His universal Benevolence delights in the Appearance of Union with his fellow
Creatures, and will maintain it as much as he possibly can, without giving open
Countenance to Iniquity, or wounding his own Soul; and herein he follows the
Example of his meek and lowly Redeemer, who did not keep up such a Separation
and Distance as the Pharisees, but freely eat with Publicans and Sinners, that
he might win them.

The eminently humble Christian is as it were clothed with Lowliness,
Mildness, Meekness, Gentleness of Spirit and Behavior, and with a soft, sweet,
condescending, winning Air and Deportment; these Things are just like Garments
to him, he is clothed all over with them. 1 Pet. 5. 5. And be clothed with
Humility. Col. 3. 12. Put on therefore, as the elect of God, holy and beloved,
Bowels of Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Long-suffering.

Pure Christian Humility has no such Thing as Roughness, or Contempt, or
Fierceness, or Bitterness in its Nature; it makes a Person like a little Child,
harmless and innocent, and that none need to be afraid of; or like a Lamb,
destitute of all Bitterness, Wrath, Anger and Clamor, agreeable to Ephesians. 4. 31.

With such a Spirit as this ought especially zealous Ministers of the Gospel to
be clothed, and those that GOD is pleased to improve as Instruments in his
Hands of promoting his Work: they ought indeed to be thorough in preaching the
Word of GOD, without mincing the Matter at all; in handling the Sword of the
SPIRIT, as the Ministers of the Lord of Hosts, they ought not to be mild and
gentle; they are not to be gentle and moderate in searching and awakening the
Conscience but should be Sons of Thunder: The Word of GOD, which is in it self
sharper than any two-edged Sword, ought not to be sheathed by its Ministers,
but so used that its sharp Edges may have their full Effect, even to the
dividing asunder Soul and Spirit, Joints and Marrow; (provided they do it
without judging particular Persons, leaving it to Conscience and the Spirit of
GOD to make the particular Application;) But all their Conversation should
savor of nothing but Lowliness and good Will, Love and Pity to all Mankind; so
that such a Spirit should be like a sweet Odor diffused around 'em wherever
they go, or like a Light shining about 'em, their Faces should as it were shine
with it; they should be like Lions to guilty Consciences, but like Lambs to
Men's Persons. This would have no Tendency to prevent the Awakening of Men's
Consciences, but on the contrary would have a very great Tendency to awaken
them; it would make Way for the sharp Sword to enter; it would remove the
Obstacles, and make a naked Breast for the Arrow. Yea the amiable, Christ-like
Conversation of such Ministers, in it self would terrify the Consciences of
Men, as well as their terrible Preaching; both would cooperate one with
another, to subdue the hard, and bring down the proud Heart. If there had been,
constantly and universally observable such a Behavior as this in Itinerant
Preachers, it would have terrified the Consciences of Sinners, ten Times as
much as all the Invectives, and the censorious Talk there has been concerning
particular Persons, for their Opposition, Hypocrisy, Delusion, Pharisaism, etc.
-- These Things in general have rather stupefied Sinners Consciences; they take
'em up, and make Use of 'em as a Shield, where with to defend themselves from
the sharp Arrows of the Word, that are shot by these Preachers: The Enemies of
the present Work have been glad of these Things with all their Hearts. Many of
the most bitter of them are probably such as in the Beginning of this Work had
their Consciences something gauled and terrified with it; but these Errors of
awakening Preachers are the Things they chiefly make Use of as Plasters to
heal the Sore that was made in their Consciences.

Spiritual Pride takes great Notice of Opposition and Injuries that are
received, and is apt to be often speaking of them, and to be much in taking
Notice of the Aggravations of 'em, either with an Air of Bitterness or
Contempt: Whereas pure, unmixed Christian Humility, disposes a Person rather to
be like his blessed Lord, when reviled, dumb, not opening his Mouth, but
committing himself in Silence to him that judges righteously. The eminently
humble Christian, the more clamorous and surious the World is against him, the
more silent and still will he be; unless it be in his Closet, and there he will
not be still. Our blessed Lord Jesus seems never to have been so silent, as
when the World compassed him round, reproaching, buffetting and spitting on
him, with loud and virulent Outcries, and horrid Cruelties.

There has been a great deal too much Talk of late, among many of the true and
zealous Friends of Religion, about Opposition and Persecution. It becomes the
Followers of the Lamb of GOD, when the World is in an Uproar about them, and
full of Clamor against them, not to raise another Noise to answer it, but to
be still and quiet: It Is not beautiful, at such a Time, to have Pulpits and
Conversation ring with the sound, Persecution, Persecution, or with abundant
Talk about Pharisees, carnal Persecutors, and the Seed of the Serpent.

Meekness and Quietness among GOD's People, when opposed and reviled, would be
the surest Way to have GOD remarkably to appear for their Defense. It Is
particularly observed of Moses, on the Occasion of Aaron and Miriam their
envying him, and rising up in Opposition against him, that he was very meek,
above all Men upon the Face of the Earth, Number. 12. 3. Doubtless because he
remarkably showed his Meekness on that Occasion, being wholly silent under the
Abuse. And how remarkable is the Account that follows of GOD's being as it were
suddenly roused to appear for his Vindication? And what high Honor did he put
upon Moses? And how severe were his Rebukes of his Opposers? The Story is very
remarkable, and worth every One's observing. Nothing is so effectual to bring
GOD down from Heaven in the Defense of his People, as their Patience and
Meekness under Sufferings. When CHRIST girds his Sword upon his Thigh, with his
Glory and Majesty, and in his Majesty rides prosperously, his right Hand
teaching him terrible Things, it is because of Truth and MEEKNESS and
Righteousness. Psalm. 45. 3, 4. God will cause Judgment to be heard from Heaven;
the Earth shall fear and be still, and God will arise to Judgment, to save all
the MEEK of the Earth. Psalm. 76. 8, 9. He will lift up the Meek, and cast the
Wicked down to the Ground. Psalm. 147. 6, He will reprove with Equity, for the
Meek of the Earth, and will smite the Earth with the Rod of his Mouth, and with
the Breath of his Lips will be say the Wicked. Isai. 11. 4. The great
Commendation that CHRIST gives the Church of Philadelphia, is that, Thou have
kept the Word of my Patience, Rev. 3. 10. And we may see what Reward he
promises her, in the preceding Verse, Behold, I will make them of the
Synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews and are not, but do lie; behold, I
will make them to come and worship at thy Feet, and to know that I have loved
thee. And thus it is, that we might expect to have CHRIST appear for us, if
under all Reproaches we are loaded with, we behaved ourselves with a Lamb-like
Meekness and Gentleness; but if our Spirits are raised, and we are vehement and
noisy with our Complaints under Color of Christian Zeal, this will be to take
upon us our own Defense, and GOD will leave it with us, to vindicate our Cause
as well as we can: Yea if we go on in a Way of Bitterness, and high Censuring,
it will be the Way to have him rebuke us, and put us to Shame before our
Enemies.

Here some may be ready to say, It Is not in our own Cause, that we are thus
vehement, but it is in the Cause of GOD; and the Apostle directed the primitive
Christians to contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints. But
how was it that the primitive Christians contended earnestly for the Faith?
They defended the Truth with Arguments, and a holy Conversation; but yet gave
their Reasons with Meekness and Fear: They contended earnestly for the Faith,
by fighting violently against their own Unbelief, and the Corruptions of their
Hearts, yea they resisted unto Blood striving against Sin; but the Blood that
was shed in this earnest Strife, was their own Blood, and not the Blood of
their Enemies. It was in the Cause of God, that Peter was so sierce, and drew
his Sword, and began to smite with it; but Christ bids him put up his Sword
again, telling him that they that take the Sword shall perish by the Sword; and
while Peter wounds, CHRIST heals. They contend the most violently, and are the
greatest Conquerors in a Time of Persecution, who bear it with the greatest
Meekness and Patience.

Great Humility improves even the Reflections and Reproaches of Enemies, to put
upon serious Self-Examination, whether or no there be not some just Cause,
whether they have not in some Respect given Occasion to the Enemy to speak
reproachfully: Whereas spiritual Pride improves such Reflections to make 'em
the more bold and confident, and to go the greater Lengths in that for which
they are found fault with. I defire it may be considered whether there has been
nothing amiss of late, among the true Friends of vital Piety in this Respect;
and whether the Words of David, when reviled by Michal, han't been
mis-interpreted and misapplied to justify them in it, when he said I will be
yet more vile, and will be base in mine own Sight. The Import of his Words is
that he would humble himself yet more before GOD, being sensible that he was
far from being sufficiently abased; and he fignifies this to Michal, and that
he longed to be yet lower, and had designed already to abase himself more in
his Behavior: not that he would go the greater Length, to show his
Regardlesness of her Revilings; that would be to exalt himself, and not more to
abase himself, as more vile in his own Sight.

Another Effect of spiritual Pride is a certain unsuitable and self-confident
Boldness before GOD and Men. Thus some in their great Rejoicings before GOD,
han't paid a sufficient Regard to that Rule, in Psalm. 2. 11. They have not
rejoiced with a reverential Trembling, in a proper Sense of the awful Majesty
of GOD, and the awful Distance between GOD and them. And there has also been an
improper Boldness before Men, that has been encouraged and defended, by a
Misapplication of that Scripture, Prove. 29. 25. The Fear of Man brings a
Snare. As though it became all Persons, high and low, Men, Women and Children, in
all religious Conversation, wholly to divest themselves of all Manner of
Shamefacedness, Modesty or Reverence toward Man; which is a great Error, and
quite contrary to Scripture. There is a Fear of Reverence that is due to some
Men. Romans 13. 7. Fear, to whom Fear; Honor, to whom Honor. And there is a
Fear of Modesty and Shamefacedness, in Inferiors toward Superiors, that is
amiable, and required by Christian Rules. 1 Pet. 3. 2. While they behold your
chaste Conversation, coupled with Fear. And 1 Timothy 2. 9. In like Manner also,
that Women adorn themselves, in modest Apparel, with Shamefacedness and
Sobriety. And the Apostle means that this Virtue shall have Place, not only in
civil Communication, but also in spiritual Communication, and in our religious
Concerns and. Behavior, as is evident by what follows. Ver. 11, 12. Let the
Women learn in Silence, with all Subjection. But I suffer not a Woman to teach,
nor to usurp Authority over the Man, but to be in Silence. Not that I would
hence infer that Women's Mouths should be shut up from Christian Conversation;
but all that I mean from it at this Time is, that Modesty, or Shamefacedness,
and Reverence toward Men, ought to have some Place, even in our religious
Communication one with another. The same is also evident by 1 Pet. 3. 15. Be
ready always to give an Answer, to every Man that asks you a Reason of the
Hope that is in you, with Meekness and Fear. It Is well if that very Fear and
Shamefacedness, which the Apostle recommends, han't sometimes been condemned,
under the Name of a cursed Fear of Man.

It Is beautiful for Persons when they are at Prayer as the Mouth of others, to
make GOD only their Fear and their Dread, and to be wholly forgetful of Men
that are present, who let 'em be great or small, are nothing in the Presence of
the great GOD. And it is beautiful for a Minister, when he speaks in the Name of
the Lord of Hosts, to be bold, and put off all Fear of Men. And it is beautiful
in private Christians, though they are Women and Children, to be bold in
professing the Faith of CHRIST, and in the Practice of all Religion, and in
owning GOD's Hand in the Work of his Power and Grace, without any Fear of Men,
though they should be reproached as Fools and Madmen, and frowned upon by great
Men, and cast off by Parents and all the World. But for private Christians,
Women and others, to instruct, rebuke and exhort, with a like Sort of Boldness
as becomes a Minister when preaching, is not beautiful.

Some have been bold in some Things that have really been Errors; and have
gloried in their Boldness in practicing them, though cried out of as odd and
irregular. And those that have gone the greatest Lengths in these Things, have
been by some most highly esteemed, as those that come out, and appear bold for
the Lord Jesus Christ, and fully on his Side; and others that have professed to
be godly, that have condemned such Things, have been spoken of as Enemies of
the Cross of CHRIST, or at least very cold and dead; and many that of
themselves, were not inclined to such Practices, have by this Means been driven
on, being ashamed to be behind, and accounted poor Soldiers for CHRIST.

Another Effect of spiritual Pride is Assuming: It oftentimes makes it natural
to Persons so to act and speak, as though it in a special Manner belonged to them
to be taken Notice of and much regarded. It is very natural to a Person that is
much under the Influence of spiritual Pride, to take all that Respect that is
paid him: If others show a Disposition to submit to him, and yield him the
Deference of a Preceptor, he is open to it, and freely admits it; yea, it is
natural for him to expect such Treatment, and to take much Notice of it if he
fails of it, and to have an ill Opinion of others that don't pay him that which
he looks upon as his Prerogative: He is apt to think that it belongs to him to
speak, and to clothe himself with a judicial and dogmatical Air in
Conversation, and to take it upon him as what belongs to him, to give forth his
Sentence, and to determine and decide: Whereas pure Christian Humility vaunteth
not it self, does not behave it self unseemly, and is apt to prefer others in
Honor. One under the Influence of spiritual Pride is more apt to instruct
others, than to enquire for himself, and naturally puts on the Airs of a
Master: Whereas one that is full of pure Humility, naturally has on the Air of
a Disciple; his Voice is, What shall I do? What shall I do that I may live more
to GOD's Honor? What shall I do with this wicked Heart? He is ready to receive
Instruction from my Body, agreeable to Jam. 1. 19. Wherefore, my beloved
Brethren, let every Man be swift to hear, slow to speak. The eminently humble
Christian thinks he wants Help from every Body, whereas he that is spiritually
proud thinks that every Body wants his Help. Christian Humility, under a Sense
of others Misery, entreats and beseeches; spiritual Pride affects to command,
and warn with Authority.

There ought to be the utmost Watchfulness against all such Appearances of
spiritual Pride, in all that prosess to have been the Subjects of this Work,
and especially in the Promoters of it, but above all in Itinerant Preachers:
The most eminent Gifts, and highest Tokens of GOD's Favor and Blessing, will
not excuse them: Alas! What is Man at his best Estate! What is the most highly
favored Christian, or the most eminent and successful Minister, that he should
now think he is sufficient for something, and somebody to be regarded, and
that he should go forth, and act among his Fellow Creatures, as if he were wise
and strong and good!

Ministers that have been the principal Instruments of carrying on this
glorious Revival of Religion, and that GOD has made Use of, as it were to bring
up his People out of Egypt, as he did of Moses, should take Heed that they
don't provoke GOD as Moses did, by assuming too much to themselves, and by
their intemperate Zeal, to shut them out from seeing the good Things that GOD
is going to do for his Church in this World. The Fruits of Moses's Unbelief,
which provoked GOD to shut him out of Canaan, and not to suffer him to partake
of those great Things GOD was about to do for Israel on Earth, were chiefly
these two Things; First, His mingling Bitterness with his Zeal: he had a great
Zeal for GOD, and he could not bear to see the intolerable Stiff-neckedness of
the People, that they did not acknowledge the Work of GOD, and were not
convinced by all his Wonders that they had seen: But human Passion was mingled
with his Zeal. Psalm. 106. 32, 33. They angered him also at the Waters of Strife;
so that it went ill with Moses for their Sakes: Because they provoked his
Spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his Lips. Hear now ye Rebels, says
he, with Bitterness of Language. Secondly, He behaved himself, and spoke with
an assuming Air: He assumed too much to himself; Hear now ye Rebels, must fetch
Water out of this Rock? Spiritual Pride wrought in Moses at that Time: His
Temptations to it were very great, for he had had great Discoveries of GOD, and
had been privileged with intimate and sweet Communion with him, and GOD had
made him the Instrument of great Good to his Church; and though he was so humble
a Person, and, by GOD's own Testimony, meek above all Men upon the Face of the
whole Earth, yet his Temptations were too strong for him: Which surely should
make our young Ministers, that have of late been highly favored, and have had
great Success, exceeding careful, and distrustful of themselves. Alas! how far
are we from having the Strength of holy, meek, aged Moses! The Temptation at
this Day is exceeding great, to both those Errors that Moses was guilty of;
there is great Temptation to Bitterness and corrupt Passion with Zeal; for
there is so much unreasonable Opposition made against this glorious Work of
GOD, and so much Stiff-neckedness manifested in Multitudes of this Generation,
notwithstanding all the great and wonderful Works in which GOD has passed
before them, that it greatly tends to provoke the Spirits of such as have the
Interest of this Work at Heart, so as to move 'em to speak unadvisedly with
their Lips. And there is also great Temptation to an assuming Behavior in some
Persons: When a Minister is greatly succeeded, from Time to Time, and so draws
the Eyes of the Multitude upon him, and he sees himself flocked after, and
resorted to as an Oracle, and People are ready to adore him, and to offer
Sacrifice to him, as it was with Paul and Barnabas, at Lystra, it is almost
impossible for a Man to avoid taking upon him the Airs of a Master, or some
extraordinary Person; a Man had Need to have a great Stock of Humility, and
much divine Assistance, to resist the Temptation. But the greater our Dangers
are, the more ought to be our Watchfulness and Prayerfulness, and Diffidence of
our selves, lest we bring our selves into Mischief. Fishermen that have been
very successful, and have caught a great many Fish, had Need to be careful that
they don't at Length begin to burn Incense to their Net. And we should take
Warning by Gideon, who after GOD had highly favored and exaited him, and made
him the Instrument of working a wonderful Deliverance for his People, at Length
made a God of the Spoils of his Enemies, which became a Snare to him and to his
House, so as to prove the Ruin of his Family.

All young Ministers in this Day of the bringing up the Ark of GOD, should take
Warning by the Example of a young Levite in Israel, viz. Uzza the Son of
Abinadab. He seemed to have a real Concern for the Ark of GOD, and to be
zealous and engaged in his Mind, on that joyful Occasion of bringing up the
Ark, and GOD made him an Instrument to bring the Ark out of its long continued
Obscurity in Kirjath-jearim, and he was succeeded to bring it a considerable
Way toward Mount Zion; but for his Want of Humility, Reverence and
Circumspection, and assuming to himself, or taking too much upon him, GOD broke
forth upon him, and smote him for his Error, so that he never lived to see, and
partake of the great Joy of his Church, on Occasion of the carrying up the Ark
into Mount Zion, and the great Blessings of Heaven upon Israel, that were
consequent upon it. Ministers that have been improved to carry on this Work
have been chiefly of the younger Sort, who have doubtless, (as Uzza had,) a
real Concern for the Ark; and it is evident that they are much animated and
engaged in their Minds, (as he was) in this joyful Day of bringing up the Ark;
and they are afraid what will become of the Ark under the Conduct of its
Ministers, (that are sometimes in Scripture compared to Oxen;) They see the Ark
shakes, and they are afraid these blundering Oxen will throw it; and some of
'em it is to be feared, have been over officious on this Occasion, and have
assumed too much to themselves, and have been bold to put forth their Hand to
take hold of the Ark, as though they were the only fit and worthy Persons to
defend it.

If young Ministers had great Humility, without a Mixture, it would dispose 'em
especially to treat aged Ministers with Respect and Reverence, as their
Fathers, notwithstanding that a sovereign GOD may have given them greater
Assistance and Success, than they have had. 1 Pet. 5. 5. Likewise ye younger,
submit your selves unto the elder; yea all of you, be subject one to another;
and be clothed with Humility; for God resists the Proud, and gives Grace to
the Humble. Lev. 19. 32. Thou shall rise up before the hoary Head, and honor
the Face of the old Man, and fear thy GOD; I am the LORD.

As spiritual Pride disposes Persons to assume much to themselves, so it also
disposes 'em to treat others with Neglect: On the contrary, pure Christian
Humility disposes Persons to honor all Men, agreeable to that Rule, 1 Pet. 2.
17.

There has been in some, that I believe are true Friends of Religion, too much
of an Appearance of this Fruit of spiritual Pride, in their Treatment of those
that they looked upon to be carnal Men; and particularly in refusing to enter
into any Discourse or Reasoning with them. Indeed to spend a great deal of Time
in Jangling and warm Debates about Religion, is not the Way to propagate
Religion, but to hinder it; and some are so dreadfully set against this Work,
that it is a dismal Task to dispute with them, all that one can say is utterly
in vain, I have found it so by Experience; and to go to enter into Disputes
about Religion, at some Times, is quite unseasonable, as particularly in
Meetings for religious Conference, or Exercises of Worship. But yet we ought to
be very careful that we don't refuse to discourse with Men, with any Appearance
of a supercilious Neglect, as though we counted 'em not worthy to be regarded; on
the contrary we should condescend to carnal Men, as CHRIST has condescended to
us, to bear with our Unteachableness and Stupidity, and still to follow us with
Instructions, Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept, saying, Come let us
reason together; setting Light before us, and using all Manner of Arguments
with us, and waiting upon such dull Scholars, as it were hoping that we should
receive Light. We should be ready with Meekness and Calmness, without hot
disputing, to give our Reasons, why we think this Work is the Work of GOD, to
carnal Men when they ask us, and not turn them by as not worthy to be talked
with; as the Apostle directed the primitive Christians to be ready to give a
Reason of the Christian Faith and Hope to the Enemies of Christianity, 1 Pet.
3. 15. Be ready always to give an Answer to every Man that asks you a Reason
of the Hope that is in you, with Meekness and Fear. And we ought not to condemn
all Reasoning about Things of Religion under the Name of carnal Reason. For my
Part, I desire no better than that those that oppose this Work, should come
fairly to submit to have the Cause betwixt us tried by strict Reasoning.

One Qualification that the Scripture speaks of once and again, as requisite in
a Minister is, that he should be (...) apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3. 2. And the
Apostle seems to explain what he means by it, in 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. Or at least
there expresses one Thing he intends by it, viz. That a Minister should be
ready, meekly to condescend to, and instruct Opposers. And the Servant of the
Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all Men, apt to teach, patient, in
Meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will
give them Repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth.

Secondly, Another Thing from whence Errors in Conduct, that attend such a
Revival of Religion, do arise, is wrong Principles.

And one erroneous Principle, than which scarce any has proved more mischievous
to the present glorious Work of GOD, is a Notion that it is GOD's Manner, now in
these Days, to guide his Saints, at least some that are more eminent, by
Inspiration, or immediate Revelation, and to make known to 'em what shall come
to pass here after, or what it is his Will that they should do, by Impressions
that he by his Spirit makes upon their Minds, either with, or without Texts of
Scripture; whereby something is made known to them, that is not taught in the
Scripture as the Words lie in the Bible. By such a Notion the Devil has a great
Door opened for him; and if once this Opinion should come to be fully yielded
to, and established in the Church of GOD, Satan would have Opportunity thereby
to set up himself as the Guide and Oracle of God's People, and to have his Word
regarded as their infallible Rule, and so to lead 'em where he would, and to
introduce what he pleased, and soon to bring the Bible into Neglect and
Contempt: -- Late Experience in some Instances, has shown that the Tendency of
this Notion is to cause Persons to esteem the Bible as a Book that is in a
great Measure useless.

This Error will defend and support all Errors. As long as a Person has a
Notion that he is guided by immediate Direction from Heaven, it makes him
incorrigible and impregnable in all his Misconduct: For what signifies it, for
poor blind Worms of the Dust, to go to argue with a Man, and endeavor to
convince him and correct him, that is guided by the immediate Counsels and
Commands of the great JEHOVAH?

This great Work of GOD has been exceedingly hindered by this Error; and 'till
we have quite taken this Handle out of the Devil's Hands, the Work of GOD will
never go on without great Clogs and Hindrances. But Satan will always have a
vast Advantage in his Hands against it, and as he has improved it hitherto, so
he will do still: And it is evident that the Devil knows the vast Advantage he
has by it, that makes him exceeding loath to let go his Hold.

It Is strange what a Disposition there is in many well disposed and religious
Persons, to fall in with and hold fast this Notion. It Is enough to astonish one
that such multiplied, plain Instances of the failing of such supposed
Revelations, in the Event, don't open every one's Eyes. I have seen so many
Instances of the failing of such Impressions, that would almost furnish an
History: I have been acquainted with them when made under all Kinds of
Circumstances, and have seen 'em sail in the Event, when made with such
Circumstances as have been fairest and brightest, and most promising; as when
they have been made upon the Minds of such, as there was all Reason to think
were true Saints, yea eminent Saints, and at the very Time when they have had
great divine. Discoveries, and have been in the high Exercise of true Communion
with GOD, and made with great Strength, and with great Sweetness accompanying,
and I have had Reason to think, with an excellent heavenly Frame of Spirit, yet
continued, and made with Texts of Scripture, that seemed to be exceeding
apposite, yea many Texts following one another, extraordinarily and wonderfully
bro't to the Mind, and with great Power and Majesty, and the Impressions
repeated over and over, after Prayers to be directed; and yet all has most
manifestly come to nothing, to the full Conviction of the Persons themselves.
And GOD has in so many Instances of late in his Providence, covered such Things
with Darkness, that one would think it should be enough quite to blank the
Expectations of such as have been ready to think highly of such Things; it
seems to be a Testimony of GOD, that he has no Design of reviving Revelations
in his Church, and a Rebuke from him to the groundless Expectations of it.

It seems to me that That Scripture, Zech. 13. 5. is a Prophecy concerning
Ministers of the Gospel, in the latter, and glorious Day of the Christian
Church, which is evidently spoken of in this and the foregoing Chapters; The
Words are, I am no Prophet; I am an Husbandman: For Man taught me to keep
Cattle from my Youth. The Words, I apprehend, are to be interpreted in a
spiritual Sense; I am an Husbandman: The Work of Ministers is very often in the
New Testament, compared to the Business of the Husbandman, that take Care of
GOD's Husbandry, to whom he lets out his Vineyard, and sends 'em forth to
labor in his Field, where one plants and another waters, one sows and another
reaps; so Ministers are called Laborers in GOD's Harvest. And as it is added,
Man taught me to keep Cattle from my Youth. So the Work of a Minister is very
often in Scripture represented by the Business of a Shepherd or Pastor. And
whereas it is said, I am no Prophet; but Man taught me from my Youth. It Is as
much as to say, I don't pretend to have received my Skill, whereby I am fitted
for the Business of a Pastor or Shepherd in the Church of GOD, by immediate
Inspiration, but by Education, by being trained up to the Business by human
Learning, and Instructions I have received from my Youth or Childhood, by
ordinary Means.

And why cannot we be contented with the divine Oracles, that holy, pure Word of
GOD, that we have in such Abundance, and such Clearness, now since the Canon of
Scripture is completed? Why should we desire to have any Thing added to them
by Impulses from above? Why should not we rest in that standing Rule that GOD
has given to his Church, which the Apostle teaches us is surer than a Voice
from Heaven? And why should we desire to make the Scripture speak more to us
than it does? Or why should any desire any higher Kind of Intercourse with
Heaven, than that which is by having the holy Spirit given in his sanctifying
Influences, infusing and exciting Grace and Holiness, Love and Joy, which is
the highest Kind of Intercourse that the Saints and Angels in Heaven have with
GOD, and the chief Excellency of the glorified Man CHRIST JESUS?

Some that follow Impulses and Impressions go away with a Notion that they do
no other than follow the Guidance of GOD's Word, and make the Scripture their
Rule, because the Impression is made with a Text of Scripture, that comes to
their Mind, though they take that Text as it is impressed on their Minds, and
improve it as a new Revelation, to all Intents and Purposes, or as the
Revelation of a particular Thing, that is now newly made, while the Text in it
self, as it is in the Bible, implies no such Thing, and they themselves do not
suppose that any such Revelation was contained in it before. As for Instance,
suppose that Text should come into a Person's Mind with strong Impression, Act.
9. 6. Arise, and go into the City; and it shall be told thee what thou must do.
And he should interpret it as an immediate Signification of the Will of GOD,
that he should now, forthwith go to such a Neighbor Town, and as a Revelation
of that future Event, viz. That there he should meet with a further Discovery
of his Duty. If such Things as these are revealed by the Impression of these
Words, it is to all Intents, a new Revelation, not the less because certain
Words of Scripture are made Use of in the Case: Here are Propositions or Truths
entirely new, that are supposed now to be revealed, that those Words do not
contain in themselves, and that 'till now there was no Revelation of any where
to be found in Heaven or Earth. These Propositions, That it is GOD's Mind and
Will that such a Person by Name, should arise at such a Time, and go from such
a Place to such a Place, and that there he should meet with Discoveries, are
entirely new Propositions, wholly different from the Propositions contained in
that Text of Scripture, no more contained, or consequentially implied in the
Words themselves, without a new Revelation, than it is implied that he should
arise and go to any other Place, or that any other Person should arise and go
to that Place. The Propositions supposed to be now revealed, are as really
different from those contained in that Scripture, as they are from the
Propositions contained in that Text, Genesis 5. 6. And Seth lived an hundred and
five Years, and begat Enos.

This is quite a different Thing from the Spirit's enlightening the Mind to
understand the Precepts or Propositions of the Word of GOD, and know what is
contained and revealed in them, and what Consequences may justly be drawn from
them, and to see how they are applicable to our Case and Circumstances; which
is done without any new Revelation, only by enabling the Mind to understand and
apply a Revelation already made.

Those Texts of Scripture that speak of the Children of GOD as led by the
Spirit, have been by some, brought to defend a being guided by such Impulses;
as particularly, those Romans 8. 14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God,
they are the Sons of God: And Gal. 5. 18. But if ye are led by the Spirit, ye
are not under the Law. But these Texts themselves confute them that bring them;
for it is evident that the leading of the Spirit that the Apostle speaks of is a
gracious Leading, or what is peculiar to the Children of GOD, and that natural
Men cannot have; for he speaks of it as a sure Evidence of their being the Sons
of GOD, and not under the Law: But a leading or directing a Person, by
immediately revealing to him where he should go, or what shall hereafter come
to pass, or what shall be the future Consequence of his doing thus or thus, if
there be any such Thing in these Days, is not of the Nature of the gracious
leading of the Spirit of GOD, that is peculiar to GOD's Children; it is no more
than a common Gift; there is nothing in it but what natural Men are capable of,
and many of them have had in the Days of Inspiration: A Man may have ten
Thousand such Revelations and Directions from the Spirit of GOD, and yet not
have a Jot of Grace in his Heart: It Is no more than the Gift of Prophecy, which
immediately reveals what will be, or should be hereafter; but this is but a
common Gift, as the Apostle expressly shows, 1 Cor. 13. 2, 8. If a Person has
any Thing revealed to him from God, or is directed to any Thing, by a Voice
from Heaven, or a Whisper, or Words immediately suggested and put into his
Mind, there is nothing of the Nature of Grace, merely in this; it is of the
Nature of a common Influence of the Spirit, and is but Dross and Dung, in
Comparison of the Excellency of that gracious leading of the Spirit that the
Saints have. Such a Way of being directed where one shall go, and what he shall
do, is no more than what Bataam had from GOD, who from Time to Time revealed to
him what he should do, and when he had done one Thing, then directed him what
he should do next; so that he was in this Sense led by the Spirit, for a
considerable Time. There is a more excellent Way that the Spirit of GOD leads
the Sons of God, that natural Men cannot have, and that is, by inclining them
to do the Will of GOD, and go in the shining Path of Truth and Christian
Holiness, from an holy heavenly Disposition, which the Spirit of GOD gives
them, and enlivens in them which inclines 'em, and leads 'em to those Things
that are excellent, and agreeable to GOD's Mind, whereby they are transformed,
by the renewing of their Minds, and prove what is that good, and acceptable,
and perfect Will of God, as in Romans 12. 2. And so the Spirit of GOD does in a
gracious Manner teach the Saints their Duty; and teaches 'em in an higher
Manner than ever Balaam, or Saul, or Judas were taught, or any natural Man is
capable of while such. The Spirit of GOD enlightens 'em with Respect to their
Duty, by making their Eye single and pure, whereby the whole Body is full of
Light. The sanctifying Influence of the Spirit of GOD rectifies the Taste of
the Soul, whereby it savours those Things that are of GOD, and naturally
relishes and delights in those Things that are holy and agreeable to GOD's
Mind, and like one of a distinguishing Taste, chooses those Things that are good
and wholesome, and rejects those Things that are evil; for the sanctified Ear
tries Words, and the sanctified Heart tries Actions, as the Mouth tastes Meat.
And thus the Spirit of GOD leads and guides the Meek in his Way, agreeable to
his Promises; he enables them to understand the Commands and Counsels of his
Word, and rightly to apply them. CHRIST blames the Pharisees that they had not
this holy distinguishing Taste, to discern and distinguish what was right and
wrong. Luke 12. 57. Yea, and why, even of your own selves, judge ye not what is
right?

The leading of the Spirit which GOD gives his Children, which is peculiar to
them, is that teaching them his Statutes, and causing them to understand the
Way of his Precepts, which the Psalmist so very often prays for, especially in
the 119th Psalm; and not in giving of them new Statutes, and new Precepts: He
graciously gives them Eyes to see, and Ears to hear, and Hearts to understand;
he causes them to understand the Fear of the Lord, and so bring the Blind by a
Way they knew not, and leads them in Paths that they had not known, and makes
Darkness Light before them, and crooked Things strait.

So the Assistance of the Spirit in Praying and Preaching seems by some to have
been greatly misunderstood, and they have sought after a miraculous Assistance
of Inspiration, by immediate suggesting of Words to them, by such Gifts and
Influences of the Spirit, in Praying and Teaching, as the Apostle speaks of, 1
Cor. 14. 14, 26. (which many natural Men had in those Days.) Instead of a
gracious holy Assistance of the Spirit of GOD, which is the far more excellent
Way; (as 1 Cor. 12. 31. and 13. 1.) The gracious, and most excellent kind
Assistance of the Spirit of God in Praying and Preaching, is not by immediate
suggesting of Words to the Apprehension, which may be with a cold dead Heart,
but by warming the Heart, and filling it with a great Sense of those Things
that are to be spoken of, and with holy Affections, that that Sense and those
Affections may suggest Words. Thus indeed the Spirit of GOD may be said,
indirectly and mediately to suggest Words to us, to indite our Petitions for
us, and to teach the Preacher what to say; he fills the Heart, and that fills
the Mouth; as we know that when Men are greatly affected in any Matter, and
their Hearts are very full, it fills them with Matter for Speech, and makes 'em
eloquent upon that Subject; and much more have spiritual Affections this
Tendency, for many Reasons that might be given. When a Person is in an holy and
lively Frame in secret Prayer, it will wonderfully supply him with Matter, and
with Expressions, as every true Christian knows; and so it will fill his Mouth
in Christian Conversation, and it has the like Tendency to enable a Person in
public Prayer and Preaching. And if he has these holy Influences of the Spirit
on his Heart in an high Degree, nothing in the World will have so great a
Tendency to make both the Matter and Manner of his public Performances
excellent and profitable. But since there is no immediate suggesting of Words
from the Spirit of GOD to be expected or desired, they who neglect and despise
Study and Pre-meditation, in order to a Preparation for the Pulpit, in such an
Expectation, are guilty of Presumption; though doubtless it may be lawful for
some Persons, in some Cases, (and they may be called to it,) to preach with
very little Study; and the Spirit of GOD, by the heavenly Frame of Heart that
he gives them, may enable them to do it to excellent Purpose.

Besides this most excellent Way of the Spirit of GOD his assisting Ministers
in public Performances, which (considered as the Preacher's Privilege) far
excels Inspiration. There is a common Assistance which natural Men may have in
these Days, and which the godly may have intermingled with a gracious
Assistance, which is also very different from Inspiration, and that is his
assisting natural Principles; as his assisting the natural Apprehension,
Reason, Memory, Conscience and natural Affection.

But to return to the Head of Impressions and immediate Revelations; many lay
themselves open to a Delusion by expecting Direction from Heaven in this Way,
and waiting for it: In such a Case it is easy for Persons to imagine that they
have it. They are perhaps at a Loss concerning something, undetermined what
they shall do, or what Course they should take in some Affair, and they pray to
GOD to direct them, and make known to 'em his Mind and Will; and then, instead
of expecting to be directed, by being assisted in Consideration of the Rules of
GOD's Word, and their Circumstances, and GOD's Providence, and enabled to look
on Things in a true Light, and justly to weigh them, they are waiting for some
secret immediate Influence on their Minds, unaccountably swaying their Minds,
and turning their Tho'ts or Inclinations that Way that GOD would have them go,
and are observing their own Minds, to see what arises there, whether some Texts
of Scripture don't come into the Mind, or whether some Ideas, or inward Motions
and Dispositions don't arise in something of an unaccountable Manner, that they
may call a divine Direction. Hereby they are exposed to two Things, First, They
lay themselves open to the Devil, and give him a fair Opportunity to lead them
where he pleases; for they stand ready to follow the first extraordinary
Impulse that they shall have, groundlesly concluding it is from GOD. And
Secondly, They are greatly exposed to be deceived by their own Imaginations;
for such an Expectation awakens and quickens the Imagination; and that
oftentimes is called an uncommon Impression, that is no such Thing; and they
ascribe that to the Agency of some invisible Being, that is owing only to
themselves.

Again, another Way that many have been deceived, is by drawing false
Conclusions from true Premises. Many true and eminent Saints have been led into
Mistakes and Snares, by arguing too much from that, that they have prayed in
Faith; and that oftentimes when the Premises are true, they have indeed been
greatly assisted in Prayer for such a particular Mercy, and have had the true
Spirit of Prayer in Exercise in their asking it of GOD; but they have concluded
more from these Premises than is a just Consequence from them: That they have
thus prayed is a sure Sign that their Prayer is accepted and heard, and that
GOD will give a gracious Answer, according to his own Wisdom, and that the
particular Thing that was asked shall be given, or that which is equivalent;
this is a just Consequence from it; but it is not inferred by any new Revelation
now made, but by the Revelation that is made in GOD's Word, the Promises made
to the Prayer of Faith in the holy Scriptures: But that GOD will answer them in
that individual Thing that they ask, if it ben't a Thing promised in GOD's
Word, or they don't certainly know that it is that which will be most for the
Good of God's Church, and the Advancement of CHRIST's Kingdom and Glory, nor
whether it will be best for them, is more than can be justly concluded from it.
-- If GOD remarkably meets with one of his Children while he is praying for a
particular Mercy of great Importance, for himself, or some other Person, or any
Society of Men, and does by the Influences of his Spirit greatly humble him,
and empty him of himself in his Prayer, and manifests himself remarkably in his
Excellency, Sovereignty and his All-sufficient Power and Grace in JESUS CHRIST,
and does in a remarkable Manner enable the Person to come to him for that
Mercy, poor in Spirit, and with humble Resignation to God, and with a great
Degree of Faith in the divine Sufficiency, and the Sufficiency of CHRIST's
Mediation, that Person has indeed a great deal the more Reason to hope that God
will grant that Mercy, than otherwise he would have; the greater Probability is
justly inferred from That, agreeable to the Promises of the holy Scripture, that
the Prayer is accepted and heard; and it is much more probable that a Prayer
that is heard will be returned with the particular Mercy that is asked, than
one that is not heard. And there is no Reason at all to doubt, but that God
does some Times especially enable to the Exercises of Faith, when the Minds of
his Saints are engaged in Tho'ts of, and Prayer for some particular Blessing
they greatly desire; i. e. GOD is pleased especially to give 'em a believing
Frame, a Sense of his Fullness, and a Spirit of humble Dependence on him, at
such Times as when they are thinking of and praying for that Mercy, more than
for other Mercies; he gives 'em a particular Sense of his Ability to do that
Thing, and of the Sufficiency of his Power to overcome such and such Obstacles,
and the Sufficiency of his Mercy, and of the Blood of CHRIST for the Removal of
the Guilt that is in the Way of the Bestowment of such a Mercy, in particular.
When this is the Case, it makes the Probability still much greater, that God
intends to bestow the particular Mercy sought, in his own Time, and his own
Way. But here is nothing of the Nature of a Revelation in the Case, but only a
drawing rational Conclusions from the particular Manner and Circumstances of
the ordinary gracious Influences of GOD's Spirit. And as GOD is pleased
sometimes to give his Saints particular Exercises of Faith in his Sufficiency,
with Regard to particular Mercies they seek, so he is sometimes pleased to make
Use of his Word in order to it, and helps the Actings of Faith with Respect to
such a Mercy, by Texts of Scripture that do especially exhibit the Sufficiency
of GOD's Power or Mercy, in such a like Case, or speak of such a Manner of the
Exercise of GOD's Strength and Grace. The strengthening of their Faith in GOD's
Sufficiency in this Case, is therefore a just Improvement of such Scriptures;
it is no more than what those Scriptures, as they stand in the Bible, do hold
forth just Cause for. But to take them as new Whispers or Revelations from
Heaven, is not making a just Improvement of them. -- If Persons have thus a
Spirit of Prayer remarkably given them, concerning a particular Mercy, from
Time to Time, so as evidently to be assisted to act Faith in GOD, in that
Particular, in a very distinguishing Manner, the Argument in some Cases, may be
very strong that GOD does design to grant that Mercy, not from any Revelation
now made of it, but from such a Kind and Manner of the ordinary Influence of
his Spirit, with respect to that Thing.

But here a great deal of Caution and Circumspection must be used in drawing
Inferences of this Nature: There are many Ways Persons may be misled and
deluded. The Ground on which some expect that they shall receive the Thing they
have asked for, is rather a strong Imagination, than any true humble Faith in
the divine Sufficiency. They have a strong Persuasion that the Thing asked
shall be granted, (which they can give no Reason for.) without any remarkable
Discovery of that Glory and Fullness of GOD and CHRIST, that is the Ground of
Faith. And sometimes the Confidence that Persons have that their Prayers shall
be answered, is only a Self-righteous Confidence, and no true Faith: They have
a high Conceit of themselves as eminent Saints, and special Favorites of GOD,
and have also a high Conceit of the Prayers they have made, because they were
much enlarged and affected in them; and hence they are positive in it that the
Thing will come to pass. And sometimes when once they have conceived such a
Notion, they grow stronger and stronger in it; and this they think is from an
immediate divine Hand upon their Minds to strengthen their Confidence; whereas
it is only by their dwelling in their Minds on their own Excellency, and high
Experiences, and great Assistances, whereby they look brighter and brighter in
their own Eyes. Hence it is found Observation and Experience, that nothing in
the World exposes so much to Enthusiasm as spiritual Pride and
Self-righteousness.

In order to drawing a just Inference from the supposed Assistance we have had
in Prayer for a particular Mercy, and judging of the Probability of the
Bestowment of that individual Mercy, many Things must be considered. We must
consider the Importance of the Mercy sought, and the Principle whence we so
earnestly desire it; how far it is good, and agreeable to the Mind and Will of
GOD; the Degree of Love to GOD that we exercised in our Prayer; the Degree of
Discovery that is made of the divine Sufficiency, and the Degree in which our
Assistance is manifestly distinguishing with respect to that Mercy. And there
is nothing of greater Importance in the Argument than the Degree of Humility,
Poverty of Spirit, Self-emptiness and Resignation to the holy Will of GOD,
which GOD gives us the Exercise of in our seeking that Mercy: Praying for a
particular Mercy with much of these Things, I have often seen blessed with a
remarkable Bestowment of the particular Thing asked for.

From what has been said, we may see which Way GOD may, only by the ordinary
gracious Influences of his Spirit, sometimes give his Saints special Reason to
hope for the Bestowment of a particular Mercy they desire and have prayed for,
and which we may suppose he oftentimes gives eminent Saints, that have great
Degrees of Humility, and much Communion with GOD. And here, I humbly conceive,
some eminent Servants of JESUS CHRIST that have appeared in the Church of GOD,
that we read of in Ecclesiastical Story, have been led into a Mistake; and
through Want of distinguishing such Things as these from immediate Revelations,
have thought that GOD has favored 'em, in some Instances, with the same Kind
of divine Influences that the Apostles and Prophets had of old.

Another erroneous Principle that some have embraced, that has been a Source of
many Errors in their Conduct, is, That Persons ought always to do whatsoever
the Spirit of GOD (though but indirectly,) inclines them to. Indeed the Spirit of
GOD in it self is infinitely perfect, and all his immediate Actings, simply
considered, are perfect, and there can be nothing wrong in them; and therefore
all that the Spirit of GOD inclines us to directly and immediately, without the
Intervention of any other Cause that shall pervert and misimprove what is from
the Spirit of GOD, ought to be done; but there may be many Things that we may
be disposed to do, which Disposition may indirectly be from the Spirit of GOD,
that we ought not to do: The Disposition in general may be good, and be from
the Spirit of GOD, but the particular Determination of that Disposition, as to
particular Actions, Objects and Circumstances, may be ill, and not from the
Spirit of GOD, but may be from the Intervention or Interposition of some
Infirmity, Blindness, Inadvertence, Deceit or Corruption of ours; so that
although the Disposition in general ought to be allowed and promoted, and all
those Actings of it that are simply from GOD's Spirit, yet the particular ill
Direction or Determination of that Disposition, which is from some other Cause,
ought not to be followed.

As for Instance, The Spirit of GOD may cause a Person to have a dear Love to
another, and so a great Desire of, and Delight in his Comfort, Ease and
Pleasure: This Disposition in general is good, and ought to be followed; but
yet through the Intervention of Indiscretion, or some other bad Cause, it may
be ill directed, and have a bad Determination, as to particular Acts; and the
Person indirectly, through that real Love that he has to his Neighbor, may
kill him with Kindness; he may do that out of sincere good Will to him, that
may tend to ruin him. -- A good Disposition may through some Inadvertence or
Delusion, strongly incline a Person to that, which if he saw all Things as they
are, would be most contrary to that Disposition. The true Loyalty of a General,
and his Zeal for the Honor of his Prince, may exceedingly animate him in War;
but yet this that is a good Disposition, through Indiscretion and Mistake, may
push him forward to those Things that give the Enemy great Advantage, and may
expose him and his Army to Ruin, and may tend to the Ruin of his Master's
Interest.

The Apostle does evidently suppose that the Spirit of GOD in his
extraordinary, immediate and miraculous Influences on Men's Minds, may in some
Respect excite Inclinations in Men, that if gratified, would tend to Confusion,
and therefore must sometimes be restrained, and in their Exercise, must be
under the Government of Discretion. 1 Cor. 14. 31, 32, 33. For ye may all
prophecy, one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted. And the
Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; for God is not the Author
of Confusion, but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints. Here by the
Spirits of the Prophets, according to the known Phraseology of the Apostle, is
meant the Spirit of GOD acting in the Prophets, according to those special
Gifts, with which each one was endowed. And here it is plainly implied that the
Spirit of GOD, thus operating in them, may be an Occasion of their having,
sometimes an Inclination to do that, in the Exercise of those Gifts, which it
was not proper, decent or profitable that they should; and that therefore the
Inclination, though indirectly from the Spirit of GOD, should be restrained, and
that its ought to be subject to the Discretion of the Prophets, as to the
particular Time and Circumstances of its Exercise.

I can make no Doubt but that it is possible for a Minister to have given him
by the Spirit of GOD, such a Sense of the Importance of eternal Things, and of
the Misery of Mankind, that are so many of them exposed to eternal Destruction,
together with such a Love to Souls, that he might find in himself a Disposition
to spend all his Time, Day and Night, in warning, exhorting and calling upon
Men, and so that he must be obliged as it were to do Violence to himself ever
to refrain, so as to give himself any Opportunity to eat, drink or sleep. And
so I believe there may be a Disposition in like Manner, indirectly excited in
Lay-Persons, through the Intervention of their Infirmity, to do what only
belongs to Ministers. Yea to do those Things that would not become either
Ministers or People: Through the Influence of the Spirit of GOD, together with
want of Discretion, and some remaining Corruption, Women and Children might
feel themselves inclined to break forth and scream aloud, to great
Congregations, warning and exhorting the whole Multitude, and to go forth and
hallow and scream in the Streets, or to leave the Families they belong to, and
go from House to House, earnestly exhorting others; but yet it would by no
Means follow that it was their Duty to do these Things, or that they would not
have a Tendency to do ten Times as much Hurt as Good.

Another wrong Principle from whence have arisen Errors in Conduct, is, that
whatsoever is found to be of present and immediate Benefit, may and ought to be
practiced, without looking forward to future Consequences. Some Persons seem to
think that it sufficiently justifies any Thing that they say or do, that it is
found to be for their present Edification, and the Edification of those that
are with them; it assists and promotes their present Affection, and therefore
they think they should not concern themselves about future Consequences, but
leave them with GOD. Indeed in Things that are in themselves our Duty, being
required by moral Rules, or absolute positive Commands of GOD, they must be
done, and future Consequences must be left with GOD; our Election and
Discretion takes no Place here: But in other Things we are to be governed by
Discretion, and must not only look at the present Good, but our View must be
extensive, and we must look at the Consequences of Things. It Is the Duty of
Ministers especially to exercise this Discretion: In Things wherein they are
not determined by an absolute Rule, and that are not enjoined them by a Wisdom
superior to their own, CHRIST has left them to their own Discretion, with that
general Rule, that they should exercise the utmost Wisdom they can obtain, in
pursuing that, which upon the best View of the Consequences of Things they can
get, will tend most to the Advancement of his Kingdom. This is implied in those
Words of CHRIST to his Disciples, when he sent 'em forth to preach the Gospel,
Mat. 10. 16. Be ye wise as Serpents. The Scripture always represents the Work
of a Gospel-Minister by those Employments that do especially require a wise
Foresight of, and Provision for future Events and Consequences. So it is
compared to the Business of a Steward, that is a Business that in an eminent
Manner requires Forecast, and a wise laying in of Provision, for the Supply of
the Needs of the Family, according to its future Necessities; and a good
Minister is called a wise Steward: So it is compared to the Business of an
Husbandman, that almost wholly consists in those Things that are done with a
View to the future Fruits and Consequences of his Labor: The Husbandman's
Discretion and Forecast is eloquently set forth in Isa. 28. 24, 25, 26. Does
the Plowman plow all Day to sow? Does he open and break the Clods of his
Ground? When he has made plain the Face thereof, does he not cast abroad the
Fitches, and scatter the Cummin, and cast in the principal Wheat, and the
appointed Barley, and the Rye, in their Place? For his God does instruct him to
Discretion, and does teach him. So the Work of the Ministry is compared to that
of a wise Builder or Architect, who has a long Reach, and comprehensive View;
and for whom it is necessary, that when he begins a Building, he should have at
once a View of the whole Frame, and all the future Parts of the Structure, even
to the Pinnacle, that all may fitly be framed together. So also it is compared
to the Business of a Trader or Merchant, who is to gain by trading with the
Money that he begins with: This also is a Business that exceedingly requires
Forecast, and without it, is never like to be followed with any Success, for
any long Time: So it is represented by the Business of a Fisherman, which
depends on Craft and Subtilty: It Is also compared to the Business of a Soldier
that goes to War, which is a Business that perhaps, above any other secular
Business, requires great Forefight, and a wise Provision for future Events and
Consequences.

And particularly Ministers ought not to be careless how much they discompose
and ruftle the Minds of those that they esteem natural Men, or how great an
Uproar they raise in the carnal World, and so lay Blocks in the Way of the
Propagation of Religion. This certainly is not to follow the Example of that
zealous Apostle Paul, who though he would not depart from his enjoined Duty to
please carnal Men, yet wherein he might with a good Conscience, did exceedingly
lay out himself to please them, and if possible to avoid raising in the
Multitude, Prejudices, Oppositions and Tumults against the Gospel; and looked
upon it that it was of great Consequence that it should be, if possible,
avoided. 1 Cor. 10. 32, 33. Give none Offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the
Gentiles, nor to the Church of God: Even as I please all Men, in all Things,
not seeking mine own Profit, but the Profit of many, that they may be saved.
Yea, he declares that he laid himself out so much for this, that he made
himself a Kind of a Servant to all Sorts of Men, conforming to their Customs
and various Humors, in every Thing wherein he might, even in Things that were
very burdensome to him, that he might not fright Men away from Christianity, and
cause them to stand as it were braced and armed against it, but on the
contrary, if possible, might with Condescension and Friendship win and draw
them to it; as you may see, 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. And agreeable hereto,
are the Directions he gives to others, both Ministers and People: So he directs
the Christian Romans, not to please themselves, but every one please his
Neighbor, for his Good, to Edification, Romans 15. 1, 2. And to follow after the
Things that make for Peace, Chap. 14. 19. And he presses it in Terms exceeding
strong, Romans 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably
with all Men. And he directs Ministers, to endeavor if possible, to gain
Opposers by a meek condescending Treatment, avoiding all Appearance of Strife
or Fierceness, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25, 26. To the like Purpose, the same Apostle
directs Christians to walk in Wisdom, toward them that are without, Ephesians. 4. 5.
And to avoid giving Offense to others, if we can, that our Good may not be evil
spoken of, Romans 14. 16. So that it is evident that the great and most zealous
and most successful Propagator of vital Religion that ever was, looked upon it
to be of great Consequence to endeavor, as much as possible, by all the
Methods of lawful Meekness and Gentleness, to avoid raising the Prejudice and
Opposition of the World against Religion. -- When we have done our utmost there
will be Opposition enough against vital Religion, against which the carnal Mind
of Man has such an Enmity; (we should not therefore needlessly increase and
raise that Enmity) as in the Apostles Days, though he took so much Pains to
please Men, yet because he was faithful and thorough in his Work, Persecution
almost every where was raised against him.

A Fisherman is careful not needlessly to reffie and disturb the Water, least
he should drive the Fish away from his Net; but he will rather endeavor if
possible to draw them into it. Such a Fisherman was the Apostle. 2 Cor. 12. 15,
16. And I will very gladly spend and be spent for you; though the more
abundantly I love you, the less I be loved. But be it so, I did not burden you,
nevertheless, being crafty, I caught you with Guile.

The Necessity of suffering Persecution, in order to being a true Christian,
has undoubtedly by some been carried to an Extreme, and the Doctrine has been
abused. It has been looked upon necessary to uphold a Man's Credit amongst
others as a Christian, that he should be persecuted. I have heard it made an
Objection against the Sincerity of particular Persons, that they were no more
hated and reproached. And the Manner of glorying in Persecution, or the Cross
of CHRIST, has in some been very wrong, so as has had too much of an Appearance
of lifting up themselves in it, that they were very much hated and reviled,
more than most, as an Evidence of their excelling others, in being good
Soldiers of JESUS CHRIST. Such an Improvement of the Doctrine of the Enmity
between the Seed of the Woman and the Seed of the Serpent, and of the Necessity
of Persecution, becoming credible and customary, has a direct Tendency to cause
those that would be accounted true Christians, to behave themselves so toward
those that are not well affected to Religion, as to provoke their Hatred, or at
least to be but little careful to avoid it, and not very studiously and
earnestly to strive, (after the Apostle's Example and Precepts,) to please them
to their Edification, and by Meekness and Gentleness to win them, and by all
possible Means to live peaceably with them.

I believe that Saying of our Savior, I came not to send Peace on Earth, but
Division, has been abused; as though when we see great Strife and Division arise
about Religion, and violent Heats of Spirit against the truly pious, and a loud
Clamor and Uproar against the Work of GOD, it was to be rejoiced in, because
it is that which CHRIST came to send. It has almost been laid down as a Maxim
by some, that the more Division and Strife, the better Sign; which naturally
leads Persons to seek it and provoke it, or leads 'em to, and encourages 'em in
such a Manner of Behavior, such a Roughness and Sharpness, or such an affected
Neglect, as has a natural Tendency to raise Prejudice and Opposition; instead
of striving, as the Apostle did to his utmost, by all Meekness, Gentleness and
Benevolence of Behavior, to prevent or assuage it. -- CHRIST came to send a
Sword on Earth, and to cause Division, no otherwise than he came to send
Damnation; for CHRIST that is set for the glorious Restoration of some, is set
for the Fall of others, and to be a Stone of Stumbling and Rock of Offense to
them, and an Occasion of their vastly more aggravated and terrible Damnation;
and this is always the Consequence of a great Out-pouring of the Spirit and
Revival of vital Religion, it is the Means of the Salvation of some, and the
more aggravated Damnation of others. But certainly this is no just Argument
that Men's Exposedness to Damnation is not to be lamented, or that we should
not exert our selves to our utmost, in all the Methods that we can devise, that
others might be saved, and to avoid all such Behavior toward 'em as tends to
lead 'em down to Hell.

I know there is naturally a great Enmity in the Heart of Man against vital
Religion; and I believe there would have been a great (...) of Opposition
against this glorious Work of GOD in New England if the Subjects and Promoters
of it had behaved haved themselves never so agreeably to Christian Rules; and I
believe if this Work goes on and spreads much in the World, so as to begin to
shake Kingdoms and Nations, it will dreadfully stir up the Rage of Earth and
Hell, and will put the World into the greatest Uproar that ever it was in since
it stood; I believe Satan's dying Struggles will be the most violent: But yet I
believe a great deal might be done to restrain this Opposition, by a good
Conformity to that of the Apostle James, Jam. 3. 13. Who is a wise Man, and
endued with Knowledge? Let him show out of a good Conversation, his Works, with
Meekness of Wisdom. And I also believe that if the Rules of Christian Charity,
Meekness, Gentleness and Prudence had been duly observed by the Generality of
the zealous Promoters of this Work, it would have made three Times the Progress
that it has; i. e. if it had pleased GOD in such a Case, to give a Blessing to
Means in Proportion as he has done.

Under this Head of Carelessness of the future Consequences of Things, it may be
proper to say something of introducing Things new and strange, and that have a
Tendency by their Novelty to shock and surprise People. Nothing can be more
evident from the New Testament, than that such Things ought to be done with
great Caution and Moderation, to avoid the Offense that may be thereby given,
and the Prejudices that might be railed, to clog and hinder the Progress of
Religion: Yea, that it ought to be thus in Things that are in themselves good
and excellent, and of great Weight, provided they are not Things that are of
the Nature of absolute Duty, which though they may appear to be Innovations, yet
cannot be neglected without Immorality or Disobedience to the Commands of GOD.
What great Caution and Moderation did the Apostles use in introducing Things
that were new, and abolishing Things that were old in their Day? How gradually
were the Ceremonial Performances of the Law of Moses removed and abolished
among the Christian Jews? And how long did even the Apostle Paul himself
conform to those Ceremonies which he calls weak and beggarly Elements? Yea even
to the Rite of Circumcision, ( Acts 16. 3.) that he speaks so much in his
Epistles of the Worthlesness of, that he might not prejudice the Jews against
Christianity? So it seems to have been very gradually that the Jewish Sabbath
was abolished, and the Christian Sabbath introduced, for the same Reason. And
the Apostles avoided teaching the Christians in those early Days, at least for
a great while, some high and excellent divine Truths, because they could not
bear 'em yet. 1 Cor. 3. 11. 2. Heb. 5. 11. to the End. Thus strictly did the
Apostles observe the Rule that their blessed Master gave them, of not putting
new Wine into old Bottles, left they should burst the Bottles, and lose the
Wine. And how did CHRIST himself, while on Earth, forbear so plainly to teach
his Disciples the great Doctrines of Christianity, concerning his Satisfaction,
and the Nature and Manner of a Sinner's Justification and Reconciliation with
God, and the particular Benefits of his Death, Resurrection and Ascension,
because in that infant State the Disciples were then in, their Minds were not
prepared for such Instructions; and therefore the more clear and full
Revelation of these Things was reserved for the Time when their Minds should be
further enlightened and strengthened by the Out-pouring of the Spirit after his
Ascension. Joh. 16. 12, 13. I have yet many Things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bear them now: Howbeit, when he, the Spirit of Truth is come, he will
guide you into all Truth. And Mark. 4. 33. And with many such Parables spoke he
the Word unto them, as they were able to bear it. -- These Things might be
enough to convince any one, that don't think himself wiser than CHRIST and his
Apostles, that great Prudence and Caution should he used in introducing Things
into the Church of GOD, that are very uncommon, though in themselves they may be
very excellent, least by our Rashness and imprudent Haste we hinder Religion,
much more than we help it.

Persons that are influenced by an indiscreet Zeal are always in too much
Haste; they are impatient of Delays, and therefore are for jumping to the
uppermost Step first, before they have taken the preceding Steps; whereby they
expose themselves to fall and break their Bones: It is a Thing very taking with
them to see the Building rise very high, and all their Endeavor and Strength
is employed in advancing the Building in Height, without taking Care withal
proportionably to enlarge the Bottom; whereby the whole is in Danger of coming
to the Ground; or they are for putting on the Cupola and Pinnacle before they
are come to it, or before the lower Parts of the Building are done; which tends
at once to put a Stop to the Building, and hinder its ever being a complete
Structure. Many that are thus imprudent and hasty with their Zeal, have a real
eager Appetite for that which is good; but are like Children, that are
impatient to wait for the Fruit 'till the proper Season of it, and therefore
snatch it before it is ripe: Oftentimes in their Haste they overshoot their
Mark, and frustrate their own End; they put that which they would obtain
further out of Reach than it was before, and establish and confirm that which
they would remove. Things must have Time to ripen: The prudent Husbandman waits
'till he has received the former and the latter Rain, and 'till the Harvest is
ripe, before he reaps. We are now just as it were beginning to recover out of a
dreadful Disease that we have been long under; and to feed a Man recovering
from a Fever with strong Meat at once, is the ready Way to kill him. The
Reformation from Popery was much hindered by this hasty Zeal: Many were for
immediately rectifying all Disorders by Force, which were condemned by Luther,
and were a great Trouble to him. See Sleiden's Hist, of the Reformation, page
52. etc. and Book V. throughout. It is a vain Prejudice that some have lately
imbibed against such Rules of Prudence and Moderation: They will be forced to
come to 'em at last; they will find themselves that they are not able to maintain
their Cause without 'em; and if they will not hearken before, Experience will
convince 'em at last, when it will be too late for them to rectify their
Mistake.

Another Error, that is of the Nature of an erroneous Principle, that some have
gone upon, is a wrong Notion that they have of an Attestation of divine
Providence to Persons or Things. We go too far when we look upon the Success
that GOD gives to some Persons, in making them the Instruments of doing much
Good, as a Testimony of GOD's Approbation of those Persons and all the Courses
they take. It is a main Argument that has been made Use of to defend the
Conduct of some of those Ministers, that have been blamed as imprudent and
irregular, that GOD has smiled upon them and blessed them, and given them great
Success, and that however Men charge them as guilty of many wrong Things, yet
it is evident that GOD is with them, and then who can be against them? And
probably some of those Ministers themselves, by this very Means, have had their
Ears stopped against all that has been said to convince 'em of their
Misconduct. But there are innumerable Ways that Persons may be misled, in
forming a Judgment of the Mind and Will of GOD, from the Events of Providence.
If a Person's Success be a Reward of something that GOD sees in him, that he
approves of, yet it is no Argument that he approves of every Thing in him. Who
can tell how far the divine Grace may go in greatly rewarding some small Good
that he sees in a Person, a good Meaning, something good in his Disposition,
while he at the same Time, in sovereign Mercy, hides his Eyes from a great deal
that is bad, that it is his Pleasure to forgive, and not to mark against the
Person, though in it self it be very ill? GOD has not told us after what Manner
he will proceed in this Matter, and we go upon most uncertain Grounds when we
undertake to determine. It is an exceeding difficult Thing to know how far Love
or Hatred are exercised toward Persons or Actions, by all that is before us.
GOD was pleased in his Sovereignty to give such Success to Jacob in that, which
from Beginning to End, was a deceitful, lying Contrivance and Proceeding of
his, that in that Way, he obtained that Blessing that was worth infinitely more
than the Fatness of the Earth, and the Dew of Heaven, that was given to Esau,
in his Blessing, yea worth more than all that the World can afford. GOD was for
a while with Judas, so that he by GOD's Power accompanying him, wrought
Miracles and cast out Devils; but this could not justly be interpreted as GOD's
Approbation of his Person, or his Thievery, that he lived in at the same Time.

The Dispensations and Events of Providence, with their Reasons, are too little
understood by us, to be improved by us as our Rule, instead of GOD's Word; God
has his Way in the Sea, and his Path in the mighty Waters, and his Footsteps
are not known, and he gives us no Account of any of his Matters; and therefore
we cannot safely take the Events of his Providence as a Revelation of his Mind
concerning a Person's Conduct and Behavior, we have no Warrant so to do, GOD
has never appointed those Things, but something else to be our Rule; we have
but one Rule to go by, and that is his holy Word, and when we join any Thing
else with it as having the Force of a Rule, we are guilty of that which is
strictly forbidden, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Prove. 30. 6. and Rev. 22. 18. They who make
what they imagine is pointed forth to 'em in Providence, their Rule of
Behavior, do err, as well as those that follow Impulses and Impressions: We
should put nothing in the Room of the Word of GOD. It is to be feared that some
have been greatly confirmed and emboldened by the great Success that GOD has
given them, in some Things that have really been contrary to the Rules of GOD's
holy Word. If it has been so, they have been guilty of Presumption, and abusing
God's Kindness to them, and the great Honor he has put upon them: They have
seen that God was with them, and made them victorious in their Preaching; and
this it is to be feared has been abused by some to a Degree of Self-confidence;
it has much taken off all Jealousy of themselves; they have been bold therefore
to go great Lengths, in a Presumption that GOD was with them, and would defend
them, and finally bastle all that found Fault with them.

Indeed there is a Voice of GOD in his Providence, that may be interpreted and
well understood by the Rule of his Word; and Providence may to our dark Minds
and weak Faith, confirm the Word of GOD, as it fulfils it: But to improve
divine Providence thus, is quite a different Thing from making a Rule of
Providence. There is a good Use may be made of the Events of Providence, of our
own Observation and Experience, and human Histories, and the Opinion of the
Fathers, and other eminent Men; but finally all must be brought to one Rule,
viz. the Word of GOD, and that must be regarded as our only Rule.

Nor do I think that they go upon sure Ground, that conclude that they have not
been in an Error in their Conduct, because that at the Time of their doing a
Thing, for which they have been blamed and reproached by others, they were
favored with special Comforts of GOD's Spirit. GOD's bestowing special
spiritual Mercies on a Person at such a Time, is no Sign that he approves of
every Thing that he sees in him at that Time. David had very much of the
Presence of GOD while he lived in Polygamy: And Solomon had some very high
Favors, and peculiar Smiles of Heaven, and particularly at the Dedication of
the Temple, while he greatly multiplied Wives to himself, and Horses, and
Silver and Gold; all contrary to the most express Command of GOD to the King,
in the Law of Moses, Deuteronomy. 17. 16, 17. We cannot tell how far GOD may hide his
Eyes from beholding Iniquity in Jacob, and seeing Perverseness in Israel. We
cannot tell what are the Reasons of GOD's Actions any further than he interprets
for himself. GOD sometimes gave some of the primitive Christians, the
extraordinary Influence of his Spirit, when they were out of the Way of their
Duty; and continued it, while they were abusing it; as is plainly implied, 1
Cor. 14. 31, 32, 33.

Yea, if a Person has done a Thing for which he is reproached, and that
Reproach be an Occasion of his feeling sweet Exercises of Grace in his Soul,
and that from Time to Time, I don't think that is a certain Evidence that GOD
approves of the Thing he is blamed for. For undoubtedly a Mistake may be the
Occasion of stirring up the Exercise of Grace, in a Man that has Grace. If a
Person, through Mistake, thinks he has received some particular great Mercy,
that Mistake may be the Occasion of stirring up the sweet Exercises of Love to
GOD, and true Thankfulness and Joy in GOD. As for Instance, if one that is full
of Love to GOD should hear credible Tidings, concerning a remarkable
Deliverance of a Child, or other dear Friend, or of some glorious Thing done
for the City of GOD, no Wonder if, on such an Occasion, the sweet Actings of
Love to GOD, and Delight in GOD should be excited, though indeed afterward it
should prove a false Report that he heard. So if one that loves GOD, is much
maligned and reproached for doing that which he thinks GOD required and
approves, no Wonder that it is sweet to such an one to think that GOD is his
Friend, though Men are his Enemies; no Wonder at all, that this is an Occasion of
his, as it were, leaving the World, and sweetly betaking himself to GOD, as his
sure Friend, and finding sweet Compiacence in GOD; though he be indeed in a
Mistake, concerning that which he thought was agreeable to GOD's Will. As I
have before shown that the Exercise of a truly good Affection, may be the
Occasion of Error, and may indirectly incline a Person to do that which is
wrong; so on the other Hand, Error, or a doing that which is wrong, may be an
Occasion of the Exercise of a truly good Affection. The Reason of it is this,
that however all Exercises of Grace be from the Spirit of GOD, yet the Spirit
of GOD dwells and acts in the Hearts of the Saints, in some Measure after the
Manner of a vital, natural Principle, a Principle of new Nature in them; whose
Exercises are excited by Means, in some Measure as other natural Principles
are. Though Grace ben't in the Saints, as a mere natural Principle, but as a
sovereign Agent, and so its Exercises are not tied to Means, by an immutable
Law of Nature, as in meet natural Principles; yet GOD has so constituted, that
Grace should dwell so in the Hearts of the Saints, that its Exercises should
have some Degree of Connection with Means, after the Manner of a Principle of
Nature.

Another erroneous Principle that there has been something of, and that has
been an Occasion of some Mischief and Confusion, is that external Order in
Matters of Religion, and Use of the Means of Grace, is but little to be
regarded: It Is spoken lightly of, under the Names of Ceremonies and dead Forms,
etc. And is probably the more despised by some because their Opposers insist so
much upon it, and because they are so continually hearing from them the Cry of
Disorder and Confusion. -- It Is objected against the Importance of external
Order that GOD don't look at the outward Form, he looks at the Heart: But that
is a weak Argument against its Importance, that true Godliness don't consist in
it; for it may be equally made Use of against all the outward Means of Grace
whatsoever. True Godliness don't consist in Ink and Paper, but yet that would
be a foolish Objection against the Importance of Ink and Paper in Religion,
when without it we could not have the Word of GOD. If any external Means at all
are needful, any outward Actions of a public Nature, or wherein GOD's People
are jointly concerned in public Society, without Doubt external Order is
needful: The Management of an external Affair that is public, or wherein a
Multitude is concerned without Order, is in every Thing found impossible.
Without Order there can be no general Direction of a Multitude to any
particular designed End, their Purposes will cross one another, and they will not
help but hinder one another. A Multitude cannot act in Union one with another
without Order; Confusion separates and divides them, so that there can be no
Concert or Agreement. If a Multitude would help one another in any Affair, they
must unite themselves one to another in a regular Subordination of Members, in
some Measure as it is in the natural Body; by this Means they will be in some
Capacity to act with united Strength: And thus CHRIST has appointed that it
should be in the visible Church, as 1 Cor. 12. 14. to the End, and Romans 12. 4,
5, 6, 7, 8. Zeal without Order will do but little, or at least it will be
effectual but a little while. Let a Company that are very zealous against the
Enemy, go forth to War, without any Manner of Order, every one rushing forward
as his Zeal shall drive him, all in Confusion, if they gain something at first
Onset, by surprising the Enemy, yet how soon do they come to nothing, and fall
an easy helpless Prey to their Adversaries? Order is one of the most necessary
of all external Means of the spiritual Good of GOD's Church; and therefore it
is requisite even in Heaven it self, where there is the least Need of any
external Means of Grace; Order is maintained amongst the glorious Angels there.
And the Necessity of it in order to the carrying on any Design, wherein a
Multitude are concerned, is so great, that even the Devils in Hell are driven
to something of it, that they may carry on the Designs of their Kingdom. And
it is very observable, that those Kinds of irrational Creatures, for whom it is
needful that they should act in Union and join a Multitude together, to carry
on any Work for their Preservation, they do by a wonderful Instinct that GOD
has put into them, observe and maintain a most regular and exact Order among
themselves; such as Bees and some others. And Order in the visible Church is
not only necessary to the carrying on the Designs of CHRIST's Glory and the
Church's Prosperity, but it is absolutely necessary to its Defense; without it,
it is like a City without Walls, and can be in no Capacity to defend it self
from any Kind of Mischief: And so however it be an external Thing, yet is not
to be despised on that Account; for though it ben't the Food of Souls, yet it is
in some Respect their Defense. -- The People of Holland would be very foolish
to despise the Dikes that keep out the Sea from overwhelming them, under the
Names of dead Stones and vile Earth, because the Matter of which they are built
is not good to eat.

It seems to be partly on the Foundation of this Notion of the Worthlesness of
external Order, that some have seemed to act on that Principle, that the Power
of judging and openly censuring others should not be reserved in the Hands of
particular Persons, or Consistories appointed thereto, but ought to be left at
large, for any Body that pleases to take it upon them, or that think themselves
fit for it, But more of this afterward --

On this Foundation also, an orderly attending on the stated Worship of GOD in
Families, has been made too light of; and it has been in some Places too much
of a common and customary Thing to be absent from Family Worship, and to be
abroad late in the Night at religious Meetings, or to attend religious
Conversation. Not but that this may be, on certain extraordinary Occasions; I
have seen the Case to be such in many Instances, that I have thought did afford
sufficient Warrant for Persons to be absent from Family Prayer, and to be from
Home 'till very late in the Night: But we should take Heed that this don't
become a Custom or common Practice; if it should be so, we shall soon find the
Consequences to be very ill.

It seems to be on the same Foundation, of the supposed Unprofitableness of
external Order, that it has been thought by some, that there is no Need that
such and such religious Services and Performances should be limited to any
certain Office in the Church; (of which more afterward.) And also that those
Offices themselves, as particularly that of the Gospel Ministry, need not be
limited as it used to be, to Persons of a liberal Education; but some of late
have been for having others that they have supposed to be Persons of eminent
Experience, publicly licensed to preach, yea and ordained to the Work of the
Ministry; and some Ministers have seemed to favor such a Thing: But how little
do they seem to look forward, and consider the unavoidable Consequences of
opening such a Door? If once it should become a Custom, or a Thing generally
approved and allowed of, to admit Persons to the Work of the Ministry that have
had no Education for it, because of their remarkable Experiences, and being
Persons of good Understanding, how many Lay-Persons would soon appear as
Candidates for the Work of the Ministry? I doubt not but that I have been
acquainted with Scores that would have desired it. And how shall we know where
to stop? If one is admitted because his Experiences are remarkable, another
will think his Experiences also remarkable; and we perhaps, shall not be able
to deny but that they are near as great: If one is admitted because besides
Experiences, he has good natural Abilities, another by himself, and many of his
Neighbors, may be thought equal to him. It will be found of absolute Necessity
that there should be some certain, visible Limits fixed, to avoid bringing
Odium upon our selves, and breeding Uneasiness and Strife amongst others; and I
know of none better, and indeed no other that can well be fixed, than those
that the Prophet Zechariah fixes, viz. That those only should be appointed to
be Pastors or Shepherds in GOD's Church, that have been taught to keep Cattle
from their Youth, or that have had an Education for that Purpose. Those
Ministers that have a Disposition to break over these Limits, if they should do
so, and make a Practice of it, would break down that Fence, which they
themselves after a while, after they have been wearied with the ill
Consequences, would be glad to have some Body else build up for them. Not but
that there may probably be some Persons in the Land, that have had no Education
at College, that are in themselves better qualified for the Work of the
Ministry than some others that have taken their Degrees, and are now ordained.
But yet I believe the breaking over those Bounds that have hitherto been set,
in ordaining such Persons, would in its Consequences be a greater Calamity,
than the missing such Persons in the Work of the Ministry. The opening a Door
for the Admission of unlearned Men to the Work of the Ministry, though they
should be Persons of extraordinary Experience, would on some Accounts be
especially prejudicial at such a Day as this; because such Persons, for want of
an extensive Knowledge, are oftentimes forward to lead others into those
Things, which a People are in Danger of at such a Time, above all other Times,
viz. Impulses, vain Imaginations, Superstition, indiscreet. Zeal, and such like
Extremes; instead of defending them from them, for which a People especially
need a Shepherd, at such an extraordinary Season.

Another erroneous Principle that it seems to me some have been, at least, in
Danger of, is, that Ministers, because they speak as CHRIST's Ambassadors, may
assume the same Style, and speak as with the same Authority that the Prophets
of old did, yea that JESUS CHRIST himself did in the 23d of Matthew, Ye
Serpents, ye Generation of Vipens, etc. and other Places; and that not only
when they are speaking to the People, but also to their Brethren in the
Ministry. Which Principle is absurd, because it makes no Difference in the
different Degrees and Orders of Messengers that GOD has sent into the World,
though God has made a very great Difference: For though they all come is some
Respect in the Name of GOD, and with something of his Authority, yet certainly
there is a vast Difference in the Degree of Authority with which GOD has
invested them. JESUS CHRIST was one that was sent into the World as GOD's
Messenger, and so was one of his Apostles, and so also is an ordinary Pastor of
a Church; but yet it don't follow, that because JESUS CHRIST and an ordinary
Minister are both Messengers of GOD, that therefore an ordinary Minister in his
Office, is vested with an equal Degree of Authority, that CHRIST was, in his.
As there is a great Difference in their Authority, and as CHRIST came as GOD's
Messenger, in a vastly higher Manner, so another Style became him, more
authoritative than is proper for us Worms of the Dust, though we also are
Messengers of inferior Degree. It would be strange if GOD, when he has made so
great a Difference in the Degree in which he has invested different Messengers
with his Authority, should make no Difference as to the outward Appearance and
Show of Authority, in Style and Behavior, which is proper and fit to be seen
in them. Though GOD has put great Honor upon Ministers, and they may speak as
his Ambassadors, yet he never intended that they should have the same outward
Appearance of Authority and Majesty, either in their Behavior or Speech, that
his Son shall have, when he comes to Judgment, at the last Day; though both come,
in different Respects and Degrees, in the Name of the Lord: Alas! Can any Thing
ever make it enter into the Hearts of Worms of the Dust, that it is fit and
suitable that it should be so?

Thus I have considered the two first of those three Causes of Error in Conduct
that were mentioned; I come now to the

Third and last Cause of the Errors of those that have appeared to be the
Subjects or zealous Promoters of this Work, viz. a being ignorant or
unobservant of some particular Things, by which the Devil has special Advantage.

And here I would particularly take Notice 1. Of some Things with Respect to
the inward Experiences of Christians themselves. And 2. Something with Regard
to the external Effects of Experiences.

There are three Things I would take Notice of with Regard to the Experiences
of Christians, by which the Devil has many Advantages against us.

1. The first Thing is the Mixture there oftentimes is in the Experiences of
true Christians; whereby when they have truly gracious Experiences, and divine
and spiritual Discoveries and Exercises, they have something else mixed with
them, besides what is spiritual: There is a Mixture of that which is natural,
and that which is corrupt, with that which is divine. This is what Christians
are liable to in the present exceeding imperfect State: The great Imperfection
of Grace, and Feebleness and Infancy of the new Nature, and the great Remains
of Corruption, together with the Circumstances we are in in this World, where
we are encompassed all round with what tends to pollute us, exposes to this.
And indeed it is not to be supposed that Christians ever have any Experiences
in this World that are wholly pure, entirely spiritual, without any Mixture of
what is natural and carnal: The Beam of Light, as it comes from the Fountain of
Light upon our Hearts, is pure, but as it is reflected thence, it is mixed: The
Seed as sent from Heaven and planted in the Heart, is pure, but as it springs
up out of the Heart, is impure; yea there is commonly a much greater Mixture,
than Persons for the most Part seem to have any Imagination of; I have often
thought that the Experiences of true Christians are very frequently as it is
with some Sorts of Fruits, that are invelop'd in several Coverings of thick
Shells or Pods, that are thrown away by him that gathers the Fruit, and but a
very small Part of the whole Bulk is the pure Kernel, that is good to eat.

The Things, of all which there is frequently some Mixture with gracious
Experiences, yea with very great and high Experiences, are these three, Human,
or natural Affection and Passion; Impressions on the Imagination; and a Degree
of Self-righteousness or spiritual Pride. There is very often with that which
is spiritual a great Mixture of that Affection or Passion which arises from
natural Principles; so that Nature has a very great Hand in those vehement
Motions and Flights of the Passions that appear. Hence the same Degrees of
divine Communications from Heaven, shall have vastly different Effects, in what
outwardly appears, in Persons of different natural Tempers. The great Mixture
of that which is natural with that which is spiritual, is very manifest in the
peculiar Effects that divine Influences have in some certain Families, or
Persons of such a Blood, in a distinguishing Manner of the operating of the
Passions and Affections, and the Manner of the outward Expressions of 'em. I
know some remarkable Instances of this. The same is also evident by the
different Effects of divine Communications on the same Person at different
Times, and in different Circumstances: The Novelty of Things, or the sudden
Transition from an opposite Extreme, and many other Things that might be
mentioned, greatly contribute to the raising of the Passions. And sometimes
there is not only a Mixture of that which is common and natural with gracious
Experience, but even that which is animal, that which is in a great Measure
from the Body, and is properly the Result of the animal Frame. In what true
Christians feel of Affections toward GOD, all is not always purely holy and
divine; every Thing that is felt in the Affections don't arise from spiritual
Principles, but common and natural Principles have a very great Hand; an
improper Self-Love may have a great Share in the Effect: GOD is not loved for
his own Sake, or for the Excellency and Beauty of his own Perfections as he
ought to be; nor have these Things in any wise, that Proportion in the Effect
that they ought to have. So in that Love that true Christians have one to
another, very often there is a great Mixture of what arises from common and
natural Principles, with Grace; and Self-Love has a great Hand: The Children of
GOD ben't loved purely for Christ's Sake, but there may be a great Mixture of
that natural Love that many Sects of Heretics have boasted of, who have been
greatly united one to another, because they were of their Company, on their
Side, against the rest of the World; yea, there may be a Mixture of natural
Love to the opposite Sex, with Christian and divine Love. So there may be a
great Mixture in that Sorrow for Sin that the godly have; and also in their
Joys; natural Principles may greatly contribute to what is felt, a great many
Ways, as might easily be shown, would it not make my Discourse too lengthy.
There is nothing that belongs to Christian Experience that is more liable to a
corrupt Mixture than Zeal; though it be an excellent Virtue, a heavenly Flame,
when it is pure: but as it is exercised in those who are so little sanctified,
and so little humbled, as we are in the present State, it is very apt to be
mixed with human Passion, yea with corrupt hateful Affections, Pride and
uncharitable Bitterness, and other Things that are not from Heaven but from
Hell.

Another Thing that is often mixed with what is spiritual in the Experiences of
Christians, are, Impressions on the Imagination; whereby godly Persons,
together with a spiritual understanding of divine Things, and Conviction of
their Reality and Certainty, and a strong and deep Sense of their Excellency or
great Importance upon their Hearts, have strongly impressed on their Minds
external Ideas or Images of Things. A Degree of Imagination in such a Case; as
I have observed elsewhere, is unavoidable, and necessarily arises from human
Nature, as constituted in the present State; and a Degree of Imagination is
really useful, and often is of great Benefit; but when it is in too great a
Degree it becomes an impure Mixture that is prejudicial. This Mixture very
often arises from the Constitution of the Body. It commonly greatly contributes
to the other Kind of Mixture mentioned before, viz. of natural Affections and
Passions; it helps to raise them to a great Height.

Another Thing that is often mixed with the Experiences of true Christians,
which is the worst Mixture of all, is a Degree of Self-righteousness or
spiritual Pride. This is often mixed with the Joys of Christians; the Joy that
they have is not purely the Joy of Faith, or a Rejoicing in Christ Jesus, but
is partly a rejoicing in themselves; There is oftentimes in their Elevations a
looking upon themselves, and a viewing their own high Seize; they rejoice
partly because they are taken with their own Experiences and great Discoveries,
which makes 'em in their own Apprehensions so to excel; and this heightens all
their Passions, and especially those Effects that are more External.

There is a much greater Mixture of these Things in the Experiences of some
Christians than others; in some the Mixture is so great, as very much to
obscure and hide the Beauty of Grace in them, like a thick Smoke that hinders
all the Shining of the Fire.

These Things we ought to be well aware of, that we may not take all for Gold
that glisters, and that we may know what to countenance and encourage, and what
to discourage; otherwise Satan will have a vast Advantage against us, for he
works in the corrupt Mixture. Sometimes for want of Persons distinguishing the
Oar from the pure Metal, those Experiences are most admired by the Persons
themselves that are the Subjects of them, and by others, that are not the most
excellent. The great external Effects, and Vehemence of the Passions, and
violent Agitations of the animal Spirits, is sometimes much owing to the
corrupt Mixture; (as is very apparent in some Instances) though it be not always
so. I have observed a great Difference among those that are under high
Affections, and seem disposed to be earnestly talking to those that are about
them; some insist much more, in their Talk, on what they behold in GOD and
CHRIST, the Glory of the divine Perfections, CHRIST's Beauty and Excellency,
and wonderful Condescension and Grace, and their own Unworthiness, and the
great and infinite Obligations that they themselves and others are under to
love and serve GOD; some insist almost wholly on their own high Privileges,
their Assurance of GOD's Love and Favor, and the Weakness and Wickedness of
Opposers, and how much they are above their Reach. The latter may have much of
the Presence of GOD, but their Experiences don't appear to be so solid and
unmixed as the former. And there is a great deal of Difference in Persons
Earnestness in their Talk and Behavior; in some it seems to come indeed from
the Fullness of their Hearts, and from the great Sense they have of Truth, a
deep Sense of the Certainty and infinite Greatness, Excellency and Importance
of divine and eternal Things, attended with all Appearances of great Humility;
in others their Earnestness seems to arise from a great Mixture of human
Passion, and an undue and intemperate Agitation of the Spirits, which appears
by their Earnestness and Vehemence not being proportioned to the Nature of the
Subject they insist on, but they are violent in every Thing they say, as much
when they are talking of Things of smaller Importance, as when speaking of
Things of greater Weight. I have seen it thus in an Instance or two, in which
this Vehemence at length issued in Distraction. And there have been some few
Instances of a more extraordinary Nature still, even of Persons finding
themselves disposed earnestly to talk and cry out, from an unaccountable Kind
of bodily Pressure, without any extraordinary View of any Thing in their Minds,
or Sense of any Thing upon their Hearts; wherein probably there was the
immediate Hand of the Devil.

2. Another Thing by which the Devil has great Advantage, is, the unheeded
Defects there sometimes are in the Experiences of true Christians, and those
high Affections wherein there is much that is truly good.

What I now have Respect to is something diverse from that Defect, or
Imperfection of Degree, which is in every holy Disposition and Exercise in this
Life, in the best of the Saints. What I aim at is Experiences being especially
defective in some particular Thing, that ought to be in them; which though it
ben't an essential Defect, or such a Defect as is in the Experiences of
Hypocrites, which renders them utterly vain, monstrous, and altogether
abominable to GOD, yet is such a Defect as maims and deforms the Experience;
the Essence of truly Christian Experiences is not wanting, but yet that is
wanting that is very needful in order to the proper Beauty of the Image of
Christ in such a Person's Experiences; but Things are very much out of a due
Proportion: There is indeed much of some Things, but at the same Time there is
so little of some other Things that should bear a Proportion, that the Defect
very much deforms the Christian, and is truly odious in the Sight of GOD.

What I observed before was something that deformed the Christian, as it was
too much, something mixed, that is not belonging to the Christian as such; what
I speak of now is something that deforms the Christian the other Way, viz. By
their not being enough, something wanting, that does belong to the Christian as
such: The one deforms the Christian as a monstrous Excrescence, the other as
thereby the new Creature is maimed, and some Member in a great Measure wanting,
or so small and withering as to be very much out of due Proportion. This is
another spiritual Calamity that the Saints are liable to through the great
Imperfection of Grace in this Life; like the Chicken in the Egg, in the
beginning of its Formation, in which, though there are indeed the Rudiments or
Lineaments of all the Parts, yet some few Parts are plain to be seen, when
others are hid, so that without a Microscope it appears very monstrous.

When this Deficiency and Disproportion is great, as sometimes it is in real
Saints, it is not only a great Deformity in it self, but has many ill
Consequences; it gives the Devil great Advantage, and leaves a Door open for
Corruption, and exposes to very deformed and unlovely Actions, and issues
oftentimes in the great wounding of the Soul.

For the better understanding of this Matter, we may observe that GOD in the
Revelation that he has made of himself to the World by Jesus Christ, has taken
Care to give a proportionable Manifestation of two Kinds of Excellencies or
Perfections of his Nature, viz. Those that especially tend to possess us with
Awe and Reverence, and to search and humble us, and those that tend to win and
draw and encourage us: By the one, he appears as an infinitely great, pure,
holy and Heart-searching Judge; by the other, as a gentle and gracious Father
and a loving Friend: By the one he is a pure, searching and burning Flame; by
the other a sweet, refreshing Light. These two Kinds of Attributes are as it
were admirably tempered together in the Revelation of the Gospel: There is a
proportionable Manifestation of Justice and Mercy, Holiness and Grace, Majesty
and Gentleness, Authority and Condescension. GOD has thus ordered that his
diverse Excellencies, as he reveals himself in the Face of JESUS CHRIST, should
have a proportionable Manifestation, herein providing for our Necessities; he
knew it to be of great Consequence that our Apprehensions of these diverse
Perfections of his Nature should be duly proportioned one to another; a Defect
on the one Hand, viz. Having much of a Discovery of his Love and Grace, without
a proportionable Discovery of his awful Majesty, and his holy and searching
Purity, would tend to spiritual Pride, carnal Confidence and Presumption; and a
Defect on the other Hand, viz. Having much of a Discovery of his holy Majesty,
without a proportionable Discovery of his Grace, tends to Unbelief, a sinful
Fearfulness and Spirit of Bondage. And therefore herein chiefly consists that
Deficiency of Experiences that I am now speaking of: The Revelation GOD has
made of himself in his Word, and the Provision made for our spiritual Welfare
in the Gospel is perfect, but yet the actual Light and Communications we have,
are not perfect, but many Ways exceeding imperfect and maimed. And Experience
plainly shows that Christians may have high Experiences in some Respects, and
yet their Circumstances may be unhappy in this Regard, that their Experiences
and Discoveries are no more general. There is a great Difference among
Christians in this Respect, some have much more general Discoveries than
others, who are upon many Accounts the most amiable Christians. Christians may
have Experiences that are very high, and yet there may be very much of this
Deficiency and Disproportion: Their high Experiences are truly from the Spirit
of GOD, but Sin comes in by the Defect; (as indeed all Sin is originally from a
defective, privative Cause;) and in such a Case high Discoveries, at the same
Time that they are enjoyed, may be, and sometimes are the Occasion, or Causa
sine qua non of Sin; Sin may come in at that back Door, the Gap that is left
open; as spiritual Pride often does: And many Times the Spirit of GOD is
quenched by this Means, and GOD punishes the Pride and Presumption that rises,
by bringing such Darkness, and suffering such awful Consequences and horrid
Temptations, as are enough to make one's Hair stand an End to hear them.
Christians therefore should diligently observe their own Hearts as to this
Matter, and should pray to GOD that he would give 'em Experiences in which one
Thing may bear a Proportion to another, that GOD may be honored and their
Souls edified thereby; and Ministers should have an Eye to this, in their
private Dealings with the Souls of their People.

It Is chiefly from such a Defect of Experiences that some Things have arisen
that have been pretty common among true Christians of late, that have been
supposed by many to have risen from a good Cause; as particularly talking of
divine and heavenly Things, and expressing divine Joys with Laughter or a light
Behavior. I believe in many Instances such Things have arisen from a good
Cause, as their Causa sine qua non; that high Discoveries and gracious joyful
Affections have been the Occasion of them: but the proper Cause has been Sin,
even that odious Defect in their Experience, whereby there has been wanting a
Sense of the awful and holy Majesty of GOD as present with them, and their
Nothingness and Vileness before him, proportionable to the Sense they have had
of GOD's Grace and the Love of CHRIST: And the same is true in many Cases of
Persons unsuitable Boldness, their Disposition to speak with Authority,
intemperate Zeal, and many other Things that sometimes appear in true
Christians, under great religious Affections.

And sometimes the Vehemence of the Motion of the animal Spirits, under great
Affections, is owing in considerable Measure, to Experiences being thus
partial. I have known it in several Instances, that Persons have been greatly
affected with the dying Love of CHRIST, and the Consideration of the Happiness
of the Enjoyment of him in Heaven, and other Things of that Nature, and their
animal Spirits at the same Time have been in a great Emotion, but in the midst
of it have had given 'em a deep Sense of the awful, holy Majesty of GOD, and it
has at once composed them, and quieted animal Nature, without diminishing their
Comfort, but only has made it of a better, and more solid Nature; when they
have had a Sense both of the Majesty and Grace of GOD, one Thing has as it were
balanced another, and caused a more happy Sedateness and Composure of Body and
Mind.

From these Things we may learn how to judge of Experiences, and to estimate
their Goodness. Those are not always the best Experiences, that are attended
with the most violent Affections, and most vehement Motions of the animal
Spirits, or that have the greatest Effects on the Body; nor are they always the
best, that do most dispose Persons to abound in Talk to others, and to speak in
the most vehement Manner; (though these Things often arise from the Greatness of
spiritual Experiences;) But those are the most excellent Experiences that are
qualified as follows; 1. That have the least Mixture, or are the most purely
spiritual. 2. That are the least deficient and partial, in which the diverse
Things that appertain to Christian Experience are proportionable one to
another. And 3. That are raised to the highest Degree: It Is no Matter how high
they are raised if they are qualified as before mentioned, the higher the
better. Experiences thus qualified, will be attended with the most amiable
Behavior, and will bring forth the most solid and sweet Fruits, and will be
the most durable, and will have the greatest Effect on the abiding Temper of
the Soul.

If GOD is pleased to carry on this Work, and it should prove to be the Dawning
of a general Revival of the Christian Church, it may be expected that the Time
will come before long, when the Experiences of Christians shall be much more
generally thus qualified. We must expect green Fruits before we have ripe ones.
It Is probable that hereafter the Discoveries which the Saints shall have of
divine Things, will be in a much higher Degree than yet have been; but yet
shall be so ordered of an infinitely wise and all-sufficient GOD, that they
shall not have so great an Effect, in Proportion, on the Body, and will be less
oppressive to Nature; and that the outward Manifestations will rather be like
those that were in Stephen, when he was full of the Holy Ghost, when all that
sat in the Council, looking sted fastly on him, saw his Face, as it had been
the Face of an Angel. Their inward Fullness of the Spirit of GOD, in his divine,
amiable and sweet Influences shall as it were shine forth in an heavenly
Aspect, and Manner of Speech and Behavior. But

3. There is another Thing concerning Experiences of Christians, of which it is
of yet greater Importance that we should be aware, than either of the
preceding, and that is the degenerating of Experiences. What I mean is
something diverse from the mere Decay of Experiences, or their gradually
vanishing, by Persons losing their Sense of Things; It Is Persons Experiences
growing by Degrees worse and worse in their Kind, more and more partial and
deficient, in which Things are more out of due Proportion; and also have more
and more of a corrupt Mixture, the spiritual Part decreases, and the other
useless and hurtful Parts greatly increase. There is such a Thing, and it is
very frequent, as Experience abundantly evidences: I have seen it in very many
Instances; and great are the Mischiefs that have risen through want of being
more aware of it.

There is commonly, as I observed before, in high Experiences, besides that
which is spiritual, a Mixture of three Things, viz. Natural or common
Affections and Workings of the Imagination, and a Degree of Self-righteousness
or spiritual Pride. Now it often comes to pass, that through Persons not
distinguishing the Wheat from the Chaff, and for want of Watchfulness and
humble Jealousy of themselves, and laying great Weight on the natural and
Imaginary Part, and yielding to it, and indulging of it, that Part grows and
increases, and the spiritual Part decreases; the Devil sets in, and works in
the corrupt Part, and cherishes it to his utmost; 'till at length the
Experiences of some Persons, who began well, come to but little else, but
violent Motions of carnal Affections, with great Heats of the Imagination, and
a great Degree of Enthusiasm, and swelling of spiritual Pride; very much like
some Fruits which bud, blossom and kernel well, but afterward are blasted with
an Excess of Moisture; so that though the Bulk is monstrously great, yet there is
little else in it but what is useless and unwholesome. It appears to me very
probable, that many of the Heresies that have arisen, and Sects that have
appeared in the Christian World, in one Age and another, with wild
enthusiastical Notions and Practices, began at first by this Means, that it was
such a Degenerating of Experiences that first gave Rise to 'em, or at least led
the Way to 'em.

There is nothing in the World that does so much expose to this degenerating of
Experiences, as an unheeded spiritual Pride and Self-Confidence, and Persons
being conceited of their own Stock, without an humble, daily and continual
Dependence on GOD. And this very Thing seems to be typified of old, by the
corrupting of the Manna. Some of the Children of Israel, because they had
gathered a Store of Manna, trusted in it, there being, as they apprehended,
sufficient in the Store they had gathered and laid up, without humbly looking
to Heaven, and stooping to the Earth for daily Supplies; and the Consequence
was, that their Manna bred Worms and stank, Exodus 16. 20. Pride above all
Things promotes this Degeneracy of Experiences, because it grieves and quenches
the Spirit of the Lamb of GOD, and so kills the spiritual Part; and it
cherishes the natural Part, it inflames the carnal Affections, and heats the
Imagination.

The unhappy Person that is the Subject of such Degeneracy of Experiences, for
the most Part, is not sensible of his own Calamity; but because he finds
himself still violently moved, and greater Heats of Zeal, and more vehement
Motions of his animal Spirits, thinks himself fuller of the Spirit of GOD than
ever. But indeed it is with him, as the Apostle says of the Galatians, Gal. 3.
3. Having begun in the Spirit, they are made perfect by the Flesh.

By the Mixture there is of common Affection with Love to GOD, the Love of true
Christians is liable to degenerate, and to be more and more built on the
Foundation of a Supposition of being his high and peculiar Favorites, and less
and less on an Apprehension of the Excellency of GOD's Nature, as he is in
himself. So the Joy of Christians, by Reason of the Mixture there is with
spiritual Joy, is liable to degenerate, and to come to that at last, as to be
but little else but Joy in Self, Joy in a Person's own supposed Eminency, and
Distinction from others in the Favor of GOD. So Zeal, that at first might be
in great Part spiritual, yet through the Mixture there is, in a long
Continuance of Opposition and Controversy, may degenerate more and more into
human and proud Passion, and may come to Bitterness, and even a Degree of
Hatred. And so Love to the Brethren may by Degrees come to but little else but
Fondness, and Zeal for a Party; yea, through a Mixture of a natural Love to the
opposite Sex, may degenerate more and more, 'till it issues in that which is
criminal and gross. And I leave it with those who are better acquainted with
Ecclesiastical History, to enquire whether such a Degeneracy of Affections as
this, might not be the first Thing that led the Way, and gave Occasion to the
Rise of the abominable Notions of some Sects that have arisen, concerning the
Community of Women. However that is, yet certainly the mutual Embraces and
Kisses of Persons of different Sexes, under the Notion of Christian Love and
holy Kisses, are utterly to be disallowed and abominated, as having the most
direct Tendency quickly to turn Christian Love into unclean and brutish Lust,
which will not be the better, but ten Times the worse, for being christened by the
Name of Christian Love. I should also think it advisable, That Meetings of
young People, of both Sexes, in the Evening, by themselves, without a Minister,
or any elder People amongst them, for religious Exercises, should be avoided:
For though for the present, while their Minds are greatly solemnized with lively
Impressions, and a deep Sense of divine Things, there may appear no ill
Consequence; yet we must look to the further End of Things, and guard against
future Dangers and Advantages that Satan might gain against us. As a lively,
solemn Sense of divine Things on the Minds of young Persons may gradually
decay, so there will be Danger that an ill Improvement of these Meetings may
gradually prevail; if not in any unsuitable Behavior while together in the
Meeting, yet when they break up to go Home, they may naturally consort together
in Couples, for other than religious Purposes; and it may at last come to That,
that young Persons may go to such Meetings, chiefly for the Sake of such an
Opportunity for Company-keeping.

The Defect there sometimes is in the Experiences of Christians exposes 'em to
degenerate, as well as the Mixture that they have. Deficient maimed Experiences
do sometimes become more and more so: The Mind being wholly intent upon those
Things that are in View, and those that are most wanting being neglected, there
is less and less of them, and so the Gap for Corruption to come in grows wider
and wider. And commonly both these Causes of the degenerating of Experiences
operate together.

We had need to be jealous over our selves with a godly Jealousy, as the
Apostle was over the Christian Corinthians, lest by any Means, as the Serpent
beguiled Eve through his Subtilty, so our Minds should be corrupted from the
Simplicity that is in CHRIST. GOD indeed will never suffer his true Saints
totally and finally to fall away, but yet may punish their Pride and
Self-Confidence, by suffering them to be long led into a dreadful Wilderness,
by the subtle Serpent, to the great wounding of their own Souls, and the
Interest of Religion.

And before I dismiss this Head of the Degenerating of Experiences, I would
mention one Thing more that tends to it; and that is Person's aiming in their
Experience to go beyond the Rule of GOD's Word, i. e. aiming at that, which is
indeed, in some Respect, beyond the Rule. Thus some Persons have endeavored
utterly to root out and abolish all natural Affection, or any special Affection
or Respect to their near Relations, under a Notion that no other Love ought to
be allowed, but spiritual Love, and that all other Love is to be abolished as
carnal, and that it becomes Christians to love none upon the Account of any
Thing else, but the Image of GOD; and that therefore Love should go out to one
and another only in that Proportion in which the Image of GOD is seen in them.
They might as well argue that a Man ought utterly to disallow of, and endeavor
to abolish all Love or Appetite to their daily Food, under a Notion that it is
a carnal Appetite, and that no other Appetite should be tolerated but spiritual
Appetites. Why should the Saints strive after that, as an high Attainment in
Holiness, which the Apostle in Romans 1. 31. mentions as one Instance wherein the
Heathen had got to the most horrid Pass in Wickedness, viz. A being without
natural Affection?

Some have doubted whether they might pray for the Conversion and Salvation of
the Souls of their Children, any more than for the Souls of others; because the
Salvation of the Souls of others would be as much to GOD's Glory, as the
Salvation of their Children; and they have supposed that to pray most for their
own, would show a selfish Disposition. So they have been afraid to tolerate a
compassionate Grief and Concern for their nearest Friends, for Fear it would be
an Argument of want of Resignation to GOD.

And it is true, there is great Danger of Persons setting their Hearts too much
upon their earthly Friends; our Love to earthly Friends ought to be under the
Government of the Love of GOD, and should be attended with a Spirit of
Submission and Resignation to his Will, and every Thing should be subordinated
to his Glory: But that is no Argument that these Affections should be entirely
abolished, which the Creator of the World has put within Mankind, for the Good
of Mankind, and because he saw they would be needful for them, as they must be
united in Society, in the present State, and are of great Use, when kept in
their proper Place; and to endeavor totally to root them out, would be to
reproach and oppose the Wisdom of the Creator. Nor is the Being of these
natural Inclinations, if well regulated, inconsistent with any Part of our Duty
to GOD, or any Argument of a sinful Selfishness, any more than the natural
Abhorrence that there is in the human Nature of Pain, and natural Inclination
to Ease that was in the Man CHRIST JESUS himself.

It Is the Duty of Parents to be more concerned, and to pray more for the
Salvation of their Children, than for the Children of their Neighbors; as much
as it is the Duty of a Minister to be more concerned for the Salvation of the
Souls of his Flock, and to pray more for them, than those of other
Congregations, because they are committed to his Care; so our near Friends are
more committed to our Care than others, and our near Neighbors, than those
that live at a great Distance; and the People of our Land and Nation are more
in some Sense, committed to our Care than the People of China, and we ought to
pray more for them, and to be more concerned that the Kingdom of CHRIST should
flourish among them, than in another Country, where it would be as much, and no
more for the Glory of GOD. Compassion ought to be especially exercised toward
Friends, Job. 6. 14. CHRIST did not frown upon a special Affection and
Compassion for near Friends, but countenanced and encouraged it, from Time to
Time, in those that in the Exercise of such an Affection and Compassion,
applied to him for Relief for their Friends; as in the Instance of the Woman of
Canaan, Jairus, Mary and Martha, the Centurion, the Widow of Nain, and many
others. The Apostle Paul, though a Man as much resigned and devoted to GOD, and
under the Power of his Love, perhaps as any mere Man that ever lived, yet had a
peculiar Concern for his Country men the Jews, the rather on that Account, that
they were his Brethren and Kinsmen according to the Flesh; he had a very high
Degree of compassionate Grief for them, insomuch that he tells us he had great
Heaviness and continual Sorrow of Heart for them, and could with himself
accursed from CHRIST for them.

There are many Things that are proper for the Saints in Heaven, that are not
suitable to the State GOD has set us in, in this World: And for Christians, in
these and other Instances, to affect to go beyond the present State of Mankind,
and what GOD has appointed as fit for it, is an Instance of that which the wise
Man calls a being righteous overmuch, and has a Tendency to open a Door for
Satan, and to cause religious Affections to degenerate into something very
unbecoming of Christians.

Thus I have, as I proposed, taken Notice of some Things with Regard to the
inward Experiences of Christians, by which Satan has an Advantage. I now
proceed in the

2d. Place, to take Notice of something with Regard to the external Effects of
Experiences, which also gives Satan an Advantage. What I have Respect to, is
the secret and unaccountable Influence that Custom has upon Persons, with
respect to the external Effects and Manifestations of the inward Affections of
the Mind. By Custom I mean, both a Person's being accustomed to a Thing in
himself, in his own common, allowed and indulged Practice, and also the
Countenance and Approbation of others amongst whom he dwells, by their general
Voice and Practice. It is well known, and appears sufficiently by what I have
said already in this Treatise and elsewhere, that I am far from ascribing all
the late uncommon Effects and outward Manifestations of inward Experiences to
Custom and Fashion, as some do; I know it to be otherwise, if it be possible
for me to know any Thing of this Nature by the most critical Observation, under
all Manner of Opportunities of observing. But yet, this also is exceeding
evident by Experience, that Custom has a strange Influence in these Things: I
know it by the different Manners and Degrees of external Effects and
Manifestations of great Affections and high Discoveries, in different Towns,
according to what Persons are gradually led into, and insensibly habituated to,
by Example and Custom; and also in the same Place, at different Times,
according to the Conduct that they have: If some Person is among them to
conduct them, that much countenances and encourages such Kind of outward
Manifestations of great Affections, they naturally and insensibly prevail, and
grow by Degrees unavoidable; but when afterward they come under another Kind
of Conduct, the Manner of external Appearances will strangely alter: And yet it
seems to be without any proper Design or Contrivance of those in whom there is
this Alteration; it is not properly affected by them, but the Influence of
Example and Custom is secret and insensible to the Persons themselves. These
Things have a vast Influence in the Manner of Persons manifesting their Joys,
whether with Smiles and an Air of Lightness, or whether with more Solemnity and
Reverence; and so they have a great Influence as to the Disposition Persons
have under high Affections to abound in Talk; and also as to the Manner of
their speaking, the Loudness and Vehemence of their Speech; (Though it would be
exceeding unjust, and against all the Evidence of Fact and Experience, and the
Reason of Things, to lay all Dispositions Persons have to be much in speaking
to others, and to speak in a very earnest Manner, to Custom.) It Is manifest
that Example and Custom has some Way or other, a secret and unsearchable
Influence on those Actions that are involuntary, by the Difference that there
is in different Places, and in the same Places at different Times, according to
the diverse Examples and Conduct that they have.

Therefore, though it would be very unreasonable, and prejudicial to the Interest
of Religion, to frown upon all these extraordinary external Effects and
Manifestations of great religious Affections, (for a Measure of them is
natural, necessary and beautiful, and the Effect in no wise disproportioned to
the spiritual Cause, and is of great Benefit to promote Religion;) yet I think
they greatly err who think that these Things should be wholly unlimited, and
that all should be encouraged in going in these Things to the utmost Length
that they feel themselves inclined to: The Consequence of this will be very
bad: There ought to be a gentle Restraint held upon these Things, and there
should be a prudent Care taken of Persons in such extraordinary Circumstances,
and they should be moderately advised at proper Seasons, not to make more Ado
than there is Need of, but rather to hold a Restraint upon their Inclinations;
otherwise extraordinary outward Effects will grow upon them, they will be more
and more natural and unavoidable, and the extraordinary outward Show will
increase, without any Increase of the internal Cause; Persons will find
themselves under a Kind of Necessity of making a great Ado, with less and less
Affection of Soul, 'till at length almost any slight Emotion will set them
going, and they will be more and more violent and boisterous, and will grow
louder and louder, 'till their Actions and Behavior becomes indeed very
absurd. These Things Experience proves.

Thus I have taken Notice of the more general Causes whence the Errors that
have attended this great Revival of Religion have risen, and under each Head
have observed some particular Errors that have flowed from these Fountains. I
now proceed as I proposed in the

Second Place, to take Notice of some particular Errors that have risen from
several of these Causes: in some perhaps they have been chiefly owing to one,
and in others to another, and in others to the Influence of several, or all
conjunctly. And here the

1st Thing I would take Notice of is censuring others that are professing
Christians, in good Standing in the visible Church, as unconverted. I need not
repeat what I have elsewhere said to show this to be against the plain and
frequent and strict Prohibitions of the Word of GOD: It is the worst Disease
that has attended this Work, most contrary to the Spirit and Rules of
Christianity, and of worst Consequences. There is a most unhappy Tincture that
the Minds of many, both Ministers and People, have received that Way. The
Manner of many has been, when they first enter into Conversation with any
Person, that seems to have any Show or make any Pretenses to Religion, to
discern him, or to fix a Judgment of him, from his Manner of talking of Things
of Religion, whether he be converted, or experimentally acquainted with vital
Piety or not, and then to treat him accordingly, and freely to express their
Thoughts of him to others, especially those that they have a good Opinion of as
true Christians, and accepted as Brethren and Companions in CHRIST; or if they
don't declare their Minds expressly, yet by their Manner of speaking of them, at
least to their Friends, they will show plainly what their Thoughts are. So when
they have heard any Minister pray or preach, their first Work had been to
observe him on a Design of discerning him, whether he be a converted Man or no;
whether he prays like one that feels the saving Power of GOD's Spirit in his
Heart, and whether he preaches like one that knows what he says. It has been so
much the Way in some Places, that many new Converts don't know but it is their
Duty to do so, they know no other Way. And when once Persons yield to such a
Notion, and give in to such a Humor, they will quickly grow very discerning in
their own Apprehension, they think they can easily tell a Hypocrite: And when
once they have passed their Censure, every Thing seems to confirm it, they see
more and more in the Person that they have censured, that seems to them to show
plainly that he is an unconverted Man. And then, if the Person censured be a
Minister, every Thing in his public Performances seems dead and sapless, and
to do them no Good at all, but on the contrary to be of deadning Influence, and
poisonous to the Soul; yea it seems worse and worse to them, his Preaching
grows more and more intolerable: which is owing to a secret, strong Prejudice,
that steals in more and more upon the Mind, as Experience plainly and certainly
shows. When the Spirit of GOD was wonderfully poured out in this Place, more
than seven Years ago, and near thirty Souls in a Week, take one with another,
for five or six Weeks together, were to Appearance bro't Home to CHRIST, and
all the Town seemed to be alive and full of GOD, there was no such Notion or
Humor prevailing here; when Ministers preached here, as very many did at that
Time, young and old, our People did not go about to discern whether they were
Men of Experience or not: They did not know that they must: Mr. Stoddard never
brought 'em up in that Way; it did not seem natural to 'em to go about any
Thing of that Nature, nor did any such Thing enter into their Hearts; but when
any Minister preached, the Business of every one was to listen and attend to
what he said, and apply it to his own Heart, and make the utmost Improvement of
it. And it is remarkable, that never did there appear such a Disposition in the
People, to relish, approve of, and admire Ministers preaching as at that Time:
Such Expressions as these were frequent in the Mouths of one and another, on
Occasion of the preaching of Strangers here, viz. That they rejoiced that there
were so many such eminent Ministers in the Country; and they wondered they
never heard the Fame of 'em before: They were thankful that other Towns had so
good Means; and the like. And scarcely ever did any Minister preach here, but
his preaching did some remarkable Service; as I had good Opportunity to know,
because at that Time I had particular Acquaintance, with most of the Persons in
the Town, in their Soul Concerns. That it has been so much otherwise of late in
many Places in the Land, is another Instance of the secret and powerful
Influence of Custom and Example.

There has been an unhappy Disposition in some Ministers toward their Brethren
in the Ministry in this Respect, which has encouraged and greatly promoted such
a Spirit among some of their People. A wrong Improvement has been made of
CHRIST's scourging the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple; it has been
expected by some, that CHRIST was now about thus to purge his House of
unconverted Ministers, and this has made it more natural to them to think that
they should do CHRIST Service, and act as Co-workers with him, to put to their
Hand, and endeavor by all Means to cashier those Ministers that they thought
to be unconverted. Indeed it appears to me probable that the Time is coming,
when awful Judgments will be executed on unfaithful Ministers, and that no Sort
of Men in the World will be so much exposed to divine Judgments; but then we
should leave that Work to CHRIST, who is the Searcher of Hearts, and to whom
Vengeance belongs; and not without Warrant, take the Scourge out of his Hand
into our own. There has been too much of a Disposition in some, as it were to
give Ministers over as Reprobates, that have been looked upon as Wolves in
Sheep's Clothing; which has tended to promote and encourage a Spirit of
Bitterness toward them, and to make it natural to treat them too much as if
they knew GOD hated them. If GOD's Children knew that others were Reprobates,
it would not be required of them to love them; we may hate those that we know
GOD hates; as it is lawful to hate the Devil, and as the Saints at the Day of
Judgment will hate the Wicked. -- Some have been too apt to look for Fire from
Heaven upon particular Ministers; and this has naturally excited that
Disposition to call for it, that CHRIST rebuked in his Disciples at Samaria.
For my Part, though I believe no Sort of Men on Earth are so exposed to spiritual
Judgments as wicked Ministers, yet I feel no Disposition to treat any Minister
as if I supposed that he was finally rejected of GOD; for I cannot but hope that
there is coming a Day of such great Grace, a Time so appointed for the
magnifying the Riches and Sovereignty of divine Mercy, beyond what ever was,
that a great Number of unconverted Ministers will obtain Mercy. There was no
Sort of Persons in CHRIST's Time that were so guilty, and so hardened, and
toward whom CHRIST manifested such great Indignation, as the Priests and
Scribes, and there were no such Persecutors of CHRIST and his Disciples as
they; and yet in that great Out-pouring of the Spirit that began on the Day of
Pentecost, though it began with the common People, yet in the Progress of the
Work, after awhile, a great Company of Priests in Jerusalem were obedient to
the Faith, Act. 6. 7. And Saul, one of the most violent of all the persecuting
Pharisees, became afterward the greatest Promoter of the Work of GOD that ever
was. I hope we shall yet see in many Instances a Fulfillment of that in Isa. 29.
24. They also that erred in Spirit shall come to Understanding, and they that
murmured shall learn Doctrine.

Nothing has been gained by this Practice. The End that some have aimed at in
it has not been obtained, nor is ever like to be. Possibly some have openly
censured Ministers, and encouraged their People's Uneasiness under them, in
Hopes that it would soon come to That, that the Uneasiness would be so general,
and so great, that unconverted Ministers in general would be cast off, and that
then Things would go on happily: but there is no Likelihood of it. The Devil
indeed has obtained his End; this Practice has bred a great deal of Unhappiness
among Ministers and People, has spoiled Christians Enjoyment of Sabbaths, and
made 'em their most uneasy, uncomfortable and unprofitable Days, and has stirred
up great Contention, and set all in a Flame; and in one Place and another where
there was a glorious Work of GOD's Spirit begun, it has in a great Measure
knocked all in the Head, and their Ministers hold their Places. Some have aimed
at a better End in censuring Ministers; they have supposed it to be a likely
Means to awaken them: Whereas indeed, there is no one Thing has had so great a
Tendency to prevent the Awakening of disaffected Ministers in general: And no
one Thing has actually had such Influence to lock up the Minds of Ministers
against any good Effect of this great Work of GOD in the Land, upon their
Minds, in this Respect: I have known Instances of some that seemed to be much
moved by the first Appearance of this Work, but since have seemed to be greatly
deaden'd by what has appeared of this Nature. And if there be one or two
Instances of Ministers that have been awakened by it, there are ten to one on
whom it has had a contrary Influence. The worst Enemies of this Work have been
inwardly eased by this Practice; they have made a Shield of it to defend their
Consciences, and have been glad that it has been carried to so great a Length;
at the same Time that they have looked upon it, and improved it, as a Door
opened for 'em to be more bold in opposing the Work in general.

There is no such dreadful Danger of natural Men's being undone by our
forbearing thus to censure them, and carrying it toward them as visible
Christians; it will be no bloody, Hell-peopling Charity, as some seem to
suppose, when it is known that we don't treat 'em as Christians, because we
have taken it upon us to pass a Judgment on their State, on any Trial, or
Exercise of our Skill in examining and discerning them, but only as allowing
them to be worthy of a public Charity, on their Profession and good external
Behavior; any more than Judas was in Danger of being deceived, by CHRIST's
treating him a long Time as a Disciple, and sending him forth as an Apostle,
(because he did not then take it upon him to act as the Judge and Searcher of
Hearts, but only as the Head of the visible Church.) Indeed such a Charity as
this may be abused by some, as every Thing is, and will be, that is in its own
Nature proper, and of never so good Tendency. I say nothing against dealing
thoroughly with Conscience, by the most convincing and searching Dispensation
of the Word of GOD: I don't desire that that Sword should be sheathed, or
gently handled by Ministers; but let it be used as a two-edged Sword, to
pierce, even to the dividing asunder Soul and Spirit, Joints and Marrow; let
Conscience be dealt with, without any Complements; let Ministers handle it in
flaming Fire, without having any more Mercy on it, than the Furnace has on
those Metals that are tried in it. But let us let Men's Persons alone: Let the
Word of GOD judge them, but don't let us take it upon us 'till we have Warrant
for it.

Some have been ready to censure Ministers because they seem, in Comparison of
some other Ministers, to be very cold and lifeless in their ministerial
Performances. But then it should be considered that for ought we know, GOD may
hereafter raise up Ministers of so much more excellent and heavenly
Qualifications, and so much more spiritual and divine in their Performances,
that there may appear as great a Difference between them, and those that now
seem the most lively, as there is now between them, and others that are called
dead and sapless; and those that are now called lively Ministers may appear to
their Hearers, when they compare them with others that shall excel them, as
wretchedly mean, and their Performances poor, dead, dry Things; and many may be
ready to be prejudiced against them, as accounting them good for nothing, and
it may be calling them Soul-Murderers. What a poor Figure may we suppose, the
most lively of us, and those that are most admired by the People, do make in
the Eyes of one of the Saints of Heaven, any otherwise than as their Deadness,
Deformity andRottenness is hid by the Veil of Christ's Righteousness?

Another Thing that has been supposed to be sufficient Warrant for openly
censuring Ministers as unconverted, is their opposing this Work of GOD that has
lately been carried on in the Land. And there can be no Doubt with me but that
Opposition against this Work may be such, as to render either Ministers or
People, truly scandalous, and expose 'em to public Ecclesiastical Censure; and
that Ministers hereby may utterly defeat the Design of their Ministry, (as I
observed before;) and so give their People just Cause of Uneasiness: I should
not think that any Person had Power to oblige me, constantly to attend the
Ministry of one, who did from Time to Time, plainly pray and preach against
this Work, or speak reproachfully of it frequently in his public Performances,
after all Christian Methods had been used for a Remedy, and to no Purpose.

But as to determining how far opposing this Work is consistent with a State of
Grace, or how far, and for how long Time, some Persons of good Experience in
their own Souls, through Prejudices they have received from the Errors that
have been mixed with this Work, or through some peculiar Disadvantages they are
under to behold Things in a right View of them, by Reason of the Persons they
converse with, or their own cold and dead Frames, is, as Experience shows, a
very difficult Thing; I have seen that which abundantly convinces me that the
Business is too high for me; I am glad the: GOD has not committed such a
difficult Affair to me; I can joyfully leave it wholly in his Hands, who is
infinitely fit for it, without meddling at all with it my self. -- We may
represent it as exceeding dangerous to opposed is Work, for this we have good
Warrant in the Word of GOD; but I know of no Necessity we are under to
determine whether it be possible for these that are guilty of it to be in a
State of Grace or no.

GOD seems so strictly to have forbidden this Practice, of our judging our
Brethren in the visible Church, not only because he knew that we were too much
of Babes, infinitely too weak, fallible and blind, to be well capacitated for
it, but also because he knew that it was not a Work suited to our proud Hearts;
that it would be setting us vastly too high, and making us too much of Lords
over our Fellow Creatures. Judging our Brethren and passing a condemnatory
Sentence upon them, seems to carry in it an Act of Authority, especially in so
great a Case, to sentence them with respect to that State of their Hearts, on
which depends their Liableness to eternal Damnation; as is evident by such
Interrogations as those, (to hear which from GOD's Mouth, is enough to make us
shrink into Nothing with Shame and Confusion, and Sense of our own Blindness
and Worthlesness) Romans 14. 4. Who art thou that judge another Man's Servant?
To his own Master he stands or falls. And Jam. 4. 12. There is one Law
giver that is able to save and to destroy; who art thou that judge another?
Our wise and merciful Shepherd has graciously taken Care not to lay in our Way
such a Temptation to Pride; he has cut up all such Poison out of our Pasture;
and therefore we should not desire to have it restored. Blessed be his Name,
that he has not laid such a Temptation in the Way of my Pride! I know that in
order to be fit for this Business, I must not only be vastly more knowing, but
more humble than I am.

Though I believe some of GOD's own Children have of late been very guilty in
this Matter, yet by what is said of it in the Scripture, it appears to me very
likely, that before these Things which GOD has lately begun, have an End, GOD
will awfully rebuke that Practice; may it in sovereign and infinite Mercy be
prevented, by the deep and open Humiliation of those that have openly practiced
it.

As this Practice ought to be avoided, so should all such open, visible Marks
of Distinction and Separation that imply it; as particularly, distinguishing
such as we have judged to be in a converted State with the Compellations of
Brother or Sister; any further than there is a visible Ecclesiastical
Distinction. In those Places where it is the Manner to receive such, and such
only to the Communion of the visible Church, as recommend themselves by giving
a satisfying Account of their inward Experiences, there Christians may openly
distinguish such Persons, in their Speech and ordinary Behavior, with a
visible Separation, without being inconsistent with themselves: And I don't now
pretend to meddle with that Controversy, whether such an Account of Experience
be requisite to Church Fellowship: But certainly, to admit Persons to Communion
with us as Brethren in the visible Church, and then visibly to reject them, and
to make an open Distinction between them and others, by different Names or
Appellations, is to be inconsistent with our selves; it is to make a visible
Church within a visible Church, and visibly to divide between Sheep and Goats,
setting one on the right Hand, and the other on the left.

This bitter Root of Censoriousness must be totally rooted out, as we would
prepare the Way of the Lord. It has nourished and upheld many other Things
contrary to the Humility, Meekness and Love of the Gospel. The Minds of many
have received an unhappy Turn, in some Respects, with their Religion: There is
a certain Point or Sharpness, a Disposition to a Kind of Warmth, that does not
favor of that meek, Lamb-like, sweet Disposition that becomes Christians: Many
have now been so long habituated to it, that they don't know how to get out of
it; but we must get out of it; the Point and Sharpness must be blunted, and we
must learn another Way of manifesting our Zeal for GOD.

There is a Way of reflecting on others, and censuring them in open Prayer,
that some have; which though it has a fair Show of Love, yet is indeed the
boldest Way of reproaching others imaginable, because there is implied in it an
Appeal to the most high GOD, concerning the Truth of their Censures and
Reflections.

And here I would also observe by the Way, that some have a Way of joining a
Sort of Imprecations with their Petitions for others, though but conditional
ones, that appear to me wholly needless and improper: They pray that others may
either be converted or removed. I never heard nor read of any such Thing
practiced in the Church of GOD 'till now, unless it be with Respect to some of
the most visibly and notoriously abandoned Enemies of the Church of GOD. This
is a Sort of cursing Men in our Prayers, adding a Curse with our Blessing;
whereas the Rule is Bless and curse not. To pray that GOD would kill another,
is to curse him with the like Curse wherewith Elisha cursed the Children that
came out of Bethel. And the Case must be very great and extraordinary indeed to
warrant it, unless we were Prophets, and did not speak our own Words, but Words
indicted by the immediate Inspiration of the Spirit of GOD. It Is pleaded that if
GOD has no Design of converting others, it is best for them, as well as best for
others, that they should be immediately taken away and sent to Hell before they
have contracted more Guilt. To which I would say, that so it was best that
those Children that met Elisha, seeing GOD has no Design of converting them,
should die immediately as they did; but yet Elisha's imprecating that sudden
Death upon them, was cursing them; and therefore would not have been lawful for
one that did not speak in the Name of the LORD as a Prophet.

And then if we give Way to such Things as these, where shall we stop? A Child
that suspects he has an unconverted Father and Mother, may pray openly that his
Father and Mother may either be converted, or taken away and sent to Hell now
quickly, before their Guilt is greater. (For unconverted Parents are as likely
to poison the Souls of their Family in their Manner of training them up, as
unconverted Ministers are to poison their People.) And so it might come to
That, that it might be a common Thing all over the Country, for Children to
pray after this Manner concerning their Parents, and Brethren and Sisters
concerning one another, and Husbands concerning their Wives, and Wives
concerning Husbands; and so for Persons to pray concerning all their
unconverted Friends and Neighbors; and not only so, but we may also pray
concerning all those Saints that are not lively Christians, that they may
either be enlivened or taken away; if that be true that is often said by some
at this Day, that these cold dead Saints do more Hurt than natural Men, and
lead more Souls to Hell, and that it would be well for Mankind if they were all
dead.

How needless are such Petitions or Imprecations as these? What Benefit is
there of them? Why is it not sufficient for us to pray that GOD would provide
for his Church, and the Good of Souls, and take Care of his own Flock, and give
it needful Means and Advantages for its spiritual Prosperity? Does GOD need to
be directed by us in what Way he shall do it? What need we ask of GOD to do it
by killing such and such Persons, if he don't convert them? Unless we delight
in the Thoughts of GOD's answering us in such terrible Ways, and with such
awful Manifestations of his Wrath to our Fellow Creatures.

And why don't Ministers direct Sinners to pray for themselves, that GOD would
either convert them or kill them, and send them to Hell now, before their Guilt
is greater? In this Way we should lead Persons in the next Place to
Self-murder: For many probably would soon begin to think that That which they
may pray for, they may seek, and use the Means of.

Some with whom I have discoursed about this Way of praying, have said, that
the Spirit of GOD, as it were, forces them to utter themselves thus, as it were
forces out such Words from their Mouths, when otherwise they should not dare to
utter them. But such a Kind of Impulse don't look like the Influence of the
Spirit of GOD. The Spirit of GOD sometimes strongly inclines Men to utter
Words; but not by putting Expressions into the Mouth, and urging to utter them;
but by filling the Heart with a Sense of divine Things, and holy Affections;
and those Affections and that Sense inclines the Mouth to speak. That other Way
of Men's being urged to use certain Expressions, by an unaccountable Force, is
very probably from the Influence of the Spirit of the Devil.

2. Another Thing I would take Notice of, in the Management of which there has
been much Error and Misconduct, is Lay-Exhorting; about which there has been
abundance of Disputing, Jangling, and Contention.

In the midst of all the Disputes that have been, I suppose that all are agreed
as to these two Things, viz. 1. That all exhorting one another of Laymen is not
unlawful or improper, but on the contrary, that some Exhorting is a Christian
Duty. And 2. I suppose also, all will allow that there is something that is
proper only for Ministers; that there is some Kind or Way of Exhorting and
Teaching or other, that belongs only to the Office of Teachers. All will allow,
that GOD has appointed such an Office as that of Teachers in the Christian
Church, and therefore doubtless will allow that something or other is proper
and peculiar to that Office, or some Business of Teaching that belongs to it,
that don't belong as much to others as to them.

If there be any Way of Teaching that is peculiar to that Office, then for
others to take that upon them, is to invade the Office of a Minister; which
doubtless is very sinful, and is often so represented in Scripture. But the
great Difficulty is to settle the Bounds, and to tell exactly, how far Laymen
may go, and when they exceed their Limits; which is a Matter of so much
Difficulty, that I don't wonder if many in their Zeal have transgressed. The
two Ways of Teaching and Exhorting, the one of which ought ordinarily to be
left to Ministers, and the other of which may and ought to be practiced by the
People, may be expressed by those two Names of Preaching, and Exhorting in a
Way of Christian Conversation. But then a great deal of Difficulty and
Controversy arises to determine what is Preaching, and what is Christian
Conversation. However I will humbly offer my Thoughts concerning this Subject
of LayExhorting, as follows.

1. The common People in exhorting one another ought not to cloth themselves
with the like Authority with that which is proper for Ministers. There is a
certain Authority that Ministers have, and should exercise in teaching, as well
as governing the Flock. Teaching is spoken of in Scripture as an Act of
Authority, 1 Timothy 2. 12. In order to a Man's preaching, special Authority must
be committed to him. Romans 10. 15. How shall they preach, except they be sent?
Ministers in this Work of Teaching and Exhorting are clothed with Authority,
as CHRIST's Messengers, ( Mal. 2. 7.) and as representing him, and so speaking
in his Name, and in his Stead, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19, 20. And it seems to be the
most honorable Thing that belongs to the Office of a Minister of the Gospel,
that to him is committed the Word of Reconciliation, and that he has Power to
preach the Gospel, as CHRIST's Messenger, and speaking in his Name. The Apostle
seems to speak of it as such, 1 Cor. 1. 16, 17. Ministers therefore in the
Exercise of this Power, may cloth themselves with Authority in speaking, or
may teach others in an authoritative Manner. Tit. 2. 15. These Things speak and
exhort, and rebuke with all Authority: Let no Man despise thee. But the common
People in exhorting one another, ought not thus to exhort in an authoritative
Manner. There is a great deal of Difference between teaching as a Father
amongst a Company of Children, and counselling in a brotherly Way, as the
Children may kindly counsel and admonish one another. Those that are mere
Brethren, ought not to assume Authority in exhorting, though one may be better,
and have more Experience than another. Laymen ought not to exhort as though they
were the Ambassadors or Messengers of CHRIST, as Ministers do; nor should they
exhort and warn and charge in his Name, according to the ordinary Import of
such an Expression, when applied to Teaching. Indeed in one Sense, a Christian
ought to do every Thing he does in Religion in the Name of Christ, i. e. He
ought to act in a Dependence on him as his Head and Mediator, and do all for
his Glory: But the Expression as it is usually understood, when applied to
Teaching or Exhorting, is speaking in CHRIST's Stead, and as having a Message
from him.

Persons may cloth themselves with Authority in speaking, either by the
authoritative Words they make Use of, or in the Manner, and authoritative Air
of their speaking: Though some may think that this latter is a Matter of
Indifferency, or at least of small Importance, yet there is indeed a great deal
in it: a Person may go much out of his Place, and be guilty of a great Degree
of Assuming, in the Manner of his speaking those Words, which as they might be
spoken, might be proper for him: The same Words spoken in a different Manner,
may express what is very diverse: Doubtless there may be as much Hurt in the
Manner of a Person's speaking, as there may in his Looks; but the wise Man
tells us, that an high Look is an Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 21. 4. Again,
a Man may cloth himself with Authority, in the Circumstances under which he
speaks; as for Instance, if he sets himself up as a public Teacher. Here I
would have it observed, that I don't suppose that a Person is guilty of this,
merely because he speaks in the Hearing of many: Persons may speak, and speak
only in a Way of Conversation, and yet speak in the Hearing of a great Number,
as they often do in their common Conversation about temporal Things, at Feasts
and Entertainments, where Women as well as others, do converse freely together
about worldly Things, in the hearing of a considerable Number; and it may
happen to be in the Hearing of a great Number, and yet without Offense: And if
their Conversation on such Occasions should turn on spiritual Things, and they
should speak as freely and openly, I don't see why it would not be as harmless.
Nor do I think, that if besides a great Number's being present, Persons speak
with a very earnest and loud Voice, this is for them to set up themselves as
public Teachers, if they do it from no Contrivance or premeditated Design, or
as purposely directing themselves to a Congregation or Multitude, and not
speaking to any that are composed to the Solemnity of any public Service; but
speaking in the Time of Conversation, or a Time when all do freely converse one
with another, they express what they then feel, directing themselves to none
but those that are near 'em, and fall in their Way, speaking in that earnest
and pathetical Manner, to which the Subject they are speaking of, and the
affecting Sense of their Souls naturally leads them, and as it were constrains
them: I say, that for Persons to do thus, though many happen to hear them, yet it
don't appear to me to be a setting themselves up as public Teachers: Yea, if
this be added to these other Circumstances, that all this happens to be in a
Meeting House; I don't think that merely its being in such a Place, much alters
the Case, provided the Solemnity of public Service and divine Ordinances be
over, and the solemn Assembly broke up, and some stay in the House for mutual
religious Conversation; provided also that they speak in no authoritative Way,
but in an humble Manner, becoming their Degree and Station, though they speak
very earnestly and pathetically.

Indeed Modesty might in ordinary Cases, restrain some Persons, as Women, and
those that are young, from so much as speaking, when a great Number are
present; at least, when some of those present are much their Superiors, unless
they are spoken to: And yet the Case may be so extraordinary, as fully to
warrant it. If something very extraordinary happens to Persons, or if they are
in extraordinary Circumstances: as if a Person be struck with Lightning, in the
midst of a great Company, or if he lies a dying, it appears to none any
Violation of Modesty, for him to speak freely, before those that are much his
Superiors. I have seen some Women and Children in such Circumstances, on
religious Accounts, that it has appeared to me no more a transgressing the Laws
of Humility and Modesty, for them to speak freely, let who will be present,
than if they were dying.

But then may a Man be said to set up himself as a public Teacher, when he in
a set Speech, of Design, directs himself to a Multitude, either in the
Meeting House or elsewhere, as looking that they should compose themselves to
attend to what he has to say; and much more when this is a contrived and
premeditated Thing, without any thing like a Constraint, by any extraordinary
Sense or Affection that he is then under; and more still, when Meetings are
appointed on Purpose to hear Lay-Persons exhort, and they take it as their
Business to be Speakers, while they expect that others should come, and compose
themselves, and attend as Hearers; when private Christians take it upon them in
private Meetings, to act as the Masters or Presidents of the Assembly, and
accordingly from Time to Time to teach and exhort the rest, this has the
Appearance of authoritative Teaching.

When private Christians, that are no more than mere Brethren, exhort and
admonish one another; it ought to be in an humble Manner, rather by Way of
Entreaty, than with Authority; and the more, according as the Station of
Persons is lower. Thus it becomes Women, and those that are young, ordinarily
to be at a greater Distance from any Appearance of Authority in speaking than
others: Thus much at least is evident by that in 1 Timothy 2. 9, 11, 12.

That Lay-Persons ought not to exhort one another as clothed with Authority,
is a general Rule but it cannot justly be supposed to extend to Head of Families
in their own Families. Every Christian Family is a little Church, and the Heads
of it are its authoritative Teachers and Governors. Not can it extend to
Schoolmasters among his Scholars; and some other Cases might perhaps be
mentioned, that ordinary Discretion will distinguish, where a Man's
Circumstances do properly cloth him with Authority, and render it fit and
suitable for him to counsel and admonish others in an authoritative Manner.

2. No Man but only a Minister that is duly appointed to that sacred Calling,
ought to follow Teaching and Exhorting as a Calling, or so as to neglect that
which is his proper Calling. An having the Office of a Teacher in the Church of
GOD implies two Things, 1. A being invested with the Authority of a Teacher;
and 2. A being called to the Business of a Teacher, to make it the Business of
his Life. Therefore that Man that is not a Minister, that takes either of these
upon him, invades the Office of a Minister. Concerning assuming the Authority
of a Minister I have spoken already. But if a Layman don't assume Authority in
his Teaching, yet if he forsakes his proper Calling, or does so at least in a
great Measure, and spends his Time in going about from House to House, to
counsel and exhort, he goes beyond his Line, and violates Christian Rules.
Those that have the Office of Teachers or Exhorters, have it for their Calling,
and should make it their Business, as a Business proper to their Office; and
none should make it their Business but such. Romans 12. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8. For I say,
through the Grace given unto me, to every Man that is among you, not to think
of himself more highly than he ought to think; but to think soberly, according
as GOD has dealt to every Man the Proportion of Faith. For as we have many
Members, in one Body, and all Members have not the same Office; so we being
many, are one Body in Christ. -- He that teaches, let him wait on Teaching, or
he that exhorts, on Exhortation. 1 Cor. 12. 29. Are all Apostles? Are all
Prophets? Are all Teachers? 1 Cor. 7. 20. Let every Man abide in the same
Calling wherein he was called. 1 These. 4. 11. And that ye study to be quiet,
and to do your own Business, and to work with your own Hands, as we commanded
you.

It will be a very dangerous Thing for Laymen, in either of these Respects, to
invade the Office of a Minister; if this be common among us we shall be in
Danger of having a Stop put to the Work of GOD, and the Ark's turning aside
from us, before it comes to Mount Zion, and of GOD's making a Breach upon us;
as of old there was an unhappy Stop put to the Joy of the Congregation of
Israel, in bringing up the Ark of GOD, because others carried it besides the
Levites: And therefore David, when the Error was found out, says, 1 Chronicles. 15.
2. None ought to carry the Ark of GOD, but the Levites only; for them has the
Lord chosen to carry the Ark of God, and to minister unto him for ever. And
because one presumed to touch the Ark that was not of the Sons of Aaron,
therefore the Lord made a Breach upon them, and covered their Day of Rejoicing
with a Cloud in his Anger.

Before I dismiss this Head of Lay-Exhorting, I would take Notice of three
Things relating to it, upon which there ought to be a Restraint.

1. Speaking in the Time of the solemn Worship of GOD, as public Prayer,
Singing, or Preaching, or Administration of the Sacrament of the Holy Supper;
or any Duty of social Worship: This should not be allowed. I know it will be
said, that in some Cases, when Persons are exceedingly affected, they cannot
help it; and I believe so too: but then I also believe, and know by Experience,
that there are several Things that contribute to that Inability, besides merely
and absolutely the Sense of divine Things they have upon their Hearts. Custom
and Example, or the Thing's being allowed, have such an Influence, that they
actually help to make it impossible for Persons under strong Affections to
avoid speaking. If it was disallowed, and Persons at the Time that they were
thus disposed to break out, had this Apprehension, that it would be a very
unbecoming, shocking Thing for 'em so to do, it would be a Help to 'em, as to
their Ability to avoid it: Their Inability arises from their strong and
vehement Disposition; and so far as that Disposition is from a good Principle,
it would be weakened by the coming in of this Though It to their Minds, viz. "What
I am going to do, will be for the Dishonor of CHRIST and Religion: And so that
inward Vehemence, that pushed 'em forward to speak, would fall, and they would
be enabled to avoid it. This Experience confirms.

2. There ought to be a moderate Restraint on the Loudness of Persons talking
under high Affections; for if there be not, it will grow natural and
unavoidable for Persons to be louder and louder, without any Increase of their
inward Sense; 'till it becomes natural to 'em, at last, to scream and hallow to
almost every one they see in the Streets, when they are much affected: But this
is certainly a Thing very improper, and what has no Tendency to promote
Religion. The Man CHRIST JESUS when he was upon Earth, had doubtless as great a
Sense of the infinite Greatness and Importance of eternal Things, and the Worth
of Souls, as any have nowadays; but there is not the least Appearance in his
History, of his taking any such Course, or Manner of exhorting others.

3. There should also be some Restraint on the abundance of Persons Talk, under
strong Affections; for if Persons give themselves an unbounded Liberty, to talk
just so much as they feel an Inclination to, they will increase and abound more
and more in Talk, beyond the Proportion of their Sense or Affection; 'till at
length it will become ineffectual on those that hear them, and by the
Commonness of their abundant Talk, they will defeat their own End.

One Thing more I would take Notice of before I conclude this Part, is the
Mismanagement that has been in some Places of the Duty of singing Praises to
GOD. I believe it to have been one Fruit of the extraordinary Degrees of the
sweet and joyful Influences of the Spirit of GOD that have been lately given,
that there has appeared such a Disposition to abound in that Duty, and
frequently to fall into this divine Exercise; not only in appointed solemn
Meetings, but when Christians occasionally meet together at each other's
Houses. But the Mismanagement I have Respect to, is the getting into a Way of
performing it, without almost any Appearance of that Reverence and Solemnity
with which all visible, open Acts of divine Worship ought to be attended; it
may be two or three in a Room singing Hymns of Praise to GOD, others that are
present talking at the same Time, others about their Work, with little more
Appearance of Regard to what is doing, than if some were only singing a common
Song, for their Amusement and Diversion. There is Danger, if such Things are
continued, of its coming to that by Degrees, that a mere Nothing be made of
this Duty, to the great Violation of the third Commandment. Let Christians
abound as much as they will in this holy, heavenly Exercise, in GOD's House and
in their own Houses; but when it is performed, let it be performed as an holy
Act, wherein they have immediately and visibly to do with GOD. When any social
open Act of Devotion, or solemn Worship of GOD is performed, GOD should be
reverenced as visibly present, by those that are present. As we would not have
the Ark of GOD depart from us, nor provoke GOD to make a Breach upon us, we
should take Heed that we handle the Ark with Reverence.

With Respect to Companies singing in the Streets, going to, or coming from the
Place of public Worship, I would humbly offer my Thoughts in the following
Particulars.

1. The Rule of CHRIST concerning putting new Wine into old Bottles, does
undoubtedly take Place in Things of this Nature, supposing it to be a Thing
that in it self is good, but not essential, and not particularly enjoined or
forbidden. For Things, so very new and uncommon, and of so open and public a
Nature, to be suddenly introduced and set up and practiced, in many Parts of
the Country, without the Matter's being so much as first proposed to any
public Consideration, or giving any Opportunity for the People of GOD to weigh
the Matter, or to consider any Reasons that might be offered to support it, is
putting new Wine into old Bottles with a Witness; as if it were with no other
Design than to burst them directly. Nothing else can be expected to be the
Consequence of this, than Uproar and Confusion, and great Offense, and unhappy
mischievous Disputes, even among the Children of GOD themselves: Not that that
which is good in it self, and is new, ought to be forborne, 'till there is no
Body that will dislike it; but it ought to be forborne 'till the visible Church
of GOD is so prepared for it, at least, that there is a Probability that it
will not do more Hurt than Good, or hinder the Work of GOD more than promote
it; as is most evident from CHRIST's Rule, and the Apostles Practice. If it be
brought in, when the Country is so unprepared, that the Shock and Surprise on
Persons Minds, and the Contention and Prejudice against Religion, that it is
like to be an Occasion of, will do more to hinder Religion, than the Practice
of it is like to do to promote it, then the Fruit is picked before it is ripe.
And indeed, such an hasty Endeavor to introduce such an Innovation, supposing
it to be good in it self, is the likeliest Way to retard the effectual
Introduction of it; it will hinder its being extensively introduced, much more
than it will promote it, and so will defeat its own End. But

2. As to the Thing it self, If a considerable Part of a Congregation have
Occasion to go in Company together to a Place of public Worship, and they
should join together in singing Praises to GOD, as they go, I confess, that
after long Consideration, and endeavoring to view the Thing every Way, with
the utmost Deligence and Impartiality I am capable of, I cannot find any valid
Objection against it. As to the common Objection from Mat. 6. 5. And when thou
prayest, thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are; for they love to pray
standing in the Synagogues, and in the Corners of the Streets, that they may be
seen of Men. It is strong against a single Person's singing in the Streets, or
in the Meeting House, by himself, as offering to GOD personal Worship; but as
it is brought against a considerable Company, their thus publicly worshipping
GOD, it appears to me to have no Weight at all; to be sure it is of no more
Force against a Company's thus praising GOD in the Streets, than against their
praising him in the Synagogue or Meeting House, for the Streetsand the
Synagogues are both put together in these Words of our Savior, as Parallel in
the Case that he had Respect to. It Is evident that CHRIST speaks of personal,
and not public Worship. If to sing in the Streets be oftentatious, then it
must be because it is a public Place, and it cannot be done there without being
very open; but it is no more public than the Synagogue or Meeting House is
when full of People. Some Worship is in its Nature private, as that which is
proper to particular Persons, or Families, or private Societies, and has
Respect to their particular Concerns: But that which I now speak of, is
performed under no other Notion than a Part of GOD's public Worship, without
any Relation to any private, separate Society, or any chosen or picked Number,
and in which every visible Christian has equal Liberty to join, if it be
convenient for him, and he has a Disposition, as in the Worship that is
performed in the Meeting House. When Persons are going to the House of public
Worship, to serve GOD there with the Assembly of his People, they are upon no
other Design than that of putting public Honor upon GOD, that is the Business
they go from Home upon, and even in their walking the Streets on this Errand,
they appear in a public Act of Respect to GOD; and therefore if they go in
Company with public Praise, it is not a being public when they ought to be
private. It Is one Part of the Beauty of public Worship, that it be very
public; the more public it is, the more open Honor it puts upon GOD; and
especially is it beautiful in that Part of public Worship, viz. public
Praise; For the very Notion of public praising of GOD, is to declare abroad
his Glory, to publish his Praise, to make it known, and proclaim it aloud, as
is evident by innumerable Expressions of Scripture. It Is fit that GOD's Honor
should not be concealed, but made known in the great Congregation, and
proclaimed before the Sun, and upon the House-Tops, before Kings, and all
Nations, and that his Praises should be heard to the utmost Ends of the Earth.

I suppose none will condemn singing GOD's Praises, merely because it is
performed in the open Air, and not in a close Place: And if it may be performed
by a Company in the open Air, doubtless they may do it moving, as well as
standing still. So the Children of Israel praised GOD, when they went to Mount
Zion, with the Ark of GOD; and so the Multitude praised CHRIST, when they
entered with him into Jerusalem, a little before his Passion; and so the
Children of Israel were wont, from Year to Year, to go up to Jerusalem, when
they went in Companies, from all Parts of the Land, three Times in the Year,
when they often used to manifest the Engagedness of their Minds, by traveling
all Night, and manifested their Joy and Gladness, by singing Praises, with
great Decency and Beauty, as they went toward GOD's holy Mountain; as is
evident by Isa. 30. 29. Ye shall have a Song, as in the Night, when a holy
Solemnity is kept, and Gladness of Heart; as when one goes with a Pipe, to
come into the Mountain of the Lord, to the mighty One of Israel. And Psalm. 42.
4. When I remember these Things, I pour out my Soul in me; for I had gone with
the Multitude, I went with them to the House of God, with the Voice of Joy and
Praise, with a Multitude that kept holy Day. Psalm. 100. 4. Enter into his Gates
with Thanksgiving, and into his Courts with Praise. When GOD's People are going
to his House, the Occasion is so joyful to a Christian in a lively Frame, (the
Language of whose Heart is, Come, let us go up to the House of the Lord, and
who is glad when it is so said to him,) that the Duty of singing Praises seems
to be peculiarly beautiful on such an Occasion. So that if the State of the
Country was ripe for it, and it should be so that there should be frequent
Occasions for a considerable Part of a Congregation to go together to the
Places of public Worship, and there was in other Respects a proportionable
Appearance of Fervency of Devotion, it appears to me that it would be
ravishingly beautiful, if such Things were practiced all over the Land, and
would have a great Tendency to enliven, animate and rejoice the Souls of GOD's
Saints, and greatly to propagate vital Religion. I believe the Time is coming
when the World will be full of such Things.

3. It seems to me to be requisite that there should be the Consent of the
governing Part of the worshipping Societies, to which Persons have joined
themselves, and of which they own themselves a Part, in order to the
introducing of Things in public Worship, so new and uncommon, and not
essential, nor particularly commanded, into the Places where those worshipping
Societies belong: The Peace and Union of such Societies seems to require it;
seeing they have voluntarily united themselves to these worshipping Societies,
to that End, that they might be one in the Affairs of GOD's public Worship,
and obliged themselves in Covenant to act as Brethren and mutual Assistants,
and Members of one Body, in those Affairs, and all are hereby naturally and
necessarily led to be concerned with one another, in Matters of Religion and
GOD's Worship; and seeing that this is a Part of the public Worship, and
Worship that must be performed from Time to Time in the View of the whole,
being performed at a Time when they are meeting together for mutual Assistance
in Worship, and therefore that which all must unavoidably be in some Measure
concerned in, so at least as to show their Approbation and Consent, or open
Dislike and Separation from them in it; I say it being thus, Charity and a
Regard to the Union and Peace of such Societies, seems to require a Consent of
the governing Part, in order to the introducing any Thing of this Nature;
(unless they think those Societies unworthy that they should be joined to them
any longer, and so first renounce them, as the worshipping Societies of which
they are Members.) Certainly if we are of the Spirit of the Apostle Paul, and
have his Discretion, we shall not set up any such Practice without it: He for
the Sake of Peace, conformed, in Things wherein he was not particularly
forbidden, to the Jews, when among them; and so when among those that were
without the Law, conformed to them, wherein he might. -- To be sure those go
much beyond proper Limits, who coming from abroad, do immediately of their own
Heads, in a strange Place, set up such a new and uncommon Practice among a
People.

In introducing any Thing of this Nature among a People, their Minister
especially ought to be consulted, and his Voice taken, as long as he is owned
for their Minister. Ministers are Pastors of worshipping Societies, and their
Heads and Guides in the Affairs of public Worship. They are called in
Scripture, those that rule over them, and their People are commanded to obey
them, because they watch for their Souls, as those that must give Account. If
it belongs to these Shepherds and Rulers to direct and guide the Flock in any
Thing at all, it belongs to 'em so to do, in the Circumstantials of their
public Worship.

Thus I have taken particular Notice of many of those Things that have appeared
to me to be amiss, in the Management of our religious Concerns, relating to the
present Revival of Religion, and have taken Liberty freely to express my
Thoughts upon them. Upon the whole it appears manifest to me, that Things have
as yet, never been set a-going in their right Channel; if they had, and Means
had been blessed in Proportion as they have been now, this Work would have so
prevailed, as before this Time to have carried all before it, and have triumphed
over New England as its Conquest.

The Devil in driving Things to these Extremes, besides the present Hindrance
of the Work of GOD, has, I believe, had in View, a twofold Mischief hereafter,
in the Issue of Things; one with Respect to those that are more cold in
Religion; to carry Things to such an Extreme, that People in general, at
length, having their Eyes opened, by the great Excess, and seeing that Things
must needs be wrong, he might take the Advantage to tempt them entirely to
reject the whole Work, as being all nothing but Delusion and Distraction. And
another is with Respect to those that have been very warm and zealous, of GOD's
own Children, that have been out of the Way, to sink them down in Unbelief and
Darkness. The Time is coming I doubt not, when the bigger Part of them will be
convinced of their Errors; and then probably the Devil will take Advantage to
lead them into a dreadful Wilderness, and to puzzle and confound them about
their own Experiences, and the Experiences of others; and to make them to doubt
of many Things that they ought not to doubt of, and even to tempt them with
atheistical Thoughts. I believe if all true Christians all over the Land,
should now at once have their Eyes opened, fully to see all their Errors, it
would seem for the present to damp Religion: The dark Thoughts, that it would
at first be an Occasion of, and the inward Doubts, Difficulties and Conflicts
that would rise in their Souls, would deaden their lively Affections and Joys,
and would cause an Appearance of a present Decay of Religion. But yet it would
do GOD's Saints great Good in their latter End; it would fit them for more
spiritual and excellent Experiences, more humble and heavenly Love, and unmixed
Joys, and would greatly tend to a more powerful, extensive and durable
Prevalence of vital Piety.

I don't know but we shall be in Danger by and by, after our Eyes are fully
opened to see our Errors, to go to contrary Extremes. The Devil has driven the
Pendulum far beyond its proper Point of Rest; and when he has carried it to the
utmost Length that he can, and it begins by its own Weight to swing back, he
probably will set in, and drive it with the utmost Fury the other Way; and so
give us no Rest; and if possible prevent our settling in a proper Medium. What
a poor, blind, weak and miserable Creature is Man, at his best Estate! We are
like poor helpless Sheep; the Devil is too subtle for us: What is our Strength!
What is our Wisdom! How ready are we to go astray! How easily are we drawn
aside, into innumerable Snares, while we in the mean Time are bold and
confident, and doubt not but that we are right and safe! We are foolish Sheep,
in the midst of subtle Serpents and cruel Wolves, and don't know it. Oh! how
unfit are we to be left to our selves! And how much do we stand in Need of the
Wisdom, the Power, the Condescension, Patience, Forgiveness and Gentleness of
our good Shepherd!

PART V.
Showing positively, what ought to be done to promote this WORK.
IN considering of Means and Methods for promoting this glorious Work of GOD, I
have already observed, in some Instances wherein there has been needless
objecting and complaining, and have also taken Notice of many Things amiss,
that ought to be amended: I now proceed in the

Third and last Place, to show positively, what ought to be done, or what
Courses (according to my humble Opinion) ought to be taken to promote this
Work. The Obligations that all are under, with one Consent, to do their utmost,
and the great Danger of neglecting it, were observed before. I hope that some,
upon reading what was said under that Head, will be ready to say, What shall we
do? To such Readers I would now offer my Thoughts, in Answer to such an Enquiry.

And that which I think we ought to set our selves about in the first Place, is
to remove Stumbling Blocks. When GOD is revealed, as about to come, gloriously
to set up his Kingdom in the World, this is proclaimed, Prepare ye the Way of
the Lord, make strait in the Desert an high Way for our God, Isai. 40. 3. And
again, Isai. 57. 14. Cast ye up, Cast ye up; prepare the Way; take up the
Stumbling Block out of the Way of my People. And Chap. 62. 10. Go through, go
through the Gates; prepare you the Way of the People; Cast up, Cast up the
Highway; gather out the Stones.

And in order to this, there must be a great deal done at confessing of Faults,
on both Sides: For undoubtedly many and great are the Faults that have been
committed, in the Jangling and Confusions, and Mixtures of Light and Darkness,
that have been of late. There is hardly any Duty more contrary to our corrupt
Dispositions, and mortifying to the Pride of Man; but it must be done.
Repentance of Faults is, in a peculiar Manner, a proper Duty, when the Kingdom
of Heaven is at Hand, or when we especially expect or desire that it should
come; as appears by John the Baptist's Preaching. And if GOD does now loudly
call upon us to repent, then he also calls upon us to make proper
Manifestations of our Repentance. I am persuaded that those that have openly
opposed this Work, or have from Time to Time spoken lightly of it, cannot be
excused in the Sight of GOD, without openly confessing their Fault therein;
especially if they be Ministers. If they have any Way, either directly or
indirectly, opposed the Work, or have so behaved, in their public Performances
or private Conversation, as has prejudiced the Minds of their People against
the Work, if hereafter they shall be convinced of the Goodness and Divinity of
what they have opposed, they ought by no Means to palliate the Matter, and
excuse themselves, and pretend that they always thought so, and that it was
only such and such Imprudences that they objected against, but they ought
openly to declare their Conviction, and condemn themselves for what they have
done; for it is CHRIST that they have spoken against, in speaking lightly of,
and prejudicing others against this Work; yea, worse than that, it is the Holy
Ghost. And though they have done it ignorantly, and in Unbelief, yet when they
find out who it is that they have opposed, undoubtedly GOD will hold them bound
publicly to confess it.

And on the other Side, if those that have been zealous to promote the Work,
have in any of the forementioned Instances, openly gone much out of the Way,
and done that which is contrary to Christian Rules, whereby they have openly
injured others, or greatly violated good Order, and so done that which has
wounded Religion, they must publicly confess it, and humble themselves, as
they would gather out the Stones, and prepare the Way of GOD's People. They who
have laid great Stumbling Blocks in others Way, by their open Transgression,
are bound to remove them, by their open Repentance.

Some probably will be ready to object against this, that the Opposers will
take Advantage by this to behave themselves insolently, and to insult both them
and Religion. And indeed, to the Shame of some, they have taken Advantage by
such Things; as of the good Spirit that Mr. Whitefield showed in his
Retractations, and some others. But if there are some embittered Enemies of
Religion, that stand ready to improve every Thing to its Disadvantage, yet that
ought not to hinder doing an enjoined Christian Duty; though it be in the
Manifestation of Humility and Repentance, after a Fault openly committed. To
stand it out, in a visible Impenitence of a real Fault, to avoid such an
Inconvenience, is to do Evil, to prevent Evil. And besides, the Danger of an
evil Consequence is much greater on the other Side: To commit Sin, and then
stand in it, is what will give the Enemy the greatest Advantage. For Christians
to act like Christians, in openly humbling themselves, when they have openly
offended; in the End brings the greatest Honor to CHRIST and Religion; and in
this Way are Persons most likely to have GOD appear for them.

Again, At such a Day as this, GOD does especially call his People to the
Exercise of extraordinary Meekness and mutual Forbearance: For at such a Time,
CHRIST appears as it were coming in his Kingdom, which calls for great
Moderation in our Behavior toward all Men; as is evident Phil. 4. 5. Let your
Moderation be known unto all Men: the Lord is at Hand. The Awe of the divine
Majesty that appears present or approaching, should dispose us to it, and deter
us from the contrary. For us to be judging one another, and behaving with
Fierceness and Bitterness, one toward another, when he who is the Searcher of
all Hearts, to whom we must all give an Account, appears so remarkably present,
is exceeding unsuitable. Our Business, at such a Time, should be at Home,
searching our selves, and condemning our selves, and taking Heed to our own
Behavior. If there be glorious Prosperity to the Church of GOD approaching,
those that are the most meek, will have the largest Share in it: For when
CHRIST rides forth, in his Glory and his Majesty, it is because of Truth,
Meekness and Righteousness, Psalm. 45. 3, 4. And when GOD remarkably arises, to
execute Judgment, it is to save all the Meek of the Earth, Psalm. 76. 9. And
it is the Meek, that shall increase their Joy in the Lord, Isa. 29. 19. And when
the Time comes, that GOD will give this lower World into the Hands of his
Saints, it is the Meek that shall inherit the Earth, Psalm. 37. 11. and Matthew.
5. 9. But with the froward, God will show himself unsavory.

Those therefore, that have been zealous for this Work, and have greatly erred
and been injurious with their Zeal, ought not to be treated with Bitterness.
There is abundant Reason to think, that most of them are the dear Children of
GOD, for whom CHRIST died; and therefore that they will see their Error. As to
those Things, wherein we see them to be in an Error, we have Reason to say of
'em as the Apostle, Philip. 3. 15. If any are otherwise minded, God shall
reveal this unto them. Their Errors should not be made Use of by us, so much to
excite Indignation toward them, but should influence all of us, that hope that
we are the Children of GOD, to humble our selves, and become more entirely
dependent on the LORD JESUS CHRIST, when we see those, that are GOD's own
People, so ready to go astray. And those Ministers that have been judged, and
injuriously dealt with, will do the Part of CHRIST's Disciples, not to judge
and revile again, but to receive such Injuries with Meekness and Forbearance,
and making a good Improvement of them, more strictly examining their Hearts and
Ways, and committing themselves to GOD. This will be the Way to have GOD
vindicate them in his Providence, if they belong to him. We have not yet seen the
End of Things; nor do we know who will be most vindicated, and honored of GOD,
in the Issue. Eccles. 7. 8. Better is the End of a Thing, than the Beginning
thereof; and the patient in Spirit, is better than the proud in Spirit.

Contrary to this mutual Meekness, is each Party's stigmatizing one another
with odious Names; as is done in many Parts of New England: which tends greatly
to widen and perpetuate the Breach. Such distinguishing Names of Reproach, do
as it were divide us into two Armies, separated, and drawn up in Battle-Array,
ready to fight one with another; which greatly hinders the Work of GOD.

And as such an extraordinary Time as this, does especially require of us the
Exercise of a great deal of Forbearance, one toward another; so there is
peculiarly requisite in GOD's People, the Exercise of great Patience, in
waiting on GOD, under any special Difficulties and Disadvantages they may be
under, as to the Means of Grace. The beginning of a Revival of Religion will
naturally and necessarily be attended with a great many Difficulties of this
Nature; many Parts of the reviving Church will, for a while, be under great
Disadvantages, by Reason of what remains of the old Disease, of a general
Corruption of the visible Church. We cannot expect that, after a long Time of
Degeneracy and Depravity, in the State of Things in the Church, Things should
all come to Rights at once; it must be a Work of Time: And for God's People to
be overhasty and violent, in such a Case, being resolved to have every Thing
rectified at once, or else forcibly to deliver themselves, by Breaches and
Separations, is the Way to hinder Things coming to Rights, as they otherwise
would, and to keep 'em back, and the Way to break all in Pieces. Not but that
the Case may be such, the Difficulty may be so intolerable, as to allow of no
Delay, and GOD's People cannot continue in the State wherein they were, without
Violations of absolute Commands of GOD. But otherwise, though the Difficulty may
be very great, another Course should be taken. GOD's People should have their
Recourse directly to the Throne of Grace, to represent their Difficulties
before the great Shepherd of the Sheep, that has the Care of all the Affairs of
his Church; and when they have done, they should wait patiently upon him: If
they do so, they may expect that In his Time, he will appear for their
Deliverance: But if instead of that, they are impatient, and take the Work into
their own Hands, they will bewray their Want of Faith, and will dishonor GOD,
and cannot have such Reason to hope that CHRIST will appear for them, as they
have desired, but have Reason to fear, that he will leave 'em to manage their
Affairs for themselves, as well as they can: When otherwise, if they had waited
on CHRIST patiently, continuing still instant in Prayer, they might have had
him appearing for them, much more effectually to deliver them. He that
believes shall not make haste; and it is for those that are found patiently
waiting on the Lord, under Difficulties, that he will especially appear, when
he comes to do great Things for his Church, as is evident by Isa. 30. 18. and
Chap. 40. at the latter End, and 49. 23. and Psalm. 37. 9. and many other Places.

I have somewhere, not long since, met with an Exposition of those Words of the
Spouse, that we have several Times repeated in the Book of Canticles, I charge
you, O Daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor awake my Love, 'till he
please, which is the only satisfying Exposition that ever I met with; which was
to this Purpose, viz. That when the Church of GOD is under great Difficulties,
and in Distress, and CHRIST don't appear for her Help, but seems to neglect
her, as though he were asleep, GOD's People, or the Daughters of Jerusalem, in
such a Case, should not show an hasty Spirit; and not having Patience to wait
for Christ to awake for their Help, 'till his Time comes, take indirect Courses
for their own Deliverance, and use violent Means for their Escape, before
Christ appears to open the Door for them; and so as it were, stir up, and awake
Christ, before his Time. When the Church is in Distress, and GOD seems not to
appear for her in his Providence, he is very often represented in Scripture, as
being asleep; as CHRIST was asleep in the Ship, when the Disciples were tossed
by the Storm, and the Ship covered with Waves: And GOD's appearing afterward
for his People's Help, is represented as his awaking out of Sleep. Psalm. 7. 6.
and 35. 23. and 44. 23. and 59. 4. and 73. 20. CHRIST has an appointed Time for
his thus awaking out of Sleep: And his People ought to wait upon him; and not,
in an impatient Fit, stir him up, before his Time. It Is worthy to be observed
how strict this Charge is, given to the Daughters of Jerusalem, which is
repeated three Times over in the Book of Canticles, Chap. 2. 7. and 3. 5. and
8. 4. In the 2d Chapter and six first Verses, is represented the Supports
CHRIST gives his Church, while she is in a suffering State, as the Lilly among
Thorns: In the 7th Verse is represented her Patience in waiting for CHRIST, to
appear for her Deliverance, when she charges the Daughters of Jerusalem, not to
stir up, nor awake her Love 'till he please, by the Roes, and the Hinds of the
Field; which are Creatures of a gentle, harmless Nature, are not Beasts of
Prey, do not devour one another, don't fight with their Enemies, but fly from
them; and are of a pleasant, loving Nature, Prove. 5. 19. In the next Verse, we
see the Church's Success, in this Way of waiting under Sufferings, with
Meekness and Patience; CHRIST soon awakes, speedily appears, and swiftly comes;
The Voice of my Beloved! Behold, he comes, leaping upon the Mountains,
skipping upon the Hills!

What has been mentioned hitherto, has Relation to the Behavior we are obliged
to (...) we would prevent the Hindrances of the Work, but besides these, there
are Things that must be done, more directly to advance it. And here, it
concerns every one, in the first Place, to look into his own Heart, and see to
it that he be a Partaker of the Benefits of the Work himself, and that it be
promoted in his own Soul. Now is a most glorious Opportunity for the Good of
Souls. It Is manifestly, with respect to a Time of great Revival of Religion in
the World, that we have that gracious, earnest and moving Invitation
proclaimed, in the 55th of Isai. Ho, every one that thirsts! etc. as is
evident by what preceeds in the foregoing Chapter, and what follows in the
Close of this. Here, in the 6th Verse it is said, Seek ye the Lord, while he
may be found; call upon him, while he is near. And it is with special Reference
to such a Time, that CHRIST proclaims as he does, Rev. 21. 6. I will give unto
him that is athirst, of the Fountain of the Water of Life freely. And Chap. 22.
17. And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come; and let him that hears say, Come;
and let him that is athirst come; and whosoever will, let him take the Water of
Life freely. And it seems to be with Reference to such a Time, which is
typified by the Feast of Tabernacles, that JESUS, at that Feast, stood and
cried, as we have an Account, Joh. 7. 37, 38. In the last Day, that great Day
of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any Man thirst, let him come
unto me and drink. He that believes on me, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers
of living Water. And it is with special Reference to GOD's Freeness and
Readiness to bestow Grace at such a Time, that it is said in Isa. 60. 11. of
the spiritual Jerusalem, Thy Gates shall he open continually, they shall not be
shut, Day nor Night.

And though I judge not those that have opposed this Work, and would not have
others judge them, yet, if any such shall happen to read this Treatise, I would
take the Liberty to entreat them to leave off concerning themselves so much
about others, and look into their own Souls, and see to it that they are the
Subjects of a true, saving Work of the Spirit of GOD. If they have Reason to
think they never have been, or it be but a very doubtful Hope that they have,
then how can they have any Heart to be busily and fiercely engaged about the
Mistakes, and the supposed false Hopes of others? And I would now beseech those
that have hitherto been something inclining to Arminian Principles, seriously
to weigh the Matter with Respect to this Work, and consider, whether, if the
Scriptures are the Word of God, the Work that has been described in the first
Part of this Treatise, must not needs be, as to the Substance of it, the Work
of GOD, and the Flourishing of that Religion, that is taught by CHRIST and his
Apostles; and whether any good Medium can be found, where a Man can rest, with
any Stability, between owning this Work, and being a Deist; and also to
consider whether or no, if it be indeed so, that this be the Work of God, it
don't entirely overthrow their Scheme of Religion; and therefore whether it
don't infinitely concern 'em, as they would be Partakers of eternal Salvation,
to relinguish their Scheme, Now is a good Time for Arminians to change their
Principles. I would now, as one of the Friends of this Work, humbly invite 'em
to come and join with us, and be on our Side; and if I had the Authority of
Moses, I would say to them as he did to Hobab, Number. 10. 29. We are journeying
unto the Place, of which the Lord said, I will give it you; come thou with us;
and we will do thee Good: For the Lord has spoken Good concerning Israel.

As the Benefit and Advantage of the good Improvement of such a Season, is
extraordinary great; so the Danger of neglecting, and misimproving it, is
proportionably great. It Is abundantly evident by the Scripture, that as a Time
of great Out-pouring of the Spirit, is a Time of great Favor to those that are
Partakers of the Blessing; so it is always a Time of remarkable Vengeance to
others. So in Isai. 61. 2. the same that is called, the acceptable Year of the
Lord, is called also, the Day of Vengeance of our God. So it was amongst the
Jews, in the Apostles Days: The Apostle in 2 Cor. 6. 2. says of that Time, that
it was the accepted Time, and Day of Salvation; And Christ says of the same
Time, Luke 21. 22. These are the Days of Vengeance. At the same Time that the
Blessings of the Kingdom of Heaven were given to some, there was an Ax laid at
the Root of the Trees, that those that did not bear Fruit, might be hewn down,
and cast into the Fire, Matthew. 3. 9, 10, 11. Then was glorified, both the
Goodness and Severity of GOD, in a remarkable Manner. Romans 11. 22. The Harvest
and the Vintage go together: At the same Time that the Earth is reaped, and
GOD's Elect are gathered into the Garner of GOD, the Angel that has Power over
Fire, thrusts in his Sickle, and gathers the Cluster of the Vine of the Earth,
and casts it into the great Wine Press of the Wrath of God, Rev. 14. at the
latter End. So it is foretold, that at the Beginning of the glorious Times of
the Christian Church, at the same Time that the Hand of the Lord is known,
toward his Servants, so shall his Indignation, toward his Enemies, Isa. 66.
14. So when that glorious Morning shall appear, wherein the Sun of
Righteousness shall arise, to the Elect, with Healing in his Wings, the Day
shall burn as an Oven to the Wicked, Mal. 4. 1, 2, 3. There is no Time like
such a Time, for the Increase of Guilt, and treasuring up Wrath, and desperate
hardening of the Heart, if Men stand it out; which is the most awful Judgment,
and Fruit of divine Wrath, that can be inflicted on any Mortal. So that a Time
of great Grace, and pouring out of the Spirit, and the Fruits of divine Mercy,
is evermore also, a Time of great Out-pouring of something else, viz. Divine
Vengeance, on those that neglect and misimprove such a Season.

The State of the present Revival of Religion, has an awful Aspect upon those
that are advanced in Years. The Work has been chiefly amongst those that are
young; and comparatively, but few others have been made Partakers of it. And
indeed, it has commonly been so, when GOD has begun any great Work, for the
Revival of his Church; he has taken the young People, and has cast off the old
and stiff-necked Generation. There was a remarkable Out-pouring of the Spirit
of GOD, on the Children of Israel in the Wilderness, on the younger Generation,
their little ones, that they said, should be a Prey, the Generation that entered
into Canaan, with Joshua; which is evident by many Things in Scriptnre. That
Generation seems to have been the most excellent Generation that ever was in
the Church of Israel. There is no Generation, of which there is so much Good,
and so little Hurt spoken in Scripture; as might be shown, if it would not be
too long. In that Generation, that were under twenty Years, when they went out
of Egypt, was that Kindness of Youth, and Love of Espousals, spoken of, Jer. 2.
2, 3. But the old Generation were passed by, and remained obstinate and
stiff-necked, were always murmuring, and would not be convinced by all GOD's
wondrous Works that they beheld. GOD by his awful Judgments that he executed in
the Wilderness, and the Affliction that the People suffered there, convinced
and humbled the younger Generation, and fitted them for great Mercy; as is
evident by Deuteronomy. 2. 16. but he destroyed the old Generation; he swore in his
Wrath, that they should not enter into his Rest, and their Carcases fell in the
Wilderness: When it was a Time of great Mercy, and pouring out of GOD's Spirit
on their Children, it was remarkably a Day of Vengeance unto them; as appears
by the 90 Psalm. Let the old Generation in this Land, take Warning from hence,
and take Heed that they don't refuse to be convinced, by all GOD's Wonders that
he works before their Eyes, and that they don't continue forever objecting,
murmuring and cavailling against the Work of GOD, least while GOD is bringing
their Children into a Land flowing with Milk and Honey, he should swear in his
Wrath concerning them, that their Carcases shall fall in the Wilderness.

So when GOD had a Design of great Mercy to the Jews, in bringing 'em out of
the Babylonish Captivity, and returning them to their own Land, there was a
blessed Out-pouring of the Spirit upon them in Babylon, to bring 'em to deep
Conviction and Repentance, and to a Spirit of Prayer, to cry earnestly to GOD
for Mercy; which is often spoken of by the Prophets: But it was not upon the
old Generation, that were carried Captive. The Captivity continued just long
enough, for that perverse Generation to waste away and die in their Captivity;
at least those of them that were adult Persons, when carried Captive. The old
Generation, and Heads of Families, were exceeding obstinate, and would not
hearken to the earnest repeated Warnings of the Prophet Jeremiah; but he had
greater Success among the young People; as appears by Jer. 6. 10, 11. To whom
shall I speak and give Warning, that they may hear? Behold their Ear is
uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken: Behold, the Word of the Lord is unto
them a Reproach; they have no Delight in it. Therefore I am full of the Fury of
the Lord; I am weary with holding in; I will pour it out upon the Children
abroad, and upon the Assembly of the young Men together; for even the Husband
with the Wise (i. e. The Heads of Families, and Parents of these Children)
shall be taken, the aged, with him that is full of Days. Blessed be GOD! There
are some of the elder People, that have been made Partakers of this Work: And
those that are most awakened, by these Warnings of GOD's Word, and the awful
Frowns of his Providence, will be most likely to be made Partakers hereafter.
It infinitely concerns them to take Heed to themselves, that they may be
Partakers of it; for how dreadful will it be to go to Hell, after having spent
so many Years in doing nothing, but treasure up Wrath.

But above all others whatsoever, does it concern us that are Ministers, to see
to it that we are Partakers of this Work, or that we have Experience of the
saving Operations of the same Spirit, that is now poured out on the Land. How
sorrowful and melancholy is the Case, when it is otherwise? For one to stand at
the Head of a Congregation of GOD's People, as representing CHRIST and speaking
in his Stead, and to act the Part of a Shepherd and Guide to a People, in such
a State of Things, when many are under great Awakenings, and many are
converted, and many of GOD's Saints are filled with divine Light, Love and Joy,
and to undertake to instruct and lead 'em all, under all these various
Circumstances, and to be put to it, continually to play the Hypocrite, and
force the Airs of a Saint in Preaching, and from Time to Time, in private
Conversation, and particular dealing with Souls, to undertake to judge of their
Circumstances, to try to talk with those that come to him, as if he knew what
they said; to try to talk with Persons of Experience, as if he knew how to
converse with them, and had Experience as well as they; to make others believe
that he rejoices when others are converted, and to force a pleased and joyful
Countenance and Manner of Speech, when there is nothing in the Heart, what
sorrowful Work is here! Oh! how miserably must such a Person feel! What a
wretched Bondage and Slavery is this! What Pains, and how much Art must such a
Minister use to conceal himself! And how weak are his Hands! Besides the
infinite Provocation of the most high GOD, and Displeasure of his Lord and
Master, that he incurs, by continuing a secret Enemy to him in his Heart, in
such Circumstances. I think there is a great deal of Reason, from the
Scripture, to conclude, that no Sort of Men in the World, will be so low in
Hell, as ungodly Ministers: Every thing that is spoken of in Scripture, as that
which aggravates Guilt, and heightens divine Wrath, meets in them; however some
particular Persons, of other Sorts, may be more guilty than some of these.

And what great Disadvantages are unconverted Ministers under, to oppose any
Irregularities, or Imprudences, or intemperate Zeal, that they may see in those
that are the Children of GOD, when they are conscious to themselves, that they
have no Zeal at all? If Enthusiasm and Wildness comes in like a Flood, what
poor weak Instruments are such Ministers to withstand it? With what Courage can
they open their Mouths, when they look inward, and consider how it is with them?

We that are Ministers, not only have Need of some true Experience of the
saving Influence of the Spirit of GOD upon our Heart, but we need a double
Portion of the Spirit of GOD at such a Time as this; we had need to be as full
of Light, as a Glass is, that is held out in the Sun; and with Respect to Love
and Zeal, we had need at this Day, to be like the Angels, that are a Flame of
Fire. The State of the Times extremely requires a Fullness of the divine Spirit
in Ministers, and we ought to give our selves no Rest 'till we have obtained
it. And in order to this, I should think Ministers, above all Persons, ought to
be much in secret Prayer and Fasting, and also much in Praying and Fasting one
with another. It seems to me it would be becoming the Circumstances of the
present Day, if Ministers in a Neighborhood would often meet together, and
spend Days in Fasting, and fervent Prayer, among themselves, earnestly seeking
for those extraordinary Supplies of divine Grace from Heaven, that we need at
this Day: And also if, on their occasional Visits one to another, instead of
spending away their Time in sitting and smoking, and in diverting, or worldly,
unprofitable Conversation, telling News, and making their Remarks on this and
the other trifling Subject, they would spend their Time in praying together,
and singing Praises, and religious Conference. How much do many of the common
People shame many of us that are in the Work of the Ministry, in these
Respects? Surely we do not behave our selves so much like Christian Ministers,
and the Disciples and Ambassadors of Christ, as we ought to do. And while we
condemn zealous Persons for their doing so much at censuring Ministers at this
Day, it ought not to be without deep Reflections upon, and great Condemnation
of our selves: For indeed, we do very much to provoke Censoriousness, and lay a
great Temptation before others, to the Sin of Judging: And if we can prove,
that those that are guilty of it, do transgress the Scripture Rule, yet our
Indignation should be chiefly against our selves.

Ministers, at this Day in a special Manner, should act as Fellow-helpers, in
their great Work. It should be seen that they are animated and engaged, and
exert themselves with one Heart and Soul, and with united Strength, to promote
the present glorious Revival of Religion: And to that End should often meet
together, and act in Concert. And if it were a common Thing in the Country, for
Ministers to join in public Exercises, and second one another, in their
Preaching, I believe it would be of great Service. I mean that Ministers having
consulted one another, as to the Subjects of their Discourses, before they go
to the House of GOD, should there speak, two or three of them going, in short
Discourses, as seconding each other, and earnestly enforcing each other's
WarningsandCounsels. Only such an Appearance of united Zeal in Ministers, would
have a great Tendency to awaken Attention, and much to impress and animate the
Hearers; as has been found by Experience, in some Parts of the Country.

Ministers should carefully avoid weakening one another's Hands. And therefore
every Thing should be avoided, by which their Interest with their People might
be diminished, or their Union with them broken. On the contrary, if Ministers
han't forfeited their Acceptance in that Character, in the visible Church, by
their Doctrine or Behavior, their Brethren in the Ministry ought studiously to
endeavor to heighten the Esteem and Affection of their People toward them,
that they may have no Temptation to repent their admitting other Ministers to
come and preach in their Pulpit.

Two Things, that are exceeding needful in Ministers, as they would do any
great Matters, to advance the Kingdom of Christ, are Zeal and Resolution. The
Influence and Power of these Things, to bring to pass great Effects, is greater
than can well be imagined: A Man of but an ordinary Capacity, will do more with
them, than one of ten Times the Parts and Learning, without them: More may be
done with them, in a few Days, or at least Weeks, than can be done without
them, in many Years. Those that are possessed of these Qualities, commonly
carry the Day, in almost all Affairs. Most of the great Things that have been
done in the World of Mankind, the great Revolutions that have been accomplished
in the Kingdoms and Empires of the Earth, have been chiefly owing to these
Things. The very Sight or Appearance of a thoroughly engaged Spirit, together
with a fearless Courage and unyielding Resolution, in any Person, that has
undertaken the managing any Affair amongst Mankind, goes a great Way toward
accomplishing the Effect aimed at. It Is evident that the Appearance of these
Things in Alexander, did three Times as much toward his conquering the World,
as all the Blows that he struck. And how much were the great Things that Oliver
Cromwell did, owing to these Things? And the great Things that Mr. Whitefield
has done, every where, as he has run through the British Dominions, (so far as
they are owing to Means) are very much owing to the Appearance of these Things,
which he is eminently possessed of. When the People see these Things apparently
in a Person, and to a great Degree, it awes them, and has a commanding
Influence upon their Minds; it seems to them that they must yield; they
naturally fall before them, without standing to contest or dispute the Matter;
they are conquered as it were by Surprise. But while we are coldandheartless,
andonly go on in a dull Manner, in an old formal Round, we shall never do any
great Matters. Our Attempts, the Appearance or such Coldness and Irresolution,
will not so much as make Persons think of yielding: They will hardly be sufficient
to put it into their Minds; and if it be put into their Minds, the Appearance
of such Indifference and Cowardice, does as it were call for, and provoke
Opposition. -- Our Misery is Want of Zeal and Courage; for not only through Want
of them, does all fail that we seem to attempt, but it prevents our attempting
any Thing very remarkable, for the Kingdom of CHRIST. Hence, oftentimes it has
been, that when any Thing very considerable, that is new, is proposed to be
done, for the Advancement of Religion, or the public Good, many Difficulties
are found out, that are in the Way, and a great many Objections are started,
and it may be, it is put off from one to another; but no Body does any Thing.
And after this Manner good Designs or Proposals have oftentimes failed, and
have sunk as soon as proposed. Whenas, if we had but Mr. Whitefield's Zeal and
Courage, what could not we do, with such a Blessing as we might expect?

Zeal and Courage will do much in Persons of but an ordinary Capacity; but
especially would they do great Things, if joined with great Abilities. If some
great Men, that have appeared in our Nation, had been as eminent in Divinity,
as they were in Philosophy, and had engaged in the Christ an Cause, with as
much Zeal and Fervor, as some others have done, and with a proportionable
Blessing of Heaven, they would have conquered all Christendom, and turned the
World upside down. We have many Ministers in the Land that don't want for
Abilities, they are Persons of bright Parts and Learning; they should consider
how much is expected, and will be required of them, by their Lord and Master,
and how much they might do for Christ, and what great Honor, and how glorious
a Reward they might receive, if they had in their Hearts an heavenly Warmth,
and divine Heat, proportionable to their Light.

With Respect to Candidates for the Ministry, I will not undertake particularly to
determine, what Kind of Examination or Trial they should pass under, in order
to their Admission to that sacred Work: But I think this is evident from the
Scripture, that another Sort of Trial, with Regard to their Virtue and Piety,
is requisite, than is required in order to Persons being admitted into the
visible Church. The Apostle directs, that Hands be laid suddenly on no Man; but
that they should first be tried, before they are admitted to the Work of the
Ministry: But it is evident that Persons were suddenly admitted, by Baptism,
into the visible Church, from Time to Time, on their Profession of their Faith
in Christ, without such Caution and Strictness in their Probation. And it seems
to me, those would act very unadvisedly, that should enter on that great and
sacred Work, before they had comfortable Satisfaction concerning themselves,
that they have had a saving Work of God on their Souls.

And though it may be thought, that I go out of my proper Sphere, to intermeddle
in the Affairs of the Colleges, yet I will take the Liberty of an Englishman,
(that speaks his Mind freely, concerning public Affairs) and the Liberty of a
Minister of Christ, (who doubtless may speak his Mind as freely about Things
that concern the Kingdom of his Lord and Master) to give my Opinion, in some
Things, with Respect to those Societies; the original and main Design of which
is to train up Persons, and fit them for the Work of the Ministry. And I would
say in general, that it appears to me that Care should be taken, some Way or
other, that those Societies should be so regulated, that they should, in Fact,
be Nurseries of Piety. Otherwise, they are fundamentally ruined and undone, as
to their main Design, and most essential End. They ought to be so constituted,
that Vice and Idleness should have no Living there: They are intolerable in
Societies, whose main Design is, to train up Youth in Christian Knowledge and
eminent Piety, to fit them to be Pastors of the Flock of the blessed Jesus. I
have heretofore had some Acquaintance with the Affairs of a College, and
Experience of what belonged to its Tuition and Government; and I cannot but
think that it is practicable enough, so to constitute such Societies, that
there should be no being there, without being virtuous, serious and diligent.
It seems to me to be a Reproach to the Land, that ever it should be so with our
Colleges, that instead of being Places of the greatest Advantages for true
Piety, one cannot send a Child thither, without great Danger of his being
infected, as to his Morals; as it has certainly, sometimes been with these
Societies: It Is perfectly intolerable; and any Thing should be done, rather
than it should be so. If we pretend to have any Colleges at all, under any
Notion of training up Youth for the Ministry, there should be some Way found
out, that should certainly prevent its being thus. To have Societies for
bringing Persons up to be Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, and to lead Souls to
Heaven, and to have 'em Places of so much Infection, is the greatest Nonsense
and Absurdity imaginable.

And, as thorough and effectual Care should be taken that Vice and Idleness
ben't tolerated in these Societies, so certainly, the Design of 'em requires,
that extraordinary Means should be used in them, for training up the Students
in vital Religion, and experimental and practical Godliness; so that they
should be holy Societies, the very Place should be as it were sacred: They
should be, in the midst of the Land, Fountains of Piety and Holiness. There is
a great deal of Pains taken, to teach the Scholars human Learning; there ought
to be as much, and more Care, thoroughly to educate 'em in Religion, and lead
'em to true and eminent Holiness. If the main Design of these Nurseries, is to
bring up Persons to teach CHRIST, then it is of greatest Importance that there
should be Care and Pains taken, to bring those that are there educated, to the
Knowledge of Christ. It has been common in our public Prayers, to call these
Societies, the Schools of the Prophets; and if they are Schools, to train up
young Men to be Prophets, certainly there ought to be extraordinary Care there
taken, to train 'em up to be Christians.

And I cannot see, why it is not on all Accounts fit and convenient, for the
Governors and Instructors of the Colleges, particularly, singly and frequently
to converse with the Students, about the State of their Souls. As is ths
Practice of the Rev. Dr. Doddridge, one of the most noted of the present
dissenting Ministers in England, who keeps an Accademy at Northampton, as he
himself informs the Rev. Mr. Wadsworth of Hartford, in Connecticut, in a
Letter, dated at Northampton, March 6. 1740, 41. The Original of which Letter I
have seen, and have by me an Extract of it, sent to me, by Mr. Wadsworth; which
is as follows;

Through the divine Goodness, I have every Year, the Pleasure to see some Plants
taken out of my Nursery, and set in neighboring Congregations; where they
generally settle with a unanimous Censent, and that to a very remarkable
Degree, in some very large, and once divided Congregations. A Circumstance, in
which, I own and adore the Hand of a wise and gracious God; and cannot but look
upon it as a Token for Good. I have at present, a greater Proportion of pious
and ingenious Youth under my Care, than I ever before had. So that I hope the
Church may reasonably expect some considerable Relief from hence, if GOD spare
their Lives a few Years, and continue to them those gracious Assistances, which
he has hitherto mercifully imparted. -- I will not, Sir, trouble you at
present, with a large Account of my Method of accademical Education: Only would
observe, that I think it of vast Importance, to instruct them carefully in the
Scriptures; and not only endeavor to establish them in the great Truths of
Christianity, but to labor to promote their practical Influence on their
Hearts. For which Purpose, I frequently converse with each of them alone, and
conclude the Conversation with Prayer. This does indeed take up a great deal of
Time; but, I bless GOD, it is amply repaired, in the Pleasure I have, in seeing
my Labor is not in vain in the LORD.

There are some that are not Ministers, nor are concerned immediately in those
Things that appertain to their Office, or in the Education of Persons for it,
that are under great Advantages to promote such a glorious Work as this. Some
Laymen, though it be not their Business publicly to exhort and teach, yet are
in some Respects, under greater Advantage to encourage and forward this Work,
than Ministers. As particularly great Men, or Men that are high in Honor and
Influence. How much might such do, to encourage Religion, and open the Way for
it to have free Course, and bear down Opposition, if they were but inclined?
There is commonly a certain unhappy Shyness, in great Men, with Respect to
Religion, as though they were ashamed of it, or at least, ashamed to do very much
at it; whereby they dishonor, and doubtless, greatly provoke the King of
Kings, and very much wound Religion among the common People. They are careful
of their Honor, and seem to be afraid of appearing openly forward and zealous
in Religion, as though it were what would debase their Character, and expose 'em
to Contempt. But in this Day of bringing up the Ark, they ought to be like
David, that great King of Israel, who made himself vile before the Ark; and as
he was the highest in Honor and Dignity, among GOD's People, so thought it
became him to appear foremost, in the Zeal and Activity he manifested on that
Occasion; thereby animating and encouraging the whole Congregation to praise
the Lord, and rejoice before him, with all their Might: And though it diminished
him in the Eyes of scoffing Michal, yet it did not at all abate the Honor and
Esteem of the Congregation of Israel, but advanced it; as appears by 2 Samuel 6.
22.

Rich Men have a Talent in their Hands, in the Disposal and Improvement of
which, they might very much promote such a Work as this, if they were so
disposed. They are far beyond others under Advantage to do Good, and lay up for
themselves Treasares in Heaven. What a thousand Pities is it, that for Want of
a Heart, they commonly have no Share at all there, but Heaven is peopled mostly
with the Poor of this World? One would think that our rich Men, that call
themselves Christians, might devise some notable Things, to do with their
Money, to advance the Kingdom of their professed Redeemer, and the Prosperity
of the Souls of Men, at this Time of such extraordinary Advantage for it. It
seems to me, that in this Age, most of us have but very narrow, penurious
Notions of Christianity, as it respects our Use and Disposal of our temperal
Goods. The primitive Christians had not such Notions: They were trained up by
the Apostles in another Way. -- GOD has greatly distinguished some of the
Inhabitants of New England, from others, in the Abundance that he has given 'em
of the good Things of this Life. If they could now be persuaded to lay out some
considerable Part of that which GOD has given 'em for the Honor of GOD, and
lay it up in Heaven, instead of spending it for their own Honor, or laying it
up for their Posterity, they would not repent of it afterward. How liberally
did the Heads of the Tribes contribute of their Wealth, at the setting up the
Tabernacle, though it was in a barren Wilderness? These are the Days of the
erecting the Tabernacle of GOD amongst us. We have a particular Account how the
Goldsmiths and the Merchants helped to rebuild the Wall of Jerusalem, Neh. 3.
32. The Days are coming spoken of in Scripture, and I believe not very far off,
when the Sons of Zion shall come from far, bringing their Silver and their Gold
with them, unto the Name of the Lord their God, and to the holy One of Israel;
and when the Merchants of the Earth, shall trade for CHRIST, more than for
themselves, and their Merchandise and Hire shall be Holiness to the Lord, and
shall not be treasured, or laid up for Posterity, but shall be for them that
dwell before the Lord, to eat sufficiently, and for durable Clothing; and when
the Ships of Tarshish shall bring the Wealth of the distant Parts of the Earth,
to the Place of God's Sanctuary, and to make the Place of his Feet glorious;
and the abundance of the Sea shall be converted to the Use of God's Church, and
she shall suck the Milk of the Gentiles, and suck the Breasts of Kings. The
Days are coming, when the great and rich Men of the World, shall bring their
Honor and Glory into the Church, and shall, as it were, strip themselves, to
spread their Garments under CHRIST's Feet, as he enters triumphantly into
Jerusalem; and when those that will not do so shall have no Glory, and their
Silver and Gold shall be cankered, and their Garments Moth-eaten; for the
Saints shall then inherit the Earth, and they shall reign on Earth, and those
that honor GOD he will honor, and those that despise him shall be lightly
esteemed.

If some of our rich Men would give one Quarter of their Estates to promote
this Work, they would act a little, as if they were designed for the Kingdom of
Heaven, and a little as rich Men will act by and by, that shall be Partakers of
the spiritual Wealth and Glories of that Kingdom.

Great Things might be done for the Advancement of the Kingdom of CHRIST, at
this Day, by those that have Ability, by establishing Funds, for the Support
and Propagation of Religion; by supporting some that are eminently qualified
with Gifts and Grace, in preaching the Gospel in certain Parts of the Country,
that are more destitute of the Means of Grace; in searching out Children, of
promising Abilities, and their Hearts full of Love to CHRIST, but of poor
Families, (as doubtless there are such now in the Land) and bringing them up
for the Ministry; and in distributing Books, that are remarkably fitted to
promote vital Religion, and have a great Tendency to advance this Work; or if
they would only bear the Trouble, Expense and Loss of sending such Books into
various Parts of the Land, to be sold, it might be an Occasion that ten Times
so many of those Books should be bought, as otherwise would be; and in
establishing and supporting Schools, in poor Towns and Villages; which might be
done on such a Foundation, as not only to bring up Children in common Learning,
but also, might very much tend to their Conviction and Conversion, and being
trained up in vital Piety; and doubtless something might be done this Way, in
old Towns, and more populous Places, that might have a great Tendency to the
Flourishing of Religion, in the rising Generation.

But I would now proceed to mention some Things, that ought to be done, at such
a Day as this, that concern all in general.

And here, the first Thing I shall mention, is Fasting and Prayer. It seems to
me, that the Circumstances of the present Work do loudly call God's People to
abound in this; whether they consider the Experience GOD has lately given 'em,
of the Worth of his Presence, and of the blessed Fruits of the Effusions of his
Spirit, to excite them to pray for the ContinuanceandIncrease, andgreater
Extent of such Blessings; or whether they consider the great Encouragement GOD
has lately given 'em, to pray for the Out-pourings of his Spirit, and the
carrying on this Work, by the great Manifestations he has lately made, of the
Freeness and Riches of his Grace; and how much there is, in what we have seen
of the glorious Works of GOD's Power and Grace, to put us in Mind of the yet
greater Things of this Nature, that he has spoken of in his Word, and to excite
our Longings for those Things, and Hopes of their Approach; or whether we
consider the great Opposition that Satan makes against this Work, and the many
Difficulties with which it is clogged, and the distressing Circumstances that
some Parts of GOD's Church in this Land are under at this Day, on one Account
and another.

So is GOD's Will, through his wonderful Grace, that the Prayers of his Saints
should be one great and principal Means of carrying on the Designs of CHRIST's
Kingdom in the World. When GOD has something very great to accomplish for his
Church, it is his Will, that there should precede it, the extraordinary Prayers
of his People; as is manifest by Ezekiel. 36. 37. I will yet, for this, be
enquired of, by the House of Israel, to do it for them; together with the
Context. And it is revealed that, when GOD is about to accomplish great Things
for his Church, he will begin by remarkably pouring out the Spirit of
GraceandSupplication. Zech. 12. 10. If we are not to expect that the Devil
should go out of a particular Person, that is under a bodily Possession,
without extraordinary Prayer, or Prayer and Fasting; how much less, should we
expect to have him cast out of the Land, and the World, without it.

I am sensible that considerable has been done in Duties of this Nature, in
some Places; but I don't think so much as GOD, in the present Dispensations of
his Providence calls for. I should think the People of GOD in this Land, at
such a Time as this is, would be in the Way of their Duty, to do three Times so
much at Fasting and Prayer as they do; not only, nor principally, for the
pouring out of the Spirit on those Towns or Places where they belong; but that
GOD would appear for his Church, and in Mercy to miserable Men, to carry on his
Work in the Land, and in the World of Mankind, and to fulfill the Things that he
has spoken of in his Word, that his Church has been so long wishing and hoping
and waiting for. They that make Mention of the Lord, at this Day, ought not to
keep Silence, and should give God no Rest, 'till he establish, and 'till he
make Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth, agreeable to Isa. 62. 6, 7. Before the
first great Out-pouring of the Spirit of GOD, on the Christian Church, which
began at Jerusalem, the Church of GOD gave themselves to incessant Prayer, Act.
1. 13, 14. There is a Time spoken of, wherein GOD will remarkably and
wonderfully appear, for the Deliverance of his Church from all her Enemies, and
when he will avenge his own Elect: And CHRIST reveals that this will be in
Answer to their incessant Prayers, or crying Day and Night, Luke 18. 7. In
Israel, the Day of Atonement, which was their great Day of Fasting and Prayer,
preceeded and made Way for the glorious and joyful Feast of Tabernacles. When
CHRIST is mystically born into the World, to rule over all Nations, it is
represented in the 12 Chap. of Rev. as being in Consequence of the Church's
crying, and travailing in Birth, and being pained to be delivered. One Thing
here intended, doubtless is, her crying and agonizing in Prayer.

GOD seems now, at this very Time, to be waiting for this from us. When GOD is
about to bestow some great Blessing on his Church, it is often his Manner, in
the first Place, so to order Things in his Providence, as to show his Church
their great Need of it, and to bring 'em into Distress for Want of it, and so
put 'em upon crying earnestly to him for it. And let us consider GOD's present
Dispensations toward his Church in this Land: A glorious Work of his Grace has
been begun etcarried on; and GOD has, of late, suffered innumerable
Difficulties to arise, that do in a great Measure clog and hinder it, and bring
many of GOD's dear Children into great Distress; and yet don't wholly forsake
the Work of his Hand; there are remarkable Tokens of his Presence still to be
seen, here and there; as though he was not forward to forsake us, and (if I may
so say) as though he had a Mind to carry on his Work; but only was waiting for
something that he expected in us, as requisite in order to it. And we have a
great deal of Reason to think, that one Thing at least is, that we should
further acknowledge the Greatness and Necessity of such a Mercy, and our
Dependence on GOD for it, in earnest and importunate Prayers to him. And by the
many Errors that have been run into, and the Wounds we have thereby given our
selves and the Cause that we would promote, and the Mischief and Confusion we
have thereby made, GOD has hitherto been remarkably showing us our great and
universal Dependence on him, and exceeding Need of his Help and Grace: which
should engage our Cries to him for it.

There is no Way that Christians in a private Capacity can do so much to
promote the Work of GOD, and advance the Kingdom of CHRIST, as by Prayer. By
this even Women, Children and Servants may have a public Influence. Let
Persons be never so weak, and never so mean, and under never so poor Advantages
to do much for Christ, and the Souls of Men, otherwise; yet, if they have much
of the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, in this Way, they may have Power with
him that is infinite in Power, and has the Government of the whole World: And
so a poor Man in his Cottage may have a blessed Influence all over the World.
GOD is, if I may so say, at the Command of the Prayer of Faith; and in this
Respect is, as it were, under the Power of his People; as Princes, they have
Power with God, and prevail: Though they may be private Persons, their Prayers
are put up in the Name of a Mediator, that is a public Person, being the Head
of the whole Church, and the Lord of the Universe: And if they have a great
Sense of the Importance of eternal Things, and Concern for the precious Souls
of Men, yet they need not regret it, that they are not Preachers; they may go
in their Earnestness and Agonies of Soul, and pour out their Souls before One
that is able to do all Things; before him they may speak as freely as
Ministers; they have a great High Priest, through whom they may come boldly at
all Times, and may vent themselves before a Prayer-hearing Father, without any
Restraint.

If the People of GOD, at this Day, instead of spending Time in fruitless
Disputing, and talking about Opposers, and judging of them, and animadverting
upon the Unreasonableness of their Talk and Behavior, and its Inconsistence
with true Experience, would be more silent in this Way, and open their Mouths
much more before GOD, and spend more Time in Fasting and Prayer, they would be
more in the Way of a Blessing. And if some Christians in the Land, that have
been complaining of their Ministers, and struggling in vain to deliver
themselves, from the Difficulties they have complained of, under their
Ministry, had said and acted less before Men, and had applied themselves with
all their Might to cry to GOD for their Ministers, had as it were risen, and
stormed Heaven with their humble, servent and incessant Prayers for them, they
would have been much more in the Way of Success.

GOD in his Providence, appearing in the present State of Things, does
especially call on his People in New England to be very much in praying to him
for the pouring out of the Spirit upon Ministers in the Land. For though it is
not for us to determine, concerning particular Ministers, how much they have of
the Spirit of GOD; yet in the general, it is apparent, that there is, at this
Day, Need of very great Degrees of the Presence of GOD with the Ministry in
New England, much greater Degrees of it than has hitherto been granted; they
need it for themselves, and the Church of God stands in extreme Need of it.

In Days of Fasting and Prayer, wherein the whole Church or Congregation is
concerned, if the whole Day, besides what is spent in our Families, was not
spent in the Meeting House, but Part of it in particular praying Companies or
Societies, it would have a Tendency to animate and engage Devotion, more than
if the whole Day were spent in public, where the People are no Way active
themselves in the Worship, any otherwise than as they join with the Ministers.
The Inhabitants of many of our Towns are now divided into particular praying
Societies, most of the People, young and old, have voluntarily associated
themselves, in distinct Companies, for mutual Assistance, in social Worship, in
private Houses: What I intend therefore is, that Days of Prayer should be spent
partly in these distinct praying Companies. Such a Method of keeping a Fast as
this, has several Times been proved, viz. In the Forenoon, after the Duties of
the Family and Closet, as early as might be, all the People of the Congregation
have gathered in their particular religious Societies; Companies of Men by
themselves, and Companies of Women by themselves; young Men by themselves, and
young Women by themselves; and Companies of Children, in all Parts of the Town,
by themselves, as many as were capable of social religious Exercises; the Boys
by themselves, and Girls by themselves: And about the middle of the Day, at an
appointed Hour, all have met together in the House of GOD, to offer up public
Prayers, and to hear a Sermon suitable to the Occasion: And then, they have
retired from the House of God again, into their private Societies, and spent
the remaining Part of the Day in praying together there, excepting so much as
was requisite for the Duties of the Family and Closet, in their own Houses. --
And it has been found to be of great Benefit, to assist and engage the Minds of
the People in the Duties of the Day.

I have often thought it would be a Thing very desirable, and very likely to
be followed with a great Blessing, if there could be some Contrivance, that
there should be an Agreement of all GOD's People in America, that are well
affected to this Work, to keep a Day of Fasting and Prayer to God; wherein we
should all unite on the same Day, in humbling our selves before GOD for our
past long continued Luke warmnessandUnprofitableness; not omitting Humiliation
for the Errors that so many of GOD's People that have been zealously affected
toward this Work, through their Infirmity and remaining Blindness and
Corruption, have run into; and together with Thanksgivings to GOD, for so
glorious and wonderful a Display of his Power and Grace, in the late
Out-pourings of his Spirit, to address the Father of Mercies, with Prayers and
Supplications, and earnest Cries, that he would guide and direct his own
People, and that he would continue, and still carry on this Work, and more
abundantly and extensively pour out his Spirit; and particularly that he would
pour out his Spirit upon Ministers; and that he would bow the Heavens and come
down, and erect his glorious Kingdom through the Earth. -- Some perhaps may think
that its being all on the same Day, is a Circumstance of no great Consequence;
but I cannot be of that Mind: Such a Circumstance makes the Union and Agreement
of God's People in his Worship the more visible, and puts the greater Honor
upon God, and would have a great Tendency to assist and enliven the Devotions
of Christians: It seems to me, it would mightily encourage and animate God's
Saints, in humbly and earnestly seeking to God, for such Blessings which
concerns them all; and that it would be much for the rejoicing of all, to
think, that at the same Time, such Multitudes of GOD's dear Children, far and
near, were sending up their Cries to the same common Father, for the same
Mercies. CHRIST speaks of Agreement in asking, as what contributes to the
Prevalence of the Prayers of his People. Matthew. 18. 19. Again I say unto you,
that if any two of you, shall agree on Earth, as touching any Thing that they
shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven. If the
Agreement, or united Purpose and Appointment of but two of God's Children,
would contribute much to the Prevalence of their Prayers, how much more the
Agreement of so many Thousands? CHRIST delights greatly in the Union of his
People, as appears by his Prayer in the 17th of John: And especially is the
Appearance of their Union in Worship, lovely and attractive unto him.

I doubt not but such a Thing as I have now mentioned is practicable, without a
great deal of Trouble: Some considerable Number of Ministers might meet
together, and draw up the Proposal, wherein a certain Day should be pitched
upon, at a sufficient Distance, endeavoring therein to avoid any other public
Day, that might interfere with the Design, in any of the Provinces, and the
Business of the Day should be particularly mentioned; and these Proposals
should be published, and sent abroad, into all Parts, with a Desire, that as
many Ministers as are disposed to fall in with 'em, would propose the Matter to
their Congregations, and having taken their Consent, would subscribe their
Names, together with the Places of which they are Ministers, and send back the
Proposals thus prescribed, to the Printer; (the Hands of many Ministers might
be to one Paper) and the Printer having received the Papers, thus subscribed,
from all the Provinces, might print the Proposals again, with all the Names;
thus they might be sent abroad again, with the Names, that God's People might
know who are united with 'em in the Affair: -- One of the Ministers of Boston
might be desired to have the Oversight of the printing and dispersing the
Proposals. -- In such a Way, perhaps, might be fulfilled, in some Measure, such
a general Mourning and Supplication of God's People, as is spoken of, Zech. 12.
at the latter End, with which the Church's glorious Day is to be introduced.
And such a Day might be something like the Day of Atonement in Israel, before
the joyful Feast of Tabernacles.

One Thing more I would mention concerning Fasting and Prayer, wherein I think
there has been a Neglect in Ministers; and that is, that although they recommend,
and much insist on the Duty of secret Prayer, in their Preaching; so little is
said about secret Fasting. It is a Duty recommended by our Savior to his
Followers, just in like Manner as secret Prayer is; as may be seen by comparing
the 5. and6. v. of the 6. Chap. of Mat. with v. 16, 17, 18. Though I don't
suppose that secret Fasting is to be practiced in a stated Manner, and steady
Course, as secret Prayer, yet it seems to me, it is a Duty that all professing
Christians should practice, andfrequently practice. There are many Occasions,
of both a spiritual and temporal Nature, that do properly require it; and there
are many particular Mercies, that we desire for our selves or Friends, that it
would be proper, in this Manner, to seek of GOD.

Another Thing I would also mention, wherein it appears to me that there has
been an Omission, with Respect to the external Worship of GOD. There has been
of late, a great Increase of preaching the Word, and a great Increase of social
Prayer, and a great Increase of singing Praises: These external Duties of
Religion are attended, much more frequently than they used to be; yet I cannot
understand that there is any Increase of the Administration of the Lord's
Supper, or that God's People do any more frequently commemorate the dying Love
of their Redeemer, in this sacred Memorial of it, than they used to do: Though I
don't see why an Increase of Love to Christ, should not dispose Christians, as
much to increase in this, as in those other Duties; or why it is not as proper,
that Christ's Disciples should abound in this Duty, in this joyful Season,
which is spiritually Supper-Time, a Feast Day with God's Saints, wherein Christ
is so abundantly manifesting his dying Love to Souls, and is dealing forth so
liberally of the precious Fruits of his Death. It seems plain by the Scripture,
that the primitive Christians were wont to celebrate this Memorial of the
Sufferings of their dear Redeemer every Lord's Day: And so I believe it will be
again in the Church of Christ, in Days that are approaching. And whether we
attend this holy and sweet Ordinance so often now, or no, yet I cannot but think
it would become us, at such a Time as this, to attend it much oftener than is
commonly done in the Land.

But another Thing I would mention, which it is of much greater Importance,
that we should attend to; and that is the Duty, that is incumbent upon God's
People at this Day, to take Heed, that while they abound in external Duties of
Devotion, such as Praying, Hearing, Singing,and attending religious Meetings,
there be a proportionable Care to abound in moral Duties, such as Acts of
Righteousness, Truth, Meekness, Forgiveness and Love toward our Neighbor;
which are of much greater Importance in the Sight of God, than all the
Externals of his Worship: Which our Savior was particularly careful, that Men
should be well aware of. Mat. 9. 13. But go ye, and learn what that means, I
will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice. And Chap. 12. 7. But if ye had known what
this means, I will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, ye would not have condemned
the Guiltless.

The internal Acts and Principles of the Worship of God, or the Worship of the
Heart, in the Love and Fear of God, Trust in God, and Resignation to God, etc.
are the most essential and important of all Duties of Religion whatsoever; for
therein consists the Essence of all Religion. But of this inward Religion,
there are two Sorts of external Manifestations or Expressions. The one Sort,
are outward Acts of Worship, such as meeting in religious Assemblies, attending
Sacraments,and other outward Institutions,and honoring God with Gestures, such
as bowing, or kneeling before him, or with Words, in speaking honorably of
him, in Prayer, Praise, or religious Conference. And the other Sort, are the
Expressions of our Love to GOD, by obeying his moral Commands, of Self-denial,
Righteousness, Meekness, and Christian Love, in our Behavior among Men. And
the latter are of vastly the greatest Importance in the Christian Life. God
makes little Account of the former, in Comparison of them. They are abundantly
more insisted on, by the Prophets, in the Old Testament, and CHRIST and his
Apostles, in the New. When these two Kinds of Duties are spoken of together,
the latter are evermore greatly preferred. As in Isa. 1. 12, to the 18. and
Amos 5. 21, etc. -- and Mic. 6. 7, 8. and Isa. 58. 5, 6, 7. and Zech. 7. ten
first Verses, and Jer. 2. seven first Verses, and Mat. 15. 3, etc. Often, when
the Times were very corrupt in Israel, the (...) abounded in the former Kind of
Duties, but were in such Times, always notoriously deficient in the latter; as
the Prophets complain Isa. 58. four first Verses, Jer. 6. 13, compared with
ver. 20. Hypocrites and Self-righteous Persons, do much more commonly abound in
the former Kind of Duties, than the latter; as Christ remarks of the Pharisees,
Mat. 23. 14, 25, and 34. When the Scripture directs us to show our Faith by our
Works, it is principally the latter Sort are intended; as appears by Jam. 2.
from 8 ver. to the End, and 1 John 2d Chap. ver. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. And we are
to be judged at the last Day, especially by these latter sort of Works; as is
evident by the Account we have of the Day of Judgment, in the 25 of Matthew.
External Acts of Worship, in Words and Gestures, and outward Forms, are of
little Use, but as Signs of something else, or as they are a Profession of
inward Worship: They are not so properly showing our Religion by our Deeds; for
they are only a showing our Religion by Words, or an outward Profession. But he
that shows Religion in the other Sort of Duties, shows it in something more
than a Profession of Words, he shows it in Deeds. And though Deeds may be
hypocritical, as well as Words; yet in themselves they are of greater
Importance, for they are much more profitable to our selves and our Neighbor.
We cannot express our Love to God, by doing any Thing that is profitable to GOD;
GOD would therefore have us do it in those Things that are profitable to our
Neighbors, whom he has constituted his Receivers: Our Goodness extends not to
God, but to our Fellow Christians. The latter Sort of Duties, put greater
Honor upon God, because there is greater Self-denial in them. The external
Acts of Worship, consisting in bodily Gestures, Words and Sounds are the
cheapest Part of Religion, and least contrary to our Lusts. The Difficulty of
thorough, external Religion, don't lie in them. Let wicked Men enjoy their
Covetousness, and their Pride, their Malice, Envy and Revenge, and their
Sensuality and Voluptuousness, in their Behavior amongst Men, and they will be
willing to compound the Matter with God, and submit to what Forms of Worship
you please, and as they as you please; as is manifest in the Jews of (...) the
Days of the Prophets, and the Pharisees in Christ's Time, and the Papists and
Mahometans at this Day.

At a Time, when there is an Appearance of the Approach of any glorious Revival
of God's Church, God does especially call his professing People to the Practice
of moral Duties. Isa. 56. 1. Thus faith the Lord; keep ye Judgment, and do
Justice; for my Salvation is near to come, and my Righteousness to be revealed.
So when John preached, that the Kingdom of Heaven was at Hand, and cried to the
People, Prepare ye the Way of the Lord, make his Paths strait, as we have an
Account, Luke 3. 4. the People asked him, What they should do? He answers, He
that has two Coats, let him impart to him that has none, and he that has
Meat, let him do likewise. The Publicans said, What shall we do? He answers,
Exact no more than that which is appointed you. And the Soldiers asked him,
What shall we do? He replies, Do Violence to no Man; neither accuse any
falsely; and be content with your Wages. Ver. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

God's People, at such a Time as this, ought especially to abound in Deeds of
Charity, or Almsgiving. We generally, in these Days, seem to fall far below
the true Spirit and Practice of Christianity, with Regard to this Duty, and
seem to have but little Notion of it, so far as I can understand the
New Testament. -- At a Time when God is so liberal of spiritual Things, we
ought not to be strait-handed toward him, and sparing of our temporal Things.
-- So far as I can judge by the Scripture, there is no external Duty
whatsoever, by which Persons will be so much in the Way, not only of receiving
temporal Benefits, but so spiritual Blessings, the Influences of God's (...)
Spirit in the Heart, in divine Discoveries and spiritual Consolations. I think
it would be unreasonable to understand those Promises, made to this Duty, in
the 58 Chap. of Isaiah, in a Sense exclusive of spiritual
DiscoveriesandComforts. Isa. 58. 7th v. etc. -- Is it not to deal thy Bread to
the hungry, and that thou bring the Poor that are cast cut, to thy House? When
thou see the Naked that thou cover him and that thou hide not thy self from
thine own Flesh? Then shall thy Light break forth as, the Morning, and thy
Health shall spring forth speedily, and thy Righteousness shall go before thee,
and the Glory of the Lord shall be thy Rere-ward; then shall thou call, and the
Lord shall answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, Here I am. If thou take
away from the midst of thee, the Yoke, the putting forth of the Finger, and
speaking Vanity; and if thou draw out the Soul to the Hungry, and satisfy the
afflicted Soul; then shall thy Light rise in Obscurity, and thy Darkness be as
the Noonday; and the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy Soul
in Drought, and make fat thy Bones; and thou shall be like a watered Garden,
and like a Spring of Water, whose Waters fail not. So, that giving to the Poor
is the Way to receive spiritual Blessings, is manifest by Psalm. 112. 4 Ver.
etc. Unto the Upright, there arises Light in the Darkness; he is gracious, and
full of Compassion, and righteous: A good Man shows Favor and lends, he
will guide his Affairs with Discretion; surely he shall not be moved for ever;
the Righteous shall be in everlasting Remembrance; he shall not be afraid of
evil Tidings, his Heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord; his Heart is
established, he shall not be afraid, until he see his Desire upon his Enemies:
He has dispersed, he has given to the Poor; his Horn shall be exalted with
Honor. That this is one likely Means to obtain Assurance, is evident by 1 John
3. 18, 19. My little Children, let us not love in Word, neither in Tongue, but
in Deed, and in Truth; and hereby we know that we are of the Truth, and shall
assure our Hearts before him.

We have a remarkable Instance in Abraham, of God's rewarding Deeds of Charity
with sweet Discoveries of himself, when he had been remarkably charitable to
his Brother Lot, and the People that he had redeemed out of Captivity with him,
by exposing his Life to rescue them, and had re-taken not only the Persons, but
all the Goods, the Spoil that had been taken by Chedorlaomer, and the Kings
that were with him, and the King of Sodom offered him, that if he would give
him the Persons, he might take the Goods to himself, Abraham refused to take
any Thing, even so much as a Thread or Shoelatchet, but returned all. He might
have greatly enriched himself, if he had taken the Spoils to himself, for it
was the Spoils of five wealthy Kings, and their Kingdoms, yet he coveted it
not; the King and People of Sodom were now become Objects of Charity, having
been stripped of all by their Enemies, therefore Abraham generously bestowed
all upon them; as we have an Account in Genesis 14. and four last Verses. And he
was soon rewarded for it, by a blessed Discovery that God made of himself to
him; as we have an Account in the next Words, After these Things, the Word of
the Lord came unto Abram, in a Vision, saying, Fear not Abram, I am thy Shield,
and thy exceeding great Reward. I am thy Shield, to defend thee in Battle, as I
have now done; and though thou have charitably refused to take any Reward, for
exposing thy Life, to rescue this People, yet fear not, thou shall not lose,
thou shall have a Reward, I am thy exceeding great Reward.

When Christ was upon Earth he was poor, and an Object of Charity; and during
the Time of his public Ministry, he was supported by the Charity of some of
his Followers, and particularly certain Women, of whom we read Luke 8. 2, 3.
And these Women were rewarded, by being peculiarly favored with gracious
Manifestations, which Christ made of himself to them. He discovered himself
first to them after his Resurrection, before the twelve Disciples: They first
saw a Vision of glorious Angels, who spoke comfortably to them; and then Christ
appeared to 'em, and spoke Peace to 'em, saying, All Hail, be not afraid; and
they were admitted to come, and hold him by the Feet, and worship him, Mat. 28.
And though we cannot now be charitable in this Way, to Christ in Person, who in
his exalted State, is infinitely above the Need of our Charity; yet we may be
charitable to Christ now, as well as they then; for though Christ is not here,
yet he has left others in his Room, to be his Receivers; and they are the Poor.
Christ is yet poor in his Members; and he that gives to them, lends to the
Lord: And Christ tells us that he shall look on what is done to them, as done
to him.

Rebekah, in her Marriage with Isaac, was undoubtedly a remarkable Type of the
Church, in her Espousals to the Lord Jesus. But she found her Husband, in doing
Deeds of Charity, agreeable to the Prayer of Abraham's Servant, who prayed that
this might be the Thing that might distinguish and mark out the Virgin, that
was to be Isaac's Wise. So Cornelius was bro't to the Knowledge of Christ, in
this Way. He was a devout Man, and one that feared God, with all his House;
which gave much Alms to the People, and prayed to God always. And an Angel
appeared to him, and said to him, Thy Prayers and thine Alms are come up for a
Memorial before God; and now send Men to Joppa, and call for one Simon, whose
Surname is Peter, etc. Act. 10. at the beginning. And we have an Account in the
following Parts of the Chapter, how God, by Peter's Preaching, revealed Christ
to Cornelius and his Family, and of the Holy Ghost's descending upon them, and
filling their Hearts with Joy, and their Mouths with Praises.

Some may possibly object that for Persons to do Deeds of Charity, in Hope of
obtaining spiritual Blessings and Comforts in this Way, would seem to show a
Self-righteous Spirit, as though they would offer something to God, to purchase
these Favors. But if this be a good Objection, it may be made against every
Duty whatsoever. All external Duties of the first Table will be excluded by it,
as well as those of the second. First-Table-Duties have as direct a Tendency to
raise self-righteous Persons Expectations of receiving something from God, on
Account of them, as second-Table-Duties; and on some Accounts more, for those
Duties are more immediately offered to God, and therefore Persons are more
ready to expect something from God for them. But no Duty is to be neglected,
for Fear of making a Righteousness of it. And I have always observed, that
those Professors that are most partial in their Duty, exact and abundant in
external Duties of the first Table, and slack as to those of the second, are
the most Self-righteous.

If God's People in this Land, were once brought to abound in such Deeds of
Love, as much as in Praying, Hearing, Singing, and religious Meetings and
Conference, it would be a most blessed Omen: There is nothing would have a
greater Tendency to bring the GOD of Love down from Heaven to the Earth: So
amiable would be the Sight, in the Eyes of our loving and exalted Redeemer,
that it would soon as it were fetch him down from his Throne in Heaven, to set
up his Tabernacle with Men on the Earth, and dwell with them. I don't remember
ever to have read of any remarkable Out-pouring of the Spirit, that continued
any long Time, but what was attended with an abounding in this Duty. So we know
it was with that great Effusion of the Spirit that began at Jerusalem in the
Apostle Days: And so in the late remarkable Revival of Religion in Saxony,
which began by the Labors of the famous Professor Franck, and has now been
carried on for above thirty Years, and has spread it happy Influences into many
Parts of the World it was begun, and has been carried on, by a wonderful
Practice of this Duty. And the remarkable Blessing that God has given Mr.
Whitefield, and the great Success with which he has crowned him, may well be
thought to be very much owing to his laying out himself so abundantly in
charitable Designs. And it is foretold, that God's People shall abound in this
Day, in the Time of the great Out-pouring of the Spirit that shall be in the
latter Days. Isai. 32. 5 and 8. The vile Person shall no more be called
liberal, nor the Churl said to be bountiful. -- But the Liberal devises
liberal Things, and by liberal Things shall he stand.

To promote a Reformation, with Respect to all Sorts of Duties, among a
professing People, one proper Means, and that which is recommended by frequent
Scripture Examples, is their solemn, public renewing their Covenant with GOD.
And doubtless it would greatly tend to promote this Work in the Land, if the
Congregations of GOD's People could generally be brought to this. If a Draught
of a Covenant should be made by their Ministers, wherein there should be an
express Mention of those particular Duties, that the People of the respective
Congregations have been observed to be most prone to neglect, and those
particular Sins that they have heretofore especially fallen into, or that it
may be apprehended they are especially in Danger of, whereby they may prevent
or resist the Motions of God's Spirit, and the Matter should be fully proposed
and explained to the People, and they have sufficient Opportunity given them
for Consideration, and then they should be led, all that are capable of
Understanding, particularly to subscribe the Covenant, and also should all
appear together, on a Day of Prayer and Fasting, publicly to own it before God
in his House, as their Vow to the LORD; hereby Congregations of Christians
would do that which would be beautiful, and would put Honor upon GOD, and be
very profitable to themselves.

Such a Thing as this, was attended with a very wonderful Blessing in Scotland,
and followed with a great Increase of the blessed Tokens of the Presence of
God, and remarkable Out-pourings of his Spirit; as the Author of the fulfilling
of the Scripture informs, p. 186. 5th Edition.

A People must be taken, when they are in a good Mood, when considerable
religious Impressions are prevailing among 'em; otherwise they will hardly be
induced to this; but innumerable will be their Objections and Cavils against it.

One Thing more I would mention, which if God should still carry on this Work,
would tend much to promote it, and that is, that an History should be published
once a Month, or once a Fortnight, of the Progress of it, by one of the
Ministers of Boston, who are near the Press, and are most conveniently
situated, to receive Accounts from all Parts. It has been found by Experience,
that the Tidings of remarkable Effects of the Power and Grace of God, in any
Place, tend greatly to awaken and engage the Minds of Persons, in other Places.
It Is great Pity therefore, but that some Means should be used, for the most
speedy, most extensive and certain giving Information of such Things, and that
the Country ben't left, only to the flow, partial and doubtful Information, and
false Representations of common Report.

Thus I have, (I hope, by the Help of GOD,) finished what I proposed. I have
taken the more Pains in it, because it appears to me, that now God is giving us
the most happy Season to attempt an universal Reformation, that ever was given
in New England. And it is a thousand Pities, that we should fail of that which
would be so glorious, for want of being sensible of our Opportunity, or being
aware of those Things that tend to hinder it, or our taking improper Courses to
obtain it, or not being sensible in what Way God expects we should seek it. If
it should please God to bless any Means, for the convincing, the Country of his
Hand in this Work, and bringing them fully and freely to acknowledge his
glorious Power and Grace in it, and engage with one Heart and Soul, and by due
Methods, to endeavor to promote it, it would be a Dispensation of divine
Providence, that would have a most glorious Aspect, happily signifying the
Approach of great and glorious Things to the Church of GOD, and justly causing
us to hope, that CHRIST would speedily come, to set up his Kingdom of Light,
Holiness, Peace and Joy on Earth, as is foretold in his Word. Amen; Even so
come LORD JESUS!

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 68. line 12. read Over-powering. p. 82. l 21 r do this p 94. l 25. r
Figure p 96 l 19 r Church of God. p 102 l. 18 r. Habitable. p 114 l. 8 r. came.
p. 129 l 28 r sit still. p. 131 l 29 r oppresses them. p 135 l 9 r. Jewish
Teachers p 155 l (...) r Woman. p. 159 r. 18 delc or p 161 l 18. r tends p 185.
l. 26 r one with. p 190 l 31 r. Works. p. 196 l. 31 r source p. 197. l 14 r
narrowly p 209 l. 16 r. brutish. p. 233 l. 10 r. Spirit. p. 234 l. 10 r brings.
p. 241 l. 5. r found by. p. 254 l. 15 r. be used. p. 284 l. 2 r. to little. p.
342 l. 9 r. treasuring. p. 347 l. 14. r. with the Appearance. p. 349. l. 18 r.
Original. p. 351 l. 15 r. the. l. 28 r. Consent. p. 365 l. 9 r. Subscribed.


