ACCOUNT, Showing the PROGRESS of the Colony of GEORGIA IN AMERICA FROM IT IS
First Establishment.

Published per Order of the Honorable the Trustees.

LONDON: Printed in the Year M, DCC, XLI.

MARYLAND: Reprinted and Sold by Jonas Green, at his PRINTING-OFFICE in
Annapolis. 1742.

THE PREFACE.
IN the Year 1741, there was Printed and Published by P. T. in Charlestown in
South Carolina, for the Authors P. T -- r, M. D. H. A -- n, M. A. D. D -- s,
and Others, Land-holders in Georgia, (at that Time in Charlestown) a Pamphlet
entitled, A True and Historical Narrative of the Colony of Georgia in America,
etc. Dedicated to his Excellency James Oglethorpe, Esquire General and Commander in
Chief of his Majesty's Forces in South Carolina and Georgia, etc. The
Dedication seems a very just Introduction to such a Narrative, and both the one
and the other, the real Offspring of such factious and turbulent Authors, being
a mean low witted Sneer, a malicious ill-natured Invective, against that
honorable Gentleman, wherein the Authors, without any regard to Good Manners
or Common Civility, treat his Excellency (as it were to his Face) with such
Rudeness as ill becomes any Person to use even to an Inferior: However, I
cannot say but, a very fit Prelude to such an inconsistent, spiteful, false
Narrative, as is subjoined to the Dedication; a Narrative founded in Lies and
Misrepresentations, projected and published by a few Persons of no Estate, and
as little Character, Persons sour'd in their Tempers, because not humored in
their endeavors of subverting, or at least altering, the Constitution of a new
settled Colony, even in it is Infancy, and before any great Experiment was made
of Advancing and Improving it; Persons, who were under a necessity of Banishing
themselves from a Colony, where, for their seditious and rebellious Practices,
and turbulent restless Spirits, they were every Day in danger of being called
to Account, as stirrers up of Discontent, and as Incendiaries against the Peace
of the Government; Persons who had shared deeply in his Excellency's Favors,
and therefore guilty of the most monstrous Sin in nature, viz. Ingratitude; for
Si ingratum dixeris, Omnia. In short, they are Persons to whom do most justly
belong the Character given by the Right Honorable Sir William Young, in a
Debate concerning the Printer of a seditious Paper, that they are Men whose
daily Employment has been, for some Time, to misrepresent the Public Measures,
to disperse Scandal, and excite Rebellion; who have industriously propagated
every Murmur of Discontent, and preserved every Whisper of Malevolence from
perishing in the Birth. Gent. Mag. Supplement to 1741, page 682. B.

These are the mighty Authors and Publishers of the Scurrilous Narrative! the
Design of which seems to be pointed chiefly toward obstructing the Peopling,
and further Settling, the Colony of Georgia, and sullying the Character and
Administration of a Gentleman, who may (without Flattery or Falsehood) be justly
termed the Romulus, Father, and Founder of Georgia; a Gentleman who, without
any Views but that of enlarging its Majesty's Dominions, propagating the
Protestant Religion, promoting the Trade of his Country, and providing for the
Wants and Necessities of indigent Christians, has voluntarily banished himself
from the Pleasures of a Court, and exposed himself to the repeated Dangers of
the vast Atlantic Ocean, in several perilous and tedious Voyages; instead of
allowing himself the Satisfaction, which a plentiful Fortune, powerful Friends,
and great Merit, entitle him to in England, he has inured himself to the
greatest Hardships, that any the meanest Inhabitant of this new Colony could be
exposed to; his Diet has been moldy Bread, or boiled Rice instead of Bread,
Salt Beef, Pork, etc. his Drink has been Water, his Bed the damp Earth, without
any other Covering than the Canopy of Heaven to shelter him; and all this to
set an Example to this new Colony, how they might bear with such Hardships in
their new Settlements.

His Conduct in War, falls nothing short of his Prudence in private Life, and
Policy in Public Stations, however the same might have been misrepresented to
the World, with respect to the Miscarriage before St. Augustine, the true
Causes of which are justly to be laid at the Door of Two Sorts of Men,
concerned in that Expedition; first, those under a Command different from the
General, upon whose Assistance the Success of that Expedition chiefly depended,
but who entirely left him when their Assistance was most wanted. The Second
Sort were those Out-Guards, who were to give the Alarm to the Main-Guard, when
the Spaniards advanced; but who, instead of firing their Pieces, and giving the
Alarm, flung down their Arms and ran away; by which Means, the Slaughter of the
Men at Musa happened: And yet, Ill Nature will lay the Blame of all to his
Excellency, when indeed the Miscarriage was occasioned by either Neglect of, or
Disobedience to, the Military Orders that his Excellency had given; or by not
being supported by those under a different Command, on whom he chiefly depended
for the Success of that Attack; but (to his Excellency's great Surprise)
instead of sending their Boats and Men ashore, according to a Result of a
Council of War, held on board one of his Majesty's Ships, to assist in order to
destroy the Six Galleys, wherein the Spaniards greatest Safeguard lay, and
which continually fired from under the Walls over the River, on the Land
Forces, hoisted their Sails and went away, without giving the least Notice of
their Departure, by which Means the Garrison was relieved with Provisions
through the Metanges, a small Inlet about Four Leagues to the Southward of the
Bar, which might have been prevented, had those of a different Command done
their Duty. Thus I leave any impartial Man, to judge the Consequence of their
Departure at so critical a Iuncture, and the fatal Event it produced to his
Majesty's Land Forces. However, his Excellency's Conduct has been approved of
at Home, and will soon appear in such a Light, that his Enemies will be ashamed
of their impudent Lies, and perhaps pay for their own Folly; and how far the
Ill Nature, and impotent Malice, of the Authors of the Narrative, have carried
them beyond the Bounds of Truth or good Manners, will appear in the following
Sheets, which give a true and authentic Account of the Progress of that Colony,
from it is first Establishment, to the Year 1741, which being published by the
Order of the Honorable the Trustees, and printed in London Anno 1741, is now
Reprinted here, with no other View, than to obviate the Prejudices which may
be raised in the Minds of People, by that Scandalous Narrative, and so may be a
Means of delivering that New Settlement, from the il Effect of such
Misrepresentations as are handed about by that label, to deter his Majesty's
Subjects from settling in that Frontier Colony, so necessary for advancing and
protecting the Trade of this, and our Mother Country, on the Southermost Part
of North America, and extending our Colonies both on the Gulf of Florida* and
the Bay of Mexico.

Magna est Veritas, and prevalebit.

AN ACCOUNT, Showing the Progress of the Colony of GEORGIA IN AMERICA, From
it is First ESTABLISHMENT.
HIS Majesty King GEORGE the Second, by his Letters Patent bearing date the 9
th Day of June, One thousand seven hundred and thirty two, reciting amongst
many other things, that many of his poor Subjects were through Misfortunes and
want of Employment reduced to great Necessities, and would be glad to be
Settled in any of his Majesty's Provinces of America, where by Cultivating the
Lands Wast and Desolate, they might not only gain a comfortable Subsistence,
but also, strengthen his Majesty's Colonies, and increase the Trade, Navigation
and Wealth of his Majesty's Realms, and that the Provinces in North America had
been frequently Ravaged by Indian Enemies, more especially that of South
Carolina, whose Southern Frontier continued unsettled and lay open to the
Neighboring Savages; and that to relieve the Wants of the said Poor People,
and to protect his Majesty's Subjects in South Carolina, a Regular Colony of
the said Poor People should be Settled and Established in the Southern
Frontiers of Carolina, did for the Considerations aforesaid, Constitute a
Corporation by the Name of, the Trustees for Establishing the Colony of Georgia
in America, with Capacity to purchase and take Lands, to sue, and to be sued,
to have a Common Seal, and to Choose Members of the said Corporation on the
third Thursday in March Yearly, with restraining Clauses, that no Member of the
said Corporation should have any Salary, Fee, Perquisite, Benefit or Profit
whatsoever for Acting therein, or have any Office, Place or Employment of
Profit under the said Corporation, with a Direction for the said Corporation
every Year to lay an Account in Writing before the Lord Chancellor, Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, Master of the Rolls, Chief Justice of the Common
Plea and Chief Baron of the Exchequer, or any Two of them, of all Moneys or
Effects by them Received or Expended for Carrying on the good Purposes
aforesaid, with a Power to make Bylaws, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances;
And Granted amongst other things to the said Corporation and their Successors,
under the Reservations therein mentioned, seven undivided Parts (the whole into
eight equal parts to be divided) of all those Lands, Countries and Territories,
situate, lying and being in that part of South Carolina in America, which lies
from the most Northern Stream of a River there commonly called the Savannah,
all along the Sea Coast to the Southward, unto the most Southern Stream of a
certain other great Water or River, called the Alatamaha, and Westward from the
Heads of the said Rivers respectively in direct Lines to the South Seas, To
have and to hold the same, to them the said Corporation and their Successors
for Ever, for the better support of the said Colony under the Yearly Rent of
Four Shillings Proclamation Money of South Carolina, for every Hundred Acres of
the said Lands for ever, which the said Corporation should Grant, Demise, Plant
or Settle, but not to Commence until Ten Years after such Grant, Demise,
Planting or Settling: And Erected and Created the said Lands, Countries, and
Territories into one independent and separate Province by the Name of GEORGIA,
and made the Inhabitants who should reside therein, free and not subject to any
Laws, Orders, Statutes, or Constitutions of South Carolina, except the
Commander in Chief of the Militia, and Authorized the said Corporation for the
Term of twenty one Years from the Date of the said Letters Patent to form and
prepare Laws, Statutes and Ordinances for the Government of the said Colony,
not repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of England, to be presented under their
Common Seal, to his Majesty in Council, for his Approbation or Disallowance,
and that the said Laws so Approved of should be in full Force and Virtue within
the said Province: And empowered the Common Council for the Time being of the
said Corporation, or the major Part of them, to dispose of, expend and apply,
all the Moneys and Effects belonging to the said Corporation, and to make
Contracts for Carrying and Effecting the good Purposes therein intended, and
that they should from Time to Time, appoint a Treasurer, Secretary, and such
other Officers, Ministers, and Servants of the said Corporation as they should
see proper, for the good Management of their Affairs, and at their Pleasure to
remove them and appoint Others in their stead, and that they should appoint
reasonable Salaries, Perquisites* and other Rewards for their Labor or
Services, and that such Officers should be Sworn before they Act for the
faithful and due Execution of their respective Offices and Places; and
declared, that the Treasurer and Secretary for the Time being should be
incapable of being Members of the said Corporation; and granted to the said
Corporation that it should be lawful for them, their Officers or Agents, to
Transport and Convey into the said Province, such of his Majesty's Subjects and
Foreigners as were willing to go and Inhabit and Reside there; and declared all
Persons Born within the said Province, and their Children and Posterity, to be
Free Denizens as if they had been Born within any of his Majesty's Dominions:
And empowered the said Common Council in the Name of the Corporation and under
their Common Seal, to distribute, convey, assign, and set over such particular
Portions of the said Lands; Tenements and Hereditaments, unto such of his
Majesty's Subjects and others willing to Live in the said Colony, upon such
Terms, and for such Estates, and upon such Rents, Reservations and Conditions,
as the same might lawfully be granted, and as to the said Common Council, or
the major Part of them, should seem fit and proper, Provided that no Grant
should be made of any part of the said Lands, unto, or in trust for, or for the
Benefit of any Member of the said Corporation, and that no greater Quantity of
the said Lands be granted either entirely or in parcels, to or to the use of,
or in trust for, any one Person, than five hundred Acres; and declared that all
Grants made contrary to the true intent and meaning thereof should be
absolutely Null and Void: And granted that the said Corporation for the Term of
Twenty One Years from the Date of the said Letters Patents should have Power to
Erect and Constitute Judicatures and Courts of Record, or other Courts, to be
held in his Majesty's Name, for the hearing and determining of all manner of
Crimes, Offenses, Pleas, Processes, Plaints, Actions, Matters, Causes and
Things whatsoever, arising or happening within the said Province, or between
Persons Inhabiting or Residing there, and for awarding and making out
Executions thereupon; and directed the said Corporation to Register or cause to
be Registered, all Leases, Grants, Plantings, Conveyances, Settlements and
Improvements whatsoever, as should at any time be made of any Lands, Tenements
or Hereditaments within the said Province, and Yearly transmit Authentic
Accounts thereof unto the Auditor of the Plantations, or his Deputy, and to the
Surveyor of South Carolina, to inspect and survey the same, to Ascertain the
Quit-Rents that should become due according to the Reservation before
mentioned; but not to have, or take any Gratuity, Fee or Reward for such Survey
or Inspection, on Forfeiture of their Office; with a Proviso, That all Leases,
Grants and Conveyances to be made, of any Lands within the said Province, or a
Memorial Containing the Substance or Effect thereof, should be Registered with
the Auditor of the Plantations within One Year from the Date thereof, otherwise
that the same should be void: And directed, that all Rents, Issues or Profits
which should come to the said Corporation, issuing or arising out of, or from
the said Province, should be laid out and applied in such manner as would most
improve and enlarge the said Colony, and best Answer the good Purposes therein
mentioned, and for defraying all other Charges about the same; and directed the
said Corporation from time to time to give in to one of the Secretaries of
State, and to the Commissioners of Trade and Plantations, Accounts of the
Progress of the said Colony: And directed that the said Common Council should
from time to time for the said Term of twenty one Years from the Date of the
said Letters Patent, have Power to appoint all such Governors, Judges,
Magistrates, Ministers, and Officers, Civil and Military, both by Sea and Land,
within the said District, as they should think fit and needful for the
Government of the said Colony (except such Officers as should be appointed for
Managing, Collecting, and Receiving such of his Majesty's Revenues as should
arise within the said Province) with a Proviso, that every Governor so
Appointed, should be Approved by his Majesty, and Qualify himself as other
Governors in America are by Law required to do, and give Security for
Observing the Acts of Parliament relating to Trade and Navigation, and Obeying
all Instructions from his Majesty, or any Acting under his Authority, pursuant
to the said Acts: And Granted, that the said Corporation for the said Term of
twenty one Years, from the Date of the said Letters Patent, should have Power,
by any Commander or other Officer for that Purpose appointed, to Train,
Instruct, Exercise, and Govern, a Militia for the special Defense and Safety of
the said Colony, to Assemble in Martial Array, and put in Warlike Posture, the
Inhabitants of the said Colony, and in Time of actual War, Invasion, or
Rebellion, to use and exercise the Law Martial, and also to erect Forts and
Fortify any Place or Places within the said Colony, and the same to furnish
with all necessary Ammunition, Provision and Stores of War for Offense and
Defense, and from time to time to commit the Custody and Government of them to
such Person or Persons as to them should seem meet, Declaring that the
Governor or Commander in Chief of South Carolina should have the Chief Command
of the Militia of Georgia, and that they should observe his Orders: And Granted
that the said Corporation should have Power to Import or Export their Goods, at
or from any Port or Ports that should be appointed by his Majesty within the
said Province for that purpose, without being obliged to touch at any other
Port in Carolina: And Declared, that after the End of the said twenty one
Years, such Form of Government, and method of making Laws, Statutes, and
Ordinances for the Government of the said Province, and it is Inhabitants,
should be Observed and Established within the same, as his Majesty his Heirs
and Successors should Ordain and Appoint, and should be agreeable to Law; and
that after the End of the said twenty one Years, the Governor, and all
Officers Civil and Military, within the said Province, should be Appointed by
his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors.

In Pursuance of his Majesty's Charter, and in order to fulfill the good Intents
and Purposes therein expressed, it was thought necessary for the Trustees to
send over such poor People and foreign Protestants as were willing to Live in
Georgia, not only to cultivate the Lands, but at the same Time to strengthen
his Majesty's Colonies. For which purpose they considered each Inhabitant both
as a Planter and a Soldier; and they were therefore to be Provided with Arms
for their Defense, as well as Tools for their Cultivation, and to be Taught the
Exercise of both, and Towns were to be laid out for their Settlements, and
Lands allotted to each of them for their Maintenance as near to those Towns as
conveniently could be, that they might never have Occasion to be too far
distant from their Towns, which were to be regarded as their Garrisons.

And as the Military Strength of the Province was particulary to be taken care
of, it seemed necessary to Establish such Tenures of Lands as might most
effectually preserve the Number of Planters, or Soldiers, equal to the Number
of Lots of Lands, and therefore each Lot of Land was to be considered as a
Military Fief, and to contain so much in Quantity as would Support such Planter
and his Family; and Fifty Acres were judged sufficient and not too much for
that Purpose, and Provision was made to prevent an Accumulation of several Lots
into one Hand, lest the Garrison should be lessened, and likewise to prevent a
Division of those Lots into smaller Parcels, lest that which was no more than
Sufficient for one Planter, when entire, should if divided amongst several, be
too scanty for their Subsistence.

And in the Infancy of the Colony, the Lands were Granted in Tail Male,
preferable to any other Tenure, as the most likely to answer these Purposes;
for if the Grants were to be made in Tail General, it was thought that the
Strength of each Township would soon be diminished, in as much as every Female
Heir in Tail, who was unmarried, would have been entitled to one Lot, and
consequently have taken from the Garrison the Portion of one Soldier; and by
Intermarriages several Lots might have been united into one; and if such Tenant
in Tail General had had several Daughters, his Lot must have been Divided
equally amongst them all as Copartners.

Nor were these the only inconveniences which were thought likely to arise
from Estates in Tail General: For Women being equally incapable to Act as
Soldiers or serve on Juries, these Duties, and many others, such as Watchings
and Wardings, etc. would return so much oftener to each Man, in proportion as
the Number of the Men in the Township was lessened, and by that means become
very burdensome to the Remaining Male Lot holders, and in case of any Attack
from the Indians, French or Spaniards, the Township would be less able to make
a Defense.

And as it was not thought proper to Grant Estates in Tail General, it appeared
to be more inconvenient to Grant them in Fee Simple; which Estate would have
been attended with all the Objections before mentioned incident to Estates in
Tail General, and to several other besides; for the Right of Alienation being
inseparable from an Estate in Fee, the Grantee might have Sold, Mortgaged, or
Aliened his Lands to whomever he thought fit, which was a Power not to be
entrusted with the People sent over, for the following Reasons:

1. From Considering their Condition.

2. From Considering the Purposes they were sent for.

3. From Considering the Persons to whom Lands might be Alienated. And,

4. From Considering that it might Occasion a Monopoly of Land contrary to the
Intent of the Charter.

As to the First, The Persons sent over were poor indigent People, who had for
the most part so indiscreetly managed what they had been Masters of here, that
it did not seem safe to trust so absolute a Property in their Hands, at least
in the Infancy of the Colony, and before they had by a careful and industrious
Behavior given some Reason to believe they would prove better Managers for the
future.

As to the Second, They were sent over to inhabit, cultivate, and secure, by a
personal Residence, the Lands Granted to them within the Province, and they
voluntarily engaged so to do; And in expectation that they would perform those
Engagements, they were Maintained at the Expense of the Public during their
Voyage, and their Passage was paid for them, and they were provided with Tools,
Arms, Seeds, and other Necessaries, and Supported from the Public Store, many
of them at least for four Years together from their first Landing, in which
respect the Public may be said to have Purchased those People for a valuable
Consideration, their Personal Residence, and all the Industry and Labor they
could bestow in the Cultivation of this Province, and to have given them even
Pay for the Hazard they might run in the Defense of it.

As to the Third, It was thought unsafe to Grant them such an Estate as might
be the Means of introducing such sort of People as might Defeat what the
Trustees had always at Heart, viz. The Preservation of the Protestant Religion
in that Province, which was necessary to be taken Care of, both on a Political
and Religious Account; the French lying to the West and the Spaniards to the
South of the Province of Georgia.

As to the Fourth, A Monopoly of several Lots into one Hand would necessarily
have been the consequence of a Free Liberty of Buying and Selling Lands within
the Province, which would have been directly contrary to the Intent of the
Charter, whereby the Grant of Lands to any one Person is limited not to exceed
five hundred Acres.

A further inconvenience seemed likely to arise in every Case where the Tenant
in Fee died without any Children, or without having disposed of his Lot by
Will; for the Heir General who might have the Right to it might not happen to
be found out for many Years after, especially if it was one of the Foreign
Protestants, and all that Time the House would have run to decay, and the Land
remain uncultivated and become a harbor for Vermin, to the great annoyance and
damage of the Neighboring Lots.

But though the beforementioned restraints were intended for the good of the
whole, yet whenever particular Cases required it they were taken off and
dispensed with: And upon any application for leave to alienate Lands, Licenses
were always granted for that purpose; and when the succession of Females became
less dangerous to the Province, by the growing strength and increase of the
Poople, and by the Security provided for it by his Majesty's Forces there, the
Trustees resolved to enlarge the Tenures of the Lands to Estates in Tail
General.

The Tenures being thus settled, it was thought necessary to require the
Inhabitants to cultivate their Lands within a limited Time, and in order to
raise Raw Silk, which was intended to be one of the Produces there, a certain
proportion of white Mulberry-Trees were to be Planted, and in their respective
Grants Ten Years were allowed for the Cultivation, and one hundred white
Mulberry-Trees were to be planted on every ten Acres of Land when Cleared; with
a Power for the Trustees to reenter on the Parts that should remain
uncultivated.

But as the People were not able to Cultivate their Lands within the Time
required by their Grants, by reason of the Alarms from the Spaniards, the
Droughts in that part of America, and other unforeseen Accidents, the Trustees
resolved to release all forfeitures on that Account, and to require the
Cultivation of no more than five Acres of the said fifty Acres within the
Remainder of the said Term of Ten Years.

And as other Persons applied to the Trustees for Grants of Land, in order to
go over and settle there at their own Expense, particular Grants were made
under the same Tenure and on the following Conditions, viz. That they should
within twelve Months from the Date of their Grants, go to and arrive in
Georgia, with one Man Servant for every fifty Acres Granted them, and should
with such Servants abide, settle, inhabit and continue there for three Years.
That they should within ten Years Clear and Cultivate one fifth part of the
Land granted them, and within the next ten Years Clear and Cultivate three
fifth parts more of the said Lands, and plant one thousand white Mulberry-Trees
upon every one hundred Acres thereof when Cleared. And that they should not at
any time hire, keep, lodge, board or employ any Negroes within Georgia on any
Account whatsoever without special Leave. Which Conditions were readily
approved of, and Counterparts executed by them all; and to those who desired to
name their Successor on failure of Issue Male, special Covenants were entered
into by the Trustees for that Purpose, agreeable to their own Propositions. And
for an Encouragement for their Men Servants to behave well, like Covenants were
entered into, to Grant to every such Man Servant, when requested thereunto by
any Writing under the Hand and Seal of the Master, Twenty Acres of Land under
the same Tenure.

The Trustees were induced to prohibit the use of Negroes within Georgia, the
Intention of his Majesty's Charter being to provide for poor People incapable
of subsisting themselves at Home, and to settle a Frontier to South Carolina,
which was much exposed by the small number of its White Inhabitants. It was
impossible that the Poor who should be sent from hence, and the Foreign
Prosecuted Protestants, who must go in a manner Naked into the Colony, could be
able to purchase or subsist them if they had them, and it would be a Charge too
great for the Trustees to undertake; and they would be thereby disabled from
sending White People. The first Cost of a Negro is about Thirty Pounds, and
this Thirty Pounds would pay the Passage over, provide Tools and other
Necessaries, and defray the Charge of subsistence of a White Man for a Year, in
which time it might be hoped that the Planter's own Labor would grant him some
subsistence, Consequently the Purchase Money of every Negro (abstracting the
Expense of subsisting him as well as his Master) by being applied that way,
would prevent the sending over a White Man who would be a Security to the
Province, whereas the Negro would render that Security Precarious.

It was thought the White Man, by having a Negro Slave, would be less disposed
to Labor himself; and that his whole Time must be employed in keeping the
Negro to Work, and in watching against any Danger he or his Family might
apprehend from the Slave, and that the Planter's Wife and Children would by the
Death or even the Absence of the Planter, be at the Mercy of the Negro.

It was also apprehended, that the Spaniards at St. Augustine would be
continually enticing away the Negroes, or encouraging them to Insurrections.
That the first might easily be accomplished since a single Negro would run away
thither without Companions, and would only have a River or two to Swim over,
and this Opinion has been confirmed and justified by the Practices of the
Spaniards even in Times of profound Peace amongst the Negroes in South
Carolina, where, though at a greater Distance from St. Augustine, some have
fled in Periaguas and little Boats to the Spaniards, and been Protected, and
others in large Bodies have been incited to Insurrections, to the great Terror
and even endangering the Loss of that Province, which though it has been
established above seventy Years, has scarce White People enough to secure her
against her own Slaves.

It was also considered that the Produces designed to be raised in the Colony,
would not require such Labor as to make Negroes necessary for Carrying them
on; for the Province of Carolina produces chiefly Rice, which is a Work of
Hardship proper for Negroes, whereas the Silk and other Produces which the
Trustees proposed to have the People employed on in Georgia, were such as Women
and Children might be of as much use in as Negroes.

It was likewise apprehended, that if the Persons who should go over to Georgia
at their own Expense, should be permitted the use of Negroes, it would dispirit
and ruin the Poor Planters who could not get them, and who by their Numbers
were designed to be the strength of the Province; it would make them Clamorous
to have Negroes given them, and on the Refusal would drive them from the
Province, or at least make them negligent of their Plantations, where they
would be unwilling, nay would certainly disdain, to work like Negroes; and
would rather let themselves out to wealthy Planters as Overseers of their
Negroes.

It was further thought, that upon the Admission of Negroes, the wealthy
Planters would, as in all other Colonies, be more induced to absent themselves
and live in other Places, leaving the Care of their Plantations and Negroes to
Overseers.

It was likewise thought, that the Poor Planter sent on Charity, from his
desire to have Negroes, as well as the Planter who should settle at his own
Expense, would (if he had leave to alienate) Mortgage his Land to the Negro
Merchant for them, or at least become a Debtor for the Purchase of such
Negroes; and under these Weights and Discouragements would be induced to sell
his Slaves again upon any necessity, and would leave the Province and his Lot
to the Negro Merchant: In Consequence of which all the small Properties would
be swallowed up, as they have been in other Places, by the more wealthy
Planters.

It was likewise Considered, that the admitting of Negroes in Georgia would
naturally facilitate the Desertion of the Carolina Negroes through the Province
of Georgia, and Consequently this Colony instead of proving a Frontier and
adding strength to the Province of South Carolina, would be a Means of drawing
off the Slaves of Carolina, and adding thereby a strength to Augustine.

From these several Considerations, as the Produces to be raised in the Colony
did not make Negro Slaves necessary, as the Introduction of them so near to a
Garrison of the Spaniards would weaken rather than strengthen the Barrier, and
as they would introduce with them a greater Propensity to Idleness among the
Poor Planters, and too great an Inequality among the People, it was thought
proper to make the Prohibition of them a Fundamental of the Constitution.

When the Trustees had made these Dispositions, and were enabled by
Benefactions from several private Persons, on the 3 d of October 1732, It was
resolved, to send over One hundred and fourteen Persons Men Women and Children,
being such as were in decayed Circumstances, and thereby disabled from
following any Business in England, and who if in Debt had leave from their
Creditors to go, and such as were recommended by the Minister, Churchwardens
and Overseers of their respective Parishes. And James Oglethorpe, Esquire one of
the Trustees, went with them at his own Expense, to settle them.

On the 24 th of the same Month the People were all Examined whether any of
them had any Objections to the Terms and Conditions proposed to them, which
they all declared they had not, but that they were fully satisfied with them,
and executed Articles under their Hands and Seals, Testifying their Consents
thereto, which are now in the Public Office belonging to the Trustees.

But four of them desiring that their Daughters might inherit as well as Sons,
and that the Widows Dower might be considered, the Trustees immediately
Resolved, that every Person who should desire the same, should have the
Privilege of naming a Successor to the Lands granted to them, who in Case the
Possessor should die without Issue Male, should hold the same to them and their
Heirs Male for ever; and that the Widows should have their Thirds as in
England, with which Resolutions the People being all acquainted, were very well
satisfied.

The Trustees prepared Forms of Government, agreeable to the Powers given them
by their Charter; they Established under their Seal a Court of Judicature for
Trying Causes as well Criminal as Civil in the Town of Savannah, (the Name
which was given to the first Town to be raised) by the Name and Style of The
Town Court; They also appointed Magistrates there, viz. Three Bailiffs and a
Recorder; and inferior Officers, viz. Two Constables and two Tything Men: They
Chose for Magistrates such as appeared to them the most Prudent and Discreet,
but amongst a Number of People who were all upon a Level at their first setting
out, it was impossible to make any Choice or Distinction which would not create
some future uneasinesses among them.

On the 16 th of November, 1732, when the One Hundred and Fourteen Persons, and
with them the Reverend Mr. Herbert a Clergyman of the Church of England, and a
Man from Piedmont (engaged by the Trustees to instruct the People in the Art of
Winding Silk) Embarkt on Board the Ship Anne, Capt. Thomas; several of the
Trustees went to Gravesend, called over the People, and made a strict Enquiry
into their Accommodations and Provisions, and left the People very well
satisfied. Soon after Fifteen more Persons were sent, Eleven of whom were
Sawyers, in order to Assist the People in Building their Houses.

At the time of the Embarkation five thousand Acres of Land were Granted to
Three of the Colonists, in trust for them or the survivors of them, to make
Grants from time to time to every Man of twenty one Years of Age or upwards,
(who should arrive in Georgia, and desire the same) fifty Acres of Land to hold
to him and his Heirs Male.

The Common Council of the Trustees (in whom by the Charter the disposal of
Money was lodged) did resolve at their first meeting, that the Bank of England
should be desired to keep the Money belonging to the Trust, which the Bank
accepted, and have continued so to do, paying no Sums but by Draughts signed by
five of the Common Council.

The Trustees desired by a Letter, Sir Thomas Lombe's sentiments of the
Goodness of the Raw Silk produced in Carolina, and the proper methods of
carrying on that Undertaking with Success, on which they received Appendix, No
1.
from Sir Thomas Lombe great Encouragement to proceed in it, by his Approbation
of the Silk produced in that Climate, of which he had made Experiments.

On the 28 th February 1732, the Trustees received a Letter from Mr.
Oglethorpe, dated the 13 th January 1732, on Board the Ship Anne, of
Charlestown in South Carolina, giving an Account of his safe Arrival there
with the People, with the Loss only of two Children.

On the 18 th of July 1733, they received another Letter from him, which is
here inserted at length, as it gives an Account of the situation where he
Planted the People.

From the Camp near Savannah, the 10th February 1732, 3. Gentlemen,
I Gave you an Account in my last, of our Arrival at Charlestown; The Governor
and Assembly have given us all possible Encouragement. Our People arrived at
Beaufort on the 20th of January, where I lodged them in some new Barracks built
for the Soldiers, whilst I went my self to view the Savannah-River. I fixed
upon a Healthy Situation about ten Miles from the Sea; the River here forms an
half Moon, along the South side of which the Banks are about forty feet high,
and on the Top a Flat, which they call a Bluff; the plain High Ground extends
into the Country about five or six Miles, and along the River side about a
Mile. Ships that draw twelve feet Water can ride within ten Yards of the Bank.
Upon the River side in the Center of this Plain, I have laid out the Town,
opposite to which is an Island of very Rich Pasturage, which I think should be
kept for the Trustees Cattle; the River is pretty Wide, the Water fresh, and
from the Key of the Town you see it is whole Course to the Sea, with the Island
of Tybee, which forms the Mouth of the River, for about six Miles up into the
Country. The Landscape is very agreeable, the stream being Wide and bordered with
high Woods on both sides. The whole People arrived here on the 1st of Febuary;
at Night their Tents were got up. Till the 10th we were taken up in unloading,
and making a Crane, which I then could not get finished, so took off the Hands
and set some to the Fortification and began to fell the Woods. I have marked out
the Town and Common, half of the former is already cleared, and the first House
was begun Yesterday in the afternoon. A little Indian Nation, the only one
within fifty Miles, is not only in Amity, but desirous to be Subjects to his
Majesty King George, to have Lands given them among us, and to breed their
Children at our Schools; their Chief, and his beloved Man, who is the Second
Man in the Nation, desire to be instructed in the Christian Religion.

I am, Gentlemen, etc.


In this Month of April, the Trustees in another Embarkation of seventeen
Persons, sent some Italians whom they had procured from Piedmont, in order to
promote the Silk Business.

They received another Letter from Mr. Oglethorpe, dated the 20 th February
1732, of which the following Extract gives a further Account of the People and
their Situation.

OUR People are all in perfect Health; I chose the Situation for the Town upon
an high Ground, forty Feet perpendicular above High Water mark; the Soil dry
and sandy, the Water of the River fresh, Springs coming out from the sides of
the Hill. I pitched upon this Place not only for the Pleasantness of the
Situation, but because from the abovementioned and other signs, I thought it
Healthy; for it is sheltred from the Western and Southern Winds (the worst in
this Country) by vast Woods of Pine-Trees many of which are an Hundred and few
under Seventy Feet high. There is no Morse on the Trees, though in most parts of
Carolina they are covered with it, and it hangs down two or three feet from
them. The last and fullest conviction of the Healthfulness of the Place, was,
that an Indian Nation who knew the Nature of this Country chose it for their
Situation. The Trustees endeavored very early to secure the Friendship of the
Indians, who by Ranging through the Woods, would be capable of giving constant
Intelligence to prevent any Surprise upon the People, and would be a good out
Guard for the inland Parts of the Province. For this Purpose they were treated
with all possible Candor and Gentleness: They were acquainted, that the
English had no Intention to Hurt or Distress them, but would be ready to Assist
and Protect them on all Occasions. They received several Presents from the
Trustees, and were promised, that if any of the People of Georgia injured them,
they should upon their Complaints and proof of it find a ready Redress. For
which, in return, the Indians engaged never to take any Revenge themselves, as
it might breed ill Blood between the English and them. And as they have since
found, that Justice has been always done to them upon proper Complaints, they
have been true to their Engagements.

The Indians made a formal and voluntary Cession of that part of the Country to
Mr. Oglethorpe for the King of Great Britain, by which a further Right and
Title to it was acquired and added to that of the first Discovery and
Cultivation; and a Treaty of Friendship and Commerce with them was settled,
which was soon after sent over to the Trustees for their Ratification.

In the Month of May 1733, the Trustees sent over six Persons more.

The Number of People sent on the Charity from the beginning to the 9 th June
1733, (on which day of the Month the Trustees Account is Yearly made up, which
is directed to be delivered to the Lord Chancellor and the other Persons named
in the Charter) amounted to One hundred and fifty two, of whom One hundred and
forty one were Britons, and Eleven were foreign Protestants, and sixty one were
Men.

The Lands granted in Trust this Year in order to be granted out in smaller
Portions in Georgia, were the aforesaid five thousand Acres.

The Lands granted within this Year to Persons going at their own Expense, were
four thousand four hundred and sixty Acres.

The Money received from Private Persons this Year amounted to 3723 l. 13 s. 7
d. whereof the Trustees applied 2254 l. 17 s. 9 d. of which they exhibited an
Account to the Lord Chancellor and the Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
pursuant to their Charter, and carried the Remainder into their succeeding
Account.

From the 9th June 1733, to the 9th June 1734.
BEsides the several Works on which the People were employed at Savannah, as
Pallisading the Town, Clearing the Place from Pine Trees, etc. and Building of
Houses, some other Works were carried on, viz. a Public Garden was laid out,
which was designed as a Nursery, in order to supply the People for their
several Plantations with white Mulberry Trees, Vines, Oranges, Olives, and
other necessary Plants. A Gardener was appointed for the Care of it, and to be
Paid by the Trustees. A Crane was made for Landing of Goods upon the Bluff; a
Battery raised which Commands the River some distance below the Town, and on
the Island of Tybee at the Entrance of the River a Beacon was Erected Ninety
Feet high, which has been of great Service not only to the Ships entering the
River Savannah, but to those likewise which Sail by the Coast, there being none
like it all along the Coast of America.

A Fort was likewise Built at the narrow passages of an inland River (called
Ogeechee) in order to Protect the Settlement from any inland Invasion from
Augustine. Two little Villages were laid out and settled at about Four Miles
distant from Savannah, inland from the River, and a Mile from each other, which
were called Hampstead and Highgate.

In the Carolina Gazette Appendix, No 2.
dated the 22d March 1732, a further Account was given of the Settlement at
Savannah, which was Written by a Gentleman of Charlestown, who with some
others went thither out of Curiosity.

The Parliament having Granted out of Money arisen from the Sale of the Lands
at St. Christopher, Ten Thousand Pounds for the further Settling and Securing
the Colony, the Trustees resolved to lose no Time in Strengthening it with
People, and accordingly in the Months of September and October 1733, they sent
over two Embarkations of Persons, whose Numbers are entered at the End of this
Years Proceedings, and of whom many were Persecuted Protestants from Saltzburgh.

As very pleasing Accounts of the Country and Settlement were sent from several
of the People there to their Friends, the Trustees were informed that some
Persons had gone about in several Parts of England offering Money and Land in
their Names (but without their Knowledge or Authority) to any who should be
desirous of going to Georgia: Therefore they Published an Advertisement in some
of the News Papers, in order to prevent the ill Consequences of drawing
Laborious People out of the Country with such Expectations, and they declared
that they had never given such Power to any Persons whatsoever, and that they
never used any Solicitations to induce People to go over.

Number sent. British. Foreign Protestants. Men. The Persons sent on the
Charity this Year were -- 341 whereof 237 and 104 and in 135 Those in the
former Year were 152 whereof 141 and 11 and in 61 The number of Persons sent in
the two Years to the 9 June 1734 were 493 whereof 378 and 115 and in 196

The Lands Granted in Trust this Year in order to be Granted out in smaller
Portions in Georgia were Eight Thousand and One Hundred Acres.

The Lands Granted this Year to Persons going at their own Expense were Five
Thousand Seven Hundred and Twenty five Acres.

The Money received this Year pursuant to Act of Parliament was L. 10,000 and
from private Persons 1502 l. 19 s. 3 d. whereof the Trustees applied 6863 l. 0
s 10 d. of which they exhibited an Account to the Lord Chancellor and Master of
the Rolls, pursuant to their Charter, and carried the Remainder into their
succeeding Account.

From the 9th June 1734, to the 9th June 1735.
IN the Month of June 1734, Mr. Oglethorpe arrived from the Colony, and with
him came some of the principal Indians of the Lower Creek Nation who live
nearest to Savannah.

When these Indians were in England, they desired of the Trustees that the
Measures, Prices and Qualities of all Goods to be Purchased by them with their
Deer-skins, might be settled, as likewise the Weights; that nobody might be
allowed to Trade with the Indians in Georgia without a License from the
Trustees, in order that if they were in any respect Injured or Defrauded by the
Traders, they might know where to Complain; and they further desired there
might be but one Storehouse in each Indian Town for supplying them with the
Goods they might want to Purchase, from whence the Trader should be obliged to
supply them at the first Prices.

The Reason which the Indians gave for this Application, was, because the
Traders with them had often in an Arbitrary Manner raised the Prices of Goods,
and defrauded them in the Weights and Measures, and by their Impositions had
often created Animosities between the English and Indians, which had frequently
ended in Wars between them prejudicial to both.

The Trustees having considered of their Request, and being informed that the
Council and Assembly of Carolina had passed an Act the 20th August 1731,
entitled, An Act for the better Regulation of the Indian Trade, and for
appointing a Commissioner for that purpose with Regulations, which the Trustees
hoped might be effectual in Georgia, prepared an Act, entitled, An Act for
Maintaining the Peace with the Indians in the Province of Georgia, with the
same Regulations and Provisions as were in the Carolina Act; which Act ceased
to be in Force in Georgia since it was erected into a Distinct Independent
Province not subject to the Laws of Carolina.

The Trustees receiving frequent Informations from the Colony of the pernicious
Effects of Drinking Rum and other Spirituous Liquors, by not only creating
Disorders amongst the Indians (who had been plentifully supplied with it by the
Traders) but also Destroying many of the English, and throwing the People into
various Distempers, prepared an Act, entitled, An Act to prevent the
Importation and Use of Rum and Brandies in the Province of Georgia, or any kind
of Spirits or Strong Waters whatsoever. At the same time they endeavored to
supply the Stores with Strong Beer from England, Mollasses for Brewing Beer,
and with Madeira Wines, which the People might purchase at reasonable Rates,
and which would be more refreshing and wholesome for them. The Magistrates of
the Town of Savannah were likewise empowered to grant Licenses to private
Persons for Retailing Beer, Ale, etc. And the Trustees have great Reason to
believe that the remarkable Healthiness of Ebenezer in the Northern Part, and
Frederica in the Southern Part of Georgia, is very much owing to the
Prohibition of the Use of Rum: For in those Parts where Rum in defiance of the
Act has been introduced, the People have not in general been so Healthy and
Vigorous.

At the same Time the Trustees taking into Consideration the many
Inconveniences which would attend the Introduction of Negroes in a Frontier,
for the several Reasons before specified, prepared an Act for rendering the
Colony of Georgia more Defensible by prohibiting the Importation and Use of
Black Slaves or Negroes into the same.

These Three Acts were laid before the King in Council in the Month of January
1734, and after a Report from the Lords Commissioners for Trade and Plantations
to the Committee of Council, that they were proper to receive his Majesty's
Royal Approbation, they were Ratified by his Majesty in Council.

Though the Lands Granted by the Trustees were to Revert to them on failure of
Issue Male, in order to be re-granted for keeping up a number of Men; yet the
Trustees as Guardians of the People when any such Failure happened, resolved
that the value of the Improvements upon the Lands of the late Occupiers, should
be Valued and Paid to or for the Benefit of the Female Issue or near Relation,
and the first Issue of such a Failure being on the Death of Mr. De Ferron, the
Value of the Improvements he had made upon his Estate was on the 5th Febr. 1734
Ordered and Paid for the Use of his Daughter in England, who being destitute
would have been absolutely unable to proceed in the Cultivation of her Father's
Lot.

Two Embarkations were made this Year, whose Numbers are hereafter mentioned,
which consisted chiefly of Saltzburghers, who with the Saltzburghers that went
before, were settled in a Town called by them Ebenezer, upon the River
Savannah, at some distance above the Town, and by the Sobriety and Industry of
the People they prove a very thriving Settlement.

Number sent. British. Foreign Protestants. Men. The Persons sent on the
Charity this Year were -- 81 whereof 23 and 58 and in 43 Those in the former
Years were 493 whereof 378 and 115 and in 196 The number of Persons sent in the
three Years to the 9 June 1735 were 574 whereof 401 and 173 and in 239

The Lands Granted in Trust this Year in order to be Granted out in smaller
Portions in Georgia were Two Thousand Five Hundred Acres.

The Lands Granted this Year to Persons going at their own Expense were One
Thousand Nine Hundred Acres.

The Money received this Year in Benefactions amounted to 5416 l. 7 s. 7 d.
whereof given in South Carolina 464 l. 185 s. 2 d. the Amount in Sterling Money
and in England 4951 l. 9 s. 5 d. which the Trustees applied, as also part of
their former Balance to the Amount of 11, 194 l. 9 s. 2 d. of which they
exhibited an Account to the Lord Chancellor, and Master of the Rolls, pursuant
to their Charter, and carried the then Remainder into their succeeding Account.

From the 9th June 1735, to the 9th June 1736.
THat all Persons who should be desirous of going to Georgia might be apprized
in Time of the several Conditions they were to Perform, Appendix, No 3, and 4.
Rules were drawn up and Printed for those who should be sent on the Charity,
as well as those who should go on their own Expense, in which the Conditions
were specified as well as the Necessaries for their Subsistence and Labor.

The Parliament having in the Year 1735 Granted Twenty six Thousand Pounds for
the further Settling and Securing the Colony of Georgia, the Trustees thought
it prudent to strengthen the Southern Part of the Province by making a
Settlement on the Alatamaha River, to which they were strongly induced by a
Appendix, No 5.
Memorial sent to his Majesty from the Governor and Council of South Carolina,
dated the 9th April 1734, wherein after Thanking his Majesty for his peculiar
Favor and Protection, and especially for his most benign Care so wisely
calculated for the Preservation of South Carolina, by his Royal Charter to the
Trustees for Establishing the Colony of Georgia, and after Representing the
Practices of the French to seduce the Indians in Amity with South Carolina, the
Attention of the French to the Improvement of their Settlements, and their late
Enlargement of them nearer to Carolina, the Defenseless Condition of their
Province, and the Danger of the Inhabitants from their own Negroes, and the
Ruinous Situation of the West India Trade in case the French should possess
themselves of Carolina; they add, that the Harbors and Ports of Carolina and
The Harbor in the Southern Part of Georgia the nearest to the Gulf of Florida
which has yet been Sounded, has been proved by Affidavits of three Captains of
Ships who have been there, viz. Capt. Thomas Shubrick, Capt. George Dymond, and
Capt. William Thomson, to be capable of receiving Ships of Forty Guns, and to
be safely Land locked: And by the Appendix, No 6.
Affidavit of Thomas Pearce Mariner, who was on the Coast of Georgia near four
Years, it appears, that Ships is this Harbor may in Twenty four Hours from the
Bar, run out into the Gulf Stream of Florida, through which Stream the Spanish
Galleons (when not passing the Windward Passage) always come.
Georgia enable his Majesty to be absolute Master of the Passage through the
Gulf of Florida, and to impede at his Pleasure the Transportation Home of the
Spanish Treasure, which should his Majesty's Enemies Possess would then prove
so many convenient Harbors for them to annoy a great Part of the British Trade
to America, as well as that which is carried on through the Gulf from Iamaica.

Upon which Inducements the Trustees resolved to make Embarkations for
Strengthening the Southern Part of Georgia, and to obviate any Objections which
might be made by sending over any of our useful Poor from England; and as the
Trustees found that many of the Poor who had been useless in England were
inclined to be useless likewise in Georgia, they determined that these
Embarkations should consist chiefly of Persons from the Highlands of Scotland,
and Persecuted German Protestants.

While these Embarkations were preparing, the Trustees made Preparations for
the new Settlements: They Established the Civil Government for the new Town
(which was called Frederica) in the same Manner as they had before at Savannah.

In the Month of January 1735, the Highlanders arrived in Georgia (and with
them several of the same Country as Servants to private Grantees) they were
settled on the Alatamaha River, about Sixteen Miles distant by Water from the
Island of St. Simons (which is at the Mouth of the River) they soon raised
convenient Huts 'till their Houses could be Built; and the Town at their own
desire was called Darien; which Name still remains to the District, but the
Town is since Named by them New-Inverness.

On the 6th February 1735, the Embarkation under the Conduct of Mr. Oglethorpe,
arrived in Georgia, they were settled upon St. Simon's Island, the Town called
Frederica was soon laid out, and the People were set to Work in Building their
Houses. The Creek Indians who went thither upon Occasion of this new
Settlement, agreed that the English should possess St. Simon's Island, with the
Others contiguous to it: The Land of the Island is very fertile, chiefly Oak
and Hickery, intermixed with Savannahs and old Indian Fields, and according to
a Survey made of it, it is about Forty five Miles in Circumference.

For a Communication between the Settlements in the Northern and Southern Parts
of the Province by Land, a Road was soon afterward opened.

Number sent. British. Foreign Protestants. Men. The Persons sent on the
Charity this Year were -- 470 whereof 341 and 129 and in 224 Those in the
former Years were 574 whereof 401 and 173 and in 239 The number of Persons sent
in the four Years to the 9 June 1736 were 1044 whereof 742 and 302 and in 463

The Lands Granted in Trust this Year in order to be Granted out in smaller
Portions were Twenty Thousand Acres; And in Trust for Religious Uses, to be
cultivated, with the Money arising from Private Benefactions given for that
Purpose, in order to settle a Provision upon a Clergyman at Savannah, a
Catechist and a Schoolmaster, Three Hundred Acres.

The Lands Granted this Year to Persons going on their own Expense were Nine
Thousand Three Hundred Acres.

The Money received this Year pursuant to Act of Parliament, was L. 26,000, and
in Benefactions 2,164 l. 19 s. 6 d. 3 q. whereof in South Carolina 411 l. 1 s.
1 d. 3 q. the Amount in Sterling Money and in England 1,753 l. 18 s. 5 d.
whereof the Trustees applied 22,697 l. 5 s. 3 q. of which they exhibited an
Account to the Lord Chancellor, and Master of the Rolls, pursuant to their
Charter, and carried the Remainder into their succeeding Account.

From the 9th June 1736, to the 9th June 1737.
FOr the Security of the People (who were settled the last Year on St. Simon's
Island) and the Southern Part of the Province, several Forts were Built this
Year, viz

One at Frederica, with Four regular Bastions and a Spur Work toward the
River, and several Pieces of Cannon were mounted on it.

About Ten Miles from Frederica a large Battery is Built commanding the
Entrance into the Sound, where Ten or Twelve Forty Gun Ships may safely Ride,
there being sufficient Water on the Bar called Iekyll for such Ships to go
over, which Bar lies in 30 d. 40 m. and behind Iekyll Island there is Water and
Room enough for Shipping for Ten Miles up. The Battery is enclosed within a
strong Wall, and has a Guard-House within the Wall capable of holding Twenty
four Men.

Another Fort was Built on the Southwest Part of the Island of St. Peter's (now
called Cumberland) which lies in 30 d. 30 m. under which Fort, on which are
Mounted several Pieces of Ordnance pointed toward the River, all Sloops and
Boats in the Inland Passage to this Island must come. Within the Pallisade
round the Fort there are fine Springs of Water, and there is a well Framed
Timber Log House, Thirty Feet by Eighteen, with a Magazine under it both for
Ammunition and Provisions. A Scout Boat is stationed at this Island.

As these Precautions were taken for the Southern Part of the Province,
Directions were given for a Fort to be Built for the Security of the Northern
Part, by way of an Out-Guard against any Invasion by Land. This was at a Place
called Augusta, which has proved a very thriving Town, it being now the chief
Place of Trade with the Indians, and where the Traders of both Provinces of
South Carolina and Georgia resort, from the Security they find there. Augusta
is about Two Hundred Thirty Miles by Water from the Town of Savannah, and large
Boats which carry about Nine Thousand Pounds Weight of Deer-skins can Navigate
down the River Savannah. The Town, which stands upon a high Ground near the
River, is well Inhabited, and has several Warehouses in it furnished with Goods
for the Indian Trade. A Road has been likewise made, so that Horsemen can now
Ride from this Town to Savannah, as likewise to the Cherokee Indians, who are
situated above the Town of Augusta and Trade with it. A Garrison has been kept
at this Fort at the Trustees Expense, 'till the Arrival of the Regiment his
Majesty since Ordered for the Defense of the Colony.

Whilst these Dispositions were making for the Security of the Province, the
Parliament gave Ten Thousand Pounds this Year for the further Settling and
Securing the Colony; but as the Expenses of the Forts and the Supplies which
were sent for the Support of the Colony, were very great, and as many People in
the Northern Part of the Province were as yet unable to subsist themselves, and
out of Compassion to them and their Families a Store was still kept open for
their subsistence, the Trustees sent over but few Persons this Year.

In the beginning of the Year 1737, the Spaniards at Augustine made
Preparations for Attacking the Colony of Georgia; they laid in Quantities of
Corn and Provisions, bought up a great number of Fire Arms, and large Bodies of
Regular Troops were sent thither from the Havannah.

The Lieutenant Governor of South Carolina informed the Magistrates of Savannah
of these Preparations: This Advice and the frequent Alarms which were otherwise
given, drew the People off from their Labor in the Sowing Season, and their
Improvements in their Plantations were neglected, and they were obliged to make
Preparations for their Defense.

At the same Time the Highlanders at New-Inverness, who were exposed to Danger,
Built a Fort there and Twelve Pieces of Cannon were mounted on it.

Though the People at Savannah were not so immediately exposed to Danger, they
began to Build a large Fort at their Town of Pallisade Work with Bastions: But
as the Trustees perceived this took off the People from their Cultivation, that
the Work would be very Chargeable and they had not Money to support the
Expense, they found themselves under a Necessity to put a stop thereto.

Number sent. British. Foreign Protestants. Men. The Persons sent on the
Charity this Year were -- 32 whereof 32 and and in 19 Those in the former Years
were 1044 whereof 742 and 302 and in 463 The number of Persons sent in the five
Years to the 9 June 1737 were 1076 whereof 774 and 302 and in 482

The Lands Granted in Trust this Year in order to be Granted out in smaller
Portions in Georgia were Three Thousand Acres, and in Trust to be cultivated,
with the Money arising from private Benefactions given for that Purpose, in
order to raise a Maintenance for a Minister and Schoolmaster at Frederica, and
other Religious Uses, Three Hundred Acres.

The Lands Granted this Year to Persons going on their own Expense were Four
Thousand Three Hundred Acres.

The Money received this Year pursuant to Act of Parliament, was L. 10,000, and
in Benefactions 3,627 l. 18 s. 7 d. whereof in South Carolina the Amount in
Sterling Money 333 l. 19 s. 6 d. and in England 3,293 l. 19 s. 1 d. which the
Trustees applied, as also part of their former Balance to the Sum of 17,239 l.
19 s. 5 d. of which they exhibited an Account to the Lord Chancellor, and
Master of the Rolls, pursuant to their Charter, and carried the then Remainder
to their succeeding Account.

From the 9th June 1737, to the 9th June 1738.
THe Lieutenant Governor of South Carolina having acquainted the Trustees, by a
Letter dated from the Council Chamber the 7th February 1736, 7, that he had
received Advice from Commodore Dent, of Preparations made by the Spaniards at
Augustine and the Havannah, in order to make an Attack on the Colony of
Georgia, and the Trustees having in a Appendix, No ^.
Memorial to his Majesty set forth the Inability of the Colony to Protect
themselves against such a Force as was Preparing at the Havannah and Augustine,
his Majesty was graciously pleased to order a Regiment of Six Hundred effective
Men to be raised and sent to Georgia for the Defense and Protection of it.

And as an Encouragement for the Soldiers good Behavior, the Trustees resolved
to give each of them a Property in the Colony; they therefore made a Grant of
Land in Trust for an Allotment of Five Acres of Land to each Soldier of the
Regiment to Cultivate for his own Use and Benefit, and to Hold the same during
his continuance in his Majesty's Service; and for a further Encouragement, they
resolved, that each Soldier, who at the end of Seven Years from the Time of his
Inlisting in the Regiment, should be desirous of quitting his Majesty's
Service, and should have his regular Discharge, and would settle in the Colony,
should on his Commanding Officer's Certificate of his good Behavior, be
entitled to a Grant of Twenty Acres of Land.

The Parliament having taken into Consideration the great Expenses which the
Trustees had been at in making Roads through the Province, and the several
Fortifications in it, and the Presents made to the Indians to engage them
firmer in the British Interest, and likewise the Preparations which were making
by the Spaniards in order to take or destroy the Colony, and having Granted
this Year a Sum of Twenty Thousand Pounds for the further Settling and Securing
the Colony, the Trustees made another Embarkation, which consisted chiefly of
Persecuted German Protestants.

Number sent. British. Foreign Protestants. Men. The Persons sent on the
Charity this Year were -- 298 whereof 135 and 163 and in 152 Those in the
former Years were 1076 whereof 774 and 302 and in 482 The number of Persons
sent in the six Years to the 9 June 1738 were 1374 whereof 909 and 465 and in
634

By Accounts received from the Colony before the End of this Year, there appear
to have been One Thousand One Hundred and Ten Persons in Georgia, besides those
at Tybee, Skidoway Fort, Argyll, Thunderbolt and Augusta, in the Northern Part,
and those at St. Andrews and Amelia in the Southern Part.

The Lands Granted in Trust this Year in order to be Granted out in smaller
Portions in Georgia were Three Thousand Acres.

The Lands Granted this Year to Persons going on their own Expense were One
Thousand Acres.

The Money received this Year pursuant to Act of Parliament was L. 20,000, and
in Benefactions 909 l 19 s. 10 d. 2 q. whereof the Trustees applied 18,870 l.
13 s. 3 d. 2 q. of which they exhibited an Account to the Lord Chancellor, and
Master of the Rolls, pursuant to their Charter, and carried the Remainder into
their succeeding Account.

From the 9th June 1738, to the 9th June 1739.
AS several Merchants and Captains of Ships had for their own Interest carried
into the Colony from New York and other Places, large Cargoes of Provisions,
etc. great part of which (to save the Merchants from Losses) was taken in at
the Store without a proper Authority from the Trustees, and an Expense created
thereby which the Trustees could not Estimate, nor have Ability to Discharge,
and for which certified Accounts were returned to them; the Trustees published
an Advertisement in the London Gazette, and Ordered it to be Published in the
South Carolina Gazette, and to be affixed upon the Doors of the Storehouses at
Savannah and Frederica, That out of a due Regard to Public Credit they had
Resolved, that all Expenses which they had Ordered or should Order to be made
in America for the use of the Colony, should be Defrayed and Paid for in
Georgia, in Sola Bills of Exchange only, under their Seal; and they gave
Notice, that no Person whatsoever had any Authority from them, or in their
Name, or for their Account, to purchase or receive any Cargoes of Provisions,
Stores or Necessaries, without Paying for them in the said Sola Bills.

Upon the Petition of one Abraham De Lion, a Freeholder of Savannah in Georgia,
that he had expended a great Sum in the Cultivation of Vines, which he had
carried from Portugal, and had brought to great Perfection; and several
Certificates being produced of his Improvements in Cultivating them, and of the
Goodness of the Grapes, and of their Thriving in the most barren Lands of the
Province, the Trustees assisted him to proceed in his Improvements.

The Security of the Colony being provided for by the Regiment sent over by his
Majesty, the Parliament gave Eight Thousand Pounds for the further Settling the
Colony. Therefore the Trustees sent over an Estimate of all the Expenses they
allowed to be made in the Province, by which several Military Expenses, which
they had been engaged in for the Defense of the Colony, and which were very
great, were reduced.

The Trustees this Year sent over the Rev. Mr. Norris to reside at Frederica,
with a Salary of Fifty Pounds a Year, Ordered a House to be Built for him, and
another for the Inhabitants to perform Divine Service in 'till a Church could
be Built there.

The Assembly of South Carolina having in the last Year passed an Ordinance for
raising a Sum to indemnify their Traders in opposition to the Act which was
approved of by his Majesty in Council for maintaining the Peace with the
Indians in the Province of Georgia, upon a Memorial from the Trustees
complaining of the said Ordinance, and upon a Petition of the Council and
Assembly of South Carolina against the said Act, there was a solemn Hearing
before the Lords Commissioners of Trade and Plantations, and afterward before
a Committee of the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council: Whereupon his Majesty
was pleased to Order, that the said Ordinance of the Assembly of South Carolina
should be Repealed and declared Void, and was pleased to send an Instruction to
the Trustees to prepare a proper Act or Ordinance for settling the Trade
carried on by the Provinces of South Carolina and Georgia with the Indians, on
such a Footing as might be for the mutual Benefit and Satisfaction of both
Provinces; And his Majesty at the same Time was graciously pleased to give an
Instruction to Samuel Horsey, Esquire Governor and Lieutenant General of
South Carolina, to Recommend to the Council and Assembly there to pass a Law
for the like Purpose in that Province: But Samuel Horsey, Esquire dying soon after,
and no other Governor having since gone to South Carolina, that Affair remains
unsettled.

The Trustees immediately sent to Col. Oglethorpe a Copy of his Majesty's
Instructions, and desired that he would Consult with Lieutenant Governor Bull
in South Carolina, that Plans of proper Acts might be prepared and sent over to
the Trustees for their Consideration, in order to answer the Purposes of his
Majesty's Instructions, and that in the mean Time the Commissioners of
South Carolina and the Commissioners of Georgia, might proceed in their
respective Provinces in concert with each other to carry on a mutual Trade to
the Indians in both Provinces.

Mr. Stephens, Secretary in Georgia, having informed the Trustees, that the
Grand Jury at Savannah claimed a Right of Administering Oaths, and making
Enquiry thereon into all such Matters as they should think fit, and the
Trustees having perceived that in a Representation of the said Grand Jury they
had pretended to such Right, sent a Letter to Mr. Stephens to acquaint him,
That the Trustees were sensible great Mischiefs might be done by ill-designing
Men who might procure themselves to be put upon the Panel, if this Claim of the
Grand Jury was allowed of, and therefore the Trustees ordered him to acquaint
the People that the Grand Jury had no such Right, and that their Claim was
entirely illegal.

As the Trustees both by their Letters and Instructions to the Magistrates had
constantly exhorted and encouraged the People to a Cultivation of their Lands
on which they were to Depend for their Support, and as they found that many (as
well of those whom they had sent over as Objects of Charity, as of others who
at different Times had gone into the Colony from other Plantations for a
Temporary Maintenance) still continued in their Idleness, and were a Burden
upon the Trust, they gave Orders for striking off the Store all such as having
had Time to Cultivate their Lands had neglected it. This carried from the
Colony many of those who had gone thither or joined it from any Parts of
America to gain a Subsistence for a Year or two, and of others who had not
considered the Hardships of attending the first Settlement of a Country, and
were tired of their Labor.

The Trustees receiving an Account dated the 12th February 1738 from their
Secretary in the Province, of an Uneasiness amongst several Persons upon the
Tenures of their Lots being confined to the Heirs Male, and they considering
that the Colony had been for some Time Established, and the People grown more
numerous, and a Regiment being station'd in it for it is Defense, whereby the
former Tenures became less necessary, did on the 15 March following, at their
Anniversary Meeting, resolve, That in Default of Issue Male, any legal
Possessor of Land, might by a Deed in Writing, or by his Last Will and
Testament, appoint his Daughter as his Successor, or any other Male or Female
Relation, with a Proviso, that the Successor should in the proper Court in
Georgia, personally claim the Lot Granted or Devised within Eighteen Months
after the Death of the Grantor or Devisor.

This was soon after extended to every legal Possessor's being empowered to
appoint any other Person to be his Successor.

But whilst the Trustees were taking these steps for the Satisfaction of the
People, and whilst those in the Southern Part of the Province (though exposed to
greater Danger) were industrious and easy in their Settlements, many of those
in the Northern Part, who had neglected the Cultivation of their Lands, drew up
a Appendix, No ^.
Representation dated the 9th Dec. 1738, setting forth the Want of a Fee Simple
to their Lands, and Negroes to cultivate them, but they were far from being
seconded or supported by the People in the Southern Parts of the Province, in
this Representation, who not only refused to Sign it, but Appendix No 9.
Petitioned the Trustees against the Use of Negroes, setting forth the Danger
they should be in from the Spaniards who had proclaimed Freedom to all Slaves
who should resort to them, and that by this means they should be exposed to an
Enemy without and a more dangerous one in their Bosoms.

The Industrious Saltzburghers also at Ebenezer (who are in the Northern Part
of the Province not far from Savannah) Appendix, No 1^.
Petitioned against Negroes, and set forth their Satisfaction and Happiness in
their Settlement; that they had raised in the last Season, more Rice, Pease,
Potatoes, Pomkins, Cabbage, Corn, etc. than was necessary for their
Consumption, and that they did not find the Climate so Warm but that it was
very tolerable for Working People.

Number sent. British. Foreign Protestants. Men. The Persons sent on the
Charity this Year were -- 9 whereof 2 and 7 and in 4 Those in the former Years
were 1374 whereof 909 and 465 and in 634 The number of Persons sent in the
seven Years to the 9 June 1739 were 1383 whereof 911 and 472 and in 638

The only Return from Georgia this Year, was an Account of the People at
Savannah, who were One Hundred and Nine Freeholders, besides their Wives and
Children, and besides Inmates and Servants, of the latter of which there were a
great Number, part of whose Passages were paid for in the next Year on
Representations made to the Trustees for that Purpose.

The Lands Granted in Trust this Year to be Cultivated for the Maintenance of
an Orphan House in Georgia, were Five Hundred Acres.

The Money received this Year pursuant to Act of Parliament, was L. 8,000, and
in Benefactions 473 l. 9 s. 4 d. which the Trustees applied, as also part of
their former Balance to the Amount of 10,347 l. 4 s. 1 d. of which they
exhibited an Account to the Lord Chancellor, and Master of the Rolls, pursuant
to their Charter, and carried the then Remainder into their succeeding Account.

From the 9th June 1739, to the 9th June 1740.
AT the Time that some of the People at Savannah were so clamorous for Negroes
(for Seventy five Land and Freeholders of whom Fifty two were Freeholders, did
not apply for them) the Province of South Carolina was under frequent Alarms on
account of their Negroes there. They had Intelligence that a Conspiracy was
formed by the Negroes in Carolina to Rise and forcibly make their Way out of
the Province, to put themselves under the Protection of the Spaniards; who had
proclaimed Freedom to all who should run away to them from their Owners. That
this Conspiracy was discovered at Winyaw the most Northern Part of that
Province, from whence as the Negroes must bend their Course, it argued that the
other Parts of the Province must be Privy to it, and that the Rising was to be
universal. Whereupon the whole Province was upon their Guard; the number of
Negroes in South Carolina being computed to be about Forty Thousand, and the
number of White Men at most not above Five Thousand. As several Negroes who
were employed in Periaguas and other like Craft (which they carried off with
them) had taken the Benefit of the Spaniards Proclamation and gone to
Augustine, the Government of South Carolina sent a solemn Deputation to Demand
their Slaves; This Deputation consisted of Mr. Brathwaite a Member of the
Council, Mr. Rutlidge one of the Assembly, and Mr. Amian Clerk of the Assembly;
But the Governor of Augustine though in Time of profound Peace, peremptorily
refused to deliver them up, and declared he had Orders to receive all such as
should come there and protect them.

Upon this, and the Petition which was sent from the Highlanders at Darien, and
the Saltzburghers at Ebenezer, representing the Danger and Inconvenience of the
Introduction of Negroes, the Trustees sent under their Seal an Appendix, No 11.
Answer to the Representation of some of the Inhabitants of Savannah.

Among the Persons to whom Grants of Land were made in order to their settling
at their own Expense in the Colony, some never went over; others were Gentlemen
of Carolina who neglected to take up their Lands, or even desire to have them
laid out; and others who quitted their Plantations, and went to reside at
Savannah as Shopkeepers. One Man in particular an Apothecary Surgeon, from the
beginning neglected his Grant and followed his Practice in the Town; another
quitted his Plantation and betook himself to Selling of Rum: To these Two
almost all the Town of Savannah were Indebted for Physic or Rum, and they
first raised the Clamor that Lands might be alienable, and Negroes admitted,
which would have made them Possessors of the chief Part of the Lots. To these
some others who had gone at their own Expense, and had employed their
Covenanted Servants on their Plantations joined themselves, taking their
Servants from their Labor and letting them out to Hire in the Town for the
sake of an immediate Profit, on which they lived in an idle and riotous manner;
and even at the Time when their Servants were taken off from their proper
Labor in their Plantations, they fomented the Clamor for Negroes in order to
carry them on: The Spirit of Idleness which was very early introduced in the
Town, many of the People were too ready to follow; constant Clubs have been
held, and Horse Races kept up by them to amuse and divert the People from their
Labor: And Delinquents (who have insulted the Laws even in the Courts of
Justice and declared they would do their utmost to destroy the Colony) have
when committed to Prison been abetted and supported by them. By these the
beforementioned Representation was formed, and many of the People by their own
Inclination to Idleness, by the Power the others had over them as Creditors,
and by Hopes being given them that if they stuck together the Trustees must
grant them Negroes, or see the Colony abandoned, were thus drawn in to Sign the
same, in which they in a manner Demanded the Permission of Negroes and an
Alteration of their Tenures.

The Trustees to make all the People as Easy and Contented as they could,
published an Advertisement in the London Gazette the 8th September 1739, and
other Papers, which was continued for several Days, and ordered it to be
Published in the South Carolina Gazette, that they had resolved to enlarge
their Grants on Failure of Issue Male, and to make a Provision for the Widows
of the Grantees in the following manner, viz. That the Lands already Granted
should on Failure of Issue Male descend to the Daughters of such Grantees, and
in case those should be no Issue Male or Female, that the Grantee might Devise
such Lands, and for want of such Devise* that such Lands should Descend to
their Heirs at Law; with a Proviso that the Possession of the Person who should
enjoy such Devise should not be increased to more than Five Hundred Acres, and
that the Widows of the Grantees should Hold and Enjoy the Dwelling House,
Garden, and one Moiety of the Lands their Husbands should Die seized of for and
during the Term of their Lives.

The Trustees directed in the Advertisement, that those who intended to have
the Benefit given them should enter their respective Claims, in order that
proper Grants and Conveyances in the Law might be forthwith prepared and
executed for that purpose; and that no Fee or Reward was to be taken for the
entering of any such Claim directly or indirectly by any Person or Persons
whatsoever.

In the Month of August 1739, the Trustees received Advice from General
Oglethorpe, That he had frequent Intelligence of the Spaniards endeavoring to
Bribe the Indians and particular the Creek Nation into a Rupture with the
English, which made it necessary for him to go to the General Assembly of the
Indian Nations at the Coweta-Town about Five Hundred Miles distant from
Frederica, in order to prevent such Designs and Seditions among them, and that
he had been obliged to buy Horses and Presents to carry up to this Meeting,
where the Choctaws (who are upon the Frontiers between the English and French
Settlements) and the Chickesaws were to send their Deputies.

This Journey of General Oglethorpe's has since appeared to be of great Service
to the Public; for on the 26 August 1739, Mr. Stephens received an Express
from Col. Bull Lieutenant Governor of South Carolina, that he had Intelligence
from Lieutenant Governor Clarke of New York concerning the French Marching from
Mont-Real near Quebeck with a Body of about Two Hundred Regular Troops and Five
Hundred Indians, who were to be reinforced by French and Indians in their
Journey: That this Army was designed against the Indians in Friendship with his
Britannick Majesty's Subjects of Carolina and Georgia who are situated near
some Branches of the Mississippi River. Col. Bull added, that he should
immediately dispatch an Express to the Creek Nations with Advice to General
Oglethorpe of the Contents of Lieutenant Governor Clarke's Letter, and that it
was necessary that both the Provinces of Carolina and Georgia should be on
their Guard, though if the Creek Indians should prove True the Danger would not
be great. General Oglethorpe by his Treaties with the Indians in this Journey
has confirmed them in the British Interest, and made a new Treaty with them,
whereby their former Concession of Lands to Great Britain was Confirmed and
Extended.

A parcel of Raw Silk was brought this Year from Georgia by one Mr. Samuel
Augspourgur, who made an Affidavit before a Master in Chancery, that he
received it from the Hands of Mr. Thomas Jones the Trustees Store-keeper at
Savannah, who told him it was the Produce of Georgia, and the said Samuel
Augspourguer who resided in the Southern Part of the Province said, That, when
at Savannah, he saw the Italian Family there winding off Silk from the Coquons.

The Silk was showed at the Trustees Office to Mr. John Zachary an eminent Raw
Silk Merchant, and Mr. Booth one of the greatest Silk Weavers in England, who
declared it was as fine as any Italian Silk, and that it was worth at least
Twenty Shillings a Pound.

This Mr. Samuel Augspourguer who joined the Colony in the Year 1736, left it
in July 1739, with two Men Servants and their Children on his Plantation, and
came over to obtain a Grant of Five Hundred Acres of Land, and to get some of
his own Countrymen from the Canton of Bearn in Switzerland to go with him as
Servants on his Return to Georgia in order to proceed more effectually in the
Cultivation of his Lands.

Number sent. British. Foreign Protestants. Men. The Persons whose Passages
were Paid for on the Charity were 138 whereof 4 and 134 and in 49 The Persons
sent on the Charity in the former Years were mdash; 1383 whereof 911 and 472
and in 638 The number of Persons sent in the eight Years to the 9 th June 1740,
were 1521 whereof 915 and 606 and in 687

The Lands Granted this Year to be Cultivated at the Expense of the
Incorporated Society in Scotland for promoting Christian Knowledge in order to
raise a Maintenance for the Scots Minister at New-Inverness in Georgia were
Three Hundred Acres.

The Lands Granted this Year to be Cultivated by a Person at his own Expense
were Five Hundred Acres.

The Lands Granted in Trust in the said Eight Years in order to be Granted out
in smaller Portions in Georgia were Forty one Thousand Six Hundred Acres; to be
Cultivated for Religious Uses were Nine Hundred Acres, and to be Cultivated for
the Maintenance of an Orphan House were Five Hundred Acres.

The Lands Granted in the said Eight Years to Persons who were to Cultivate
them at their own Expense were Twenty seven Thousand One Hundred and Eighty
five Acres.

The Money received this Year pursuant to Act of Parliament was L. 20,000 and
in Benefactions 181 l. 4 s. 3 d. 2 q. whereof in South Carolina the amount in
Sterling Money 86 l. 6 s. 11 d. 2 q. and in England 94 l. 17 s. 4 d. whereof
the Trustees applied 16,614 l. 2 s. 5 d. 2 q. of which they exhibited an
Account to the Lord Chancellor, and the Lord Chief Justice of the Court of
King's Bench, pursuant to their Charter, and the Remainder of all the Money
they ever received being 5917 l. 7 s. 7 d. will be carried into their
succeeding Account.

From the 9th June 1740, to the present Time.
THe Trustees this Year took further Methods for the Satisfaction of the People
in the Province, they extended the Tenures by which a Daughter of a Grantee, or
any other Person, was made capable of enjoying by Devise or Inheritance, any
quantity of Lands which did not increase her or his Possession to more than Two
Thousand Acres.

A License was likewise Granted to all the present Possessors of Land in
Georgia, to make Leases of any Parts of their Lots for any Term not exceeding
Three Years to any Person residing in Georgia and who should reside there
during the Term of such Lease.

A general Release was likewise passed by which no Advantage was to be taken
against any of the present Possessors of Land in Georgia for any Forfeitures
incurred at any Time before Christmas 1740, in relation either to the Tenure or
Cultivation of Lands, and the Possessors of Fifty Acres of Land were not
obliged to cultivate more than Five Acres thereof in Ten Years from their
Grants, and those under Fifty Acres in proportion: And the Possessors of Five
Hundred Acres of Land were not obliged to cultivate more than One Hundred and
Twenty Acres thereof in Twenty Years from their Grants, and those of under Five
Hundred Acres and above Fifty Acres in proportion, in order to prevent any
Forfeitures for want of Cultivating the Quantities required.

Under these Circumstances it is presumed that no Complaint can now with Reason
be made against the Tenure by which the Inhabitants at this Time hold their
Lands, since they have more Power than is generally given by Marriage
Settlements in which the Grantees are only Tenants for Life, incapable of
Mortgaging or Aliening or making any Disposition by their Last Will, whereas
the Freeholders in Georgia are now become Tenants in Tail-General, and may with
the License of the Common Council of the said Trustees upon Application made to
them for that purpose, Mortgage or Alien, and further without that License have
it absolutely in their Power on Failure of Issue in Tail to dispose thereof by
their Last Will.

By an Account received from the Secretary in the Province it appears, that on
the 1st August 1740, about Seventy Freeholders of the Northern Part of the
Province, delivered in the Town Court of Savannah their Claims of Lots under
the Tenures which were Advertized the last Year in the South Carolina and
London Gazettes.

That on the 15th of the same Month, as many or more appeared in the said Town
Court on the said Occasion, and that on the 27th of the same Month diverse more
delivered in their Claims likewise.

The Trustees are informed by their Secretary in the Province, that in
pursuance of their Orders he had just finished an authentical Account of the
State of the Colony with respect to the Number of Inhabitants in the several
Towns and Villages, the Number of Houses and the Settlements made, the Progress
which the several People had made in the Cultivation of their Lands, and their
Ability or Inability to support themselves, and in case where the last appeared
the Reason of it; the Proportions of the different sorts of Soil as near as
could be computed, and an Account of the several Produces which by Experience
or Appearance could or might be raised for Trade. And the Trustees are daily in
expectation of receiving from him the said Account. But by the several Accounts
before received they are enabled to give, though an imperfect one, the
following State of the Settlements, viz.

The Town of Savannah is about Ten Miles up the River Savannah, where are
(besides Warehouses and Huts) at least One Hundred and Thirty Houses in the
Town; as these for the sake of Air, and to prevent the spreading of any Fire,
are Built at some Distance from each other, they make several spacious Squares
and wide Streets. There is a regular Magistracy settled in the Town, which the
Trustees are obliged to be at the Expense of Supporting, 'till the Colony
arrives at sufficient Strength to do it. There are in the Town a Courthouse, a
Storehouse, a Goal, a House for the Trust Servants, a Wharf, a Guard-House and
some other Public Buildings; a Church is at present Building and a Clergyman
is settled there. The Town is excellently situated for Trade, the Navigation of
the River being very secure and Ships of Three Hundred Tons can lie within Six
Yards of the Town and the Worm does not Eat them.

About Four Miles from Savannah, inland from the River, are the Two Villages
Highgate and Hampstead, which lie at about a Mile distant from each other: The
People settled there apply themselves chiefly to Gardening, and supply the Town
of Savannah with quantities of Greens and Garden stuff.

By the Account of Mr. Thomas Stephens, who at his Father's request was sent
over to assist him in his Business of Secretary in the Province and continued
with him there some short Time, he states, that there are Twenty Plantations
within Twenty Miles round Savannah, which have each of them from Five to Thirty
Acres of Land Cleared.

About Fifteen Miles from Savannah is a Village called Abercorn; about Twenty
Miles further up the River is the Town of Ebenezer where the Saltzburghers are
settled with Two Ministers, one of whom computed that the Number of his
Congregation in June 1738 consisted of One Hundred and Forty six. Therefore as
the Infants could not be reckoned in the Computation, and as Seven more have
since been sent and settled with them, it is believed the Number has been
increased; especially since the Town is so Healthy that by a Letter sent to the
Society for Propagating Christian Knowledge by the Rev. Mr. Bolzius one of the
Ministers at Ebenezer, dated the 26 June 1740, he declared, That in a Years
Time one Person only had died, which was a Child of Four Years old. The People
are Industrious and Sober, they raise not only a sufficient quantity of Corn
and other Produces for their own Subsistence, but they sell great quantities to
those at Savannah who have not been so careful of their own Plantations; they
have great Herds of Cattle, and are in so Thriving a Condition that not one
Person has abandoned his Settlement, or sent over the least Complaint about the
Tenures or the Want of Negroes. On the contrary they in a Body Petitioned
against the use of Negroes, and their Ministers have declared, that their
Signing that Petition was a voluntary Act: And at their desire another
Embarkation of their Countrymen, who are willing to go from Germany and join
them, is designed to be sent with all convenient speed.

About Ten Miles from hence, and upon a River running into Savannah is a Place
called Old Ebenezer, where is a Cow-pen and a great number of Cattle for the
use of the Public and for Breeding.

At a considerable distance from hence is the Town of Augusta before described,
which with the great resort of Traders and Indians, is in a thriving Condition,
and is and will be a great Protection to both the Provinces of Carolina and
Georgia against any Designs of the French.

In the Southern Part of the Province is the Town of New Inverness upon the
River Alatamaha where the Highlanders are settled.

And about Twenty Miles from hence on the Island of St. Simons near the Sea is
the Town of Frederica with a regular Magistracy, as at Savannah, supported at
the Expense of the Trust; strong Fortifications round the Town are almost
finished, and at the South East Point of the Island are Barracks for Three
Hundred and Thirty Men.

There are Settlements on the Islands of Iekyll and Cumberland which lie at a
small distance from each other to the Southward of Frederica, and on the last
Two Forts are Built, one of which was described before, and the other was
finished in April 1740 upon the South End of the Island. It commands the Inlet
of Amelia Sound, is strongly Pallisaded with Flankers, and is Defended by Eight
Pieces of Cannon.

Barracks are Built upon this Island for Two Hundred and Twenty Men with
Storehouses, which were finished in October 1738.

There are Six Forts in the Province, and a Battery of Cannon erected to secure
the Harbor of St. Simons, under which Ships may safely lie.

The Indians, from the Presents which they have Annually received from the
Trustees, and from the Justice and Humanity with which they have been treated,
are secured in the British Interest, notwithstanding the Arts both of the
French and the Spaniards to seduce them: By this South Carolina has been free
from those Wars, in which (as the Preamble of his Majesty's Charter sets forth)
they had frequently suffered, and so late as in the Year 1715 had been laid
almost Wast with Fire and Sword, and by the Security which South Carolina
received by such a Frontier as Georgia is to it, very large Tracts of Land have
been Cultivated in the Southern Part of that Province, which no Person would
venture to settle on before, and a great quantity of Rice raised thereon.

As the People in Georgia sent on the Charity were supported to enable them to
raise their own Provisions in the first Place on the Lands they should Clear,
and to convert the Timber they should cut down in Clearing those Lands into
Lumber, which they might to their great Advantage Transport to the Sugar
Colonies, and further to raise Silk, Wine and Oil, for which the Climate was
very proper, it was hoped from thence they would gain a comfortable
Subsistence, and be of service to their Mother Country in raising such
Produces, which at present are purchased from Foreigners with Ready Money.

Having thus stated the Plan laid down for the Trustees by his Majesty's
Charter, the several steps taken by them for the Execution of that Plan, with
their Yearly Progress therein, the several Obstructions from unforeseen
Accidents which have checked that Progress, with the present Condition of the
Colony, according to the latest and most authentic Accounts from thence, they
submit the whole to the Wisdom of this Honorable House, being entirely
disposed to follow any Directions that shall flow from thence. And as they have
no other View but the Service of their Country, by making this Colony as useful
to the Interest of Great Britain, as by it is Situation and Climate it is capable
of being, they heartily wish the Trust in abler Hands that those important
Services might not be defeated through their Inability.

By Order of the Trustees, Benj. Martyn, Secretary.

APPENDIX.
Number 1. To the Trustees for Establishing the Colony of GEORGIA.
Gentlemen,
IN Writing this Answer to a Letter I had the Honor to receive from you, dated
the 29 th Instant, wherein you desire to know my Sentiments of an Undertaking
to raise Raw Silk in your new Settlement in Georgia; of the Probability of
succeeding therein; the proper steps to be taken to bring that Work to
Perfection, and my Opinion of the Nature, Quality and Use of the Raw Silk
produced in Carolina: It is a great Pleasure to me, that from Experiments which
I made some Years ago, I can now besides my Opinion, give you some Information
concerning that Silk which may be depended upon.

The Value and Usefulness of the Undertaking will appear as soon as we consider
that all the Silk consumed in this Kingdom, is now of foreign Growth and
Manufacture, which Costs the Nation very great Sums of Money Yearly to
purchase; and that the raising our Supply thereof in his Majesty's Dominions in
America would save us all that Money, afford Employment to many Thousands of
his Majesty's Subjects, and greatly increase the Trade and Navigation of
Great Britain.

It appears to me as Beneficial to the Kingdom, attended with as little Hazard
or Difficulty, as much Wanted, and which may as soon be brought to Perfection
in a proper Climate as any Undertaking so Considerable in itself, that I ever
heard of. I therefore think that there is a very great Probability of it is
succeeding, if such proper Methods are pursued, and such Assistance afforded to
the poor People at their first setting out, as are necessary to Settle,
Instruct and Encourage them.

The Silk produced in Carolina has as much natural Strength and Beauty as the
Silk of Italy (which is commonly called fine Silk) and by the several
Experiments I have tried with it, I am satisfied that it might be made to
answer the same Purposes that Italian Silk now does, if it be reeled in short
Skains, a fine clean and even Thread: To effect which if some experienced
Persons are at first sent to Teach the People, the Work will soon be made easy
to the meanest Capacity, and the value of the Silk will be thereby greatly
increased.

As for my own Part, if at any Time you should think I can be of use to promote
so good a Work, I shall be ready to execute your Commands as far as I am able;
and always remain,

Gentlemen, Your most Obedient, Humble Servant, Tho. Lombe.
Old Iuory, Jan. 31. 1732.
Number 2. Extract of a Letter from South Carolina Gazette dated at
Charlestown, 22 d. March 1732.
ON Tuesday the 13th Instant I went on board a Canoa in Company with Mr. Geo.
Ducat and Mr. John Balantine, with Four Negroes, and about 10 o'Clock we set
out from Mr. Lloyd's Bridge for Georgia, and passing by Port Royal on Wednesday
Night, we arrived on Friday Morning an Hour before Day at Yamacraw a Place so
called by the Indians, but now Savannah in the Colony of Georgia. Sometime
before we came to the Landing the Sentinel challenged us, and understanding who
we were, admitted us on Shore. This is a very high Bluff Forty Feet
perpendicular from High Water Mark; it lies according to Capt. Gascoigne's
Observation in the Latitude of 31 d. 58 m. which he took off Tybee an Island
that lies at the Mouth of the Savannah River. It is distant from Charlestown S.
W. according to Course and Windings of the Rivers and Creeks about 140 Miles,
but by a Direct Course 77, allowing Suillivant's Island to be in the Latitude
of 32 d. 47 m. from Augustine N. E. and by E. about 140 Miles, and by the
Course of the Rivers is distant from Fort Moore 300 Miles, but upon a direct
Line but 115 Miles N. W. and by W. This Bluff is distant 10 Miles from the
Mouth of the Rivers on the South side, and Purrysburgh is 24 Miles above it on
the North, and is so situated that you have a beautiful Prospect both up and
down the River. It is very sandy and barren and consequently a wholesome Place
for a Town or City. There are on it 130 odd Souls, and from the Time they
Embarked from London to the Time I left the Place, there Died but two sucking
Children and them at Sea. When they arived there was standing on it a great
quantity of the best sort of Pine, most of which is already cut down on the
spot where the Town is laid out to be Built. The Land is barren about a Mile
back, when you come into very rich Ground; and on both sides within a quarter
of a Mile of the Town is choice good Planting Land. Col. Bull told me that he
had been Seven Miles back and found it extraordinary good.

Mr. Oglethorpe is indefatigable, takes a great deal of Pains, his Fare is but
indifferent having little else at present but Salt Provisions. He is extremely
well beloved by all his People, the general Title they give him is Father. If
any of them is Sick, he immediately Visits them and takes a great deal of Care
of them. If any Difference arises he is the Person that decides it. Two
happened while I was there and in my Presence, and all the Parties went away to
outward appearance Satisfied and Contented with his Determination. He keeps a
strict Discipline, I never saw one of his People Drunk nor heard one of them
Swear, all the Time I was there: He does not allow them Rum but in lieu gives
them English Beer: It is surprising to see how Cheerful the Men go to Work
considering they have not been bred to it: There are no Idlers there even the
Boys and Girls do their Parts. There are Four Houses already up but none
finished, and he hopes when he has got more Sawyers, which I suppose he will
have in a short Time, to finish Two Houses a Week. He has ploughed up some
Land, part of which he has sowed with Wheat, which is come up and looks
promising. He has Two or Three Gardens which he has sowed with diverse sorts of
Seeds, and planted Thyme and other sort of Pot Herbs, Sage, Leeks, Skellions,
Celeri, Liquorice, etc. and several sorts of Trees. He was Paliisading the Town
round including some part of the Common, which I do suppose may be finished in
about a Fortnights Time. In short he has done a vast deal of Work for the Time,
and I think his Name justly deserves to be immortalized.

Mr. Oglethorpe has with him Sir Walter Rawleigh's written Journal, and by the
Latitude of the Place, the Marks and Traditions of the Indians, it is the very
first Place where he first went on shore, and talked with the Indians, and was
the first Englishman they ever saw; and about half a Mile from Savannah is a
high Mount of Earth under which lies their Chief King: And the Indians informed
Mr. Oglethorpe that their King desired before he died, that he might be Buried
on the Spot where he talked with that great good Man.

The River Water is very good, and Mr. Oglethorpe has proved it several ways,
and thinks it as good as the River of Thames. On Monday the 19 th we took our
Leave of Mr. Oglethorpe at Nine o'Clock in the Morning, and Embarked for
Charlestown; and when we set off he was pleased to Honor us with a Volley of
Small Arms and the Discharge of Five Cannon: And coming down the Rivers we
found the Water perfectly Fresh Six Miles below the Town, and saw Six or Seven
large Sturgeon leap, with which Fish that River abounds, as also with Trout,
Perch, Cat and Rock Fish, etc. and in the Winter Season there is variety of
Wild Fowl, especially Turkeys, some of them weighing Thirty Pounds, and
abundance of Deer.

Number 3. Rules for the Year 1735.
THe Trustees intend this Year to lay out a County and Build a new Town in
Georgia.

They will give to such Persons as they send upon the Charity, viz.

To every Man, A Watchcoat, A Musket and Bayonet to those who have them not of
their own, An Hatchet, An Hammer, An Hand-saw, A Shod Shovel or Spade, A broad
Hoe, A narrow Hoe, A Gimlet, A Drawing Knife, And there will be a Public
Grindstone to each Ward or Village. He will also have an Iron Pot and a pair of
Pot-hooks, And a Frying Pan.


And for his Maintenance in the Colony for one Year he will have,

To be delivered in such proportions and at such times as the Trust shall think
proper. 300 Pounds of Beef or Pork, 114 Pounds of Rice, 114 Pounds of Pease,
114 Pounds of Flour, 44 Gallons of Strong Beer, 64 Quarts of Mollasses for
Brewing Beer, 18 Pounds of Cheese, 9 Pounds of Butter, 9 Ounces of Spice, 9
Pounds of Sugar, 5 Gallons of Vinegar, 30 Pounds of Salt, 12 Quarts of Lamp Oil
and a Pound of spun Cotton, And 12 Pounds of Soap.


And to the Mothers, Wives, Sisters or Children of such Men, Provision will be
given in the Colony for One Year in the following manner, viz.

To each Head of them, that is to say to every Person of the Age of Twelve
Years and upwards, viz.

To be delivered as above. 300 Pounds of Beef or Pork, 114 Pounds of Rice, 114
Pounds of Pease, 114 Pounds of Flour, 64 Quarts of Mollasses for Brewing Beer,
18 Pounds of Cheese, 9 Pounds of Butter, 9 Ounces of Spice, 9 Pounds of Sugar,
5 Gallons of Vinegar, 30 Pounds of Salt, 6 Quarts of Lamp Oil and half a Pound
of spun Cotton. And 12 Pounds of Soap.


And for every Person above the Age of Seven, and under the Age of Twelve, Half
the said Allowance, being esteemed Half an Head.

And for every Person above the Age of Two and under the Age of Seven, one
Third of the said Allowance, being esteemed one Third of an Head.

The Trustees pay their Passage from England to Georgia, and in the Voyage they
will have the following Provisions, viz. In every Week Four Beef Days, Two Pork
Days, and one Fish Day, and their Allowance served out daily as follows: That
is to say, On the Four Beef Days,
Four Pounds of Beef for every Mess of Five Heads, And Two Pounds and an half
of Flour, And half a Pound of Suet or Plumbs.
On the Two Pork Days,
Five Pounds of Pork for every Five Heads. And Two Pints and half of Pease for
every Five Heads.
And on the Fish Day,
Two Pounds and half of Fish for every Five Heads. And half a Pound of Butter
for every Five Heads.
The whole at Sixteen Ounces to the Pound.

And allow each Head Seven Pounds of Bread of Fourteen Ounces to the Pound, by
the Week.

And Three Pints of Beer and Two Quarts of Water (whereof one of the Quarts for
Drinking and the other for Boiling Victuals) each Head by the Day for the space
of a Month; and a Gallon of Water (whereof Two Quarts for Drinking and the
other Two for Boiling Victuals) each Head by the Day after during their being
on the Passage.

The Heads to be accounted in this manner. Every Person above the Age of Twelve
Years to be accounted a whole Head. All Persons of the Age of Seven Years and
under the Age of Twelve Years to be accounted Two for One. All Persons above
the Age of Two Years and under the Age of Seven Years to be accounted Three for
One; and any Person under the Age of Two Years is not to be accounted.

And the said Persons are to enter into the following Covenants before their
Embarkation, viz.

That they will repair on Board such Ship as shall be provided for Carrying
them to the Province of Georgia, and during the Voyage, will Quietly, Soberly,
and Obediently demean themselves, and go to such Place in the said Province of
Georgia, and there obey all such Orders as shall be given for the better
Settling, Establishing and Governing the said Colony.

And that for the first Twelve Months from their Landing in the said Province
of Georgia, they will Work and Labor in Clearing their Lands, making
Habitation, and necessary Defenses, and in all other Works for the common Good
and public Weal of the said Colony, at such Times, in such Manner, and
according to such Plan and Directions as shall be given.

And that they from and after the Expiration of the said last mentioned Twelve
Months, will, during the Two next succeeding Years, abide, settle and inhabit
in the said Province of Georgia, and Cultivate the Lands which shall be to them
and their Heirs Male severally allotted and given, by all such Ways and Means
as according to their several Abilities and Skills they shall be best Able and
Capable.

And such Persons are to be settled in the said Colony, either in new Towns or
new Villages.

Those in the Towns will have each of them a Lot Sixty Feet in Front and Ninety
Feet in Depth, whereon they are to Build an House, and as much Land in the
Country as in the whole will make up Fifty Acres.

Those in the Villages will each of them have a Lot of Fifty Acres, which is to
lie all together, and they are to Build their Houses upon it.

All Lots are Granted in Tail Male and Descend to the Heirs Male of their
Bodies for ever; And in Case of Failure of Issue Male Revert to the Trust, to
be Granted again to such Persons as the Common Council of the said Trustees
shall think most for the Advantage of the Colony. And they will have a special
regard to the Daughters of Freeholders, who have made Improvements on their
Lots, not already provided for by having Married, or Marrying Persons in
Possession or entitled to Lands in the Province of Georgia in Possession or
Remainder.

All Lots are to be preserved separate and undivided, and cannot be united, in
order to keep up a Number of Men equal to the Number of Lots, for the better
Defense and Support of the Colony.

No Person can Lease out his House or Lot to another without License for that
Purpose, that the Colony may not be ruined by Absentees Receiving and Spending
their Rents else where, therefore each Man must cultivate the same by himself
or Servants.

And no Person can Alienate his Land or any part, or any Term, Estate or
Interest therein, to any other Person or Persons, without special License for
that Purpose, to prevent the uniting or dividing the Lots.

If any of the Land so Granted, should not be Cultivated, Planted, Cleared,
Improved or Fenced with a Worm Fence or Pales six Feet High, during the space
of Ten Years from the Date of the Grant, then every part thereof not
Cultivated, Planted, Cleared, Improved or Fenced as aforesaid, shall belong to
the Trust, and the Grant as to such parts shall be void.

There is reserved for the support of the Colony, a Rent Charge for ever, of
Two Shillings Sterling Money for each Fifty Acres; the Payment of which is not
to Commence 'till Ten Years after the Grant.

And the Reversion or Remainder expectant on the Demise of such Persons without
Issue Male, shall remain to the Trust.

But the Wives of the Freeholders in case they should Survive their Husbands,
are during their Lives entitled to the Mansion House and one half of the lands
Improved by their Husbands, that is to say, enclosed with a Fence of Six Feet
High.

All Forfeitures for Non-Residence, High Treason, Felonies, etc. are to the
Trustees for the Use of the Colony.

Negroes and Rum are Prohibited to be used in the said Colony, and Trade with
the Indians, unless Licensed.

None are to have the Benefit of being sent upon the Charity in the manner
abovementioned, but, 1. Such as are in Decayed Circumstances, and thereby
disabled from following any Business in England, and who if in Debt, must have
leave from their Creditors to go. 2. Such as have Numerous Families of Children
if Assisted by their respective Parishes, and Recommended by the Minister,
Churchwardens and Overseers thereof.


The Trustees do expect to have a good Character of the said Persons given,
because no Drunkards or other notoriously vicious Persons will be taken.

And for the better to Enable the said Persons to Build the new Town, and Clear
the Lands, the Trustees will give leave to every Freeholder, to take over with
him, One Male Servant or Apprentice of the Age of Eighteen Years and upwards to
be Bound for no less then Four Years, and will by way of Loan to such
Freeholder, Advance the Charges of Passage for such Servant or Apprentice, and
Furnishing him with the Clothing and Provision hereafter mentioned, to be
delivered in such Proportions, and at such Times, as the Trust shall think
proper, viz. A Pallias and Bolster and Blanket for Bedding. A Frock and
Trowsers of Lintsey-Woolsey, A Shirt and Frock and Trowsers of Oznabrigs, A
pair of Shoes from England, And two pair of Country Shoes.
for Clothing. And 200 Pounds of Meat, And 342 Pounds of Rice, Pease, or
Indian Corn,
for Food for a Year.
The Expense of which Passage, Clothing and Provisions, is to be Re-paid the
Trustees by the Master, within the Third Year from their Embarkation from
England.

And to each Man Servant and the Heirs Male of his Body for ever, after the
Expiration of his Service, upon a Certificate from his Master of his having
Served well, will be granted Twenty Acres of Land, under such Rents and
Agreements, as shall have been then last Granted to any other Man Servant in
like Circumstances.

Signed by Order of the Common Council of the said Trustees, for Establishing
the Colony of Georgia in America, this Second Day of July, 1742. Benj. Martyn,
Secretary

Number 4.
TO such Persons who can carry Ten Men Servants, and settle with them in
Georgia, at their own Expense, and whose Characters the Trustees, upon Enquiry,
shall approve of, will be granted Five Hundred Acres of Land in Tail Male, and
descend to the Heirs Male of their Bodies for ever, under the Yearly Rents of
Twenty Shillings Sterling Money for every Hundred Acres, for the Support of the
Colony, the Payment of which is not to commence until Ten Years after the Grant.

And the Land is so granted upon the following Conditions and Covenants,

That such Persons do pay the Rent reserved as the same shall become due, and
no Part to be unpaid for six Months after due.

That they within a Month of the Grant shall register the same, or a Memorial
thereof with the Auditor of the Plantations.

That they within Twelve Months from the Grant, shall go to and arrive in
Georgia, with Ten able Bodied Men Servants being each of the Age of Tweny Years
and upwards.

That they shall abide in Georgia with such Men Servants Three Years from the
Registring of the Grant there, Building their Houses and Cultivating their
Lands.

That they shall Clear and Cultivate within Ten Years from the Grant Two
Hundred Acres of Land, part of the said Five Hundred Acres, and Plant Two
Thousand white Mulberry-Trees or Plants thereupon, and on every Hundred of the
other Three Hundred Acres, One Thousand White Mulberry-Trees or Plants when
Cleared, and preserve the same Quantity from time to time thereupon, the
Trustees obliging themselves to furnish the Plants.

That they do not Alienate the said Five Hundred Acres of Land or any part
thereof for any Term of Years, or any Estate or Interest in the same, to any
Person or Persons without special Leave.

That they do not make Pot-ash in Partnership without Leave, but may make it
themselves not in Partnership.

On the Determination of the Estate in Tail Male the Land to Revert to the
Trust.

That they shall not depart the said Province without License.

All Forfeitures for Non-Residence, High Treason, Felonies, etc. are to the
Trustees for the Use and Benefit of the Colony.

If any part of the said Five Hundred Acres of Land shall not be Cultivated,
Planted, Cleared and Fenced round about with Worm-Fence or Pales Six Feet high,
within Eighteen Years from the Grant, all and every such part shall Revert to
the Trust, and the Grant as to such Part be void.

And the Common Council of the Trust at the Expirations of the Terms such Men
Servants shall be severally bound for, (being none less than Four Years) when
requested by the Grantee, will Grant to each of such Men Servants Twenty Acres
of Land in Tail Male, under such Rents, Conditions, Limitations and Agreements,
as shall have been then last Granted to any Others Men Servants in like
Circumstance.

When the Land Reverts to the Trust on the Determination of the Estate in Tail
Male, it is to be Granted again to such Person as the Common Council of the
Trust shall think most for the Advantage of the Colony, and the Trust will have
a special Regard to the Daughters of such who have made improvements on their
Lots, not already provided for by having Married, or Marrying Persons in
Possession or entitled to Lands in the Province of Georgia in Possession or
Remainder.

And the Wives of such Persons in case they should survive their Husbands, are,
during their Lives, entitled to the Mansion House and one half of the Lands
Improved by their Husbands, that is to say, enclosed with a Fence Six Feet high.

Negroes and Rum are Prohibited to be used in the said Province, and Trade with
the Indians unless Licenced.

Number 5. To the KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY. The Humble Memorial and
Representation of the State and Condition of your Majesty's Province of
South Carolina, from the General Assembly of the said Province.
YOUR Majesty's most Dutiful Subjects of this Province, having often felt with
Hearts full of Gratitude, the many Signal Instances of your most Sacred
Majesty's peculiar Favor and Protection, to those Distant Parts of your
Dominions, and especially those late Proofs of your Majesty's most Gracious and
Benign Care, so wisely calculated for the Preservation of this your Majesty's
Frontier Province on the Continent of America, by your Royal Charter to the
Trustees for Establishing the Colony of Georgia, and your Great Goodness so
Timely applied, for the promoting the Settlement of the Swiss at Purrysburgh;
Encouraged by such views of your Majesty's Wise and Paternal Care, extended to
your Remotest Subjects, and excited by the Duty we owe to your most Sacred
Majesty, to be always Watchful for the Support and Security of your Majesty's
Interest, especially at this very critical Conjuncture, when the Flame of a War
breaking out in Europe, may very speedily be lighted here in this your
Majesty's Frontier Province, which, in Situation, is known to be of the utmost
Importance to the General Trade and Traffic in America: We therefore your
Majesty's most faithful Governor, Council, and Commons, convened in your
Majesty's Province of South Carolina, crave Leave with great Humility to
Represent to your Majesty the present State and Condition of this your
Province, and how greatly it stands in need of your Majesty's Gracious and
Timely Succor in case of a War, to Assist our Defense against the French and
Spaniards, or any other Enemies to your Majesty's Dominions, as well as against
the many Nations of Savages which so nearly Threaten the Safety of your
Majesty's Subjects.

The Province of South Carolina, and the new Colony of Georgia, are the
Southern Frontiers of all your Majesty's Dominions on the Continent of America,
to the South and South-West of which is Situated the strong Castle of St.
Augustine, Garrisoned by Four Hundred Spaniards, who have several Nations of
Indians under their Subjection, besides several other small Settlements and
Garrisons, some of which are not Eighty Miles Distant from the Colony of
Georgia. To the South-West and West of us the French have erected a
considerable Town near Fort Thoulouse on the Moville-River, and several other
Forts and Garrisons, some not above Three Hundred Miles distant from our
Settlements; and at New-Orleans on the Mississippi River, since her late
Majesty Queen Anne's War, they have exceedingly increased their Strength and
Traffic, and have now many Forts and Garrisons on both sides of that great
River for several Hundred Miles up the same; and since his most Christian
Majesty has taken out of the Mississippi Company, the Government of that
Country into his own Hands, the French Natives in Canada, come daily down in
Shoals to settle all along that River, where many Regular Forces have of late
been sent over by the King to Strengthen the Garrisons in those Places, and
according to our best and latest Advices, they have Five Hundred Men in Pay,
constantly employed as Wood-Rangers, to keep their Neighboring Indians in
Subjection, and to prevent the distant ones from Disturbing the Settlements;
which Management of the French has so well succeeded, that we are now very well
assured they have wholly now in their Possession and under their Influence, the
several numerous nations of Indians that are Situate near the Mississippi
River, one of which called the Choctaws by estimation consists of about Five
Thousand Fighting Men, and who were always deemed a very Warlike nation, lies
on this side the River not above Four Hundred Miles distant from our
Out-settlements, among whom, as well as several other Nation of Indians, many
French Europeans have been sent to settle, whom the Priests and Missionaries
among them encourage to take Indian Wives, and use diverse other alluring
Methods to Attach the Indians the better to the French Alliance, by which Means
the French are become thoroughly acquainted with the Indian Way, Warring and
Living in the Woods, and have now a great Number of White Men among them, able
to perform a long March with an Army of Indians upon any Expedition.

We further beg leave to inform your Majesty, that if the Measures of France
should provoke your Majesty to a State of Hostility against it in Europe, we
have a great reason to expect an Invasion will be here made upon your Majesty's
Subjects by the French and Indians from the Mississippi Settlements: They have
already paved a Way for a Design of that Nature, by Erecting a Fort called the
Albama Fort, alias Fort Lewis, in the middle of the upper Creek Indians, upon a
Navigable River leading to Moville, which they have kept well Garrisoned and
Mounted with Fourteen Pieces of Cannon, and have lately been prevented from
erecting a Second nearer to us on that Quarter. The Creeks are a Nation very
Bold, Active, and Daring, consisting of about Thirteen Hundred Fighting Men
(and not above One Hundred and Fifty Miles distant from the Choctaws) whom,
though we heretofore have Traded with, claimed and held in our Alliance, yet
the French on Account of that Fort and a superior ability to make them Liberal
Presents, have been for some time striving to draw them over to their Interest,
and have Succeeded with some of the Towns of the Creeks; which, if they can be
Secured in your Majesty's Interest, are the only Nation which your Majesty's
Subjects here can depend upon as the best Barrier against any Attempts either
of the French or their Confederate Indians.

We most Humbly pray Leave farther to inform your Majesty, that the French at
Moville perceiving that they could not gain the Indians to their Interest,
without buying their Deer-Skins (which is the only Commodity the Indians have
to purchase Necessaries with) and the French not being able to dispose of those
Skins by reason of their having no Vend for them in Old France, they have found
Means to encourage Vessels from hence, New York, and other Places (which are
not Prohibited by the Acts of Trade) to Truck those Skins with them for Indian
Trading Goods, especially the British Woollen Manufactures, which the French
dispose of to the Creeks and Choctaws, and other Indians, by which Means the
Indians are much more Alienated from our Interest, and on every Occasion object
to us that the French can supply them with Strouds and Blankets as well as the
English, which would have the contrary Effect if they were wholly supplied with
those Commodities by your Majesty's Subjects Trading with them. If a Stop were
therefore put to that pernicious Trade with the French, the Creek Indians chief
Dependence would be on this Government, and that of Georgia, to supply them
with Goods; by which Means great Part of the Choctaws, living next the Creeks,
would see the Advantage the Creek Indians enjoyed by having British Woollen
Manufactures wholly from your Majesty's Subjects, and thereby be invited in a
short Time to Enter into a Treaty of Commerce with us, which they have lately
made some Offers for, and which, if Effected, will soon lessen the Interest of
the French with those Indians, and by Degrees Attach them to that of your
Majesty.

The only Expedient we can propose to Recover and Confirm that Nation to your
Majesty's Interest, is by speedily making them Presents to withdraw them from
the French Alliance, and by Building some Forts among them your Majesty may be
put in such a Situation, that on the first Notice of Hostilities with the
French, your Majesty may be able at once to reduce the Albama Fort, and we may
then stand against the French and their Indians, which, if not timely prepared
for before a War breaks out, we have too much Reason to Fear we may be soon
overrun by the united strength of the French, the Creeks and Choctaws, with
many other Nations of their Indians Allies: For, should the Creeks become
wholly Enemies, who are well acquainted with all our Settlements, we probably
should also be soon Deserted by the Cherokees, and a few others, small Tribes
of Indians, who, for the sake of our Booty, would readily join to make us a
Prey to the French and Savages. Ever since the late Indian War the Offenses
given us then by the Creeks have made that Nation very Jealous of your
Majesty's Subjects of this Province. We have therefore concerted Measures with
the Honorable James Oglethorpe, Esquire who, being at the Head of a new Colony,
will (we hope) be Successful for your Majesty's Interest amongst that People.
He has already by Presents Attached the Lower Creeks to your Majesty, and has
laudably undertaken to endeavor the fixing a Garrison among the Upper Creeks,
the Expense of which is already in part provided for in this Session of the
General Assembly of this Province: We hope therefore to prevent the French from
Encroaching farther on your Majesty's Territories, until your Majesty is
graciously pleased further to Strengthen and Secure the same.

We find the Cherokee Nation has lately become very Insolent to your Majesty's
Subjects Trading among them, notwithstanding the many Favors the Chiefs of
that Nation received from your Majesty in Great Britain, besides a considerable
Expense which your Majesty's Subjects of this Province have been at in making
them Presents, which inclines us to believe that the French by their Indians
have been tampering with them. We therefore beg leave to inform your Majesty,
that the Building and Mounting some Forts likewise among the Cherokees, and
making them Presents will be highly necessary to keep them steady in their Duty
to your Majesty, lest the French may prevail in Seducing that Nation, which
they may the more readily be inclined to from the Prospect of getting
considerable Plunder in Slaves, Cattle, etc Commodities which they very well
know they have among us, several other Forts will be indispensably necessary,
to be a cover to your Majesty's Subjects settled backwards in this Province, as
also to those of the Colony of Georgia, both which in Length are very
extensive; for though the Trustees for Establishing the Colony of Georgia, by a
particular Scheme of good Management painfully Conducted by the Gentleman
engaged here in that Charitable Enterprise, has put that small part of the
Colony, which he has not yet been able to establish, in a Tenable Condition
against the Spaniards of Florida which lie to the Southward; yet the back
Exposition of those Colonies to the vast Number of French and Indians which
border on the Westward, must, in case of a War, cry greatly aloud for your
Majesty's Gracious and Timely Succor. The Expense of our Safety on such an
Occasion, we must, with all Humility, acquaint your Majesty, either for Men or
Money, can never be Effected by your Majesty's Subjects of this Province, who,
in conjunction with Georgia, do not in the whole amount to more than Three
Thousand Five Hundred Men, which Compose the Militia and wholly consist of
Planters, Tradesmen and other Men of Business.

Besides the many Dangers which by Land we are exposed to from so many Enemies
that lie on the back of us; we further beg leave to represent to your Majesty,
the Defenseless Condition of our Ports and Harbors, where any Enemies of your
Majesty's Dominions may very easily by Sea Invade us, there being no
Fortifications capable of making much Resistance. Those in Charlestown Harbor
are now in a very ruinous Condition, occasioned by the late violent Storms and
Hurricanes which already cost this Country a great deal of Money, and now
require several Thousands of Pounds to Repair the old and Build new ones, to
Mount the Ordnance which your Majesty was graciously Pleased to send us, which,
with great Concern, we must inform your Majesty we have not yet been able to
accomplish, being lately obliged for the Defense and Support of this your
Majesty's Province and Government, to Raise, by a Tax on the Inhabitants, a
Supply of above Forty Thousand Pounds Paper Currency per Annum, which is a
considerable deal more than a Third Part of all the Currency among us; a Charge
which your Majesty's Subjects of this Province are but barely able to Sustain.
Since your Majesty's Royal Instruction to your Majesty's Governor here, an
entire Stop has been put to the Duties which before accrued from European Goods
Imported; and if a War should happen, or any thing extraordinary, to be farther
Expensive here, we should be under the utmost Difficulties to provide
additionally for the same, lest an Increase of Taxes with an Apprehension of
Danger, should drive away many of our present Inhabitants, as well as
Discourage others from coming here to Settle for the Defense and Improvement of
your Majesty's Province, there being several daily moving with their Families
and Effects to North Carolina, where there are no such Fears and Burdens.

We must therefore beg leave to inform your Majesty, that, amidst our other
perilous Circumstances, we are Subject to many Intestine Dangers from the
great Number of Negroes that are now among us, who amount at least to Twenty
Two Thousand Persons, and are Three to One of all your Majesty's White Subjects
in this Province. Insurrections against us have been often Attempted, and would
at any Time prove very Fatal if the French should instigate them, by artfully
giving them and Expectation of Freedom. In such a Situation we most humbly
Crave leave to acquaint your Majesty, that even the present ordinary Expenses
necessary for the Care and Support of this you Majesty's Province and
Government, cannot be provided for by your Majesty's Subjects of this Province,
without your Majesty's gracious Pleasure to Continue those Laws for
Establishing the Negroes and other Duties for Seven Years, and for
appropriating the same, which now lie before your Majesty for your Royal Assent
and Approbation; and the further Expenses that will be requisite for the
Erecting some Forts and Establishing Garrisons in the several necessary Places,
so as to form a Barrier for the Security of this your Majesty's Province, we
most humbly Submit to your Majesty.

Your Majesty's Subjects of this Province, with fullness of Zeal, Duty and
Affection to your most Gracious and Sacred Majesty, are so highly sensible of
the great Importance of this Province to the French, that we must conceive it
more than probable, if a War should happen, they will use all Endeavors to
bring this Country under their Subjection; the would be thereby Enabled to
Support their Sugar Islands with all sorts of Provisions and Lumber by an easy
Navigation, which to our great Advantage is not so Practicable from the present
French Colonies, besides the facility of gaining then to their Interest most of
the Indian Trade on the Northern Continent; they might then easily unite the
Canadees and Choctaws with the many other Nations of Indians which are now in
their Interest. And the several Ports and Harbors of Carolina and Georgia
which now enable your Majesty to be absolute Master of the Passage through the
Gulf of Florida, and to impede, at your Pleasure, the Transportation home of
the Spanish Treasure, would then prove so many Convenient Harbors for your
Majesty's Enemies, by their Privateers or Ships of War to annoy a great Part of
the British Trade to America, as well as that which is carried on through the
Gulf from Jamaica; besides the Loss which Great Britain must feel in so
considerable a Part of it is Navigation, as well as the Exports of Masts, Pitch,
Tar and Turpentine, which, without any Dependence on the Northern Parts of
Europe, are from hence plentifully supplied for the Use of the British Shipping.

This is the present State and Condition of your Majesty's Province of
South Carolina, utterly incapable of finding Funds sufficient for the Defense
of this Wide Frontier, and so Destitute of White Men, that even Money itself
cannot here raise a sufficient Body of them.

With all Humility we therefore beg Leave to lay ourselves at the Feet of your
Majesty, humbly imploring your Majesty's most gracious Care in the Extremities
we should be reduced to on the breaking out of a War; and that your Majesty
would be graciously pleased to extend your Protection to us, as your Majesty,
in your great Wisdom, shall think proper.

In the Council Chamger of South Carolina, 9th April, 1734 Robert Johnson, Tho.
Broughton, President, Paul Jenys, Speaker.


Number 6.
THomas Pearce, aged Forty Years and upwards, of the Dover Man of War, Mariner,
having been at Georgia in America, on board the Peter and James, Captain George
Dymond, in the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty-five; and, from that
Ship, on board the Hawk Sloop, Stationed at Georgia until the Beginning of the
Year One Thousand Seven Hundred and Thirty-nine; and having Sounded every
Inlet, from the Sea all along the Coast of Georgia, from Jekyll Sound to Tybee
Sound, makes Oath and says, That the said Coast Four Leagues from the Land,
is all even Ground, not less than Seven or Eight Fathom Water, and any Ship
keeping in that Depth of Water may Steer along the same with the greatest
Safety, and Anchor if they have occasion: That on the Bar at Jekyll there is at
least Thirteen Feet and a half, at Low Water, and at High Spring Tides
Twenty-four Feet; and on the Bar at Tybee there is at least Sixteen Feet and a
half at Low Water, and at High Water Spring Tides Twenty-Five Feet and a half;
and the Difference between the Spring and Niep Tides is generally between Three
and Four Feet.

And this Deponent farther says, That he is well assured, and would undertake,
by Sounding with a Boat, even at Niep Tides, to carry in Forty-Gun Ships over
either of the said Bars; and says, That he has seen in the Sound at St.
Simon's, from Jekyll Bar, Ten Sail of Ships at one Time, and that Ten or Twelve
Forty Gun Ships may safely ride there; but behind Jekyll Island there is Water
and Room enough for Shipping for Ten Miles up; and that the Sound at Tybee is
large enough to hold with Safety Seven or Eight Forty Gun Ships.

And this Deponent farther says, That Ships in Jekyll Sound may in Twenty-four
Hours, from the Bar, run out into the Gulf-Stream of Florida, through which
Stream the Spanish Galleons (when not passing the Windward Passage) always come.

Thomas Pearce.

Number 7. To the KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY. The humble Memorial of the
Trustees for Establishing the Colony of Georgia in America.
Humbly Shows,
THat they being entrusted by your Majesty with the Care of the Colony of
Georgia, which was formerly Part of your Majesty's Province of South Carolina,
and your Majesty's Colony of Georgia being very much exposed to the Power of
the Spaniards, and become an object of their Envy, by having valuable Ports
upon the homeward Passage from the Spanish West Indies, and the Spaniards
having increased their Forces in the Neighborhood thereof; The Trustees, in
consequence of the great Trust reposed in them by your Majesty, find themselves
obliged, humbly to lay before your Majesty, their Inability sufficiently to
Protect your Majesty's Subjects settled in Georgia, under the Encouragement of
your Majesty's Charter, against this late Increase of Forces, and therefore
become humble Suppliants to your Majesty, on the Behalf of your Subjects
settled in the Province of Georgia, that your Majesty would be pleased to take
their Preservation into your Royal Consideration, that, by a necessary Supply
of Forces, the Province may be Protected against the great Dangers that seem
immediately to Threaten it.

All which is most humbly submitted to your Majesty's great Wisdom.

Signed by Order of the Trustees, this 10 th Day of August 1737. Benj. Martyn,
Secretary.

Number 8. To the Honorable the Trustees for Establishing the Colony of
Georgia in America.
May it please your Honors,
WE, whose Names are underwritten, being all Settlers, Freeholders, and
Inhabitants of the Province of Georgia, and being sensible of the great Pains
and Care exerted by you, in endeavoring to settle this Colony, since it has
been under your Protection and Management, do unanimously join to lay before
you, with the utmost Regret, the following Particulars.

But, in the first Place, we must beg Leave to observe, That it has afforded us
a great deal of Concern and Uneasiness, that former Representations, made to
you, of the same Nature, have not been thought worthy of a due Consideration,
nor even of an Answer. We have most of us settled in this Colony, in pursuance
of a Description and Recommendation of it, by you, in Britain; and from the
Experience of residing here several Years, do find, that it is impossible the
Measures hitherto laid down for making it a Colony can succeed. None of all
those who have planted their Lands, have been able to raise sufficient Produce
to maintain their Families, in Bread-kind only, even though as much Application
and Industry have been exerted to bring it about, as could be done by Men
engaged in an Affair, in which they believe the Welfare of themselves and
Posterity so much depended, and which they imagine must require more than
ordinary Pains to make it succeed; so that by the accumulated Expenses, every
Year, of Provisions, Clothing, Medicines, etc. for themselves, Families, and
Servants, several of them have expended all their Money, nay, even run
considerably in Debt, and so been obliged to leave off Planting, and making
further Improvements; and those who continue are daily exhausting more and more
of their Money, and some daily increasing their Debts, without a Possibility of
being reimburs'd, according to the present Constitution. This being now the
General State of the Colony, it must be obvious, that People cannot subsist by
their Land according to their present Establishment, and this being a Truth
resulting from Trial, Practice, and Experience, cannot be contradicted by any
Theorical Scheme or Reasoning. The Land then, according to the present
Constitution, not being able to maintain the Settlers here, they must
unavoidably have recourse to, and depend upon, Trade; but to our woeful
Experience likewise, the same Causes that prevent the first, obstruct the
latter; for though the Situation of this Place is exceedingly well adapted for
Trade, and, if it were encouraged, might be much more improved by the
Inhabitants, yet the Difficulties and Restrictions which we hitherto have and
at present do labor under, debar us of that Advantage. Timber is the only
Thing we have here which we can Export, and notwithstanding we are obliged to
fall it in planting our Land, yet we cannot manufacture it fit for a Foreign
Market, but at double the Expense of other Colonies; as for Instance, the River
of May, which is but Twenty Miles from us, with the Allowance of Negroes, load
Vessels with that Commodity at one half of the Price that we can do; and what
should induce Persons to bring Ships here, when they can be loaded with one
Half of the Expense so near us? Therefore the Timber on the Land is only a
continual Charge to the Possessors of it, though of very great Service in all
the Northern Colonies, where Negroes are allowed, and consequently Labor
cheap. We do not in the least doubt, but that in Time Silk and Wine may be
produced here, particularly the former; but since the Cultivation of Lands with
White Servants only cannot raise Provision for our Families, as before
mentioned, therefore it is likewise impossible to carry on these Manufactures
according to the present Constitution. It is very well known that Carolina can
raise every thing that this Colony can, and they having their Labor so much
cheaper, will always ruin our Market, unless we are in some measure on a
Footing with them; and as in both, the Land is worn out in Four or Five Years,
and then fit for nothing but Pasture, we must be always at a great deal more
Expense than they in clearing new Land for Planting. The Importation of
Necessaries for Life comes to us at the most extravagant Rate, Merchants in
general, especially of England, not being willing to supply the Settlers with
Goods upon Commission, because no Person here can make them any Security of
their Lands and Improvements, as is very often practiced in other Places, to
promote Trade, when some of the Employer's Money is laid out in necessary
Buildings and Improvements, fitted for the Trade intended, without which it
cannot be carried on. The Benefit of the Importation, therefore, is to all
transient Persons who do not lay out any Money amongst us, but on the contrary
carry every Penny out of the Place: And the chief Reason for their enhancing
the Price, is, because they cannot get any Goods here, either on Freight or
Purchase, for another Market. If the Advantage accruing from Importation
centerd in the Inhabitants, the Profit thereof would naturally circulate
amongst us, and be laid out in Improvements in the Colony. Your Honors, we
imagine, are not insensible of the Numbers that have left this Province, not
being able to support themselves any longer, and those still remaining, who
have Money of their own, and Credit with their Friends, have laid out most of
the former in Improvements, and lost the latter for doing it on such precarious
Titles; and upon account of the present Establishment, not above Two or Three
Persons, except those brought on Charity, and Servants sent by you, have come
here for the Space of Two Years past, either to settle Land or encourage Trade,
neither do we hear of any such likely to come, until we are on better Terms.

It is true, his Majesty has been graciously pleased to Grant a Regiment for
the Defense of this Province, and the neighboring Colony, which indeed will
very much Assist us in Defending ourselves against all Enemies, but otherwise
does not in the least contribute to our Support; for all that part of their Pay
which is expended here, is laid out with Transient People, and our Neighbors
of Carolina, who are capable to supply them with Provisions and other
Necessaries at a moderate Price, which we, as before observed, are not at all
capable to do, upon the present Establishment: This being our present Condition
it is obvious what the Consequences must be.

But we, for our parts, having entirely relied on, and confided in, your good
Intentions, believing you would Redress our Grievances that should appear, and
now, by our long Experience from Industry and continual Application to
Improvement of Land here, do find it impossible to pursue it, or subsist
ourselves any longer, according to the present nature of the Constitution: And
likewise believing you will agree to those Measures which are found by
Experience, capable to make this Colony succeed, and to promote which we have
consumed our Money, Time and Labor; we do, from a sincere and true Regard to
it is Welfare, and in Duty both to you and ourselves, beg leave to lay before
your immediate Consideration, the Two following chief Causes of these our
present Misfortunes, and this deplorable State of the Colony; and which, we are
certain, if Granted, would be an infallible Remedy for both.

1. The want of a Free Title or Fee Simple to our Lands, which, if Granted,
would occasion great Numbers of new Settlers to come among us, and likewise
encourage those who remain here, cheerfully to proceed in making further
Improvements, as well to retrieve their sunk Fortunes, as to make Provision for
their Posterity.

2. The want and use of Negroes with proper Limitations, which, if Granted,
would both induce great Numbers of White People to come here, and also render
us Capable to subsist ourselves by raising Provisions upon our Lands, until we
could make some Produce of it for Export, and in some measure to balance our
Importation. We are very sensible of the Inconveniences and Mischiefs that have
already, and do daily arise from an unlimited use of Negroes; but we are as
sensible that these might be prevented by a due Limitation, such as, so many to
each White Man, or so many to such a Quantity of Land, or in any other Manner
which your Honors shall think most proper. By Granting us, Gentlemen, these
Two particulars, and such other Privileges as his Majesty's most dutiful
Subjects in America enjoy, you will not only prevent our impending Ruin, but we
are fully satisfied, also, will soon make this the most flourishing Colony
possessed by his Majesty in America, and your Memories will be perpetuated to
all future Ages, our latest Posterity sounding your Praises as their first
Founders, Patrons and Guardians: But if, by Denying us those Privileges, we
ourselves and Families are not only Ruined, but even our Posterities likewise,
you will always be mentioned as the Cause and Authors of all their Misfortunes
and Calamaties; which we hope will never happen.

Savannah, in Georgia, December. 9. 1738. We are, with all due Respect, Your
Honors most Dutiful, and Obedient Servants, Henry Parker, Robert Gilbert, his
mark. Thomas Christie, John Fallowfield, John Brownfield, William Woodroofe.
Pat. Tailfer, And. Grant, Sam. Mercer, Robert Williams, Patrick Graham, Da.
Douglas, Tho. Baillie, Hugh Anderson, James Carwells, John Lyndall, Jos.
Fitzwalter, Elisha Forster, Walter Fox, William Ewen, J. Amoury, Ja. Houston,
James Williams, Edward Jenkins, Thomas Omaston, Joseph Wardrop, George Buncle,
Adrian Loyer, P. Joubert, John Burton, Robert Hows, Wm. Maiers, his mark.
Thomas Salter, James Baillow, James Anderson, John Seillie, William
Starfickett, Petre Baillou, Peter Emory, Henry Lloyd, Wm. Elbert, John Smith,
Wm. Calvert, Stephen Marrauld, Jacob Mathews, Isaac Young, Robert Hainks,
Archibald Glen, Tho. Neale, Stephen Terien, his mark. Sam. Ward, James Smith,
his mark. Pierre Morel, Stephen de Monford, David Gainder, James Chensac, his
mark. James Landry, his mark. Simson Rouviere, his mark. Louis Stamen, Thomas
Tripp, Sam. Holmes, James Mure, William Parker, John Graham, James Papot, John
Penrose, David Snook, Edward Townshend, John Desborough, Andrew Duche, James
Galloway, John Desborough, Junr. Edward Bush, Benj. Adams, Charles Britain,
John Rae, William Colthred, John Young, Samuel Lacey, Andrew Walker, John
Miller, Richard Rogers, Thomas Gantlet, Richard Millechamp, Isaac Young, Senr.
John Kelley, Ios. Stanley, Tho. Young, his mark. Thomas Cross, his mark.
Richard Davis, Thomas Wattele, Thomas Baillie, his mark. James Corneck, James
Burnsides, Hugh Frazer, his mark. Samuel Parker, William Sterling, Tho.
Andrews, George Gorsand, John Stonehewer, John Teasdeail, Wm. Greenfield, his
mark. Cha. Greenfield, his mark. Thomas Young, his mark. James Dormer, William
Carter, Henry Moulton, his mark. Thomas Tibbett, James Dean, Don. Stewart,
Gille Becu, Francis Brooks, John Clarke, Henry Green, Jacob Wats, John Dudding,
George Bush, his mark. Peter Deshter, his mark. Henry Manley, his mark. Head
Gardener, Kenedy O Brien.


Number 9.
WE are informed, that our Neighbors of Savannah have petitioned your
Excellency for the Liberty of having Slaves; we hope and earnestly entreat,
that before such Proposals are hearkened unto, your Excellency will consider
our Situation, and of what dangerous and bad Consequence such Liberty would be
of to us, for many Reasons.

1. The Nearness of the Spaniards, who have proclaimed Freedom to all Slaves
who run from their Masters, makes it impossible for us to keep them, without
more Labor in watching them, than we would be at to do their Work.

2. We are Laborious, and know a White Man may be, by the Year, more usefully
employed than a Negro.

3. We are not Rich, and becoming Debtors for Slaves, in case of their running
away, or dying, would inevitably ruin the poor Master, and he become a greater
Slave to the Negro-Merchant, than the Slave he bought could be to him.

4. It would oblige us to keep a Guard-Duty, at least as severe as when we
expected a daily Invasion; and, if that was the Case, hoiw miserable would it
be to us, and our Wives and Children, to have an Enemy without, and a more
dangerous one in our Bosom.

5. It is shocking to human Nature, that any Race of Mankind, and their
Posterity, should be sentenced to perpetual Slavery; nor, in Justice, can we
think otherwise of it, than that they are thrown amongst us, to be our Scourge
one Day or other for our Sins; and as Freedom to them must be as dear as to us,
what a Scene of Horror must it bring about! And the longer it is unexecuted,
the bloody Scene must be the greater. We, therefore, for our own Sakes, our
Wives and Children, and our Posterity, beg your Consideration, and entreat,
that instead of introducing Slaves, you will put us in the Way to get some of our
Countrymen, who, with their Labor, in Time of Peace, and our Vigilance, if we
are Invaded, with the Help of those, will render it a difficult thing to hurt
us, or that part of the Province we possess. We will for ever Pray for your
Excellency, and are, with all Submission,

Your Excellency's most Obedient, Humble Servants, John Mackintosh Moore, John
Mackintosh Lynvilge, Ranald Mc Donald, HM Hugh Morrison's mark. John Mc Donald,
John Macklean, John Mackintosh, Son to L. John Mc Intosh Bain, James Mc Kay,
Daniel Clark, First. Alexander Clark, Son to the above. Donald Clark, Third,
his mark. Ios. BY Burges, his mark. Donald Clark, Second. Archibald AMB Mc
Bain, his mark. Alexander Munro. William Munro. John Cuthbert.

New-Inverness, 3d. Ian. 1738, 9.
To his Excellency General Oglethorpe.
Number 10.
Ebenezer, 13th March, 1739.
WE Saltzburghers, and Inhabitants of Ebenezer, that have signed this Letter,
entreat humbly in our, and our Brethrens, Names, your Excellency would be
pleased to show us the Favor, of desiring the Honorable Trustees for sending
to Georgia another Transport of Saltzburghers, to be settled at Ebenezer. We
have, with one Accord, wrote a Letter to our Father in God, the Reverend Mr.
Senior Urlsperger, at Augsperg, and in that Letter expressly named those
Saltzburghers and Austrians whom, as our Friends, Relations, and Countrymen, we
wish to see settled here. We can indeed attest of them, that they fear the Lord
truly, love Working, and will conform themselves to our Congregation. We have
given them an Account of our being settled well, and being mighty well pleased
with the Climate and Condition of this Country, having here several Preferences
in Spiritual and Temporal Circumstances, for other People in Germany, which
your Honor will find in the here enclosed Copy of our Letter to Mr. Senior
Urlsperger; if they fare as we do, having been provided in the Beginning with
Provisions, a little Stock for Breed, some Tools and good Land, by the Care of
the Honorable Trustees, and if God grants his Blessing to their Work, we doubt
not, but they will gain with us, easily, their Bread and Subsistence, and lead
a quiet and peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty. Though it is here a
hotter Season than our native Country is, yet not so extremely hot as we were
told on the first Time of our Arrival; but since we have been now used to the
Country, we find it tolerable, and, for working People, very convenient,
setting themselves to Work early in the Morning, 'till Ten o'Clock, and, in the
Afternoon, from Three to Sunset; and having Business at home, we do them in our
Huts and Houses, in the Middle of the Day, till the greatest Heat is over.
People in Germany are hindered by Frost and Snow, in the Winter, from doing any
Work in the Fields and Vineyards; but we have this Preference, to do the most
and heaviest Work at such a Time, preparing the Ground sufficiently for the
Planting in the Spring. We were told by several People, after our Arrival, that
it proves quite impossible and dangerous, for White People to plant and
manufacture any Rice, being a Work only for Negroes, not for European People;
but having Experience of the contrary, we laugh at such a Talking, seeing that
several People of us have had, in last Harvest, a greater Crop of Rice, than
they wanted for their own Consumption. If God is pleased to enable us, by some
Money, for building such Mills, convenient for the cleaning the Rice, as we use
in Germany for the making several Grains fit for eating, then the Manufacture
of Rice will be an easy and Profitable Thing: For the present, we crave your
Excellency's Goodness to allow, for the Use of the whole Congregation, some
Rice-Sieves of several Sorts, from Charlestown, which cannot be had at
Savannah: We will be accountable to the Store for them. Of Corn, Pease,
Potatoes, Pumpkins, etc. we had such a good Quantity, that many Bushels were
sold, and much was spent in feeding Calves, Cows, and Hogs. If the Surveyor,
according to his Order and Duty, had used Dispatch in laying out our Farms
(which we have got not sooner than last Fall) item, if not, we all were
disappointed by long Sickness, and planting the yellow Pennsylvania Corn, we
would have been able, by the Blessing of God, to spare a greater Quantity of
Grain, for getting of Meat-kind and Clothes, of which we are in want. It is
true, the two Acres of Ground for each Family's Garden, are set out some time
ago; but being there very few Swamps fit for planting of Rice, and some of them
wanting a good deal of Dung, we were not able, in the Beginning, to dung it
well, therefore we could not make such a good Use of those Acres, as we now
have Reason to hope, by the Assistance of God, after our Plantations are laid
out: Hence it is, that we plant the good Ground first, and improve the other
Soil then, when Occasion will require it, in the best Manner we can. In the
first Time, when the Ground must be cleared from Trees, Bushes, and Roots, and
fenced in carefully, we are to undergo some hard Labor, which afterward will
be the easier and more pleasing, when the hardest Trial is over, and our
Plantations are better regulated. A good deal of Time was spent in building
Huts, Houses, and other necessary Buildings, in Town, and upon the Farms; and
since we wanted Money for several Expenses, several Persons of us hired
ourselves out, for some Weeks, for building the Orphan-House and it is
Appurtenances. Item, The Reverend Mr. Gronau's House, which happened to be
built in the hottest Summer-Season, and now some of us are employed to build
the Reverend Mr. Bolzius's House, which Buildings having taken away some Time
from our Work in the Ground; but the fair Opportunity of earning some Money at
home, was a great Benefit to us; this being now so, that neither the hot Summer
Season, nor any Thing else, hinders us from Work in the Ground, and we wish to
live a quiet and peaceable Life at our Place. We humbly beseech the Honorable
Trustees not to allow it, that any Negro might be brought to our Place, or in
our Neighborhood, knowing by Experience that Houses and Gardens will be always
robbed by them, and White People are in danger of Life because of them, besides
other great Inconveniences. Likewise we humbly beseech you and the Trustees,
not to allow any Person the Liberty of buying up Lands at our Place, by which,
if granted, it would happen, that by bad and turbulent Neighbors our
Congregation would be spoiled, and poor harmless People troubled and oppressed;
but we wish and long for such Neighbors to be settled here, whose good Name
and honest Behavior is known to us and our Favorers. The Honorable Trustees
have been always Favorers and Protectors of poor and distressed People,
therefore we beseech you and them, they would be pleased to take us farther
under your Fatherly Care, that the Remembrance of their Benevolence and
Kindness to our Congregation might be conveyed to our late Posterity, and be
highly praised. We put up our Prayers to God for rewarding your Excellency, and
the Honorable Trustees, manifold, for all their good Assistance and Benefits
which are bestowed upon us, and humbly beg the Continuance of your and their
Favor and Protection, being, with the greatest Submission and Respect,

Your Honors Most Obedient, Dutiful Servants, Inhabitants at Ebenezer. Gabriel
Maurer, John Maurer, George Kogler, Paulus Zittrauer, Peter Reuter, Stephen
Rottenbergher, Ambrosii Zubli, John Jacob Zubli, Christopher Ortmann, Ruprecht
Kalober, Leonhard Rauner, Christian Reidelspergher, John Hornberger, George
Bruckner, Carl. Sigismund Ott, Matthias Zettler, Ruprecht Eischberger, John
Peter Arnsdorff, Bartholomeus Rieser, Bartholomeus Zant, Thomas Gsotrwandel,
Simon Reiter, Matthias Brandher, Christian Lieinberger, Fridrick Willhelm
Molter, Martin Hertzog, Christian Hessler, John Pletter, Frank Sigismund, Simon
Steiner, George Schwaiger, John Schmidt, Leonhard Crause, Peter Gruber, Jacob
Schartner, Joseph Leitner, John Cornberger, Martin Lackner, Luprecht Steiner,
Veit Lemmen Hosser, John and Catle Floerel, Ruprecht Zimmerman, Andreas
Grimmiger, Matthias Burgsteiner, Veit Landselder, Joseph Ernst, John Michel
Rieser, Thomas Pichler, John Spielbielger.

WE Ministers of the Congregation at Ebenezer, join with the Saltzburghers in
this Petition, and verify, that every one of them has Signed it with the
greatest Readiness and Satisfaction.

John Martin Boblius, Israel Christian Gronau.




To his Excellency General Oglethorpe.
Number 11. To the Magistrates of the Town of Savannah in the Province of
GEORGIA.
THE Trustees for Establishing the Colony of Georgia in America, have received
by the Hands of Mr. Benjamin Ball of London, Merchant, an attested Copy of a
Representation Signed by you the Magistrates, and many of the Inhabitants, of
Savannah, on the 9th December last, for altering the Tenure of the Lands, and
introducing Negroes into the Province, transmitted from thence by Mr. To.
Williams.

The Trustees are not surprised to find unwary People drawn in by Crafty Men,
to join in a Design of extorting, by Clamor, from the Trustees, an Alteration
in the fundamental Laws framed for the Preservation of the People from those
very Designs.

But the Trustees cannot but express their Astonishment, that you, the
Magistrates appointed by them to be Guardians of the People, by putting those
Laws in Execution, should so far forget your Duty, as to put your selves at the
Head of this Attempt.

However, they direct you to give the Complainants this Answer from the
Trustees, That they should deem themselves very unfit for the Trust reposed in
them by his Majesty on their behalf, if they could be prevailed upon, by such
an irrational Attempt, to give up a Constitution, framed from the greatest
Caution for the Preservation of Liberty and Property, and of which the Laws
against the use of Slaves and for the Entail of Lands, are the surest
Foundations.

And the Trustees are the more confirmed in their Opinion, of the
unreasonableness of this Demand, that they have received Petitions from the
Darien, and other Parts of the Province, representing the Inconvenience and
Danger which must arise to the good People of the Province from the
Introduction of Negroes, and, as the Trustees themselves are fully convinced,
that besides the Hazard attending that Introduction, it would destroy all the
Industry among the White Inhabitants; and that, by giving them a Power to Alien
their Lands, the Colony would soon be too like it is Neighbors, void of White
Inhabitants, filled with Blacks, and reduced to the precarious Property of a
few, equally disposed to domestic Treachery and foreign Invasion. And
therefore the Trustees cannot be supposed to be in a Disposition of Granting
this Request, and if they have not before this signified their Dislike of it,
their Delay is to be imputed to no other Motives but the Hopes they had
conceived, that Time and Experience would bring the Complainants to a better
Mind. And the Trustees readily join Issue with them in their Appeal to
Posterity, who shall judge between them, who were their best Friends, those who
endeavored to preserve for them a Property in their Lands, by Tying up the
Hands of their unthrifty Progenitors, or they who wanted a Power to Mortgage or
Alien them; who were the best Friends to the Colony, those who with great
Labor and Cost, had endeavored to form a Colony of his Majesty's Subjects,
and Persecuted Protestants, from other Parts of Europe, had Placed them on a
fruitful Soil, and strove to secure them in their Possessions, by those Arts
which naturally tend to keep the Colony full of useful and industrious People,
capable both to Cultivate and Defend it, or those who to gratify the greedy and
ambitious Views of a few Negro Merchants, would put it into their Power to
become sole Owners of the Province, by introducing their baneful Commodity,
which it is well known by sad Experience, has brought our Neighbor Colonies to
the brink of Ruin, by driving out their White Inhabitants, who were their Glory
and Strength, to make Room for Black, who are now become the Terror of their
advised Masters.

Signed by Order of the Trustees, this Twentieth Day of June, 1739. Benj.
Martyn, Secretary.

FINIS.

