THE Constitution and Government OF Harvard-College.

An ACCOUNT Of the Constitution and Government of Harvard-College, from its
first Formation in the Year 1636 to the Year 1742.
THE subsequent Collection of Laws, which founded the Government of
Harvard-College, was made on a late extraordinary Case, wherein the Overseers
of said College assumed to themselves a SOVEREIGN Power over that College, and
the SOLE Right to judge and censure and dismiss the PRESIDENT or ANY Member of
the Corporation of said College, without the Consent or any Act of that
Corporation for the same. This occasioned the following Examination into the
Constitution and Government of Harvard-College, beginning at the first
Formation of that College in the Year 1636 and ending with the present Year of
our Lord 1742, wherein all the Laws that constitute the Government of said
College are laid together and compared; and then from these Laws an Argument is
formed to prove "What Powers belong to the Corporation and to the Overseers of
said College; and what Powers over that College still remain in the GENERAL
COURT. And from the whole it is finally concluded "Who are the VISITORS of said
College and have the Right at ALL Times to look into the State of the
COLLEGE-STOCK and see that it is not embezzled or any Part of it alienated from
its proper Uses.

I. THE First Erecting a SCHOOL or COLLEGE at Newtown (afterward Cambridge)
before the General Court in 1642 appointed OVERSEERS for said College.
Taken from the Court Records.

Sept. 1636. The Court agreed to give 400 l. toward a SCHOOL or COLLEGE,
whereof 200 l. to be paid the next Year, and 200 l. when the Work is finished;
and the next Court to appoint where and what Building.

Court Rec. B. 1. P. 183. Anno 1637. "The College is ORDERED to be at Newtown.

Court Rec. B. 1. P. 204. "For the College; This Committee of the Court must
have appointed Mr. Eaton to be the Master of this public School. For on this
Year, when the said College or School was under the ordering of this Committee,
he was appointed Master or Professor of it; (...) appears from College Records
No. B. Now No Record says (...) he was appointed; but since (...) Overseers, or
any other standing Power over this College, w^^^ (...) by the Court, there
could be none but the Court or Committees from them, that (...) In a College
which appears to be from the Beginning, and now was, the College of (...)
CHRIST; For that Court (...) it and named it and ordered where it should be
built and (...) ^^^^ing it should be^ and appointed the abovesaid Committee on
this Year to take Order (...) College, and the Committee ^eem to be of some
Continence, for the Governor, Deputy G^^^ (...) or the (...) were always to be
one of them. It Is true that the next Year after Mr. Fa^^ (...) and (...) of the
Colony invite Mr. Dunsler to be (...) C^^^ R^^^ No. D. But it does not appear
from any (...) Power." They could not give it to themselves (...) to be the
College of the General Court! Nor had these Magistrates and Elders an original
or proper Right to that College-Stock which (as in No. D.) they put into Mr.
Dunster's Hanus, together with the Care of carrying on the College Buildings;
for it appears (No. C. compared with the Court Records, Mark) that the Year
before, the general Court put that Stock, and the Care of carrying on the
College Buildings, into the Hands of Mr. Shepherd; and it is plain by what Mr.
Dunster says in his Resignation (hereafter inserted) that the General Court
looked on these Magistrates and Elders, to have No Authority to do these
Things, or to invite him to be President! And so they did those Things only on
Sufferance or Permission of the Court. From all therefore it is certain that,
till Overseers were appointed in 1642, the College was under the immediate
Government of the General Court and those Committees whom the Court appointed
to take Order about it. and how far the Act of 42 gave the Overseers a Power
over the President and Fellows of said College ( after they were made a
Corporation; may plainly appear by what shall be said hereafter.
The Governor Mr. Winthrop, the Deputy Mr. Dudley, the Treasurer Mr.
Bellingham, Mr. Humphry, Mr. Herlackendon, Mr. Stoughton, Mr. Cotton, Mr.
Wilson, Mr. Damport, Mr. Wells, Mr. Shepherd, Mr. Peter's; these or the greater
Part of them, whereof Mr. Winthrop, Mr. Dudley or Mr. Bellingham, to be always
one; to TAKE ORDER for a College at Newtown.

Court Rec. B. 1. P. 213. May 1638. "It is ordered that Newtown shall be
henceforth called Cambridge.

Co. R. B. 1. P. 221. March 1638, 9. "It is ordered that the College agreed on
formerly to be built at Cambridge, be called HARVARD COLLEGE.

Court Rec. B. 1. 241. Anno 1639. "The Court granted to Mr. Nathanael Eaton 500
Acres of Land, if he continue his Employment, for his Life, to be to him and
his Heirs.

Court Rec. B. 1. P. 252. Mr. Nathaniel Eaton being accused for cruel and
barbarous beating of Mr. Naz. Brisco, and for other neglecting and misusing of
his Scholars, And No. C. From these two Records compared, it appears that what
the Court did in discharging Mr. Eaton from keeping School etc. Had a primary
and direct Reference to his keeping the School of the College abovesaid. And
that the Court alone (and not the said Magistrates and Elders) dismissed Mr.
Eaton from his Presidency in the College -- And thus the next President Mr.
Dunster who resigned his Place in the Year 1654, resigned it first to the Court
alone; Now this was after the Overseers and Corporation of said College were
appointed by the Acts of 42 and 50; and yet the said Magistrates and Elders of
the 6 neighboring Towns ( though THEN Overseers;) had nothing to do with Mr.
Dunster's Resignation till the general Court gave them Power finally to receive
it. (And as to the Corporation of said College, They never had any Thing to do
with it at all; So certain is it that the General Court, who constituted the
said Overseers and Corporation, never looked on those Acts, which constituted
them ta^e such, as ^^^vering these Overseers and Corporation, to dismiss a
Minister of that Corporation. And if they had No such Right Then. it is certain
they have never had it in themselves S^^^, and so have no Power to do it Now.
It was ORDERED that Mr. Eaton should be DISCHARGED from keeping School with us
without License. And Mr. Eaton is fined to the Country 66 l. 13 s. 4 d. which
Fine is respited to the next Court, unless he remove in the mean while; the
Court agreed Mr. Eaton should give Mr. Naz. Brisco 30 l. for Satisfaction for
the Wrong done him, and to be paid presently. Capt. Jennison and Mr. Mayhow
were appointed It here seems that Mr. Eaton was not to be called to Account the
next Week for his Fine to the Country, so that was respited to the next Court,
and not to be paid at all if he removed in the mean while. Nor was it for the
Satisfaction-Money which he was to pay Mr. Brisco, for that was to be paid
presently. It therefore was for the (...) St^^ that the Court here ordered he
should be called to Account. For that Stock (as appears, Coll. Rece. No. B.)
was put into his Hands. So that the Court alone had the proper Rights in these
early Fines, to dispose of that Stock.
to call Mr. Eaton to Account the beginning of next Week, and to desire Mr.
Samuel (...) and Mr. Joseph Cook to help them the best they can.

Court Rec. B. 1. P. 262, 3. Anno 1640. "The FERRY between Boston and
Charlestown is granted to the College.

Court Rec. B. 1. P. 283. I. THE First Erecting a SCHOOL or COLLEGE at Newtown
(afterward Cambridge) before the General Court in 1642 appointed OVERSEERS for
said College.
Taken from the College Records.

A. Sept. 1636. "At a General Court held at Boston, The Court voted for the
erecting a public SCHOOL "or COLLEGE in Cambridge 400 l. to be paid out of the
Country Treasury.

Coll. Rec. B. 3. P. 1. B. Anno 1637. Mr. Nathaniel Eaton was chosen Professor
of said SCHOOL. To whose Care the Management of the Donations were betrusted;
for the erecting such Edifices as were meet and necessary for A College and for
his own Lodgings.

Col. Rec. B. 3. P. 2. C. Sept. 1639. Mr. Nathaniel Eaton appearing in the
Court held at Boston, and being there convicted of sundry Abuses and inhumane
Severities, by him acted toward the Scholars under his Charge, was openly
sentenced and removed from his abovesaid Trust. The Care of carrying on the
Building begun by Mr. Eaton was then committed to the Management of Mr. Samuel
Shepherd; and the College-Stock put into his Hands.

Coll. Rec. B. 3. P. 2. D. Aug. 27. 1640. At a Meeting of the Magistrates and
Elders at Boston, The Reverend Mr. HENRY DUNSTER was by them invited to accept
the Place of President of the College, which he accordingly accepted; to whom
was committed the Care and Trust of finishing the College Buildings and his own
Lodgings, and the C^^^^^y of the ^spand^, and such Do^^ti^^^ a^ might further
be added to the ^ncrease thereof.

Coll. Rec. B. 3, P. 3. II. The Act of the General Court in 1642, which
constituted and appointed OVERSEERS to said Harvard-College, before that
College was made a CORPORATION.
WHEREAS through the good Hand of God upon us, there is a College founded in
Cambridge in the County of Middlesex Called Harvard-College, viz. by the
General Court. For the Court by Law gave it that Name, ordering that it should
be called Harvard-College; as appears from the Court Records Anno 1638, 9. Dr.
Aylisse in his Account of the University of Oxford (Vol. 2. P. 3.) when he
comes to define a College, has these Words, A College is a Legal Body or
Corporation. The Persons who are incorporated hereinto are a Body formed to
last and endure in perpetual Succession of Time, and thus every College must
have its legal Commencement or Beginning. Now according to this Definition, or
Account of such a Society, Harvard-College was a College improperly so called,
'till the Act or Charter of 1650 which made it a Legal Body or Corporation, and
which incorporated the President and Fellows as a Body to last and endure in
perpetual Succession of Time. So that from the Date of that Charter the said
College MUST have its Legal Commencement or Beginning. And accordingly the
General Court declare, on common Law, in the last and most exact Regulation
they made of said College in Dec. 1707, That the FIRST Foundation and
Establishment of that College and of the Government thereof had its ORIGINAL
from an Act of the Court made in the Year 1650 which had not been repealed or
nulled. So that the above cited Act of 42 is beyond the FIRST Foundation of the
present College and of the GOVERNMENT thereof; and therefore the present
incorporated College, or Harvard College as a College properly so called, seems
to have nothing to do with this Act of 42 or with any POWERS contained in it,
but only with the incorporating Act of 1650 as its FIRST Foundation. This Act
now follows.
, called HARVARD COLLEGE; For the Encouragement whereof this Court has given
the Sum of 400 l. and also the Revenue of the FERRY betwixt Charlestown and
Boston, and that the well-ordering and managing of the said College is of great
Concernment.

It is therefore ordered by this Court and the Authority thereof, that the
Governor and Deputy Covernour, for the Time being, and all the Magistrates of
this Jurisdiction, together with the teaching Elders of the six next adjoining
Towns, viz. Cambridge, Watertown, Charlestown, Boston, Roxbury and Dorchester,
And the President of the said College, for the Time being, SHALL from Time to
Time Have Full Power and Authority to make and establish all such Orders,
Statutes and Constitutions as they shall see necessary for the instituting
guiding and furthering of the said College, and the several Members thereof,
from Time to Time, in Picty Morality and Learning: And also to Dispose, Order
and Manage to the Use and Behoof of the said College, and Members thereof, all
Gists, Legacies, Bequeaths, Revenues, Lands and Donations, as either have been,
are, or shall be conferred, bestowed, or any Way shall fall, or come to the
said College.

And whereas is may come to pass that Many of the said Megistrates and said
Elders may be Absent, or otherwise Employed about other weighty Affairs, when
the said College may need their present Help and Counsel, it is therefore
ordered that the greater Number of Magistrates and Elders which shall be
present with the President shall have the Power of the Whole; PROVIDED that if
any Constitution Order or Orders by them made shall be found burtful unto the
said College or the Members thereof of to the Wealpublick; Then upon APPEAL of
the Party or Parties grieved unto the Company of Overseers first mentioned,
they shall repeal the said Order or Orders (if they see Cause) at their next
Meeting, or Stand Accountable thereof to the Next GENERAL COURT.

III. The Colony Law or Charter which incorporated said Harvard-College, May
31. 1650.
WHEREAS through the good Hand of God many well-devoted Persons have been and
daily are moved and stirred up to give and bestow sundry Gifts, Legacies, Lands
and Revenues, for the Advancement of all good Literature, Arts and Sciences, in
Harvard-College in Cambridge in the County of Middlesex, and to the Maintenance
of the President and Fellows, and for all Accommodations of Buildings, and all
other necessary Provisions, that may conduce to the Education of the English
and Indian Youth of this Country in Knowledge and Godliness,

It is therefore Ordered and Enacted by this Court, and the Authority thereof,
that for the furthering so good a Work and for the Purposes aforesaid, from
HENCEFORTH, that the said COLLEGE in Cambridge in Middlesex in New England
shall be a CORPORATION consisting of seven Persons, to wit, a President, five
Fellows and a Treasurer or Burser; and that HENRY DUNSTER shall be the first
President, Samuel Mother, Samuel Danforth Masters of Art, Jonathan Mitchel,
Comfort Star and Samuel Eaton Batchelors of Art, shall be the five Fellows, and
Thomas Danforth to be present Treasurer; all of them being Inhabitants in the
Bay, and shall be the first Seven Persons of which the said Corporation shall
consist.

And that the said seven Persons or the greater Number of them, procuring the
Present of the OVERSEERS of the College and by their Council and Consent shall
have Power and are her^by authorized at any Time or Times to ELECT a new
President, Fellows or Treasurer so often and f^^^ Time to Time as any of the said
Person or Persons shall DIE or be REMOVED.

Which said President and Fellows for the Time being shall for ever hereafter
(...) ^ame and Fact be one Body Politic and Corporate in Law to ALL Intents
and Purposes; and (...) have perpetual Succession, and shall be called by the
Name of "Pr^^^^^^ and Fellows of ^^^^^ard College" and shall from Time to Time
be eligible as aforesaid, and (...) that Name th^^ (...) their Successo^ shall
and may purchase and require to themselves, (...) free Gift and Donation, any
Lands. Ten^^^^^ ^spand^ with^^ this J^^i^^^^tion ^spand^ Massachuset^s, not
exceeding the Value of 500 l. per Annum, and any Goods and Sums of ^^^^y
whatsover, to the Use and Behoof of the said President, Fellows and Scholars of
the said ^^^^ge; and also may sue and plead or be sued and impleaded by the
Name aforesaid in all Co^^s and Places of Judicature within the Jurisdiction
aforesaid.

And that the said President with any three of the Fellows shall have Powers,
and are hereby authorized, when they shall think fit, to make and appoint a
common Seal for (...) Use of the said Corporation

And the President and Fellows or the major Part of them, from Time to Time,
may meet and CHOOSE such Officers and Servants for the College, and make such
Allowance to them and THEM also to REMOVE, and after DEATH or REMOVAL to CHOOSE
such others, and to make from Time to Time such ORDERS and Bylaws for the
better ordering and carrying on the Work of the College, as they shall think
fit. Provided the said ORDERS be allowed by the OVERSEERS.

And also that the President and Fellows or major Part of them with the
Treasurer shall have Power to make conclusive Bargains for Lands and Tenements
to be Purchased by the said Corporation for valuable Consideration.

And for the better ordering of the Government of the said College and
Corporation, be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the President and
three more of the Fellows shall and may from Time to Time, upon due Warning or
Notice given by the President to the rest, hold a Meeting for the debating and
concluding of Affairs concerning the Profits and Revenues of any Lands, and
disposing of their Goods; provided that all the said Disposings be according to
the Will of the Donors; and for Direction in all emergent Occasions. Execution
of all Orders and Bylaws, and for the procuring of a General Meeting of ALL
the OVERSEERS and SOCIETY in GREAT and DIFFICULT Cases and in Cases of
NON-AGREEMENT; in ALL which Cases aforesaid, the Conclusion shall be made by
the major Part, the said President having a casting Voice, the OVERSEERS
consenting thereunto. And that all the aforesaid Transactions shall tend to and
for the Use and Behoof of the President, Fellows, Scholars and Officers of the
said College, and for all Accommodations of Buildings, Books, and all other
necessary Provisions and Furnitures, as may be for the Advancement and
Education of Youth in all manner of good Literature, Arts and Sciences.

The two remaining Clauses of this Charter have no Relation to the Overseers of
said College, but only exempt the Estate of the College and Scholars from
Rates, Toll and Excise; and the Corporation, Scholars, and Servants of said
College, from civil and military Offices and Services; and the Estates of said
Servants, to 100 l. a Man, from Country Rates.

IV. The Appendix to the College Charter of 1650. At a General Court held at
Boston, Oct. 1657
In Answer to certain Proposals presented to this Court by the OVERSEERS of
Harvard-College; As an Appendix to the College-Charter, it is Ordered:

The Corporation shall have Power from Time to Time to make such Orders and
Bylaws for the better ordering and carrying on of the Work of the College as
they shall see Cause without Dependence on the Consent of the Overseers
foregoing; Provided always that the Corporation shall be responsible unto and
those Orders and Bylaws shall be alterable by the Overseers according to their
Discretion.

And when the Corporation shall hold (...) Meeting for agreeing with College
Servants, for making of Orders and Bylaws, for debating and concluding of
Affairs concerning the Profits and Revenues of any Lands or Gifts and the
d^^posing thereof (Provided that all the said Disposals be according to the
Will of the Donors) for managing all emergent Occasions, for the procuring of a
GEN^^AL Meeting of the OVERSEERS and SOCIETY in great and difficut Cases and in
Cases of New-Agr^^ment, and for all other College Affairs to them (...) all
thse Cases the Conclusion shall be valid being made by the major Part of the
Corporation, the President having casting Vote; Provided always that in these
Things also they be responsible to the Overseers aforesaid.

And in Case the Corporation shall see cause to call a Meeting of the
Overseers, or the Overseers shall see good to meet of themselves; it shall be
sufficient unto the Validity of College Acts that Notice be given to the
Overseers in the six Towns mentioned in the printed Law Anno 1642, when the
rest of the Overseers by Reason of the Remoteness of their Habitations cannot
conveniently be acquainted therewith.

This APPENDIX, or the greater Part of it, seems to be NULLED by a succeeding
Law of the Colony (called the College Charter of 1672) which ends with this
Sanction of the Court. All and every of which Premises we do ^nd^in and enact
to be FULLY established for LAW; any L^^, GRANT, or Us^ge to the CONTRARY, in
any wise notwithstanding. Now the greater Part of ^^d Appendix is contrary to
this posteriour Law of 72. And indeed this latter Law is the most proper
Appendix to the Charter of 50; for in express Terms ^us grounded on said
Charter as on its Foundation; not does it alter any Thing in that Charter but
in some ^ew Cases. So there is no Occasion to infort it here, Reference being
had there^^ in the Court Records. The greatest Alteration it makes in said
Charter of 50 (...) that in some Things it gives more Power to the Corporation
of said College, and less to the O^^er^^e^s, than the Charter of 50 does. Which
may be one Reason why this Law of 72 was not entered in due Form into some
College Records, as the said Appendix of 50 has been.

PRACTICES upon the Preceding Laws of 42 and 50, which originally constituted
the Overseers and Corporation of Harvard-College.

The four preceding Laws of 42, 50, 57, 72, were all the standing Laws, on
which the Government of said College was founded, in old Charter Times. And
since Practices upon ancient Laws, nearest the Times wherein such Laws were
made, do best explain and interpret them; here are subjoined some Acts of the
Court, in those early Times, which show what Sense the Court put upon these two
Laws which originally constituted the Overseers and Corporation of said
College; and what Powers the Court, without Reserve to themselves, had been
pleased to grant in these Laws to the Overseers and Corporation of said
College. Thus;

Ann^ 1654. After the Court had constituted the Overseers and Corporation of
said College; it appears from the Province Records, (Vol. 3. P. 245) That the
Court on Perusal of the RETURN of the Committee appointed to consider of the
College-Business, ORDER that all the STOCK appertaining to the College should
be committed to the Care and TRUST of the Overseers of said College. Now by the
Act of 42 the Overseers had the College-Stock given to them; but afterward the
Charter of 50 takes it out of their Hands and puts it into the Hands of the
Corporation; and now in 54 the Court in an extraordinary Case INTERPOSE and
susp^nd the Powers of the Charter, and, for a Time, put that Stock back again
into the Hands of the Overseers. At first View this may seem an extraordinary
Act in the Court, who by a solemn Grant of the Charter of 50 had vested the
Property of that Stock in the said Corporation. But there is ^^ally nothing
extr^^rdinary in this Act. For as VISITORS, of their OWN College, the Court had
a Right at ALL Times to see that this STOCK was well ^^hen Care of! And
therefore this Year when the said Corporation were so few in Number, and
President Dunster being now about to quit his Place, and so the said College be
lo^^ with^^^ a HEAD: In the^^ weak State of that Society, the Court seem for
the (...) of that Stock ^^commit it, for a Time, to the Care and TRUST of the
Overseers. This was on Act that, in Com^^^^^o^, the VISITORS of a College had a
Right to do.

Ann^ 1654. The Court ordered (Prove. Rec. Vol. 3. p. 274) that Mr. Whi^^^ and
Mr. Cobbet Pastors or Teachers of the Churches of Dedham and Lyn and Mr. Norton
an unsettled Teacher in Boston, should BE Overseers; and JOIN with the rest of
the Overseers, in the Work of the College. And thus, notwithstanding the Acts
of 42 and 50, the Court in the Year 54 made NEW Overseers; and by the same
Power the Court could have unmade the Former Overseers. So dependent were the
Overseers of the said College in those Times upon the Court. Such a state of
Dependency, for the Continuance of their Being on the Court, does not seem to
imply that the Overseers of said College were, in and by their Constitution,
the VISITORS of said College; For Visitors, as such, have not a dependent
precarious Existence.

Anno 1654. Mr. Henry Dunster, the President appointed and named in the College
Charter of 50, resigned his Place; while that Charter and all the Powers
granted in it (as well as the Powers granted in the Act of 42 to the Overseers)
were so well understood by ALL Parties concerned! For the Court had granted
that Charter but four Years before. Now from the public Histories of this
Country, and from the large Account of the Matter in the College Records, it
appears that Mr. Dunster (like Mr. K^nt at Mar (...)) was forced either to
resign his Place or to recant some of his religious Tenets, and he chose the
former. So this forced Resignation was in effect the same Thing with a
Dismission of him from his Place. And now let it be observed, "To WHOM He
resigns; and how far the Overseers or Corporation of said College were
concerned in the Business of his Resignation, which here follows.

The President's Resignation exhibited to the GENERAL COURT held at Boston June
10. 1654.
To the Worshipful and Honored RICHARD BELLINGHAM, Esquire Governor of the
Massachusetts Colony, with the rest of the Honored Assistants and Deputies in
General Court at Boston now assembled.
Worshipful and Honored Gentlemen and faithful Trustees of your Colony.
Whereas now at last I understand that the Call or Invitation I had unto my
present Business in the College, together with the Promises, Encouragements and
Allurenments thereto on Aug. 27. 1640, by about Ten Gentlemen, whom I then
understood to be Magistrates with Mr. DUDLEY then Governor and about Sixteen
Ministers or Elders, whom I also then took to be and st^^ from my Heart do
think to continue the Persons that seriously and cordially consult for the
Welfare of the Colony, and that especially in the liberal and learned Education
of the Youth of the Country; yet seeing that now This FULLY confirms the Remark
made at the beginning of this Collection of Laws, P. 4, 5. viz. That before the
Year 42 the said College was the College of the GENERAL COURT alone. And that
the Court before the Act of 42, looked on none but Themselves, and those whom
they appointed to Office IN it, to have ANY Authority over this College.
I FULLY understand that the said Persons had NO Authority to do any such Act
or Acts as to give such a Viz. in Aug. 1640.
CALL or to promise any such Encouragements or Allurements; and besides, seeing
there be such Laws, Orders or Injunction There are no such Laws now on Record
as were in Part imposed ont he College. It Is true, that the Charter of 5^
Imposed on the College some Part of the Old College Laws, which were very
difficult to be strictly conformed to in Practice, e. g. The Overseer, ^^^^nt
is requi^^^ by Charter to the Execution of every By-Law, i. e. to punish any
Undergraduate (...) for Absence from Prayers; or for going out of Town without
Leave! Such Things as these Mr. (...) seems here to refer to. And to judge that
the Charter half nulled and ^^^s; confirmed the old College Laws, ^^^^eding the
^^d Charter, in many Ca^^^.
in Part already imposed on the Place as be destructive thereto, and that our
former Laws and Orders by which we have managed our Place, be declared illegal
and null, so that all possible Means of managing our Trust to the best End is
so either made void, interfering and entangled, or at least questionable and
offensive, that whatsoever we do is to Myself and the Fellows unwarrantable and
not secure, and with some Principles te^^ing to Dissolution. To mention no
further Grounds [viz. His being an Anabaptist, which this (...) and Good Man
really was]:

THEREFORE I here resign u^ the Place wherein hitherto I (...) with all my
Heart (blessed be the Lord who gave it) serving YOU and YOURS. And henceforth
(that you in the Interim may be provided) I shall be willing to do the best I
can for some few Weeks or Months to continue the Work, acting according to the
Orders prescribed to us; If the Society in the Interim fall not to Pieces in
our Hands; and what Advice for the present or for the future I can give for the
public Good, in this Behalf, with all Readiness of Mind I shall do it, and
daily by the Grace of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, pray the LORD to help and Counsel
us all, in whom I rest.

Yours faithfully to serve, Henry Dunster.


This Resignation President Dunster delivered to the Overseers of said College,
which being presented to the General Court then setting, the Court thereon
passed the following Order.

In Answer to a Writing presented to this Court by Mr. Henry Dunster, wherein
among other Things he is pleased to make a Resignation of his Place as
President, this Court does ORDER that it shall be LEFT to the Care and
Discretion of the Overseers of the College to make Provision, in Case he
persist in his Resolution more than one Month and inform the Overseers, for
some meet Person to carry an End that Work for the present, and also to act in
whatever Necessity shall call for UNTIL the next Sessions of this Court, when
we shall be better enabled to settle what will be needful in all Respects with
Reference to the College: And that the Overseers will be pleased to Make RETURN
to this Court at that Time of what they shall do herein. The Deputies have
passed this, and desire our honored Magistrates Consent thereto.

William Torrey, Cler.

12. 4. 1654

Consented hereunto by the Magistrates.

Richard Bellingham, Governor.

Court Records Book 3. p. 262. And Overseers Book, No. 2. p. 1.

And thus so near the Time when the College Charter of 50 was granted it
app^^^s that the very President named and appointed in that Charter, made not
his Resignation to the Overseers and Corporation (though he out it (...) of the
Overseers (...) to them) but to the General Court; And hereon the Court ORDERED
that this Affair should be LEFT with the Overseers (just as ^^e Court might
have ordered that it should be Left with any other Persons) so that it is
evident the Overseers acted not in this Affair by any inherent Powers of their
own, but by an extrinsick and delegated Power from the Court, and as a
temporary Committee of the Court until the next Sessions, when the Court should
be better enabled to SETTLE in ALL Respects what was needful for the College;
and the Overseers were to make RETURN of what they should do in this Affair, to
the Court who had Employed them in it.

And after the Court had thus empowered the Overseers to treat with Mr. Dunster
they then enter into long and various Conferences with him and address him
thus, Mr. President; The General Court seem to require of you that you Inform
the Overseers whether you persist in your Resignation, and [the Court] EXPECT
from us a Provision for the College in Case of your Persistance, and a Return
to the Count of What we have done in this Business.

And again; Whereas in Observance of an ORDER of Court made, June 10. 1654, The
Overseers have had sundry Meetings with Mr. Dunster to know whether he persist
in his Resignation lately exhibited to the General Court. And as they would not
be wanting to Mr. Dunster whose LAPSE [viz into the Tenets of the Anabaptiste]
is the Matter of their Gri^s, so that they may not be wanting to the Truth, the
College, the Country, nor the Tru^ committed to them by the General Court viz
in this Affair wherein they acted as a Committee of the Court;] they therefore
declare that is the Lord do not incline (...) his Heart before the middle of
September next to give Satisfaction according to the Rules of Christ; the 4
n^^^ be (...) in Ca^e there be no other Remedy [viz from (...) ^^^it which is
all the Remedy that can be here supposed] to take Care for furnishing the
College with another President. -- Then after two or three more Pro's and Con's
(no Way relating to the Occasion of these Extracts) he on Oct. 24.1654, makes
his final Resignation to the Overseers of said College who were now sent and
empowered by the Court as their Committee to receive it. And the Overseers in
November following provided another President, and in the mean Time commit the
Care and Government of the said College to the Fellows thereof. -- And thus the
Overseers of said College acted through the whole of this Affair; not by any
Power of their own, but by a delegated Power from the Court; for this Power
expired as soon as, according to Order, they had made Return to the COURT who
had employed them in this Affair.

Let it be noted that this Resignation of Mr. Dunster, implied in it a proper
Dismission of him; for a voluntary Resignation is of a quite different Nature.
Thus a Member of said Corporation residing at Harvard College when he designs
to settle abroad in the World may resign to the President of said College, i.
e. may inform the President that he is determined to leave the College and quit
his Post in it, (which none can hinder him from doing.) But this is far from
implying that the said President can force such a Member to resign. But that
Power that can rightfully force him to resign, is most certainly A POWER which
can rightfully dismiss him. Now this was President Dunster's Case. For the
Overseers of said College, when they acted as Delegates from the COURT, tell
him expressly tht unless he would give Satisfaction according to the Rules of
Christ they must be Constrained to furnish the College with another President.
So this Power included in it a Power from the COURT to dismiss him.

N. B. The next and the only other Instance of a Dismission of a Member of said
Corporation was on Feb. last 1741, 2; without any Power from the COURT or any
Act of said Corporation for the same, but by the Sole and SOVEREIGN Authority
of the Overseers of said College; who having no plain Law for it not from Times
immemorial any Instance of such a Thing on their Side, seemed now resolved to
make one, that so they might plead it in future Times. Precedents against Law
are DANGEROUS Things; especiallly if they rise so high as to turn out Members
of CORPORATIONs." Such a Thing done in England would cause an INSURRECTION
(...) And if this Power does not belong to the Corporation and Overseers of
said College by LAW, The Overseers of said College by such an Act have assumed
to themselves the Powers of the GENERAL COURT viz. Those Powers which in
President Dunster's Case were not the Powers of the Overseers, but were
delegated to them from the COURT, and so were the Powers of that COURT. --
Nothing therefore can demand a more critical Examination than such Precedence
and that at their first Beginning before they acquire the force of Laws and in
future (...) will be pleaded As Law ag^^^^s (...) Rights of the GENERAL COURT
itself.

V. The State of Harvard-College since the now Province Charter was granted.
AFTER the vacating the old Colony Charter of the Massachusetts in 1684, there
were some new Laws or College-Charters made by the general Court of this
Province. But these Laws (as all others made under our present
Province-Charter) were of Course to be sent Home for the Royal Approbation; And
they all were sent Home accordingly, and have been disapproved. So that no Laws
whatever remain, but the four preceding Laws fo 42, 50, 57 and 72, as the
Foundation on which the Government of the said C^^^^e now stands. And all or
some of these Laws are valid to this Day on the following Grounds 1. T^ese Law,
were made in old Charter Times, when it was not requisite to send them Home for
Approbation; and so they never were disapproved at Home. 2. As they never were
disapproved at Home, so they never were repealed by the General Court who made
them; Only so far as the succeeding do interfere with, s^p^^^de or repeal the
Preceding, or any Clauses in the Preceding, and in such a Case the suc^^ding
take Place; and particularly the Charter of 50, and the last of these Laws made
in the Year 1572 which is properly an APPENDIX to the said Charter of 50. And
3. What of those Laws rema^ned valid, in old Charter Times, was virtually and
implicitly confirmed by a Clause in our present Province-Charter and by a
declarative Order of the General Court in 1707 respecting the College Charter
of 50; BOTH of Which here follow as the last Regulation made of the
Constitution and Government of said College.

I. From the Province Charter granted by King WILLIAM and Queen MARY.

In this Charter after their Majesty's Subjects of the Colony, have this
Province granted to them, thus and thus bounded, with all Lands -- Places --
Hereditaments, etc. There follows this Proviso.

PROVIDED nevertheless, and we do for us, our Heirs and Successors grant and
ordain that all and every such Land, Tenements and Hereditaments and all other
Estates which any Person or Persons, or Bodies Politic or Corporate, Towns,
Villages, COLLEGES or Schools, do hold and enjoy or ought to hold and enjoy,
within the Bounds aforesaid, by or under any GRANT or Estate duly made or
granted by any GENERAL COURT (...) be V^tue of the Letters Patents herein
before, recited, or by any other lawful Right or F^^le what^ever, SHALL (...)
by such Person and Persons, Bodies P^li^^^ and Corp^^^te, (...), their
respective Heirs, This for the Province Co^^ter. -- And thus t^^ Charter (...)
the College in the T^^^ of Can^^ the ^^re (...) of C^^^bri^^ used to be or
continue ^ill a Town; (...) it (...) Tow^^ (...) they were ^e^^, in ^^d Charter
Tim (...) Re^^lation made of t^^ s^d C^^eg^, b^ an Order of the G^^er^ Court
(...), at which Time the Court (...) the C^^^^ (...) to (...) E^^^^tion on the
C^^^ter of 1650, after the said College had been on (...) Charters ever since
the Times of the Revelation.
SUC^ESSORS and assigns forever, hereafter HELD and (...), according to the
Purport and Intent of such respective Grant, under an (...) ^o^^^ct
nevertheless to the R^nts and Services thereby reserved or made p^yable, any
Matter or Thing whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding.

II. At a Great and General Court held at Boston Wednesday May 28. 1707. and
continued by several Prorogations to Wednesday Oct. 29 following, being the
third Sessions.

In Council; Thursday Dec. 4. 1707.

THE GOVERNOR and COUNCIL having Accepted and Approved the Choice made by the
Fellows of Harvard College in Cambridge of Mr. John Leverett to be present
President of the said College to fill up that Vacancy; Propose that the HOUSE
of Representatives consider of and grant a suitable Salary to be paid to the
said President annually out of the public Treasury-for his Encouragement and
Support during his Continuance in said Office, residing at Cambridge and
discharging the proper Duties to a President belonging and entirely devote
himself to that Service.

And inasmuch at the FIRST Foundation and Establishment of that HOUSE and the
GOVERNMENT thereof had its ORIGINAL from an Act of the General Court made and
passed in the Year 1650, which has not been REPEALED or NULLED; The President
and Fellows of the said College are DIRECTED from Time to Time to regulate
themselves according to the Rules of the CONSTITUTION by the Act Prescribed;
And to exercise the Powers and Authorities thereby granted for the Government
of that House and Support thereof.

Saturday, Dec. 6. 1707. The Representatives returned the Vote passed in
Council the 4th current referring to the College, with their Concurrence
thereto; and this further Addition thereon, viz. That the Sum for Salary be One
Hundred and Fifty Pounds.

To which the Council voted and Agreement, and the Governor consented

This was the LAST Act of the COURT relating to the Government of said College,
and this Act referred that College back again to its original Foundation on the
College-Charter of 50. Which had not been REPEALED or NULLED; as the old Colony
Law of 42 had been, by the Incorporating Act of 1650. So that the Overseers of
said College have now no Power over that College by the Act of 42, but by the
College Charter of 50 alone. Which gives the OVerseers of said College only a
Power to act with the Corporation and not without them, as appears on
Inspection from that Charter itself. And on this Foundation the said College
has continued, or OUGHT to have continued, to this present Year of our Lord,
1742.

And if any Persons in the Government of said College, should at any Time go
off from this Foundation, and set up a Power INDEPENDENT on said Charter, and
SOVEREIGN over the said Corporation; the General Court alone can remand them 2
Second Time back to that Charter again, as the FIRST Foundation of that House
and of the Government thereof; and DIRECT them to regulate themselves from Time
to Time according to the CONSTITUTION by that Act prescribed.

REASONS to prove that the Honorable and Reverend Overseers of Harvard-College
have no Independent Power over the Corporation of said College, nor can Dismiss
a Member of said Corporation, solely by Themselves; But that the GENERAL COURT
alone have such a Sovereign Power; And are the VISITORS of said College.
IN Order to the Proof of This, Let it be Premised. 1. That from all the
Preceding Laws it appears that the said Harvard-College was originally the
College of the General Court of the Massachusett; Colony; That the General
Court of said Colony built it and named it and ordered where it should be built
and what Kind of Building it should be; And that all the Powers which any
Persons ever had from the beginning, or now have over the said College, were
originally derived to them from the General Court of the Colony abovesaid; so
that no Persons whatever can have any Power over the said College, but only so
far as the General Court have been pleased to grant it to them. 2. It appears
in particular that the Overseers and Corporation of said College owe their
Being and all the standing Powers They now have, or ever had over the said
College, To Four Laws of the General Court which were made in the Year 1642,
1650, 1657 and 1672. The First of which Laws originally constituted Overseers
of said College; The Second incorporated the said College, and is called the
Charter of 50; The Third is called an Appendix to said Charter; And the Fourth
confirmed, added to or altered, some or all of these preceding Laws. So that
no Powers can now belong to the Overseers and Corporation of said College but
those Powers which the Court granted to them in some or all of these four Laws.
3. That in the two latter Laws of 57 and 72, the Court gave to the Overseers of
said College no New Powers of any Importance over the said Corporation; And so
there is no Occasion to consider any of these four Laws, but the two First, in
order to determine whether the Overseers of said College have an Independent
and Sovereign Power over the said Corporation.


Now from these two Laws, which constituted the Overseers and Corporation of
said College, it manifestly appears that the Court did not vest the Overseers
of said College with such a sovereign Power over the said Corporation; But that
the Court, who originally had this Power, reserved it to themselves; And are
VISITORS of said College. For

1. The prior Law of 1642, which constitute^ (...) of said College, gave them
no Power over that College considered as a Body Politic or (...)

This Law was made before the Corporation of said College (...) a ^^ING; and
therefore it gave the Overseers only a Power ever and unincorp^rate^ College.
It was the latter Law of 1650 which fist incorporated said College; for in this
Law it is exp^^sly Ordered and ^nacted by the Court, that From Henceforth the
said COLLEGE in Cambridge shall be a Corporation. So that by the Law of 1642
the Court gave the Overseers of said College no Power over that College
considered as a a Corporation; And therefore when afterward the Court m^d
Harvard-College a Corporation is 1650, so far as this latter Law, which in
incorporated said College, S^^^^^ted the Members of this Corporation to the
Overseers, so far and no father have the Overseers a Power over the said
College or Corporation. And thus the latter Law supersedes or repeals the
former Law of 1642. And this Sense the Great and General Court seem to have put
upon the latter Law of 1050; For when in December. 1707 the said Corporation were
ordered to regulate themselves according to the original Constitution of the
said College, the Court then declared that The first Foundation and
Establishment of That House and the Government thereof had its Origin^ from an
Act of the General Court made and passed in the Year 1650 which had not been
repealed or nulled. So that the FIRST Foundation both of that House and the
Government thereof had not its ORIGINAL from the prior Law of 1642 but from the
latter Law of 1650. And hereon it follows that the Law of 1642 (which was
before the FIRST Foundation of that House and the Government thereof) was sat
aside and removed out of the Way in order to Lay the (...) ^^^n^ation o^ that
House and in Government upon the incorporating Act of 1650. And therefore the
said Law of 42 is n^ Part of the P^undation of the present House of the College
not of the Government thereof. So that by this Law of 42 the Overseers of said
College (instead of having 2 sovereign Power over it) seem to have no Power at
all over it, not over the Corporation thereof.

A plain Instance may illustrate this Law of 164^: Suppose the General Court in
1642 had appointed Overseers to order and govern the Inhabitants of a Place, in
the Colony, who had not as yet been incorporated into a T^^n; and afterward in
1650 the C^^rt should have have made the place a Town^hip; -- How far would
these Inhabitants, now incorporated into a Town, be su^ject to their former
Overseers by Virtue of the Law which constituted such Overseers before the
Place was made a Town? Could these Overseers turn out the SELECT M^N of that
Town (...) all future Times after the Place was made a Township? By N. Means!
Unless the latter Law, which incorporated the Place into a Township, gave such
a Power to the former Overseers of the Place. Nor would these Overseers have
any Powers at all over such a Place, after it was made a Town, unless those
Powers which were granted or confirmed to them in the latter Law which
incorporated the Place into a Township. -- And thus as to the Overseers and
Corporation of the College abovesaid; The Law of 42 which appointed Overseers
to said College before it was incorporated, gives them no Power over that
College after it was made a Corporation; but all the Powers of the Overseers
over said College after it was incorporated, are only those Powers which are
granted or confirmed to them in the latter Law of 1650 which made the said
College a Corporation.

Some truly worthy and valuable teaching Elders of the six neighboring Towns
are of Opinion, That the Law of 42 abovesaid is the great STANDING Law that
contains all the more important and superior Powers over the said College; And
that the Charter of 50 was made as a Thing by the BY, and only empower the
President and Fellows to do some small Matters; and for the Sake of the
College-Stock, it being necessary that they should be a Corporation in Law in
order to acquire and hold a Stock. But in Answer hereto. 1. This Supposition is
apparently contrary to the above mentioned Declaration of the General Court,
which determines that the Act or Charter of 50 is the ORIGINAL of said College.
So that the said Law of 42 is beyond the ORIGINAL of that College, and
therefore seems to be out of Date. So far is it from being certain that this
Law of 42 is "The great standing LAW -- "the LAW that contains all the more
important and superior Powers over the said College. But 2. This Supposition
abovesaid is contrary to the whole Strain and Tenou^ of the said Charter of 50
which no longer treates the President and Fellows as in a State of Minority
under (...) (though the most Honorable in the Land) but at now grown up to the
full Statute of MEN. Thus particularly the said Charter enacts, That in all
great and difficult Cases a general Meeting of ALL the Overseers and Society,
or Corporation, shall be procured; and the Conclusion be made by the major Part
(of the Corporation) the Overseers consenting thereto -- Is this only a Power
in said Corporation to do some small Matters? Or is this treating the President
and Fellows as still in a State of Minority and Pupillage under Overseers, when
a general Meeting of ALL the Overseers can make no Conclusion at all, and that
in the most great and difficult Cases, but by consenting to a Conclusion made
on such Cases by the Corporation? -- Thus again it is enacted in said Charter,
That the President and Fellows shall forever hereafter in Name and Fact be one
Body Politic or Corporate in Law to ALL Intents and Purposes and therefore not
to ONE Intent and Purpose only. viz. The acquiring and holding a Stock, and the
suing or being sued on the Account thereof. And thus evidently did the Court by
this Charter, manumitt the said College from a State of mere Pupillage to
Overseers, and locked on it as now grown up to Maturity and sitting to be
incorporatd with a President and Fellows and to have all the Rights and
Privileges of a Corporation in Law; -- as truly as in the Instance, above
supposed, of a Place in the Colony put under Overseers, in its infant State;
but afterward incorporated when grown up and increased in full Numbers of
Inhabitants. And as a Law that incorporates a Town can by a very just Figure of
Speech be called the ORIGINAL of such a Town, so the incorporating Act of 1650
abovementioned is, in its own Nature, the ORIGINAL of Harvard-College, as well
as it has been declared by the Legislature to Be the ORIGINAL of said College.
And therefore

II. The latter Law of 1650, which incorporated Harvard College, and not the
Prior Law of 1642, contains those Powers which the present Overseers have over
the Corporation of the said College.

Now by this latter Law which incorporated Harvard College, the For the Truth
of this FACT let the said Charter of 50, be consulted from Beginning to End!
all the Powers of the Overseers which are either granted or mentioned, or even
referred to, in that Charter are contained in the 3d, 6th and 8th small
Paragraphs of said Charter, at it is printed in the preceding Collection of
Colony Laws relating to Harvard College. And so the Decision of the Fact here
referred to, and whether the Writer of this Pamphlet speaks Truth or Falsifies
in such an Assertion, may be SHORT.
ONLY Power given to the Overseers of said College is a Power to Counsel the
Corporation of that College to act, or to consent to and allow of the Acts of
the said Corporation. So that the Overseers of said College have no independent
and SOVEREIGN Power over the Corporation of said College, even by that Law
which is the only Law that now gives them any Power over that Corporation. To
apply this in particular to the POWER of dismissing a Member of said
Corporation. [Which let it be noted, is a Case on which this Law is absolutely
silent and no where says "WHO have such a (...) the POWER given to the
Overseers over the said Corporation, by that Law which appointed and made the
said Corporation, is a Power to counsel that Corporation to act or to consent
to their Acts; it follows that all the Power which the Overseers can have in
dismissing a Member of that Corporation, is a Power to counsel the said
Corporation to dismiss such a Member, or to consent to an Act of that
Corporation for his Dismission; And therefore the Overseers of this College
have no Power to dismiss a Member of that Corporation without an Act of the
said Corporation for it; What can be more plain? -- So that it may f^eely be
said (and no Offense is justly offered in saying) that the Honorable and
Reverend Overseers of said College, cannot, without a Breach upon the
College-Charter, assume the Power to dismiss a Member of that Corporation,
singly by themselves? So far is this Charter from giving to the Overseers of
said College a SOVEREIGN Power to call a Member out of that Corporation before
themselves alone; and try, and judge, and sentence, and turn him out of that
Corporation; and all this Time the PASSIVE Corporation are to know nothing,
unless by private Notice given them, "What has been doing to One of their
Members -- or "What had finally become of him" 'till the Overseers of said
College are pleased to give them Information. This is as foreign to the Design
and Spirit of the Law, which incorporated Harvard College, as it is to the
plain and express Letter of it; and is such a Power as evidently seems to NULL
the Charter or must it self be NULLED by it; And which of the Two are to Stand,
to General Court alone, who founded that College and who appointed NO Visitors
to it, can finally determine and Declare "Whether their OWN Act of 1650 which
incorporated that College, or "Whether One unwarranted Precedent, which is
subversive of that Act, is ultimately to remain VALID.

It may be added here Ex Abundanti that supposing some Powers granted to the
Overseers of said College in the Law of 42, to act solely by themselves, were
NOT superseded or vacated by the Charter of 50 which first incorporated said
College; Yet all this notwithstanding, it is still TRUE that the Power of
removing a Member of said Corporation if NOT One of those Powers that CAN be
supposed to remain solely with the Overseers After the said Charter of 50 was
granted. For since this Power of removing a Member of the Corporation is no
where mentioned in the prior Law of 42 (and no Wonder, for the said Corporation
and (...) NO Being) it therefore follows that if such a Power is contained at
all in that Law, It must be so, because it is implied under some of the GREAT
and more important Powers granted to the Overseers in that Law. Now, This,
This, brings the Matter to a Point! For the Charter of 50 i^ EXPRESS that the
Overseers are to act with the Corporation in all GREAT and DIFFICULT Cases. So
that supposing the Law of 42 was in some Respects still in Force, yet the
College Charter of 50 comes afterward and leaves NO Powers in that Law for the
Overseers to act solely by themselves in any Cases of GREAT Importance! The
Words in the Charter of 50 are these ( Not they stand in the Copy of the
Overseers CLERK and in some other faulty Copies of that Charter, which ought to
be corrected; but as the Words stand in the ORIGINAL Charter itself, and in the
RECORDS of the General Court!) That For Direction in all emergent Occasions,
Execution of all Orders and Bylaws, and for the procuring of a GENERAl Meeting
of ALL the OVERSEERS and SOCIETY in GREAT and DIFFICULT Cases, and in Cases of
Non-agreement; In ALL which Cases aforesaid, the Conclusion shall be made by
the major Part, the said President having a casting Voice, the OVERSEERS
Consenting thereunto. -- Now here if by the Term "Society" is meant This Sense
of the Term "Society" seems not to be here intended; for if ^ere, Then all the
Members of the College must Vote with the President and Fellows, and the
Conclusion be made by the major Part. -- If so "The UNDERGADUATES would most
certainly; carry it!
the College in general, including the President, Fellows, and all its Members;
Or if by that Term is meant the "SOCIETAS" that is, the Company of SOCII, which
with a President are the Corporation of SEVEN appointed in this Charter; It Is
still, either Way, True that in difficult Cases and in great Cases a General
Meeting of ALL the Overseers and of all the Corporation is to be PROCURED
PROCURED! and therefore not merely notified or warned to meet, as some have
pretended to argue, against the express Words here referred to in the Charter.
Such a loose LICENSE indulged, in interpreting Laws, would destroy any Law in
the World! -- But when this Charter mentions "The Procuring a general Meeting
of all the Overseers and Society in great and difficult Cases" is it not self
evident that it actually ^^ans that such a Meeting should BE Procured in those
Cases? Most certainly; -- And therefore the Charter is not ACTED upon if in
those Cases such a Meeting is not Procured! e. g. Feb. 18. 1741, 2.
, and in ALL such Cases (as it expressly follows!) The Conclusion shall be made
by the major Part (of the Corporation) the President having a casting Voice,
the Overseers CONSENTING thereunto. And thus it is evident to the Degree of
Demonstration, that in NO great Cases and in NO difficult Cases had the
Overseers a Power left them to act solely by themselves, after the Charter of
50 had incorporated said College! So carefully has this Charter guarded against
an Independent and SOVEREIGN Power in the Overseers of said College to act
without the Corporation in Matters of GREAT Moment. And so far is this Charter
from granting or allowing (...) the Overseers a Power of acting, WITHOUT the
Corporation in such Cases, that this Charter neither grants or allows it to the
Overseers, even acting WITH the Corporation, unless a GENERAL Meeting of ALL
the Overseers and of ALL the Corporation be procured for Concluding on such
Affairs of Importance.

This is the Purport and Intent, this is Spirit, Soul and Body of that Charter
(and which No Power can alter but THAT Power which can destroy this Charter
itself) viz. That Cases of Importance should be transacted in a General
Assembly of the WHOLE Government of Harvard-College: And not (...) be
determined on by a PART, or, when unhappily divided and disagreeing in their
Judgments, by "a Party. Hence then to apply (...) and important a Case as the
dismissing a Member of that Corporation; it is demonstrable 1. That a GENERAL
Meeting of ALL the Overseers, without a Meeting of the Corporation that is
general also! can have NO Power by Charter to dismiss a Member of that
Corporation. And 2. Much less have a general Meeting of all the Overseers a
Power to dismiss a Member of that Corporation without any Meeting at all of the
Corporation, procured for that End. And 3. Much less still have the Overseers
of said College such a Power, without a general Meeting even of their OWN
Members procured for that End.
-- As in a late Case without a General, or even any Meeting of the
Corporation, and also in the Winter Season and Recess of the General Court when
there was not and could not be a general Meeting of the overseers themselves,
some of those Magistrates and Teaching Elders, who are mentioned in the Law of
42, Met together and assumed to themselves the SOLE Power of turning out what
Members of the Corporation they though sit. This was such an apparent receding
from the Foundation of Harward-College that if a few more Precedents of the
like Sort were Submitted to, it would settle such a Power over that College
that nothing could prevent the Ruin of its Constitution unless the Great and
General Court, whose College it is, INTERPOSED and determined, as they did the
LAST Time they Interposed "That the FIRST Foundation of that College and the
GOVERNMENT thereof had its ORIGINAL from an ACT of the Court made and passed in
the Year 1650, And ordered and (...) that according to that ACT the Overseers
of said College should make NO Conclusion in GREAT and difficult Cases unless
it were in a general Meeting of ALL the Overseers and Society, or Corporation,
UNITED. -- Without such a Remedy, the Consequences of the Overseers dismissing
Members of the Corporation by themselves alone, when they have no such Power BY
Charter, may be these: "That possibly, in Times to Come, so many Members of the
Corporation may be dismissed solely by the Overseers, and so without any
competent Authority, that those who succeed into their Places would be merely
Members of the Corporation De Fa^^^ while those who were thus dismissed would
be still Members of the Corporation De Jure. And t^^^ by Degrees there might be
a Corporation De Facto, in Opposition to a Corporation De Jure. And THEN what
would become of all the COLLEGE-STOCK! -- It would no longer be in the Hands of
a Corporation De Jure but only in the Hands of a Corporation De Facto, that is,
in plain English, It would be in the Hands of NO Corporation at all!

And yet if any Person belonging to Harvard-College offers to lisp this real
and most certain Danger of all Things in that Society, He is industriously
represented as One who is going to ruin the College! Who is striking at its
Foundation -- Who is undernuning its Government -- And betraying all Things
into the Hands of the CHURCH -- Just as if the Clergy of the Church of England
would not REJOICE to see the Day when That College should be a Corporation De
Facto with a VAST Treasury, in Opposition to a Corporation De Jure with NO
Treasury at all! THEN would be the Time for them to cry "Down with it -- Raze
it, raze it, even to the Foundation. -- Or rather this Cry would be prevented
with a Laugh at a Society that like the foolish Woman in the Proverbs Plucketh
down her House with her own Hands; And thus such a Suggestion that " The
COLLEGE is in Danger (and not that "The CHURCH is in Danger") answers itself,
and is as STUPID as it is VILLAINOUS. The Stupia^ Part, no Doubt, came from
some Teaching Elder in the COUNTRY; and the Villainous Part from some Long Chin
who with his Brethren in Iniquity care not One SIX PENCE "What becomes of that
College; or the Education of Youth in it: or whether the Tutors belonging to
it, can examine Freshmen; or be able so much as to understand the BOOKS which
they hear their Classes recite out of! -- Or How many Thousands per Annum were
squandered away by Parents for the Education of their Children in this sort; if
ever it should so happen in future Times that such a Course of Things should
prevail in that Place -- THESE are the Men that want nothing but to keep the
State of that Society in Darkness, and then (if they could have the Influence
of the Government in it) they know that they should be "The RULERS of that
DARKNESS. --

BUT to resume the Argument drawn from the Clause in the Charter above cited
which leaves NO Power in the Law of 42 for the Overseers of said College to act
solely by themselves in any Cases of great Importance. "There is something
still further remarkable with respect to these Words in the Charter of 50; and
it is this; that the same Words are repeated over again without any real
Alteration in the th^^d Law relating to the College; though the manifest Design
of the Law was to explain and a^^ some Parts of this Charter in Favor to the
Overseers of said College. Now in this Law of 57 it is expressly said, that for
the procuring of a GENERAL Meeting of the Overseers and Society in GREAT and
DIFFICULT Cases, and in Cases of Non-agreement -- In All these Cases the
Conclusion shall be valid [viz. for the procuring such a Meeting] being made by
the major Part of the Corporation, the President having a casting Vote. -- So
that this Law confirms it over again and shows it to be the continued as well
as original Sense of the Legistature, that in ALL Cases relating to said
College which are difficult Cases or great Cases a GENERAL Meeting of the
Overseers and of the Society (or Corporation) are to be procured. -- And which
Way the Conclusion shall be made on these Cases, when such a united Meeting of
the Overseers and Corporation is procured, this Law does not say -- And
therefore does not alter! That is, this Law leaves it of Course without
Alteration to the College-Charter of 50 which had already so clearly determined
that Point, that it needed No Explanation when this explanatory Law was made!

So that supposing t^^ Thousand Times over (and LET the Ho^^^^s and Ch^^^y's of
the Age, turn this Argument round and round 'till their HOT Heads grow giddy
with it) "That the Overseers of said College had Some Powers left them to act
solely by themselves after the Charter of 50 was granted; yet it is still TRUE
that the Charter of 50 and its Appendix in 57, show the Original and Continued
Sense of the Legistature to be "That in all Difficult Cases and in all Great
Cases such a Power was Vacated from the Day and DATE of Charter of 50! And that
in Lieu of this Power, both the Charter of 50 and the explanatory Law of 57
Supposing the Law of 57 to be now null (as it can be proved to be) Yet this no
Way affects the Force of this Argument; for that Law was once valid, and when
it was so, it showed the Sense of the Legislature to be the same on this Point,
now under Consideration, as it was when the Legislature granted the said
Charter of 50. And this is the whole that the present Argument is concerned
with.
gives to the Overseers (and that in a General Meeting of ALL their Number)
only a Power of counselling and consenting to Acts of the Corporation in great
and difficult Cases. -- How then is it possible for the Overseers of said
College (against Both these Laws, and without any Law for it) To have the SOLE
Power in so Great and Difficult a Case as That of removing a President or any
other Member of the said Corporation. It Ought to be spoke out freely, "That,
such a Power is an IMPOSSIBLE Power! And whenever it is assumed, all its Acts
are essentially Nullities. And therefore all that was done in a late Case,
Novum^et ante hune diem inauditum, from Oct. 21. 1741, to April 1. 1742, was
and is in it self Null ab Initio; and there Now exists a certain Member of a
Corporation De Facto, in Opposition to one De Jure.

Some of the Consequences of which (together with the assuming a Power to make
Members of the Corporation De Facto in Opposition to those that are so De Jure)
It Is of the last Importance to consider more at large than as yet they have
been. 1. In such a Case while Some only (and not the Major Part) of the Members
are merely De Facto Members of the Corporation; 'Twill be utterly uncertain
whether any of their Acts are VALID or not: And that for this plain Reason;
Because so many of their Votes may turn upon the Votes of a De Facto Member,
whose Vote will be no Vote at all De Jure: And so the Votes of the said
Corporation ^^^mselves (when ^urning on such Votes) will really (...) at all
(...) is chosen a Member of that Corporation, in Fact, he will not be a Member
of that Corporation of right; Which (by the By) will be a quick Way of making
the Majority of that Corporation to consist of mere De Facto Members only! And
thus when any Money is let out, who can say whether it is rightfully let out or
not; or when any Lands or Tenements belonging to said College are By express
Charter the major Part of the Corporation can Lease, though the rest are
absent. Suppose then but Four should be present to lease a Farm of 100 l. per
Annum, and one of these should be a mere De Facto Member; the Consequence of
this is that This would be no Lease at all. For there would be only three ^^^al
Members to concur to such an Act. And Three Members make no Quorum of the
Corporation. And in this Case though the Corporation might with Difficully
recover such a Farm into their own Hands again; yet they would lose the whole
Rent! For the Lease on which it was DUE would be only a Piece of Waste Paper.
leased, the Validity of such Leases when depending on the Vote of a De Facto
Member are no Leases at all; And if any Person to whom such Lands or Tenements
are leased, should refuse to pay Rent or when his Lease is expired should
refuse to quit his Posession; What intricate Confusion on this, as well as on
the several other Accounts abovesaid, would be introduced into all the Affairs
of that Corporation. And what perplexed Difficulties (to the Sport of WICKED
Lawyers and to the Grief and Concern of GOOD Ones) would the introducing one
single De Facto Member, Occasion to that Corporation in recovering, not their
Rents which in such a Case they could not do, but even their own STOCK into
their Hands again. Do the ra^a, mad, headlong Young teaching Elders think any
Thing of such TERRIBLE Consequences when they appear so The Writer of this
Paper is resolved to SPEAK as Keenly of THEM as they have ^^alous^^ acted
against HIM. He owes them NO Obedience Independent on the Corporation. Nor ever
will PAY them any, while They act in their SOLITARY Capacity.
keenly Eager to vote to themselves the Sole Power to turn out any Member of
that Corporation; when such a Power belongs not to them by Charter; And thereby
that Member being still a Member De Jure, his Successor can be only a mere De
Facto Member, i. e. No Member of that Corporation at all; And thus they would
assume a Power to fill up that Corporation with mere De Facto, Members and so
to dissolve it! -- This calls ALOUD for the Interposition of the Le^^slature,
to reduce these young Elders within their proper Bounds; and to put a Stop to
such Confusion Before it be too Late. -- ALL these are the Beginning of Sorrows
-- But the END is not yet. Though by a SION that has been given th^^ is Reason to
think that it is NEAR even at the DOORS. For 2. When once the Overseer^ of said
College have assumed to themselves the Sole Power of dismissing any Members of
the Corporation abovesaid, the Consequence will be This (Since it has been
demonstrated that they have NO such Power By Charter!) that all the Members of
said Corporation, that succeed into the Place of Those who are Thus dismissed,
will be mere De Facto Members of said Corporation! And when a few such are
actually made (and ONE is already made!) Then the major Part of said
Corporation will soon come to consist of De Facto Members. And what now will
follow! -- Why these Things. "That all their Acts will be Null and VOID; That a
mere De Facto Corporation will be the only Corporation existing; and thereon
that all the College Stock will be Left and SUNK! For Query; Could a mere De
Facto Corporation SUE by Charter -- when by Charter they are NO Corporation at
all! Could such a Corporation recover any Moneys let out into the Hands of
others! Or could they get in the Rents of all the Lands or Tenements ONCE
possessed by a De Jure Corporation of said College! -- What if those who had
such Moneys in their Hand, or were in Possession of such Lands and Ten^ments
should refuse to pay the Just Interest and Rents due for them! And not only so,
but also keep those Moneys or Lands and Tenements in a SUIT! Could not a Lawyer
successfully force and PUSH their Cause against this mere De Facto Corporation,
before any Court in the Province? Most certainly! -- Yea, the Credit of such a
Corporation would at Length run so Low that the very FERRYMEN would stand Suit
against them. For these listening Ferrymen would soon find out, from the
infinite Numbers of Passengers whom they were perpetually rowing over, that
"there was No Corporation to sue them for their Ferry Rent." And thereon
feeling Themselves at the End of the Year to be "RICH MEN; And none to demand a
single Halfpence of Ferrage Money at their Hands. -- They would at once take
it into their Head, to quit all their Boats, and putting their Negroes into
them, would set up for JACK Gentlemen and perk it in the Face of their old
MASTERS. This is comical enough; But yet any Lawyer in the Land if he was asked
the Question in earnest "Whether in this Case they could have such a Right? "He
would DECLARE that it was a Serious Truth! And thus the WHOLE College-Stock
(which it is the Interest of said College, to have constantly Out at Use;) would
be in the Possession of those to whom it was Let: And a mere De Facto
Corporation could never recover either Principal or Interest (...) College. --
What then would become of it! It would either be held and enjoyed by the
present Lucky Possessors or revert to the Donors and their Heirs, or "Escheat
to the KING. And which of these would de the Consequence, the Writer of this
Paper is oblig^d in Modesty not to determine but would leave to Those who are
Masters of Law.

And thus the Dissolution of all Things is at Hand! in said College when once a
Member of that Corporation is dismissed without a competent Authority; The Same
Power can dismiss ALL the Members of that Corporation; And then every Thing
will return to its primitive Chaos; And the said College will no longer be
called "Harvard College; but be a" TOHU BOHU; without Form and VOID, -- And
DARKNESS will be upon the Face of the DEEP.

Enough, and perhaps more than Enough! has been said on this second general
Article, viz. That the CHARTER of 50, and not the Prior Law of 42, contains
those Powers which the present Overseers have over the Corporation of said
College. -- And now on a Cool Review of the main ARGUMENT, and the particular
Reasonings under this Article, it may at Length the Justly affirmed 1. That the
Charter of 50, which incorporated Harvard College, gives to the Overseers a
Power only to counsel the said Corporation to act, or to consent to their Acts.
And therefore in such a Case for Instance, as the dismissing a Member of that
Corporation, the Overseers of said College can do nothing by CHARTER, but
Counsel the Corporation to Dismiss such a Member, or Consent to an Act of that
Corporation for his Dismission. -- Which has never yet been done, from the Time
that the said College in Dec. 1707. was set again on its first Charter of 50.
to this present Day July 7.1742. as appears from the VOTES of the Honorable
and Reverend Overseers Themselves; -- And therefore Member of the Corporation
has been dismissed during this WHOLE Interval or Period of Time. 2. That
Supposing the Charter of 50 Did not in ALL Cases supersede the Law of 42; yet
it certainly supersedes That Law so far as it respects GREAT and Difficult
Cases; so that in ALL Such Cases of Importance, the Overseers of said College
cannot act on the old Law of 42; but are to act on the Charter of 50 in
Conjunction with the Corporation, and That in a General Meeting of ALL the
Overseers and Corporation, not merely notified or warned, but PROCURED! -- And
therefore in so Great and Difficult a Case as the removing a President or Any
Member of that Corporation, the Overseers of said College cannot Allow of or
Consent to an Act of that Corporation for the Dismissing such a Member (which
by CHARTER is All that the Overseers Can do in such a Case) unless a General
Meeting of ALL the Overseers and Corporation be Procured for that End. And 3.
That the APPENDIX of 57 confirms all these Reasonings to he TRUE.
And shows the Sense of the Legislature to be the same on these Point^ (...)
which it was at first when the Charter of (...) was granted. And it appear
that the Legislature never altered their Sense of these Matters, but on the
contrary, showed This to be their Sense over again, the Last Time they
INTERPOSED to regulate the Constitution of said College, When in Dec. 1707. The
Court Referred Harvard College back again to the Act of 50 as the ORIGINAL of
THAT House, and of the GOVERNMENT thereof; N^w on This Act all these Reasonings
are grounded, And That as on their ORIGINAL likewise! and being thus placed on
the same firm BASIS as Harvard College itself is, They must Stand or Fall! with
THAT House and the GOVERNMENT Thereof. -- So that from all these concurring
Arguments it appears to be an Impossibility in LAW that the Overseers of said
College, should have the Sole Power in themselves to dismiss a Member of that
Corporation. And therefore if they have any Power, in such a Case, it must be
in Conjunction With the Corporation and not Without Them! -- Which is the next
Thing to be considered and perhaps may be effectually disproved. For

III. The Law, or CHARTER, which incorporated Harvard College, grants not the
Power of B^ing a PRESIDENT or ANY other Member of the Corporation, to the
Overseers and Corporation of said College in Conjunction: -- Any more than it
does to EITHER of the^ singly and a Part.

Here let to be noted that a Guard was placed at the very Entrance on the last
general Article (page 18) against such a Power, as being no where granted in
the Charter of 50, either to the Overseer^, or to the Corporation, or to Both
conjointly. And thus the General Argument on this Head, in the Preceding
Article, is carried on Hypothetically and by Way of Supposition only. viz. That
IF the Overseers of said College had any Power in such a Case, it must be in
Conjunction with the Corporation and not without Them. But now the Writer of
this Pamphlet comes to argue Categorically and Directly against such a Power in
the Overseers and Corporation of said College. And therefore to BEGIN. -- By
the Charter of 50 the Only Power granted to the Overseers and Corporation, in
this Case, is To make a NEW Member of the Corporation so often and from Time to
Time as any of the Former shall DIE or be REMOVED. Here the Law stops short:
And no where says "HOW or By WHOM, a President or Fellow of the Corporation
shall be removed; And so the General COURT having this Power originally in
Themselves, over their OWN College! And not here granting it to any Persons
whatever, this Power therefore remains Still in the COURT; and the COURT alone
have it to this Day: -- As None but the COURT had such a Power Before the
Overseers and Corporation were appointed by the Law^ of 42 and 50, when they
dismissed Mr. Eaton from his Presidency in said College; and as None but the
COURT had this Power After the Overseers and Corporation were appointed, and
FULLY invested with ALL their Powers, when in 1654 the Court delegated the
Overseers as their Committee to treat with the (...) President Mr. Dunster, and
to receive his final Resignation, and to make RETURN to the Court of what they
had done in that Affair, and the (...) never after (...) Law, granted this
Power to any Persons whatever.

Now to clear this Argument from that MIST of Obscurity, which modern Notions
and some Novel Practices have cast upon it, let those Premises be again
considered which were laid down a^ the Beginning of this Discourse, viz. That
Harvard College was originally the College of the General Court; for that Court
built it, and named and endowed it, as well as incorporated the same. --
Therefore ALL Power over that College was originally in the General Court
alone. -- Therefore NO Powers over that College which have not been actually
granted to others by some Law, CAN belong to any Persons whatever, but are
Still the Powers of the Court, at tru^^ as they were at the Beginning when all
Power over that College existed in the General Court alone, before the Times
wherein the Court gave Some PART of their Power, ever THEIR OWN College, to the
Overseers and Corporation by the Acts of 42 and 50. -- So that ALL Powers
whatever that have not been communicated to the said Overseers and Corporation,
by some positive Law or Grant from the General Court, still continue in that
Court; as the Water which has not as yet been communicated to the S^rian or
Rivulet still continues in the FOUNTAIN. -- This is a certain Truth as to the
Power of removing a Pre^^dent or Any Member of that Corporation; for there is
no Law or Charter whatever in which the Court has communicated this Power to
Others; and therefore this Power remains in the Fountain of ALL Power over that
College, which is the GENERAL COURT alone! If any Thing farther need to be
added, in so plain a CASE! there are two Things that may be urged which put it
out of all Question that the General Court reserved this Power to Themselves
among other Powers of VISITATION which the Court never granted to any Persons
whatever!

1. The First is that the explanatory Law of 57 is more Silent on this Power
than the Charter of 50 itself! Now one great Design of this Law of 57 was to
explain or determine what might seem obscure and undermined in the Charter of
50; and of all Cases that needed to be explained or determined in said Charter,
This Case ( supposing it to be contained in that Charter!) needed it the most;
take it either Way, viz. as a Case not determined at all in that Charter, or as
of Importance to be determined and not fitting to be left at a loose! -- Yet
does that explanatory Law leave this Clause in the Charter (which barely
mentions the removing Members of the Corporation, without mentioning who had
the Power to remove them) at as great a loose as it was before! And though this
Law descends to such little Affairs as "How the Corporation should hold a
Meeting to agree with College-Servants and be responsible to the Overseers for
all such Agreements; yet this Law says not one Word on so great and so
undetermined a Case as this "Who should have the Power of removing a President
or Fellow of said Corporation" which (on both the Accounts above) needed more
to be explained or determined by this Law of 57 than any Thing in that Charter
whatever. Nothing therefore can account for the Reason why this explanatory Law
should pass over so important a Matter in Silence, but this, viz. that such a
Power, not being granted in said Charter to any Persons whatever, was never
looked on in those Times to be contained in that Charter at all. And THEN the
Wonder ceases why this explanatory Law did not determine or settle" Who had or
should have such a Power; for this Law was to explain or determine what was IN
the said Charter, and not this Power which was Still in the General Court (for
who can imagine that the Court in this explanatory Law designed to explain or
settle their OWN Powers?) And hereon also Another Wonder ceases viz. Why the
Overseers of said College should be so wanting to Themselves as no to put such
a Thing into their Proposals to the Court for Explanation (though these
PROPOSALS, which were for the Benefit of the Overseers, was the very Occasion
of making this Law itself, as appears from the Preamble.) The Reason hereof
seems to be very plain viz. Because ALL Parties concerned with the Government
of the College were conscious, in those early Times which were so near the Time
wherein said Charter was granted, that the Power of removing the President or
any Member of said Corporation was never given BY Charter to any Persons
whaterver, but that the Court had reserved it to themselves. And therefore if
one (among the rest) of the PROPOSALS of the Overseers to the Court had been to
explain or determine "Who had the Power of removing the President, or any other
Members of the Corporation, on Maladministration of when guilty of sundry
Crimes and Misdemeanors; The Overseers of said College (with all due and
sincere Deference to them be it mentioned) might have been honorably reminded
by the Court "WHO had This Power in Themselves but three Years before, in the
Case of President Dunster "When the Court thought fit to appoint the Overseers
(without joining the Corporation with them) as their Committee to manage that
Affair, and "to make Return to the Court of what they had done therein."

2. Another Thing which puts it out of Question that the Court reserved this
Power to Themselves, is, the manifest Difference made in the Charter between
the removing a Member of the Corporation and removing inferior College
Officers and Servants. Now to exhibit this to Eye sight, let those two Passages
be laid together, which are the only Passages in the Charter that mention the
removing of Both these Kinds of Officers.

The Choosing and Removing Members of the Corporation by Charter. And the said
seven Persons or the greater Number of them procuring the Presence of the
Overseers of the College, and by their Counc^l and Consent shall have Power,
and are hereby authorized, at any Time or Times to ELECT a new President
Fellows or Treasurer so often and from Time to Time as any of the said Person
or Persons SHALL die or BE removed --

FINIS to This Power granted in the Charter!

The Choosing and Removing College Servants by Charter. And the President and
Fellows, or major Part of them, from Time to Time may meet and CHOOSE such
Officers and Servants for the College, and make such Allowance to them, and
THEM also to REMOVE, and after DEATH or REMOVAL to choose such others -- as they
shall think Fit.

Thus equally express and particular is this Law in specifying Who should have
the Power of choosing Both these Kinds of Officers. But when it comes to say Who
should have the Power to remove Then. -THEN appears the Difference! for as to
the small Power of removing College Servants, the Law is as plain and express
"Who should have That Power, as it is "Who should have the Power to Choose them.
But as to the important Power of removing Members of the Corporation (which in
Law can exist separately from the Power of choosing them, as well as in
Conjunction ^^^h it, and often does so in Colleges abroad) Here the Law is all
over altum Silentium -- Not a Word is said who should have this Power! -- Now
what Reason can be assigned for so manifest a Difference, (...) ^his? viz. That
the latter Power being of so much greater Importance than that of removing
College Servants, the Court who had All Power originally in themselves over
this College (and who therefore could sovereignly grant the Power of choosing
without granting t^^^ ^ower of removing, just as they pleased) did not intend
in this Law to grant the important Power of removing Members of that
Corporation, out of their own Hands; but thought fit to reserve it to
themselves, among those Visitatorial Powers which the Court originally had over
this College and never granted to Any Persons whatever.

The only Objection that can be here made has, in Reality, been obviated
already, viz. That it is implied of Course, and in the Nature of the Thing that
those have the Power of removing who by Charter have the Power of making
Members of the Corporation; since the Court mention not, in the Charter, who
should have the Power of removing them or grant it to others. But this
Objection suppresses one Half of the Truth; if the Whole Truth had been given,
the Objection would appear inconclusive a^ first View: Thus that it is implied
of Course and in the Nature of the Thing [^^ther] that those, who by Charter
have the Power of making Members of the Corporation, have the Power of removing
them [or else that the COURT, who originally had this Power, did not part with
it at all, but reserved it to themselves] since the Court mention not in the
Charter who should have this Power or grant it to others. Now that the latter
of these Suppositions is True, appears by what has been said already; and may
further appear beyond Contradiction by what follows. For 1. The Former
Supposition (on which the Objection is grounded) no Way accounts for the Reason
why this Law so expressly grants the small Power of Removing (as well as
choosing) the inferior Officers; and yet makes no Grant at all of so much
greater a Power as that of removing the Superior. Whence comes it to pass!
that this Law does not leave the lesser Power of removing College Servants, to
be implied of Course in the Power of choosing them; as well as according to this
Supposition, it does the greater Power of removing Members of the Corporation?
-- If this Law had not expressly mentioned who should have the Power of removing
Either of these Kinds of Officers, the Objection would then have been of some
Force -- Or if the Law had expressly mentioned who should have the greater Power
of removing Members of the Corporation and had said nothing about the lesser
Power of removing College Servants; then it might have been supposed (what
seems to be the true Way of arguing in such Cases) that the Greater Power being
granted, the Lesser was left to be understood and so implied of course. But
since, unfortunately, for the Objection it is quite the contrary. "What possible
Reason can be given [if this Law supposes of course and in the Nature of the
Thing, these are to (...) the POWER of removing who have the Power of making
College Officers] that the Law is not as silent on the petty Power of removing
a College Servant, as it is absolutely silent about the important Power of
removing a President or other Members of that Corporation? This is easily
accounted for, on Supposition that the Court reserved this greater Power
entirely to themselves; but it is impossible to account for it on Supposition
that the Court made NO such Reserve. 2. There is no Connection in the Nature of
the Thing between the Power of removing and the Power of putting into Office.
So that it cannot be inferred that both these Powers are granted only because
One of them is so. Yea it is utterly untrue in Fact that those always have the
Power of removing, who have the Power of putting into Office. And of this the
Representatives themselves, belonging to that Honorable Court who made this
Law, are a known and public Instance! For by the Choice of their respective
Towns they are made Representatives; but their respective Towns, it is well
known, have not the Power of removing their Representatives from out of the
General Court; But the House, alone, who have not the Power to make
Representatives for the Province, have yet the sole Power to remove them from
their Place in the House. So that it is not true either Way, that those have the
Power of removing, who have the sole Power of putting into Place or Trust; nor
those the Power of putting into Place, who have the sole Power of removing a
Person from Place or Trust -- and that from one of the most Honorable PLACES
and Trusts in the Province. Thus it appears, from so eminent an Instance, that
there is no Connection in the Nature of the Thing between these two Powers. --
In Truth, they are sometimes granted and conveyed separately and sometimes in
Conjunction, just as the supreme Power from whom they are communicated thinks
fit. Certainly then a General Court who originally had these two Powers over a
College that was a Creature of their OWN, may grant the One and sovereignly
keep the Other to themselves without granting it at all. Now an absolute
SILENCE, under some Circumstances, upon One of these Powers (when the other is
expressly and formally granted) is every Way equivalent to an Exception; and so
makes an express Negation of such a Grant to be entirely superfluous. And of
this sort is that Silence in the Charter on the Power of removing Members of
the Corporation; for, by what has been observed above, it can be accounted for
no other Way. But 3. and finally to decide this Matter "On which Side of the
Question are ancient Practices upon this Law? These are the best Expositors of
ancient Laws. Now let the Case of President Dunster (p. 5. and 9 -- 12 of this
Paper) be read over in View to the Charter on this Point, and it will appear
that no Comment ever determined the Meaning of a TEXT better than the Account
of this Case determines (what the Charter has not expressly done) by whom the
President, Fellows or Treasurer SHALL be removed! -- The JUDGES on this Law (as
Visitors) in his Case, were the Legislature who made the Law. And who can
explain or determine the Sense of a Law so well as the Legislature who made it?
-- particularly if a great Part of that Legislature consists of the same
individual Persons who framed and passed such a Law; which, from the Elections
in the Records for the Year 1690 and (...) appears in this Case to be (...)! --
The Overseers and Corporation also to whom the Charter of 50 was granted,
consisted by a great Majority of the same Persons in 1654 when Mr. Dunster was
dismissed, as they did in 1650. So that the generality of all Persons concerned
in his Case must have had a perfect Understanding and even personal Knowledge
of the Powers granted in the Charter; and of the Reason of that SILENCE in it,
on the Power of removing Members of the Corporation. The Time also was so near
the Time when that Charter was granted, that the very IDEAS of the several
Power put into it, and the Import of the Clause that is so Silent on the Power
of removing Members of that Corporation must have been fresh and lively in the
Minds of all these Persons who were concerned in his Dismission. And now with
such singular Advantages to know and to judge of the Sense of this Law "How
(...) the all judge and act upon it in his Case? Why ALL alike! -- with the
same Sentiments, the same Views of the Charter on this Point. -- Thus Mr.
Dunster when he found he must resign, appears to be at no Loss " To Whom to
resign. And thus the Court, to whom he resigned, appear to receive his
Resignation as a Matter the Cognizance of which belonged properly to them; and
as what came regularly before them, without coming at all before the Overseers
and Corporation! -- And when the Court delegated their Power to the Overseers
as their Committee to manage this Affair and make Return upon it, they do it
just as they might have appointed any other Persons to do the same Thing for
them! -- Nor is there the least Appearance that the Overseers or Mr. Dunster or
the Corporation ever thought that his Dismission, without Any Act of the
Overseers and Corporation for it, was not altogether according to Charter; nor
did ANY of these Gentlemen through the WHOLE of their long Conferences and mutual
Replies (which lasted so many Months and gave them all so much Occasion to
canvass this Point) ever once suggest that the Power of removing that President
was vested by Charter in the Overseers and Corporation. Not a Man of them ALL
appears to know (what, with the Advantages above described, they must have
known! if it had been implied in that Charter at all) that "Those had the Power
of removing Members of the Corporation who by Charter had the Power of making
them such." -- And yet it is now pretended by some of their late Posterity (who
are of Yesterday and know nothing) that it is so clear and obvious a Sense of
the Charter that those should have the Power of removing who have Power of
choosing, that it is implied of course and in the Nature of the Thing
"ridiculous. Such modern Refinements on the Charter which some Children of our
Forefathers have made long since their Day, are of NO Account; while the UNITED
Sense of the original Grantors and Grantees, in the only Instance of dismissing
a Member of that Corporation, is on the other Side of the Question; and every
rational Argument, grounded on the Silence of the Charter, and the Silence of
the Appendix to the Charter, is on the same Side of the Question also. It
having been shown that such Silence could no Way be accounted for but by taking
it (not as implying of courss a Grant of such a Power, but the reverse) as
indicating that the Court made no Grant of this Power at all, but reserved it
to themselves -- Nor does it seem in the least strange that the Power of
^^^^^ing Members of that Corporation should be separated from that of choosing
them; or if it did, it is nothing to the Question; for as Chief Justice Holt
observes on the Power that Founders of Colleges have in such Cases, The
Question is not, What is reasonable for the Founder to do, but what be has done
on perusal of the Statute. -- His WILL is his REASON in disposing and ordering
his OWN. And thus in the present Case; If it appears (as it plainly does on
Perusal of the Statute!) that the Court as Founder has made a Separation of
these Powers; the sovereign WILL of the Legislature in disposing its OWN after
this Manner, is and OUGHT to be "Reason sufficient" for All beneath them to
acquiesce in -- supposing no other Reason could be assigned; which yet is not
the Case in the Instance before us, for a wise and just Reason (...) obvious:
-- The important Powers of Visitation were never granted in that Charter; Now
the Power of removing Members from out of that Corporation is of as great
Importance as most Powers of Visitation are, and is of much greater than that
of electing Members into it. So that these two Powers might with very good
Reason be separated; and the Greater be reserved (on the same wise Reason that
ALL Powers of Visitation were reserved) while the losser was granted. For as to
electing such Members; No Person among a fit Number of Candidates has an
antecedent Right to be chosen, and so is not legally injured if passed by; Nor
can he claim an Appeal, if not chosen; Nor does it really imply that he is
criminal in the Eyes of the Electors. But 'its quite otherwise when a Person
already in a Corporation is turned out of it. This must be for Crimes; and high
Crimes; the World will so take it; and his Credit as to any future Trust or
Place, and even in the common Employments of Life for Subsistence, may suffer
on this Account. The present President (his own Conscience being Witness!)
Would look on it as more ignominious to be turned out of his Place in that
Corporation, than never to have been chosen into it at all, but have continued
on his Ministry in the Church of which he was teaching Elder, Now it has often
happened in Colleges abroad (and been as often lamented by the best Friends to
such Societies when it has happened) that some Presidents and Heads of Colleges
have been Set and Bent on aggrandizing themselves and enlarging their own Power
by all Manner of Ways and Means. In one Word, "The Constitution which gives
them No negative, and on which therefore they are but PRIMI inter PARES is what
they cannot bear! Nothing short of BASHAW. Government will content them. And
with a few leading Members gained over to their Side, and some others
intimidated, they can compass their Ends and Tyrannize over the Rest of their
EQUALS who only stand up for the Rights of their own Place and the Privileges
of such Societies against the ambitio^^ Heads and Presidents of this Sort, who
will never leave till they have made such troublesome Equals fall Victims to
these TURKISH Politics. Now since in this Court, which incorporated
Harvard-College, there were many worthy and learned Gentlemen, who had been
educated in Colleges abroad, they must have seen ENOUGH of this Mischief! To
excite their Care to guard against it in a College they were then founding in
this Land; and therefore they might judge the most effectual Way to prevent it,
was to put NO such Power into the Charter, as That of amoving Members of that
Corporation, which 'twas the Interest, and so often the Inclination of Heads
and leading Members of such Corporations to Abuse. And thus the Court in their
Wisdom might think fit to reserve this important Power among those Powers of
VISITATION which were never granted in that Charter at all; and among which,
according to chief Justice Holt, the FOUNDERS of Colleges can reserve just what
particular Powers they please. This leads in the last Place to consider who are
the VISITORS of Harvard College, and therefore to say --

IV. THE GREAT and GENERAL COURT who founded Harvard College, and appointed No
Visitors to it, when they finally incorporated the same, are the Sole local
VISITORS of that College.

Colleges must have Visitors! "Every College, says Holt on Colleges, has a
VISITOR either by to Appointment of the Founder, or the Law" so that if the
Founder appoints no Visitor himself, the Law will do it for him. To imagine
therefore that Harvard College has no Visitor is not only a vain Fancy but a
dangerous Delusion! -- If that Society has none, the Conclusion is short
"Harvard College is NO Corporation in Law" And Then what will become of all
their STOCK. It Is, on this Supposition, gone for ever out of the Hands of those
SEVEN that pass by the idle Name of President and Fellows of Harvard College."
-- The very FERRYMEN will despise them! And those must be weaker than FERRYMEN
who give any further Donations to an unincorporated Number of Men that can
receive none, or Let them to Use, or sue for them in again, by any NAME that
they dare publicly own and can maintain in Law. But if that College is a
Corporation, the Conclusion is as short the other Way, that "VISITORS there are
and must be Somewhere", and These can call the whole Body of them to Account
and make the loftiest Head of that College to TREMBLE if they find him spoiling
his LORD's Goods or smiting his Brethren with the FIST of Wickedness. The Power
of VISITORS does not depend on any accidental or local Customs or Laws. It
depends not even on the Appointment of the Founder himself! But has a necessary
Existence; and his Heirs will have it after him, if he appoints no VISTOR to a
College or his own rounding. Now the Court alone founded Harvard College, and
appointed no Visitor to it. So None but the Court could be the Visitors; and
therefore, as Heir, none but the Legistature is or can be the local VISITORS of
this College.

Here let the Proof of this 4th Article and the general Assertions under it be
made out. The greater Part shall be taken from what Dr. Ayliff (i. e. L. L. D.)
has written in his Account of the University of OXFORD," in which this Doctor
of LAWS has treated at large on the Power of Visitors as warranted by Custom,
Law, and common Right. Here then 1. It must be said that Harvard College is a
LAY Corporation. A College, says the Dr. Vol. 2. Page 52, is an ecclesiastical
Corporation, by Cannon Law, if the Number of Clerks exceed or equal that of
Laymen: If not; It Is confessed to be a LAY Corporation. Now in the Charter of
50, which is the sole Foundation of Harvard College as a Corporation, there is
no Provision made for any Clerks at all! And so it is accidental to that
Foundation, whether those who are upon it be Clerks or Lawyers or Physicians.
Yea as to the Fact, viz. What Function the first SEVEN on that Foundation
happened to be of, it appears there were six Laymen to one Clerk. Yet further,
if the Overseers were here considered (as being on the Foundation though not
incorporated upon it) it appears that the Honorable were twenty, and the
Reverend not more than ten, when first set on the Foundation of 50. And thus if
the said Corporation are taken singly, or together with the Overseers, and this
in View either to Fact or Right, it appears that more Laymen were on the
Foundation than Clerks. So that according to Dr. Ayl^^^ It must be confessed
that Harvard College is a LAY Corporation. It Is evident also from the express
Design of the Institution that the said Corporation is not acclesiastical. All
the Passages in the Char^er relating to its Design are these, "For the
Advancement of all good Literature Arts and Sciences." This is plainly an
Institution at large. Again "For the Education of Youth in Knowledge and
Godliness." Now Godliness does not distinguish a Clerk from a Layman any more
than Knowledge does. Lastly For the Advancement and Education of Youth in all
Manner of good Literature Arts and Sciences, This Design is as unappropriated
as can be; It Is common and indifferent to all; and not as we are told in
ELECTION Sermons that the great and peculiar Design of our pious Ancestors in
founding this College was that it might be a NURSERY for the Gospel Ministry
among us, and to supply our Churches with Pastors and Teachers nothing of this
is written by our pious Ancestors in the Charter; and it is directly against the
very TEXT of the Charter itself; and so it must pass for Oral Tradition. And
thus this College taken in all Views is not an ecclesiastical Corporation: If
it had been so, the Right of Visitation (according to Ayliff Page 7. And Holt
on Colleges) would have devolved to the CHURCH as Heir; but now we must look
elsewhere for this Right. And therefore 2. It must be determined who were the
Founders of this College. Now Ayliff Page 6. says He is the Founder of a
College who First erects and endowes it and not He who incorporates it. In this
Sense of Founding (as distinguished from the incorporating ACT by which alone a
College is founded as a Body politic) the Dr. goes on and says, If the King
and a common Person at the same Time gives Lands etc. to a College on its
Foundation [viz. o^ it^ being FIRST erected and endowed] The King is said to be
the Founder by Reason of his Eminence; But if a common Person founds a College
WITH Possessions of small Value, and the King afterward endowes it with
greater, yet the common Person shall be taken to be the Founder and not the
King. Hence "th^n by a Parity of Reason; In the first Case, supposing any
common Persons had been as early in erecting and endowing that College as the
Court was, yet the Court alone (by Reason of its Eminence) would have been the
Founder; and these common Persons could by no Means be styled Co-Founders with
the Court! But in the latter Case (a fortiori) the Court is the sole Founder:
For if a common Person, on being the First in erecting and endowing that
College, would have held the Name of Founder against the Court itself;
certainly then the Court, who really were the FIRST, will hold the Name of
Founder against all common Persons; let these afterward give ever so much to
it. Now that the Court were First in erecting and endowing it, appears from the
Province and College Records compared Page 4. 5, of this Paper. The Court first
began the FUND for erecting and endowing this College in 1636. But what all
private Persons gave to is was afterward; and in particular what Mr. Harvard
gave to it was by WILL in 1638. Hence then Mr. Harvard and all other private
Donours were Benefactors to this College: but the COURT alone (...) Founders
This brings (...) directly to the P^^^ters of said College. For 3. The Founder
and his Heirs MUST be the Visitors of a College, that is a lay Corporation, if
he appoints no Visitor to it himself. -- Though Corporations for public
Governmennt as Cities, Towns, etc. have no Visitors, yet chief Justice Holt
affirms of private Societies founded on the Score of Charity (as he says all
Colleges are) that Where there is a Corporation, as a College or Hospital,
there must (...) Visitors (Tit, Visitors) A College cannot BE without a
Visitor, says Ayliff. Page 74. It is not at the Pleasure of the Founder whether
there shall be a Visitor or not. Page 76." A Visitor says Holt, is of Necessity
by Law! -- This Power was not introduced by Canons or Constitutions
ecclesistical; but is an Appointment i^ Law; it arises from the Property which
the Founder had in the Lands given etc. and as HE is the Author of the Charity,
the Law gives HIM and his HEIRS a visitatorial Power (Tit. Visitors) Thus this
Right has a necessary Existence. It Is originally in the Founder and Will
descend to his Heirs if he appoint No Visitor himself. Herein Dr. Ayliff and a
greater than the Dr, are express. If there be no particular Visitor appointed
by the Founder's Statutes, the Law appoints the Founder and his Heirs to be
Visitors. Thus Ayliff Page 76. In a Word, "The LAW does in Defect of a
particular Appointment, make the Founder Visitor. If HE is silent during his
own Time, the Right will descend to his HEIRS. Thus Holt on Visitors. And after
him what Need of further Evidence.

And now the only remaining Question is, "Whether the Court who founded Harvard
College ever did appoint a Visitor to it? If not; Then from all these
Authorities, this Right will descend to every succeeding Assembly as Heir. And
that College cannot BE without the Court as Visitors" yea GREAT and GENERAL as
the COURT is, yet in all Humility let it be said that it is not at the Pleasure
of that Court whether they shall be Visitors or not -- for in this Case the
Court is Visitor of Necessity by Law. But that the Court never appointed any
Visitor, appears from the Laws of 42 and 50 which are the only Laws in which
'twas ever pretended that Visitors were appointed. The Name Visitor or the
Terms Visitation, Visitatorial etc. do not once occur in these Laws. Now Ayliff
(Page 74. 5) makes it so necessary for "a Visitor to be appointed and named
such by the Founder in express Terms" that he even labors to prove that by the
Description of such a Power given to any Persons they are created Visitors,
whether expressly styled such in the Founder's Statutes or not. Because
otherwise, says he, the giving such a Power would be vain and the Clause
useless since none therefore are styled or appointed Visitors by Name in these
Laws, let the Powers granted in them be considered and compared with that of
Visitation as described by Ayliff and chief Justice Holt. To begin then with
the Law of 42 which appointed Overseers to Harvard College before it was
incorporated. And here 1. Visitors are not the stated Legislative or executive
Power of a College; but are appointed by the Founder to see that those, who are
such, do their Duty. But by the Law of 42, before there was a Corporation, the
Overseers themselves were the only stated and ordinary Power to make Laws and
Orders for the College. By this then they are not described as having a Power
of Visitation, nor would the Power given them to make Laws and Orders be vain
and the Clause useless though they were not Visitors -- Unless that College was
^o be governed without any Laws and Orders at all! 2. Visitors are Independet
and Sovereign in all Cases where they are Visitors at all. Thus on Appeals they
are the dernier Resort, Who shall judge them? -- Let their Sentence be right or
wrong, the Party is concluded by it says Holt on Visitors. But by the Law of 42
the Overseers in all Cases of Appeals whatever, made from a Meeting of their
Number that was not General to a General Meeting of their whole Number, could
conclude Nothing against an Apellant! For if they did not reverse former
Judgment, the Party was so far from being concluded by i^, that the Overseers
themselves were to stand accountable to the General Court for it; But a
standing Power over VISITORS to call them to Account for their Conduct, and
that in the most ordinary Cases that could come before them, is such a Paradox
as was never heard of in the World! Appeals lie from our inferior Courts to the
Superior; but even Inferior Courts stand not accountable to the Superior for
their Acts. It Is therefore doubly absurd and impossible that the Overseers
should be Visitors on this Law. But 3. The great Business of a Visitor, and the
main End of his Power, is to see that the Charity of the Founder is not
perverted says Ayliff Page 77. To prevent all perverting the Charity there is
by Law a visitatorial Power says Holt on Visitors. But by the Law of 42 the
Overseers were the very Persons who were betru^ted with the College-Stock and
all Donations to it; so that 'till it can be shown that this Law appoints them
"on their perverting the Charity" to visit themselves, to set in Judgment upon
themselves for so doing, it is to No Purpose to (...) them this Law appoints
them Visi^^ (...) 4. All Power given the Overseers in the Law of 42 (whether
respecting the College-Stock or the making Statutes Orders or Constitutions for
the College) was abrogated a few Years after, by the Charter of 50; as has been
demonstrated (Page 16, 17. of this Paper) both from the Nature of an
incorporating Act, end from the express Declaration of the General Court that
the FIRST Foundation of that College and the Government thereof had its
ORIGINAL from the Act of 50. So then from the Year 1650 the Overseers were so
far from being Visitors by the Act of 42, that on that Act they could neither
be Visitors or Visited on ANY Foundation at all! But 5. supposing the Charter
of 50 did not wholly supersede the Act of 42; yet the Argument Ex Abundanti,
Page 19. (...) seq. of this Paper, may be urged as strongly against a Power of
Visitation in the Overseers, as it may against any other Power of Importance
granted to them in this Act; For the Charter of 50 comes after this Act, and
leaves NO Powers of Importance in it: but vests them in the General Assembly of
all the Overseers and Society! -- And now what a VAIN Attempt would it be in
any Persons to struggle through such a SERIES of Impossibilities in order to
settle a Power of Visitation on such a Law? And yet there is another Difficulty
behind, that would make the Attempt (if possible) still more vain: And that is,
that in common Law, "Visitors pres^ppose "a Corporation! The Power of
Visitation exists consequent on and not prior to the Act that incorpora^^^ a
College. Hear the following Authorities on this Point. The very Definition of a
Visitor in the common Law-Dictionaries (as in Jacob's) is "an Inspector of the
Government of a Corporation." But where was there a Corporation in 1642 for the
Overseers to Inspect? Or where, in the Law of 42, is there a Syllable that
stands in View to any Future Corporation, for the Overseers or for Any one else
to in^pect? None at all. The Overseers then by that Law were not Visitors even
in Habitu ^ut P^tenti^ any more than in Act. And thus the last Shift, that
would betake itself to the very Ja^gon of the School^en for a Support, i^ in
this Case precluded. From what Dr. Ayliff says also (Page 77.) It Is as plain as
Words can make it, that Visitors presuppose a Corporation actually existing
Where those, says he, who are to receive the Charity of the Founder [as the
Overseers did in 42] are NOT incorporated (...) but Trustees are appointed,
there is then NO visitatorial Power; Because the Interest of (...) Re^^^^ is
not vested in them. But when they are incorporated then, to prevent all
perverting the (...), the Law establishes a visitatorial Power. This was
exactly the Case of Harvard College (...) the Charity of its Founder. For by
the Law of 42 the Overseers were only to dis^^^^ ^^^er and manage to the Use
and Behoof of the College and its Members [and not to their ^own ^s Overseers]
all Gift, Legacies etc made TO the said College. Thus by this Act they were
(...) Trustees of the Charity. But how different is the Style of the
incorporating Act of 50 The ^^^^^dent and Fellows by that Name shall and may
purc^^se ^^d acquire to THEMSELVES [here is (...) Property] or receive upon
free Gift and Donation any Lands. -- And Goods and Sums of Money -- (...) to
the Use and Behoof of said Pres^^^^^ and Fellows [as well as] Scholars of said
College. Here is Property apain; and the Interest of the Revenue, in all Senses
of the Phrase is here and elsewhere by (...) vested in them as a Corporation.
So then before the incorporating Act of 50 there was NO visitatorial Power over
Harvard College, because the Interest of the Revenue was not vested in a
Corporation. The Doctor repeats this over again page 87. Adn says absolutely
(without Respect to Trustees) that where (...) Persons are NOT incorporated
there is NO visitatorial Power, Because the Interest of the Revenue ^^ ^ot
vested in them. And all this is confirmed by Chief Justice Holt who (Tit.
Visitors) asserts in such a Case where none are incorporated There is NO
visitatorial Power Because the Interest of the Revenue is not vested in them.
But where they are incorporated there to prevent all perverting the Charity
there is by Law a visitatorial Power. This Power then has no BEING 'till a
College is incorporated; and therefore could NOT BE in the Law of 42 which was
made eight Years before the incorporating Harvard College. Adn thus so great an
Authority as HOLT has decided the Case for ever against the Teaching Elders as
being NO Visitors upon that Act. FINIS to the Law of 42.

Pass We n^w to the incorporating Act of 50. But this Act also describes no
Power of Visitation. And particularly it does not describe the Overseers as the
Visitors. All the Power given them in this Law is a Power to Council the
Corporation of act, or to Consent to their Acts: Which is a Power that cannot
act at all but only council Others to act (at whose Pleasure it still lies
whether they will take such Council --) or else at farthest it is a Power that
cannot act without the Corporation and so can effect nothing of itself. This is
so f^r from being a Description of a Power of Visitation, which is independent
and SOVEREIGN, that it is directly the Description of a Power that is not such.
It Is a Power also that is ordinary and relates only to the consenting to and so
completing the Laws and Orders made by the Corporation. But it is the Right and
proper Office of a Visitor when College Laws and Orders, that have been made
and completed, are found hurtful to the Society or its Members, Then to
interpose and RESCIND them BY and OF HIMSELF. Now there is not a Syllable in
the Charter that gives the Overseers a Power thus to interpose and Rescind One
such College Law or Order -- let it be found ever so hurtful. " They then are
NOT the VISITORS of Harvard College by Charter" Q. E. D. -- Hence then the
Overseers of that College, Honorable and Reverend as they are on OTHER
Accounts, yet it must be said that they are NOT to be Honored or Revered as
VISITORS. Nor Can they have a Right to turn out Members of that Corporation! An
Attempt to do such an Act, as appears from all the Premises, would be in Effect
(though far from such Intention) as Attempt to null the Charter -- to dissolve
the Corporation -- to bring on a universal Dissipation of its Treasury -- and
thereon Mr. HOLLIS' Donations is particular must on the very Conditions on
which they were received, be returned back to England again! This requires the
serious Consideration of ALL Persons who have any Concern for that College. --
But to go on. If any a^e described as Visitors, in the Charter, It Is the
general Assembly of All the OVERSEERS and SOCIETY in great and difficult Cases,
and in Cases of Non-Agreement, in all which Cases the Conclusion shall be made
BY the Major Part [of the Corporation] the Overseers consenting thereunto. But
this also is no Description of a Power of Visitation in them; for great and
difficult Cases and Cases of Non-Agreement may happen to the stated Legislative
and executive Power of a College, in making and executing Laws, as truly as to
Visitors. This Clause then describes nothing peculiar to a Visitor, but only
what is common to a Visitor and to others that are not such; and so contains no
Description of a Power of Visitation at all. The plain Sense of the Clause is
only this: that the stated Legislative and executive Power of that College, who
by Charter are the Overseers and Corporation, are not to determine such
important Cases (and it is fitting they should not!) as they may do small and
common Cases at a Meeting that is not General, but are to do it at a full and
general Meeting of All their Number. This alters not the Capacity in which they
are to act in full and general Meeting on such Cases; but leaves them still,
what they were before, the Legislative and executive Power only. If it had
altered their Capacity, so as to make them Visitors -- What Absurdities would
follow! For ever WHOM would it make them Visitors? Why over the whole stated
Legislative and Executive Power of the College (for so are ALL Visitors of
Colleges!) And thus the WHOLE Legislative and executive Power of that College
would be Visitors of the WHOLE Legislative and Executive Power of that College
-- Wholly Visitors and Wholly to be visited by themselves. And so their WHOLE
Number to set upon and give Sentence for (or against) their WHOLE Number. Such
Absurdities are too gross to need any Refutation. Let One Consequence of so
absurd an Interpretation of the Charter be mentioned: The only Ground on which
Ayliff (and even Holt!) argues that a Power of Visitation will exist of
Necessity by Law, is, that they Charity might not be perverted by the
incorporated, who have it in their Hands. Now suppose (what the very End of a
visitatorial Power obliges us to suppose may happen) that so great and
difficult a Case Should happen, as that the Corporation should embezzle the
College-Stock or pervert if from its devoted Uses; -- How could this Mischief
be prevented! Or how would it be possible to call the Corporation to an Account
for it! When in this very Case and by this very Clause of the Charter (if the
Corporation with the Overseers were Visitors) the Conclusion must be made by
the Corporation itself; and hereon the more they embezzled the College-Stock
(and so the more they needed to be visited!) the less likely they would be to
make the Conclusion that they should be visited for it -- or with the Overseers
to sit in Judgment upon themselves for so doing -- unless it were for this
fatal Purposs, viz. To vote themselves innocent, and so come off Triumphant!
For what could be done in such a Case? None of these Visitors could, BY
Charter, make the Conclusion (for the Overseers to consent to) but the
Corporation. So that if they should be hardy enough to make such a Conclusion
(and stand by it!) They could go on to make Waste of the College-Stock, and
defy the whole Number of the Honorable and Reverend Overseers to do their
Worst. Thus the very End for which the Law appoints a Power of Visitation would
be destroyed, if this Clause in the Charter was to be taken as describing such
a Power given to the Corporation and Overseers. It Is Time then to give up this
Sense of the Clause and with it ALL Thoughts of finding a Power of Visitation
described in the Charter: since this, which comes nearest to the Description of
such a Power, is not and cannot be a Description of it.

And thus it appears, after a thorough Examination, that there is NO Law in
which the Founder of this College conveyed this Right of visiting the same,
away to others. And then this Right ( which MUST exist somewhere!) Can exist in
None but the Founder and his Heirs; That is, according to chief Justice Holt,
the COURT in this Case is Visitor of NECESSITY by Law! -- Thus it is in all
Colleges in England, when the Founder appoints no Visitor. Two Instances of
this, in Ayliff, are remarkable. The one is Lincoln College The Bishop of
Lincoln, says Ayliff, is Visitor of this College, only of common Right; and not
by any particular Appointment of the Founder. 'Twas founded by R. Fleming
Bishop of Lincoln before the Reformation; who could have no Heir by Descent, in
those Times of enjoined Celibacy; Nor did he vest this Right in another. -- Yet
it died not with him -- nor devolved to the Crown -- Nor to the Church in
common -- Nor to the University -- But because the Founder lived and died
"Bishop of Lincoln" This Right descended to his Successors in that Sec. Such a
necessary Existence has this Right ( independent on the Appointment of the
Founder) and so inseparable is it from HEIRSHIP that, unless the Founder make
the Separation by his own Act, if there be no other Heir but a spiritual Heir,
it falls to him of common Right. Another Instance is Christ Church College, one
of the most famous in the University of Oxford, founded by King Henry 8th after
the Impeachment of Cardinal Woolsey who began it. This College, says Ayliff, is
visited only by the King and Queen in Person or by their Commission. King Henry
8th on his new Institution thereof having left or appointed No special Visitor
by Any Statute; The CROWN as Heir in VISITOR; which some have deemed a
Happiness. In a like Case therefore on the NEW Institution of Harvard College
by the Charter of 50 ( after Overseers were appointed in 42) The COURT having
lose or appointed No special Visitor by any Statute, the Legislature as Heir is
VISITOR; which Some (and it is to be hoped that ALL the teaching Elders who are
Overseers) have deemed a HAPPINESS. -- And as to the Corporation of that
College, what is left for the to do but to own and recognize the Right of their
FOUNDER over them! Of the Founder, that Annual Benefactor, that Visitor, whom
they have often treated with an Indignity that nothing could exceed but the
Goodness and Patience even to Longsuffering with which the Court have forborne
to resent it in the severest Manner. What open Disrespect, for Instance, has
been shown them by that Corporation at the public Solemnity of a Commencement.
The Court when sitting ('it is true) have been invited to it; But when they came
to the Place, ALL their Members but the Honorable Overseers have been left at
Noonday to wander about the Yard and Entries of that College, and been obliged
to get a common Dinner where they could Find one (or return Home fasting!)
While an ample Entertainment has been going on for Other Guests WITHIN. These
public Affronts offered them by that Corporation, the Writer of this Paper has
seen with his own Eyes and has blushed to see what he could not help; at the
same Time that he has trembled at what might follow on their thus treating the
LEGISLATURE! -- A Legislature who gave them their BEING at first; and by whose
Bounty annually continued to them, they have Subsisted ever Since!

And now "who are the VISITORS of Harvard College" may appear to all Persons
who may have just and important Occasion to apply to them. Nor can the Writer
of this Paper think it foreign to the Subject, or unuseful to Harvard-College
(or to any Persons concerned with it) to mention the peculiar Business of a
Visitor, and their Method of Procedure in Colleges abroad. A Visitor, says
Ayliff, Page 95, in all his Enquiries and Determinations ought to proceed
according to the mere Law and Rights of Nations, where Matters of necessary
Substance and not positive Form are observed. Thus on Complaints made to
Visitors There ought to be some Matter of Accusation in Writing given to the
Party accused, and a convenient Time assigned him for Answer, etc. and so of
other Matters to which we have a common and natural Right, not to be destroyed
by any local or more general Ordinance or Statute whatever. Thus Ayliff on the
Method of their Procedure. As to the peculiar Office of a Visitor, it primarily
respects "the Revenues, the Possessions, the WHOLE Estate of a College! The
inspecting whereof is so essential a Part of this Office, that Ayliff and even
chief Justice Holt often repeats it as the grand Reason why the Law appoints a
Visitor at all, "It is not FITTING fays Ayliff, that Members endowed and who
have Charity bestowed upon them should be Left to themselves." To apply this to
the Corporation of Harvard College; the State of whose Treasury has-been kept
in such mysterious Secrecy as if they had No Masters! As if None but themselves
had any Business with their Treasury, or a Right even so much as to know what
it consisted of -- The Writer of this Paper has been for 10 or 12 Years a
Member of that Corporation, and he cannot find by their Records that there has
been a formal Visitation of their Treasury ever since the Times of the
Revolution! By what he has heard, the Visitors of Colleges in England have a
Register of the whole Estate of their respective Colleges; and all the
Additions thereto from Time to Time, are entered into such Registers
accordingly. And indeed how would it be possible for a Visitor to know whether
the Charity was perverted or not (which is the primary End for which the Law
appoints a Visitor) if the himself knew not what the Charity was, nor the
particular Uses and Ends for which it was bestowed It Is his Right to demand,
and the indispensible Duty of a Corporation to give in such an Account; if they
should refuse it, they would be guilty of the most audacious Contumacy and be
proceeded against as REBELS to their VISITOR accordingly. -- Whether and how
far the Corporation of Harvard College have exhibited in to their Visitor such
Accounts of their WHOLE Estate! What Lands and Tenements, and what Moneys and
Goods it consists of; with the Value, the Income, and the several Uses of the
particulars, the Writer of this Paper knows not -- He never was privy to any
such Thing -- Nor of late Years is it extant as he can find upon their Records.
-- But on ONE Account it is of the last Importance that the Whole Estate of that
College should be known. And that is, leaft by the continual Additions made
thereto, it should at Length exceed the Value of 500 l. per Annum, which is the
Limit set to it by Charter, and so the Charter itself be Forfeit! [The Charter
puts it on the Value and not the actual Income of 500 l. per Annum. The Rule
then is "What by common Estimate the Value is, and not what the Corporation
think fit to rent their Estate at" -- And indeed they have sometimes rented
that for 5 l. which without being bettered by Improvement they have the very
next Year rented at 25 or 30 l. per Annum] Now how near already they have, by
acquiring purchasing or receiving upon free Gift or Donation, opproached to the
Limit of 500 l. per Annum (as Money passed in 1650) is highly needful to be
ascertained. The Library itself is worth 8 or 10000 l. The Lands and Tenements
in Cambridge and the adjoining Towns may be valued at more than 200. l. per
Annum -- Besides the three Buildings called Colleges, and the President's
House, which have all been acquired (...) received on Donation long since the
Charter of 50 was granted: If to these were added the Lands on which they
stand. And the In^^^^ of Charl^^ T^^^^ ^^^^Y -- And one Half of the Township of
Hopkintown -- And Merriconeag -- And the many other Lands and Tenements
belonging to that College -- with the Hollisian Donations of 300 l. or more per
Annum -- And the rich Apparatus -- And all the INDIAN MONEY -- And the Gifts of
an honorable Family in Salem -- And other numerous Donations formerly made --
And that are continually making (three Gentlemen of Boston have lately by Will
given more than 1000 l. and a Chapel is now given) -- ALL these, or What of
these can properly be valued at some Rate per Annum, may perhaps on Due
Estimate be found to come very near the NE Plus Ultra fixed by Charter! And
it is the proper Right and Office of their Visitor, by a frequent Inspection of
the STATE of the COLLEGE-STOCK, to see that by the continual Additions made
thereto, it does exceed that Limit -- Least the Charter should be Forfeit.

Another special Part of a Visitor's Office is "to receive Appeals and redress
Grievances." Viz. when the Cases are important." A Visitor, says Ayliff, is
bound in Duty and Conscience to receive an Appeal provided it be not frivolous
He has a standing Authority, says Holt on Visitors, at all Times to hear
Complaints and redress Grievances -- He has a POWER to hear [and therefore when
he judges it needful he may hear] Any Difference and redress Any particular
Injury at Any Time. And now to make the Application of this to Harvard College
-- A Place where Grievances and Injuries do so much abound. Exp^lsions and even
final Degradations, in many Cases, are Grievances, and great Grievances. The
best Gentlemen's Sons in the Country are liable to be expelled and so to be
RUINED unless they can have Redress by appealing to a Visitor. And this Remedy
cannot be denied them! They have as much a Right to it as Visitors have to BE
Visitors. -- As to final Degradations; There is one peculiar Sort of it which
is for no Crime at all. And that is the fixing Gentlemen's Sons (by a perpetual
Degradation!) below their just Place in College Classes and then spreading it
about the Country in printed Catalogues. Of this there often have been
Complaints, and LOUD and JUST Complaints! The Writer of this Paper (who in
Times past has been concerned in placing many a College Class) was so weary of
the Injuries done to particular Persons herein, that he at Length freely and
publicly told the President and Fellows that he could not in Conscience have
any Thing to do with such Matters as they had been managed; it appearing to him
that there was no RULE by which a Class could be placed, but what (on some View
or other) was acted backward and forward upon, almost every Year -- And
sometimes in placing one and the same Class; And that if they insisted on his
acting with them in this Affair, he must insist upon it to enter his Protest
with Reasons and numerous Examples that he could produce; and would refe^ the
whole Matter to the Overseers and Corporation. On which his Brethren in the
Government of the College chose not to insist on his acting with them in this
Article; and from that Time forward went on without him. -- And indeed the
Matter is flagrant. There is scarce a Family of Note in the Country but what
have had Injustice done them on this Account. It Is but their looking over the
printed Catalogues and they may find where the Names of their abused Parents or
abused Selves or abused Son^ or Relatives stand for a public and lasting Mark
of Infamy on their Families. Even the Sons of Governors! And Sons of
Councillors! After the Parents have been raised to these High Stations, are
found placed beneath the Sons of those who were only teaching Elders. And the^^
are Gentlement (if it were decent to mention Names) that now have the Honor of
sitting in the General Court who know this to be true. Some could say, for
Instance, how their Class-Mate Mr. Solomon Otis was treated on this Account.
With what Face can any Person vindicate so scandalous an Act as that of placing
him below so many Sons of teaching Elders, and of others, in a public printed
Catalogue to be spread over the whole Land! It Is surprising that such Numbers
of Gentlemen in the Country, who have suffered these Indignities, can passively
bear them without seeking Redress; -- Or at least not enquire "Whether the Acts
of the President and Fellows are Final in this Case? If these ^entlemen will
patiently bear such ignominious Treatment -- The Writer of this Paper had
almost (...) "They WELL deserve to be thus treated." The Remedy is plain; The
President and Fellow have not the full Power of placing such Classes. They of
late Years have assumed it without Law and against Charter. -- Perhaps the
Practice was first settled on some of those temporary Charters, made since the
Revolution, on which a new Course of Things obtained in that College (and among
other Things) DEGREES were then given without the Consent of Overseers, as well
as Classes placed without such Consent.) But all these temporary Charters are
long since extinct! And the Charter of 50 alone remains for the Governors of
said College to act upon. And therefore there must be some Ground, some
Foundation, in the Charter of 50, for Such a Power; unless it be Ex Toto
arbitrary and illegal, and then it is high Time it should be demolished. But the
only Clause in the Charter of 50, that can be the Ground of this Power, is that
which enables the President and Fellows "to make Bylaws and Orders, provided
the said Orders be allowed by the Overseers" So that if there had been a By-Law
approved by the Overseers that "The placing the Youth in their Classes, and in
public Catalogues, should be left with the Corporation (or President and
Tutors -- or President Professors and Tators, as Expulsions are) then their
Doing this would have been Valid. But since there is no such By-Law (...)
^^der, it necessarily follows from the Charter that the ORDERING the Places (or
Precedence) (...) ^^^^'s Sons in a Class and public Catalogue must, in every
Act of it, receive the Consent of (...) ^^^^s -- as truly as every Act of
giving the Youth their Degrees must receive such Consent." So (...) the LIST
that contains the Order of their Names be presented to the Overseers, at some
of (...) ^etings, for their Perusal and Approbation; It Is certain that such
Classes are not legally placed (...) -- But still; Whoever has this Power, yet
if at any Time or by any Means there should be a (...) Abuse of it in some
particular Instances ( -- as in the Case of Mr. Otis --) such Errata are (...)
to the Correction of the Visitor; To whom in common Law, there li^^ an Appeal
which No (...) NO Bylaws of College can prevent. For "He has a Power to
redress any particular (...) (says Holt) at any Time." -- And is bound in Duty
and Conscience, says Ayliff, to receive an (...) ^^^id^d it be not frivolous.

(...) Writer of this Paper has gone through what he proposed; and presumes he
has shown (...) to the Corporation and the Overseers of Harvard College as they
stand in View to (...) Powers over that College still remain the GENERAL COURT.
He has done the (...) ought the most proper to Convince. Viz. by giving All the
Laws that relate to (...) that are of Importance to it, and then the Reader
having these Laws by him, may turn (...) judge for himself whether the
Reasonings of the Writer upon them are just and conclusive. The Writer is not
sensible that he has concealed the Force of any Arguments that may be advanced
in Opposition to what he has laid down. He has done his BEST to produce them
all; and had given them their due Weight, and perhaps sometimes too particular
a Consideration. What Errors there may be in his Reasonings, or what
Inaccuracies of Style, or Improprieties of Phrase and Expression in his
Writing, he leaves to the Judgment and Candor of his Readers. But if he has
been guilty of any Artful Evasions -- any fallacious Sophistical Arguings on a
Subject of such Importances; let these be treated without Mercy. -- As to any
indecent Reflections in this Piece, which might be occasioned by the Unexampled
Treatment he has lately met with, he would only say, that 'He has not the
Inhumanity to wish the most malicious of his UNREASONABLE Enemies to change
Circumstances with him, and then be put upon the Trial to write a Piece on this
Subject with (...) Reflections in it. But with These and all Other Defects in
the Piece itself, it may still be of public Service to Harvard College, whose
Treasury! Whose Constitution! Whose very BEING! it so nearly concerns. He
therefore offers it to the serious Perusal of ALL the true Friends to that
Society; and subscribes himself

Nathan Prince.

ERRATA.
Page 9. line 24. For these read this. p. 15. l. 22. No New Power^, r. no
independent or New Powers, p. 20. l. 19. dele to, p. 21. l. 12. dele and
determined, l. (...). succeeded, l. 27. after England, ins^r^ in a Parenthesis
(if they were such Enemies to that College as they have been represented) 9.
(...). l. ult Suggestion r. Cry p. 25. l. 25. can dismiss r. can ^al^ ^ismiss.
p. 26. l. 23. For on this Act, r. Now on This Act. p. 28. l. 8. undermined, r.
undetermined. p. 31. l. 21. Records. r. Court Records. p. 36. l. 12. have r.
were.


