Early PIETY; Exemplified in Elizabeth Butcher of BOSTON: Who was born July
14th, 1709. AND Died June 13th, 1718.

BEING Just eight Years and eleven Months old.

The Fourth Edition.

Jer. ii. 2. -- Thus says the LORD, I remember thee, the Kindness of thy Youth
--.

Matthew. xxi. 16. -- Out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings thou have perfected
Praise:

BOSTON: Printed by J. DRAPER, for C. HARRISON over against the Brazen-Head in
Cornhill. M, DCC, XL, I.

THE PREFACE.
AMONG the great and precious Promises contained in the Holy Scriptures, we
find that good Word, Isa. 44.3. -- I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my
Blessing upon thine Offspring. Accordingly, Our Lord Jesus Christ manifested
his Displeasure when his Disciples rebuked such as brought young Children to
him; saying, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for
of such is the Kingdom of God. And he took them into his Arms, put his Hands
upon them, and blessed them, Mark 10.13. -- 16. Now this Action of our Savior
demonstrates that some Children are blessed, and that with spiritual Blessings
in heavenly Things, being the Heirs of the Kingdom of God. And no doubt the
Infant Seed of Believers make no small Part of the Kingdom of Glory. Yea, there
have been some little Ones in whom have been found remarkable Signs of an
extraordinary Conversion: Such Manifestations of a saving Knowledge of God, and
of Christ, as gave abundant Reason to hope they were taught of God; the Power
of God's Grace being magnified in the natural Infirmities of their Childhood.

The Child, who is the Subject of the ensuing Narrative, (drawn up by another
Hand, and well attested;) is justly reckoned One of this happy Number. Her
Behavior in her Sickness was above her Years. And her dying Speeches seemed
plainly to show that the Favor of God in Christ, was in her Esteem better than
Life. May God support her pious Mother under her great Languishments and Pains,
with the joyful Hope of going to this desirable Child; but more especially of
being present with the Lord, when she shall be absent from the Body.

And now, Let us praise our glorious Lord, who gives such Grace unto Children,
and ordains Strength out of their Mouths.

Let godly Parents be excited and encouraged to come to the Throne of Grace, to
ask Grace for their Children. Blessed be God! The Infant Seed of Believers, are
not Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, nor Strangers to the Covenant of
Promise. No, The Promise is to you, and to your Children. God's Promise to
Abraham, before the giving of the Law, was, That He would be a God to him, and
to his Seed after him, Genesis 17.7. And the Word of God assures us, that the
Blessing of Abraham is come upon the believing Gentiles, Gal. 3.13, 14, 16.
What an Encouragement is here given to our Faith, in praying for our Children!
What an Obligation is here laid upon us, to give up our Children unto God in
Baptism, and then to bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord!
The more diligent and faithful we are in answering our Covenant Engagements,
the more Comfort shall we probably enjoy in our Children while they live, and
the more Hope shall we have in their Death, if it pleases God to take them
from us in their Childhood.

Let Children also be affected and moved to inquire after the God of their
Fathers, and to seek him early. Cry to him, My Father, Thou art the Guide of my
Youth. Offer up your first ripe Fruits unto God. Begin in the Morning of your
Days to serve him who is the Lord of all your Time. You are strongly obliged to
this, not only as God is your Creator, but also as you are his Children by a
Covenant Relation. When you were baptized, God's Name was called upon you, and
you were devoted to his Service. Do not then alienate yourselves from him; but
glorify him with your Souls and Bodies which are his. Prize this great
Privilege of being born under the Shadow of the Covenant; but take heed lest
you be carnally confident and secure. Know it, if your Lives are among the
Unclean, you shall be cast into outer Darkness, though you are the Children of
the (visible) Kingdom. Be earnest with God therefore to give you that invisible
Grace which is represented by Water in Baptism. This divine Ordinance teaches
you, That by Nature you are defiled, being shapen in Iniquity and conceived in
Sin. Seek to God then to wash you thoroughly from your Iniquity, and to cleanse
you from your Sin, by pouring out his holy Spirit upon you, and so applying the
Blood of Christ to your Souls. In a Word, labor to know the holy Scriptures
from your Childhood, learn your Catechism, pray to God, keep the Sabbath holy,
be dutiful to your Parents, fly the Sins of Pride, Idleness, Uncleanness,
Lying, Calling wicked Names, and all other youthful Lusts; and follow the
Things that are pure and lovely and of good Report.

Now, That you may be animated and encouraged to make haste to keep God's
Commandments, by the exemplary Instance of early Piety set before you in the
following Pages, I do in an especial Manner commend this little Book to your
attentive Reading, and you to the Blessing of that God who teaches us to
profit, beseeching him to fulfill that gracious Promise in you, Isa. 54.13. And
all thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the Peace of
thy Children.

Joseph Sewall.
Boston, August 20th 1719.
A Short NARRATIVE of the Life and Death of Elizabeth Butcher.
The I. SECTION. Containing a brief Account of her, from her Birth in July,
1709, to her first remarkable Illness in Sept. 1716.
1. ELIZABETH BUTCHER, Daughter to Alvin and Elizabeth Butcher of Boston, was
born July 14th 1709. Her Parents gave her up to God from the Womb, and as soon
as she was capable of speaking, they began to instruct her in the Things of God.

2. When she was about two Years and an Half old, as she lay in the Cradle, she
would ask herself that Question, 'What is my corrupt Nature?' and would make
Answer again to herself, 'It is empty of Grace, bent unto Sin, and only to Sin,
and that continually. 'She took great Delight in learning her Catechism, and
would not willingly go io Bed without saying some Part of it.

3. She being a weakly Child, her Mother carried her into the Country for her
Health: And when she was about three Years old, and at Meeting she would set
with her Eyes fixed on the Minister, to the Admiration of all that sat about
her, who said that grown up People might learn and take Example of her. She
took great Delight in Reading, and was ready and willing to receive Instruction.

4. But nothing more extraordinary as we remember appeared in her, till she
came to be about six Years old. Then she began to inquire concerning God, and
the Nature and Affairs of her Soul, and she said, she was afraid she had not
lived up to that End for which she was made. She was asked, What was the End
she was made for? The Child answered, -- To glorify God: But I am afraid I have
not lived to the Glory of God, as I should have done. She was told, That she
must pray to God, that he would be pleased to pardon her Sins, and give her
Grace to serve and glorify him.

5. She was not contented with the ba^e Reading of God's Word, but would
frequently ask the Meaning of it. And when she was at her Work, she would often
ask where such and such Places of Scripture were, and would mention the Words,
that she might be directed to find them.

6. It was her Practice to carry her Catechism or some other good Book to Bed
with her, and in the Morning she would be sitting up in her Bed reading before
any of the Family were awake besides her.

7. One Day as she was sitting by the Fire, she asked, -- Why our first Parents
eating the forbidden Fruit was counted Sin to them? At another Time she asked,
Who were meant by the wise and foolish Virgins? And what was meant by the Oil
in the Lamps? And as she was reading a Sermon of Dr. COTTON MATHER'S, she
asked, Who was meant by the goodly Cedar? And when she was told, she said, --
And who are meant by the Fowls that are but just fledged? She was told they
meant, little Children: and Christ called them to come to him. But, said she,
How can I, who am but a Child, go to Christ? Being informed, she said, -- But
will Christ accept of me? She was answered, Yes; and several Places of
Scripture were mentioned for her Encouragement.

The II. SECTION. Containing a short Account of her in her first Illness, from
Sept. 1716, to Feb. 1710, 17.
1. IN September, 1716, she was taken ill and in her Sickness (...) her self
with such wonderful Patience as that all that came near admired. She would
often put up that Request, Heavenly Father, Give me thy Christ, give me thy
Grace, and pardon all my Sins, for Jesus Christ's sake, Amen. Then she said,
What is Sanctification? And made Answer to herself, It is the Work of God's
free Grace. -- What are the Benefits which in this Life do accompany or flow
from Justification, Adoption, and Sanctification? They are, Assurance of God's
Love, Peace of Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost, Increase of Grace, and
Perseverance therein to the End.

2. Being asked, if she was willing to die, and go to Christ; she said Yes: But
Child you know you are a Sinner; she said, Yes: And you know where the Wicked
go when they die; she said, Yes, they are cast into Hell: And being asked if
she was not afraid of going thither; she said, No, For Christ is an
all-sufficient Savior, and he is able to save me, and I hope he will: Though I
have not yet seen Christ, yet I hope I shall see him.

3. A while after she said, I am weary of this World, and long to be gone: O
when shall I go, O when shall I go! Her Mother asked her, if she was willing to
leave her alone? She answered, Yes, For when you die, I hope you will go to
Heaven too.

4. She feeling an Alteration in herself, desired her Mother to send for Mr.
SEWALL, and when he came, he asked her how she did; she answered, Very weak: He
asked her if she was willing to die? She said, Yes: He said, Do you know that
you are a Sinner? She said, Yes: He asked her, if she had not heard that there
was another and a better World than this? She answered, Yes. He asked her
several other Questions, but they slipped my Memory. He was going to ask her one
Question, but said it was a great one to ask a Child, but however he would, and
said to her, Child, are you willing humbly to submit to the Will of God, either
for Life or Death? She said, Yes.

5. A while after she was weeping, and being asked the Reason, she said, I
though it I saw the Flames of Hell, and was going there, but I though it I saw Christ,
and he called me to come to him, and then I was not afraid; and I have cried to
God for Grace to serve him.

6. A while after she was taken with Convulsion Fits, and lay several Hours,
all Hopes of Recovery being taken away: But she reviving again, her Pain
returned with greater Violence: She prayed to God to take her away out of this
miserable World, and cried, -- O God, my God, If thou will please to take me
away, I will be willing to bear what Pain thou shall please to lay upon me: O
God, my dear God, I love thee dearly! And this she repeated several Times over.

7. Her Mother sitting by her weeping, the Child said, Dear Mother, you make me
have more Pain: Her Mother said, No, my dear Child, I don't: She said, Yes, you
cry, and that troubles me, and causes me to have more Pain.

8. Mr. SEWALL being sent for again, he said, Child, Is it not better to be in
Heaven with God and Christ, than to be here? She answered, Yes, Yes. He asked
her if he should pray to God that he would be pleased to take her to himself?
She made a quick Reply, doubling her Words, Yes, Yes. He asked her another
Question, but being in great Trouble, it slipped my Memory: But the Child made no
Answer to it, and only said, I am spent.

9. A few Hours after, her Pains abating again, the Fits returned with more
Violence than before, and held her for several Hours, and then left her. She
lay for some Days so senseless that she knew not those that came to see her.
But it pleased God to restore her again to her former Health: And before she
was able to sit up, she would call for her Book, and lay and read by the Hour
together.

The III. SECTION. Containing a brief Account of her, from her first remarkable
Illness in the Fall and Winter, 1716, to her second, in April, 1718.
1. SHE had by Course read almost through the Old Testament; but at other Times
her Delight was to read in the New, concerning the Birth of Christ, and his
Sufferings; and would ask the Meaning of what she read.

2. One Day as she sat by herself reading the 7th of the Revelations,
concerning the Number of them that were sealed; when she came to the 9th Verse,
she was overheard to weep 'till she came to the End of the Chapter.

3. One Morning as she lay in her Bed, she asked, What was meant by the
Fountain, and the House of David, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, in Zech.
13.1.

4. Hearing a Sermon from Luke 15. concerning the Prodigal Son; a few Days
after, she was saying the Text over to herself; she then asked, Who was meant
by the Father; and who by the Son?

5. She had begun to learn the Proofs of the Assemblies Catechism; and when she
came to that in, 1 John 5.7. She asked, If the Father was God, and if the Son
was God also, and if the Holy Ghost was God also? For it is said here, That
there are Three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy
Ghost, and these Three are One: And this seems as if there were Three Gods, and
yet three is but One. And she desired to be told something of this Mystery. She
was told, There was but one GOD, though there were Three Persons in the Godhead.
That Christ was the Eternal Son of God, and the same in Substance and equal
with the Father in Power and Glory, and was God. Then said the Child, Though
Christ be the Son of God, yet is He God also? Answer was made her, Yes: and the
Holy Ghost was the Spirit of God, and proceeded both from the Father and the
Son, and was the same in Substance with them both, and was equal in Power and
Glory. And a while after she asked. If Christ took upon him the Nature of a
Man? She was told that he did.

6. She rejoiced greatly when the Lord's Day came, especially if it were fair
Weather for her to go to the Public Worship of God. And when she came Home,
she would take a Book, and sit and read, till it was time to go to the
Afternoon Exercise, without the least sign of Weariness. And if she was
detained at Home on the Sabbath; she would not spend the Day in Idleness, but
in religious Employments.

7. It pleased God to exercise her with great Pain in every Part of her Body,
which did something impair the Natural Quickness and Strength of her Senses.
But between two or three Months before her Death, her Understanding was
brightned to admiration.

8. When the Spring came on, and mention was made of the Public Catechizing;
she Rejoiced greatly, and would be often speaking of its drawing near. One
Morning as she lay in her Bed she said; O that charming Duty, O that sweet Day
is coming: Being asked, what Day she meant? She answered, Catechizing Day, I
mean that sweet Day. A few Days after she said, I will not depend upon going to
Catechizing, for I believe I shall be prevented by some means or other. She was
told, If she was well and the Weather permitted, nothing else would hinder her.
Ah! said the Child, I am persuaded, I shall be prevented some way or other from
going. And according to the strong Impulse she had upon her Mind, it proved to
her: For she was taken Sick two or three Days before the Catechizing came,
which was in April 1718.

The IV. SECTION. Containing a more partiular Account of her in her second
Illness, from April 1718. to the June succeeding, when she Died.
1 WHEN She was first taken, she was in some doubt of her spiritual State, and
said, She was afraid she did not belong to God, nor love him as she should; for
Mother, you have told me, that they that fear God and love him, would make it
their chief Care and Endeavor to keep his Commandments; but I am afraid I have
not kept them as I ought. Her Mother asked her, what particular Command she
could accuse her self of breaking? She said, The Fifth Commandment says,
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, and have I honored you? have I obeyed you as
I ought? Her Mother told her; You have been an obedient Child to me, and
wherein you have offended in any small Matter, I do forgive you, and pray God
to forgive you also.

2. The Day following she cried out -- I am a great Sinner, a great Sinner,
what will become of me, Oh! what will become of me, I am afraid that God will
not have Mercy on me, my Sins are so many and so great. She was told, though her
Sins were never so many and great, yet the Mercy of God was greater, and more
abundant than her Sins; for that was like himself Infinite, and endures
forever, that there was Forgiveness with him; and that he had Promised, that
those who confess and forsake their Sins should Mercy. But said the Child,
Satan tempts me to Despair of Mercy, because my Sins are so great and many. But
she was then Exhorted not to give way to the Temptations of Satan, but to hope
in the Mercy of God; for the Lord takes Pleasure in them that Fear him, and in
them that hope in his Mercy. And she was told that he said in Isa. 55.7. Let
the Wicked forsake his Way and the unrighteous Man his thoughts: and let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have Mercy upon him, and to our God, for he
will abundantly Pardon.

3. A while after she said, behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my
Mother conceive me: I am a miserable and sinful Creature; Convinced I am of
Sin, but afraid not Converted; I am a poor Creature that has no sight of my
Interest in Christ; and without a Christ, without a Christ, I am undone for
ever; Oh for a Christ, Oh for a Christ, for a Christ to save me! And then she
prayed, and said --

4. Lord, have Mercy on me according to thy loving Kindness; according to the
Multitude of thy Tender Mercies blot out all my Trangressions with thine own
Blood: Wasn me thro'ly from mine Iniquities, and cleanse me from my Sins:
Create in me a clean Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me: O give
me a new Heart, a humble Heart, a broken Heart, and contrite Spirit: Oh
Sanctify me by thy Holy Spirit through out, in Soul, Spirit, and Body: Renew me
in the whole Man after thine own Image in Knowledge, Righteousness and true
Holiness: Oh give me a Christ, give me thy Grace, Pardon all my Sins: O Lord
take away all mine Iniquities, and receive me graciously, Circumcise my Heart
to fear thy Name, and lead me in the Way that is pleasing in thy Sight: Oh be
my God in Life, my Guide unto Death, and the unchangeble Portion of my Soul
forever: Fit and prepare me for all Changes, but especially for Death my great
and last Change: And this I beg for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake, AMEN.

5. In the time of her Health she was very careful of her Words, and no ill
Language was ever heard to proceed from her Lips. Yet now in her Sickness, she
examined her self what Sins she had been Guilty of, both in Words and Actions.
And taking a view of the Commandments, some of them she said she was afraid she
had been guilty of breaking, and did accuse her self of Disobedience. and
condemned her self for her Sins. And being in great Pain of Body; she said, Now
am I suffering the Desert of my Sins: Oh that I might have but a Moments case:
But I need not wonder that I have no case, for I deserve none: Have Mercy upon
me O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my Bones are sore vexed: Look
upon my Afflictions and my Pain, and forgive all my Sins.

6. Mr. Prince came in to see her: She desired him to Pray with her: He asked
her what he should Pray for? She answered That God would be pleased to Pardon
all her Sins, and give her an Interest in Christ.

7. A while after she cried out, O I am a poor Creature that wants Assurance:
Oh for Assurance, Oh for Assurance! Oh that God would be pleased to lift up the
Light of his Countenance upon me! O that he would be pleased to own me in his
Covenant, and Bless me. Her Mother seeing her in this Distress, asked her if
she should send for Mr. SEWALL to talk with him, and hear what he had to say to
her? The Child answered, Mr. SEWALL may give me Encouragement as you do, but
except God speaks to me too, all will signify nothing. Well Child, said her
Mother, wait upon God still, who will in his own Time, I hope, speak Peace to
thy Soul. Mr. SEWALL was sent for, but he was not at home.

8. She was told for her Encouragement, that she was a Lamb of Christ's Flock;
and that he had said, he would take the Lambs in his Arms, and carry them in
his Bosom; and suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for
of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; and you know that Promise in Prove. 8.17. I
Love them that Love me, and those that seek me early shall find me. The Child
answered, If the Lord will please to help me, I will seek him. She was told
that the Lord would help her, and was exhorted to trust in the Free Grace and
Mercy of God through Christ. Oh, said the Child; I am willing to accept of
Christ, but I am afraid Christ is not willing: Answer was made, that if she was
willing to accept of Christ, that to be sure Christ was willing to accept of
her: She answered, I am willing.

9. A while after she said, I will venture my Soul upon Christ, and if I
perish, Lord, it shall be at the Fountain of thy Mercy: For thou have promised,
that whosoever comes unto thee, thou will in no wise cast out. O Lord I desire
as I am able, to come unto thee, and I am sure thou will not cast me off. And
she was composed for some time: But Satan assaulted her again in setting her
Sins before her; and she cried out, Oh the Sin of my Nature, (unless my Soul be
sprinkled with the Blood of Christ,) is enough to undo me, were I guilty of no
other.

10. About a Month before her Death, on the Sabbath in the Afternoon, she said
to her Mother; Now I have a believing sight of Christ: Now Christ is mine and I
am his: Oh, how sweet is Christ: Oh he is sweet, he is sweet! and if you did
but taste and feel what I do, you would long to be gone. Then she said; Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly: Dear Jesus, sweet Jesus, come quickly. Then she said;
Lord Jesus give me Patience, give me Patience to wait thy Time, for thy Time is
the best Time: Lord Jesus give me Patience.

11. Her Mother sat weeping by her, and to comfort her, the Child said; Dear
Mother, though we part now, it will be but a little while before you will follow
and come to me: and that will be a happy meeting for us, to meet at the Right
Hand of Christ in the great Day. Then she thanked her Mother for the
Instructions and Corrections she had given her, and said had it not been for
them I might have gone to Hell; but it will not be long now before the blessed
Angels will come and carry my Soul to the Bosom of Christ; Oh I long to be
gone, I long to be gone to that Blessed Place: Sweet Jesus, come quickly.

12. A while after she said: My Pain is great which I undergo to go to Christ;
but not so great as the Pains Christ underwent for me: Oh I wonder I wonder
that Christ should be so willing to die for me who am so great a Sinner.

13. Mr. SEWALL was sent for again; but before he came, the Child was spent
with extreme Pain and much speaking, that she was not able to say any thing to
him. In the Night she asked the Young Woman that watched with her, to read the
25th of Matthew to her.

14. One Morning she asked; where is that Place of Scripture? Eat O Friends,
drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved. The Glass standing on the Table, she
asked to have it turned, and said; my Glass is almost run, my Work is almost
ended.

15. On Thursday was three Weeks before her Death, her Mother seeing an
Alteration in her, said, my Child is struck with Death. Upon which she replied,
Is Death come and am I prepared, am I prepared? She lay still for some time,
and then said; O Death where is thy Sting; O Grave where is thy Victory, and
what will thou gain by this thing!

16. There was a Person she had a peculiar Respect for, and desired her Mother
when she had opportunity, to speak to her; for she was afraid she did not
consider her Soul and Eternity.

17. The Lord's Day following she said over the 23d Psalm, and when she had
concluded it, her Mother asked her; if she was not afraid to pass through the
dark Valley of the shadow of Death? she answered; No, for God has promised
that he will never leave me nor forsake me, neither will he suffer me to leave
or forsake him.

18. She lying in great Pain Day and Night, would often say, Lord Jesus give me
Patience, give me Patience, that I may not dishonor God. She said, Oh if I
should be deceived at last, and deceive others, and they think I am Good, how
miserable shall I be forever?

19. Her Aunt Stone being present, and the Child being in great Pain, and
complaining of those about her, for refusing to do something for her which she
found relieved her, but they were fearful of overdoing, she said, -- They do
not pity me, but I hope Christ pities me, and will prepare a Place for me. A
little while after, being restless with her Pains, she checked her self saying,
-- Why do I complain? Christ endured more than this for me: I wonder how he did
to bear it. And a little while after hearing it Thunder; she said, it Thunders,
I am afraid God will kill me with it; but whether he kills me with that, or
with this Pain, if I may but go to Christ, it will be well.

20. The Tuesday following Mr. SEWALL came to see her, and after some
Discourse, he asked he on what she depended for Salvation? She replied, on
Christ and the Promises. He said, well Child hold fast thy Faith, and still
trust in Christ. Then she said; Oh I long to be gone to that blessed Place. He
asked what blessed Place? She not readily answering, he said; do you mean
Heaven? She said, Yes: And when he was going away, desired him to remember her
in his Prayers: And asked him when he would please to come again to see her?

21. Two Persons being in the Room, they said to one another; this Child has
been a Child affliction all its Days. The Child replied; and it is for my Good.

22. She had another Combat with Satan and said, He would persuade her that
Christ was withdrawn from her: And she cried out, Oh what shall I do, Oh what
shall I do? I am undone! She said, O Lord, cast me not out of thy sight; cast
me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me: Restore
unto me the Joy of thy Salvation, and uphold me with thy free Spirit; never
leave me nor forsake me: But guide me by thy Counsel while here, and afterward
receive me to thine heavenly Kingdom: And this I ask for thy Son Jesus Christ's
sake; and in Testimony of my desire and Assurance to be heard, I say, AMEN.

23. She was comforted again in the Night: And the Watcher sitting by her Bed
side, about Midnight, heard her say, Yonder, Yonder, up above,
Sits my Savior, clothed in Love,
And there is my smiling God.


24. She said, she had something to say to Mr. SEWALL the next time he came to
see her: And being asked, what it was, she said, she would thank him for the
many Prayers he put up for her, for God had heard and answered them.

25. At another time she said concerning Christ; Why is his Chariot so long a
coming? Why stay so long the Wheels of his Chariot? For me to stay is Pain; but
to Die is Gain.

26. Mr. PRINCE coming to see her the Monday before her Death, she desired him
to Pray with her, he said well, and what shall we Pray for now? She replied,
that I may have a saving Knowledge of Christ, that God would please to Pardon
all my Sins, and prepare me for Death my great and last Change.

27. The Day following, her Pains abated, and she seemed to be better for 2 or
3 Days, and no one perceived her to draw near her Change, till a few Minutes
before she was taken Speechless, the Child said, something choked her: Her
Mother felt of her Hands, and finding them in a cold Sweat, and her Countenance
alter, she said my Child is a going: Ah Mother, said the Child, so must you as
well as I. She said something more; but her Speech and Spirits failing, we
could not understand her.

She breathed her Soul into the Arms of Christ on Friday, the 13th of June,
1718. Being 8 Years and just 11 Months old.

HAPPY the Parents, and the Pastors be,
Bringing thy Little Ones, Great GOD, to thee!
How pleasant it is to see them safe from harms,
Loved and Embraced, in CHRIST'S Outstretched Arms!
That this Great KING many Mansions fitly fill,
He Lists for Church Triumphant, whom he will.
FINIS.
Advertisement. Just Published,
THE First Part of the Rev. Mr. W^^^field's JOURNAL from London to Gibraltar.
With what induced him to leave his Native Country, and travel into Foreign
Parts.

Also,

A Continuation of the Frst Volume of the Rev. Mr. Whitefield's JOURNAL, from
Gibraltar to Georgia.

As also,

CHRIST (...) the Clouds coming to Judgment. By the Rev. Dr. BATES.

Sold by Charles Harrison, over against the Brazen Head in Cornhill.

N. B. At the abovesaid Place may be had Bibles, Common-Pray-(...) etc. and a
Sortment of pleasant Histories: As also Books neatly bound, Gilt on the Back or
Lettered, with other Plain Binding all at a reasonable Price.


