Mr. McGregory's SERMON ON THE Trial of the SPIRITS.

THE Spirits of the present Day Tried.

A SERMON At the Tuesday Evening-Lecture in Brattle-street, BOSTON, Nov. 3.
1741.

By the Reverend Mr. John McGregory, Of Londonderry in New England.

With a PREFACE by some Ministers of Boston.

I. These. v. 21. Prove all Things: hold fast that which is Good.

BOSTON, Printed by D. FOUL for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhill. 1742.

CORRECTIONS.
Page. Line. Read 14 24 Colt 17 5 had no soone^ 18 5 Persons 23 17 monstrous 25
24 Sorts

The PREFACE.
AS all the Protestant Churches in Europe, both Episcopalian and Presbyterian
most happily agreed at the* Time of the Reformation in the Scripture Doctrines
of Grace, as appears by the Harmony of their Confessions published; in
particular, the Church of Scotland in 1560, the Church of England in 1562, 3,
and the Church of Ireland in 1616; so it must be owned that the Presbyterians
have generally persevered in a steady Adherence to the Original Doctrines of
the Reformation, to the present Day.

And as the Assembly's shorter Catechism has been all along agreeable to the
known Principles of the New England Churches, and has been generally received
and taught in them as a System of Christian Doctrine agreeable to the HOLY
SCRIPTURES, wherein they happily unite; It is a great Pleasure to us that our
Presbyterian Brethren who come from Ireland are generally with us in these
important Points, as also in the particular Doctrines of experimental Piety
arising from them, and the wondrous Work of GOD agreeable to them at this Day
making its triumphant Progress through the Land: all now happily combining to
illustrate and confirm each other in so glaring and strong a Manner as is
irresistible to serious and unprejudiced Beholders; and has already forced many
Men of clear Minds, strong Powers, considerable Knowledge, and firmly riveted
in the Arminian and Socinian Tenets, to give them all up at once and yield to
the adorable Sovereignty and Irresistibility of the DIVINE SPIRIT in his saving
Operations on the Souls of Men.

For to see on the one Hand such Men as these, some of them of licentious
Lives, long inured in a Course of Vices, and of high Spirits, coming to the
Preaching of the Word, some only out of Curiosity, others with a strong
Antipathy and mere Design to get Matter of Cavilling and Banter; all at once in
Opposition to their inward Enmity, Resolutions, and Resistances, to fall under
an unexpected and hated Power; to have all the Strength of their Resolution and
Resistance taken away; to have such an inward View of the horrid Wickedness not
only of their Lives, but also of their Hearts, with their exceeding great and
immediate Danger of eternal Misery, as has amazed their Souls and thrown them
into Distress unutterable, yea forced them to cry out in the Assemblies with
the greatest Agonies: and then in two or three Days and sometimes sooner, to
have such unexpected and raised Views of the infinite Grace and Love of GOD in
CHRIST, as have enabled them to believe in Him, lifted them at once out of
their Distresses, filled their Hearts with Admiration and Joy unspeakable and
full of Glory, breaking forth in their shining Countenance and transporting
Voices to the Surprise of those about them: And to see them kindling up at once
into a Flame of Love and Praise GOD, an utter Detestation of their former
Courses and vicious Habits, yea by such a Detestation the very Power of those
Habits at once receive a mortal Wound. In short to see their high Spirits on a
sudden humbled, their hard Hearts made tender, their Aversion from the Holy GOD
now turned into a powerful and prevailing Bent to contemplate upon Him as
revealed in CHRIST, to labor to be like Him in Holiness, to please and honor
Him by a universal and glad Conformity to his Will and Nature, and to promote
his holy Kingdom in all about them; loving them, forgiving them, asking
Forgiveness of them, abounding in Acts of Justice, Charity, in a meek and
condescending Carriage toward them meanest, and aspiring after higher Sanctity
--

And to see other Gentlemen of the like Knowledge, Parts and Principles, and of
sober, just and religious Lives, as far as their mere Reason with outward
Revelation are able to carry them, and prepossessed against this Work as
imagined Enthusiasm; yet at once surprizingly to find themselves entirely
destitute of that inward Sanctity and supreme Love to GOD and Holiness which
the Gospel teaches as absolutely needful to see the Kingdom of Grace and Glory;
to find themselves no more than conceited Pharisees, who had been working out a
Righteousness of their own for Justification; and to have a clear Discovery of
their inward Enmity to CHRIST and the Nature and Way of Redemption by Him, with
the native Vileness of their Hearts and Lives they had never seen before: In
short to find themselves yet unrenewed in the Spirit of their Minds, and under
the heavy Wrath and Curse of GOD; to open into the clear Discovery of their
past Delusions; to find the Hardness of their Hearts, the Blindness of their
Minds, their utter Impotence to convert themselves or believe in CHRIST; to
loose all their former Confidence, give up their beloved Schemes, see
themselves undone and helpless, and sink into great Distress: and then
condemning themselves as guilty Wretches humbly lying at the Foot of absolute
and sovereign Grace, and looking up to CHRIST the only Mediator to reconcile
them to the glorious GOD, to justify them wholly by his own most perfect
Righteousness, and to enlighten, quicken, sanctify, dwell in and govern them by
his ALMIGHTY SPIRIT; and there to wait till they find a new and mighty Life and
Power come into their Souls, enabling them to embrace, trust in and love this
divine REDEEMER, rejoice with Satisfaction in Him, and perform every Kind of
Duty both to GOD and Man with Pleasure and with quite another Frame and Spirit
than before --

Such great and sudden Turns as these are as evident Demonstrations as we can
possibly conceive of the Truth of the inspired Scriptures, and in particular of
those Scripture Doctrines of the sovereign and victorious Grace of CHRIST,
received and taught among us: We see with our Eyes, that when He rides forth
on the Word of Truth conquering and to conquer, his right Hand teaches Terrible
Things, He makes his Arrows so sharp and piercing in the Hearts of his stoutest
Enemies, as oblige them to fall down under Him; and when the Day of his Power
comes on any People. He makes the most obstinate to be most gladly willing and
obedient to Him: And these Principles of Grace, and these Works of GOD do most
invincibly confirm each other.

And though it must be owned with Sorrow that some few who see these wondrous
Works continue unconvinced; yet this is no more strange than that some of the
most learned and religious Men, as were the Scribes and Pharisees who saw the
wondrous Works of CHRIST on Earth, yet continued unconvinced that they were the
Works of GOD, yea pursued Him with unrelenting Enmity and Violence. However,
it is a reviving Consolation to us, that as this Work surprizingly goes on from
Town to Town, it goes on more and more to silence the most fierce Opposers:
Though mighty Oppositions rise at first, it bares them down before it; and our
more mighty SAVIOR seems resolved to go on still from conquering to conquer.

In vain do its remaining Enemies attempt to brand it with the Name --
Enthusiasm. For this is like the gentile Romans branding the Jewish Religion
with the hated Name of Superstition: and if this Work is truly Enthusiasm, then
we have been wholly mistaken in the Meaning of the Word: and what they call
Enthusiasm is a Glorious and Blessed Work of GOD, most powerfully and suddenly
changing the very Hearts and Lives of Men; making them in a great Degree like
to CHRIST in Love and Righteousness and Holiness and Meekness and Humility;
filling their Hearts with holy Joy and their Mouths with Praises.

But we must remit the remaining Opposers to the Law and Testimony of GOD
Himself in the inspired Oracles; as our Rev. and Dear Brother the Author of the
following valuable Sermon does. And we are glad on this Occasion to join our
Testimony with him, both to the same Doctrines of Grace and to the wondrous
Works of GOD agreeable to them: as also to declare our great Satisfaction to see
him and others of our said Presbyterian Brethren concurring with us in them:
with our Apprehension that our uniting in these important Points, is such a
powerful Band of Union in Christian Love and Fellowship as should overcome the
Remains of every Kind of Prejudice that may yet subsist among our People: and
our earnest Wishes that with a tender and meek Forbearance of each other in
different Sentiments about Church Order and Government, we may all unite in
maintaining and promoting these more excellent and momentous Points of Grace
and vital Piety.

Boston, Jan. 12. 1741, 2. THOMAS PRINCE JOHN WEBB WILLIAM COOPE


I. JOHN IV. I. Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether
they be of God: because many false Prophets are gone out into the World.


WE read Rev. 12.12. That the Devil came down among the Inhabitants of the
Earth having great Wrath because he knew his Time was short. When the strong
Man armed keeps his Palace, all his Goods are in Peace: every Thing is then
as he would have it to be* his Subjects go sleeping on to Hell, and imagine
themselves all the while in the direct Way to Heaven. But on the other Hand,
when he perceives that his Policies begin to be detected, the Eyes of his
Slaves to be opened to see their Misery and their Need of the Remedy, and that
by this Means his Kingdom appears to be going to Wreck; when he sees the
Standard of the great Messiah erected and the Gathering of the People about it;
when he sees them flock thereto as a Cloud and as the Doves to their Windows;
that Men are daily deserting his Government by Hundreds and Thousands, and
going over to Christ the great Deliverer: When (I say) he beholds Things having
such an Appearance, he then thinks it is high Time for him to bestir himself,
and if possible to support his tottering Empire. To this End he convocates the
black Divan, takes Counsel how he may mar God's Work most effectually: and in
Pursuance of this Counsel he finds it sometimes necessary to transform himself
into an Angel of Light, and to send forth his Ministers; who though inward they
are ravening Wolves, yet they come in Sheeps Clothing: and partly by hellish
Lies, partly by aggravating some real Indiscretions, partly by false Parallels,
perverting some Texts of Scripture, and misapplying others; they put some of
the weaker even of God's own Children to a Stand to that Degree that they know
not for some Time what to say: So that they would deceive (were it possible)
the very Elect.

Thus it is in this glorious Day of Gospel Grace. As the good Spirit appears to
be striving in a remarkable Manner; So Satan and his Instruments, we have
Reason to think, are very industrious: Yea so cunningly does this insiduous
Adversary manage, that he sometimes gets good Men engaged upon his Side. We
have great Reason to fear that it is now a Time in various Places in which
there is Ground for the repeating of God's Complaint by his Prophet Hos. 4.6.
My People are destroyed for lack of Knowledge; that those who lead them cause
them to err: and that by this Means God's Name continually every Day is
blasphemed. But blessed be God, that we have our Bibles. So that if it should
happen at any Time that those whose Lips ought to preserve Knowledge, should
themselves turn aside from the Ways of God either in Doctrine or Morals; that
in this Case we are not obliged to follow them implicity, but that we have a
sure Word of Prophesy even the Law and Testimony for our Rule, and also the
Promise that if we ask the Holy Spirit we shall receive him. In sum, we have
great Reason to be thankful that our God has given us Liberty and put us in a
Capacity of judging for our selves. That I may therefore have an Opportunity of
showing the Necessity and Importance of using this our Christian Liberty aright
in trying the Spirits whether they be of God; I have chosen to speak from the
above Text as the Ground of the following Discourse: where the Apostle says,
Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God:
etc.

It may not perhaps be amiss to observe briefly, that the Penman of this
Epistle was the Evangelist and beloved Disciple John: the particular Time when
he wrote it is uncertain: the Persons to whom he wrote it are said to be Jews:
not those that dwelt in Judea, but those who lived in the Eastern Part of Asia,
viz. in the Empire of Parthia. -- The Scope of the Apostle in this Epistle is,
partly to prove, that JESUS of Nazareth is the true MESSIAH; not only to induce
Men steadfastly to believe this great Fundamental, but to impress the Truth of
it upon their Souls in a more deep, lively and practical Manner; partly to
reduce the Licentious, to raise the spiritually Dead, and quicken all to a more
strict, lively and vigorous Christianity; and partly to excite Christians to
the Duty of mutual Love, which seems to have been this beloved Disciple's
favorite Subject.

More particularly in the Words we have (1.) A Caution. (2.) A Duty enjoined.
(3.) A Motive to the Performance of said Duty.
(1.) A Caution in these Words, Beloved, believe not every Spirit. The Term
Spirit is here by a Figure put for the Person who is acted by a Spirit whether
good or bad. It Is q. d. believe not every Person pretending to Inspiration, or
to be the Messenger of God: Don't be so credulous and implicit as to suffer
your selves to be imposed upon by every one who says he has a Commission from
Heaven. -- The (2.) Thing in the Words in a Duty enjoined in these, Words, T^^
the Spirits, q. d. Christ your gracious Master has forbidden you to be the
Servants of Men, or to pin your Faith upon any Man's Sleeve: you are therefore
to be Followers of no Man farther than he is of Christ: Nay your Master has not
only allowed you to judge for your selves, but he has put you in a Capacity so
to do: to this end he has made you reasonable Creatures, and given you his Word
in your native Language: Imitate the Bereans therefore: search the Scriptures
daily with all Readiness of Mind, to see if the Things that are spoken be so.
-- But then the (3.) Thing in the Words is a Motive to the Performance of the
Duty enjoined in the Words, because many false Prophets are gone out into the
World. q. d.
You ought to be very careful in trying the Spirits, inasmuch (...) these last
Times are perilous Times, the World is full of Deceivers: take Heed therefore
and beware of these false Teachers: remember that it is not all Gold that
glitters; that Satan himself is often transformed into an Angel of Light; that
many pretend to come in God's Name with a thus says the Lord in their Mouths,
whom he has not sent, Jer. 29.8, 9. Has not your Master warned you that false
Christ's and false Prophets shall arise, and shall show great Signs and Wonders,
to deceive (were it possible) the very Elect: You had great Need then to be
cautiously upon your Guard.

The Method I design in the prosecuting this Subject shall be to speak somewhat
to each of these following Heads.

I. First, I shall briefly show that there have always been false Prophets or
Teachers in the World, who have pretended to Inspiration. II. Secondly, That
God has graciously been pleased to give his Church a certain and invariable
Rule, by which they may distinguish between the Spirit of Truth and the Spirit
of Error. III. Thirdly, That it is highly necessary, that Christians make good
Use of this Rule, in trying the Spirits and judging for themselves. IV.
Fourthly, I shall endeavor to try the Spirits which have been the instrumental
Cause of that religious Commotion in various Parts of this Continent and
elsewhere, to see if they be of God. -- And Lastly, I shall conclude with some
brief Application of the Subject.
I. I begin with the first of these Heads in Order, viz. to show that there
have been always false Prophets or Teachers in the World, who have pretended to
Inspiration or divine Revelation. -- That this is a Truth any Person who is
acquainted with sacred and profane History will readily grant. If we look into
sacred History during the Old Testament Period we shall find a Multitude of the
Devil's Ministers, all pretending to divine Inspiration. I might show a great
many particular Instances. We have God warning his People, Deuteronomy. 13.12. of
false Teachers who should endeavor cunningly to draw them aside from the
Worship of the true God to that of Idols. Thus we read 2 Timothy 3.8. that there
was a Jannes and a Jambres in the Court of Pharaoh who withstood Moses, and who
by Sorcery and the Help of the Devil thought to do as great Miracles as Moses
did by the infinite Power of God. -- And thus Balaam, notwithstanding his high
Pretenses to divine Revelation and also to the most inflexible Integrity; yet
was one who dealt with the Devil in hellish Spells and Enchantments, and also a
Person then if we come down to the Days of Elisha, we find the Prophets of
Baall were very numerous, and also exceeding zealous in their Way, in so much
that they leaped upon the Alter and cut themselves with Knives and Lancers till
the Blood gushed out. -- And thus we read that there was a Zedekiah to oppose
Micaiah the true Prophet of the Lord, and to persuade Ahab to go to Ramoth
Gilead to his own Ruin. -- Thus there were lying Prophets, in the Days of
Jeremiah, who persuaded Zedekiah and his People that Jerusalem should not fall
into the Hands of the Chaldeans; and by this Means led that poor unhappy Prince
and his People to their Ruin, by hindering them to make that seasonable
Capitulation which might have prevented it.

And then if we turn our Eye from the sacred History of the Old Testament to
the profane Histories that are co-incident with and after that Period, we
shall find innumerable Cheats and Impostors of this Sort. He must needs be a
Stranger to or at least superficially acquainted with the Grecians, the Romans
and other Pagan Histories, who has not heard of the famous Sibylline Oracles,
of the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos, that of Diana at Ephesus, as likewise that
of Jupiter Hamon in Libia, with many others: the respective Priests of which
all pretended to be inspired by their Gods when they gave forth the oracular
Answers: -- Who has not heard of the two famous Impostors viz. Zoroastres in
Persia and Mahomet in Arabia.

And then if we take a View of the New Testament Period, and the Time that has
since ensued, we shall find that no sooner did the Light of the Gospel shine
out and the glorious Sun of Righteousness irradiate the World with his
illuminating and chearing Beams, but the Prince of Darkness endeavored to
obscure it. -- Were there not those even in the Days of the Apostles who erred
in the great Doctrine of Justification, who were for mixing the Deeds of the
Law along with Faith, and who taught that we are justified partly by Faith and
partly by Works? whose pernicious Tenets the Apostle Paul refutes in a solid
and elaborate Manner in his Epistles to the Romans and Galatians. -- Were there
not those who quarreled with and impugn'd the high and sovereign Doctrine of
Predestination, whose Cavils the Apostle answers in the ninth Chapter to the
Romans. Thus the Apostle Peter tells us of unlearned and unstable men who
wrested Scriptures to their own Destruction. Do we not read of ungodly Men who
turned the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ into Lasciviousness; who under
Pretense of exalting free Grace, unloos'd the Reins on the Neck of their
impetuous Lusts saying, Let us continue in Sin that Grace may abound? Were
there not an Himeneus and Philetes, who denied the Resurrection, and overthrew
the Faith? Was there not an Ebion who denied the Divinity of Christ, and who
taught the Obligation of the ceremonial Law under the Gospel? A Cerinthus who
taught that Christ should at his Coming give to his People all carnal or
sensual Delights, and who denied the whole Scripture, Matthew's Gospel
excepted: -- What vile Principles did the Gnostics hold? What abominable
Practices were they guilty of? and yet what high Pretenses to Revelation did
they make?

If we come further down and look into the Legends of the Church of Rome; how
many rediculous Stories, how many counterfeit Miracles, and lying Wonders have
we there? And then if we descend still further down and come to the Time of the
Reformation, we shall find that no sooner did that blessed Day of Gospel Light
break forth upon the World, but the Devil endeavored to obscure it. How many
extravagant Sects, how many heretical Opinions showed themselves in the Days of
the true Reformers? the respective Patrons of which all pretended to be zealous
Protestants, and to make a loud Cry against the Church of Rome? He who will be
at Pains to read the History of the German Anabaptists, the gross Errors and
rediculous Extravagancies they run into; as also that of some of the Sectaries
in South-Britain in the last Century; as likewise the Rise and Progress of the
subtle Error of Arminius; cannot but grant the Point.

Thus from what has been briefly said upon this Head, it plainly appears that
there have been always false Teachers in the World who have pretended to
Inspiration, as far as we have any History to inform us. And it is very
probable it will be so as long as the Devil has a Kingdom in the World. -- But
what I pray do the Adversaries of the present religious Commotion gain by the
proving of this Point, except they can likewise prove that the Promoters of the
present Work hold the same pernicious Principles, or as bad as those ancient
Heretics did; or that they are guilty of the same wicked Practices that those
were? Does it indeed follow as a just Consequence that because Arius, Socinus,
Pelagius, Arminius, etc. were Heretics and falfe Teachers; that therefore
Messieurs the Erskines in Scotland and their Adherents there, Messieurs the
Tennents in Pensylvania and their Adherents there, Dr. Edwards and Mr.
Whitefield in the Church of England and their Adherents there, are also
Heretics and false Teachers; especially considering that they oppose those
ancient Heretics, and in opposition to them do maintain the Doctrines of the
39 Articles of the Church of England, and those of the Westminster Confession
of Faith? He who can make a just Consequence of this, may reconcile Light and
Darkness, and prove that bitter and sweet are the same Things.

II. I proceed to the second Thing, viz. to show that God has been graciously
pleased to give his Church a complete and invariable Rule, by which they may
distinguish between the Spirit of Truth and the Spirit of Error. I need not
dwell long on this Head. It Is only necessary to observe briefly, that the HOLY
SCRIPTURES contained in the several Books of the Old and New Testament is this
Rule. I presume you all hold at least by Profession; that the Scripture is the
Word (...) God, and consequently the great Rule of Faith and practice. I shall
not therefore at present stay upon the proof of that which is granted upon all
Hands. And he who grants this. viz. that the Scripture is the only Rule, will
be obliged to admit of particular Texts taken out of Scripture to prove that it
is a complete Rule. And of these there are Abundance: see Psalm. 19.8. The Law
of the Lord is perfect converting the Soul, etc. Thus, Mic. 6.8. He has showed
thee, O Man what is good, etc. To the same Purpose is 2 Timothy 3.16. All
Scripture is given by Inspiration of God; and is profitable for Doctrine for
Reproof, for Correction, and Instruction in Righteousness; that the Man of God
may be perfect, etc. -- And it is a Mercy for which we cannot be too thankful,
that we have this Rule, and are not obliged to receive as Doctrines the
Commandments of Men: Who had they the leading of our Judgments and Consciences,
would soon (we have Reason to fear) bring us to burlesque all serious
Godliness, and to ridicule the Operations of the blessed Spirit under the
Notion of Enthusiasm and fanciful Delusions.

When I say the Scripture is a complete Rule, and that God has thereby put his
People into a Capacity to distinguish between the Spirit of Truth and the
Spirit of Error; I would by no Means be understood to exclude the Necessity of
the Spirit's Teachings. CHRIST, as a Prophet, teaches by his SPIRIT, as well as
by his Word: yea and the Teaching of the SPIRIT is absolutely necessary in
Order to the saving and practical Understanding of the Word. A Person indeed
may possibly attain a sound and right doctrinal Knowledge without the Spirit,
so as to approve of the Things that are excellent, being instructed out of the
Law, Romans 2.18. and by this Means may be so far Judge of Doctrine, as to try
the Spirits aright. But a saving practical Knowledge he cannot attain without
the Teaching of the Spirit: nor does this any Way derogate from the
Compleatness and Perfection of the Rule: it is not owing to any Defect in the
Sun, that a blind Eye cannot see the Light.

III. I pass to the Third Thing in the Method; viz. to show that it is highly
necessary that Christians make good Use of the Rule that God has given them, in
trying the Spirits and judging for themselves.

That this is a Truth, is plain from the Words of my Text: Try the Spirits,
etc. To (...) purpose we have the Injunction 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all Things,
hold fast that which is good. Thus Phil. 1.9, 10. The Apostle prays on the
Behalf of that Church, that their Love may grow more and more in Knowledge and
in all Judgment, that they may approve the Things that are excellent. And thus
Heb. 5.13, 14. The Apostle speaks of grown or experienced Christians, who he
says have their Senses exercised to discern both Good and Evil. The Apostle
desires the Corinthians to be Followers of him no further than he was of
CHRIST, 1 Cor. 11.1. which plainly shows that they has a Right to try him, and
his Doctrines, by the Rule. Thus we have the Bereans commended, and the Epithet
of Noble given them, for their assiduous Care in searching the Scripture to see
if the Things spoken even by the Apostles were so. Acts 17.11. And it is spoken
to the just Praise of the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.2. That she had tried those
who said they were Apostles, and had found them to be Liars. With which agrees
our Lord's Injunction to the Disciples, Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures.

In Sum, God has graciously allowed Christians, as a Part of their Christian
Liberty, a Judgment of Discretion: And this it is their Duty to hold fast,
making good Use of the Powers that God has endowed them withal as reasonable
Creatures, in trying the Spirits by the Rule of God's Word: bringing all
private Spirits and all particular Doctrines to this great infallible Standard,
this Platform of Faith and Manners; as they agree or disagree with it,
receiving or rejecting them. Isa. 8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if
they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no Light in them.

IV. I come now to the fourth and last Thing proposed in the doctrinal Part,
which was to try the Spirits which have been the instrumental Cause of that
religious Commotion in various Parts of this Continent and elsewhere, to see if
they be of God. -- As this (in the present Conjuncture) (...) the most material
Head, I shall endeavor to be somewhat larger upon it: And that I may proceed
the more distinctly I shall essay to try (1.) the Spirit of the Promoters, (2.)
of the Opposers of the present Work: and then let every one judge for himself
and (...) which appears to be most of God. But ere I proceed I would beg Leave
to premise a few Things; 1. I premise that it is very unjust to charge any
Party in general with the erroneous Opinions or imprudent Conduct of one or
more particular Persons who have declared themselves to be of the Party:
Especially if said Party be so far from approving of or countenancing said
Opinions and Conduct, that they declare against them, and take due Care as far
as Circumstances will allow, to deal with the Person or Persons in Order to his
or their Reformation. -- As for Example, I appeal to the unprejudiced; Would it
have been just to have charged Christianity in general with the Errors of Ebion
and Cerinthus, the Gnostics, or any other of the ancient Heretics? To have
charged the Reformation with the Errors and ridiculous Extravagances of the
German-Anabaptists? Or the Church of England with those of Wiston? Would it
have been just in a common Enemy of Christianity to charge Paul with the
Dissimulation of Peter, when he withstood him to the Face in that wherein he
was to be blamed? And in like Manner would it be just to charge Mr. Whitefield
with the Errors of Mr. Wesley? Thus in Case any of the professed Promoters of
the present Work in the Land should run into any Errors, or be guilty of any
extravagant Conduct; would it be just to make this a Matter of Reproach to the
whole Work? 2. I would premise that if a Minister or a private Christian should
drop a Expression which not being so well cautioned as it ought to be, is by
reason of its Ambiguity capable of being explained in an unsound Sense: that
even in this Case it is most unjust and uncharitable to explain it in such a
Sense: granting we have sufficient Means of knowing that this Sense is contrary
to the Person's settled Opinion. 3. I would premise that granting we know that
a Person has readily been in an Error in Judgment for some Time; yet if we know
that he has retracted said Error, it is most disingenuous to speak of him as if
he still retained it, and to endeavor to make the World believe that it is
still his Opinion. As for Instance, would it not have been highly injurious to
have charged Augustine with any of this former Errors after he had written his
Book of Retractions?


These few Particulars being premised which I think cannot but be granted; I
proceed as I proposed to try the Spirits.

[I.] Of the Promoters of this present Work. And in the doing of this I shall
essay to try them. (1.) With Respect to their Doctrine. (2.) With Respect to
their Manner of Life. (3.) With Respect to their Labors. And (4.) With Respect
to the Effects their Labors have produced.


I. I shall essay to try them with Respect to their Doctrine. This is one
excellent Mark by which Christians may distinguish between true and false
Teachers: and therefore we have it prescribed as a Rule by which we may discern
between the Spirit of CHRIST and the Spirit of Antichrist, in the Context. Let
a Person be seemingly never so sober and blameless in his Walk, let him make
never so high Pretenses to Inspiration or divine Revelation; yet if he bring
any Doctrine contrary to Godliness, or which is subversive of the genuine
Doctrines of the Gospel, we are not to believe that the Spirit by which he is
acted is of God. Yea although he should show a Sign or a Wonder, and they should
come to pass; yet ought we not to believe him: because thereby the Lord our God
does try us, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. We are not so much as to receive him into our
Houses, neither to bid him God Speed: But though he appeared like an Angel, we
are to hold him accursed, 2 John 10. ver. Gal. 1.8. -- Now the Doctrines which
the Promoters of this Work teach, are the Doctrines of the Gospel, the
Doctrines of the Apostle's Creed, of the 39 Articles of the Church of England,
and of the Westminster Consession of Faith. To these they often appeal for the
Truth of what they preach. -- More particularly these Men are careful to teach
and inculcate the great Doctrine of Original Sin, in Opposition to Pelagius,
Arminius, and their respective Followers. That this Sin has actually descended
from Adam, the natural and federal Head, to all his Posterity proceeding from
him by ordinary Generation; that hereby the Understanding is darkened, the Will
depraved, and the Affections under the Influence of a wrong Biass, to that
Degree that they are utterly indisposed to any Thing that is spiritually good;
that Man, as a sad Consequence of the Fall, had lost all Power in Things
spiritual. This Doctrine they insist upon, in Order to humble the Pride of Man,
to drive him out of himself, and convince him of his own Emptiness? -- They
teach likewise with due Care the Doctrine of the Imputation of the
Righteousness of the second Adam, viz. JESUS CHRIST, God equal and of the same
Substance with the Father, in Order to atone for the Guilt and Cleanse from the
Pollution of that Sin descended upon fallen Man from the first Adam; that he
must be made to Sinners Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption;
and that he is the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. As also that this
Righteousness is apprehended and applied by Faith alone, without the Deeds of
the Law; that all Works are and consequently all boasting is excluded; that
though Works have no Part in our Justification, yet the Faith which justifies
the Soul is lively and operative; that which justifies it self in the Sight of
the World by Works, which purifies the Soul from the Pollution of Sin, and
influences the Person who has it to bring forth the Fruits of new Obedience.
They teach likewise that this Faith is the Gift of God; that a Man cannot
believe by any inherent Power of his own; and that yet notwithstanding Faith
being our Act and a commanded Duty, we are to endeavor to believe; and with a
due Sense of our own Insufficiency and a humble Dependence upon GOD for
Strength, we are to strive to exert the vital Act. -- As to Conversion or
Regeneration, they hold this to be absolutely necessary; that the Tree must be
made good, before the Fruit be so; that except a Man undergo a supernatural
Change by the Operation of the Holy Ghost upon his Soul, or be born of Water
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And in as much as
they find that Man in his natural State is full of Self-Conceit, that in his
own Opinion he is rich and increased in Goods and stands in need of Nothing, or
as Job expresses it, That vain Man would be wise, though he be born like the
wild Asses Cold; they therefore in their Preaching make Use of the Terrors of
the Law: they use the Law, as God has appointed it to be used, viz. in a
Subserviency to the Gospel, or as a Schoolmaster to bring Men to Christ, Gal.
3.24. But to say that the Law is the only Topic on which they constantly
insist, endeavoring to work on the lower Passions, and to drive Men with
slavish Fear like brute Creatures, is false and slanderous. They preach also
the Consolations of the Gospel, the intrinsic Beauty of Holiness, and the
Reasonableness of Christ's Service. -- As to THE SPIRIT, I never heard that the
most considerable Promoters of this Work pretended to the extraordinary Gifts
thereof that were peculiar to the apostolic Age. I believe I might venture to
challenge their Adversaries to show that they pretend to the Spirit in any
other Sense, than in his convincing, enlightening, directing and comforting
Influences. And in these Respects the Spirit is the Privilege of all true
Believers. If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, thus, he is none of his
Romans 8.10. -- As to civil Government, they are exceeding loyal, they put Men in
Mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers; to render to all their Dues,
Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Honor to whom Honor, and Fear to whom Fear;
to render to Caesar the Things that are Caesar's; and to pray for Kings, and
all in Authority, that we may live quiet and peaceable Lives in all Godliness
and Honesty. With Respect to the Government of the Church, they hold that
CHRIST is the sole Head and King of the Church; that the Government is upon his
Shoulders; that he is King of Kings and Lord of Lords; that in Order to the
Management of the Affairs of his House, He has set Officers in the same; that
he has vested these, not with a legislative Power, or a Power to make new Laws
and impose them upon his free Subjects, but only with an executive Power, or a
Power to put in Execution those Laws which he has already made. I might
instance a great many other Particulars with Respect to the Soundness of these
Men's Doctrines; but the Time would fail me: And therefore let it suffice to
say, that their Opposers have not been able hitherto, and I believe cannot yet
show one Particular in which they have departed from the Faith.

I am aware it may be said by some; but why do these Men insist so much upon
Original Sin, upon the New Birth, and Justification by Faith alone? Are there
not other Doctrines to be preached as well as these? and is it not the Business
of a Gospel-Minister to declare the whole Counsel of God? To which I answer 1.
That I deny that they always insist upon these particular Doctrines. 2. I take
these to be some of the Reasons why they insist so much upon them. (1.) Because
these are great important Doctrines. Justification by Faith (as Luther has
observed) is the Article of a standing or falling Church. And indeed we cannot
deny the Observation to be just, if we allow what the Apostle says, viz. that
if Righteousness come by the Law, CHRIST is dead in vain. (2.) Because it is
exceeding difficult to bring vain conceited Man to a firm and steadfast Belief
of them. (3.) Another Reason why they insist so much upon these Doctrines is
because others insist so little upon them: Nay, some do openly deny them; deny
the Necessity of supernatural Grace, hold the Power of Man's Will in Things
spiritual, say that we are justified partly by Faith and partly by Obedience,
and that CHRIST'S Righteousness was only to make up the Defects of our
Righteousness.

Is it not high Time for all who are faithful to CHRIST'S Cause, to appear for
and inculcate these Doctrines, when CHRIST is thus wounded in the House of his
professed Friends? When the very Foundations of our Religion are shaken, and
the distinguishing Doctrines of Christianity are explained away? For this I may
venture to say; that Arminianism tends to Deism, and Deism superceeds the
Christian Scheme: no need of CHRIST to do that which we are supposed to have
Power to do our selves: If Righteousness come by the Law, then CHRIST is dead
in vain.

2. Let us try them with Respect to their Manner of Life. And can it be denied
that this has been very ememplary and heavenly? I grant indeed, that this of it
self is no Proof of their being sent of God, if their Doctrines were false. The
Character of Socinus was wise, grave, religious, etc. But when Purity of
Doctrine and Life go together; both united make a very strong Evidence. Now the
most famous and successful of them do evidently appear to have much of their
Conversation in Heaven, to have got a great Degree of Knowledge of their own
Hearts. What a sweet forgiving Spirit do they show to their most virulent and
bitter Enemies? What Lambs are they in their own Cause, and yet what Lions in
CHRIST'S? We see an Example of this with Respect to Mr. Wesley and Mr.
Whitefield: The latter of these had a most endeared Affection for the former;
and yet he, viz. Wesley, no sooner stricken at the great Doctrines of Election
and the Saints final Perseverance, but the other appears openly against him:
thereby showing that the Cause of CHRIST was dearer to him than any Friend he
had upon Earth, and that he knew no Man after the Flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16.

3. Let us try them with Respect to their abundant Labors. And have not
several of them been eminent Followers of CHRIST? In this Particular how
zealous are they about their Master's Business? How are these Angels or
Messengers of God caused to fly swiftly in publishing the everlasting Gospel to
them that dwell upon the Earth? What prodigious Fatigue of Body and Mind do
they expose themselves to, out of a tender Love to Souls? And how wonderfully
are they supported in all their Toil? These Things are so remarkable with
Respect to Mr. Whitefield in particular, that the great and pious Doctor Watts
of London speaking of him in a Letter to his Correspondent here, expresses
himself thus; I must say it seems to me as though some divine Power attended
him to support him under such endless Fatigues. In a World, I think these Men
may very consistent with Modesty and Truth appeal to the Churches where they
have been, and say with the Apostle 2 Timothy 3.10. But thou have fully known my
Doctrine, Manner of Life, Purpose, Faith, Long-Suffering, Charity, Patience.

4. Let us next try them with Respect to the Effects that their Labors have
produced, and can any have the Front to deny that these have been good? Have
not covetous Worldlings in a great Measure had their Affections weaned from the
Things of the Earth, and set upon those Things that are above: Are there not
innumerable Instances of Swearers, Drunkards, unclean Persons, Tattlers, Liars,
Sabbath Breakers, etc. who have left off their favorite Vices; have cut off
the right Hand, and plucked out the right Eye? Have not several pharisaical
self justifying Person, who thought themselves in a very good State before, had
their sandy Foundations discovered; so that they have been made to alter their
Tone, and instead of saying, God I thank thee that I am not as other Men are,
they have been made to cry, Lord be merciful to us Sinners? Have not many had
their secret Sins so particularly touched by the penetrating Sword of God's
Spirit, that they have been made to cry out with the Woman of Samaria, Come see
a Man that told me all that ever I did? Have not many seen both the Heinousness
of Sin, and the Desirableness of CHRIST, with other Eyes than ever they did
before? Have found a Sweetness in the Bible, a Delight in secret Prayer, and
Christian Conference, and Meditation, that before they were Strangers to? Has
not Bigotry been very much subdued? And many of late have so learned CHRIST, as
to esteem one another as Christians, and not to place the Kingdom of Heaven in
Meats and Drinks? Yea; has not God in his just Sovereignty been revealing the
Mysteries of his Kingdom to Babes, while he has hid them from the wise and
prudent? Have not little Children been heard singing Hosanna to the SON of
David? God thus perfecting Praises from the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings, and
to the stilling of the Enemy and the Avenger. -- O my Brethren, are any of you
under the malignant Influence of such a woeful Prejudice, as to imagine that
these and many other such desirable Effects are the Works of the Devil? It is
my Hope and shall be my Prayer that God will remove your Prejudices.

And thus I have endeavored to try the Spirits that promote this Work: Next
let us try the Spirits of the Opposers of the same. And in doing of this I
shall endeavor to try them. (1.) With Respect to their Doctrine, (2.) With
Respect to the Spirit or Temper, with which they oppose the present Work.


1. Let us try them with Respect to their Doctrine. And it will be found upon
Examination that some of the most violent Opposers are Men of Arminian,
Pelagian, and Deistical Principles. This is too evident to be denied: Several
of them being such as scoff at the Imputation of Original Sin, who deny the
Doctrine of Justification by Faith alone, as likewise the high Doctrine of
Predestination: And who do strongly assert Man's natural Powers in Things
spiritual. I foresee indeed that it may be said that all who oppose the present
Work are not Men of such Principles, granting some be. I answer, I charitably
hope they are not: But I should rejoice that they would give less Reason, to
suspect them of verging that Way. -- Is it not a Truth too plain to be denied,
that there has been of late a great Growth of the subtle Error of Arminius in
the protestant World? And I wish I could say that our Side of the Atlantic
were free of it. Why then are they not more careful to preach against it, to
tell their People of the Danger of it, to show them that it is destructive to
true Christianity. -- In a Word, when they appear as zealous against it, and
make as loud a Cry concerning the Danger of it, as they do against the New
Schemers as they affect to term them: We shall then have more Room for Charity
toward them in this Regard.

After all, I do charitably believe that there are some weaker Brethren, both
of Ministers and People, who are led in to oppose this Work, and yet are no
Arminians; but are sound in the Doctrines of Predestination, supernatural
Grace, and Justification by Faith alone: But in the mean Time, I believe that
the principal and most inveterate Opposers are Men of Arminian and Pelagian
Principles, and that these others are only Deputy of second Hand Opposers. They
are like the two Hundred Men who went up with Absalom from Jerusalem at the
Time of Rebellion: But were not made privy to the Plot? It Is said of them that
they went in their Simplicity and knew not any Thing. -- As these are honest in
the main; there is the better Ground to hope that God in his own good Time will
undeceive them, and let them see their Error. And thus far with Respect to
their Doctrine.

I come next to try them with Respect to the Spirit or Temper with which whey
oppose the present Work. I shall show of few of the Properties of this Spirit,
which in an obvious Manner do discover themselves in the Opposers. As

1. Many of them seem to the acted by a lying Spirit. That same Father of Lies,
who was a lying Spirit in the Mouth of Ahab's Prophets, is still in Being: And
indeed if ever Hell seemed to be broken loose in horrid Lies and Calumny, now
appears to be the Time. I would not say that all who oppose the present Work
are wilful Liars because I would be as charitable as possible: but this seems
to be the Case; viz. some hatch the Lies, and others laboring under the
malignant Influence of a prejudiced Mind do too easily believe them and report
them for Truths. How else I pray comes it to pass that so many horrid Lies are
forged? -- Has not Mr. Whitefield been represented as a base, mercenary,
covetous Man, one who goes about gathering Money to make an Estate for himself?
-- Have not both he and Messieurs the Erskine's in Scotland been represented as
Persons in Confederacy with the People to the cursed Errors of the Church of
Rome? Have not several of their Doctrines been grossly misrepresented, as any
Person may see who will read with Candor what they have written in their own
Defense? Have not their unguarded Expressions been laid hold of, yea Words put
upon the Rack to extort Meanings from them which it is plain the Authors never
intended? -- Are there not some who are exceeding industrious in endeavoring
to make People believe, that these Men hold it as a Principle, that a few Tears
and some Convulsion-like Fits are of themselves sufficient Evidences of a Work
of God? -- That they pretend to the Gifts of discerning Spirits to such a
Degree as to know whether a Person be converted on not by looking in his Face,
or by a few Words Discourse with him? -- That all converted Persons behoove to
be able to give Account of their Conversion with Respect to its Time, Manner,
and other Circumstances? -- But it would swell to a Volumn to repeat one half
of the Slander that is them, which was by the Church of Rome against our
Reformers from Popery, and by the Scribes and Pharisees against our blessed
LORD and his Apostles. -- Now my Brethren, Say I beseech you what Spirit these
Lies do proceed from: Whither it is most probable that they come from the God
of Truth or the Father of Lies. One would think a good Cause did not need such
Props as these to support it.

2. As it is a lying so it is a most uncharitable Spirit. The Opposers of the
present Work do blame the Promoters of the same for want of Charity; because
these preach (as they say) too much Terror, and make the Gate of Heaven too
strait: But what I pray can be more uncharitable than to represent this whole
Work in a general undistinguished Manner as the Work of the Devil? To say it is
nothing but Phanaticism and Enthusiasm? That it is like a Bubble upon the Water
which will quickly be gone? That the Men who promote it are wandering Stars, or
blazing Comets, or like raging Waves of the Sea foaming out their own Shame?
Are these the Gentlemen of such extensive Charity! Is this the Wisdom that
comes from above; which is pure, peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated? This
that Charity described by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 13? Which vaunteth not it self,
does not behave it self unseemly, which thinks no Evil? If this be Charity,
may God deliver me from the Effects of it! O my Soul come not thou into their
Secret, into their Assembly mine Honor be not thou united. Genesis 49.6.

3. As it is an uncharitable so it is an envious Spirit. -- Envy is a most
diabolical Passion: This is thought to be one of the prime Causes of the
Devil's first Rebellion against his Creator: And it were to be wished that
there was not one Fiber of this cursed Root in Ministers. alas, does not the
Conduct of some of them give too much Ground to suspect that they envy the
Success of the Lord's Work in the Hands of their Brethren: -- That which ought
to be Matter of Joy to them, seems to irritate their Spleen, and to fill them
with a peevish Discontent. O that such Ministers had more of the Spirit of
Moses; who when he was told that Eldad and Medad prophesied in the Camp and
desired to forbid them, says to the Messenger, Enviest thou for my Sake? would
to God that all the Lord's People were Prophets etc. -- Or that of John
Baptist; who rejoiced at the growing Fame of JESUS, saying, HE must increase,
but I must decrease. -- Or that of Paul; who rejoiced that CHRIST was preached
though by some out of Envy and Strife. -- O that Ministers instead of
weakening, would endeavor to strengthen each others Hands, that they would
rejoice in each others Usefulness. Is not the Harvest plenty? Are not the
Laborers few? Is there not Work enough for all in the spacious Vineyard of
Christ? Why need they then stand quarreling with one another; when there is so
much planting, watering, pruning and cultivating to be done?

4. As it is an envious so it is a partial Spirit. The Apostle James gives it
as one of the Properties of the Wisdom that comes from above, that it is
without Partiality. -- There is no Perfection in this corrupt sinful State.
Many Blemishes are to be seen in the Life of the most eminent Saint; which are
the inevitable Consequents of human Frailty and Remains of a Body of Sin and
Death. So that if all the Defects of any Author, all the Blemishes of any
Person, all the Imprudencies in the Management of any Cause be industriously
gathered together and magnified, and in the mean Time no Mention made of that
which is commendable in them; in will make the best Person or Cause in the
World look with a dark and gloomy Aspect. As for Instance look into the Life of
David the Man after God's own Heart: Gather all the Blemishes thereof together,
his Lying, his vain Glory, his Cruelty, his Murder, his Adultery; and in the
mean Time, suffer Partiality to draw a Vail over the bright Part of his
Character, which shall conceal whatsoever was excellent in him: And this
Picture of him so drawn, shall be so far from amiable, that it will look
monsterous and deformed.

Now I appeal to Facts, whither this be not the practice of many of the
Opposers of the present Work? They constantly pore upon the dark Side of it:
whatever they can hear of that, they imagine will cast a Slur upon it; they
greedily lay hold of, and magnify with all their Art and Eloquence. If a Friend
of the Work be imprudent, or unguarded in any Part of his Conduct; this shall
be industriously improved, but not a Word said of what is commendable in him.
If he drop an Expression that is somewhat ambiguous, they will be sure to
interpret it in the worst Sense: Nor do they stop here, but give out that this
is the Opinion of the whole Party. -- I appeal to the unprejudiced, whither
this be candid, impartial Treatment?

5. Lastly, As it is a partial so it is a profane mocking Spirit. -- I am
^^eived at Heart that I have Occasion to mention this: But let any Man peruse
the Writings of Commissary Garden in Carolina, and compare these with some
ludicrous sarcastical Language that is vented in other Places, both from Press
and Pulpit, and then say whether this be a false Charge. -- Felix trembled when
Paul reasoned of Righteousness, of Temperance and Judgment to come. -- Soul
Concern had the same Effect upon the Jailor, Acts 16. Peter's Hearers felt the
Dint of the Gospel two edged Sword, so as to be pricked at the Heart, Act. 2.
-- The Father of the Child cried out with Tears, saying, Lord I believe, help
mine Unbelief: Mark 5.24. -- God speaking of true Penitents, says, He will lead
them with Weeping and Supplication, Jer. 31.9. The Psalmists Heart trembled
before God, and he was afraid of his righteous Judgments. -- Heman while he
suffered the Terrors of the Lord, was distracted. Psalm. 88.14. God's People are
said to be Persons of a pure Lip, Zeph. 3.7. -- And to speak the Language of
Canaan, Isai. 17.18. -- The Psalmist says, O taste and see that the Lord is
good, Psalm. 34. and elsewhere, come and hear all ye that fear God; I will tell
you what he has done for my Soul: -- We read, Mal. 3.16. That those who feared
the Lord spoke often one to another: What did they speak of? Why they
discoursed of God's Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Patience, and Wisdom, evidenced
in his Government of the World: They established each other in the Ways of God
against the proud and atheistical Disputers of those Days. But now in our Days
when God's Word and Spirit produce the same Effects with those mentioned in the
above quoted Texts; these Things are all vilified, and undervalued. Men are
made to believe that there is no need of Tears and deep Sorrow for Sin; the
Work of Conversion may be done in a more smooth, rational and easy Way; that
these are no probable Symptoms of a Work of God; they may be all accounted for
from physical and mecanical Principles; -- Persons must not entertain religious
Conversation, use mutual Freedom in tal^^^g over their Experiences and
communing about the State of their Souls; this savours too much of hypocritical
Ostentation, and is inconsistent with Decency and Politeness. -- By this Means,
alas, alas, the bruised Reed is broken and the smoking Flax quenched; Men are
rocked asleep in the Cradle of carnal Security; and instead of being put upon
Soul Enquiry, they are made to believe that they are well enough already: So
that they go smoothly down the Stream to Hell, singing Agag's Requiem to
themselves, that surely the Bitterness of Death is already past. -- O that God
would give such Ministers to see what they are doing; whose Interest they are
serving, while they are filling the Minds of poor People with groundless
Prejudices against the Work of God.

And thus I have endeavored to bring the Spirits, (1.) of the Promoters, (2.)
of the Opposers of the present Work to the Rule or Standard. And having so
done, I desire every one to judge for himself, and to say which appears to be
most of God, which endures best to be weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary.


I proceed now to the IMPROVEMENT: and though the Subject would naturally afford
several useful Inferences; yet in Regard I Am afraid I have already incurred the
Censure of Tediousness, I shall pass other Uses of the same, and conclude with
some Words of Exhortation. -- In which I shall apply myself (1.) to all in
general; and (2.) to several Sort of Persons, according to their different
Circumstances.


FIRST to all in general; I would say my dear Brethren; take the wholesome
Advice of the Apostle in my Text; i. e. not to believe every Spirit; but try
the Spirits whether they be of God. Do not implicity pin your Faith upon any
Man's Sleeve: Be Followers of no Man farther then he is of Christ. -- To what
end has God made you reasonable Creatures, and given you the Bible in your
Mother Tongue, but that you should judge for your selves? Make Use therefore of
your Christian Liberty: Bring Persons, their Doctrines, their Spirit, and their
Practices, to the Law and to the Testimony: And as they agree or disagree
herewith, receive or reject them. -- Be exceeding careful that Party Prejudice
don't biass your Judgment. This is exceeding dangerous; especially when it is
in Soul Affairs. O then let me plead with you to be faithful to your precious
Souls: Lay aside all Prejudice of every Kind, whether religious, national,
congregational, domestic, or personal: Hang out the Balance fairly, and let
the Word of God be Judge. -- Be importunate with God, that he would give you a
right Sight of your selves, that he would show your Soul's State whatever it
be, whether good or bad: You Will never be able to try the Spirits of others so
well, until you have tried your own Spirits. Alas, how many are forward in
judging others, who know not what Spirit themselves are of? Pull the Beam out
of your own Eye, and then you will see the better to pull the Mote out of your
Brothers. --

But

SECONDLY, I would be more particular in applying myself to several Sorts of
Persons, according to their different Circumstances.

And 1. To you who are full of strong Prejudices against this Work; insomuch
that you are inclinable to think that it is all Delusion, and the Work of the
Devil. I would ask you; were not some of you very warm in Favor of is within
these twelve Months? What is the Reason of your sudden Change? Have you
discovered that the Promoters of this Work have vented any false Doctrine, or
been guilty of any wicked Practice since that Time? I would ask you farther;
have you not at some Times a hesitating or doubting in your Minds about this
Work? Granting you be not fully satisfied that it is of God, yet certainly you
cannot say you are sure that it is not of God: Don't you feel somewhat within
you saying at Times, possibly I am mistaken, perhaps this Work is from Heaven?
-- Is this the Case with some of you, then I would entreat you not to show your
selves virulent Opposers of it. See that you make not Conversion-Work the
Subject of your common Drollery and Diversion: Have a Care of talking lightly
concerning Tears and Sorrow for Sin. Consider that if the Work be of God, as
you do not know but it is,; then by this Sort of Conduct you will be found
fighting against God, and grieving the blessed Spirit. Be not Mockers then,
least your Bands be made strong, Isa. 28.22. -- I appeal to your Consciences;
have any of you already been guilty of this Sort of Conduct, yet despair not:
There is Hope in Israel concerning you: You will with Saul the Persecutor
obtain Mercy, because you did it ignorantly and in Unbelief. But if Conscience
duly informed tells you that it is God's Work, and yet you do wilfully and
maliciously go on to ridicule and oppose it; assure your selves that this is a
doing despite to the Spirit of Grace: This is sinning against the Holy Ghost?
It Is an audacious shooting of the Arrows of your Scorn directly against the
Throne of the great and dreadful God! O then be exhorted to stop in Time:
Trembled to think what you are doing: Beg that God would keep you back from
presumptuous Sin. -- Take Care, if you be in Doubt about the Work, to have
Conscience duly informed: Try both Sides, and then you will be the more capable to
form an impartial Judgment: Prove all Things, and hold fast that which is good;
I These. 5.21. -- My dear Brethren, what should make any of you to doubt
concerning the Work's being of God? Will you but judge of the Tree by it is
Fruit? Is it the Work of the Devil to make Men who were at Ease in Zion careful
about their Souls? To set them about secret Prayer, Self-Examination, and
Christian Conference? To wean their Affections from the World, and to set their
Desires more upon Heaven? To give them a Sight of the Vileness of their own
Hearts, and thereby to humble their natural Pride? To make Sin appear exceeding
sinful, and Christ exceeding precious in their Eyes? Is it the Devil's Work to
make Swearers, Whorers, Drunkards, Liars, Sabbath Breakers, Scoffers at
Religion, to leave off their respective Vices? -- Let me entreat you to weigh
these Particulars with that Care which an Affair of the last Consequence
deserves, What Interest do you imagine I can propose to myself in using this
Freedom with you, but a tender Concern for your Souls? I am looking for nothing
from you, I propose no temporal Gain by you: O then if you do not regard me,
regard your own precious Souls.

But then I would next apply my self to you who are professed Favorites of the
present Work. And of you I imagine there are two Sorts, i. e. graceless and
gracious Persons. A Word to each of You.

(1.) You who have no saving Experience of Religion upon your Souls, never yet
have seen either your Misery or the Need of the Remedy. Poor Souls! alas what
will it avail you that you are professedly on the Lord's Side and seemingly
very warm in the Cause, crying with Jehu, Come see my Zeal for the Lord of
Hosts? If your Heart be not right with God, your being among good Company will
be no more Benefit to you than it was to Judas. -- What are you trusting to? Is
it your Baptism, your visible Church Membership, your Speculative or
Head-Knowledge, your Soundness and Orthodoxy in Principle? I tell you though
these Things must be, yet of themselves they will never do: You may have all
these, and yet if you go no further, you will certainly be damned. Think not then
to say within yourselves we have Abraham to our Father: Trust not to lying
Words, saying, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord. Or are you
trusting to your Convictions? Is it the Ground of your Confidence that you have
shed a few Tears and can remember the Time when you were under some Concern?
Remember that this of it self will not do; that Felix trembled, the Sinners in
Zion were afraid, Isa. 33.14. That Esau shed Tears, and yet was no true
Penitent: Your Heart must be changed, your Affections must be turned into
another Channel? Yea the prevailing Bent and Temper of your Souls must be quite
altered: In a Word, you must become new Creatures, 2 Cor. 5.17.

But then last of all to you who are not only warm in this good Cause, but are
so from a right Principle. I would say to you my dear Brethren; that I hope
there are none of you in any Measure shaken by the Opposition that God's Work
meets with in various Places. Certainly you have no Reason. I can appeal to
you, whether those who may be looked upon as the most considerable Promoters of
the present Work have been bringing any new Doctrines to your Ears, with
Respect to the Nature of Conversion, or with Respect to the Operations of the
blessed Spirit, or with Respect to Assurance of Grace; or in any one
Particular, but what are the Doctrines of your Bibles, of your Confession of
Faith, and Catechisms; the Doctrines which your dear Ancestors died in, and
which some of them sealed with their Blood. -- Don't then suffer your selves to
be banter'd out of your Senses, by a loud Cry of Error and Heresy breaking in
upon the Church; when you cannot but know that it is a false Alarm. -- And if
you would not be soon shaken in Mind; be always laboring after greater Degrees
of Knowledge, to be better rooted in your Principles, to arrive at the Stature
of adult Men in Christianity, who have their Senses exercised to know both good
and Evil, -- Hold fast the Profession of your Faith without wavering; that you
be not henceforth Children, tossed to and fro and carried about with every Wind
of Doctrine. -- And, my dear Brethren, let me in particular exhort you to keep
up Heart Work, and to maintain spiritual Communion with God: Watch and pray
that ye enter not into Temptation: Remember that though you are not the Devil's
Subjects, that yet you are still in his Territories, and therefore liable to
his Assaults. -- Be careful to exercise the Christian Grace of Charity: Don't
be guilty of rash judging: Remember that your Lord has said, Judge not, that ye
be not judged. See that you condemn not all that differ from you in Judgment
about the present Work, as carnal, graceless and Enemies to God. Consider that
even a good Man may be a while in an Error. This I charitably believe is the
Case with some in the Land at this Day. -- See that you Guard against a
litigious, wrangling Temper: Don't be forward upon all Occasions to enter into
Disputes with the Opposers of the present Work: Such a Humor, if it prevail,
will have a mischievous Tendency insensibly to worm out practical Religion.
Rather then, choose to convince your Opposers by your Lives: Let your Light
shine before Men, that they may see your good Works. If they say you are proud,
convince them that it is false, by your Humility: If they say you are
uncharitable, convince them by your Charity. If they say you are contentious,
show them that it is not so, by your peaceable Conduct. Show by these Means
that your Religion is more than an empty Name; having a powerful Influence on
your Practice: That the Grace of God which has appeared unto you bringing
Salvation, has taught you to deny Ungodliness and all worldly Lusts, and to
live soberly righteously and godly in the present World. -- If thus my Brethren
you conduct your selves, God will say to you as he did to the Church of
Philadelphia, Revel. 3.8, 10. Thou have a little Strength, and have kept my
Word, and have not denied my Name: Because thou have kept the Word of my
Patience; I also will keep thee from the Hour of Temptation which comes upon
all the World, to try them that dwell upon the Earth.

FINIS.

