The Blessings of a SOUL in Health and prospering to be supremely wished for.

A SERMON Delivered (in Part) at a Family-Meeting in private; Boston, Mar. 3.
1741, 2.

By Thomas Foxcroft.

Psalm. 67.1.2. God be merciful unto us, and bless us; and cause his Face to
shine upon us: That thy Way may be known upon Earth, thy saving Health among
all Nations

Psalm. 118 25. Save now, I beseech Thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech Thee, send
now Prosperity.

2 Cor. 13 9. This also we wish, even your Perfection.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. KNEELAND and T. GREEN, in Queenstreet over
against the Prison 1742.

The Best Wish, A Soul in Health and prospering.
III Epis. JOHN, 2. Beloved, I wish above all Things that thou may prosper,
and be in Health, even as thy Soul prospers.


HAVING given the proper Direction at the Head of his Letter to his Friend
Gaius, the Apostle proceeds to salute him in the Lord, and utters a pathetick
Wish on his Behalf, as in our Text. This affectionate Comprecation is variously
understood by Expositors.

Some take it as a Wish for his Recovery of bodily Health; making the
Prosperity of his Soul (which is here acknowledged) the Rule and Standard of
that. And in this View of the Words, we might note from them, That such as have
prosperous Souls may nevertheless have sickly and afflicted Bodies: And for the
weakly and sick Servants of Christ, we should wish their Recovery of Health, as
the greatest outward Blessing: And finally, it is a rare and admirable Case,
when any one is visibly so blessed in Spirituals, as that we may venture to
make the Measure of his Soul-Prosperity the Rule of our Wishes for his bodily
Health. Alas, what Multitudes are there of neglected and unprospering Souls,
even among Gospel-Professors, whether sick or well in Body! And as for such, to
make the Apostle's Wish in this Sense, would be a cursing, rather than blessing
them, and would imply a wishing them undone for both Worlds, miserable both in
Body and Soul. -- But I shall not consider the Text in this Light at present.

Others take it as a Wish for the Health and Prosperity of his Soul. And
considering it in this View, the following Observations may be made from it.

1. There is such a Thing as the Prosperity and Health of the Soul.

2. Soul-Prosperity and Health is the best Blessing we can wish to any.

3. The most healthy and prosperous Soul is capable of still further
Improvements; and accordingly (whatever we wish any one) an Increase of
spiritual Prosperity and Health is above all Things to be wished for him.

4. The Ministers of Christ should and faithful Ministers will (as they have
Opportunity) be observant of the Symptoms of Soul-Prosperity and Health in
others, readily acknowledge the same where it appears, and make it their most
ardent Wish on behalf of their christian Friends, that they may increase
herein. -- But this last, being peculiarly a Lesson to myself, I shall reserve
for the Subject of my own private Meditations; and employ this Discourse on the
three former, which are of more common Concernment.

DOCTRINE I. There is such a Thing as the Prosperity and Health of the Soul. --
The Apostle ascribes it to his well-beloved Gaius; Even as thy Soul prospers.
Here,

1. I shall briefly premise some Hints upon the Subject of this Prosperity and
Health, the Soul of Man.

We read, Job 32.8. There is a Spirit in Man; and the Inspiration of the
Almighty gives them Understanding. The Scriptures every where suppose Man a
Compound of Matter and Spirit. The Soul is an intelligent and undying Principle
within us; a spiritual invisible thinking Substance, distinct from our material
and animal Part; survives the Body, and has an eternal Existence. [See Eccl.
12.7. and Matthew. 10.28.] Hence holy Paul desired to depart, that he might be
with Christ, that is, in his immortal Spirit. ( Phil. 1.23.) When the Man Jesus
felt his Body dissolving, he committed his Spirit into his Father's Hand, and
gave up the Ghost. (Luke 23.46.) So dying Stephen went out of the World calling
upon the Lord Jesus, to receive his Spirit. (Acts 7.59.) -- What are the
Spirits in Prison (1 Pet. 3.19.) but Souls of wicked Men departed this Life,
and doomed to a State of Misery in the other World? And what are the Spirits of
just Men made perfect (Heb. 12.23.) but the Souls of Believers discharged from
the Encumbrance of their Clay-Tabernacles, and passed into Glory? -- In a Word,
what are we that dwell on the Face of the Earth, but Spirits that abide in the
Flesh? (Phil. 1.24.) Hence the LORD is styled the God of the Spirits of all
Flesh. (Number. 27.16.) He is so, as he forms the Spirit of Man within him
(Zech. 12.1.) and as his Visitation preserves our Spirit. (Job. 10.12.)

O let us all remember, and carry the Thought about with us continually, that
we have Souls, as well as Bodies: Souls unspeakably preferrible to our Bodies;
Souls, the Redemption whereof is precious (Psalm. 49.8.) Souls, the Salvation
whereof is the End of our Faith (1 Pet. 1.9.) And Souls, the keeping whereof we
must daily commit to God, as to a faithful Creator, in well-doing (1 Pet.
4.19.) Not caring for the Things of the World, what we shall eat or drink, or
wherewith be clothed, but caring for the Things of the Lord, that we may be
holy both in Body and Spirit (1 Cor. 7.34.) That we may glorify God in our
Body, and in our Spirit, which are God's (1 Cor. 6.20.) As Strangers and
Pilgrims, abstaining from fleshly Lusts, which war against the Soul; and living
unto Righteousness, as those who were as Sheep going astray, but are now
returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls. (1 Pet. 2.11, 25.)

O my Brethren, the SOUL is the Man. God the Father of Spirits, he weighs the
Spirits, and judges of you by the hidden Man of the Heart. You ought also to
judge of yourselves by this; and if you would know what Manner of Persons you
are, you must labor to know what Manner of Spirit you are of. -- You must take
Heed to your Spirit, denominate yourselves from this, and make this your
principal Care. O let not the Flesh and the World have the Ascendant in your
Esteem, and the Throne in your Hearts. Let not your Soul lie neglected, and
buried in the Pleasures of Sense, or the Cares of this Life. What is a Man
profited, if he gain the whole World, and lose his Soul? Or what shall a Man
give in Exchange for his Soul? (Matthew. 16.26.) Learn, I beseech you (my
Friends) every one of you, to place a just Value upon your immortal Part, and
to make your Soul your Care in the first Place. Think often and think solemnly,
that you have a Soul made for Immortality, bound to an eternal World, and which
in a little Time must be consigned to an unalterable State of Happiness or
Misery. And can any of you bear the Thought of going to Hell, or missing of
Heaven at last! O see your Danger, and don't destroy your own Soul. Realise the
Necessity of caring for your Soul; and look that you do not reward Evil to
yourselves, through Presumption or Despair. Tremble to think what Indignation and
Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish shall be upon every Soul of Man that does Evil.
But remember, that the Soul of the Righteous shall inherit Glory, Honor and
Peace everlasting. And although you may some of you be without any present
Grounds for Hope of this, as having in you still the Soul of the Wicked, an
evil Heart of Unbelief; yet through the Riches of divine Grace there is a
Possibility of getting your Soul restored to Life, yea, to Health and
Prosperity by Jesus Christ. Though your Soul be in a State of Perdition, yet not
such as that of the Spirits in Prison. No, while the God of all Patience
reprieves you from Hell, you ought to look on it as possible for you to escape
the Wrath to come; possible for you to be born from above, and so to enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. You have a Soul, though spiritually dead, yet capable of
being raised into immortal Life by the Power of God, and of being made a Vessel
of Mercy, prepared for Glory; yea, capable of a blessed Prosperity and Health
in the present World, a spiritual Health and Prosperity, which is the Beginning
and Earnest of everlasting Glory and Felicity.

This leads us,

2. To consider that Prosperity and Health, mentioned in our Text, as what the
Soul is the Subject of.

Now if we view the Soul of Man in it is philosophical Notion only, it may be
said to prosper and be in Health, when the Intellectuals are not in a diseased
infirm Estate, but sound, regular and vigorous as to the common Operations of
Reason; the Wit sharp, the Judgment solid, the Memory tenacious, Ideas clear,
and Arguings strong, Knowledge increasing, etc. -- But this State of the human
Understanding is common to Saints and Sinners; is but a partial and very
defective, low Kind of Soul-Prosperity, and capable of existing separate from
that intended in our Text. It may be called indeed rather the Health of the
Brain, than of the Soul; at least it depends immediately upon the happy Texture
of the Brain, a regular Circulation of the nervous Fluids, and Freedom of the
animal Spirits, producing a lively Imagination, and assisting the intellectual
Functions.

But the Apostle in our Text had a more exalted View, and would be understood
in a theological Sense. The Prosperity and Health of Soul, which he speaks of,
is of a sublime and spiritual Nature, not merely intellectual, but moral; and
refers not so much to an orderly State of the Head, considering Man merely as
rational and social; but to the holy Frame of his Heart, his Conscience, Will
and Affections, as well as Understanding, considering him in his Relation to
GOD, as a Subject of moral Government, a Creature formed for religious Service,
and designed for the glorifying and enjoying of God, his ultimate End.

Looking at Man in this Light, his Soul may be said to prosper and be in in
Health, when his Powers as a moral Agent are reduced under a proper Regulation,
and duly exercised on their respective Objects; so as that the Soul truly
answers the End of its Being, and enjoys that inward moral and spiritual
Happiness (...) was originally designed for. There is such a Thing as
Prosperity and Health of the Soul in this Sense, actually existent in the Life
which now is, though too uncommon.

Indeed considered as taking Place in the present World, it is not to be
understood in a strict and absolute Sense, as if any Souls dwelling in Flesh
had already attained, or could attain a proper (legal) Perfection of Holiness
and moral Happiness, exclusive of all Mixtures, and free from all Defects. For
even inspired Prophets and Apostles renounced all Pretensions to this; as you
may read both in the old Testament and New. [ Eccl. 7.20. Prove. 20.9. -- Phil.
3.12, 13. -- 1 Cor. 13.9, 10. -- 1 John 1.8.]

Verily, since the Day of Adam's Fall, there never was an Example of complete
unblemished Sanctity, or indefective moral Felicity; save only the Man Jesus,
the second Adam, who being conceived in a miraculous Way, by the Power of the
Holy Ghost, was exempt from the common Contagion of original Sin, and his Life
(in Correspondence to his innocent Nature) holy, harmless, and undefiled. But
excepting this single Instance, never was Man upon Earth whose Soul enjoyed
Prosperity and moral Health in a strict Perfection. This is reserved for the
peculiar Privilege of the coming World. And the Saints in the Earth, the most
excellent of them, must be said to be in an unprosperous unhealthy State of
Soul, compared with the perfected Spirits in Paradise.

However, there is a Sense, a lax and less proper Sense, in which some Souls
still tabernacling in mortal Bodies of Flesh and Blood, may be said to prosper
and be in Health.

I would observe here distinctly,

1. In a comparative Light, as viewed in Contradistinction to unregenerate
Sinners, all that are born again may be said to have Souls prospering and in
Health.

The Righteous are represented as a peculiar People, a chosen Generation; whose
spiritual State, moral Endowments, Soul-Privileges and Relations are all such
as speak them the excellent in the Earth, more excellent than others. ( Psalm.
16.3. Prove. 12.26.) The Ungodly are Strangers to those spiritual Blessings,
which righteous Souls enjoy. They may prosper in the World, heap up Riches, and
swim in sensual Pleasures, possess uninterrupted Health of Body, yea, and very
improved Intellectuals too: But still their Souls do not prosper, in the Sense
of our Text; no, their Souls are lean from Day to Day, in a starving pining
perishing Condition. -- Whereas now the Godly are such as have been born again,
born of God, begotten to a new, a divine and heavenly Life; and have Meat to
eat, which the World knows nothing of, whereby the divine Life is supported and
nourished in them.

A regenerating Change indeed is the fundamental Thing. True Prosperity and
Health of Soul implies an habitual State of moral Rectitude, restored to the
Soul in the new Birth. Health presupposes Life: This is as the Foundation, and
that as the Superstructure. Spiritual Life is the radical Principle; which the
Soul must have put into it by the creating Hand of God, or it can never be said
to prosper and be in Health. The Man in this happy Case is one whom the Law of
the Spirit of Life, in Christ Jesus, has made free from the Law of Sin and
Death, in such a Measure, as that his Soul may be said truly to be alive unto
God, to live in the Spirit, and to walk, not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit. He is no longer carnally minded, which to be is Death; but spiritually
minded, which is Life and Peace.

The holy Scriptures, concurrent with the Experience and Observation of all
Ages, do represent Mankind as in a fallen Condition; their Souls miserably out
of Order, infeebled, depraved, and corrupted in all their Powers; so far from
Health and Prosperity, that they are by Nature even dead in Sins. Indeed Man
was at first formed after the Image of God, in every Faculty possessing an
excellent Rectitude. ( Genesis 1.27. Eccl. 7.29.) But by sinning against God, our
first Parents fell from the Estate, wherein they were created; and all Adam's
natural Posterity, being not only in his Loins, but included in the Covenant
made with him, and so involved in the common Guilt of the first Transgression,
do justly inherit the Pollution contracted and the Misery incurred by his
Apostasy. ( Psalm. 58.3. Romans 5.12, 19.)

But, blessed be the God of all Grace, who in his infinite Wisdom and Mercy has
found out an admirable Expedient for our Recovery, and in the Fullness of Time
sent his Son, incarnate in human Nature, to save his People from their Sins. He
was wounded for our Transgressions, that by his Stripes we might be healed.
(Isai. 53.5.) He gave himself for us, that he might purify unto himself a
peculiar People. (Tit. 2.14.)

And such a People he actually has in the World; which in Time past were not a
People, but are now the People of God, who by his Stripes are healed. (1 Pet.
2.10, 24.) Multitudes have experienced the purifying Efficacy of his Blood, the
healing Virtue of his Cross, and the quickening Power of his Resurrection; even
some of the greatest Sinners. (1 Cor. 6.10, 11. Tit. 3.3, 5.)

Now the Work of the Holy Ghost in applying the Redemption by Christ, for the
quickening and healing of Men's Spirits, is one Thing implied in this Prosperity
and Health of the Soul, as essentially necessary to it: and in regard of that,
every believing Soul may be said to be in Health and prosper, if compared with
what it was by Nature, or with what the Souls of such be as are yet unconverted.

Be the Faculties of the Soul, in its mere rational Consideration, ever so much
enlarged and improved; be it enriched with all Knowledge; be its Chambers
filled with Treasures of common Science and human Prudence: Yet if there be not
a renewing Operation of the HOLY GHOST, producing a total Change in the moral
Temper and Frame of the Soul, it is not a Soul prospering and in Health. No,
it is a sickly, feeble, crazy, poor and perishing Soul, notwithstanding all its
intellectual Furniture; yea, and notwithstanding any Ornaments of seeming
Virtue, it may make a Show of, which is merely Ethical, and reaches little
higher than the sensitive Appetites.

The inner Man must be healed of all the spiritual Distempers and Wounds it got
by the Fall, and which have been increased and inflamed by actual Sins from
time to time: The Blindness of the Mind, the Hardness of the Heart, and
Numbness of the Conscience, the Stubbornness of the Will, the Madness of the
Passions, and every moral Disease must be bro't under an effectual Cure; or
else the Soul cannot be said to be in Health and prosper.

The Soul that may justly have this Character applied to it, is a Soul awakened
out of its native State of spiritual Death, and restored to its true and
genuine Life: A Soul, that has Christ formed in it, that is quickened together
with him, and made conformable to him: A Soul renewed by the Holy Spirit, in
all its Powers; the Understanding rightly informed, and the Judgment rightly
fixed; the Will rightly bent and resolved; the Conscience purged and rightly
engaged; the Affections placed on right Objects, and the Passions reduced under
a right Government* A Soul, that has just Ideas impressed upon it, and wise
Thoughts prevailing in it; a Soul, that has its Views directed to the best
Ends, and whose chief Study is to please and honor God; a Soul, that is weaned
from this present World, that is cut off from the Love of Sin, and no longer
makes Self it is Idol, is divorced from the Law, and subdued to the Gospel: A
Soul, that has Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ;
that lives by Faith, and brings forth Fruits meet for Repentance; that dwells
in Love, and has its Conversation in Heaven; delights in the Service of God,
and Communion with him: in a Word, a Soul attemper'd by Grace to the
Performance of spiritual Duties, and to the Fruition of spiritual Blessings;
humbled by a Sense of its own Unworthiness, and yet trusting in Christ Jesus,
and longing for the Enjoyment of him in Glory everlasting. This, this is the
Soul alive and in Health; and which only can be said to prosper.

This Soul has noble Lineaments of the moral Image of God upon it: This Soul is
a Temple of the Holy Ghost; and has eternal Life commenced in it. This Soul has
Heaven as it were bro't down into it. It Is bound for Heaven, and entitled to
it, as its proper Inheritance; is in an habitual Preparedness for it, and shall
for certain be finally put in Possession of it. -- This Soul is furnished with
those Gifts and Graces, that are the true Riches. This Soul is become Light in
the Lord, and has found the Knowledge of the holy One, that Pearl of great
Price. This Soul is a Partaker of his Holiness; a Partaker of the Divine
Nature, in all its revealed and communicable moral Perfections, though as yet in
a very imperfect Degree. -- This Soul obtains Peace in believing, and good Hope
through Grace; and has everlasting Consolation, at least in the Principles and
Grounds of it, or in Title and Reversion, if not in actual Enjoyment. -- This
Soul is admitted into all those divine and spiritual Relations, and relative
Privileges, which are connected with true Prosperity, and which the Saints in
Heaven esteem their Blessedness and great Glory. Such a Soul, being vitally and
mystically united to Christ, is made the Righteousness of God in him, and has
the Righteousness of God our Savior imputed to him for his Justification; has
Christ's Satisfaction placed to his Account, and his Debt to vindictive Justice
canceled, no more to be remembered against him. His Guilt is totally and for
ever blotted out; he is out of Debt; is made accepted in the Beloved, and stands
unalterably right in the Court of Heaven. This Soul is allied to Angels,
espoused to Christ, reconciled to God, adopted into his Family, and appointed
an Heir of Salvation with eternal Glory. -- This Soul is in an habitual
Readiness for all Events; and as no Evil shall come nigh to hurt it, so in its
own Apprehension (while conscious of its blessed State,) nothing can happen
amiss to it: For it has learnt to look with a sacrificing Eye upon all its
dearest Enjoyments, and has the Assurance from God, that all Things work
together for Good to them that love him. -- This is the truly living Soul.
Christ has given it eternal Life, and declared that it shall never perish, nor
shall any of its Adversaries be able to pluck it out of his Hands. Being in
Christ, there is no Condemnation to such an one. He is not of them which draw
back unto Perdition, but of them which believe to the saving of the Soul: And
nothing shall be able to separate him from the Love of God in Christ. -- In a
Word, such a Soul, washed, justified and sanctified as it is, has a Title to
and Meetness for the heavenly Inheritance. This is purchased for him, decreed
and promised to him, taken Possession of by the Forerunner in his Behalf, and
an Earnest given him by the Spirit which dwells in him. He has Treasure in
Heaven, and none can rob him of it.

Happy the Soul, in such a Case! How excellent its Character, how glorious its
Condition! Such a Soul may be said truly to prosper and be in Health; at least
in Compare with the Souls of others. Surely the ungodly are not so: But are
empty of all truly moral and spiritual Good, wretched and miserable and poor
and blind and naked; condemned as Criminals by the Law, led Captive by the
Devil, and pining to Death in their Chains. -- Compared with them, every
renewed Soul, though but a Babe in Christ, a Weakling in Grace, and a Child in
Understanding, compassed about with many Infirmities, may nevertheless be
called a Soul prospering and in Health.

I shall now apply this Point in some proper REFLECTIONS, before I pass to the
other Head.

USE I. What has been said, ministers Occasion for a mournful Remembrance of
Adam's Apostasy, and calls us to lament the ruinous State of human Nature since
the Fall.
Had the first Man persever'd in his Obedience, he had for ever possessed, and
so had we, a Soul in Health and prosperous, with regard to intellectual and
moral Perfections and Blessings. -- But alas! By one Man's Disobedience many
were made Sinners. By one Man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; and
so Death passed upon all Men, in that (or in whom) all have sinned. By the
Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men to Condemnation. Then were all dead.
-- It Is the Scripture-Account of the Origin of that Darkness, Defilement,
Disorder, and Death, which now disgraces human Nature; and which Mankind
universally had been everlasting Strangers to, if Adam (our first Father and
federal Head) had stood in his primitive Character and Condition, wherewith a
good God saw fit to honor and distinguish him.

O what Blushing and Shame, what Trembling and Sorrow become us, when we
consider how awfully Man differs now from what he was originally, as he came
out of his Creator's Hand! With what Tears of Confusion and Astonishment should
we lament our common Guilt and Fall in Adam! Verily Tears of Blood are not
sufficient for us to shed on so fearful and melancholy an Occasion. The Crown
is fallen from our Head: Woe to us that we have sinned! Alas, we were altogether
born in Sin; and in this Sense, were Transgressors from the Womb. We brought
into the World with us a carnal Mind, an evil Heart; and out of the evil
Treasure in our evil Heart have proceeded all our evil Thoughts, and evil Words
and Actions. O how loathsome and forlorn our Case in a State of Nature! The
whole Head is sick, and the whole Heart faint; there is no Soundness in us; but
we are full of Wounds and Bruises and putrefying Sores, from the Crown of the
Head to the Sole of the Foot, in moral and spiritual Respects. And well then
may God's Soul abhor us in our natural State, even as our Soul loatheth him.
Surely we were by Nature the Children of Wrath, even as others, being the
Children of Disobedience. (Ephesians. 2.2, 3.)

Let us labor for a through Conviction of this Doctrine of Original Sin. It Is
most evidently the Doctrine of Scripture: and abundantly confirmed by the
penitential Confessions of Believers in every Age. Nor can any of you, if you
consult your own Experience, find just Occasion to dispute it. Do you not feel
a Law of Sin working in you, and the Imagination of your Heart evil from your
Youth up? (Genesis 8.21.) Were not the earliest Discoveries of Reason in you
attended with Out-breakings of Corruption? How can you account for the first
evil and lustful Thought you had, but by assigning an evil Heart as the
immediate Cause? Surely, it did not come from without but sprang from within,
out of the Heart ( Mar. 7.21) Then when Lust has conceived, it brings forth
Sin. (Jam. 1.15.) And while we see Children so early, so universally
manifesting an Aversion to what is Good, and a Disposition to what is Evil,
very often too against the Light of the best Instructions, against the Force of
the best Examples, and notwithstanding all possible Restraints of a wise and
holy Government over them, what other Cause can we resolve the sad Effect into,
but the native Pravity of their own Mind and Conscience? This is the Root of
Bitterness, which springing up betimes, does so defile our Childhood and Youth.
The Fruit being so early and constantly bad, argues the Tree to be bad. A good
Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit; neither can a corrupt Tree produce good
Fruit: Wherefore by their Fruits ye shall know them. And by this Rule of
judging, we know every one to be by Nature a corrupt Tree: not excepting even
the rare Instances of such as are said to be sanctified from the Womb. For
these being sanctified but in part, do by the frequent breaking out of
remaining Lusts discover, that they were originally corrupt Trees, even as
others.

This Doctrine lies in the Foundation of the grand Scheme of Man's Redemption.
For without the Supposition of original Sin, what so great Need was there for
the Mediation of the Son of God, or for the Sanctification of the Spirit? Might
not merely the Restraints of Providence and common Grace have been sufficient
to preserve Adam's Posterity innocent, if born free of all Participation with
him in his Guilt and Pollution? And if so, what Occasion for all that Cost and
Pains, which the only wise God has laid out in the Affair of Man's Salvation!
But if that be considered, Things must needs appear in a very different Light
to every impartial Inquirer. -- Let this Thought teach you (my Friends) the
Importance of the Doctrine of original Sin; and serve to settle you in the firm
Persuasion of its Truth. Be upon your Guard against the impotent Cavils and
perverse Disputings of Men of corrupt Minds. Let no Man deceive you with vain
Words.

And being established in the Belief of the Truth, be often entertaining your
Minds with serious Meditations upon it; applying it solemnly to your own Case,
and bringing it home to your selves in particular. If any of you are among the
happy Examples of early Piety, give God the Glory of his distinguishing Grace
toward you, and be you very thankful: Yet never forget the abject Condition
you were born in; guilty, polluted, and wretched, like the rest of the World.
Nor have you quite shock off the old Man to this Day, but have a Body of Death,
to be groaning under as long as you live on Earth; and the Sense of this must
needs daily call back your Thoughts to the Day of your Nativity, when you lay
in your Blood, cast out to the loathing of your Person. -- But are not some of
you only as whited Sepulchers? Perhaps by the Advantage of a religious
Education, and early Strivings of the Spirit, you may have been kept from many
grosser Follies, may have behaved orderly, with something of moral Decency,
yea, with an Appearance of real Piety, more than common, yet all this while
remain unacquainted with vital Godliness, and your inward Part is very
Wickedness. If still unconverted, your Heart is like the rest of the Sons of
Men, full of Evil: having in it the Seeds of the worst Immoralities, which
would shoot up, and bring forth abominable Fruits, were it not for divine
Restraints. Alas, the very best of you in a State of Nature, are but as the
Lion in a Cage, whose native Fierceness is not mortified, though he appear cool
and tame. Or you are as the Swine, though externally washed from its Filthiness,
yet retaining still its natural Disposition to wallow in the Mire. Such as you,
have greatest Need very frequently and solemlny to dwell in your Thoughts upon
the deep Depravity of human Nature; lest you should be imposed upon by
deceiving Appearances, and lose your Souls by a false Peace, for want of an
effectual Sight of inherent Corruption. -- And you who are now bearing the
Reproach of your Youth, stained with open Impiety and Vice, while you mourn
your earliest Crimes, as well as later Offenses, see that you run up all to the
Springhead, as repenting David did, and bewail your unhappy Case as shapen in
Iniquity and conceived in Sin. (Psalm. 51.5.)

A mortifying and humbling Reflection this to us all! What can such base-born
Wretches as we, have to glory in! How absurd for us, that are by Nature of so
filthy and vile a Spirit, so guilty and miserable, to pride ourselves in the
Beauty of our Bodies, in the Honor of our Parentage, in the Riches of our
Inheritance, or even the Privileges of our Baptism and Education! O my Friends,
the Consideration of original Sin should hide Pride from Man, and darken the
Glory of all our external Prosperity, and our internal Advantages too, whether
natural or acquired. O let us get and maintain a realising affecting Sense of
indwelling Sin, which has so impoverished, deformed, defiled and degraded our
Souls: And let the Thought of this subdue our Pride and Vanity, give a powerful
Check to every self-exalting Imagination, humble us to the Dust, keep us low in
our own Eyes, and make us even abhor ourselves before the holy God, with whom
we have to do. To this End let us beg at the Throne of Grace, that a divine
Light may shine into our Hearts, to lay them open to our View, and thoroughly
convince us of the evil Disease, which cleaves to us; else we shall never be
duly humbled, and brought to repair to the Healer of Souls.

USE II. We have Reason to admire the infinite Mercy of God, in raising up a
second Adam, to restore our Souls from the Ruins of the Fall; and should adore
his amazing Wisdom and Power and Holiness in the Recovery of apostate Creatures.
O what Manner of Love is this, that when we had been ruined by Means of the
Sin and Fall of the first Man, another Mediator should be raised up, and sent
to redeem us out of that State of Guilt and Misery we were plunged into, and
restore our Souls once more to Prosperity and Health! Had the blessed God seen
fit, he might have glorified his Justice in our everlasting Destruction,
without a Remedy; as he cast off the Angels which sinned. But O astonishing
Distinction of sovereign Grace, in the Provision for our Recovery by Jesus, the
Lord from Heaven! Herein is Love; not that we loved God, but that God loved us,
and sent his only begotton Son, that we might live through him. (1 John 4.10.) --
And O the amazing Condescension of the Son of God, who though he was rich, yet
for our Sakes became poor, that we through his Poverty might be rich. (2 Cor.
8.9.) O the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he should come to restore that
which he took not away; that he should suffer for Sins (the Just for the
Unjust) in order to bring us unto God, that our Souls might live and prosper
and be blessed for ever. Never was there such Love as this, seen amongst Men,
or Angels. The Love of Christ passes Knowledge. We cannot sufficiently admire
it. -- Nor can we eno' admire the Condescension and Grace of God the Holy
Ghost, in undertaking the Office of applying the Salvation purchased by Christ
to the elect People of God. O if we have been made Partakers of the Benefit,
methinks we cannot but sing the Praises of divine Love.

And surprising is the Display of divine Wisdom in the Work of Redemption, as
God has wonderfully suited his Salvation to the Nature of Man and the Reason of
Things, to the Ends of his own Glory and our Felicity. He does not save Men in
their Sins, but from them; and restores that moral Purity to the Soul, which is
fundamental to the Happiness of reasonable Creatures, and was indeed our
primitive Glory. In this he manifests his Holiness and his Wisdom together.

And how is the Power of God magnified in this so great Salvation! The SON of
God displayed his Omnipotence in the obtaining eternal Redemption for us. And
the SPIRIT of God reveals his almighty Arm in the Application of purchased
Redemption. When any Soul is begotten to a new and spiritual Life, and begins
to prosper and be in Health, it is by the Power of the Holy Ghost.
Self-Conversion is as much an Impossibility to the Sinner, by his own solitary
Strength, as Self-Resurrection to a breathless Corpse. Neither is this Work in
the Power of Means and Instruments. No, the whole Efficiency is DIVINE. All
created Holiness is but a Ray from the Sun of Righteousness, who arises on
whom he will with Healing in his Wings. Only the same almighty Hand, which
formed Man at first after the Image of God, is able to restore it in the Soul.
Upon a Survey of Mankind in their lost and dead Estate, the Language of the
Prophet might fitly be sighed over them, Can these dry Bones live! And it must
be confessed, With Man it is unpossible: But all Things are possible with God.
The converting and healing of a Soul, verily it is the LORD'S Doing. It Is spoken
of as a creating Work, and compared to raising the Dead (Ephesians. 2.5, 10.) Which
imports an irresistible Omnipotence exerted in producing the blessed Effect. --
Look off from Creatures, look above Men and Means, when you behold any Instance
of Conversion, under the Ministry of the Word; and think not as though by our
own Power or Holiness we had made this Man to walk. No, but the Power of the
Lord was present to heal him. -- And let me note to you by the Way, that all
those Doctrines are justly to be suspected as false, which exalt the Power of
Man, and deny the Necessity of a divine Influence, to work a regenerating
Change in Sinners. The Case of the Woman (Luke 8.43.) which had spent all her
Living upon Physicians, neither could be healed of any, is a lively Emblem of
the Case of an apostate Soul, without Strength to restore itself, and finding
the whole Creation without any healing Medicines. The Asserters of Pelagian
FREE WILL, or the Sufficiency of our natural Faculties, by human Helps, without
the immediate Operation of supernatural Grace, to the Ends of Holiness and
Happiness, appear in my Apprehension very evidently removed from the Grace of
Christ, unto another Gospel, which yet is not another. Our Lord has left us
that express Assurance, WITHOUT ME YE CAN DO NOTHING. And if any Man teach
otherwise, not consenting to wholesome Words, even the Words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, he is proud, knowing nothing. -- Let us look on this Doctrine of Christ
as a Doctrine according to Godliness: I trust you have (some of you) found it
such by happy Experience, and you ought boldly to confess it; however profane
Wits may explode and flout at it, in their vain Opinion of an Ability and
Liberty in fallen Man, which derogates from the Honor of divine Grace, and
perverts the Gospel of Christ.

O let the Sovereignty and Power, Wisdom, Holiness and Mercy of God in the
Salvation of Souls, be equally our Meditation and Wonder and Praise
continually. Let us daily steep our Thoughts and warm our Hearts in this
heavenly Study, which will be the noble Employment of Saints and Angels
throughout a blessed Eternity.

USE III. What Joy and Satisfaction should we take in the Conversion of
Sinners; and how ought we to mourn the Case of unconverted Souls?
In every Conversion a Soul is saved from Death. (Jam. 5.20.) It Is brought into
a new and excellent Life, and put in a Way to glorious Prosperity, Health and
Happiness. And shall we not rejoice, when any are bro't to believe unto the
saving of the Soul! Verily there is Joy in Heaven over one Sinner that
repents. (Luke 15.7.) Every new Conversion spread a fresh Transport of Joy
all over Heaven; it puts a new Song into the Mouth of Angels; and is highly
pleasing to God. The Holy Ghost rejoices in a new Triumph of his Power and
Grace: The Redeemer rejoices in a new Testimony to the Merits of his Cross and
Efficacy of his Mediation: The Father rejoices in a fresh Witness to his
electing Love, the Birth of another Heir, and a new Addition to his Family.
This is emblematically represented in the Parable of the Prodigal Son, in whose
return his Father rejoiced, and killed the fatted Calf, because he had received
him safe and sound. (Luke 15.27.) -- How do we rejoice in the Return of a Child
or a Friend, thought to have been lost; and in his Recovery, after having been
sick nigh unto Death! With what Pleasure do we receive such an one, as
virtually raised from the Dead! And shall we not much more rejoice and exult in
the Return of a lost Sinner, in the Recovery of a perishing Soul. Does not Love
to our Fellow Creatures, and a Regard to the Honor of God and Interest of
Christ demand this of us? Ought we not to imitate the Example of holy Angels?
Are we not willing to participate in the Joy of Heaven on such an Occasion!

At the same Time we should lament, that the truly living Soul is so rare a
Spectacle: And should bemoan the unhappy Case of Sinners in their Unregeneracy.
Alas, their Misery is great upon them. Be they Kings and great Men of the
Earth, dwelling amidst the highest Honors, Riches and Pleasures of this World,
yet so long as alienated from the Life of God, what is the Life they live! mean
and low, little better than brutal. The most prosperous and dignified Sinner is
but a vile Person (Psalm 15.4.) a brutish Person; he is like the Beasts that
perish. (Psalm. 49.10, 12.) Verily a rueful putrefying Corpse is not more
horrible to the bodily Sight, than such a Person (dead in Sins) is to those who
have Eyes to discern between Good and Bad. O what an odious horrid Spectacle is
the Sinner, with a rotten Heart and unclean Hands, with the Image of Death and
the Smell of Hellfire upon him! -- But how lovely, how glorious a Sight the
humble Convert, with the Beauty of Holiness, the Resemblance of Heaven, and the
Presages of eternal Life upon him! While the other are our Grief, let these be
our Delight. Let every new Conversion we see or hear of, open a fresh Spring of
Joy in our Hearts, and fill our Mouths with Praise. As the Number of Converts
in Zion, in this remarkable Day of divine Power and Grace, is on the increasing
Hand, and much People are daily added to the Lord in one Place and another, how
should all that would approve themselves Lovers of Christ and Souls rejoice and
give Thanks! Praise ye the Lord: Praise the Lord, O my Soul. -- Whatever
Darkness and Difficulty may hang about the Minds of any, let them take Example
from Act. 11.18. When they heard these Things, they held their Peace, and
glorified GOD. -- O how should we magnify the Lord with Thanksgiving, who is so
marvellously at this Day visiting our Land, to take out of it a People for his
Name, and in so extensive a Manner reviving his Work amongst us! May it spread
still more and more, till the whole Land, yea the whole Earth, is filled with
the Glory of the Lord! This remarkable Work has surprizingly by various Means
and Instruments been increased and extended, since the Rev. Mr. ADAMS, Pastor
of the first Church in New London, and a faithful Brother unto them (as I
suppose) published his Thoughts upon it (Anno 1735) in a Preface to the Rev.
Mr. E. Williams's Ser. on Prove. 9.4 5. -- I beg Leave on this Occasion to
repeat from him the following Lines.

We have heard of the Grace of God in some Parts of the Country; how his good
SPIRIT has been at work in diverse Towns, to awaken a Concern in many about
what they shall do to be saved; that this Concern continues, that it spreads,
and that Persons are flocking into the Churches, as Doves to their Windows: It
must be looked upon as a Token for Good, and should produce Praises to the
LORD, who is graciously visiting his People. Only let them who are thus
awakened, take Care that they do not rest in a deceitful Work; and look well to
their future Conversation (especially since so many Eyes are upon them) that it
be altogether as becomes the Gospel of Christ --

It is not to be doubted, but that the great Enemy of Souls will endeavor to
disgrace and throw an Odium upon this good Work. It is no new Thing for him to
sow Tares in the LORD'S Field among the good Wheat, especially if the Servants
sleep.

But so long as this Concern is awakened by the reading and hearing of the
Word; while it reforms the Life, and cleanses the Way; takes People off from
their vain Confidences, and brings them kindly over to Jesus Christ; makes them
serious, watchful, prayerful and heavenly-minded; helps them to govern better
their Thoughts, Words and Actions, Appetites and Inclinations, Passions and
Affections; disposes them to be just and righteous, kind and charitable to all
that are about them; and finally, fills them with Love to God, his Truths, his
Ways, his Worship and his People; Now it has such Marks of a divine Work, that
the more general it is, so much the better: and as it advances and spreads
through the Country, we should all cry, Grace, Grace unto it.

Some People at a Distance hearing of this Concern and Stirring, are quite at a
Loss how to account for it; they wonder what should be the Occasion, and
nothing less than some Prophet or Angel sent from above, or some Expectation of
the World's sudden coming to an End, seems to them sufficient to make it either
so great or so extensive.

Others mock and deride.

But what is there after all so very unaccountable in this Matter? Or what is
there so very peculiar in their Circumstances, who are now, through the Mercy of
God, so very much concerned? Ought not all unconverted Sinners sadly to think
of their lost and undone Condition without an Interest in Christ, if they would
act reasonably? and will they not also be bro't to it in the Day when the Lord
shall open their Eyes? Truly it is wonderful, to think how they rest Day and
Night, while they have Reason to judge that they are yet in the Gall of
Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity. Then shall these wondering People know the
meaning of this Dispensation, when the Spirit of Grace and Supplication shall
drive them into their inner Chambers, to unbosom themselves before the Lord:
And it would be one of the best Days of all their Lives, were they bro't into
the like Condition.




USE IV. What has been said, should put us all upon solemn Inquiry into the
State of our Souls, whether it be a State of Conversion, or not.
In order to know whether your Souls prosper and are in Health, my Friends,
it is necessary that you first examine whether you have ever experienced that
New Birth, which is fundamental to all true spiritual Health and Prosperity.
Let me speak freely to you: In Case you have not been made alive to God through
Jesus Christ, you are vain Pretenders, and do but boast of a false Gift, in
claiming the Character of prosperous and healed Souls. Alas, there are
Multitudes in the professing World, to whom that pungent Rebuke is applicable,
Matthew. 9.12. They that be whole, need not a Physician. It seems spoken of the
conceitedly whole, who imagine they want no Healing. Like those whom Solomon
speaks of, Prove. 20.12. There is a Generation, that are pure in their own Eyes,
and yet are not washed from their Filthiness.

Some there be, that are gross Sinners, but laboring of a stupify'd
Conscience, they go on quietly in known habitual Wickedness; though under the
greatest Danger by fatal Wounds, yet insensible and utterly unconcerned to get
spiritual healing. These, if they were not Strangers to all serious
Self-Reflection, must needs know themselves to be under the Power of
unmortify'd Lusts, and in the Way to eternal Destruction. But the God of this
World has blinded their Mind, and seared their Conscience as with a hot Iron,
that they feel no Impressions from God's Word or Providence, feel no Remorse or
Shame for Sin, no Fear of Death or of Wrath to come. They are dead asleep, by
the Force of Unbelief, by the Force of stupifying Errors, or prevalent Lusts,
which make their Ears heavy, that they cannot hear, and their Eyes dark, that
they cannot see; at least, in seeing they do not understand, and in hearing
they do not perceive. As it is said of Ephraim, Hos. 7.9. Gray Hairs are here
and there upon him, yet he knows it not. Thus many a Sinner, though the evident
Tokens of Perdition are upon him, yet he knows it not; he is willingly
ignorant: And when he hears the Words of the Curse, still he blesses himself
in his Heart, saying, I shall have Peace, though I walk in the Imagination of
mine Heart, to add Drunkenness unto Thirst. Deuteronomy. 29.19. Sinners, that have
their Conscience thus benumbed and senseless, often are found trusting in their
religious Parentage, external Profession and Covenant Relation to God, as the
unbelieving Jews, who gloried in having Abraham to their Father, yet did not
the Works of Abraham; and who made their Boast of GOD, yet were Children of the
Devil. (Joh. 8.41, 44.) These are posting on to the Damnation of Hell, yet are
so stupify'd as not to consider their Hazard, nor ever really apprehend their
Necessity of a Savior.

But others there be, of a more refined Character, yet equally in Danger of
perishing by Means of a deluded Fancy, and false Hopes, from other Causes. I
have in my Eye now such as are under the Power of a deceived and flattering
Conscience; such as have taken up a groundless Opinion of themselves, as if
they were something in Religion, while indeed they are nothing. Some unhappily
form a wrong Judgment of their State, by applying false Rules, and others by
misapplying the true; and having enrolled themselves among the Children of God,
their confident Presumption breeds a Calm in their Breasts, lulls Conscience
asleep; and sometimes an Imagination that the Bitterness of Death is past,
produces a singular Satisfaction and Cheerfulness of Mind. By Reason of some
sensible Changes they have experienced in themselves, under the common and lower
Operations of the Spirit, they fondly dream, that they are whole and need not a
Physician. For Instance, they have been bro't under legal Awaknings (it may be,
very strong Convictions, great Terrors, and long continued) and afterward have
emerg'd out of their Darkness and Distress, perhaps into a Light and Joy
surprising to them; have felt Enlargements in Duty at Times, Meltings of
Passion, and seemingly good Affections; have reformed their external Practice
to a great Degree; are grown warm Advocates in the Cause of Reformation, etc.
Now here they rest, and build their Hope, at a Distance from Christ and Grace.
On such Accounts as these, they flatter themselves in their own Eyes, suppose
themselves converted and healed, and think their Souls in a prosperous Way;
while yet in Truth they remain under the Power of Death, some ineffectual Check
only is given to their Disease, and their Wounds are but soothed for the
present, by a mere palliative and superficial Cure. Indeed they never were
truly brokenhearted, never thoroughly wounded in Spirit, nor ever applied the
true Gospel-Remedy. Conscience is overruled and silenced; but not truly healed
and pacified. What Convictions they had, are only worn off; they have quenched
the Spirit; and the Calm they possess, is but a temporary and false Peace;
their Joy but a flashy and imaginary Pleasure. That awful Word is applicable to
them, Isai. 44.20. He feeds of Ashes; a deceived Heart has turned him aside,
that he cannot deliver his Soul, nor say, Is there not a Lie in my right Hand!
Alas, they still need the Physician, as much as ever; though their Heart thinks
not so.

Some who have passed under no remarkable Change, but appeared hopefully pious
from their Childhood, are little better than that young Jew in the Gospel
(Matthew. 19.) to whom our Lord Jesus said, One Thing thou lackest: And who,
after solemn Protestations of his unblemished Morals, yet when put to the Trial
chose to part with a Savior and renounce Heaven, rather than sacrifice the
World and deny his Lusts. Had this young Pretender a healed Soul, a clean
Heart, and a right Spirit within him, think you! Nay, but a sick Soul, a foul
Heart, and a false Spirit, under the disguise of a fair Profession and
plausible Appearance. Is it not to be feared, that among Christian Professors
many are but as that young Man, deceiving their Neighbors, cheating
themselves, and mocking God by a fair Show in the Flesh?

Others who have actually had a visible and perhaps very remarkable Change
wro't upon them, may yet be no better Christians than that Simon, who from a
noted Sorcerer became a Gospel-Professor, and doubtless for a time was looked
on by others (perhaps too by himself) as a notable Instance of converting
Grace; but at Length his Hypocrisy being detected, he met with that awful
Rebuke from an inspired Apostle, (Act. 8.) Thou have neither Part nor Lot in
this Matter: For thy Heart is not right in the Sight of God. -- For I perceive,
that thou art in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of Iniquity. So as to
many a Professor, it may be feared, notwithstanding their glorious Pretensions
as to inward Feelings, and a conspicuous Alteration in Externals, that after
all their Heart is not right with God, is not sound in his Statutes, but still
goes after their Covetousness, or other foolish and hurtful Lusts. Their
Corruptions are only under a present Restriction; but really retain a secret
Power and Dominion. It is but an imperfect Work they have known, whether of Law
or Gospel. Their boasted Experiences are essentially defective; their Graces
but glittering Counterfeits; and all their Virtue but unregenerate Morality:
they are alienated from the Life of God; and have but the dead Carcass of
Religion. -- Indeed it becomes short-sighted fallible Man to be very cautious
in applying so dreadful a Censure to particular Cases. I apprehend, the Word of
God, which ought to be our governing Rule, forbids our explicitly condemning
particular Persons in regard of their inferior State, and pronouncing
positively against them the Charge of Hypocrisy, but upon notorious Evidence of
bad Externals, inconsistent with a credible Profession. However, in general we
have Reason sadly to fear, that many a forward and showy Professor is really
but an empty Pretender; and at best no better than an Almost-Christian, in the
Sight of HIM whose Eyes are as a Flame of Fire, which pierce through the thickest
Vizors, and often see a wretchedly distempered Spirit under a beautiful
Outside, and visible Form of Godliness.

O let us then (how candid soever we are in judging of others) be inclined
rather to Severity in Self-Examination and Self-judging. Let it be our Concern
to get Conscience sufficiently informed by the Word and Spirit of God; and let
an enlightened Conscience do its Office, in impartially trying and censuring
us, that we may not by a deceitful Peace and a presumptuous Hope betray our
immortal Souls into remediless Ruin. O consider, my Friends, you may have many
commendable Seize, in real Gifts and seeming Graces; you may have verily
experienced admirable Changes in your Temper and Conduct, that carry the Face
of saving Conversion: and yet after all your Convictions, your Illuminations
and your Humiliations, your Terrors and Comforts, your Tears, Confessions, and
Amendments, you may still be but glistering Hyprocrites, and fail of the
washing of Regeneration, that purifying and healing Work of the SPIRIT on the
hidden Man of the Heart. O beware of all those treacherous and false Rests,
which Sinners in Zion are apt to lean upon, and which in the End will certainly
prove broken Reeds, that shall pierce them through with many Sorrows; leaving
them, after the short Pleasure of a deluded Hope, to sink down to Hell, under
the Anguish of an amazing Disappointment, an irretrievable and eternal
Disappointment! I beseech every one of you to take Warning, and see that you
don't content yourselves with any but the surest Evidences of a real Work of
saving Grace, in the restoring your Soul.

I shall now propound to you several Heads of Self-Examination, or Marks for
Trial of your State: attend, and examine yourselves, each of you, as I go along.

1. Have you ever been made to know and feel the distempered wounded and
perishing State of your Soul by Nature?

It may be, you have felt Terrors of Conscience and Fears of Hell, with some
Sense of Shame and Remorse for actual Sins, especially for scandalous
Iniquities: But if you have experienced true evangelical Convictions, you have
been made to see and mourn the Sin which dwells in you, to see and mourn the
dead Condition you are in by Nature, and to know the Plague of your own Heart;
as the Expression is, 1 Kin. 8.38. Well, reflect solemnly, and recollect what
has been your Experience in this leading Point.

Have you ever had the extreme Necessity and Exigence of your Case in a natural
State, presented to your View in a powerful convincing and affecting Light?
Have you seen your Nature overspread with the Leprosy of Sin, in Body and Soul;
the Mind clouded, the Judgment distorted, the Will vitiated, the Passions
corrupted, the Conscience depraved, the whole Man defiled? Have you seen your
Life stained with actual Pollutions, from your Youth up, in numberless
Instances, and all dreadfully aggravated! Have you seen all your Duties
attended with abominable Mixtures of Corruption and sinful Imperfection? Has
the Badness of your Hearts appeared to you, with singular Evidence, from the
Filthiness of your very best Duties, when viewed in the Glass of the
Commandment, which is spiritual, and holy and just and good?

Have you seen the Misery and Danger of your natural Condition, as under the
Bondage of Corruption and Chains of Guilt; odious to the Holiness of God, and
obnoxious to his Justice; exposed to die eternally, by the moral Efficacy of
your Disease, and by the righteous Sentence of the Law? Has Destruction from
God been a Terror to you, and the Arrows of his Quiver entered into your Reins?
Has Conscience been duly awakened to a Sense of the Wounds given by Sin? Have
you been brought to look on Sin (particularly through the Glass of Christ's
Sufferings) as the most malignant and hateful Evil, worse than the very worst
of bodily Plagues? Have you not only felt the Pain of your distempered and
wounded Condition; but under your spiritual Pollutions appeared a loathsome
Spectacle in your own Eye? Has the Corruption of your Nature, as well as the
Defilements of your Life, been Matter of Grief and Shame and Terror to you? Has
the Enmity of a carnal Mind against God, an evil Heart of Unbelief, the Source
of Disobedience, been deplored by you with many Confession, Prayers, and Tears
and Fears? Made to know the Plague of your Heart, and deeply affected with a
Sense of the absolute Need of your Spirit's being healed, have you been put
upon earnestly inquiring after some proper and sufficient Remedy? Have your
been bro't to desire the saving and healing of your Soul with more Solicitude
than ever you wished for Recovery from bodily Sickness? Infinitely to prefer
this spiritual Healing, before carnal Ease and false Rest, and to resolve you
will seek the Blessing, and accept of it upon any Terms!

Have you been beaten off from Self-Confidence, and every Creature-Dependance;
seeing your Wounds and Bruises and Distempers incurable by any Skill and Power
of yours, or by all the Art and Application of Men and Means? Have you been
reduced to an utter Despair of Relief from your own Sorrows, Reformations,
Performances in Religion, by any Virtue in themselves; and from all human Helps
whatsoever? Have you seen also your Unworthiness of divine Relief; and been
convinced, that a holy God might justly abandon you as a Hell-deserving Wretch?
-- And has this Prospect of your distressed Case pulled down the Pride of your
Heart, subdued your haughty Spirit, and brought you to God's Foot; humbly
acknowledging his Righteousness, if he should spurn you away from his Presence,
and yet resolvedly casting yourself on his free and sovereign Mercy in Christ?
-- Which brings me to another Inquiry.

2. Have you been effectually persuaded and enabled to apply to CHRIST, as the
one only appointed and sufficient Healer and Savior of Souls?

Sensible that you are dangerously sick, and need a Physician; convinced, that
all Creatures are Physicians of no Value; finding, that in vain you have used
many Medicines, that you have labored in the Fire, and wearied yourself for
very Vanity; and feeling yourself under the most pressing Necessity of a divine
Physician, and a divine Remedy, have you been bro't with Agony of Heart to
enquire after GOD the Savior, and been made willing in the Day of his Power?
Willing to submit to God, and be healed by his medicinal Grace, as dispensed in
and through Christ? Willing to be washed, to be sanctified, to be justified in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by his Spirit? Willing to be saved by Grace
through Faith? -- Have you been divinely enlightened and assisted to believe
the Record, which GOD has given of his SON; and upon the Credit of his
Testimony to receive CHRIST, as the Physician of Souls, the only authorized,
the only qualified, the only efficient Healer? Has Sin been such a Burden upon
your Conscience, as to render CHRIST precious to you, and make you welcome this
blessed Physician? Conquered and melted by the Consideration of his redeeming
Love, have you yielded up yourself, as a poor strengthless worthless perishing
Creature, to be made a Monument of his pardoning and renewing Grace? Have you
had any such impressive View of his perfect Sufficiency and gracious Readiness
to heal and save those that come to him, as has by a powerful, yet pleasing
Constraint, drawn you to put your Confidence in him, to fly for Refuge, and lay
hold upon the Hope set before you? Have you carried your Complaints to him,
opened your Case without Reserve, thrown yourself upon his Compassion, and
solicited his Help; most importunately begging, that he would deliver and heal
your Sin-sick perishing Soul; and this with a full Dependence on his Skill,
Fidelity, and Ability, to save you to the uttermost, if he undertake for you?
At the same time humbling yourself before him under a Sense of your deep
Demerits, and confessing his Justice, if he should reject you from his Care:
But still from a believing Consideration of the Gospel-Report, adventuring upon
his infinite Grace, committing you Soul into his saving Hands, as the Physician
you need, and placing your whole Trust in him; yet however with adoring
Thoughts of his absolute Sovereignty, resigning entirely to his Conduct, as to
the Manner, Time and Circumstances of his own Operations upon you? -- In a
Word, approving the only Method of Cure, which infinite Wisdom has devised and
revealed, namely FAITH IN THE BLOOD OF CHRIST, have you indeed been looking
unto JESUS for the cleansing and healing Virtue of his BLOOD, receiving the
Atonement, submitting yourself to the Righteousness which is of God by Faith;
and with a full Consent to the Application of his remedial Grace, waiting upon
him in the Ways of his Appointment? -- Let it now be inquired,

3. What Symptoms are there of a Cure begun upon you? What Signs of Life and
Health of Soul? What Evidences of spiritual Healing, from the Effects?

If the Blood of Sprinkling has been applied by the Hand of the SPIRIT, in the
Gospel-Way of Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, there is without Controversy
a healing Work wrought on your Soul, in all its Powers: And if you are really
conscious of a Faith unfeigned dwelling in you, this may be a satisfying
Evidence, that your Soul is in Health and prospers. Faith in the Blood of
Christ is eminently the Medium, employed by the Spirit of Grace, in beginning
and carrying on this blessed Work of spiritual Healing. As sure therefore as
you are that you have Faith, so sure you may be that your Soul is actually
under this blessed Work: Here Is at least a strong presumptive Argument of it.
But then in Order to judging whether you have the Faith of God's Elect, and
whether you have indeed experienced the healing Virtue of the Blood of Christ
applied by Faith, it is requisite that you examine what Fruit of the Spirit,
what Work of Faith, what Signs of spiritual Life and Health you have upon you.
Inquire then into the Influences and Effects discoverable upon you, both
privative and positive, both inward and outward.

Can you say in Truth, I am crucified with Christ? Is your old Man crucified
with him; the Flesh, with its Lusts, mortified; the World crucified unto you,
and you unto the World? Have you an habitual Brokenness of Heart, and
Tenderness of Conscience? Have you frequent Humblings and Breakings of Spirit
for Sin, original and actual, former and later? Do you hate Sin, as Sin, and
therefore every Sin? Are you afraid of sinning in any the least Instance, in
the most secret Places, and even in Thought as well as Speech and Behavior? Do
you watch and pray, that you enter not into Temptation? Do you solicitously
abstain from the Appearance of Evil, resist the very first Beginnings, and
guard against all known Occasions of Sin? Is the Desire of your Soul after
Sin-killing (as well as Sin-restraining) Grace? Do you labor the Mortification
of that which is naturally your most beloved Lust, and find yourself by Grace
habitually kept from your own Iniquity? Do you mourn the Remains of Corruption
in you; thankful for any Degree of spiritual Healing; and earnestly panting for
a through Cure; longing to have the very Principle and Root of your Diseases, in
a corrupted Nature, quite destroyed, and your Soul translated to the World of
Perfection, above the Influence of all those unhappy Objects, which here feed
and nourish your spiritual Distempers? Are you thus dead to Sin, the Flesh, and
the World?

And are you at the same Time dead to the Law? I mean not, as a Rule of
Practice, but as a Covenant of Life. Is your Hope of Righteousness and Life by
the Law, slain? Has that self-sufficient and self-righteous Principle, so
deeply radicated in the Heart of proud Man, received a deadly Wound? And is it
dying daily in you? Are you, while careful to do the Commandment, yet watchful
against that legal Spirit, which will be as a dead Fly in the precious
Ointment? Not going about to establish your own Righteousness, nor leaning to
your own Powers, do you daily depend upon a crucified JESUS, as the Lord your
Righteousness and Strength? The Life you now live, is it by the Faith of the
Son of God? -- If you are become dead to the Law, by the Body of Christ, it is
that you should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the Dead,
that you should bring forth Fruit unto God. Well, inquire whether from the
Principle of a new Nature you have your Fruit unto Holiness, and are indeed
serving God in Newness of Spirit.

Are you verily such as do live godly in Christ Jesus? Do you in Truth live,
not to yourself, but to him that loved you and died for you and rose again?
Have you those spiritual Senses, those spiritual Appetites and spiritual
Faculties, which are essential to the new Man, evidential of the new Birth, and
necessary to walking in Newness of Life? And do you feel a determinative divine
Influence, exciting the Powers of your new Nature, drawing them into Exercise,
and enabling you to maintain a Course of holy and spiritual Action?

What Is your inward Life? Is it a Life of Repentance, and of Faith with Love in
daily Exercise? Is it a Life of Dependence upon Christ, Desire toward him,
Devotedness to him, Communion with him, and Satisfaction in him? Is it a Life
filled up with holy Thoughts, and holy Affections, holy Designs, holy
Resolutions, and holy Endeavors; cleaving to the Lord with Purpose of Heart,
purifying your Soul in obeying the Truth through the Spirit, and herein
exercising yourself always to keep a Conscience void of Offense, both toward
God and toward Man?

What Is your outward Life? Do you show your Faith by your Works, and study to
adorn the Doctrine of God your Savior in all Things; doing common Actions
after a godly sort, and diligently following every good Work? Do you live, not
only a Life of Sobriety and Self-Denial, but of Devotion to God, and of
Benignity to Men? What Is the Life you live in Secret, in the Family, in your
public Appearance, Commerce, Conversation, and Business in the World? What Is
your Manner of Life on the Sabbath Day? And what on common Days? What in
Prosperity? What in Adversity? What in the several Relations and Capacities you
sustain? Is it a Life becoming such as profess Godliness? Is it as becomes the
Gospel? Adjusted to Gospel-Rules, conducted by Gospel-Principles, and directed
to Gospel-Ends?

Is CHRIST the main Scope of your whole Life? Do you live upon him, live by
him, live for him? Does Christ live in you, and his Image appear upon you? Is
the Current of your Thoughts, Aims, Purposes and Endeavors from him and to
him? Is it your earnest Expectation and Desire, that Christ may be magnified in
you? Do you go forth in his Strength daily to the Labors of the Christian
Life; by Prayers of Faith deriving vital Influences from him your Head, and
fetching in that supply of the Spirit, which you continually need? Do you come
to the Light, that your Deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God?

In fine, after all, and in the midst of all your Services for God, do you
account yourself an unprofitable Servant, disclaim and detest all Pretension of
recommending your self to the Favor of God by any Works of Righteousness,
which you have done, and have your Eye singly to the Righteousness of Christ
upon you by a gracious Imputation, for Acceptance here and Recompense
hereafter; determined to look for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal Life, and to account all Things but Loss, that you may win Christ, and
be found in him?

Thus, my Friends, I have interrogated you in a Variety of Particulars. Ask
yourselves these important Questions again and again, in solemn Manner: and let
Conscience give an upright Answer. Let Conscience report what has been your
real Experience, what the prevailing Temper of your Hearts, and the general
Tenor of your Lives; compare them with the Rule of the Word, and pass an
impartial Judgment. O make a Business of this Self-Inquiry, and be afraid of
Self-Delusion, in an Affair of such Consequence. Ought you not, as reasonable
Creatures, to be concerned to know the true State of your Souls, and to be
afraid of losing your Souls by undoing Mistakes and self-flattering Dreams!
Believe it, Multitudes think themselves something, while they are nothing; and
fatally deceive themselves. Affect your Hearts with the Consideration, that you
are as liable to be deceived, as others; that it will be no Relief to you, to
have the Company of others, whosoever or how many soever, perishing with you
under the same Deception; and that if you have been deceiving yourselves
hitherto, it will be good for you to be undeceived now in Time, while there is
yet Room for the Hope and Use of an effectual Remedy. -- But consider on the
other Hand, if on due Self-Discussion you find sufficient Grounds to conclude,
that your Souls are indeed renewed, and recovered to a State of spiritual Life
and Health, the Reflection on this will tend to fill you with Admiration of the
distinguishing Grace of God toward you, to make you studious of honoring him
by the best Returns of Gratitude, to sweeten the Comforts and alleviate the
Troubles of Life, to fortify you against the Fears of Death and Judgment, and
give you a cheerful Expectation of Eternity; as knowing that the New Birth is
the Beginning of an endless Life, and spiritual Health in this World the
earnest of everlasting Happiness in the next. Wherefore my Brethren, give
Diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. It Is a Duty of vast Concern,
and expressly enjoined upon you by the Word of God, 2 Pet. 1.10. -- Attend this
momentous Duty, as you would show yourselves Men. And beg of God to search you.

I proceed now to another Head of Improvement.

USE V. Let it be a Word of Exhortation, suited to your various Characters and
Cases, whether converted or unconverted, whether convinced or unconvinced.
To be distinct here, I would speak,

1. To secure Sinners. And is there not Reason to fear, that some here present
before the Lord, may have this black Imputation lying upon them? Are there none
of you (elder or younger) at Ease and dwelling carelessly; altogether indolent
and sottishly unconcerned about the State of your Souls, whether they prosper
or not; or else pleasing yourselves with the Thought of your Souls being in a
prosperous and healthful Condition? who yet never knew by Experience what it is
to be born of God, and to live according to God in the Spirit! Never knew what
Faith and Repentance mean, in the Power and Practice of them! Never knew what
it is to mortify the Deeds of the Body, to deny yourselves, and take up your
Cross, and follow Christ! Never knew experimentally what a good Conversation in
Christ means! And (in short) never knew so much as what Sin means, in the Sting
of it, but are Strangers to a through Distress of Conscience for Sin; and never
had your Hearts pricked, so as to have a Death-Wound given to every Lust, Self
dethroned, the World cast out, and Christ alone exalted in your Souls! Verily
if this be a just Description of the Case of any among you, I must tell such in
the Name of God, You are in a deplorable, a dangerous and perishing Condition.
You may have an undisturbed and quiet Life of it for the present: but (alas) a
wretched and forlorn, a languishing and dying Life it is at best. The Way of
Peace you have not known: Destruction and Misery are in your Ways: And your End
will be Destruction, inevitable and eternal Destruction, if you persevere and
die in your present Condition. Has not the God of Truth denounced WOE to them
that are at Ease in Zion! And forewarned you, That if you die in your Sins, it
had been better you had never been born!

I call upon you in the Name of God our Savior, the compassionate and only
Physician of Souls, to consider before it is too late, and rouse out of your
delusive, but beloved Dreams. Ah, will you choose Death and refuse Life! Will
you invade Hell, and rush on Damnation! Will you court your own Ruin! O how
long shall vain Thoughts lodge within you! Hear, ye Sinners, whether old or
young. Give over your self-flattering Conceits, your deceiving Hopes, and mad
Delays. Behold, NOW is the accepted Time: NOW is the Day of Salvation. And O
that in this Day of Visitation you may be made to know the Things of your
Peace; lest ere long they be hid, everlastingly hid from your Eyes! Boast not
of to morrow; for you know not what a Day or an Hour may bring forth. He that
being often reproved, hardneth his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without Remedy. -- Proud Sinners are apt to be angry at this plain Dealing, and
fly in the Face of their friendly Monitors: like Persons sometimes that are
sick, who see not their Danger, and are fond of Life, they cannot bear to be
told of their Hazard, they cannot endure to hear of a Physician, they loath the
Mention of any Medicine for their healing. Very threatening Symptoms are these
in the Case of bodily Sickness: and the like in Soul-Sickness are equally
dangerous. -- You that upon any serious and impartial Self-Reflection cannot but
be conscious of your having never passed from Death unto Life, let me persuade
you to admit a Conviction (O may the Holy SPIRIT bear it in powerfully on your
Mind!) of your being in a perishing Condition; sick, and needing a Physician.
Think immediately, think closely and solemnly on your Guilt and Pollution, your
Misery and Danger in a natural State. Realize your unhappy Case: and make that
your solicitous Inquiry, with the trembling Jailer, What must I do to be saved!

Believe it, if ever you convert and be healed, it is like to cost you many
bitter Cries and Tears. The sooner therefore you mind this grand Concern, the
better. -- O think of the Time of Waking: it certainly will come, either in
this World, or the next. But if not in this, it will be too late: And if in
this (I say again) the sooner, the better; the better upon all Accounts. Less
of Pain, less Anguish and Difficulty will in all Probability attend the
searching and healing your Wounds now than hereafter: and the sooner your Soul
is restored, the greater Advantage and the longer Opportunity you will have,
through Grace, to establish and advance your Soul's Prosperity, Health and
Vigor; to work for God on Earth, and to lay up Treasure in Heaven. Therefore
as the Holy Ghost says, To Day, if you will hear his Voice, harden not your
Heart. (Heb. 3.7, 8.) O Sinner, indulge no longer a false Peace and carnal
Ease: give not Way to Excuses and Delays. What meanest thou, O Sleeper! Arise,
and call upon God, if so be that God will think upon you, that you perish not.

I cannot readily think of any more proper Advices to you in your present Case,
than these. Immediately, as far as possible by the help of common Grace, break
off your evil Customs, and strive to avoid every Conscience-wasting
presumptuous Sin. -- Immediately quit your immoderate Pursuit of the World, and
set Bounds to your Business, Cares and Pleasures in it, that these may not
prove fatal Impediments to your obtaining Conviction. -- Immediately shake off
your vain Companions, and betake yourself to the Acquaintance of serious
Christians, whose Conversation may be instructive and quickening to you. --
Immediately take up the Practice of Closet-Duties; or if statedly observed, be
more afraid of trifling in secret Religion. -- Resolutely meditate on awakning
and melting Subjects. -- Daily read the Holy Bible. -- Be swift to hear the
Word preached, attend a faithful searching Ministry, and take heed how you
hear. -- And when under any Ordinance or Providence, you find Conscience begin
to be touched, now watch and pray, that you may not lose the Impression, but
that it may be thoroughly set home upon you. Know it, after all the Means you can
possibly use, it is the Work of the divine SPIRIT to convince Sinners: Yet he
ordinarily does this in the Way of Means. O neglect not any appointed Means
then: And yet have your Eye to the SPIRIT of Grace as the alone efficient
Cause. Observe his Motions. Pray for his powerful Influences. Call for a Sight
of Sin, and Sorrow for Sin: Call for Conviction, for Humiliation, for a broken
Heart, as you regard the Life of your Soul: Call instantly for these, call
aloud, pray and strive hard for these. Let mournful Reflections on your sick
Condition, and awful Prospects of your amazing Hazard, be cherished and not
repelled: yea, let them lie down and rise up with you, follow you into the
World, and accompany you Day and Night, that you may seek Salvation in earnest,
and never return to a fatal Rest in your Sins. -- And when this comes to be the
Case with you, happily you may be made ready for the Lord, prepared for the
glad Tidings of the Gospel, be disposed to welcome the Physician, and by coming
to him, have your Soul recovered to spiritual Life and Health.

But in the mean Time, whatever Comfort of Hope, you may enjoy, believe me,
it is but the Hope of the Hypocrite, which shall perish as the Spider's Web, and
leave you ashamed, in the Hour of Death and in the Day of Judgment, if you go
out of the World with an unrenewed unhealed Soul. -- Ah, how inexcusable will
you be, if you perish from under the Light and Warnings of the Gospel! Your
Blood will be upon your own Head, if you despise and reject the Physician of
Souls. -- You are sick nigh unto Death, the Graves are ready for you, Hell
gapes to receive your guilty Spirit: And how can you escape, if you neglect so
great Salvation! -- The Physician you need, is knocking at your Door now, and
waits that he may be gracious: But though he has long Patience, he will not wait
always. He may leave you, ere you are aware: and then how impossible your
Recovery! No created Arm can relieve your Soul: Sink it must into eternal
Perdition, and none can help it. O Inhabitant of Lebanon, that make thy Nest
in the Cedars, how comely shall thou be when Pangs come upon thee, the Pain as
of a Woman in Travail! For so it is written, When they shall say, Peace and
Safety, then sudden Destruction comes upon them, as Travail upon a Woman with
Child; and they shall not escape. (1 These. 5.3.) -- If Conscience never be
roused against you in this World, it will awake with a Vengeance in the next;
it will roar like a Lion, and tear you in Pieces. In Proportion to your Guilt
shall be your Torment: And there will be none to deliver. The only Savior will
be turned against you; and He will make you as a fiery Oven in the Day of his
Anger. -- WOE unto you that laugh now: for you shall mourn and weep. (The Mouth
of the Lord has spoken it, Luke 16.25.) And if you would prevent your mourning
at the last, when summoned before the great God unto Judgment and when it will
be too late to obtain Mercy, then hasten now, even to Day, while it is called
to Day, hasten to get among the Mourners in Zion. O that I could by any Means
so represent the Evil of Sin, and the Terrors of Death, Judgment and Wrath to
come, as that these Things might appear in their Reality before your Eyes! O
bethink yourselves, and consider what a Case you would be in, if now you were
taking your final Leave of the World, if now you were called before the awful
Judgment Seat, if Christ were this Moment revealed from Heaven in flaming Fire
to condemn and punish impenitent Sinners! Let Conscience be startled at the
tremendous Prospect. Instantly shake off vain Merriment; laugh no more in your
pleasing Dreams, and mad Security: But let your Heart meditate Terror, and be
bowed down heavily, at the Sight of your sinful Sickness, Misery and Hazard.

And now, supposing this to be the Case with some of you, I shall apply myself,

2. To convinced Sinners.

If there be any here present, whose Souls are not in Prosperity and Health,
but who are now awakened to some Sensibility of your sick and perishing State,
perhaps are deeply wounded in Spirit, and are crying out for a Physician; to
such I would direct a few Words by way of Counsel, Caution and Encouragement.

Let me say here,

(1.) Look to it, that you don't miscarry in the first Step toward Conversion,
by mistaking the Nature of true Conviction, and imagining yourselves in the
full Experience of this, while yet perhaps essentially defective in it. -- The
SPIRIT, when he comes, convinces of SIN, and of RIGHTEOUSNESS, and of
JUDGMENT. (Joh. 16.8.) As Agent under and for CHRIST, in the Application of
Redemption, he works Conviction in a Way becoming his own Character as the
Spirit of Grace and Truth, in a Way subservient to the Ends of his blessed
Office, and pursuant to the Design of the Savior's Undertaking; and in a Way
accommodated to the intellectual Nature of Man, in its State of Apostasy;
informing his Judgment, as well as influencing his Passions; working on his
Hopes, as well as his Fears; encouraging him from the rich Provisions of Grace,
as well as terrifying him by the flaming Sword of Justice; humbling and melting
his Heart, as well as pricking his Conscience; directing him to a Physician, as
well as affecting him with his Malady; and making Use of the Gospel, as well as
of the Law, to these Purposes.

Examine now into your Experience; and take heed, that you don't deceive
yourselves, by taking up contented with a partial and imperfect Work of
Conviction. Know it, such a Work, for the Kind and for the Measure of it, as
will make you thoroughly feel your Soul-Sickness, and Need of a Physician; as
will make you solemnly attentive to the Gospel-Report, reconciled to the Method
of Salvation by Grace through Faith in the Blood of Christ, restless under the
Burden of Sin, and disposed to welcome the Savior, in his whole remedial
Undertaking, and for all its Purposes, upon the most self-denying Terms,
without Exception or Reserve; such a Work, I say, and so much of it, there must
be in your real Experience, if you would not fail in Point of common Grace,
usually previous and preparative to Conversion. O look to it, that with Regard
to this introductory Work you do indeed begin in the Spirit, and that you do
not end in the Flesh.

(2.) Then, beware of Apostasy from hopeful Beginnings of Conviction, and
relapsing into Security. -- True Conviction, in any Degree of it, is an
Instance of divine preventing Mercy. It is the Fruit of the SPIRIT striving
with you. O forsake not your own Mercies. Quench not the Spirit. (1 These.
5.19.) Don't slight Conviction, nor oppose it: but follow it on, fall in with
it, and labor to promote its genuine Effects. As you love your Souls, be
always in Care, that you do not turn the Grace of God into Wantonness; that you
do not grieve and vex the Holy Ghost, by wilful Resistance or affected
Stupidity under his Hand. A just God may by this be provoked to cut you down
suddenly by Death; or he may swear in his Wrath, that his SPIRIT shall forever
cease striving with you: and if either of these awful Events should happen, you
are undone, without Remedy. -- O let this Reflection be as a Thunderbolt shot
into your Conscience, to keep it awake: and let the dreadful Sound in your Ears
put you upon fleeing for Refuge, to lay hold on the Hope set before you.

(3.) Beware of resting in Conviction. Alas, Conviction may proceed to a high
Degree and to a great Length, and yet after all may leave you short of that
Faith in the Blood of Christ, without which you will never experience its
healing and saving Efficacy. -- If you think to be your own Physicians, and
expect Healing merely by Virtue of your own Repentances, Reformations, and
Practice of Duties; or if you go about to make a Righteousness of your
Humiliation and religious Concern, expecting hereby to oblige the Divine
Physician to pity and relieve you; in either Case you may procure to yourselves
a Show of Healing, but verily Christ shall profit you nothing. Without the
Blood of Sprinkling applied to cleanse and heal your Souls, you must in the End
be shut out of Heaven among the defiled and abominable, must descend with
bleeding Wounds to the Place of unutterable Horror, and take your Lot with
unpardoned Devils and damned Ghosts, where the Fire is not quenched. Nay, the
Memory of your past Experiences will dreadfully enrage your Wounds hereafter;
and your practical Contempts of the Blood of Christ will make it serve only as
Oil further to inflame the Vengeance of eternal Fire. O take heed then, that
you don't any of you stop at mere Conviction, nor rest in its best Effects,
short of Gospel-Faith. Verily, no Change of Opinion, no Change of Passion, no
Change of moral Disposition and Conduct will avail to the Ends of healing and
saving your Souls, without a regenerating Change and Heart-purifying Faith. O
dread a Delusion here, in the grand turning Point. Be not cheated by a
fallacious Appearance. Don't deceive yourselves; and let no Man deceive you by
vain Words. Consult not with Flesh and Blood in the Case. Turn away your Ear
from the dangerous Flatteries, nor listen to the corrupt Advices of false
Friends about you, but cease from the Instruction which causes to err. Nature
(I know) impatient of Trouble, and eager to shake it off, is apt to seek Ease
by the nearest, though not the safest Methods. Let Conscience, directed by the
unerring Word, set Bounds here: and resolve to seek and receive Healing only in
the Gospel-Way, by Faith in the Blood of Christ.

(4.) To seek Christ and Healing in this Way of Faith, hasten as much as
possible, and beware of indulging voluntary Delays. -- Every wilful Delay is a
virtual refusing for the present, is utterly inexcusable, and very dangerous.
The longer you cherish a dilatory Disposition, you will but set yourselves at a
wider Distance from Christ and Healing; your Unbelief will contract a greater
Stubbornness, and the Wounds of Conscience grow more difficult of Cure. Do you
now stand off from Christ, and neglect so great Salvation, in Hopes of a more
convenient Season? O foolish Presumption! Take Heed lest it betray you into
fatal Security, by a final withdraw of the convincing SPIRIT from you; or else
into horrible Despair, by the Tempter's telling you hereafter, that it is too
late, as he does now, that it is too soon. -- But, you are acted perhaps by
some other Views, in thus standing aloof from the Physician. Is it because you
think your selves unworthy to come to Christ? Here Is the Show of Humility: but
it is a spurious Grace, the Issue of a haughty Mind. Do you stay away from
Christ on the Prospect of coming to him ere long better recommended, by good
Qualities in you, or good Works done by you, that may purchase his Favor, and
entitle to the Benefits of his Redemption? If so, here is the Pride of your
Hearts, and the Snare of the Devil. Obedience is the Daughter of Faith, and
Good Works are a good Nurse to Faith: but if you make Works the Mother of
Faith, that Faith is not right, it is but a Bastard-Faith. -- Be it that you
think (as many poor Souls do at such a Time) that you must not dare to believe,
until your Agonies of Sorrow and Terror have risen up to the Height of others
Experience, in some very remarkable Cases, singled out by you for a Standard; I
must needs let you know, This is your Infirmity. Such as you, who (in the
Measure of more common Experience) have tasted the Bitterness of Sin, and feel
your perishing Condition without a Savior, and are lamenting after him, but
still defer the great Transaction of closing with or coming to him, for Fear of
presuming; I must tell you, if you want further Conviction of any Thing, it is
of the Sin and Mischief of your Unbelief, which holds you off from the
Physician, hold you down upon the Rack of a tormenting Conscience, and keeps
your Wounds open and bleeding. O labor for a deeply impressed Apprehension of
the infinite Malignity and Guilt of UNBELIEF, the present and indispensable
Obligation of FAITH, and the egregious Folly of DELAYS. And let this View of
Things give Speed to the Motion of a trembling distressed Soul toward the
desired Savior. That Exhortation to the awak'ned Jailer, shows what is the
proper and immediate Duty of convinced Sinners, Act. 16.31. Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. O hasten the Flight of Faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ; as the Manslayer of old fled with swiftest Expedition to the
City of Refuge. Look instantly to JESUS, as the stung Israelites in the
Wilderness were to look immediately to the brazen Serpent, for healing.

I know indeed, the Arm of the Lord must be stretched out, and this must draw
you, or you will never be able effectually to come to Christ: yet, I beseech you,
let not the Scriptures be wrested by you, in this Case, to your own
Destruction. The Doctrine of Man's Inability will grossly be perverted, if you
make it a Pretext for voluntary Delays and careless Neglects of incumbent Duty.
Alas, Sinner, if you finally miscarry, a righteous God will charge you as the
faulty Cause, nor will you have any Cloak for your Sin. Your spiritual
Impotence will never serve you with any colouraable Plea in apologizing for
your wilful Unbelief and spiritual Sloth. If any is hugging himself in the
Dream of imaginary Safety, from such an Excuse, let him know, His Damnation
slumbereth not. -- The Sense of your own Weakness and Insufficiency should
rather put you in Fear, awaken your Care, and deter you from all Negligence. O
let it have this Effect upon you. Agreably I proceed to say,

(5.) Under the Excitements and Aids of divine common Grace, be earnestly and
diligently pursuing after saving special Grace, in a close Attendance upon the
instituted Means of obtaining it; and beware of indulging any sinful Neglect,
or slothful Management.

Ordinarily the blessed God works by his own appointed Means. The common Work
of the Spirit, whereby Sinners are brought under Conviction and Humiliation, is
usually begun and carried on by the Means of God's Appointment: and convinced
Sinners must persevere in an unwearied Attendance upon the Means, if they hope
to secure the End of that Work they are under, as preparatory to saving
Conversion. Indeed it would bewray great Ignorance and Presumption in you, to
rest in mere Means, to depend on them to do the Office of the divine Efficient,
or to depend on your own Endeavors in the Use of them, as deserving at his
Hands. However, let it be considered also, it would bewray great Ingratitude to
God, to slight the common Operations of his Spirit; and an unsufferable Affront
to him, to receive his Grace in vain, or not to give Diligence, that under its
Restraints and Assistances you may go the utmost Lengths, you are capable of in
your present Condition, both from Sin and toward Duty.

Common Grace, though specifically different from saving Grace, yet is also the
Fruit of the SPIRIT, an improvable Talent, good in its Place, and to its proper
Ends and Uses. The SPIRIT is good; and all his Gifts and Influences do
participate of his Goodness. His common Grace is good in its Kind; and all its
genuine Applications and Actings do partake of the Goodness of their Principle.
Hence a Sinner, under the Government and in the Exercise of common Grace, though
he cannot please God (in the Sense of that Scripture-Expression) yet he less
displeases him, than the openly profane, or the careless Hypocrite. He is less
abominable, when behaving as he should under Conviction and Humiliation, than
in the Fullness of his Pride and Security. While, by the Help of the SPIRIT in
his lower Operations, the Sinner is diligently and earnestly attending the
instituted Course of Means, he certainly less provokes God, than if he totally
neglected or but formally and coldly and occasionally attended them. Such an
awak'ned inquiring Sinner may be said to be not far from the Kingdom of God; he
keeps in the Way of the Blessing; and is doing what has an instrumental
Aptitude to promote the Soul's Preparation or Predisposition to Faith in
Christ, by which Faith he may please the Lord.

While then you are justly cautious and afraid of resting in any Seize
intellectual or moral, that are the Result of mere common Grace, which neither
are Conversion, nor can merit it; yet you must be cautious too of undervaluing
and neglecting the SPIRIT in his common Influences. So likewise, while you are
careful to look beyond your selves, and above all Means and Instruments, unto
the FIRST CAUSE, from whom comes down every good and perfect Gift; you are,
notwithstanding, to value the Means in their Place and Order, and be diligent
in improving them, by the Help of common Grace, to their proper Purposes; never
satisfied until you have got into the happy Number of Zion's Converts, and
obtained like precious Faith with them. -- Be waiting at the Pool, thou
Cripple, in a mournful Sense of thine Impotence: so although unworthy, the
compassionate JESUS may (ere thou art aware) appear for thy Help, and work a
Miracle of Mercy upon thee. -- Ply the Throne of Grace with your ardent and
incessant Cries for Mercy and Grace to help you; in some such Language as that,
Psalm. 41.4. I said, Lord, be merciful unto me; heal my Soul, for I have sinned
against thee. Be following hard after God, in an Attendance upon all the Means
(of his Institution) public and private, in Season and out of Season. Use them
with an Aim at Conversion, and with an Eye to the Spirit of Christ, the
sovereign Author. Come to the Means "with Diligence, Preparation, and Prayer".
O shake off spiritual Sloth: and let not that be your Condemnation (as it is
written, Hos. 5.4.) THEY WILL NOT FRAME THEIR DOINGS TO TURN UNTO THEIR GOD.

In a Word, as active Conversion is a Duty of immediate Obligation upon you,
though an impossible Duty without a Strength above your own; therefore while GOD
is saying, Turn ye, Turn ye, do you in the Fervor of your Affections, but
still with a Dependence on divine Power to enable you, make your humble
Attempts to answer the Divine Call. At your Lord's bidding, try to stretch out
the withered Hand. Make Experiment what a gracious God will do for you.
Peradventure, while employed in these your feeble Essays, the Spirit of Life
may enter into you, and accomplish in you the Work of Faith with Power. Be
therefore striving in Prayer and in the Use of Means; looking diligently lest
you fail of the Grace of God.

6. Though a righteous God may put you to wait long for Help and Healing, yet
beware that your Heart do not fret against the Lord, nor despond under your
continuing Troubles.

Confess the Justice of God, and murmur not at his Severity. Adore his Wisdom,
and wait his Time. Believe it but a necessary Discipline you are under; lie at
the Foot of Divine Sovereignty; and while you dread the false Comforts of
Presumption, yet refuse not all Comfort of Hope from Mercy, infinitely rich and
free. Whatever you do, keep Hope alive, by often reviewing and praying over
those general Gospel-Encouragements, applicable to your distressed Case. Let no
dark Reflections or gloomy Prospects prevail to silence Prayer, to dispirit
unto Duty, or obstruct your Progress in the careful painful Use of all
appointed Means. As, on the one Hand, you must be vigilant lest the Adversary
of Souls should precipitate a superficial Healing of your bruised Spirit, in
the Methods of Pharisaism or Self-Righteousness, and thus destroy your Soul by
a false Peace and presumptuous Hope: So, on the other Hand, you must take Heed,
lest he drive you to a wicked and damning Despair; by exasperating your Wounds,
blinding your Eyes to the Gospel-Remedy, or representing it to you in a
disparaging Light, and overwhelming you with the Terrors of Law and Justice.

For I must observe to you, although the Fears of awakened Sinners, so far as
they have true Grounds and a proper Operation, are certainly Products of the
Holy SPIRIT, as the Spirit of Bondage; yet that Fear of Amazement, which has a
slavish hellish Torment, and that Desperation, which drives Men to put from
them the Word of God, or makes them lie down in sullen Negligence, are Things
that do not belong to the Work of the convincing SPIRIT, nor are the genuine
Effects of any immediate Impressions of His upon their Souls: No, but they
spring out of a corrupt Heart and guilty Conscience, and the Impressions of
Satan, acting in the Form of a cruel Accuser and malicious Terrifier. O be not
ignorant of Satan's Devices, lest he get an Advantage against you. He has his
Affrightments, as well as Allurements: be upon your Guard against both. When
provoked, under Impressions of Guilt and Wrath, to despond, and give over the
Care of your Salvation as hopeless, look upon it as (what it is in Truth) a
Temptation; and resist the Devil, who is a Liar and a Murderer from the
beginning. O consider, you do but credit and please that wicked One, by all
your unbelieving Fears, your resolute Deafness to Gospel-Encouragements, your
sinful Demurs, Distrusts, Prejudices and Objections, whereby you thrust away
all Hope, and deaden your Heart to Duty. This Temper and Conduct is derogatory
to Gospel Grace, a Reproach to the Father of Mercies, a Disparagement to the
meek and compassionate Redeemer, a Grief to the Holy Spirit, the maddest
Cruelty to your own Soul, and a Gratification of your Adversary the Devil, who
goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour; "whose Trade is to
tear poor Souls in Pieces, and torture them all he can". Realise it, there is a
Terror that is dangerous, unprofitable, unnecessary; arising from Unbelief, and
desponding Tho'ts and Passions, under a Satanick Influence. Beware here. Though
the Devil would fain persuade you, that the Day of Visitation is over with you,
that your Case is unremediable, and hopeless like his own, yet believe him not.
What though your Diseases and Wounds be truly immedicable, by all the Skill and
Power of Creatures, and so your Case is hazardous and deplorable? Yet still it
is not desperate. I this Day bring you the glad Tidings, that there is Balm in
Gilead, and a Physician there.

Do you feel your selves sick and perishing? Do your Wounds smart and pain you?
Do your putrefying Sores make you even stink in your own Nostrils? And are you
afraid of dying by the Force of your malignant Maladies? O be thankful to God,
who has opened your Eyes to see your Danger, and awakened you to this
Sensibility of your threatening Sickness and horrible Bruises. But, whatever the
Devil and a deceitful Heart may say to affright you, don't give Way to
despairing Apprehensions. Believe it, there is a Physician, and in him is Help
to be found. He has a sovereign Remedy for every Malady, effectual Relief for
every Grievance. Your Sin and Misery do not exceed the Sufficiency of your
Physician, or the Virtue of his Remedies. He is able even to raise the Dead: He
quick'neth whom he will: and his Compassion is equal to his Power. He is taking
you in Hand; and if you don't repulse him in the Methods of his Wisdom and
Grace, by Unbelief, Impatience and Dispondence, nor affront him by returning to
Security and Presumption, there are promising Signs at present of a merciful
Cure intended for you. Verily, there is Hope in Israel for you as concerning
this Thing.

Though your Distress and Anguish of Conscience may be great and long continued,
yet look upon the Dealings of your Divine Physician with you as but wholesome
Severities; submit to his wise and faithful Measures; attend his salutary
Means; and hope, O trembling self-humbling Sinner, hope for a blessed Issue.
The Day seems to be dawning upon your Soul; or if at present you are in the
Horror of Darkness, nevertheless the Daylight may be near approaching. The Sun
of Righteousness may suddenly rise, and dart his healing Beams upon you. Yet a
little while, and the Physician may come to bind up your broken Heart. Have you
not seen many Instances of his healing Power and Mercy; and that in Cases as
helpless and hopeless as yours? Let these Examples be your Encouragement: or
they will render you the more inexcusable, and serve to aggravate your
Self-Destruction, if you perish at last.

Let these Tho'ts make you resolved and unwearied in diligently seeking the
Lord, while he may be found. -- You have at least the Motive of a Who can tell?
O cast your self on his sovereign Grace; and go on, go on seeking, if
peradventure He may be found of you. Seek JESUS that was crucified, whose Blood
is an adequate Remedy, be your Case ever so bad. Here, here is your Remedy,
distressed Soul! Methinks, if you have any true feeling of your Sickness and
Wounds, it must something solace your aching Heart, to hear of this glorious
effectual Remedy. O let it not lie neglected: keep it in your Eye and Thought:
try, and never cease trying, to apply it by Faith. Have you not found all other
Methods in vain Are you willing to go out of the World with bleeding Wounds and
broken Bones! Are not your Opportunities awfully uncertain, and very short! O
hasten, hasten then to get your Soul healed by the Blood of Sprinkling. How
know you but that a Day or an Hour's longer Delay may thrust you beyond Hope,
and betray you into an Eternity of Horror and Despair! Or on the other Hand, if
you will instantly set your Heart to this Thing, and with a distressed, but
still encouraged Soul, cry to the Throne of Grace for the Blood of Christ to be
applied to you through Faith, how know you but that while you are in this Care
and Prayer, the SPIRIT of the Lord may come mightily upon you, and in a Moment
give you to taste the Pleasure of your Desire accomplished! While the Words are
in your Mouth, the SPIRIT of Grace may seize your Heart, infuse a Principle of
Life, work Faith in you, and sprinkle you from an evil Conscience, by the Blood
of CHRIST, which cleanses from all Sin! After the Noise and Terror of stormy
Wind, Earthquake, and flaming Fire, you may at last suddenly hear the still
small Voice, sweetly, yet powerfully, commanding Salvation to you. And thus in
an Instant the Foundation may be laid for a Hope, that shall never make you
ashamed. -- God of his infinite Mercy, for Jesus sake, grant that this may be
your happy Case!

3. Now in the last Place, I should have directed the Exhortation -- to such as
are already got into a State of Conversion.

You that have obtained the incomparable Blessing of a healed Soul, be thankful
to your Divine Physician. Let not Men and Means, but God your Savior, have the
Praise. Admire his Skill, Power, and Compassion: and give him the Glory due to
his great Name. -- Be humble, under a Sense of remaining Corruptions and
Infirmities. -- Mourn every contracted Guilt and Defilement. -- Have continual
Recourse to the Lord Jesus Christ for fresh Applications of his Blood through
Faith; and for new Anointings of the Spirit daily. -- Aspire after a
progressive Health and Prosperity of Soul, and all the Symptoms and Effects of
it. -- Be ambitious of the Honor and Comfort of a full Assurance, that your
Soul is indeed delivered and healed. -- Long for Heaven's Perfection. -- Pity
such as are yet sick and perishing; and in the Arms of your Faith and Prayer,
bring them to the Physician of Souls. Warn the secure; assist the Awakened, by
all the Means in your Power and within your proper Line of private Duty.

But these Hints must suffice here. -- And thus I have largely considered (what
I had my Eye principally to) the first Proposition.

I should have now gone on to the other.

PROP. 2. Regenerate Souls, as viewed in a Comparison of one with another (or
of the same Souls, with themselves, at different Times) may in certain special
Cases eminently be said to prosper and be in Health.

Here I might say,

(1.) One Case is, when there is a remarkable Proficiency in christian
experimental Knowledge; singular Improvement in spiritual Wisdom and
Understanding.

(2) Another Case is, when there is a distinguishing Growth in Grace, and
Progress in the Divine Life; the new Man increasing in the Vigor and Activity
of it is holy Principles and Powers of Operation.

(3.) When there is an inward pleasurable Sensation of this spiritual Life, and
sweet Satisfaction resulting from its Exercise and Evidence, and from the
Prospects of its future Perfection

In all these Respects there is a gradual Difference among vital Christians: and
where any do excel, in all or either of these Points of superior Attainment,
such may be said, by way of Eminence, to have Souls* prospering and in Health.

I must not stay to illustrate these several Heads: but shall now hint at some
Reflections, by way of APPLICATION.

USE. 1. How lovely and venerable are all such Souls as prosper in this exalted
Sense! -- They are the wisest, and best, and most felicitous Souls on Earth.
And how happy, how amiable the Place, that is full of these prosperous Souls!

USE 2. Let it be for a Lamentation, that the Number of such Souls in the
professing World, and even among our selves, is so exceeding small. How few
strong and lively, even among living Christians!

USE 3. Let us all examine into our Character, by the Rules here presented us
-- Do we make happy Advances in Christian Knowledge and Experience, in Faith
and Holiness, in Hope and Consolation? Then may our Souls be denominated truly,
yea, eminently healthful and prosperous.

But I come to another general Note from the Text.

DOCT. II. Soul-Prosperity and Health is the best and most valuable Blessing we
can wish any one. -- I wish above all Things, etc. --
If we should consider the Nature and Dignity of the Soul of Man, or the
Necessity and Advantages of this Prosperity and Health of Soul; if we should
consider the infinite Price and divine Power, by Virtue of which we obtain it;
if we should consider the united Suffrages of Believers, or even the Sentiments
of Sinners themselves, in their dying Moments, or under Awaknings, etc. the
Point would easily receive a clear and full Confirmation. -- But I must not
dwell here.

USE. 1. Hence the vast Obligations of Thankfulness to God our Savior, lying
upon all true Believers; in that he has given them this Blessing of Blessings,
the Spirit of Love and of Power and of a sound Mind.

USE 2. Hence, when our Souls prosper and are in Health, what a just Allay must
the Reflection on this be to all the Sorrows of bodily Sickness or other
external Adversity? And what a powerful Corrective to those envious Thoughts
and Passions, sometimes too prevalent even in good Men, upon seeing others
(especially the Wicked) prospering in the World?

USE 3. Hence the amazing Stupidity and Folly of such as seldom or never wish
to themselves or others this Prosperity of Soul: But they are ever making
Provision for the Flesh, and panting after the Dust of the Earth. O the Madness
of such! They are like Children or Fools, who prefer glittering Baubles to
substantial Treasure, Shadows to Realities.

USE 4 Hence, they are deservedly to be looked on as our worst Enemies, who
wound and wrong our Souls, or hinder their Prosperity and Health. The Kisses of
every such Enemy are deceitful, and should be odious to us.

USE 5. On the other Hand, they are justly to be reputed our best Friends, who
study to promote our Soul-Prosperity and Health; though it be sometimes by the
harsh Method of Reproof. Faithful are the Rebukes of a Friend, though frequently
very cutting. Let the Righteous smite me, it shall be a Kindness, an excellent
Oil. --

USE 6. Above all, we should esteem CHRIST our greatest Friend, who is the
sovereign Helper and Healer of the brokenhearted, and though sometimes in his
Applications to wounded Spirits, he may use Corrosives, as well as Lenitives,
yet such a compassionate Benefactor to Souls is our Lord, that we need not be
afraid. Nay, though he take his sharpest Lance in Hand, we need not fear, since
it is in the Hand of infinite Love and Tenderness.

USE 7. Be we all persuaded to a just Solicitude for our Souls, that we may
secure the most excellent Prosperity and Health. -- Ye unconcerned Sinners, O
admit a Conviction of the transcendent Worth of your immortal Souls, the
incomparable Value of spiritual Blessings, and the vast Importance of improving
the present Opportunity, lest you should for ever lose them. -- Ye awakened
Sinners, take Heed that you don't deceive your selves, by mistaking the Nature
of true Prosperity, and lose your Souls, through Presumption upon uncertain
Signs, or by Despair under pressing Difficulties and Oppositions in your Way.
-- Let Converts beware of staying at any present Seize; but be solicitous
to make the swiftest and highest Advances in Soul Prosperity and Health. Though
now but Babes in Christ, see you be thriving Children. If any of you flatter
your selves that you have suddenly got to Maturity, it is an ill Sign upon you.

USE 8 When we are wishing the Welfare of others, let us in the first Place
wish them this best of Blessings, that their Souls may live and prosper and be
in Health -- This is my Heart's Desire and Prayer to God, for you, my dear
Friends: and no better Wish can I desire you to put up on my Behalf -- Ye
Parents, what can you desire better for your selves, or your Children, than
this Soul-Prosperity? O inculcate upon them the Care of their Souls; use all
private Means with them for their spiritual Good; bring them betimes under the
public Means, and by your Example teach them to Honor these. When you have
been as a Sermon, perhaps you will sometimes despise what you have heard: but
beware here. It would be just in God, if he should leave your Children to
despise your Admonition and private Means, after you have thus taught them to
contemn the public Means. Above all be much in Prayer with and for your
Children, that all Means may be blessed to their Soul-Prosperity. -- And you
that are Children, what better Blessing, than this, can you wish to yourselves,
or your Parents! O be much at the Throne of Grace on this Errand. -- And let
other Relatives, Neighbors, and Acquaintance (rich or poor in this World) make
the Wish in our Text for themselves and one another. -- Let all that wish well
to the Churches, pray that the Souls belonging to them, may be Souls bound up
in the Bundle of Life, truly prospering and in Health, and that such may daily
be added. This will bring on good and happy Times. -- Adored be sovereign
Grace, that we see at this Day many Souls coming in, under hopeful Symptoms. --
Let us pray for this whole Town and Land, that our Health may spring forth
speedily: Yea, for the whole World, that God would, send forth his Word, and
heal the Nations every where.

But I hasten to the last Observation.

DOCT. III. The most prosperous and healthful Souls on Earth are capable of
still further spiritual Improvements; which accordingly we should wish for them.
Alas, the brightest and strongest Saints are not above the Need of this
charitable and pious Wish for them: and indeed the more any Souls are really in
Health, the more humble they will be, and so the more desirous of a kind
Remembrance in the Prayers of Others.

Let us value and seek an Interest in the Affections and Prayers of the Saints;
that by them (as well as by our selves) we may have this important Request
daily put up to God for us, even that out Souls may prosper and be in Health.
-- And let us not be behind-hand with any, in our charitable Intercessions, or
in those Offices of Christian Friendship proper to accompany them.

Let us never cease very earnestly making this devout and good Wish for one
another, for our Families, for all our Relatives and Neighbors, for our
Friends and Christian Brethren, that they which have spiritual Life and Health,
may have it more abundantly; that their Souls, however prosperous already, may
have yet more of Christ and Heaven in them; and that Grace may at length be
completed in Glory.

To conclude, Let us extend our good Wishes, to the whole Church of Christ
every where: and look and long for the Time, even the set Time, to favor Zion;
when the glorious Things foretold concerning the latter Days, shall have their
full and most visible Accomplishment. Let us all take up the Prophet's holy
Resolution, Isai. 62.1. For Zion's sake will I not hold my Peace, and for
Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until the Righteousness thereof go forth as
Brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a Lamp that burns.

FINIS.
Page 7. lin. 7. read PROP. 1.- page 25. lin. 22. for Inferior, 1. Interior.


