Mr. Peabody's SERMON ON A Good and bad Hope of Salvation, etc.

THE Foundations, Effects, and distinguishing Properties of a good and bad HOPE
of Salvation; with Motives to excite all to labor and pray that they may
obtain a well-grounded Hope, and some Directions how to obtain it.

Considered in a SERMON, The Substance of which was delivered at the
Evening-Lecture at the New-North Church in Boston, on Tuesday June 8th 1742.
Where a Copy of it was desired for the Press.

By Oliver Peabody, M.A. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Natick.

Romans v. 5. And Hope makes not ashamed, because the Love of God is shed abroad
in our Hearts, by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us. BOSTON, Printed by D.
FOUL, for S. ELIOT in Cornhil. 1742.

PSALM cxix. 116. -- Let me not be ashamed of my Hope.
AS Hope and Fear, are the two governing Pasa sions of the Soul; which excite
us to Action: so it is of Concern to us, to know how to improve them so as to
promote our Happiness. And as we should improve our Fears of the Wrath of God
and eternal Torment, so as to quicken us to flee from the Wrath to come, and to
fly to the Refuge to lay hold on the Hope set before us in Christ Jesus; So we
should use our Hope, with a View to this great End.

It is greatly to be feared, that many have such a slender and sandy Foundation
of their Hope, that when they shall expect, that they are just entering into the
Possession and Enjoyment of what they hoped for; they shall find themselves
mistaken and disappointed: which is what the Psalmist deprecates in our Text.

Although he may, in this, have some Reference to his Hopes of outward good
Things agreeable to the Promise of God to him; yet it appears to me, that he has
Respect especially to future and eternal Things in this pathetick Prayer; ( Let
me not be ashamed of my Hope.)

We are not to expect to find a Connection of one Part with another, in this
admirable Psalm; and therefore I shall consider the Words in an abstracted
View: as a Prayer of holy David, (who was doubtless the Composer of this Psalm,
under the Influence and Inspiration of the Holy Ghost.)

And as this Prayer implies the Danger of our being deceived as to our Hopes of
Happiness and Salvation hereafter; so it shows us the great Necessity there is
of our having our Hopes of future Happiness so well grounded, that they may not
make us ashamed, as the Apostle expresses it, in Romans 5. 5. or as in the Text,
that we may not be ashamed of our Hope: both of which may be considered (by
divine Assistance) under this Doctrine, which I think is very plain from the
Words, viz.

DOCT. It highly becomes every one of us, to labor and pray, that our Hopes of
Happiness and Salvation in the World to come may be built on such Foundations
that we may not be ashamed thereof.

All Men in general (I believe) cherish some Hopes that they shall be happy, or
at least not miserable, after Death; whether they have any Foundation for such
Hopes or no: the most profligate Sinners flatter themselves that God will be
merciful to them; but how few are there that lay a good Foundation for their
Hopes! and how few that frequently and carefully enough examine the Grounds and
Foundations of their Hopes of Happiness!

It is certain that as the Hope of true Believers shall not make them ashamed,
so there is the Hope of the Hypocrite which shall perish. Job 8. 13, 14. -- And
the Hypocrite's Hope shall perish; whose Hope shall be cut off; and whose Trust
shall be as the Spider's Web.

Hence in as much as our eternal Happiness is so nearly concerned in it, it
appears to be of the highest Importance to us, to see to it that the Hope we
have of eternal Life; be not that of the Hypocrite; but a sure well grounded
Hope, of which we shall never be ashamed.

It must be observed here, that a Person may be said (in the Sense of our Text)
to be ashamed of his Hope when he is disappointed or frustrated of the
Enjoyment of those Things which he Hopes for.

Hope has Reference to Things to come: what we possess and enjoy we don't hope
for: and as he that comes to enjoy all which he hoped for cannot be said to be
ashamed of his Hope; so Shame and Confusion will cover them, who, instead of
the good Things they hoped for, shall find themselves frustrated and
disappointed; and made miserable. This with Respect to future and eternal
Things will be most amazing: How dreadful will it be for a Person to die. full
of Hopes of the Joys and Glories of Heaven and to find instead thereof that he
is sent down to the Place of Torment!

What I further propose, for the Proof and Illustration of this Doctrine is; to
consider and show;

1. What that Hope of Salvation, is, which is good and well grounded, and so
will not make such as have it, ashamed: and what that Hope is which will make
such as rest in it ashamed. And 2. to offer some Considerations for the Proof
of the Doctrine, and to convince us, of the Necessity of our striving and
praying, that we may all have an Hope of Salvation which we shall not be
ashamed of.

And as these Things are of great Importance. I hope I shall have your serious
and diligent Attention, to what (by divine Help) I shall offer.

And first I am to consider, What that Hope of Salvation is, which is good and
well grounded, and so will not make: those that have it, ashamed: And what that
Hope is which will make such as rest in it ashamed. And I shall endeavor so,
to describe these, as that we may be the better able to distinguish between a
true and false Hope of Happiness hereafter.

And that I may be the more easily understood, I shall consider these Things
distinctly and apart, by which they will mutually reflect Light on each other.
Agreeably I would consider first, What a good and well-grounded Hope of
Salvation is, which will not make such as have it ashamed. And then secondly,
Confider what that false Hope is, which such as rest in it, shall be ashamed of.

First, I am to consider and show what that good and well-grounded Hope of
eternal Happiness and Salvation is; which will not make such as have it
ashamed: because it will not deceive them at last; but they shall certainly
enjoy the glorious and blessed Things, which they hope for.

Hope in general; is an Expectation, hereafter to possess and enjoy something
which we esteem good, and think will tend to our Happiness; and so desire it
and suppose upon proper Endeavors, we may obtain it. This is a general
Description of Hope. We don't hope for what we now enjoy; nor for any Thing
which is not in our Esteem Good; nor for what we think, it is impossible we
should ever obtain. For although we might with for a good Thing which we are
sensible cannot be obtained. Yet we cannot be faid properly to hope for it. And
if our Endeavors to obtain what we desire and hope for, are not included in
Hope, yet they are excited by it.

Now the Hope intended in my Text (as I understand it) and which I am now to
consider; is -- the Hope that we shall hereafter enjoy, all those glorious
Things which Christ has purchased; and God has in the Covenant of Grace
mercifully promised to his chosen People; even the Favor of God, and the full
Vision and Enjoyment of him; and so complete and everlasting Happiness and
Glory, Or a firm Expectation that we personally shall be brought in the World
to come (being conformed to the Image of God) to partake of that Fullness of
Joys which is in his Presence, and those Rivers of Pleasures which flow at his
right Hand for evermore. And to flatter our selves with such an Hope and
Expectation, and after all, to find ourselves disappointed, is a Thought which
may justly fill us with Concern of Soul.

Now that I may be the better understood, I would observe that even such as are
not yet converted and brought into Christ; especially if they are under
Convictions, may so far have Hope of this great Happiness; that if they are now
up and doing working out their own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, if they
conscienciously and diligently attend and improve all the Means of Grace which
God has appointed, cherish their Convictions, and strive with all their Might:
and so wait on God. I say if they do so, they may hope that God will, of his
rich and free Grace, through Christ, work his whole Work in them and the Work
of Faith with Power; that he will give them a true saving Faith in Christ, and
unseigned Repentance of Sin; that he will convert them and that they shall upon
their Repentance and closing with Christ, become in titled to eternal Life and
Salvation, and as this should support such and keep them from Despair; so it
ought to excite them to the most diligent seeking and striving to obtain Grace
and Mercy.

But the Believer has an Hope different from this. He hopes that God has
already of his rich and free Grace, through Christ and by his Holy Spirit,
wrought in his Heart those Things upon which he is now become entitled to all
these glorious Things, that he is become a Child of God and so an Heir of God
and joint Heir with Christ to that Inheritance which fades not away, Romans 8. 17.

But in as much as some that do thus hope they are in the Way to eternal Life
may be deceived, it may be proper to consider the Foundation on which our Hopes
of Happiness hereafter must be laid, so that it may be sure and not make us
ashamed: with some of the Fruits and Properties of it.

And here, I would say, the Grace, Mercy and Goodness of God, is the first
Foundation of our Hope of Happiness in the World to come, from this Originates
our Hope of Salvation. The whole of that glorious Contrivance of the Salvation
of Sinners arises and flows from the Mercy of God; which moved him to
compassionate our Misery, and sat his infinite Wisdom on Work, to contrive and
bring about a Method, (every Way agreeable to his adorable Excellencies,
Perfections and Attributes) for our Salvation.

Indeed it is of the free, rich Grace and Mercy of God that we are saved. Every
Thing that is done by God in Order to our Salvation: and Salvation itself flows
from free Grace. Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace are ye saved through Faith, and that not of
yourselves it is the Gift of God. But then it would nevertheless be unsafe to
hope for eternal Life, merely because, God is merciful, they that are in
eternal Misery will never be happy although God is a Being of infinite; Mercy,
no! he is inexorable to all their Cries and Lamentations. We may by no Means
depend on the uncovenanted Mercy of God.

If ever we obtain saving Grace and Mercy it must be in God's own Way, in that
Method in which all his divine Attributes and Perfections will be glorified and
which is revealed to us in the Gospel, in which Life and Immortality are
brought to Light.

And this is only in and by our Lord Jesus Christ and in the Covenant of Grace,
and so agreeable to the Promises of God in the Covenant, which are in Christ
Yea and Amen. Although God be infinitely merciful, although he be in and
through Christ the Father of Mercies and God of all Grace and Consolation, and
in him is reconciling the World to himself; yet out of Christ he is a consuming
Fire, and will by no Means clear the Guilty, and it is in vain for us, to hope
to obtain Mercy unless we seek it in that Way in which alone God is pleased to
bestow it, and therefore it appears, that it is the Righteousness of Christ, it
is his Obedience, Sufferings, and Intercession, that is the Foundation on which
we must build our Hopes of obtaining the Mercy of God to everlasting Life; and
this also in the Way of the Covenant of Grace, and agreeable to the most
gracious Promises in it.

And then further the Righteousness of Christ must be made our own, that is it
must be imputed to us, and we must be made Partakers of his Benefits, by the
Application of them to us by the Holy Spirit, in Order to our Justification and
Salvation; And we must become entitled to the Mercies promised in the Covenant.
For although there is a full and happy Provision made for Sinners in Christ,
although there be a Covenant of Grace made with Believers in him, and exceeding
great and precious. Promises; yet if we never come to Christ, and embrace him
by Faith so as to be united to him; if we don't acquiesee in the Way of
Salvation by him, and receive him on his own Terms: If we don't come into the
Covenant of Grace, and lay hold on the Promises. What Benefit and Advantage
will all this be of to us? He that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16. 16.
If Christ be the chief of ten Thousand and altogether lovely; yet if we cannot
say with the Spouse, Cant. 2. 16. My Beloved, is mine and I am his. How shall
we be the better for him? Although there be Merit enough in Christ for the
Salvation of all that will come to him; yet can we expect to partake of his
Merits, and Benefits, unless we come to him in his own Way therefore?

Still further, however gracious God is, whatever Provision is made for us in
Christ, and in the Covenant; yet since no unholy Thing can enter into Heaven
Rev. 21. 27. And without Holiness no Man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12. 14. It
will follow hence that we, who are by Nature unholy, impure, and defiled, and
Children of Wrath; must be converted, changed, renewed and sanctified, in Order
to our obtaining that Heaven of Happiness, which we hope for: And in Order to
our being renewed and sanctified by the blessed Spirit, (who is God that
sanctifies us) we must be, (by the same Holy Spirit,) enlightened in the Things
of God, convinced of the evil and accursed Nature of Sin, as it is against the
Nature, Attributes and Perfections of God, and a Violation of his Law, and a
dreadful Abuse of his unequalled Mercy and Grace, many Ways discovered to us;
but especially in giving us such a glorious Savior: And also of our own
personal Guilt, that we ourselves are the very Persons who are guilty. And we
must be brought to a real unseigned Hatred of all and every Sin, considered as
Sin; and to a real Conversion or turning from Sin unto God.

Agreeably, having observed these Things, I may proceed to say, in order to lay
the Foundation of our Hope of future Happiness and Salvation, deep and sure,
and to have such an Hope as we shall not be ashamed of.

We must come to be well satisfied and assured, that we have been enabled to
comply with the Terms on which Salvation is promised. In a few Words, here,
more particularly,

They that have a good and well grounded Hope, that they are now Heirs to
Glory; are such as have good Reason to be satisfied, that they have been truly
and really convinced of Sin; and been brought to an hearty Sorrow for it, that
they have in them a real Hatred of all Sin, as Sin, that they have truly
repented of all and every Sin and that a real Change is wrought in them, that
they are turned from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to the
living God. That old Things are passeed away in them and all Things are become
new, that they are born again and created a new in Christ Jesus unto good Works
which God ordained that they should walk in them. And that they have been
enabled, by the Grace and Spirit of God (in Concurrance with their Endeavors)
to close with Christ on his own Terms; to come entirely out of themselves,
renouncing all Dependence on their own Righteousness, or any Thing that they
can possibly do to receive Christ as their Prophet, Priest and King, as their
Lord as well as Christ; and so to put over all the Concerns of their precious
and immortal Souls into his Hands. And that their Hearts are purified by Faith
and their Faith works by Love.

Whoever has a well-grounded. Assurance of this, that these Things are wrought
in and for him; has a good and sure Hope of eternal Life and Salvation, he may
lay hold on the Promises, (being united to Christ) and rest satisfied in the
never-failing Faithfulness of him that has promised: and so may go on his Way
rejoicing. If our Hope be indeed built on these Principles, on this Foundation,
we shall never be ashamed of it,

But that I may be as plain as possible, and that you may the better judge
whether the Hope you now have be indeed well grounded. Consider whether you
find in you, the Fruits and Consequents, and the distingiushing Properties of
such an Hope, or those Things that accompany it; such as these.

Do you upon a serious and close Examination, find that the Bent, Biass and
Inclination of your Souls, and Minds are to God to Religion and Holiness? Do
you take Pleasure in Meditating on God, his Divine Perfections and on his Word,
and in Communion with him? Do you love his House, Worship, Ordinances, and his
Ministers for their Work Sake; and the Image of God, and such as bear his
Image? We know we are passed from Death to Life because we love the Brethren, 1
John 3. 14.

And do you find that you have in you a true habitual Hatred of Sin and of all
Sin? Is there no darling Sin which you hug in your Bosoms, and secretly role as
a sweet Morsel under your Tongue?

Again do your Hopes of Happiness make and keep you meek, humble, and lowly in
Mind, so that in Meekness and Lowliness of Mind, you esteem others better than
your selves? They that have a good Hope will have this Temper of Mind,
Meekness, Love, Gentleness, and Goodnefs, are reckoned up among the genuine
Fruits of the Spirit that dwells in Believers, Gal. 5. 22. We shall have great
Reason to suspect the Foundation of our Hope, if our Hope puffs us up, makes us
proud, self-conceited and censorious. Of which more hereafter.

Further, are you willing and desirous to come to the Light, and to have the
Foundation of your Hope thro'ly searched and tried? It is a very dark Sign, if
we are backward and loath to trust the Foundation of our Hope to Examination,
that we our selves suspect that it is not good, and yet are too willing to be
deceived. Our Savior says John 3. 20, 21. For every one that does Evil hates
the Light, neither comes to the Light least his Deeds should be reproved. But
he that does Truth comes to the Light, that his Deeds may be made manifest
that they are wrought in God. We should consider therefore whether it be our
hearty Desire and Prayer, that God would discover us to ourselves, and give us
to know our true State and Condition, whatever Uneasiness the Knowledge of it
might now give us. Can we heartily pray as in 26 Psalm. 2. Examine me, O Lord,
and prove me, try my Reins and my Heart. And 139th Psalm 23, 24. Search' me, O
God, and know my Heart, try me and know my Thoughts, and see if there be any
wicked Way in me, and lead me in the Way everlasting.

Let me add, do you find that the more you search yourselves and try the
Grounds of your Hope, the better you are satisfied that your Hope is good? If
so this is a good Token that your Hope is laid on a good Bottom.

Still further, does your Hope of Salvation quicken you, to cleanse and purify
yourselves from all Sin, and Uncleanness, make you more earnest in your
Endeavors to be holy in Heart and Life? This is an essential Property of a
good Hope, 1 John 3.3. And every Man that has this Hope in him purifieth
himself even as he is pure. If your Hope be a good and well-grounded Hope you
will find that it will excite and stir you up to labor and strive to be more
and more holy and pure, more religious and virtuous, to be more like God.

You will not then rest in a bare slender Hope but will be giving all Diligence
to make your Calling and Election sure. 2 Pet. 1. 10. They that think low
Degrees of Grace eno', and that if they once come to have some Hope of
Happiness it is sufficient, or that they have already attained Grace enough to
carry them to Heaven and so are easy; have great Reason to fear they have no
Grace at all. Grace is of a growing Nature; Prove. 4. 18. The Path of the just
is as the shining Light, that shines more and more unto the perfect Day. And
every one that has a good Hope will find some such Temper in him as the Apostle
expresses in Phil. 3. 12. V and on, which read. They that have Grace will
desire more and never think they have enough of it here.

I would just add further here, does your Hope of Salvation, make you rejoice
more in Communion with God, and in the Manifestations of his Favor, than in
the outward Gifts of his Providence? This, the Psalmist mentions 4th Psalm. 6,
7. There be many that say, who will show us any Good? Lord, lift thou up the
Light of thy Countenance upon us. Thou have put Gladness in mine Heart, more
than in the Time that their Corn and their Wine increased. The clearer our
Hopes and Views of heavenly Joys are, the less will our Esteem of and Love to
earthly Things be. And the clearer our Evidences are that we are converted and
in the Way to Happiness, the greater will be our Joy and Comfort. Our Comfort
will arise in Proportion, to the Evidence we have that our Hopes are
well-grounded.

It should be observed here, that such as have indeed a good Hope, may
sometimes be under Clouds and Darkness, they that fear the Lord and obey the
Voice of his Servant may be left to walk in Darkness and see no Light, 50th
Isai. 10. And the Comforter that should relieve their Souls may be far from
them, Lam. 1. 16. And this may arise sometimes partly from bodily
Indispositions; more commonly from the Carelessness of such, they being off
their Guard, and so exposed to and overcome by Temptations: And falling into
some Sins which grieve the Holy Ghost and cause their Beloved to withdraw,
Cant. 5. 2. -- Again, this may arise in some, partly from comparing their
Experiences and Grounds of Hope, more with those of others; than with the Rules
in the Word of God. If Persons don't find in themselves those Things which some
others tell them they have experienced; although upon a full Examination they
may have as good Reason of their Hope; yet this may cause Doubts to arise even
in the Heart of a Believer. And it must be said we need the Assistance of the
Holy Ghost, in examining the Grounds of our Hope, and to enable us to see our
true State, and to witness with our Spirit that we are the Children of God,
Romans 18.17. And we shall not clearly see the Foundation (which may be laid in
us) to hope for Happiness, without the Help of the Spirit, so as to have no
Doubts; but if after all, in your dark Hours, you find your Hearts wake like
the Spouse's forementioned Cant. 5. 2. And your Hope is as the Anchor of your
Souls: Which supports and bears you up under all your Distresses and
Difficulties, and you have the Witness of your own Spirits, that your Hope is
built on the Foundation I have above mentioned, you may be satisfied it is a
good Hope.

There are other Marks in Scripture (agreeable to these) by which you may try
the Foundation of your Hope; but I believe if you carefully and impartially and
frequently examine yourselves by what has been said, you may come to a
satisfactory Conclusion, whether you have such an Hope as will not make you
ashamed or not.

I shall only add, if we could be fully satisfied in this important Point, we
must be frequent, serious and impartial in our Self-Examination and in
comparing ourselves with the Marks of true Believers; we must be constant in
the Use of Means; and we must be much in Prayer to God, to assist us herein,
and to discover to us what Foundation of Hope we have; and to give us the
Testimony of his Spirit with ours, that we are his Children, and have a good
Hope, and if we obtain this, we shall have Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory.
But this will receive further Light from the Consideration of that Hope which
will make such as have it ashamed. To which I now (as I proposed) proceed.

2dly, I am to consider, What that ill-grounded and false Hope is, of which,
such as have it, shall be ashamed, and some of the Properties of it.

And this being contrary to this good Hope, you may very much judge what it is,
by what has been already said, for they illustrate each other. So that I need
but little more than repeat some Things which have been already mentioned; and
show that that Hope which is founded on Things contrary thereto, or very
different therefrom is a false Hope and without good Grounds.

It is an awful and awakening Consideration, that so many hope for Happiness
without any good Ground and Foundation. Their Hope is no better than a vain
Presumption. And if such could see what their Condition really is, and how
groundless their Hope, now; as they will (if not before) when it will be
forever too late to rectify the dreadful Mistake: It might serve to excite them
to endeavor after a better Hope. That many do deceive themselves with a vain
Hope is very plain from what I have before said, and from Job 11. 20. But the
Eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not escape and their Hope shall
be as the giving up of the Ghost. And Job 18.14. His Confidence shall be rooted
out of his Tabernacle, and it shall bring him to the King of Terrors. 27 Chap.
8 v. For what is the Hope of the Hypocrite, though he has gained, when God
takes away his Soul? It is supposed here (you see) that Persons may have an
Hope of Happiness and yet perish, and oh how dreadful will this be! Let this
Consideration awaken your Attention to what may be said in showing what a false
Hope is, and excite you to see to it that you be not deceived by such an Hope.
And that you may be the better able to judge whether your Hopes of Happiness be
not built on some false Foundation: I shall offer a few Things under this Head
to your serious Consideration. Such as

First, If our Hope of Happiness is built on the Mercy of God, considered
separately from the Merits of Christ and the Covenant of Grace it is a false
Hope.

It is to be feared that too many hope to be happy hereafter, only because,
they think God is merciful and gracious; all the Foundation of their Hope is
the uncovenanted Mercy of God. But this is no good Foundation; for altho'our
Hopes of Happiness are founded on the Mercy and Grace of God, yet (as I have
before shown) it is through the Merits of Christ, and in the Way of the Covenant
of Grace. It is through Christ and in Covenant that we may hope for eternal
Mercy. It is presumption to hope for Salvation without Christ, and unless we
receive it in the Channel of the Covenant and Promises of God in it. To hope
for Mercy, therefore, without any Consideration of Christ, the Covenant of
Grace and the Promises, is to hope without good Grounds.

2dly, Our Hope of Salvation, while we have, no Reason to think we have an
Interest in Christ, that we are in the Covenant of Grace, and so entitled to
the Promises of Salvation and Happiness; is without a good Foundation.

The Mercy of God, the Merits of Christ, and the exceeding great and precious
Promises of the Gospel, will be of no further Advantage to us than we become
interested therein.

I am afraid many build their Hope of Heaven and Happiness upon this, that
there is Mercy in God, Merits enough in Christ, and many gracious Promises in
the Word of God; but never carefully enough examine to see, whether they
themselves, have complied with those Terms upon which they become entitled to
any of them. They don't (as they should do) carefully and thoroughly enough
examine, whether they have entirely come out of themselves and renounced all
Dependence on themselves, and emptied themselves of all Confidence, in their
own Merits, or Righteousness, whether they don't depend on their Faith (as a
Work by which they merit) or their Repentance or Morality; And whether they
have with their whole Heart embraced the Lord Jesus Christ in all his Offices,
as their Prophet, Priests, and King, as their whole and alone Savior. And yet
whether they have any good Reason to hope they have done these Things (by the
Help of the Spirit) or no, they vainly flatter themselves they are in the Way
to be saved by Christ.

I must (in Faithfulness) tell you, Brethren, that whatever other Foundation of
Hope you may flatter yourselves you have; yet if you are still Unbelievers, if
you have never closed with and embraced the Lord Jesus Christ on his own Terms,
if you have never heartily laid hold on the Covenant of Grace and given up
yourselves in it, and so have not laid hold on the Promises by Faith; your Hope
is not built on a good and sure Foundation, and you may expect to be ashamed of
it at last.

Thirdly, If you are not truly converted and born again, gain, if you are not
become new Creatures, and yet hope you are now in the Way to Salvation, your
Hope is vain and groundless.

Except a Man be born again, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, says our
Savior, John 3.3. and the Apostle speaks to the same Purpose, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If
any Man be in Christ Jesus be is anew Creature, old Things are done away in
him, and behold all Things are bebecome new. Now unless we find these Things in
us what Grounds of Hope can we have? Every Change does not lay a good
Foundation of Hope. A Man may be very greatly changed in his outward
Conversation, and experience some Change in his Heart; and yet never feel,
never experience an universal Change in his Heart, Soul, andi whole Nature. A
Person may be under very strong Convictions, and be brought to see Things, in
some Measure different from what he did before; and may have a considerable
Change wrought in him: he may forsake many Sins, and comply with many Duties
outwardly; and yet all this while never have his Heart really changed, nor his
Mind renewed He may not have any true Hatred of Sin, considered as Sin; for
then he would hate all Sin. Nay he may have some joy and seeming Pleasure in
Things of Religion. And what he may mistake for the Joy of the Holy Ghost, and
yet have no true, hearty Love to God, and our Savior, nor perform any Duties
from a Principle of Love to God, Hatred of Sin, Faith in Chrirst, and Obedience
to God. But this is no good Hope. It may be just observed here, that although
Faith in Christ, and Repentance of Sin (which is included in this Conversion)
be very different in their own Nature, yet they are never separated in a
Person; he that believes aright in the Lord Jesus Christ, repents of his Sins,
and is converted: And so on the contrary. And Repentance and this true real
Change in our Hearts, (which will influence our Lives, of which hereafter) is
necessary to be found in us, in order to our having a good Hope of Salvation.
Without Conversion we cannot be happy hereafter. I am sensible the Work of
Sanctification will not be perfected in this Life; but yet it must be here
begun; and you must be sanctified (if not perfectly here) yet throughout, in
every Part, Power, and Faculty of your Souls; you must be wholly, that is in
every part sanctified, and your whole Spirit, Soul, and Body must be preserved
blameless (in some Measure) unto the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 2, 3.

4. Does the Hope you have of Salvation and Happiness make and keep you humble,
meek and lowly? If not, you have Reason to fear it is no better than the Hope
of an Hypocrite.

A true and well-grounded Hope, has always this Fruit and Effect that it
humbles the Soul that has it, a good Foundation of Hope cannot be in the same
Soul, where Pride and Self-Conceit, especially spiritual Pride is cherished and
reigns. He that has a good Hope will be ready in Meekness and Lowliness of Mind
to esteem others better than himself: But a false Hope, the Hope of an
Hypocrite is apt to puff Men up with Pride, Vainglory, and Self-Conceit; they
that have such an Hope, are apt to esteem themselves better than others; to
proclaim their own Goodness, and to despise, judge and censure others. Think
not that I speak this of myself without Authority, for faith not the Scripture
the same Things, what less does our Savior teach us in the Account he gives us
of such a Pharisee in Luke 18. 10. and on, The Pharisee stood and prayed thus
with himself, God I thank thee, that I am not as other Men are, Extortioners,
Unjust, Adulterers or even as this Publican; How he boasts of himself and
despises his Neighbor! Charity is not puffed up, 1 Cor. 13. 4. Nor does it
envy others nor vaunt itself. If your Knowledge and spiritual Experiences and
Hope of Happiness which you pretend to, make you proud, and to think highly of
yourselves, and meanly of others, and if they make you uncharitably to any; you
have great Reason to fear yours is no better Hope and built on no better
Foundation, than the Hope of this Pharisee, and yet our Savior tells us the
Publican he so much despised was justified rather than he. The great God
speaking of such as say to others, Stand by thyself, come not near to me, for I
am holier than thou, says, these are a Smoke in my Nose, a Fire that burns
all Day: And threatens to reward them accordingly, 65 Isai. 5, 0.

Once more 5thly, If your Hope does not purify you, and quicken you to do all
you can to be free from all Sin, all Pollution both in Heart and Life; you have
Reason to fear it is without Ground.

If we would evidence to ourselves and others that our Hope of Salvation is
built on a sure Foundation, we must do it by bringing forth Fruits, meet for
Repentance. Matthew. 3. 8. An unholy Heart and Life cannot be consistent with a
good Hope.

A good Divine Mr. Mead.
says, you may hope for Heaven, while you are doing the Work of Hell: you may
hope for Salvation while you are working out your own Damnation; you may hope
in God, and yet never choose him for your Portion. A good Hope purifies the
Heart (as you have heard) and will excite us to endeavor to have a pure Heart,
and clean Hands. 24. Psalm. 4. but a false Hope is used as a covering for Sin,
Jer. 7. 8. and on.

If our Hopes of Happiness are on a good Foundation, they will raise our Hearts
and Affections, above the Things of this World. This World and the Things of it
will appear vain and trifling in the Eyes of him who has a good Hope of the
infinitely greater and better Things of another. He that has this Hope will
disapprove every Thing that tends to hinder his Coming to enjoy what he hopes
for, and approve every Thing that may help him forward to the Enjoyment of the
desired Good, but to enlarge no further (although more might be said here) I
have endeavored to show you how you may in some good Measure know, whether the
Foundation which you build your Hopes of Salvation upon be good or no. And so
whether you shall be likely to be ashamed of your Hope or not. And I hope what
has been said may be of Service to satisfy you herein. And this may suffice for
the first Thing I proposed to consider under the Doctrine. I proceed now to the
second, Viz.

Secondly, To offer some Considerations, for the Proof of the Doctrine, and to
convince us, of the Necessity of our striving and praying that we may all have
an Hope of Salvation, on such good Grounds, as that we shall not be ashamed of
it.

The Psalmist without Doubt had as good and well grounded an Hope, as any of us
have or can expect to have here; and yet you see, he (in the Text) prays to God
that he might not be ashamed of his Hope. And as he prayed for this, so,
doubtless, he also endeavored in the Use of proper Means, to have his Hope so
well-grounded that he might not be ashamed of it at Death, at the Judgment and
in the coming World. The Doctrine then naturally arises from die Text.

And without Doubt it is of great Concern to us all, to labor, strive, and
pray; that we may have such an Hope as shall not make us ashamed: as most
certainly all such Hopes will, as are not laid on a good and sure Foundation.
The Text plainly supposes an Hope that will be disappointed. And the wise Man
observes, Prove. 10. 28. The Hope of the Righteous shall be Gladness; but the
Expectation of the Wicked shall perish. And if Hope deferred makes the Heart
sick; but when, the Desire comes it is a Tree of Life? As Prove. 13. 12. How
dreadful will be the Shame and Confusion of those who hope for Happiness and
Salvation after Death and yet shall find themselves disappointed!

But it may be proper, under this Head, to give some Reasons of the Doctrine,
or Motives to excite us to labor and pray for a good Hope, and several
important Reasons may be briefly offered.

And besides what is said in our Text, and such other Texts as show this to be
our Duty and Interest, I would further offer the following Things to
Consideration, some of which may excite our Fear, others our Hope, and
Endeavors. Viz.

First, We should labor and pray that we may have a good Hope, because, if we
don't, we shall be in great Danger of having a false and ill-grounded Hope
which we shall be ashamed of.

The Thoughts of eternal Torment, are so shocking: that few, if any, can bear
them; hence most, if not all Men, find something or other, as a Foundation of
Hope to escape this; and it is greatly to be feared, that the greater Part of
Mankind, have a bad Foundation of Hope. And even those that enjoy the greatest
Privileges and make the highest Profession of Religion, are in Danger of this;
unless they with much Care and Prayer lay the Foundation: at first, deep and
sure, and then also often search the Foundation, to see if it be indeed such as
will not fail. We read of some chat have made Shipwreck of Faith, and a good
Conscience. 1 Timothy 1. 19. And the very Possibility of such a Thing, should
quicken us to the greatest Care that we be not like them. It is not so easy a
Matter to gain such a good Hope, as we shall with for hereafter, as some may
think it is, there are too many build this on the Sand, to allude to that of
our Savior, Matthew. 7. 24. and on. There are many false and unsafe Foundations
on which Men build their Hopes: And we have Hearts in us naturally, which are
deceitful above all Things and desperately wicked. Jer. 17. 9. We have also a
very subtle Devil, who without Doubt does all he possibly can, to prevent our
laying a good Foundation of Hope, because so long as he can keep us from this,
he has much Reason to think he shall destroy us. He is very willing we should
hope for Happiness provided our Hope be on a false Foundation. -- Hence it
appears, that unless we are very careful, diligent and prayerful, we shall be
in great Danger of a false Hope. It requires much Study, much Meditation, and
close Examination to lay a good Foundation of Hope If you only reflect and
consider what I have before mentioned as good Grounds of Hope, you will see,
that unless we strive labor and use all appointed Means, there will be no
Reason to expect a good Bottom to build our Hopes upon, we must believe,
repent, be converted and born again, in order to our having good Reason to hope
that we shall partake of the saving Grace and Mercy of God through Christ. And
surely if we will not labor to lay a good Foundation of Hope we cannot expect
it. And then we never can have a sure and good Ground of Hope unless the
Foundation be laid in us by the Holy Spirit, working the Work of God in us.
Which shows us the Necessity of our praying to God for the Spirit. Let me add
here, as there is Need of our Endeavors and Prayers in order to have a good
Ground of Hope; so there is also, in order to our seeing and knowing this that
so we may have the Comfort of it. We should give all Diligence to make our
Calling and Election sure. 2 Pet. 1. 10. And as we greatly need the Assistance
of the Spirit, in our Self-Examination, and to witness with our Spirits, so we
must seek him of God, if we would obtain such a Privilege. We have no
sufficient Ground to expect to have a good Foundation of Hope, nor a
comfortable Sense thereof; unless we labor and pray therefore. But I proceed to
consider,

Secondly, We should labor and pray that we may have a good and well-grounded
Hope; because of the great Disadvantages, and infinite Danger there is in
having a false Hope, which will make us ashamed.

There is not only Danger, that we shall rest in a false Hope; but there is as
much or more Danger of us, if it should be our unhappy Condition to build our
Hopes on the Sand, and to satisfy ourselves with an Hope that will deceive us.

There are some Persons, who never had any great Advantages to know any Thing
of Religion, and the Way and Method of Salvation, by Jesus Christ, (which is
the only Way:) and others although they have had the great Privileges of the
Gospel; yet never had any Awakenings and Convictions; but the mere Convictions
of natural Consciences, and this has been so bribed and blinded by their
prevailing Lusts and Temptations and the Deceitfulness of Sin; that they have
never fixed on any Foundation of Hope, which, upon the least Reflection and
Examination can be thought good. They may hope for Mercy on Account of this,
they think God is gracicious and merciful, and will not, did not make
Creatures, on Purpose to make them miserable; and so satisfy themselves. Now
there is great Danger of such as these; especially if they have enjoyed good
and powerful Means of Grace, and continued long in this Case and contracted
Habits of Vice and Sin. Can the Etheopian change his Skin, or the Leopard his
Spots? Then may ye also do good that are accustomed to do Evil. It is no easy
Thing to bring such to Conviction and Repentance and so to lay a good
Foundation of Hope.

But then there are others who are or have been under powerful Awakenings and
Convictions, the Word of God has been set home with Power on their Hearts; so
that they are convinced that such Things as they hitherto rested in, are by no
Means any good Foundation to rely on. Now if such as these come, after this,
again to fix upon any other false and unsafe Foundation of Hope; their Danger
will be even greater than the others, nay inexpressible. This I take to be
plainly taught in that of our Lord. Mat. 21. 31, 32. Jesus says unto them that
the Publicans and the Harlots go into the Kingdom of God before you, for John
came unto you in a Way of Righteousness, and ye believed him not: but the
Publicans and the Harlots believed him, etc. Their having had such Advantages,
and too much trusted to them, made it the harder to unhinge them, and bring
them to see that indeed they had no good Ground of Hope.

And having observed this I may proceed to consider more particularly the
Danger of having an illgrounded Hope, and the Danger of this may be considered
as it respects this Life and that to come, although what may be said as to the
first, terminates in the other World.

1. I shall consider this Danger as to this Life, while we are Probationers for
another. And under this Head I may say,

1. If Persons come to have a fixed Hope of future Happiness, and Salvation,
upon an unsafe Foundation, (especially after great Advantages and Illuminations
and after they have been brought off from some former false Grounds of Hope)
there is very great Danger that they will never be undeceived.

It is no easy Matter, to bring, even those, that have lived all their Days in
Sin, and have done nothing to secure the Favor of God through Jesus Christ,
and so have no Grounds at all to hope for Happiness; to see the Evil of their
Ways and the Danger they are in of perishing; especially, if to their own
Corruptions there be added a bad Education, and sinful Examples, and such as
tempt Men, to neglect the Concerns of their Souls.

Men are apt to be fond of, and partial to their own Ways of thinking; and the
Ways in which they have been brought up; hence we have that Direction, Train up
a Child in the Way wherein be should go; and this Reason is given for it,
because when he is old be will not depart from it. Prove. 22. 6. We see some
Persons although they are favored with all Gospel-Priviledges, and have much
Pains taken with them, and although they cannot but know (if they would consider
it) that they are in an unconverted Estate, and so have no good Foundation to
hope for Happiness; yet going on from Year to Year, in a tho'tless unconcerned
Way, as if they were sure of Happiness after Death.

It is hard to bring some such to a Sense of their Sinfulness and miserable
Condition. But if they are brought to see something of their undone and lost
Estate while in this Condition; to see their Sins and that if they continue as
they are, they must perish: and after this, by any Means they come to rest upon
some other false and unsafe Foundation of Hope; after they have been under
powerful Convictions, and after they have taken some Pains to fix on a good
Bottom; it will be more difficult to convince them of their Mistake and bring
them to lay a good Foundation of Hope, than it was before. When Persons are
come to fix their Thoughts after some Pains taken; they are usually very
Tenacious of their own Thoughts; and if you tell them that after all that they
have done, and that they hope they have experienced; they are yet without a
good Hope, and will perish if they don't get a better; it will be no easy
Matter to make them believe it although ever so true. And you may instead of
doing them any good, get a Blot to yourself, as they that reprove a Scorner do.

And besides this (if they have been led into Mistakes by the Injudiciousness
or Incorrectness of such Preachers as they have admired) this will be likely to
confuse their Minds, they scarcely knowing what or who to believe; which will
render it harder to undeceive them, and may have other very ill Consequents
with Respect to them.

Experience shows us how difficult it is, to bring Men off from any smaller
Mistakes, when they are fixed in them; and considering the Subtilty of the
great Enemy, and the Corruptions of our own Hearts, we may well suppose, it
will be harder to persuade Men to think that all they have been doing is to no
Purpose, and that they must go back to the very Foundation and do all anew.
This is apt to shock them and make them start back: and it will be well if it
don't make some desperately resolve to continue as they are, even at all
Hazzards.

Now if we consider this, it will appear to be a Matter of great Importance to
every Soul to build their Hope of Salvation, on a sure Foundation. And if you
find you have once been deceived and have had a false Hope, surely it highly
concerns you now, to lay a good Foundation; and in order to this you must
labor, use all proper Means and be much in Prayer. Let me just add here, we
see hence how very careful Ministers ought to be, to direct and assist People
in Distress and under Convictions, to lay a good and sure Foundation of Hope, a
Mistake in this may prove very prejudicial to Souls. But this must suffice for
this Head.

Secondly, We should strive and pray that our Hope of Salvation may be on good
Grounds; because if our Hopes are built on a false Foundation, we shall be in
Danger of neglecting all Means and Endeavors to have a good Hope, and so shall
be in Danger of perishing.

There is Danger, not only, that such will go on deceiving and being deceived;
but if so they will be likely wholly to neglect all those Things which are
necessary in order to their having a good Hope and so to their Salvation. They
that are whole, need not the Physician; but they that are sick. If Persons are
come to this, that they are persuaded they are in Christ, that they are
converted and born again; they will by no Means use those Means which they
ought to use in order to obtain these Things.

Although we can merit nothing at the Hands of God, by the most diligent Use of
Means; yet God has appointed Means to be used by us, in order to our having a
good Foundation of Hope. Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by tbe Word of
God. Romans 10.17. We must endeavor to work out our Salvation with Fear and
Trembling, if we would have God work in us to will, and do of his own good
Pleasure. Phillip. 2. 12, 13. And surely if we flatter ourselves that the Work
of God be already wrought in us, and we are in the Way to Happiness we shall be
likely to neglect these Means, we shall not read, hear, nor pray as if we
thought ourselves without Hope. And if we indeed have no good Foundation of
Hope; but are yet in our Sins, what infinite Danger shall we be in of being
ashamed of our Hope and of eternal Misery. And this leads me to the second more
general Head. Viz. To consider

Secondly, The dreadful and amazing Condition of such as build their Hopes of
Happiness on a false Foundation, in the World to come.

At Death, when the Soul shall depart into the World of Spirits then it shall
at once be convinced of the Falsenefs of the Foundation of it is past Hopes.
Then their Hope shall make them ashamed. When they find themselves disappointed
of the Enjoyment of all they hoped for. The very Thought of this is, enough to
fill us with Horror.

Such as only dream of Happinese hereafter, although they have no Manner of
Grounds to hope for it, and such as go on in a bold Desiance of the Wrath of
God and eternal Misery; will find when they come to experience what it is to be
damned, that it is so much more dreadful and amazing than their most enlarged
Thoughts could reach; that even their Disappointment and Misery will be
distressing and amazing.

But will not their Case be more miserable, their Disappointment more
intolerable, who have had many great Advantages, many Strivings of the Spirit,
and who have been brought near to the Kingdom of Heaven; but after all have
wilfully, carelessly and wickedly all along neglected to lay a good Foundation
of Hope.

How amazing will it be to go to Hell full of the the Hopes of Heaven and
Glory. Don't you think that the Disappointment Haman met with was very
dreadful, who when he was full of Hopes of being advanced to die highest Honor
and Grandeur; and of obtaining his full Desire on Mordecai, Esther 7, found
himself at once accused, and condemned and dragged away to a miserable Death?
But this was nothing at all to the surprising and awful Disappointment, of such
as shall have their Hopes make them ashamed at Death; What Tongue can tell,
what Heart conceive! The Horror, Shame, and Anguish that will fill the Souls of
such who shall find that they are for ever shut out of Heaven, and all Hopes of
the least Happiness which they before hoped for, and instead of this they
themselves sent down with Devils and damned Spirits into that Lake which burns
with Fire and Brimstone for ever. Is it distressing to us to be disappointed
when we are big with Hopes and Expectations that we are just ready to enjoy
some earthly Good? how much more tormenting, to be disappointed and that for
ever, of the expected Enjoyment of all possible Happiness, and to endure all
possible Misery!

Now from all these Considerations laid together, it will appear to be of the
greatest Concern to us, to endeavor and pray that we may have a well-grounded
Hope of Salvation. In these. Things I have endeavored to excite you to seek a
good Hope, from Fear of the ill Consequences of the contrary. It may be proper
further to confirm the Doctrine, by addressing your Hope in some other
Particulars, which will turn our Thoughts to much more pleasant Meditations.
And here,

First, If you rightly endeavor and pay for a well-grounded Hope, and a
comfortable Sense of it you will be likely to obtain it.

These are not Things that cannot be obtained; many have and many (in this
wonderful Day of Grace) do obtain them. And you have Reason to think you may
also, if you seek them in a right Manner. I cannot but think that the Reason why
so many have a false and ill-grounded Hope, is, in a great Measure, because
they don't take due Care to have a better. And the Reason so many are without a
comfortable Assurance that they have a well-grounded Hope, who indeed have good
Grounds of Hope, is very much, because they don't give all Diligence to make
their Calling and Election sure. The Text intimates that by proper Labor and
Prayer we may obtain such an Hope as we shall not be ashamed of: in this Way
many have obtained it, and in this Way we are directed to seek it; And this
should quicken us to die utmost Endeavors after such an Hope, and the
Evidences of it: And you have as much Encouragement to hope for Success herein
as others. But then if we would obtain this, we are not to think a few saint
Wishes and heartless Prayers are sufficient; it is a Matter of such Importance,
as to be worth all possible Endeavors, our whole Hearts and Lives are to be
chiefly taken up in it. But further to excite you to labor and pray for such a
good Hope consider the Advantages of it in this World and the other. Three
Advantages may be mentioned which relate to this Life and World. As

1st A good Hope of future Happiness will serve greatly to support and comfort
us under all the Afflictions we meet with in life.

We are here in a World of Sorrows and Troubles, and greatly need something to
support and bear us up under them. Now if we have a good and well-grounded Hope
that we are in Christ, and so that we Have the Love and Favor of God, and his
Blessing and are in the Way to eternal life; this will be our greatest Comfort
and Support.

When such as are favored with this Hope are under very heavy outward
Afflictions, grievous and repeated Bereavements, or other Distress; to consider
that this, yea all Things are ordered out to us by our heavenly Father, our
Covenant-God, to consider his Covenant-Faithfulness, his infinite Perfections,
and his gracious Promises that all Things shall work together for our Good, and
that these light Afflictions which are but for a Moment, shall work out for us
a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory; and also that Tribulation
works Patience, and Patience Experience, and Experience such an Hope as shall
not make us ashamed. What greater and stronger Consolation can we have under
our outward Afflictions? Nay further, such as have comfortable Evidences of
this Hope, sometimes have the sweet Incomes of the Holy Spirit, delightful
Communion with God, and the most the sensible and reviving Manifestations of
the Love and Favor of God to their Souls, while under outward Afflictions.
These Comforts are not always alike in those that have a good Hope: But they
that have not a good Hope of Salvation have no Grounds to expect them, any of
them at all.

I would further observe that this Hope will help to support us under spiritual
Trials and Distresses, which even such may be in; this will greatly strengthen
the Believer against the fierce Temptations and Assaults of the evil one, hence
we are advised to put on the Hope of Salvation for an Helmet, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8.

This will support us under a Sense of our remaining Corruptions and
Imperfections; when we are asleep this will keep our Hearts awake, and if, ur
Beloved withdraw; it will awake us up to seek after him, till we find him. --
Cant. 5. beginning.

They that have a real sure Ground of Hope; will not in their Times of the
greatest Darkness and Desertions utterly lose it, for any long Time; although
in a little Wrath, God may hide his Face for a Moment! yet with everlasting
Kindness will be return, and have Mercy on them. Their Hope will be as an
Anchor to the Soul, keeping it from sinking when Waves and Billows pass over it.

Secondly, When we have good Evidences that our Hope is well-grounded, this
gives us very great Joy, Peace and Comfort in this World.

If our Hopes of Salvation be built upon a sure and safe Foundation, it never
will make us ashamed; although we may not have such clear and comforting
Evidences of it. And I have no Doubt but some have really a good Hope of
Salvation and yet are under Doubts as to the Foundation of their Hopes, and
although sometimes their Evidences of their good Estate are clear and bright,
yet at other Times they may be more clouded, and less sensible.

Now as the least good Grounds to hope that we have an Interest in Christ, and
so are in the Way to obtain Salvation will give us Joy and Comfort, so in
Proportion, to the Degrees of Evidence of this, will our Pleasure and Joy be.
And when the Beliaver upon a due and proper Examination of himself, finds the
Evidences that his Hope of Happiness, is well-grounded, very bright and clear,
and when the Spirit of God witnesses with his Spirit that he is a Child of God;
this will put greater Joy and Gladness into their Hearts, than the Increase of
all outward good Things: Nay, it will give them Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory. And if such Comfort and Joy be worth seeking, we should labor for such
a Foundation of Hope from whence it proceeds,

Thirdly, This good Hope will best support us, under the Apprehensions, Views
and Approaches of Death.

Death will certainly, and may very suddenly, seize upon every one of us: and
it is worth while to spend our whole lives in Endeavors, if thereby we may
have a comfortable safe and happy Death; and Happiness after it. And we never
can have a comfortable safe and happy Death, without a well-grounded Hope of
Happiness after it. I am sensible, Sinners may have no Bands in their Death:
although they have no Hope of Salvation; yet they may be stupid and senseless
of their Danger: And so go out of the World without Fear. But how far is this
from being an happy and safe Death! We cannot die a safe and happy Death unless
after Death we shall be happy; and this cannot be unless the Foundation of it,
be laid in this Life. And if our Salvation be secured, whether we have a clear
View of it just before Death or no, yet we shall be happy. Sometimes Believers
may have great Doubts and fiery Assaults of Satan a little before Death; I
think it is not impossible but some may go doubting out of this World, to
Abraham's Bosom; nor is it at all improbable.

But with what Calmness and Serenity of Soul may they, that, not only have a
good and well-grounded Hope of Glory, but a lively Sense also that their Hope
will not make them ashamed, look Death in the Face! He that is the King of
Terrors to Sinners, is but a welcome Messenger to them, to carry them to the
Enjoyment of those glorions Things they hope for.

Some, when God has, in the Hour of Death, lifted up the Light of his
Countenance upon them, have had such Visions and Foretastes of Glory, such
bright and clear Discoveries of the Love of God to their Souls; and of their
Interest in Christ; and Christ has appeared so lovely and glorious to them,
that they have as it were, forgot the dark Entry they were to pass through to go
to Christ, their Souls seem impatiently (almost) to wait for his coming: and
when the Moment comes, they as 'twere leap forth with unutterable Joy into his
Arms.

Thus have I seen (to the Glory of free and rich Grace be it spoken) some few
both English and Indians meet the King of Terrors, without Fear and with great
Joy. And who at such a joyful Sight would not cry out, Let me die the Death of
the Righteous, and let my last End be like his? And who would not with all
possible Diligence and Ardency of Soul labor and pray for such an Hope, as
will make their Death thus delightful. But it is Time, as this leads me, having
thus considered some, (and but some) of the many Advantages of a good Hope in
this Life, before and at Death; that I in a few Words,

2dly, Consider, That this well-grounded Hope shall be swallowed up, in the
full and perfect and everlasting Enjoyment of all that we now hope for, yea and
much more, after Death.

Although there is not an End of Man at Death, but Eternity follows, yet all our
present Hopes end with the Death of the Body. The Hope of the Hypocrite and
Sinner then ends, and is turned into endless Despair, Horror and Misery. And
the Hope of the true Believer then ends, because it is swallowed up in the
Enjoyment of all that he desired, expected and hoped for! Romans 8. 24. That
which is seen why does a Man yet hope for? Whatsoever the enlightened and
sanctified Soul wishes for or desires, he shall fully and completely possess
and enjoy after Death. They that have this good Hope, shall come to see as they
are seen, to know (in their Measure) as they are known, they shall awake in the
divine Likeness, they shall be perfectly freed from all Sin, and Temptation to
it, from Sorrow and Misery and Fears thereof: and their enlarged Souls, with
all their Faculties, shall be perfectly satisfied: They shall fully and without
Interruption enjoy God the Father, and the Son their dear and precious
Redeemer, and the Spirit of all Grace and Comfort. God will be the satisfying
Portion of their Souls forever.

Let me just say here, the Souls of such as have this Hope, shall be happy and
blessed, while in their State of Separation from the Body; 'till the
Resurrection of die Body. But as the enlarged Hopes of such extend to the
Resurrection and beyond it, so their Bodies also shall arise glorious Bodies
formed and fashioned like to Christ's, Philip. 3.21. Their blessed Souls and
Bodies being united, shall give up the Account to God in the Judgment with
exceeding great Joy. And after this they shall go away into everlasting Life.

But why should I further attempt, to describe to you the Joy, Happiness and
Blessedness of such, since Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it
entered into the Heart of Man, how exceeding great and glorious their Joy and
Blessedness shall be, and this shall continue to all Eternity. Thus their Hope
shall not make them ashamed.

Thus, brethren, I have given some Reasons why we should labor and strive with
all our Powers, and pray with Ardency of Soul, that we may have a well-grounded
Hope of Salvation, that will not make us ashamed. And what can be offered, that
will influence us Hereto, if these Things will not? And thus have I finished
what I proposed for the Proof and Illustration of the Doctrine. I proceed now
to make some IMPROVEMENT of what has been said. And here

First, We infer the amazing Folly of such as are either without any Hope of
Salvation, or have a false Hope.

I cannot but fear there are too many such; and what a dreadful Condition are
they in? Consider, that you are here but for a very little Time; you, are
hastening to an endless Eternity either of Happiness or Misery; and as your
Hope is here, whether well or ill grounded, so it will be with you forever. And
Oh consider what infinite Happiness you shall enjoy hereafter, if you now
indeed see that your Hope be on a good Foundation: And on the other hand
consider how unspeakably amazing it will be to find yourselves ashamed of your
Hopes at last. Consider what has been said of these Things, and say, is it not
the greatest Folly and Stupidity, to rest and be easy without a good and sure
Hope of eternal Happiness and Salvation. They who have no Hope, and they who
have no better than no Hope, and even those who flatter themselves they have a
good Hope, although without any just Grounds, will be ashamed of their Hopes at
last. And Oh that it were possible to awaken your Consciences now, so that you
might see your Stupidity and Folly! Will you, can you calmly and deliberately
go on in this Way which you know will end in eternal Torment! And dare any run
the amazing Hazard of losing their Souls, for Want of a due Care to lay a good
Foundation of Hope!

Secondly, Hence infer their Wisdom and Happiness who have (by the Grace of
God) laid a good and sure Foundation of Hope of eternal Salvation. Thrice happy
are they; all Things are theirs. They are truly happy here amidst all their
outward Afflictions, and Sorrows, yea nevertheless happy for them. Whether they
have a certain and comfortable Assurance that their Hope is thus well-grounded
or no, yet if it be they are happy, yea, their own Hearts cannot conceive the
Glory they are to possess hereafter.

Now whatever it has cost such, how much Labor and Difficulties soever they
have undergone, yet they have shown the greatest Wisdom, in that they have
sought till they have obtained such an Hope.

But I shall not enlarge here, but proceed to say,

Thirdly, Hence, Let us all examine ourselves, to see what Foundation we have,
for our Hopes of eternal Happiness and Salvation.

You see something of the Danger of a false Hope, and the glorious Advantages
of a true one. And let these Considerations quicken every Soul of us to examine
ourselves, without Delay and before it be too late, what Foundation of Hope we
have.

It is nothing less than Heaven and Glory, than the eternal Happiness and
Salvation of our never-dying Souls, that we hope for. And O search and try till
you do really find what Foundation you have to hope for these glorious Things
upon, search deep, look to the very Bottom, see if the Foundation be laid
secure and safe. A trifling Examination and search, will signify very little.
We should be the more careful in this Search and Examination because there are
so many false Foundations of Hope, and so much Danger of our being deceived.

Give me leave to ask you Brethren, and Oh! let your Hearts go with me, and ask
your own Souls, such Questions as these, Viz.

Do you hope for Happiness and Salvation, merely because God is merciful and
gracious, although your Consciences tell you, you never complied with those
Things nor come into that Method, upon, and in which alone, you may expect his
Mercy?

Although a good Hope originates in the Mercy of God, (as I have shown) yet to
build our Hopes of Happiness upon this, separated from the Merits of Christ,
and the Covenant of Grace; and when we cannot but know, we never have done any
Thing in order to obtain the Favor of God through Christ; is to build our
Hopes on a wrong Foundation. God will not glorify his Grace and Mercy, to the
Dishonor of any other of his divine Attributes.

Again, do you hope for Salvation, because you enjoy the Means of Grace, have
heard the best of Preaching; are born of truly religious Parents; have done
some Duties; yea even come to the special Ordinances? All these Things are very
great Privileges, or Duties, and by no Means to be lightly thought or spoken
of; but all these alone, unless you are brought to believe in Christ, repent of
your Sins, and unless a real Change be wrought in your Hearts, will not give
sufficient Ground to hope for Salvation, as I might easily show had I Time. Do
you hope for Happiness, because others think and speak well of you: Consider so
they may of the greatest Hypocrites: For we cannot judge the Hearts of Men.

Again, do you hope for Salvation, because you have been greatly awakened,
enlightened and convicted? Consider, Illumination and Convictions, although
necessary to Conversion, may be where Conversion is not, there is a legal
Sorrow for Sin as well as evangelical, which implies Conviction. Have not your
Convictions arisen only from a Sense of Misery! Let me seriously ask you, have
you ever been convinced of the Evil and accursed Nature of Sin? has Sin ever
appeared to you exceeding sinful? Have you ever seen Sin as it is contrary to
the Nature, Attributes; Perfections and Law of God? All Repentance and so all
Convictions have Respect to God, against whom all Sin is committed. And it is
very plain that the brighter Discoveries God makes of himself to any the more
they will see of the evil Nature of Sin, and of their own Sinfulness, Vileness
and Misery. See Job 42. 5, 6. I have heard of thee by the hearing of the Ear:
but now mine Eye sees thee. Wherefore I abhor myself and repent in Dust and
Ashes. Read to the same Purpose, Isai. 6. from the 1st to the End of the 5th
Verse; if you have never seen any Thing of the Evil of Sin as it is against
God, you have Reason to fear, you never were rightly convinced of the evil
Nature of Sin. And as the Law of God is agreeable to his Nature holy, just and
good, so if we see Sin as it is against God, we shall all see it in a good
Measure as it is against the Law.

I must add (for I esteem it a Thing of great Importance) have you ever seen
what a dreadful Abuse Sin is of the Mercy of God? And particularly, as that is
discovered, in giving us a glorious Savior, and so as our Sins pierce our
Savior.

When we consider this and other Discoveries of the Mercy of God, does this
melt us down into a true and genuine Contrition for our Sins, and discover to
us more of its vile Nature. The Goodness of God leads to Repentance. Romans 2. 4.

But to add no more here, no Conviction may be relied upon as a good Ground of
Hope, unless it be followed by a real Conversion and turning from Sin to God.

Again, do you hope for Happiness, because after you have been convicted of
Sin, you have suddenly, or by flower Degrees, had great Light, Joy and Comfort;
and seemed to have clear Sights, or Visions of Christ and Heaven! I beseech you
suffer me in Love and Faithfulness to your Souls, to tell you: These Things
alone are not to be rested in as a sure Foundation of Hope of Salvation. There
is the Joy of the Hypocrite as well as of the true Believer, Job 20. 5. We
read, that the triumphing of the Wicked is short, and the Joy of the Hypocrite
but for a Moment, And the Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 11. 14. That Satan himself
is transformed into an Angel of Light. It is to be feared some may be deceived
with false and ill-grounded Joys. Such sensible Enjoyments and Manifestations
are exceeding sweet and refreshing, when after some Clouds, the Soul of the
Believer, has been seeking hard after God; and when these Things are
accompanied with other good and clear Evidences of a good Hope. What I caution
you against is placing too much in such sensible Enjoyments; and taking them
for Evidences of Conversion, when indeed they are not in themselves, to be
rested in as such. Let me just add, do you hope for Salvation because you have
partly forsaken your former Sins and partly complied with your former neglected
Duties? we are glad of any Reformation, in any Thing, and how much more glad
should we be to see a thorough universal Reformation of your Lives, proceeding
from a real Change wrought in your Hearts! But I must tell you that there may
be a partial Reformation where there is not a thorough Reformation, and there
may be a considerable outward Change and Reformation for a Time, and yet not
any real Change wrought in the Heart, without which you are not converted in a
Gospel-Sense: every Change is not Conversion; your different Way of Living,
different Company and the different Manner of Conversation: the Examples of
others, whom you esteem, or your going from one Stage of Life to another; may
give you a different Turn of Thought and be the Means of your disrelishing some
evil Things you before took Pleasure in, and so cause a Change in you: But in
this Case you ought carefully to consider whether you have turned from Sin to
God, agreeable to that Jer. 4. 1. If thou will return, O Israel, says the
Lord, return unto me, Joel 2. 12. There may be a turning from one Sin to
another, only an Exchange of Lusts and Sins; but this is of no Manner of
Advantage. Conversion implies a turning from all and every individual Sin, and
also a turning unto God. Into his Service, and an holy Obedience to him, and in
to all his Ways.

But not to be further tedious here, consider and closely examine whether you
have laid the Foundation of your Hope deep and sure, have you ever been
convinced of Sin as it is against God, and of your own personal Guilt, that you
are the Man? Have you had a real Change wrought in you, are the Hearts of Stone
taken out of you, and Hearts of Flesh given to you? And have you truly embraced
Christ as your only and all-sufficient Savior, your Prophet, Priest and King?
And does your Hope purify your Hearts? By these and such other Marks, which
have been more largely considered before; you may in some Measure come to know
whether you have a good Hope of Salvation or not.

But you need the Assistance of the Holy Spirit, in your Self-Examination, the
Spirit not only works in Believers Souls those Things which are the Foundation
of Hope; but when they, as in the Presence and Fear of God and humbly seeking
the Help of the Spirit, set themselves to a close and serious Examination of
themselves as to their spiritual Estate, he graciously assists them, brings
Things to their Minds, and gives them to see that they have such Things in them
as are the Evidences of a good Hope, and so enables them to draw a sure
Conclusion that they are in the Way to Glory. And when the Spirit gives these
Evidences in their full Strength and Brightness and so as to remove Doubts from
them, this is a full Assurance of Hope: And now the Spirit may be said to
witness with our Spirits that we are the Children of God.

But it is high Time I should proceed in the fourth Place to a Use of
Exhortation, with which I shall conclude all.

And the Exhortation may be addressed to the following Sorts of Persons.

First, I would speak to such as are thoughtless and unconcerned although they
have no Manner of Foundation to hope for Salvation upon.

And are there not some such, who now hear me, even in such a Day of the
wonderful Striving of the Spirit as this is! And after all that God has done
for them? I am afraid there are some who if they were asked what Ground they
have to hope for Salvation hereafter; could only tell you, that God is
merciful, and they are his Creatures. And so they hope for Mercy, although they
in a most horrid and shameful Manner abuse the Mercy of God every Day, although
they live in all Manner of Sin and Wickedness, serving the Devil and gratifying
their own Heart's Lusts. Surely as to such I may say you are without Hope, you
are treasuring up to yourselves Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation
of the righteous Judgment of God. But are there not others who although they
don't live the most vicious Lives; yet have no Reason to believe they have ever
repented of Sin, or received a Savior, that ever they have been converted, and
that do indulge some Sins; And yet are perfectly senseless of any Danger, go on
in a Series of Thoughtlessness, and a perfect Neglect of the Salvation of their
precious and immortal Souls. And Oh what a dreadful Condition are all such in!

With what Words shall I speak unto you, to persuade you to a proper Concern
for yourselves? You, it is like have no Sense of your Danger, and have no
Concern for yourselves, don't pity yourselves; but your faithful Ministers are
concerned for you, and even travail in Birth for you.

Be exhorted, poor miserable Souls, at least to sit down and consider, what a
Case you are indeed in. You can be but little longer in this World, and what
will become of you when God shall require your Souls and you shall go over into
an immense and endless Eternity; Christ is the only Savior and him you despise
and slight, you will not receive him nor have him to rule over you, and how can
you be happy! Nay look into your Hearts and endeavor to see something what you
are: look upwards, and consider the Being Perfections and Attributes of God:
And see how unlike him you are, and how impossible it is you should be happy in
the Enjoyment of God. Consider the Inhabitants, the Enjoyments and Employments
of Heaven: and think whether you are a Companion fit for such Beings, and a
Person qualified for such Work and Enjoyments? And then O turn your Eyes down
to Hell, and consider how much you are like the Devils in your Tempers and
Dispositions, and how much fitter you are for the cursed Employments of Hell,
and the Miseries thereof, than for Heaven. See (and O that you could see) the
Wrath of God that hangs over you, and the Gulf of Fire and Brimstone that gapes
for you beneath. -- Strive as you value your Souls to see your undone and
miserable Estate; and work out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling: Give
yourselves no Rest, and delay not one Moment, until you have laid a sure
Foundation of Hope of Salvation. Consider there is a Savior offered and
Salvation is offered to you as well as others. And why will you not accept the
Offer? The Spirit of God is striving in a wonderful Manner with People, here
and elsewhere, many are now taken, and why will you be lest; shall your
Parents, shall your Brethren and Sisters; shall your Neighbors, yea shall your
Children or even your Servants, be taken by the Grace of God and be eternally
happy? And will you be the only Persons that will stand out against the Calls
of God and the Strivings of the Spirit? Are you resolved to go on in your
carnal Security, without any Foundation of Hope of Happiness, till you drop
into everlasting Misery! Oh that it were possible (while it is an accepted Time
and Day of Salvation) to awaken you to a Sense of your Sin and Misery.

But I turn myself secondly, to awakened and convinced Sinners, who are now
sensible, that your former Hopes were vain, and so are desirous without Delay,
to lay a good Foundation of Hope

There is more Hope of you now than ever before, that you may be plucked as
Brands out of the Burning: Bless God therefore that you are awakened and
convinced; And by all Means cherish your Convictions; And see that they don't
wear off, until you are converted. And let me tell you there is Danger that you
will now build your Hopes upon a false Foundation. The Devil is alarmed at your
Awakening and Convictions; and if it be possible he will either quench your
Convictions and cause them to wear off; so that you may have some seeming Red
and Ease; or he will bring you to rest upon some new and false Foundation of
Hope and so deceive you at last: Therefore, dear Friends and Brethren, consider
well what you do, and be advised and directed,

First, Not to be too hasly and sudden, in thinking you are converted and in
taking Comfort.

I am afraid many deceive themselves by this. When they are under powerful
Convictions and as it were sinking down into deep Waters; they are ready; (like
a drowning Man) to catch hold of any Thing they can; to lay hold of any thing
that looks like Conversion; and so, through the Deceitfulness, of Satan, their
own Hearts of Sin, (and 'twere well if not through the Ignorance and Rashness
of some that pretend to be Teachers and Exhorters) are in great Danger of
thinking themselves in a good Estate when they are not. Oh beware of this! You
see you have hitherto been deceived; see to it that you don't now rest upon
another equally false Foundation of Hope; this may be infinitely dangerous to
you, as you have heard. Let me advise you therefore,

Secondly, To study carefully what a good and sure Foundation of Hope is on
which you may safely rest.

A Mistake in this may be fatal, therefore be exceeding careful about it; and
before you cry Peace to your Souls; see that you have a full and clear
Understanding what it is you may safely rest upon; and here I beseech you make
the precious Bible your Rule. Study that, and such good Books as are agreeable
to it. Don't regard so much what others tell you of their Experiences; And what
you must find and feel in your selves, as what the Word of God tells you, you
must find and experience, Call no Man Lord or Master here, and let nothing
satisfy your Souls till you come to be well assured that you have indeed those
Marks and Evidences that you are real Christians, which are recorded in the
holy Word of God. In a Word, rest not till your Hopes are built upon the
Foundations before mentioned.

Thirdly, Be prevailed on duly to attend on the public Worship and other
Means of Grace.

Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. Romans 10. 17. If you
love your Souls let no Temptation be able to hinder you from this; and attend
with proper Care, Diligence, and Constancy: And by no Means needlessly and
often, (as with itching Ears) wander from the Place of your stated Worship.

Fourthly, Be much in Self-Examination.

When you are satisfied what is a good Foundation of Hope, see whether you have
built your Hopes upon it, this you must come to a Knowledge of, by examining
your selves, be much, be often, therefore in this and see that your Examination
be thorough and impartial. Set yourselves as in the Presence of an holy, an
heart-searching God, and imploring his Assistance, search yourselves and the
Foundation of your Hope to the very Bottom.

Fifthly, Be careful least you be tossed about with every Wind of Doctrine.

Beware left by hearing many different Preachers (who if they think alike, yet
may express themselves very differently) you get lost and confused in your
Thoughts, and so become incapable of determining any Thing about yourselves and
your spiritual Estate. I will only add,

Sixthly. Be much in Prayer to God.

Plead with him to lead you into a plain Path; cry mightily to God that he will
save you from resting upon any false Foundations. That he will work in you a
true Repentance of and Conversion from Sin and an unseigned Faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ, that he will accept you in the Covenant of Grace, and entitle you
to all his gracious Promises, that so your Hope of Happiness may be sure and
well-grounded; instead of consulting those who know but very little, either
doctrinally or experimentally of these Things; go to those, whom Christ having
accounted faithful has set over you in the Ministry: Enquire of them what you
shall do to be saved in a meek and humble Manner. If you in these and such like
Ways cherish your Convictions and endeavor to lay a good Foundation of Hope,
you will be in a Way of obtaining such an Hope as will never make you ashamed.

Thirdly, I am to speak a few Words to such as hope you are in the Way to
Salvation.

You have heard, from the Word of God, that there is Danger that you may be
ashamed of your Hope. Let all such therefore be exhorted to see to it that the
Foundation of your Hope be good. A bear Possibility of your being deceived,
should quicken you to the greatest Care in examining the Foundation you build
upon. Could I certainly tell you that there is one, in this great Assembly that
although he is full of the Hopes of Heaven yet has no Foundation therefore, and
so will be ashamed of his Hopes; would you not all be ready with the Disciples
to say, Lord is it I, Lord is it I? It is our Duty to be often looking over the
Evidences of our good Estate, and let us be persuaded to do it. Let us go back
to the very beginning and see what it is that we laid as the Foundation of our
Hope; see whether that be good. And if any Soul of us who are Professors, and
have a Hope of Salvation find that our Hope is built on the Sand, Oh! let us
bewail it before God and immediately be up and doing, and endeavoring to lay a
better Foundation of Hope. Blessed be God it may not be too late; there may yet
be Hope for such, if they will without Delay strive and endeavor to rectify
this dangerous Mistake, and as your Hearts have hitherto deceived you, be very
jealous over them. Be careful, above all Things, that you be no more deceived
in a Matter of such infinite Importance: But see that you now lay a good
Foundation of Hope.

To conclude, if after the best Examination you find; (as I hope many of you
will) that your Hopes of Salvation are well-grounded, give all the Glory to
God, whose Work it is: beware of doing any Thing to darken your Evidences to
cause the Comforter that now relieves your Souls, to go far from you, endeavor
every Way to persuade, assist and allure others to come into the same happy
Condition with yourselves.

Happy, Brethren, are you here, happy shall you be at Death, happy shall you be
to all Eternity; Through Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father and Spirit, be
Praises everlasting. AMEN.

FINIS.

