AN ANSWER To the REVEREND Mr. Edwards's Sermon, ON The distinguishing Marks of
a Work of the Spirit of GOD, etc.

The late Religious Commotions in New England considered. AN ANSWER To the
Reverend Mr. Jonathan Edwards's SERMON, Entitled, The distinguishing Marks of a
Work of the Spirit of GOD, applied to that uncommon Operation that has lately
appeared on the Minds of many of the People of this Land.

In a LETTER to a Friend.

Together with A PREFACE, Containing an Examination of the Rev. Mr. WILLIAM
COOPER'S Preface to Mr. EDWARDS'S SERMON.

By a Lover of Truth and Peace.

BOSTON: Printed by Green, Bushel, and Allen, for T. Fleet in Cornhil. 1743.

THE PREFACE.
THE Author of the Preface I am going to examine, is a Gentleman that I neither
despise nor fear, and shall therefore treat with good Manners and Freedom.
There are indeed some Passages in his Performance, that are so severe upon such
as are arbitrarily called OPPOSERS of the Work of God, and others that look so
much like Sneer at those whom he is pleased to call ARMINIANS, that would
justify me, should I use a good deal of Severity in my Remarks: However I
purpose to be moderate, so far as is consistent with doing any Measure of
Justice to the Subject. Whether I keep my Promise, they that read may judge.

This Rev. Gentleman speaks in the most lofty Strains, concerning the late
religious Commotions among us; Pref. p. 5. The Dispensation of Grace we are now
under, is -- in some Circumstances so wonderful, that I believe there has not
been the like since the pouring out of the Spirit immediately after our Lord's
Ascension. The apostolical Times seem to have returned upon us. -- p. 17. I
cannot help expressing my Wish, that those who have been Conversant in this
Work in one Place and another, would transmit Accounts of it to such a Hand as
the Rev. Author of this Discourse, to be compiled into a Narrative, like that
of the Conversions at North-Hampton, -- which perhaps would come the nearest to
the Acts of the Apostles of any Thing extant. I do not pretend to be very much
acquainted with Church History, but this I believe, that if a Narrative of this
Work could be compiled, and the numerous strange Appearances, the infinite
Confusions and Distractions, etc. that have been among us were to come into the
Account, and set in their proper Light, there would be but few Histories like
it. Enthusiastical Times seem to have returned upon us.

I deny not but that there have been many in the Country "under such religious
Impressions as they never felt before;" neither do I doubt but that there have
been Instances of genuine sound Conversion. -- And I know of none who dissent
from this Opinion. But then has not this been the Case, even when Enthusiasm
has most prevailed? And yet, I suppose that this Gentleman would think himself
injured, if called a Friend to Enthusiasm, or though it ready to write in favor of
visionary Times, and put them nearly upon a Level with those of the Apostles.
That Good has been done, is granted on all Hands; but it is denied by many,
that near so much has been done, as to warrant this Gentleman's high Encomium
upon the Work. -- And indeed it is the Opinion of some of the most thoughtful,
discerning, serious Men among us, who may be though it to have the Honor of GOD,
and the Interest of the Redeemer's Kingdom as much at Heart, and would be as
ready to give the divine SPIRIT the Glory of a remarkable Work of Conviction
and Conversion, as the most zealous forward Contenders for the Times. -- I say,
it is the Opinion of such, that separate from what is called the Work,
enthusiastic Impulses, and suchlike Concomitants, and you reduce it to a small
Thing, that is, in Compare with what it is made to be by some who have wrote
upon it. This, I say, that Persons at a Distance, who may be desirous to know
the present State of Religion here, into whose Hands these Papers will come,
may receive some Satisfaction; And not be led into Mistakes through the
exaggerated Accounts which have been sent abroad. I would not however be though it
to charge any with wilful Enlargements beyond Reason and Justice, much less the
Gentleman who wrote the Preface, who I believe has spoken only his real
Sentiments.

We have, in p. 7. the Character of those Preachers, who it is said first began
the Work, and that they are "Good Men," I will not deny; -- neither that they
preached from Place to Place with uncommon Zeal and Assiduity; and no Doubt
their Zeal and Assiduity created them a great Number of Admirers; but however,
by themselves, are no certain Evidences of Goodness. Who more zealous and
assiduous than the Pharisees in our Lord's Time; than the begging FRIARS, and
IGNATIUS LOYOLA the Father of the Jesuits? -- And yet our Lord, an unerring
Judge of Men, gives the Pharisees the worst Character in the World; and I
believe that neither Mr. COOPER, nor any other Protestant, thinks that the
other deserve a very good one.

But then, These Gentlemen were not only zealous and assiduous, but they
preached sound Doctrine, "the Doctrines of the Reformation." Had they preached
no other than the Doctrines of the Reformation, and that with more Argument and
less Censoriousness, it would have been happy for the Country. -- But who knows
not that one of them frequently asserted, That an unconverted Minister can no
more be instrumental in the Conversion of a Sinner, than a dead Man can beget a
living Child! -- And that another said what was almost tantamount to it. --
This it is to be hoped is not a Doctrine of the Reformation, because not a
Doctrine of the Gospel. -- And having advanced that Step, the next was to
assert or at least to insinuate that many, if not most, of the Ministers in the
Country were unconverted. And now, however the Power of Godliness might
flourish under the Doctrines of the Reformation in the last Century, it is not
likely that it should flourish under such Doctrines and Assertions in this or
in any other. -- No; -- the immediate, natural, direct Tendency of such
Preaching is to obstruct the Power of Godliness: It tends to make People afraid
of their Ministers, to leaven their Minds with Prejudice against them, to
slight their Sermons and Advice, and separate from them: -- And we are now
feeling the dire Effects of such Preaching. -- Schisms abound in our Churches;
occasioned by an unrighteous Suspicion of Ministers being unconverted. -- And
though these Divisions may be by some attributed to the zealous assiduous Labors
of some later Itinerants, yet I am inclined to think that they had proved in
vain, had not the more popular Leaders advanced such harsh Things respecting
the Ministers. -- The latter only watered the Seed which the former had sowed,
which has sprung up in so great Plenty, and is like to choke the Fruits of
Righteousness, unless the heavenly Husbandman mercifully prevent. -- For my own
Part, at all Adventures, I will say it, I believe that the present Seperations
ought to be placed to the Account of that Number of Preachers which Mr. COOPER
alludes to; which indeed would not be just were they only the accidental
Consequences of what they taught, but inasmuch as they are the natural genuine
Product of it, let them bear the Blame. Indeed it must be acknowledged that a
lesser Share of it falls upon Mr. TENNENT, because he has owned his Heat and
Rashness, and expressed some Concern for it; though not enough yet. -- And it is
to be hoped that if any other of that "Number of Preachers" who have been like
him in Heat and Rashness should visit us again, that they will be more frank
than he in their Acknowledgments, and set themselves out of Justice and Charity
to heal those unhappy Contentions and Schisms which out of Ignorance and
misguided Zeal they have made.

Another Doctrine that we heard from those Gentlemen, is that of Impulses and
inward Feelings of the SPIRIT, which is not any more than the other, a Doctrine
of the Reformation; but a Doctrine of Enthusiasts; -- and is of the most
pernicious Tendency; opening the Way to Delusions of every Kind, Errors in
Judgment and in Practice: -- And of this the Rev. Gentlemen (among whom is Mr.
COOPER) who subscribed the Declaration respecting Mr. JAMES DAVENPORT and his
Conduct, were not insensible, giving it as one Reason why they did not admit
him into their Pulpits, that he was "deeply tinctured with a Spirit of
Enthusiasm." Here I cannot help remarking, that Mr. DAVENPORT'S Spirit of
Enthusiasm, is but another Phrase for those inward Feelings which a famous
Gentleman insisted upon, and yet no Declaration respecting Him was published,
nor was it so much as lisped that the Doctrine was false and of bad Tendency.
-- The Reason of which I shall not here enquire after. -- It may not be said
that the Doctrine of inward Feelings is capable of a good Meaning as it may be
explained, for that will not help the Preacher off at all, because if we look
into his Writings, and his Practice upon the Doctrine, and allow him to be his
own Expositor, we shall find that the inward Feelings he meant to recommend,
were nothing better than enthusiastic Joys and Impulses. -- I hope I may be
excused the Trouble of making Quotations on this Head.

The Manner of their Preaching is not with the enticing Words of Man's Wisdom:
Howbeit they speak Wisdom among them that are perfect. p. 7. What does Mr.
COOPER mean by this? -- Is not Mr. WHITEFIELD a good deal of an Orator? We
refer now to Style and Elocution. -- For as to the external Qualifications, he
has them, beyond all Dispute, in a remarkable Degree. Was there nothing
artificial and studied in his Compositions? -- Did not he seek for the most
moving pathetic Language? Were not his Discourses calculated to work upon the
Passions? -- And as to his immediate Successor, though he did not equal Mr.
WHITEFIELD in Choice of Words, and affecting Language, yet it was evident, that
when he did not extemporize, he was sollicitous about a good Expression; and
whoever reads his printed Sermons, will find that he does not hold in Contempt
the enticing Words of Man's Wisdom; i. e. florid Language.

When I consider these Things, I can scarce account for this Part of the
Gentlemen's Character, as it stands in Mr. COOPER'S Preface; -- unless it be
thus, That the apostolical Times being returned upon us, it was judged decent
and proper to speak of the Instruments, as the Apostles are spoken of in the
New Testament.

God has evidently wrought with them; and confirmed the Word by Signs
following. Such a Power and Presence of God in religious Assemblies, has not
been known since God set up his Sanctuary among us. -- That People were much
affected when these Gentlemen preached, is conceded: And that this might be in
some Instances through the Cooperation of the SPIRIT of GOD with the Word
preached, I will not deny: But we can by no Means allow, That the Effects
produced were certain incontestible Evidences of the extraordinary Power and
Presence of GOD in the Assemblies. -- The Hearers gave great Attention, and
Numbers were melted into Tears. -- What then? Must this certainly be owing to
the divine Power and Presence? -- If other as probable Reasons may be assigned,
then I think it is Forwardness peremptorily to ascribe this to the Power and
Presence of GOD. -- Now there were several Things concurring which had a
Tendency in a natural Way to work upon the Passions of the People. -- They were
much prejudiced in Favor of these Preachers. -- The Character of the first
arrived here before the Gentleman himself, set in the best Light. -- He was
spoken of in the most extraordinary Manner by some of the leading Ministers. --
When he came, happy was he that could first salute him, more so he that could
first get him to preach. -- This the People saw. -- When the Gentleman appeared
in the Pulpit, he was found to be THE ORATOR he had been described. -- He
preached with great Zeal and Assiduity. -- He preached every Day, and for the
most part twice, which was a Thing altogether new among us, and greatly helped
his Reputation, and led some to think that to be sure he had extraordinary
Strength communicated from Heaven. -- He was constantly attended by some of the
gravest and most venerable, and by some of the most popular Ministers among us.
-- And when their Turn to preach a Lecture came about, that Gentleman to be
sure must take it. -- This still heightened his Character. -- Add to this, that
he made great Pretensions to extraordinary Communion with GOD and CHRIST, and
placed himself high in their Favor. -- My Master has sent me, What shall I
tell my Master, I will tell my Master, I will arise up against you at the last
Day, were Phrases often in his Mouth, and they with some others that he used
are very striking to vulgar Minds. -- And now what wonder if a Person thus
qualified and circumstanced, should affect the People.

As to the Gentleman who came next, he came under the Advantage of a favorable
Character from his admired Predecessor. Mr. WHITEFIELD had spoken well of Mr.
TENNENT, and indeed had preferred him to all other Ministers he was acquainted
with in the Country. -- He took a very long Journey in a severe Winter, --
preached often, -- was exceedingly caressed by several of the Ministers, was
bold and daring, and used no Notes no more than Mr. WHITEFIELD. -- So that he
also was qualified to affect.

Besides, I am prone to think that the People sometimes affected one another.
-- Tears are apt to produce Tears in the Spectators. -- I know a Person who
made one at a religious Assembly in the Days of the Gentlemen we have been
speaking of, who by seeing others weep fell to Weeping too; -- and it may be
that was the Case with more in the Audience: It is not at all unlikely.

Now by such Observations as these we may, in a natural Way, account for the
Affectings and Meltings in the religious Assemblies without supposing them the
Effects of the divine Power and Presence. -- For my own Part, when I make them,
and especially when I observe upon the Force of Oratory, I am at no Loss nor
Doubt, in General, about the Cause. -- And since I have mentioned the Force of
Oratory, I will illustrate it by an Instance; which, as it respects merely the
mechanical Parts of Oratory, will set the Matter in a very good Light. A
Gentleman then of very good Sense and Probity informed me, that he was once
greatly affected by a Romish Priest, who was delivering a Sermon, though he
understood not a single Sentence that he spoke.: -- Such was his Voice -- such
his Gesture -- so passionate was his Manner -- so well did he talk with his
Hands and his Eyes, that in Spite of himself, the Gentleman could not forbear
weeping.

Having mentioned a Romish Preacher of great Talents as an Actor, let Mr.
COOPER give me Leave to carry him into a Romish Assembly sitting under such a
Preacher, and what serious Attention, what Gravity, what Tears do we find? The
Auditory are as much affected by a Man preaching Superstition and Absurdity, as
ever any Protestant Assemblies were by their Ministers preaching the reverse.
-- Yet from their "Looks and Deportment", from their being serious and affected
it may not be concluded that they have the Power and Presence of GOD among
them. -- But to come nearer Home, suppose any of the Moravian Brethren should
affect their Auditories to a great Degree (which is not unlikely according to
the Character Mr. TENNENT has given of them) would Mr. COOPER attribute it to
the Power and Presence of GOD attending their Ministry? -- I am of the Mind,
that in the Case of such Ministers and such Affectings, we should hear that the
Ministers had an insinuating Way, a Faculty of moving the Passions, and find
the Orator have the Honor of all that was done. -- We should not then be told
of the Power and Presence of GOD. -- Now if a Catholic or Moravian may greatly
affect an Auditory by the mere Force of Oratory, why must it necessarily be any
more than that by which other Preachers affect theirs.

We pass on,

The Work is truly extraordinary in Respect of the Extent of it. It is more or
less in the several Provinces that Measure many hundred Miles on this
Continent, says Mr. COOPER, p. 8. To which I say, that humane Nature is humane
Nature. -- Persons in different Provinces have the same Passions. If certain
Means affect some Persons in one Place, it is nothing wonderful if the same
Means affect some in another. -- And this same Observation may be applied to
what is said about the Number, and Variety of Persons who are said to be the
Subjects of this Work.

But we may not dismiss this Part of the Preface until we have expostulated a
little with the Author upon some of the peremptory Assertions contained in it.
Some elderly Persons have been snatched as Brands out of the Burning, made
Monuments of divine Mercy, and born to GOD. p. 8. It may be so, I deny it not.
But pray, Sir, how do you know it? To me it is a surprising Thing that any
Gentleman should publish such an Account with the same Positiveness, as a
Person would speak of natural Births. Sure I am, there is not equal Reason for
it. When a Man is born again, his Heart is changed, but the Heart is out of our
View. -- How then can we positively say that the Heart of any Man is changed.
-- He may tell us so, but he may either design to deceive us, or be deceived
himself. -- His Language may be changed: His sinful Customs and Habits
interrupted, and his external Conduct be very different from what it was; and
yet notwithstanding this, he may be nothing better than a gross Hypocrite, or
if sincere now, may finally prove an Apostate. Conviction of Sin, and
Abstinence from wonted Crimes may be where there is no true Love to GOD in the
Soul. -- So that I think Mr. COOPER ought not to have been quite so dogmatical
in this Assertion. -- And I should be glad to have him of the same Mind. --
When we speak of Matters of this Nature, it would not be amiss to say, we hope,
or there is Reason to believe, or to use some other the like qualifying
Expressions; especially when we our selves are not Witnesses to any Change at
all in Persons, but have it upon the Testimony of others, as was the Case with
Mr. COOPER respecting this Particular, as is evident from what follows, But
with us (sc. the Work) has lain mostly among the Young which is justly said,
and may with equal Reason be said respecting other Places. -- The Work has
every where lain mostly among the Young, and most of all among those of the
weaker Sex.

But should it be allowed that some elderly Persons have been born to GOD, yet
why should it be mentioned as something entirely new and unexpected. -- It is
to be hoped that this was the Case with some such, before the Year 1740, of
which the Pastors of these Churches regularly officiating in their Cures were
the Instruments: And had no Strangers came among us, it is to be hoped not the
fewer would have been born to God: Though Mr. COOPER perhaps cannot prevail with
himself to think so.

Out of the Mouths of Babes, some little Children, has GOD ordained to himself
Praise. p. 9. Upon which let me observe, that at a Time when there is a great
deal of Talk about Religion, it is no wonder if some Children should speak now
and then in a religious Strain: This may be accounted for without recurring to
a divine Influence as the Cause. Imitation is natural to Children, especially
in Language; and when such Imitation is taken notice of with apparent Pleasure
and Applause, it is nothing mavelous if it increases, and the pious
Expressions they hear are caught, and repeated by them. -- Whilst at the same
Time they understand not what they say, and speak only by Rote.

Mr. COOPER tells us farther, That he Trusts some poor Negroes have been
vindicated into the glorious Liberty of the Children of GOD. p. 9 -- What
Foundation he has for his Trust, I know not But if it be nothing more than
their having been affected with some Ministers so particularly and frequently
addressing them, or their making use of some good Expressions, or the like
Things with these, Mr. COOPER'S Trust is ill-grounded and vain. -- Can he say
that the Manners of these People are altered? And that among other Instances of
this, that they are become better Servants, more faithful, diligent, honest and
obedient to their own Masters. -- If this cannot be said, they are just where
they were before. -- And I believe that is pretty much the Case.

This Gentleman asserts, That some of the Learned and Knowing among Men, have
had those Things revealed to them of the Father in Heaven, which Flesh and
Blood do not teach. Ibid. If it be so, I am glad to hear it. But who these
Learned and Knowing referred to are, I cannot so much as guess.

As to Mr. COOPER'S other Classes, together with their Convictions,
Reformation, etc. we cannot observe upon them, because we must leave Room for
other Things. Only we cannot help remarking here the Gentleman's various
Distributions of Persons, in order to make the Narrative the more pompous. --
Old and Young, Great and Rich and Low and Poor, Learned and Ignorant, Negroes,
the (...) and Airy, etc. etc.

And here let me tell Mr. COOPER that it would be no difficult Task, according
to what I have heard, to make nearly the same Distribution, and give an Account
under each Head, of as great Irregularities, Follies, and Wickednesses as were
ever known in the Country. But to engage in such an Affair would be invidious,
and is what I have an Aversion to: Only when Gentlemen are carrying some Things
too high, it is not amiss to give them a Hint, which may be serviceable. -- To
be sure, we have infinite Reason, at this Day, to be humble before GOD, on
Account of the numerous impudent Vices of the Land, however some would
represent us as a very reformed People.

We go on to what is said in the 11th Page of the Preface. -- One Thing more is
worthy Remark; and that is the Uniformity of the Work. -- It is the same Work
that is carried on in one Place and another: The Method of the Spirit's
Operation on the Minds of People is the same; though with some Variety of
Circumstances, as is usual at other Times: And the particular Appearances with
which this Work is attended, that have not been so common at other Times, are
also much the same.

Mr. COOPER then tells us that the particular Appearances (of which I wish he
had given us some Account) "are objected by many against the Work." -- In
answer to the Objectors he says, -- It seems reasonable to suppose, That at an
extraordinary Season, wherein GOD is pleased to carry on a Work of his Grace,
in a more observable and glorious Manner -- there may be some particular
Appearances in the Work of Conversion, which are not common at other Times,
when yet there are true Conversions wrought.

But let it be reasonable to suppose, That "at an extraordinary Season of
Grace," there may be some uncommon Appearances; yet it is not reasonable to
suppose, That those uncommon Appearances shall be such as to cause "MANY to
object against the Work" it self; the very End and Design of those Appearances,
according to the Hypothesis, being to promote the Work. -- If "in carrying on a
Work of Grace," for the more speedy accomplishing of it, or to make it more
gloriously extensive, God should cause or allow any uncommon Appearances, it is
not probable that they should be such, as look exceedingly like the Effects of
bodily Indisposition, or a sickly Imagination, the ungoverned Passions of Men,
or the Influences of the evil Spirit. -- It is not reasonable to suppose, that
there should be such Appearances, as have ever been rife among Enthusiasts and
Visionaries, in order to carry on a Work of God's Grace: They being likely to
obstruct such a Work, instead of promoting it. -- For where there are such
Appearances there is Reason to think that the Work is not divine, and of
Consequence it will not be attended to or regarded by the World.

As to the Fruits of this Work (which we have been bid so often to wait for) so
far as there has been Time for Observation, they appear to be abiding, p. 12.
i. e. as the Writer explains himself, A great Number of those who have been
awakened, are still seeking and striving to enter in at the strait Gate. -- The
most of those who have been thought to be converted, continue to give Evidences
of their being new Creatures. However that some had "lost their Impressions"
and proved "Apostates, and Hypocrites," this Gentleman allows; which I think
fully justifies those who bid the warm and sanguine Friends to the Works, wait
a Time to see the Issue of Things. And it is worth observing, though Mr. COOPER
did not see Cause to say it, That some who were at first though it to be the most
eminent Converts, soon proved no better than Hypocrites. And has there not
lately been more Reason for Suspensions and Excommunications from some Churches
than formerly?

As to the Evidences which any give of their being NewCreatures, if they are
Scripture Evidences, it is Occasion for Joy and Hope concerning them. -- But
are they indeed such? I think Meekness, Humility, Peaceableness, Love, and Good
Works, are essential to the New Creature. And have large Numbers lately given
such Evidences as these, of their being created anew? -- It is notorious, that
among many of the great Zealots for the Times, there has been and is a Spirit
diametrically opposite to the Spirit of Christianity: A Spirit of
Censoriousness, Reviling, Clamor, Insolence, Spite, and Malice. -- The People
indeed may sometimes talk in a serious Way: They may visit their Ministers
frequently, and extol the Good Work, and the Instruments of it; they may attend
the Worship of GOD on the LORD'S Day, at Lectures, and at PRIVATE MEETINGS; and
do many other Things that make a goodly Show; but yet if they are under the
Dominion of Pride, Uncharitableness, and Passion, they belong not to the Number
of New-Creatures: They are yet carnal. And if this be not the Case with many at
this Day, who by some are judged to be NewCreatures, I am greatly mistaken.

"To be sure, a new Face of Things continues in this Town," says this
Gentleman, and then shows in what Respects: Ibid. Taverns, Dancing-Schools, and
Assemblies, -- are much less frequented. -- Dress and Aparrel are reduced. --
Religion is much more the Subject of Conversation at Friends Houses, than ever
I knew it. -- The Doctrines of Grace are espoused and relished. -- Private
religious Meetings are greatly multiplied. -- The public Assemblies
(especially Lectures) are much better attended: And our Auditories were never
so attentive and serious. There is indeed an extraordinary Appetite after the
sincere Milk of the Word.

This is the Alteration in the Face of Things in BOSTON, according to Mr.
COOPER: And though we will find no Fault with such an Alteration, yet if this
Gentleman could with Justice have added, that People were become more honest,
and just, and kind, and merciful, more punctual to their Words, better
Neighbors, better Relatives, that they bridled their Tongues better, and in
general were more circumspect in their Behavior; this would have made the Face
of Things beautiful indeed. -- And then any Character he might have given the
Work would not have been too good. -- But he knew that the Alteration did not
lie here. -- So that the "apostolical Times" are hardly returned upon them in
BOSTON: -- For those were Times when such Fruits as these abounded, Love, Joy,
Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness or Courteousness, Goodness, Faith or
Fidelity, Meekness, Temperance.

Mr. COOPER having presented us, and those abroad, with something of a
Narrative of the Work, gathers himself up, and says, "And now can any be at a
Loss to what Spirit to ascribe this Work?" -- Indeed, Sir, it is not
Demonstration that it is all from the SPIRIT of GOD. -- Those who, you say,
attribute it to the old Serpent, I leave to dispute the Point with you; though I
cannot help thinking that you will have by far the better of the Argument with
them, and that they are rash, and worse than rash, in imputing the whole of it
to him. -- There are undoubtedly other Causes besides satanic Influence to be
assigned for the greatest Part of it.

I shall pass what this Gentleman says respecting the Prejudices of Persons
against this Work, with observing that Assertion and Conjecture are very easy
Things, and that the Persons that are by him supposed prejudiced, could, if
they pleased, in their Turn, talk of the Prejudices of others. Only it may be
expected, that we take Notice of that Passage, p. 15. Others perhaps may
dislike the present Work, because it supports and confirms some Principles
which they have not yet embraced, and against which such Prejudices hang about
their Minds, as they cannot easily shake off. For it is certain these Fruits do
not grow on Arminian Ground.

I think the Gentleman has here made a considerable Discovery of himself, and
has so far opened his Heart to us, that without being liable to the Charge of
Rashness and Presumption, we may venture to assign a Reason for some Parts of
his Conduct. -- Now, we think, we know what partly induced the Gentleman to
write his Account of the Work; why the Work is so much extolled, and Mr. COOPER
so very angry with those he calls Opposers of the Work. -- It confirms some
Principles: -- The Work argues strongly in favor of this Gentleman's
Principles, and so long as that supports them, he will support that. -- Some
Persons Prejudices are latent, but Mr. COOPER'S are not of that sort. -- They
lie open and exposed. -- But after all, it is to be hoped that this Gentleman
has some better Prop for his Principles than what this Work affords. -- It is
vain to imagine that the Work will be the Means of promoting some Principles
for which this Gentleman has a great Regard. It is much more likely that through
the Violence and Imprudence of its Friends, it will prove a mighty Injury to
other Principles that we may suppose dearer to this Gentleman than those so
frequently alluded to. If I mistake not the Infidels Laugh, and expect a
Harvest from the Times, and there is a great Concern among many of the Friends
to Revelation, left they should not be disappointed.

"It is certain these Fruits do not grow on Arminian Ground." It is pity that
some Fruit should grow upon any Ground. Spleen, Bigotry, and Uncharitableness.
-- But what are these Fruits that this Ground will not yield? Mr. COOPER has
not told us expressly. -- If he means the Fruits of Righteousness, the Fruits of
Love to GOD, Love to CHRIST, and to Mankind for their sakes, as I believe he
does, I am exceeding sorry for the Assertion. -- What shall we think of the
Remonstrant or Arminian Churches in HOLLAND, which have subsisted for more than
a Century? That they have been entirely barren of good Fruits, from their
original Settlement to this Day. -- Shall we think that GOD has given no
Increase to the Labors of their Ministers. -- Does this Gentleman suppose,
that all that have sat under their Ministrations have been and are in an
unregenerate State: That those of them that are deceased are damned: And that
the End of the Survivors is to be burned, unless they change their Principles.
-- I am astonished at the Narrowness of some Gentlemen.

To go on, --

-- Was not Dr. ANTHONY HORNECK what they call an Arminian, and yet he is
judged by all to have been an Instrument of converting many Souls. -- Mr.
RICHARD BAXTER (who wrote the Call to the Unconverted, and numerous other
excellent Books) was at least half an Arminian. -- And what Man since the
Apostles Days did more toward building up the Kingdom of CHRIST, than he by
his Preaching, Visits, and Writings? -- There are many other Divines that we
might name, who were called ARMINIANS, that have through the divine Blessing been
successful Laborers in CHRIST'S Vineyard. -- So that it is not certain that
the Fruits of Righteousness cannot grow upon Arminian Ground. --

But before I quit this, I cannot help asking whether Mr. WHITEFIELD himself
did not grow upon this Ground; one to whom we are sometimes ready to apply that
Character given of Barnabas, That he was a good Man, and full of the Holy
Ghost, and of Faith. It appears from his own Account that he was converted by a
professed Arminian, for such is Mr. WESLEY. -- And whilst Mr. WHITEFIELD
continued an Arminian, for such he once was, did not the same Fruits grow upon
his Ground, as have done since? And whilst he was laboring in AMERICA, were
not the same Effects that were produced here by his Labors, produced at home
by the Labors of Mr. WESLEY and others in his Scheme. -- I leave these Things
to the Consideration of Mr. COOPER.

-- And now the least the Writer expects is to be called an Arminian, and to
some it will appear, no doubt, as plain that he is one, as that none that pass
under that Name can be saved. -- But I can assure them that if he be so named,
he will be wrongly named.

-- And as to being an Opposer of a real Work of GOD, GOD forbid that that
should be justly said of him. He can heartily say after the aged and venerable
Mr. CLAP of NEWPORT, as we have it in a late printed Letter of his, I wish all
the Conversions they tell about were true Conversions.

To what is said respecting Persons being in more Danger now of committing the
Sin against the HOLY GHOST than at other Times, I shall make no Reply. Only
will say this, That if what the Gentleman has spoken upon this Head had "dropped
from his Pen." without so much Forethought and Coolness of Spirit, it might
have been as well.

As to Mr. COOPER'S Character of the Sermon he Prefaces, whether it be just,
the World has judged before this Time: And what Character the following Answer
to it deserves, must be submitted to their Judgment. -- This we may say, That
"a Performance of this kind is seasonable and necessary," that it contains no
indecent harsh Language, and "the Arguments are drawn from Scripture, Reason,
and Experience." -- So we dismiss Mr. COOPER'S Preface, and finish what we have
to say of the following Papers.

Before I conclude this Discourse, I cannot help expressing my Concern
respecting the religious Interests of the Country, and suggesting a few Things
that may be serviceable, if attended to.

It is certainly an exceeding difficult gloomy Time with us. Such an
enthusiastic, factious, censorious Spirit was never known here. -- A vain
conceited Temper prevails. -- Children can teach their Parents and their
Ministers. -- Every low-bred illiterate Person can resolve Cases of Conscience,
and settle the most difficult Points of Divinity, better than the most learned
Divines. -- A learned Ministry is despised by many, and Seminaries of
Literature are spoken against as injurious to Religion. -- Conversions are
spoken of with the same Air, as a Person would tell a Piece of common News. --
Some of the most sober, exemplary, pious Men, if not for the Times, are loaded
with opprobrious Names. -- The Churches are full of Contention. -- We are
crumbling into Sects which Time must find a Name for. -- But do I mean to give
a Catalogue of all the bad Things among us? No; that would be a hard Task
indeed. -- They are so many and notorious, that some Gentlemen, who think very
favorably of the Work, have testified against some of them. -- Had they done
it sooner, they might have been nipt in the Bud, but now, it may be, it is
beyond their Skill to put an End to them. -- What the Issue of these Things
will be, GOD knows. -- It is enough sure to make every serious considerate
Person uneasy to look around and view the present State of the Country, and
conjecture what is to come; and it concerns all such, especially Ministers, to
exert themselves, lest the latter End of these Things be worse than the
Beginning.

How much is it to be wished, That our Ministers would, laying aside all Heat
and Animosity, and the Use of Party Names, as Arminians and Antinomians,
endeavor to strengthen each others Hands, and help each the others Usefulness.
The Circumstances of the Day are such, as strongly demand an union of Affection
among them; and if it might to a good Degree be brought about, we might hope
then to see a good Work indeed going on. But if they will be stiff and
tenacious, and make no Condescentions to each other; if they will treat one
another with Bitterness and Severity, we may expect that our present Confusions
will remain, if not that greater will arise.

-- We go on: --

At such a Time as this, it concerns Persons to take Care lest they cast
Reflections upon the Religion of the Gospel, on Account of the Errors, Fancies,
or Faults of its Professors. -- Think not that because some Christians are
enthusiastical, that none are sober; that because some are uncharitable and
censorious, that all are so; that because some high Pretenders to Religion
prove Hypocrites, that all who make a Profession of it are no better. -- Make
an Estimate of Christianity, not from this or that or the other Set of Men, but
from the original Records, the Books of the New Testament. -- And let me
recommend to all Persons the diligent Study of the BIBLE. -- Believe no Man,
however knowing, pious or zealous; however peremptory or popular. -- Prove all
Things by the Standard of Scripture. -- You have a right to do this; it is your
Duty: It is your Interest. -- To the Law and to the Testimony. -- Let every
Thing that is called GOD'S Work, be tried by his Word.

And whilst you are studying the Scriptures, neglect not fervent Prayer to the
great Author of them, that you may be led to the Knowledge of all necessary
important Truth. -- Be willing to do your Duty, and you shall know of the
Doctrine whither it be of God. -- Be meek and teachable, and you shall be
taught your Way. -- This is the best Advice we can give. -- It is meant well;
and if regarded, it may prove happy Advice, especially in this critical Day.

Thus we have gone over what was designed, not sollicitous about Accuracy,
excepting as it regards Truth. -- If any Thing that has been said should
offend any serious, judicious, catholic Christian, it would occasion
Uneasiness: But if those of another Character are offended, we shall give our
selves no Pain about it. -- If any find Fault, are disposed to Answer, and will
do it with Calmness, they may receive as calm a Reply.



A LETTER to a Friend, Concerning the late Religious Commotions IN NEW ENGLAND.
Dear SIR,
ACcording to your Desire and my Promise, I here give you my Thoughts upon the
wonderful Things of a religious Nature, that have appeared of late in this Land.

You are well aware of the fiery Zeal and violent Contests, which these Things
have been unhappily the Occasion of. It is no uncommon Thing for Persons to
discover Abundance of angry Zeal and Bitterness of Spirit, in discoursing of
those Things, which ought to be discoursed of with all possible Meekness and
Calmness of Mind.

I always account it a Rule, That the more Zeal and Passion any one indulges in
treating of controversial Points, the less likely he is to hit upon the Truth.
I profess my self to be a Lover of Truth; and hope you will not assent to any
Thing, that I here offer, but what upon the strictest Examination, appears to
be such. Let not the peculiar Friendship there is between us prejudice your
Mind in Favor of what I write; but consider it as it is in it self, and not as
it comes from your Friend.

I know, in the present Controversy, each of the contending Parties accuse the
other of being prejudiced in Favor of their respective Cause; as it is common
in all Controversies whatever. How far such a Pretense on either Side may be
just, impartial Judges (if any such there be) may determine.

I will only observe here a Pretense against the Opposers of the present Work
(as they are called) viz. That they are actuated and blinded by a Spirit of
Envy, etc. They observe the wonderful Success of some zealous Ministers, and
other Christians, in carrying on the Work of GOD, and envy them the Honor of
being made instrumental to promote so glorious a Work, while they themselves
have no Part of the Honor, and this envious Spirit blinds their Minds, and
makes them to be ill affected to the Work it self. This is no uncommon
Insinuation: And herein, as in many other Cases, there is a Discovery of the
Want of that Charity which hops all Things.

But suppose that in some Instances, there might be Room to fear that Envy was
at the Bottom of Opposition; yet may it not be asked, Whether the zealous
Promoters of this Work may not be in Danger of being prejudiced in Favor of
their own Scheme, through a Principle of Pride. -- Suppose, for Instance, That
any Thing should happen, that with all impartial Persons, should render it
suspicious whether there had been any remarkable Work of GOD carried on in the
Land, or not; or, at least, Whether there had been so much of it as has been
supposed by many: I ask, Whether a Principle of Pride in those who had laid
themselves out for the promoting this Work, would not influence them still to
maintain with Zeal, that it is the Work of GOD, lest they should be deprived of
the Honor of having converted so many Souls? I know not why Pride may not as
strongly prejudice the Mind in one Case, as Envy in the other. -- I hope these
zealous Gentlemen will not pretend that they are not as subject to Pride, as
their Brethren are to Envy.

If there are such Prejudices on either Side, it is much to be lamented. -- On
the one Hand, it should be considered, That if GOD is carrying on a glorious
Work of Grace among us, it is what all have Reason to rejoice in, let who will
be the Instruments improved in it; and it is reasonable GOD should have the
Glory. -- On the other Hand, it ought to be considered, That it is a great
Dishonor to GOD to attribute that to HIM, and call that HIS Work, which is
unworthy of him; and that it would be of very dangerous Consequence to the
Souls of Men, who are too apt to rest in a counterfeit Conversion.

I desire to pursue the Argument I have undertaken, with a due Regard to both
these Considerations.

In remarking upon Mr. Edwards's Discourse, I shall follow his Method,
beginning with his negative Instances, and shall endeavor to show, That these
Things, instead of arguing a Work to be a Work of the Spirit of GOD, do rather
offer a strong Presumption to the contrary.

1. The first, in this Kind, is the Works being carried on in a Way very
unusual and extraordinary. Not that the Strangeness of the Manner, in which a
Work is wrought: its being done in a Way which is new and uncommon, is in it
self simply considered a conclusive Argument, either in Prejudice or Favor of
it. Some Works there have been (I mean of Grace) very extraordinary both in
Themselves and the Way of their being carried on, of which the blessed GOD was
undoubtedly the Author. And other Works there have been (of the like Kind in
Pretension) very extraordinary also, which could be ascribed to no other Cause
than Satanic Influence; or, what is almost as bad, to the wild Hurry of an
enthusiastic Imagination. That therefore, on the Account of which a Work is
called extraordinary, ought always to be taken into Consideration, in order to
judge whether it be a Work of the SPIRIT of GOD. If it is denominated Unusual
and Extraordinary on Account of any remarkable Assistance granted to the
Instruments, or any miraculous Things done by them, as was the Case with
Respect to Moses, CHRIST and his Apostles: Or, if it be called Extraordinary
for its making Men, in an extraordinary Degree, Partakers of the divine Nature,
and living Images of CHRIST JESUS; and this, not only in here and there an
Instance, but in great Numbers, not only in one Place, but in many; -- When
this is the Case, the Work being Unusual and Extraordinary, instead of being an
Argument against it, is a strong Evidence that it is a Work of the SPIRIT of
GOD: But if it has the Name of Unusual and Extraordinary for this Reason
chiefly, that it is unlike to the SAME WORK of the SAME DIVINE SPIRIT in all
Places, and in all Ages; as having new and unhear'd-of Concomitants and
Effects; this Kind of Strangeness in the Work ought, in Reason, to be esteemed
a Mark of Suspicion: Especially, if that in the Work which is thus new and
unusual, has ever been so among all sober Christians, but common and ordinary
among Enthusiasts; their very Guise, what has always appeared among them as
their distinguishing Mark and known Characteristic. This Kind of Strangeness
attending a Work cannot but administer just Ground of Fear and Jealousy,
whether it be a Work of the SPIRIT of GOD; or rather it is an Argument to the
Contrary, and that it is the Effect of a deluded or overheated Imagination.

2. Secondly, Another Thing which is no good Sign of a Work of the SPIRIT is
its being accompanied with violent Effects upon the Bodies of Men; causing them
to shriek out, fall down, and swoon away; and in brief to have on them all the
symptoms of bodily Distress and Agony.

Such Effects have been common of late, in one Place and another, not upon here
and there a Person only, but great Multitudes; and this, at the same Time, and
in the same Congregation. And it is no Wonder if People finding themselves
unable to account for these Things have been ready to attribute them to the
immediate extraordinary Agency of the divine SPIRIT: And such a Conception of
the Matter has, it may be, been too much encouraged by some Preachers who have
too easily given into such Appearances, as evident Tokens of an extraordinary
Influence of the Holy GHOST.

I presume not to determine, that a Work of the SPIRIT cannot be attended with
such Effects upon Men's Bodies; but thus far, I think, I may venture to say,
that wherever these Effects are, there is great Reason to fear, lest that
should be mistaken for the wonderful Operation of the Holy SPIRIT which may be
nothing more than the Working of Men's natural Passions, heightened to an
undesirable Excess: And if instead of hastily and dogmatically ascribing these
Effects to the blessed SPIRIT, as their Author, Men would rather speak of them
under the Guard of a heedful Suspicion, they would discover a Temper and
Conduct which would much adorn their Character.

It is well known to all, in any tolerable Degree acquainted with the History
of former Times, that bodily Agitations, Convulsions, Tremblings, Swoonings,
and the like, have been common in the christian Church. But among whom have
they been so? Not among the sober and judicious; but among those who have been
evidently under the Power of an ungoverned Imagination. It is no rare Thing to
read of the Groanings, Quakings, Foamings, Roarings and Faintings, both of Men
and Women, Old and Young; yea, and of little, very little Children. But what is
exceeding remarkable, these Effects are to be met with, in NO PLACE, in NO AGE,
among Christians of Solidity, and a known exemplary Regard to the main and
substantial Parts of Religion. Look over the History of the Church, even from
the Days of CHRIST to the present Time, and you will find no such Appearances
among Christians of an established Reputation for real and solid Piety; but
they have commonly been found among Enthusiasts, who have been evidently under
the Power of Imagination.

And as this is the real Truth of the Case, and known to be so by all who know
any thing of the History of the World, ought we not to be fearful and
suspicious, when these Effects, common among Enthusiasts begin to appear and
threaten to be general? And would not such a Temper be more safe than that
which is peremptory in determining these Things to be the Operations of the
SPIRIT, condemning all who choose to speak of them with a jealous Caution.

I am sensible, that there are some Scripture Instances pleaded in favor of
these Effects on the Bodies of Men. It is said, that the three Thousand, in the
Acts, who were pricked in their Heart, CRIED OUT, saying unto Peter, and to the
Rest of the Apostles, What shall we do? Yes, and some have carried the Matter
so far, as to declare it probable that they made a GENERAL OUTCRY, in the
Assembly. But this is said entirely without Book. There is no mention made in
the Text of any CRYING OUT at all. It is only observed, that they said to Peter
and the Rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, What shall we do? And this they
did, no doubt, in a sober Manner, without any of those Shrikes which are so
common at this Day. It is evident indeed, that they were brought to be clearly
sensible of their Sin in Crucifying the Lord of Glory; and they are represented
in Consequence of this, as enquiring with a becomeing Solicitude of Soul, what
Method they should take in order to obtain Pardon. But nothing is related of
any violent Commotion in the Passions: To be sure, not as discernable as any
Effects upon their Bodies. Nothing of this Kind appears from the Story: Neither
is their any thing suggested from whence such a Thing may be collected.

How these Persons enquired of Peter and the Rest of the Apostles, what they
should do, is difficult to determine. Whither they Spoke out in the Assembly,
or repaired to them more privately; some to one Apostle, and others to another.
Nor is it a Matter of any Importance to the purpose for which this Instance is
brought. For if they spoke out in the Assembly, it is likely from the
Introduction to this Story, that it was after Sermon was over: Neither is there
the least Hint given, as though they were hurried by their Passions to interrupt
the Preacher, or bring forward any Disorder in the Time of Preaching: Neither
if they did speak out was it in inarticulate Sounds, in a way of Screaming and
Shrieking; but in plain and intelligable Words; and this for a good Reason,
that they might be instructed in the true Method of obtaining Forgiveness with
GOD, of which they had no Notion, but were entirely ignorant even of the first
Principles in the Sinner's Reconciliation by JESUS CHRIST.

The next Instance is that of the Jailer, of whom it is said, that he trembled
and fell down before Paul and Silas, enquiring what he must do to be saved. But
the Case of this Jailer was extraordinary; and if such trembled and fell down
who were in like Circumstances with him, no one could wonder at it. The Story
in short is thus. While Paul and Silas were in Prison, under the Charge of this
Jailer, there suddenly came an EARTHQUAKE, shaking the Foundations of the
Prison, and at once opening all the Doors, and loosing all the Bonds of the
Prisoners. This happened at Midnight, awaking the Jailer out of his Sleep to
his great Surprise. But what heightened it very much was his beholding the
Effects of this Earthquake, its having made Way for the Escape of the
Prisoners, by setting open the Prison Doors: This carried him so far beyond
himself, as that he drew his Sword in order to make Way with his Life, but that
he was prevented by Paul's crying out, We are all here. And now it was that he
called for a Light, and sprang in and came trembling, and fell down before Paul
and Silas.

The Circumstances of this Man, you see, were very singular. There were many
Things concurring to alarm his Fear. There was not only an Earthquake, a
terrible (and perhaps miraculous) one; but it happened in the dead of the
Night, and at once awoke him out of his Sleep, which could not but exceedingly
affright him; especially, when he remembered the certain Hazard his Life was in
if the Prisoners had made their Escape, as he concluded they had, when he saw
the Prison Doors all open. How could it be, but that a Man under such
Circumstances, should be infinitely surprised? What Wonder if the Fright that
he was in should affect his Body, and appear in a visible Tremor on him? It is
no more than might be expected of any other Man in the like Case.

But it will, perhaps, be said, that this trembling was owing to the Conviction
he was under, and proceeded from the SPIRIT of GOD, impressing his Mind with a
Fear of Hell and Wrath. This, I know, has been often asserted with a great
deal of Assurance; but the Text says no such Thing: Neither can it be proved
from any Thing that is here related of the Jailer. It is true, he asked, what
he must do to be saved. But it is as true, that his trembling was in the
Prison, when he sprang in among the Prisoners; but his Question about Salvation
after he had brought Paul and Silas out: And he might for any Thing that
appears to the contrary, have so far recovered himself as to have done
trembling BEFORE he asked this Question; or if when he enquired about
Salvation, he was in a trembling Condition, it is more than can be proved, that
this trembling did not arise from the Fright that he had been in from the
Earthquake, and the Apprehension he had of his Prisoners being gone. To be sure
these were Causes sufficient to produce this Effect. They would, in all
probability have had a like Influence upon any of us. Why then should this
Effect be attributed to the immediate Agency of the divine SPIRIT, when a
natural Cause sufficient for its Production may be assigned, and is actually
spoke of in the Story it self? And where is the Difficulty in supposing that
the divine SPIRIT might take Occasion, from the Fright the Jailer was in, to
convince him of Sin, and put him upon the Enquiry, What he must do to be saved?
And in this Light the Matter appears easy and plain. His TREMBLING was owing to
his Surprise naturally produced: HIS QUESTION to the Influence of the Holy
SPIRIT, now operating on his Mind.

But then it is pleaded, that he not only trembled, but fell down. And if he
did really fall down, as being overcome with Fear, the Earthquake that shook
the Foundations of the Prison (which was his Charge) and opened its Doors,
would be sufficient to account for it. But it may be this falling down, instead
of being the Effect of Fear, was rather a voluntary Act, designed as a Mark of
Respect and Reverence to Paul and Silas, when he now looked upon as Men of God,
in a very high and exalted Sense. It is no Objection against this Sense of the
words, That the Jaylor's bringing out Paul and Silas intervened between his
falling down, and asking them, what he must do to be saved. For he might
prostrate himself before them to do them reverence as Men of God; or he might,
in this Posture ask them into his House, or make his Acknowledgment unto them
for not treating them as became their Character. And there is the more Reason
to enterpret the Words in this Sense, as it was common in those Days, in such a
Way as this, to address to Persons who were esteemed Prophets sent from God. So
Peter Luke 5. 8.
Jairius Math. 5. 22.
the Syrophenician Woman Mark 7. 25.
and some others, fell down at Christ's Feet. So Cornelius fell down at Peter's
Feet Acts 10. 25.
And this, most probably, was the Case here: To be sure, it cannot be proved
that it was not. So that this Instance which has been so much talked of, is
little to the Purpose.

And the same must be said of that of Saul afterward Paul. It is true, he is
spoken of as falling to the Earth, and as being in a trembling astonished
Condition, when he said, Lord, What will thou have me to do? Acts 9. 4. 6.
But it is as true, that his Circumstances, at present, were as extraordinary
as these Effects upon his Body. He was suddenly, and miraculously encircled
with Light shining from Heaven. He was personally and immediately spoken to,
with an articulate audible Voice, by the LORD JESUS CHRIST himself; He was
struck instantly and totally Blind, and continued so for three Days. -- And now
what Wonder is it, if he fell down amazed! If when he spoke, it was with
Trembling and Astonishment! The hardiest Sinner alive, in like Circumstances,
would have been terribly surprised; and if the Surprise he was in, had
discovered it self in trembling and falling down, none could have reasonably
wondered at it. But what is this to the like bodily Effects, where there is not
the like Cause to produce them? Is it any Vindication of the Propriety of
tembling and falling down in ordinary Cases, because Paul trembled and lay
prostrate when he was addressed to by the SON of GOD himself from Heaven, and
miraculously struck blind? There is no Analogy between the Case of Paul and
those his Example is brought to vindicate; and therefore no arguing from the
one to the other.

But it will, probably, be here said, Paul was now struck with Conviction of
his Guilt in persecuting Christ; and this Conviction was the true Cause of his
trembling and falling down. In answer to which, I doubt not, but Paul was made
thro'ly sensible of his Guilt as a bloody Persecutor. But for any to say, this
was the Cause of the Trembling and Amazement he was in, is to give their own
and not the Scripture Account of the Matter. As Paul himself tells the Story it
was thus. There suddenly shone round about him a Light from Heaven; upon which
he fell to the Earth. i. e. this miraculous shining Light had such a powerful
Influence on him as to strike him down; and this perhaps it did in so sudden a
Manner, as to give him no Time for the Exercise of his Thoughts. And while he
lay thus prostrate, he was again surprised with the Voice of the Son of God
himself, from the excellent Glory, pointing him out by Name, as a Person who
had been injurious to him: And to this it was owing, that he spoke trembling
and astonished. This is the plain Scripture Account of the Matter. There is no
Doubt but Paul had upon his Mind a Sense of Sin and Guilt, was conscious to
himself of his ill Treatment of Christ and his Deserts on that Score, but it
was not so much the Sense of his Guilt, as the external awful Manner in which
he was spoken to, that occasioned the Tremor on his Body. The Amazement Paul
was in, and the visible miraculour Appearance, and Address of CHRIST to him,
are connected in the History as Causes and Effects: And the Causes are not only
sufficient for the Production of the Effects; but the Effects such as naturally
follow from them, and might justly be expected. And shall the Surprise of Paul,
with its Operation on his Body, under such extraordinary Circumstances be
pleaded in Vindication of the like Surprise and Operation of it, where there is
no such Cause to produce it? It is unreasonable: Such arguing would not be
admitted in any other Case whatever; neither ought it to be in this.

I know it may be said, that GOD can so reveal himself to the Mind and
Conscience of the Sinner, as to set him trembling, and cause him to fall down,
without any such external visible Appearance. But this was not the Case with
Paul: There was something very awful and surprising, that outwardly affected
both his Sight and Hearing: And therefore there is no reasoning from this
Instance to those where there are no such external Applications to the Senses.
Nay, should it be allowed (and I see no Objection against it) that Paul was
internally and well as externally wrought upon; yet even this will not make it
reasonable to argue from his Case to others, where there is only the internal
Operation; because there is something wanting in all such Cases that was in
his, and which produced those Effects which were visible on his Body. So that
upon the whole I see not that the Case of St. Paul, is of any Service in
Vindication of those Effects upon Men's Bodies, that have been of late common.

The last Instance is that of Felix, which is the more willingly mentioned,
because it serves to show, in some Measure, the Usefulness of human Learning,
which has of late been so much despised by some both among the People and
Teachers: Though to do Mr. Edwards Justice, he is not one of those that despise
it.

All the Argument that there is in this Instance lies in these Words of the
English Version, Felix trembled: The Words translated trembled, are in the
Original, emphobos genomenos; and every one in any Measure acquainted with the
Greek, knows that the Effect of Fear in bodily trembling is not the Thing
pointed out in this Phrase. When trembling through Fear is spoken of in
Scripture, another Word properly expressive of the Thing is made use of: Nor do
I think that this Word is ever used in this Sense. It properly indeed signifies
Fear, and may sometimes be taken to signify great Fear; but trembling through
Fear is not the Thing intended by it.

But enough has been said to show, That the Texts which have been brought to
justify these bodily Effects, are little to the Purpose.

3. Thirdly, We are told, That It is no Argument that an Operation that appears
on the Minds of a People, is not a Work of the Spirit of God, That it occasions
a great Ado, and a great deal of Noise about Religion.

If the Noise and Ado be such as is agreeable with the Nature of christian
Religion, and such as has always appeared in the World when the Spirit of God
has been poured out remarkably upon Men, then indeed it would be no Argument
against the present Scene, but rather an Argument for it.

But if this Noise and Ado be of a different and contrary Nature, it is an
Argument against it.

Mr. Edwards observes, That true Religion is of a contrary Nature to that of
the Pharisees, that was oftentatious, etc. And therefore if the Noise and Stir
about Religion, which now appears in the Land is generally ostentatious, then
it is an Argument against its being true Religion. -- Now what can be called
Ostentaion if this be not, for Persons to make a great Noise in Public about
their Conversion, telling how long they have been NewCreatures, running about
and inviting Men to come to Christ, and telling them that if they do not now
come they will be damned, and that they will bear Witness against them at the
last Day; praying in the Churches, and the like. -- And who can deny but that
there have been such Things very common in all Quarters of the Country?

Again, If the Operation that is upon Person's Minds, makes them noisy and
boisterous: If it produces a wrangling Spirit, and expresses itself with great
Vehemence and Bitterness against all such as they are pleased to call Opposers;
this is an Evidence against the Work's being divine; And that because this
Noise and Ado is directly contrary to that Gentleness and Meekness, which are
the genuine Effects of the Spirit of God.

It is very reasonable to suppose, that when there is an extraordinary
Operation upon the Minds of Men from the Spirit of God, that there will be much
Talk about Religion; but it does not appear very probable that when Persons
Minds are under the Operation, that their Mouths should be filled with Railing
and Bitterness. -- And how much of this Language has been heard among us, from
the Mouths of such as have made no low Pretensions to Grace? What gross Names
have they called such as could not see like them, nor speak in the same lofty
Expressions in Favor of the Work? -- Carnal Wretches, Hypocrites, Fighters
against God, Children of the Devil, cursed Pharisees, with numerous other, have
been the Names they have had bestowed upon them by their charitable zealous
Neighbors. -- And does this sound like the Language of a Christian? Does this
look like the Temper of one born from above, or of one under the Convictions of
the divine Spirit? -- Does it not rather argue a very bad Disposition, an
unmortified carnal Heart, puffed up with Pride and vain Glory?

4. Fourthly, We are told, That it is no Argument that an Operation which
appears on the Minds of a People, is not the Work of the Spirit of God, that
many that are the Subjects of it, have great Impressions on their Imaginations.
Now though Persons having Impressions on their Imaginations, does not always
prove that they have not the SPIRIT of GOD: Yet when such Impressions are very
general, and carried on to an extraordinary Height, in those who are supposed
to be under the SPIRIT'S Operation, I think this must be a Stumbling Block to
all judicious Persons. However one might give a philosophical Account of this
Phenomenon consistent with the supposition of a divine Impression upon the
Mind, yet I think, it is reasonable to Examine, Whether ever such Things have
been common among Persons upon whom GOD has remarkably poured out his Spirit?
If not, I think, that barely the Possibility of the Thing proved by
philosophical Speculation, will hardly remove the Difficulty. I believe all
will allow that these Impressions upon the Imagination, if they arise so high,
as Visions and Revelations, are vastly Disserviceable to true Religion, upon
several Accounts; and particularly as they tend to take off Men's Attention and
Regard to the Word of GOD; and indeed to lessen the Credit of the divine
Revelation; and it is something difficult to conceive that GOD should take a
Method to carry on a glorious Work of Religion in the World in such a way as
would directly tend to the Disparagement of his written Revelation. Indeed if
such Instances were rare, it might seem more reasonable, to suppose them
accidental Effects of the Spirit's Operation upon the Minds of Men: But the
Case is far otherwise, as I suppose every one knows that has conversed much
with People, in such Places as have been said to have most remarkably shared in
the Effusions of the SPIRIT.

5. Fifthly, It is a Thing not very favorable to the present Work, that
Example has been made use of in order to carry it on: Not but that Examples
are sometimes useful for the promoting of true Religion. A Christian who by a
virtuous and good Life, and the Exhibition of a Temper conformed to the great
Rules of our holy Religion, and the Image of its divine Author, discovers to
the World the Amiableness and Excellency of Religion, may be very serviceable
to the Cause of Religion, and strongly recommend it to such as behold his good
Conversation in Christ Jesus. But I presume the Work so much talked of, and so
highly extolled by some, has not been promoted by such Examples as this;
whilst some particular Appearances of the Work, we know have been multiplied
through the Virtue of Example: Thus for Instance, Crying out, Falling down,
Visions and Trances, have been very much produced by Examples. If one Person in
an Assembly has cried out, this is said to affect another and another, and
presently great Numbers in the Assembly cry out. Now I am of Opinion that we
have much less Reason to think that these Cryings out which are thus produced
by Examples, are the Effects of the Operation of the Spirit upon the Mind than
we should have, if the Persons who thus cry out had not been moved to it by
such Examples. For any one though but little acquainted with humane Nature, may
easily conceive how this may be effected, without supposing any Operation of
the Spirit upon the Mind.

And then it may farther be considered, that Enthusiasts have always been
observed, by Example, to communicate such Phenomenon or Appearances, as are
peculiar to their Sect. Any one that is but a little versed in their History,
well knows that their Peculiarities (which very much resemble what has been so
frequently and generally among our selves of late) have been very much produced
by Example. And all those Christians who have had an ill Opinion of Enthusiasm
have supposed it very easy to conceive that such Phoenomena might be produced
without the Operation of the divine Spirit upon the Mind: And they have also
supposed that it is easier to account for them than it would have been, had
they not have been produced by Example.

6. Sixthly, It is said, That it is no Sign that a Work that is wrought amongst
a People is not from the Spirit of GOD, That many who seem to be the Subjects
of it, are guilty of great Imprudencies and Irregularities in their Conduct.
But I must have Liberty to say, That the numerous Imprudencies, gross
Irregularities, the uncharitable censorious Spirit, which have appeared among
the Subjects of this Work, and in those that have been mainly improved in
promoting of it, have a very ill Aspect upon the Work. The Irregularities and
Disorders that were once in the Church of Corinth, are indeed produced as an
Argument in favor of the present Work. This Consideration, it is supposed is
sufficient to prove that the late and present Imprudencies, Irregularities and
Disorders among us, may consist with a glorious Work of the SPIRIT of GOD, and
are no Reason to suspect whether the Work is divine.

I could wish that our Disorders and Confusions were no worse than those were
in the Church of Corinth. But be that as it will, I think it ought to be
observed, that so far as the Irregularities in the Church of Corinth prevailed,
so far Religion was upon the decline among them. It is true, This Church had
been blessed with large Measures of the SPIRIT of GOD: But however, Religion
languished as Disorder increased. -- Disorders may be supposed to be both Marks
and Causes of the Decay of Godliness.

To vindicate this Work (notwithstanding the manifest Imprudences, and even
sinful Irregularities of some who are improved as great Instruments to carry it
on) the Instance of Peter is mentioned, who was guilty of a great and sinful
Error in his Conduct, of which the Apostle Paul speaks in Gal. 2. 11. But this
Instance as bad as it is, will by no Means parallel the Errors and sinful
Conduct of those Persons who have been accounted the chief Instruments of
carrying on the present Work. -- I will only instance here in the uncharitable
censorious Spririt which they have discovered, and which is said Edwards, Page
30.
to proceeed from Mistakes they have embraced concerning the Marks by which
they are to judge of others Hypocrisy and Carnality, etc. To which I reply, Let
it proceed from what it will, it is a very wicked Spirit, and directly contrary
to the Spirit and Temper of the Gospel. How far such a Spirit may consist with
a State of Grace, it is not to my present Purpose to enquire. But I presume
that there can be no Instances given of any remarkable Work of GOD'S Grace
carried on, when Men of such a Spirit and Conduct have been chiefly made use of
as the Instruments.

It is no Secret, and I think, ought not to be disguised, that those Persons
who have been thought to be the main Instruments in promoting the present Work,
are Men exceedingly remarkable for a censorious uncharitable Temper: Ever
disposed to judge and condemn their fellow Christians, and especially the
Ministers of the Gospel. And it is well known that some of the most pious and
faithful Ministers in the Country, that is, such as have been accounted so,
have been condemned by them as Pharisees and carnal Men. I do not say, that all
that appear zealous to promote the present Work discover such a censorious
Spirit: But it is notorious, that those that have been most zealous, at least
many of them, have discovered too much of it. They have judged and condemned
those whom, if they had had the smallest Share of Modesty, they must have
thought much better Men than themselves.

And then farther, it seems to me to have an ill Aspect upon the Work, that as
it has been greatly promoted by such censorious Preachers, the same Spirit
has been generally conveyed to such as have been thought to have had these
Impressions of the SPIRIT. This, I confess, appears to me, a very melancholy
Thing. If this be not the Case in general through the Land, I should be glad to
be informed of it; but sure I am, it is the Case in general in those Places
where I have had Opportunity to make Observation. Those Persons that pretend to
have had any remarkable Experience of a Work of the SPIRIT of GOD upon their
Hearts discover a very uncharitable censorious Spirit: And that much beyond
what they were wont to do before they had such Experiences. This looks very
dark.

7. Seventhly, It looks also very dark to me, that there are so many and so
great Errors in Judgment, "and so many Delusions of Satan" appearing where this
Work is supposed to be carried on in the most glorious Manner.

It cannot indeed be expected that Man in this imperfect State should be
perfectly free from Error in Judgment: But if it appears that some very gross
Errors which have lately sprung up among us, have been embraced by those who
have signalized themselves by their Zeal for the present Work, and by those
also that have been supposed to be the Subjects of it, this is a very
melancholy Consideration, and looks very suspicious. That there have been
Errors is conceeded by Mr. Edwards, and must be by all whose Minds are not
loaded with Prejudice: And I am of Opinion, that they are gross Errors. -- I
will mention one, which to be sure deserves that Character -- It is this. Viz.
A Person that has been solemnly set apart to the Work of the Gospel Ministry,
and preaches sound Doctrine, and lives a regular and good Life, but is not
converted, has been often said to be, not a Minister of CHRIST JESUS, but one
of the Devil's Ministers: And that it is as impossible that such a one should
be instrumental in converting a Sinner, as it is for a dead Man to beget a
living Child. This I believe all sober Persons will look upon as an Error. But
in my Opinion the Error of those Persons who have with much Zeal preached after
this Manner is much greater than at first it may appear to be; for ALL Persons
with them are unconverted, who have not experienced the Work of GOD upon their
Hearts just according to their particular Scheme: Nay farther than this, all
those who are not very forward to relate their Experiences, and make an open
and public Declaration of the Work of GOD'S SPIRIT upon their Hearts in their
Conversion -- By this Means, as was observed before, many worthy and faithful
Ministers have been pronounced unconverted; and this has alienated the
Affections of many of their People from them. And I think it is worthy of
Observation, that the Work in such Places generally goes on most among those
that are disaffected to their Ministers. -- Which I confess makes it look very
suspicious whether this Work which is so much talked of, especially in such
Places as have been now described, is not the Effect of a party Spirit, a
Spirit of Opposition.

Another Error that has been preached with great Zeal and Fervor, and imbibed
with greediness is, That Persons ought not to pray to GOD, until they are
converted; That to tell an unconverted Person that he must real God's Word, and
meditate and pray, is as bad Advice as the Devil himself could give.

Again, there are many that embrace this Notion, That Persons are not to pass a
Judgment upon their State from any Thing that they find in themselves upon Self
Examination. If Persons examine their own Hearts, and compare them with the
Word of GOD, and then make a Judgment upon themselves according as they find
their Hearts to agree or disagree with the Rules of GOD's Word; this is a
certain Mark of a Hypocrite; for every true Christian has another sort of
Evidence, viz. The immediate Suggestions of the SPIRIT who witnesses to them
that they are the Childen of GOD: This, they say, comes like a Flash. And I
have observed that such Persons are exceeding confident of their good Estate,
and are very forward to let every Body know their Confidence. How far such
Persons may be deluded by Satan I pretend not to determine. But Mr. Edwards
supposes that "some Delusions of Satan may be intermixed with the Work". I hope
none will be so severe upon him for this, as he and his Prefacer are upon those
that do not fall in with their Sentiments about the present Work, viz. to
suspect whether in this he may not be guilty of the unpardonable Sin against
the Holy Ghost. I shall take particular notice of these hard Speeches hereafter.

And here I agree with Mr. Edwards, that it looks probable that there are some
Delusions of Satan, in some that make great Pretensions to be the Subjects of
the present Work. Sure I am, that when Persons run into such enthusiastic
Notions as I have mentioned, and others that might be mentioned, they give
Satan a great Advantage against them. It is easy to see that Satan may, if he
be permitted, lead them into strange and pernicious Delusions.

But Mr. Edwards observes under this Head, that the same Persons may be the
Subjects of much of the Influences of the SPIRIT of GOD, and yet in some Things
be led away by the Delusions of the Devil, adding the remarkable Passage to
illustrate it, viz. And this be no more of a Paradox than many other Things
that are true of real Saints, in the present State, where Grace dwells with so
much Corruption, and the new Man and the old Man subsist together in the same
Person, and the Kingdom of GOD and the Kingdom of the Devil remain for a while
together in the same Heart. This I confess, is to me a very great Paradox
indeed, that the Kingdom of GOD and the Kingdom of the Devil should remain
together in the same Heart. That Grace dwells with much Corruption, I suppose,
every one will acknowledge; but when the Kingdom of GOD is set up in a Person's
Heart, Satan's Kingdom is at an End. However, Satan may tempt and afflict the
Children of GOD, his Kingdom in them is demolished. This I think, CHRIST
plainly teaches us, Matt. 6. 24. No Man can serve two Masters; for either he
will hate the one and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and
despise the other; ye cannot serve God and Mammon. But according to Mr.
Edwards, a Man may be a Servant of the Devil, and led away by his Delusions,
and yet be a good Man. This certainly savours of ANTINOMIANISM, to say no worse
of it. I should think that if a Person should give never so plausible an
Account of his Conversion, and afterward should appear a Servant of the Devil,
we should have no Reason to think such an one converted. But I know there are
many at this Day, that are not of my Mind in this.

How far a good Man may be led away with Satan's Delusions is not much to the
Purpose to determine; but I think, it may be safely concluded, that that which
leads Men to expose themselves to Satan's Temptations is not from GOD. And I
look upon it a very melancholy Thing, that there are so many who pretend to
have experienced much of the Influences of the SPIRIT of GOD, who by their
professed Principles, (and such Principles too as they are very tenacious of)
lay themselves open to the Delusions of the Devil.

But notwithstanding all this, Mr. Edwards supposes that the Work in general
may be the Work of the SPIRIT of GOD. I do not well understand what Mr. Edwards
means by the Work in general. If he means the extraordinary Appearances in
those that are supposed to be the Subjects of this Work, such as their crying
out, falling down, bodily Agitations and convulsive Motions, Swoons, Trances
and Visions: If he means that these in general are the Work of GOD, I confess,
I can see no Evidence of it, These Things seem to me in the general to proceed
from some other Causes. And yet, I think, Mr. Edwards must by the Work in
general, mean these Things, or what amounts to much the same, those Impressions
upon the Mind from whence those Appearances proceed; for I believe these
extraordinary Appearances are the only, or at least, the main Things, from
whence Mr. Edwards, and many others, are so very confident, that there is such
a glorious Work going on in the Land.

8. Eighthly, It has a very dark Aspect upon the Work, that there are so many
that are thought to be the Subjects of it that fall away into gross Errors and
Scandalous Practices.

Mr. Edwards says, p. 34. That there are some Counterfeits is no Argument that
nothing is true: Such Things are always expected in a Time of Reformation. What
Mr. Edwards means by Counterfeits and Apostates, (for he also uses this Word
under this Head) we may learn from the Instances which he gives. Some eminent
Persons in the Christian Church; some that GOD had endowed with miraculous
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, referred to in Heb. 6. beginning. An Instance of
these, he says, was Judas. Another Instance he mentions is that of Nicolas. So
in the Time of the Reformation from Popery, how great was the Number of those
that for a while seemed to join with the Reformers, that fell away into the
grossest and most absurd Errors, and abominable Practices. p. 36. And it is
particularly observable, that in Times of great pouring out of the Spirit to
revive Religion in the World, a Number of those that for a while seemed to
partake in it, have fallen off into whimsical and extravagant Errors, and gross
Enthusiasm, boasting of high Degrees of Spirituality and Perfection, censuring
and condemning others as carnal. Those therefore according to Mr. Edwards, are
to be accounted Counterfeits and Apostates, who maintain gross and absurd
Errors, fall into abominable Practices, whimsical Errors, gross Enthusiasm,
boasting of their own Spirituality, censuring and condemning others as carnal.
I agree with Mr. Edwards, that such as these may well be looked upon as
Counterfeits and Apostates. And then I think, that besides these, there is
another Class, that may come into the Reckoning, viz. all such as pretend to
have had great Convictions and Discoveries and yet do not live better Lives
than they did before. If they do not fall into any scandalous Practices, yet if
there is no Alteration in their Conduct, but they live just as they formerly
did, I think they must come into the Number of Counterfeits. For it must be
supposed that if they had been really wrought upon, and their Convictions and
Discoveries were genuine, there would be a Change appearing in their
Conversation; especially if before it were something loose and unguarded. The
Effect of this mighty Work, one would think, would in some Measure appear; and
the Fruits of the SPIRIT not be altogether concealed.

Again, if those that pretend to these Convictions and Discoveries are such as
before led a vicious Life; and do now abstain from those particular Vices to
which they had been addicted, and yet give into others as bad or worse, such
Persons are to be accounted Counterfeits. And I very much fear that the greater
Part of those that have pretended to have been the Subjects of the present
Work, come under one or the other of these Classes; and if so, it cannot be
said, that the Work in general is of GOD. If it could be made to appear
otherwise, I should heartily rejoice.

9. Ninthly, Another Thing which seems to have a dark Aspect upon the Work is,
that it seems to have had its Rise and to have been very much carried on by
such Kind of Preaching as does not well agree with the Preaching of CHRIST and
his Apostles.

Mr. Edwards asserts, That it is no Argument that a Work is not from the SPIRIT
of GOD, that it seems to be promoted by Ministers insisting very much on the
Terrors of GOD's holy Law, and that with a great deal of Pathos and Earnestness.

In order to settle this Point, I think, we need do no more than look into the
Method of Preaching of CHRIST and his Apostles; and compare this Preaching
which has produced these wonderful Effects, with the Sermons we have recorded
in the New Testament.

NOW CHRIST and his Apostles usually in their Preaching addressed themselves to
the Reason and Understanding of their Hearers: They laid Matter for Conviction
before them in a calm and rational Manner; and thus they treated their Hearers
as rational Creatures; not beginning at first to Work upon their Passions and
Affections. They used very much Gentleness and Mildness in their Preaching.
Thus when CHRIST preached his Hearers wondered at the gracious Words which
proceeded out of his Mouth. So the Evangelist John says, The Law was given by
Moses, but GRACE and Truth came by JESUS CHRIST. And thus it is said of such as
enjoy the Gospel Dispensation, Ye are not come unto the Mount that burned with
Fire, nor unto Blackness and Darkness and Tempest, and the Sound of a Trumpet,
and the Voice of Words, which Voice they that heard entreated that the Word
should not be spoken to them any more. -- And so terrible was the Sight, that
Moses said, I exceedingly fear and QUAKE: But ye are come to Mount Zion. --
Heb. 12. 18.

If this be a Description of the terrible Manner of the giving of the Law; and
of the mild and gentle Manner of the Dispensation of the Gospel, as I conclude
all Expositors judge; it appears to me that those Preachers who have had the
greatest Hand in promoting this Work, come nearer to the Example of the giving
the Law from Mount Sinai, than to that of the first Promulgation of the Gospel.

But it will be said, Did not CHRIST preach the Terrors of the Law, and the
Damnation of Hell? In answer to that, this I say, That CHRIST expressed himself
with a great deal of Severity against the Seribes and Pharisees, denounced many
Woes against them, but then it is to be considered that they were professed
Enemies to CHRIST and his Religion, and therefore he did not use that Mildness,
when he addressed himself to them, which generally appeared in his Preaching.

It is farther to be observed, that a great Part of CHRIST'S preaching was
taken up in explaining Morality, and showing Men their Obligations to it. This
has, I believe, been wholly neglected by many of those Preachers who have been
supposed greatly successful in carrying on the present Work. Some of them have
been so far from this that they have not spared to speak contemptuously of
Morality and GoodWorks, in their Sermons: And they have filled them with
Declamations against unconverted Ministers, and Letter-learned Pharisees; as if
they thought that the Example of CHRIST in expressing himself with Severity
against those that were his professed and malicious Enemies, would justify them
herein.

And I will appeal to any one who has had Opportunity to be acquainted with
these Things, whether those Preachers that have been thought to be most
successful in the present Work, have not mainly, (if not wholly) addressed the
Passions of their Hearers, and neglected to address their Reason and
Understanding. If so, not only the Example of CHRIST and his Apostles, but also
the Reason and Nature of Things is against them. It has always been the Method
of false Teachers, thus to work upon the Passions of Men, while they have
artfully avoided addressing their Reason; because their Doctrine and their
Designs would not bear the Examination of unbiassed Reason. I would not be
thought to charge these Gentlemen with any ill Design; but I think it is
abundantly evident, that their Conduct, in this Instance, has very much
resembled that of false Teachers, who have always been very shy of close
Reasoning, choosing rather to have their Scheme admitted by the Affections.

Now that this is an Argument against the Work let any one judge that observes
a Remark which Mr. Edwards makes, p. 76. It is chiefly young Persons that have
been the Subjects of it, (that is of the Work he is speaking of) who have less
Steadiness and Experiences, and are in the Heat of Youth. Can it be wondered
at, if such Persons, when they have had their Passions violently attacked by
these Preachers, and by their Imitators the Lay Exhorters, I say, can it be
wondered at, that they should cry out, and discover such violent Emotions of
Affection, as have been common; and yet remain in the same State that they were
in before. I cannot see here how the crying out, etc. is any Argument of the
Operation of the SPIRIT of GOD upon them. If Persons should cry out thus when
they heard a Minister preach in a Calm and rational Manner (following the
Example of CHRIST,) I should think it looked much more likely that such Persons
were under the Influence of the DIVINE SPIRIT.

It is undoubtedly a decent and beautiful Thing for Ministers to preach in such
a Manner as to show that they are in earnest in what they say. They should feel
the Weight of the Truths they deliver. And this I take may be done generally in
a mild and calm Manner, or at least without the Boisterousness and violent
Emotions of Passion, which appear in those Ministers who have been thought the
most successful.

When Ministers particularly address themselves to Children and young Persons
it looks very improper to discover violent Emotions of Passions. I know no
Example in Scripture that can justify this. And it seems most consonant to the
Reason and Nature of Things, that young Persons, and especially Children, whose
Affections are tender, and whose Understandings are very weak, should be
addressed with much Meekness and Gentleness, and the Ministers first Care
should be to inform the Judgment, and let Light into the Understanding. But,
sure I am, this is very different from the Method that has been taken by those
Preachers and Exhorters that I have been speaking of.

Thus I have briefly touched upon Mr. Edwards's negative Instances. I proceed
to say something concerning what he says positively, when he undertakes to
show, What are the sure, distinguishing Scripture Evidences and Marks of a Work
of the SPIRIT of GOD, by which we may proceed in judging of any Operation we
find in our selves, or see among a People, without Danger of being misled.

And here I acknowledge, that the Rules and Marks he mentions are good; but
cannot join with him in his explaining those Rules, and applying them as he
does.

Particularly, When that Spirit which is at work among a People operates after
such a Manner, as to raise their Esteem of that Jesus that was born of the
Virgin, and was crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem; and confirms and
establishes their Minds in the Truth of what the Gospel declares to us of his
being the Son of GOD, and the Savior of Men; it is a sure Sign that Spirit is
a SPIRIT of GOD. Yet his Way of expressing this Rule and explaining of it might
lead one to make a wrong Application of it. Thus -- When that Spirit that is at
work among a People is observed to operate, etc. and seems more to confirm and
establish their Minds, etc. it is a sure Sign, etc. p. 42 -- So in the next
Page, If the Spirit that is at work among a People -- seems to beget in them
higher and more honorable Thoughts of CHRIST than they used to have, and to
incline their Affections more to him, it is a sure Sign, etc.

When I consider that there may be much Show and Appearance of Esteem and
Affection for CHRIST, where there is no Reality, I doubt not but that
Multitudes of Persons have seemed to have a high Thought of CHRIST, and very
ardent Love to him, who have been wholly under the Influence of an
Enthusiastic Spirit.

So under his 2d Rule concerning the SPIRIT'S operating against the Interest of
Satan's Kingdom. p. 45. he explains himself thus, p. 46. So that we may safely
determine from what the Apostle says, 1 John ii. 15, 16.
that the Spirit that is at work amongst a People that is observed to work
after such a Manner as to lessen Men's Esteem of the Pleasures, Profits and
Honors of the World, etc. must needs be the SPIRIT of GOD.

Here I would enquire, Whether it has not always been observed, that when a
Spirit of Enthusiasim has prevailed, there has not been at first a great
Appearance of what Mr. Edwards here speaks of? Have not Enthusiasts seemed to
be very much weaned from the World, and very eagerly pursuing after Heaven?

Mr. Edwards goes on to speak of the Convictions and Awakening of Conscience
that Persons are under; and endeavors to prove that these could not be from
Satan. What do those Men do with their Reason that suppose, that the Spirit
that operates thus is the Spirit of the Devil? I fear, Mr. Edwards is not fully
acquainted with the Wiles of the Devil, nor considers how far Satan may be
Transformed into an Angel of Light. He lays down this Rule p. 47. The Man that
has an awakened Conscience is the least likely to be deceived of any Man in
the World. If by the Man that has an awakened Conscience, he means one whose
Mind has been greatly terrified by a boisierous Preacher or Exhorter, who has
addressed only his Passions, not his Understanding; been heaping Terror upon
him, without giving him any clear and distinct Account of the Way to Salvation.
Such a Person, thus addressed, is I think very likely to be deceived: He is
prepared to receive a false Comfort, and a false Joy. If ever Satan has Power
to give a false Joy to a Sinner, one would think he might more easily do it
when the Mind is under violent Perturbation, and the Understanding and rational
Powers are in a Manner dorment.

And besides, if we do not suppose Satan to have any Hand in deceiving and
deluding such Persons, I see not why it may not be supposed that such Persons
are more likely than others to be deluded by the working of their own
Imaginations. And if Mr. Edwards doubts of this, let him consult his venerable
Predecessor, who expresses himself thus, STODDARD'S Safety of appearing in the
Righteousness of CHRIST. p. 196.
Convinced Sinners, hearing that they shall certainly be ruined that do not
believe in CHRIST, and that they that do believe shall be saved, set themselves
in their own Strength to work their Hearts to this Duty, and after a while
imagine that they have got the Victory, and have prevailed over their Unbelief,
and wrought their Hearts to a Closure with CHRIST. This Faith is not right.

There is a Principle that very much prevails among those that pretend to have
been the Subjects of this Work, which I am sure exposes Persons to be deceived
both by Satan and their own Imaginations: It is this, That Christians are not
to judge of their Experiences by the Word of GOD. That Christians are not to
examine into the Grounds of their Hope and Joy by the Word of GOD, because
there is the immediate Witness of the Spirit, which is more certain to them
than the Word of GOD can be. Now let any one judge, whether this Principle does
not very much expose a Person to Delusion; and especially a Person that is in
great Terror of Mind.

Indeed, If the Convictions of Sin which Persons are under are followed with a
true Conversion and thorough Reformation, all must acknowledge that this is the
true Spirit. But Mr. Edwards will determine the Case before this can be judged
of, as we shall see by and by.

I will not now make any particular Remarks upon what Mr. Edwards says under
his three following Rules; but consider how he applys these Rules in the
Inferences he draws.

His first Inference is this, viz. That that extraordinary Influence that has
lately appeared on the Minds of the People abroad in this Land, causing in them
an uncommon Concern and Eagerness of Mind about the Things of Religion, is
undouhtedly, in the General, from the SPIRIT of GOD.

I cannot but observe, That this Inference is expressed very cautiously. That
extraordinary Influence that has of late appeared, is, in the General, from
the Spirit of God. I would fain know how it is evident that this Influence is
in the General from the SPIRIT of GOD, and not universally so. I suppose those
Scripture Rules which he makes the Ground of this Inference are universally
true. What need then of this Caution? unless he be doubtful with Respect to
Facts. If the Doubt lies here, I suppose that it must arise from hence, That we
are not fully certain that what appears to be an extraordinary Influence upon
Persons Minds, is so in Reality. It may be counterfeit, or it may be a
Delusion. And I believe no Man in his right Mind can doubt but that this is the
Case. Well then, How shall we certainly determine how much of it is real and
how much of it is counterfeit or delusive? If some Part of it may be so, How
can we certainly know that it is in the General from the SPIRIT of GOD?
Perhaps, it may be but a smaller Part from the SPIRIT of GOD, and the Influence
in general may be from another Cause. For we cannot look into the Hearts of
Persons that appear to have these Influences upon their Minds, and we cannot
judge wholly from what is external: And besides we may not wait to see what the
Issue of Things will be, and what Fruit those that are the Subjects of this
Work will bring forth in their Lives and Conversations.

But is it not rash to draw such an Inference, or positively to conclude that
this Influence in the General is from the SPIRIT of GOD, when our Judgment in
this Matter must depend upon that which is uncertain. And methinks this
Consideration might serve to show the Rashness and Absurdity of such a
Conclusion, This which is propagated by Example. One Person in an Assembly
seems to have a strange Influence upon his Mind, cries out, etc. This uncommon
Appearance strikes another, -- and another, etc. Now I believe that any Man
acquainted with humane Nature can easily account for this Outcry, without
supposing that it proceeds in the General from the SPIRIT of GOD. But whether
we can well account for it or not, yet we know that Enthusiasm has generally
been propagated after this Manner, and therefore I am at a Loss how we shall
certainly determine that this is in general from the SPIRIT of GOD, and not
Enthusiasm, if we are not allowed to wait the Issue of Things. I am very sure
that there are now among us many Things which much resemble Enthusiasm. The
Temper and Conduct and Principles of many Persons that pretend to be the
Subjects of this Work exactly correspond with their's whom we used to call
Enthusiasts.

Mr. Edwards pretends to mention Facts to justify him in drawing this
Inference. Thus he says, p. 62. It is notorious that the Spirit that is at
work, takes off Persons Minds from the Vanities of the World. It is to me very
evident, that when this Work first began in the Country, there was a great
Appearance of this. Persons seemed to have their Minds much taken off from the
World, and ran into an Extreme this Way; neglecting the proper Business of
their Callings; Multitudes not taking that Care which they ought to have done
for the Support of themselves and their Families; but spent their Time from Day
to Day in running after strange Teachers and Lay-Exhorters. I think the
Expression of St. Paul is applicable to the Case, They shall heap to themselves
Teachers having itching Ears. It would be well if the Conduct of Persons in
this Case could be accounted for no other Way than as Mr. Edwards supposes, and
I would charitably hope concerning some of them, that they had a real Concern
about (...) Souls. But I believe Mr. Edwards might have passed a better
Judgment in this Case if he had waited a little Longer. before he had drawn his
Inference.

He goes on, It is notorious that it puts Persons upon a more diligent
Improvement of the Means of Grace which GOD has appointed. How far this was
true when Mr. Edwards delivered and published this Discourse, I do not say. But
this I say, That it is now notorious that it puts a Multitude of Persons upon
contemning the Ministers which GOD has set over them. It puts them upon
reproaching and slandering the faithful Ministers of CHRIST; it puts many upon
withdrawing from the slated Ministry they were under, and setting up separate
Meetings; it puts them upon showing a greater Esteem for private Meetings of
their own setting up, than for the public Ordinances of CHRIST; it puts them
upon discovering a greater Esteem for ignorant Exhorters than for the most able
Ministers. These are Facts that cannot be hid from any, unless it be from some
that have been very much out of the Way of hearing and reading indeed.

Mr. Edwards goes on with his Facts, It is also notorious, That in general, it
works in Persons a greater Regard to the Word of GOD, and Desire of hearing and
reading of it. Here again Mr. Edwards expresses himself with his usual Caution,
-- in the General -- Perhaps he observed that this Influence had a different
Effect upon some, and I believe others have observed that it has a very
different Effect upon a great many at this Day. Instead of Persons having a
greater Regard for the Scripture, it is notorious that their Esteem has been
drawn off from the Scripture, and they have substituted the extraordinary
Influences of the SPIRIT, which they have supposed themselves to be under, in
the Room of the Scripture. And some have been led to a wild, extravagant, and
mystical Interpretation of Scripture, which they say the SPIRIT of GOD reveals
to them; and this they pretend to be as confident of as of their own Existence.
These extravagant Notions vastly lead of Men's Minds from the Word of GOD.

Mr. Edwards goes on, p. 63. -- I was furthermore notorious, That the Spirit
that is at work makes Persons more sensible of the Value of that JESUS that was
crucified. -- What their inward Sentiments are concerning CHRIST, and their
Desires after him, I suppose are not notorious to any one. The only Way, that I
know of, whereby we may form a Judgment concerning these Things, is, by hearing
Men's Profession, and by observing their Conversation. The former of itself is
not sufficient, for we know Men may pretend a great Love to CHRIST, and Desire
to have an Interest in him, when yet they have no Love to him. CHRIST says, If
ye love me, keep my Commandments. And we may assure ourselves. That is Men have
not a conscientious Regard to the Laws of CHRIST, but live in an open Violation
of them, all the pretended Regard to CHRIST is vain. It is abundantly evident
that those Persons who have made the greatest Pretenses to the Influence which
Mr. Edwards speaks of have greatly failed in Regard to the Duties of Morality.
Yes, and many of them have openly spoken contemptuously of them. They do not
place their Religion in Obedience to the Laws of CHRIST, it is a more spiritual
Religion that they pretend to. Their Religion consists very much in Impulses,
Visions, and Revelations. They have the immediate Witness of the SPIRIT, the
SPIRIT assuring them that they are the Children of GOD. To judge of their State
by any Rules of Scripture, would be placing too much in their own
Righteousness. They are emptied of themselves, extremely humble, and yet are
extremely prone to proclaim their own Goodness to the World. Their Religion is
a Mixture of Enthusiasm and Antinomianism. They are mighty apt to censure and
condemn all that differ from them. -- These Things are notorious, "It cannot be
but that these Things should be apparent."

Mr. Edwards supposes it a very easy Thing to determine p. 65. What Kind of
Influence the Operation they are under has upon People's Minds; whether it
seems to confirm them in a Belief of the Scriptures, or to lead them to Deism.
And I believe so too, -- for I think nothing will more naturally lead Men to
Deism than to give heed to Impulses and particular Revelations, -- than to
pretend to the extraordinary Influences of the SPIRIT; for if Persons really
had such Influences from the SPIRIT of GOD, as many pretend to, the Scriptures,
would be in a great Measure useless to them: When therefore they are very
confident of their Visions and Revelations, we find their Regard to the written
Word of GOD very much abated; for though they pretend a great Veneration for the
Scripture, yet it must be according as the Spirit reveals the mystical Sense of
it to them; and thus, by Degrees, the Scripture is to them, as they style it, a
dead Letter. I believe all will acknowledge that Enthusiasm has a Tendency to
introduce Deism. Observation and History sufficiently confirm this. And that
there is Abundance of Enthusiasm among those who pretend to be the Subjects of
this Work, I presume none will deny.

Mr. Edwards observes, p. 66. Whether Persons Convictions and the Alteration in
their Dispositions and Affections, be in a Degree and Manner that is saving, is
beside the present Question. -- Scripture Rules serve to distinguish the common
Influences of the SPIRIT of GOD, as well as those that are saving from the
Influence of other Causes. Here then I would enquire, Whether there be any Rule
of Scripture that would determine that to be a common Influence of the SPIRIT
of GOD, that leads Men farther off from true Religion than they were before?
That this has been the Case with Respect to Multitudes that have had this
extraordinary Influence he speaks of, is beyond any Dispute. That Pride and
Ostentation, that Censoriousness, Enthusiasm, Antinomianism that have appeared
in Multitudes that have made great Pretenses as the Subjects of this glorious
Work, have most certainly led them farther from true Religion than they were
before. They have the greatest Confidence imaginable that they are in a State
of Favor with GOD, and yet make it evident by their Conduct, that they belong
to the Kingdom of Darkness. They show themselves to be worse Men than they were
before they made any such Pretenses; and by Reason of their Confidence about
their good Estate, they have removed themselves out of the Reach of Convictions.

But here perhaps it will be objected, that what I have mentioned is only the
Case of a few, compared with the Multitudes that have been the Subjects of this
glorious Work. To which I answer, That if this be the Case of any of them, then
Mr. Edwards has no certain Rule to judge by in this Case, unless he will take
Time to observe the Event and Issue of Things. If his Rule fails with Regard to
one Person, how does he know but it may with Regard to another, etc.

But here I must remark, that Mr. Edwards is speaking of the EXTRAORDINARY
Influence that has lately appeared on the Minds of People. In what Respects
the Influence is extraordinary he does not plainly tell us. I suppose that the
Work of GOD'S SPIRIT upon the Minds of Men, in convincing and converting them,
is the same that it always has been. I cannot therefore conceive why he calls
it an extraordinary Influence, unless it be, because there are some
extraordinary Appearances attending of it, which he supposes to be Effects of
this Influence; such as falling down and crying out in the Time of Worship,
Faintings, Swoonings, Twitchings, Trances, Visions, etc. Were it not for these
extraordinary Things, I suppose Mr. Edwards would not have taken such Notice of
an extraordinary Influence. And the Reason that I think so is, because wherever
these Extraordinaries have appeared most, there the glorious Work has been
said to be carried on in a remarkable Manner: On such Places, it is said, GOD
has in a wonderful Manner poured out his SPIRIT! Now I think it proper here to
consider whether the State of Religion in those Places that have been most
remarkable for these Extraordinaries is better than it was before these Things
appeared among them. I presume that Mr. Edwards well knows that many Places
where these Things have most prevailed are at this Day in the utmost Confusion;
and that those Persons in them that made the greatest Pretensions to the
extraordinary Influence of the SPIRIT, have run into the greatest Disorders and
Extravagancies. From whence I cannot but judge that the extraordinary Influence
which has been made on the Minds of People has not had a Tendency to make
them better, but worse. I do not deny that there have been any Persons truly
converted in Places where these Extraordinaries have appeared: Nor do I deny
but that GOD might make use of some of these extraordinary Things to awaken
Persons, and put them upon serious Consideration. But this is beside the
Question. The Point to be proved is that those particular Persons who have been
the Subjects (...) extraordinary Influence are, in the General, better Men; or,
at least, in a fair Way to become so. Which, according to the Observation that
I have been able to make, is far from being true. This extraordinary Influence
produces these Effects in them; it fills them with Pride and Vanity, which they
discover in boasting of their Humility and other Excellencies. They take all
Opportunities to talk of their own Goodness, and the Assurance they have of the
Favor of God. And as they are relating, (as they call it) what God has done
for their Souls, they do not fail of adding a Word of Exhortation. They
discover the greatest Forwardness to intrude themselves into the Work of the
Ministry, and to make way for themselves, they are very much disposed to vilify
and reproach the Ministers of CHRIST, representing them as unworthy of their
Office. Thus their Pride leads them to censure their Fellow Christians, and
especially the Ministers of CHRIST; and if any one reproves them in the most
mild and gentle Manner, they will discover the greatest Resentment, and will
not fail of calling the Reprovers Hypocrites, Pharisees, etc. unless they are
Persons Whose Reputation they may think would be Proof against their Slanders.
This Influence prompts them to break through the Bounds of Modesty, Decency and
all Order. It runs them into numerous Errors both in Conduct and Doctrine. They
generally have a Tincture of Enthusiasm and Antinomianism: And these Principles
will serve to solve the Difficulties which are made Objections against them and
their Brethren, with Respect to their moral Conduct.

These are some of the Things which I have observed very common, and which
others could not have but have observed, for they were not done in a Corner.
And I think, it is fully evident that these Things have been the Effects of
that uncommon Influence that Persons have been under. And indeed if we separate
these extraordinary Things from the Work, what is there remaining that may
determine it extraordinary. Let us only consider this Work stripped of these
remarkable Appearances, -- such as crying out, -- falling down, -- Twitchings
and convulsive Motions -- Foamings and Frothings, -- (...) and Revelations --
Exhorters, -- Censoriousness, -- Pharisaism, etc. and I demand where its
Extraordinariness is -- If these Things were deducted from the Religion of the
present Day, what would there be in our Religion that would make it appear
different from what it used to be. And yet Mr. Edwards will not pretend that
any or all of these Things are sure Evidences of a Work of GOD. And yet these
are the Extraordinaries that appear among us, and it is upon the Account of
these Things, at least many of them, that it is so confidently affirmed, That
there is a glorious Work of GOD going on in the Land.

I make no doubt but there is and always has been a glorious Work of GOD's
Grace among us. But if we pretend to distinguish the Work of GOD that is going
on at this Day, from the Work of GOD that has been carried on from Time to Time
among us, the Distinction must arise from the Extraordinaries, when yet, not
one of them, no, nor all together, are Evidences of the Influences of GOD'S
SPIRIT; but, in the General, we may assure our selves they proceed from other
Causes.

I shall here particularly take Notice of Mr. Edwards's Caution respecting the
Sin against the Holy Ghost.

P. 87. If there be any that will still resolutely go on to speak contemptibly
of these Things, I would beg of them to take Heed that they be not guilty of
the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost. -- A little after, he says, If the
Work goes on, it is well, if among the many that show an Enmity against it, and
reproach it, some be not guilty of this Sin, if none have been already.

I believe Mr. COOPER thought this would sound something harsh to some Persons,
and therefore when he, in his Preface to Mr. Edwards's Discourse, expresses
something like it, he adds, P. 15. I hope these Words have dropped from my Pen,
not in an untemperate Zeal, but with due Caution, and some suitable Solemnity
of Spirit. As to the Solemnity of Spirit in him or in Mr. Edwards when they
wrote as they did about the unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost, I judge
not; but, I think, their Zeal appears to be somewhat untemperate, and not
according to Knowledge.

When Mr. Edwards says, If there are any that will still resolutely go on to
speak contemptibly of these Things etc. -- I suppose by these Things he means
the Extraordinaries, such as crying out, falling down, etc. those uncommon
external Appearances which the Work has been attended with. If Persons had a
serious Thoughtfulness about Religion, and should discover their Concern for
Souls in such a Way as Persons have usually done, it cannot be imagined that
Mr. Edwards would think that those Persons whom he thus Cautions, would speak
contemptibly of these Things, i. e. of the Appearances of Religion in those
Persons. For it is evident, that in his Caution he has a particular Reference
to his Brethren in the Ministry, p. 88. I believe the Ministers in this Country
never were will not to speak contemptibly of a Disposition to Piety that they
could discover in their People. Therefore I conclude he here means the uncommon
external Appearances that attend the Work; and why should it be thought an
unpardonable Sin to speak contemptibly of these Things. Mr. Edwards seems to
suppose it may be lawful to contemn the Peculiarities of Enthusiasts, p. 55.
There is a Counterfeit of Love, that often appears amongst those that are led
by a Spirit of Delusion: There is commonly in the wildest Enthusiasts a Kind of
Union and Affection that appears in them one toward another, arising from
Self-Love, occasioned by their agreeing one with another in those Things
wherein they greatly differ from all others, and for which they are the Objects
of the Ridicule of all the Rest of Mankind; which naturally will cause them so
much the more to prize the Esteem they observe in each other of those
Peculiarities, that make them the Objects of others Contempt. -- Now it appears
very evident to me that most if not all the uncommon external Appearances which
have attended this Work are the VERY THINGS for which Enthusiasts have been the
Objects of the Ridicule of Mankind. They are, (at least some of them) the
Peculiarities which make them the Objects of others Contempt. Mr. Edwards does
not here censure all Mankind for contemning Enthusiasts upon the Account of
these Peculiarities; and yet it is an unperdonable Sin against the Holy Ghost
to speak contemptibly of these very Things, when they are found among our own
People. This to me looks like Partiality.

Let us a little consider what are the Peculierities for which Enthusiasts are
contemned and ridiculed by the rest of Mankind. Are not these some of them,
viz. Violent Agitations of Body, falling down, heaving of the Breast,
pretending to extraordinary Communications from the Spirit of God. -- The Light
within, Revelations, Trances, depreciating the Word of God, and setting up the
Light within, or some other Rule above it. These are some of their
Peculiarities; and all these Things are among the uncommon Appearances that
attend this Work, as every one must know that has been much conversant where
it has been carried on. Now I cannot see the Odds between speaking
contemptibly of these Things in these who are called Quakers, and in those who
have not yet had that Term of Reproach cast upon them; since we are not allowed
to suspend our Judgment, and wait to see the Issue and Consequence of Things,
for at first, to be sure, they appear just alike. Those that are waiting to see
the Issue of the Work (says Mr. Edwards) think that they shall be better able
to determine by and by: But they are probably, many of them, mistaken. p. 85.

He goes on to run a Parallel between those Persons and the Jews who saw the
Miracles of CHRIST, but waited to see better Evidences of his being the
Messiah. I hope he does not imagine that the uncommon Appearances which he
speaks of are as full a Proof of an extraordinary Influence upon the Hearts of
Men by the Spirit of GOD, as the Miracles of CHRIST were of his being the true
Messiah; and yet I cannot well see the Force of his Reasoning without this
Supposition.

Mr. COOPER in his Preface seems to go upon this Supposition, where he says, p.
15. Those (he is speaking of Opposers) if they had Opportunity to be rightly
informed, I am ready to think, would have been Disbelievers, and Opposers of
the Miracles and Mission of our Savior, had they lived in his Days. What can
be meant by being rightly informed but having a just and true Account of the
uncommon Appearances that attend this Work? If so then he must suppose that
these Things (however the Generality of sober Men look upon them to be
Stumbling Blocks) are as full a Proof of a glorious Work of the SPIRIT of GOD
in the Land, as CHRIST'S Miracles were of his divine Mission.

And indeed I see not how Mr. Edwards can reasonably say as he does about the
unpardonable Sin against the Holy Ghost without supposing this. But it seems
very wonderful to me, that any Person should think that there is such full
Evidence of an extraordinary Work of GOD'S Grace going on in the Land, as there
was that CHRIST was the true Messiah. For these very Things which are the main
(if not the only) Proofs that can be pretended, are such Things as are
Stumbling Blocks; to the greater Part of thinking Men. Now though it be granted
that there were many Stumblingblocks in the Way of the Jews, which prevented
their believing on CHRIST; yet those Things were not the Evidences of his being
the true Messiah, or at least the main Evidences which were appealed to.

But suppose the Evidences which accompany this Work were as full Proof of its
being what Mr. Edwards supposes it to be, as the Miracles of CHRIST, and all
other Evidences in Conjunction, were of his being the Son of GOD, (which is
infinitely remote from Truth) yet should I think it rash in any one to conclude
from hence, that those Persons who reject this Evidence are guilty of the Sin
against the HOLY GHOST. For it does not appear to me that any Person was guilty
of this Sin while CHRIST was upon Earth.

Those Persons that blasphemed the Miracles of CHRIST in casting out Devils,
saving, that he did them by the Help of Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, are
supposed by some to have been guilty of the unpardonable Sin against the HOLY
GHOST: But there is no Evidence of this. CHRIST does indeed Caution against
this Sin, but in his Caution intimates to them that they had not yet been
guilty of the unpardonable Sin. Whosoever speaks a Word against the Son of
Man, it shall be forgiven: But whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost it
shall not be forgiven him, Mat. 12. 32. They had hitherto only spoken against
the Son of Man: But he cautions them against speaking against the HOLY GHOST,
i. e. rejecting the Evidence that should be given for establishing the
christian Institution, when the HOLY GHOST should come according to his
Promise. It was now the Ministry of the Son of Man. But soon after his
Resurrection from the Dead, the Dispensation of the HOLY GHOST succeeded. And
CHRIST here admonishes them of their Danger, if they should blaspheme the HOLY
GHOST as they had done him. And that those Persons were not guilty of the
unpardonable Sin in the Days of CHRIST'S Ministry, appears very evident from
hence, that the Offers of Salvation were made to them by CHRIST'S Apostles
after the HOLY GHOST was given. Although they had rejected and blasphemed CHRIST,
and had withstood all the Evidence he gave of his divine Mission, yet GOD was
pleased to grant them a farther Trial, and give them farther Evidence of the
Truth of the christian Institution by the Resurrection of CHRIST from the Dead,
and miraculous Gifts of the SPIRIT.

Thus, as I conceive, it does not appear from the Scriptures, that any Persons
were ever guilty of the unpardonable Sin, but those that rejected and
blasphemed the miraculous Gifts of the HOLY GHOST. And this I think is
sufficient to show the Rashness of charging any Person in our Day, with being
guilty of this Sin in speaking against the present Work, unless there had been
the same Miracles wrought to confirm it, that were wrought in the Apostles
Days, or were other Proof equal to it; but his, I presume, no Man, in his right
Mind, will assert.

Mr. Edwards, under his last Head, does, in the General, speak well, and I wish
that he and his zealous Friends may follow the good Advice he there gives.

THE END.

