A Prospect of the CITY OF Jerusalem, IN It Is SPIRITUAL Building, Beauty and
Glory.

SHOWED IN A SERMON Preached at Hartford in His Majesty's Colony of
Connecticut, May 13th, 1742, Being the Anniversary Day for Electing the
Honorable the GOVERNOR, the DEPUTY GOVERNOR and the Worshipful ASSISTANTS
there.

By Isaac Styles, A. M. Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in North Haven.

Psalm. cxxxvii. 5, 6. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right Hand forget
her Cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my Tongue cleave to the roof of my
Mouth: if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief Joy. N. LONDON; Printed and
Sold by T. GREEN, Printer to the GOVERNOR and COMPANY, 1742

At a General Assembly holden at Hartford on the Second Thursday of May, Anno
Domini, 1742.
Ordered by this Assembly, THAT Joseph Whiting Esquire; and Capt. Jonathan Allen,
return the Thanks of the Assembly to the Reverend Mr. Isaac Styles, for his
Sermon delivered before this Assembly on the Thirteenth Instant; and desire a
Copy thereof that it may be printed.

George Wyllys Secr.

PSALM CXLVII. 2. The LORD does Build up Jerusalem,
AS every house is builded by some man; so he that built all things is God. The
Heavens and the Earth, the upper and lower Stories of the vast and stupendous
^rame and goodly Structure of the Universe, (...) glorious piece of divine
Architecture: And ^o are all the Hosts of them; the Angels of Light, those
morning Stars, those firstborn and eldest Sons of time, those bright
Intelligences of the superior World; Thousands and Ten Thousand times Ten
Thousands of whom People the Empyrean Heavens, inhabiting those blissful Abodes
where they do always behold the face of their Father which is in Heaven; and
are continually feasled with the Joys of Beatisick Vision: Together with
Mankind, who dwell in houses of Clay, whose foundation is in the Dust: And all
the other various Kinds and Species, Ranks and Orders of ^nferior Creatures,
whether Animate or Inanimate, belonging to this visible Creation He whose Name
alone is Jehovah, who was before and is above all Worlds, a Being
Super-intellectual, Self-existent, Independent, Self-sufficient and
alsufficient; this alwise Artificer by his mighty Fiat, called up and caused
this stately Fabric to start forth out of nothing: That high vaulted Roof,
that spacious and glittering Canopy spread over our heads (imbellish'd and
bespangled with numerous bright Luminaries; the Sky which is strong and as a
molten Lookingglass, enameled, bedecked and embossed with innumerable worlds of
Light, of various Magnitudes Immensity more orient and glistering than the most
sparkling Diamond or Pearl, than the Gold of Ophir, the precious Onyx or the
Sapphire) this is the work of his Fingers; the wondrous Work of Him which is
perfect in Knowledge. It Is he who by his Wisdom has thus garnished the Heavens,
who has there pitched a Tabernacle for the Sun, and appointed the Ordinances
of Heaven; who has made and guides Arcturus with his sons Orion and Plei^des
and the Chambers of the South, those influential and useful Constellations.

It Is the same alwise and alpowerful Being who has also laid the beams of his
chambers in the Waters, and fixed the Groundfills and Foundations of this
Earth, or rather hangs the same upon nothing: For his huge, ponderous
te^^^q^^ous Globe has no Atlas to support it No, there is nothing underneath
save everlasting Arms; an incontestible proof of a Divine Being, an eternal
Power and Godhead, Job 26.7. He stretches out the North over the empty place,
and hangs the Earth upon nothing.

Terra pilae similis nullo fulcimine nixa, aere sublato, tam grave pendet onus.

How wonderful! to see an Orb of such vast Bulk, hang equally poised with its
own weight and swimming about in the liquid Ether. Of old have thou laid the
foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of thy hands, Psalm.
102.25. The Earth (no less than the Heavens) with all its Appurtenances; its
useful Atmostphere and all its beautiful Apparatus and rich Furniture; the
winged Choristers which sing among the Branches, and what time they life up
themselves on high scorn the House and his Rider; every Beast of the Forest
and the Cattle upon a thousand Hills; the Finny Nations and whatsoever passes
through the paths of the Seas, these all loudly proclaim the Wisdom, the Power
and the Goodness of their Munificent Creator. O Lord, how manifold are thy
works! in wisdom have thou made them all: the Earth is full of thy riches. So
is this great and wide Sea, etc. Psalm. 104.24, 25.

And as all things were made by him, so by him all things consist: His
Omnipotent Manutenency upholds and keeps them from relapsing into their
primordial Abyss of Nonentity, their original Nothing. As He spoke and it was
done, so be commanded and it stood fast. For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled
in Heaven, in or among the heavenly Bodies, which by virtue of that Word of
God's Power by which they were made, do constantly continue the same in their
Substance and Order and Courses, which, by virtue of the fixed and established
Laws whereby they are governed, are continually fulfilling their Annual and
Diurnal Revolutions, and shedding down their benign Influences of Light and
Heat upon this Earth: And it follows, Thou have established the Earth and it
abides: They, viz the Heavens and the Earth continue this day according to
thine Ordinances, Psalm. 119.89, 91.

As for Mankind they are his peculiar Workmanship: His hands have made and
fashioned them, and that in wondrous wise; the Inspiration of the Almighty has
given them Understanding, whereby they are capable of superior pleasure and
felicity in the Contemplation of, and an Assimulation to, and Communion with
the Ever-being and Ever-blessed Jehovah, in whose presence there is fullness of
Joy; and the fruition of whom, and nothing else, yields consummate Beatitude to
an intelligent Mind.

The Lord is good unto all, and leaves not himself without Witness among the
Heathen, in that he gives them Rain and fruitful Seasons, filling their hearts
with food and gladness, -- But his Divine Philantrophy, his Love and good will
to his own dear chosen People (together with all the other Excellencies and
Perfections belonging to his thrice glorious Essence, which have time
immemorial been Employed for their welfare and Happiness; particularly his
amazing Contrivance and Transaction for their recovery from the ruins of their
Apostasy) merits our special Notice and challenges our most devout Resentment
and grateful Acknowledgments.

This is what the Psalmist takes special Notice of and summarily mentions in
the Text, as an Argument whereby he would stir up himself and others to
celebrate the high Praises of God.

Who was the inspired Author and Penman of this Psalm is uncertain, whether
David or some Prophet who lived after the Jews restoration from the Babylonish
Captivity and the Rebuilding of their City and Temple in Jerusalem: But
undoubtedly the Text has a primary reference to that great, notable and
wonderful Event. Hence the following words are, -- He gathers together the
Outcasts of Israel. And yet it may be considered not only as a brief and bright
Meditation and compendious Narration of what God had done and was then doing;
but likewise as a Prophetic indigitation of what God has ever since been, is
still doing, and will do in behalt of his Church and chosen People even to the
end of the World. For Jerusalem not only in David and Solomon's days and during
the time that the first Temple was standing, but after the Rebuilding of it,
was the chosen Place of the stated and solemn Worship of the true God: For the
Lord had chosen Zion, he desired it for his habitation; and loved the gates of
that Mountain more than all the dwellings of Jacob. Thither King David had
brought up the Ark of the Covenant and had there fixed its resting Place; even
in this City of David, in whose Palaces God was Known for a Refuge: The house
of God was there, and thither the Tribes went up, the Tribes of the Lord unto
the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the Lord. And there
also were set Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones which appertained to the house
of David. It was now the Sent of God's Public Worship and Ordinances, and so
an eminent Type and Figure of his universal Church for evermore. It was a City
that was compact together, and so a lively and lovely Emblem of the Churches
Unity and Happiness, and the flourishing State of Religion in all after times;
pointing us to that Jerusalem which is above, or rather from above, is free and
is the Mother of us all: By which is meant the Gospel Church, sometimes (...)
the heavenly Jerusalem, and the new Jerusalem coming down from God out of
heaven as a Bride adorned for her Husband. -- As the Literal Jerusalem was a
Type of the Spiritual, so the Rebuilding of the former was a Type of the
Reviving and Edification of the latter.

And if we run over the Annals of the Church and observe the several Periods
wherein God has remembered it in, and raised it up from, its low Estate; we
shall find that it bears no little Resemblance to Jerusalem in the fall and
rise thereof, which our Text nextly refers to.

Now then, by the Lord's Building up Jerusalem, we may understand in general,
no only his Rearing up the Church of Israel and making them the Subjects of
many peculiar and distinguishing Privileges and Immunities; Blessings both of
a Spiritual and Temporal nature and reference, but likewise all that he has
done, is now doing and may do hereafter in Building up the Christian Church;
all that any way contributes to the furtherance of the Welfare and Happiness of
his People in Gospel Days.

Here a large field of Discourse opens to our view; but I may not enter far
into it, lest I exceed the narrow limits of Time allotred me. Would the time
permit me, I might mention the loving Kindnesses of the Lord and the great
Goodness toward the house of Israel which he has bestowed on them, according
to his Mercies, and according to the multitude of his loving Kindnesses: And
likewise the loving Kindnesses of the Lord according to all that the Lord has
bestowed on Us and Others of the Gentile Church through the several Periods and
successive Ages thereof: As also those glorious things which are spoken
concerning the City of God, in those Scripture Predictions and Promises which
have not as yet had their plenary accomplishment. For according to his promise,
we are looking for new Heavens and a new Earth wherein dwells Righteousness.
We are waiting in hope and praying for the great Deliverer to come to Zion and
turn away Ungodliness from Jacob. We are wishing for the dawn of that happy
day, when He who is the Light of the Gentiles, shall be likewise the Glory of
his People Israel, -- When the Lord shall bring back his ancient People from
all the Lands whither his anger has scattered them, and release them from
their Bands of thick Darkness, whom Satan has bound, lo, this Seventeen
Hundred Years.

The ancient method of Preaching in Old Testament times, consisted very much in
an historical Narration or Recital of memorable Mercies relating to God's
Church and People; See Psalm. 78. 1 -- 7. Holy men of God as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost, have taken in hand to set in order a Declaration of many
remarkable things respecting the Birth, Infancy and Growth of the Church, both
Jewish and Christian. A most valuable Church History this! Than which there is
none Extant more Instructive, Delightful, Entertaining and Profitable; nor
indeed is there any that is Equally so.

Here then let me briefly mention a few things relating to the Upbuilding,

1. Of the Jewish Church, more especially during the Fourteen Generations from
Abraham to David. The God of glory appeared unto Abraham when he was in
Mesopotamia, and said unto him, Get thee out of thy Country and from thy
Kindred, etc. And by Faith when he was so called to go out into a place which
he, viz. in his Seed, should afterward receive for an Inheritance, be obeyed,
and by faith sojourned in the land of Promise; and from him sprang there even
of one, and him as good as dead, so many as the Stars of the sky in multitude,
and as the Sand which is by the sea shore innumerable. Abraham (thence called
the Father of the Faithful) was the first lively Stone that was laid in that
spiritual Building. Isa. 51.1, 2. Look unto the Rock whence ye are hewn, etc.
i. e. Look unto Abraham your Father and unto Sarah that bare you; for I called
him alone and blessed him and increased him.

When Israel was a Child then the Lord loved him, and called his Son out of
Egypt; he taught them also to go, taking them by their Arms: He led him about,
He instructed him, He kept him as the apple of his Eye: The Lord alone did lead
him, and there was no strange god with him. What mavelous things did he in
the sight of their Fathers in the land of Egypt, in the field of Zoan? And
during their Forty Years Travel through the Wilderness of Sinai, how often did
he appear Riding on the Heavens for their help, and in his Excellency upon the
Skies? When Means failed and they could not help themselves; when they knew not
what to do no which way to turn and could only stand still and see the
Salvation of God. Witness his dividing the Sea and (...) the Ransomed of the
Lord to pass over: His raining down Manna upon them to Eat, giving of them the
Corn of Heaven, so that Man did eat Angels food: His raining Flesh also upon
them as Dust, and feathered Fowl like as the sand of the Sea, Moreover his
cleaving the Rocks in the Wilderness, and giving them Drink as out of the great
Depths, bringing Streams out of the flinty Rock, and causing Waters to run down
thence like Rivers.

In what an elegant and exalted Style strong and lively Metaphors, are the
signal Favors of Heaven toward that People recognized and recorded in that
Swan-like Song of Moses? Deuteronomy. 32 8, ^14, And so by the Prophet Habakkuk, Chap.
3. 3. -- 16. And elsewhere in the Sacred Pages. The Wisdom, Goodness, Justice,
Holiness, Faithfulness and Power of God were Conspicuous and eminently
displayed in the Methods of his guiding, governing, protecting and building up
his Church and People at that Day; in setting up and establishing Religion
among them, giving them his Adoption, his Covenant, his Law and Promises;
setting up his Tabernacle, giving them Ordinances and Institutions, and
appointing Priests and Levites to teach Jacob his Law and Israel his Statutes,
and administer those Ordinances according to that Mosaic Paedagogy. This is
remarked in our Context as a signal Instance of divine Favor and the
distinguishing Mercy of God toward them, Ver. 19, and 20. The Gospel was
Preached to them at sundry times and in diverse manners; particularly in the
brazen Serpent, and the Rock that followed them, which Rock (the Apostle assures
us) was Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 4. Moreover, in setting up Civil Government among
them, sending Moses his Servant, as well as Aaron whom he had chosen. While
they were and remained under a Theocratical form of Government, God himself as
their great Legislator, delivered them all their Civil Statutes as well as
Sacred Canons; all their Laws, Moral, Ceremonial, Judicial and Military; and
raised up, qualified and improved such as were Utriusque tabulae Custodes, who
were happily Instrumental toward their Upbuilding both in Church and
Commonwealth; toward securing to them whatsoever was Valuable pertaining
either to Religion or Property: Men famous and had in reputation for Wisdom,
Integrity, Ability and Faithfulness; able Men and such as feared God, men of
Truth and hating Covetousness; wise men and understanding and known, i. e.
approved among their Tribes. Such should all Civil Rulers be. See Numb. 11.16,
17, 25.

Thus God led them through the Wilderness by the right hand of Moses and Aaron,
with his own glorious Arm, going before them; affording them all that Light and
Direction which their darkness and difficulties, streights and perplexities
called for; teaching them in the way which they should go, and guiding them
with his Eye: Supporting them under and extricating them out of their
distresses and dangers. In the Mount of their difficulties he was seen, working
deliverance and salvation for them; and brought them at length to the border of
his Sanctuary, even to the Mountain which his right Hand had purchased. He
drove out the Heathen before them, made room for them and did plant them in the
land flowing with Milk and Honey: for they got not the Land in possession by
their own Sword, neither did their own Bow save'em, but his right hand and his
holy arm and the light of his Countenance, because he had a favor unto them.

Thus happy was Israel, so that no People was like unto them, a People saved by
the Lord, the Shield of their Help, and who was the Sword of their Excellency;
whose Wisdom, Power and Goodness were singularly Concerned and Employed for
them: And this notwithstanding their base and black ingratitude, frowardness,
multiplied Prevarications and manifold Heaven-daring Rebellions against him.

And (to pretermit many things) how did the Lord appear in his glory, by the
Building up of Zion? How did his Wonder-working Providence, even literally
Build up Jerusalem, in the Reign of David and Solomon? And so after it had been
Demolished, laid in Ashes and turned into a ruinous heap by the Chaldeans, that
bloody and hasty Nation.

But I may not further Enlarge here, but must hasten,

2. To take Notice of some few things relating to the Lord's Building up his
New Jerusalem the Gospel Church. God willing to show his Wrath and make his
Power known, endured with much Long-suffering the vessels of Wrath fitted to
Destruction; and that he might make known the riches of his Glory on the
vessels of Mercy which he had before prepared unto glory, even Us whom he has
called under the New Testament dispensation, not of the Jews only, but also of
the Gentiles. He now calls us His People which were not his People, and us
Beloved which were not Beloved. In how surprising a manner was the Arm of the
Lord Revealed, during the Apostolic Age, when also to the Gentiles be granted
Repentance unto Life; when Thousands were added to the Church, even such as
should be Saved, and that in one Day, and by the preaching of one Sermon? when
in great Numbers and with great Speed they came flocking into the Christian
Church, fulfilling that which was spoken by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 66.8.
when the Earth was made to bring forth in one Day, when a Nation was born at
once. And Chap. 60.8. Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as Doves to their
windows? How many golden Candlesticks were Erected, even where Satan's seat and
synagogue had been; in those dark places of the Earth which had been full of
the habitations of Cruelty? Thus was the glory of the Lord revealed, and all
Flesh saw it together. And Gods way has ever since been and is still in the
Sanctuary. Who is so great a God as our God? But I must dismiss this though it, and
proceed now to offer two or three brief hints, from whence it may further
appear that the words of our text are words fitly spoken, like apples of gold
in pictures of silver. Words taken in their allusive and metaphorical or
figurative Sense, very significant and expressive of diverse things relating to
the Church of God respecting both the Esse and the Been Esse of it; which are
to be attributed and ascribed to none but Him who works all things according
to the Counsel of his own will.

And here,

First, That the Church is fitly flyl'd Jerusalem, appears in that,

(1) Jerusalem (which was built up as a City that is Compact together) was a
lively Emblem or Picture of the Church's Unity and Peace. The Name signifies
Peace: Which Name was given it after David took the Fort of Zion from the
Jebusites. For before that it was called Jebus; a Noun of a quite contrary
signification: Which being interpreted, is, The Fire of God. Agreeable to which
mystical Name, the Inhabitants (who were a People hated and accursed by God,
against whom he had had indignation a long time, and that fire kindled in his
anger burnt to the lowest Hell) perhaps were suffered (as a just Judgment of
heaven upon them) to live in the fire of Contention, Variance and Strife, in
Malice and Envy, Hateful and Hating one another.)

It was not now distinct and opposite, but united and uniform both in its
Government and Religion. In a resembling manner there is (at least there ought
to be) Unity, Uniformity, Peace and Harmony maintained and cultivated among
Christians. That they all may be one, agreeable to our Savior's Prayer, and to
the inspired Apostle's description of the Church, Fpb 4.1, -- 6 and 12, -- 16.
Peace and Love and Unity is the great and distinguishing Law and Character of
the Christian Profession. A divided Church is (in a very ill sense) terrible as
an Army with Banner; and as the Company of Two Armies, -- Indeed the phrase (in
strictness of speech) is a Solaecism, and a Contradiction in terms.

(2) Jerusalem was a very pleasant and beautiful City. Beautiful for Situation
and for its goodly Buildings; particularly the Temple, which was the most
magnifical, curious and splendid Edifice that ever human Art contrived, Hands
Erected or mortal Eyes beheld. On account of which, men called that City, the
perfection of Beauty, the Joy of the whole Earth. In like manner, the Church is
exceeding Beautiful; especially in the Eyes of him who sees not as ruin sees,
but looks on the heart. Psalm. 45.13. The Kings Daughter is all glorious
within, her Clothing also is of wrought Gold. Ezekiel. 16.13. -- Thou wast
exceeding beautiful: Thy beauty was perfect through my Comeliness, which I had
put upon thee, says the Lord God. See also Rev. 9.8, -- With what lively and
significant flowers of divine Rhetoric does the heavenly Bridegroom set forth
the excelling Beauties of his Spouse, the Church, in that Song of Songs which
is Solomon's? Thou art beautiful, O my Love as Tirza, comely as Jerusalem. Turn
away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me. Thou have ravished my
heart, my sister, my spouse, with one of thine Eyes, etc. Who is she that
looks forth as the Morning, fair as the Moon, and clear as the Sun? How fair
and how pleasant art thou, O Love, for Delights? Thine head upon thee is like
Carmel, and the hair of thine head like purple. Thy neck is as a tower of
Ivory. How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O princes Daughter! Thy stature
is like to a palm tree. Behold thou art fair my love, behold thou art fair:
Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee, --

Thus do all true Believers (who are the constituent parts of this Building of
God, this Temple in which the Holy Ghost dwells) shine with a distinguishing
Luster, and reflect a Divine, God-like Beauty; insomuch that Jerusalem, yea
even Solomon's Temple in all its glory was not adorned and beautified like one
of these.

It Is true, the Visible Church (collectively taken) sometimes resembles one that
has lain among the Pots; and may say as in Cart. 1. 5, 6. I am black as the
tents of Kedar. Look not upon me, etc. But then again there are times when it
resembles a dove whose wings are covered over with Silver, and her feathers
with yellow Gold. The Daughter of Zion was covered with a dark Cloud, the
beauty of Israel was greatly marred; her gold was become dim, her most fine
gold was changed, when those miseries and calamities spoken of in Daniel were
brought upon the Jews, by the remainder of the Grecian Empire, and afterward
by the Roman Empire, about the time of our Savior's Nativity, especially at
the time of the Destruction brought upon the City and Temple and Nation by
Titus.

But yet when the bright and morning Star appeared, and the Sun of
Righteousness arose with healing in his wings, how beautiful and glorious did
the Kingdom of the Messiah soon appear? Fulfilling what was spoken by the
Prophet Isaiah, when he beheld his glory and spoke of him. Isa. 4.2. In that
day shall the Branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of
the Earth shall be excellent amp; comely. And (blessed be God) we hope er'e long
to see a more ample Fulfillment of these and such like glorious Prophecies and
Promises, Isa. 60.1, 3. Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of
the Lord is risen upon thee. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and
Kings to the brightness of thy rising. Chap. 52.1. Awake, awake, put on
strength, O Zion, put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem; for henceforth
there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean, etc.
Chap. 54.11, 12. Behold I will lay thy stones with fair Colors, and lay thy
foundations with Sapphires; and I will make thy windows of Agates, and thy
gates of Carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant Stones, etc.

The good Lord hasten the time when there shall be even upon the Bells of the
Horses, Holiness unto the Lord, and when every Pot in Jerusalem and in Judah,
shall be Holiness unto the Lord; when every common thing, such as Bells, and
Bridles, and the Utensils of private Houses, Pots and Pitchers, etc. shall be
dedicated to God, i. e. used in his Service and as Instruments to his Glory.

(3) As the Mountains were round about Jerusalem, by which it was in some
measure Screen'd both from stormy Winds and Tempests, and from the assaults of
the Enemy: So the Lord is round about his People from henceforth even for ever.
-- We have a strong City, Salvation will God appoint for Walls and Bulwarks,
etc. Isa. 26.1-4.

But I must hasten,

Secondly, To show with what Propriety of speech the Lord is said to Build up
Jerusalem.

And,

(1) The Lord has laid the Foundation of his Church. Other Foundation has no
man laid than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3, 11. The Church is
built on the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief Cornerstone. This is the Lord's doing and it is mavelous in
our Eyes. Isa. 28.16. Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I lay in Zion for a
Foundation, a Stone, a tried Stone, a precious Cornerstone, a sure Foundation,
etc. As the Temple (that illustrious Type of the Christian Church) was founded
on a Rock, viz. Mount- Moriah; so on this Rock of Ages the Church is built,
whence it is that the gates of Hell cannot prevail against it. This Foundation
of God stands sure: It Is an everlasting Foundation. Hence the Superstructure,
viz the Church Built thereon, is more stable, durable and permanent, than all
the Monuments, Statues and triumphal Arches Erected to perpetuate the Memory of
Princes, than Mountains of Brass. than Pyramids of Gold or Pillars of Marble,
-- Upon this living Stone has the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom which shall
never be destroyed; a Kingdom spiritual and heavenly in the Laws and
Administration of it: Not bounded by any Limits, as worldly Empires are; but
truly Universal, which is the true Catholic Church. And this lead me to say,

(2) The Material, wherewith this spiritual House is built, are of his
providing, and by his Hands formed, fashioned, sitted and laid therein. See 1
Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 2.10. Believers are there called lively Stones. Men (before
Faith) are as dead as Stones in regard of spiritual Life. Now its God alone who
can of Stones raise up Children unto Abraham, i, e. Can quicken and make
spiritually Alive such as are dead in trespasses and sins.

Men (who before Conversion are like Stones or Timber in their native Roughness
or Crookedness before they are hewed and squared) by Renewing grace become like
Corner stones, polished after the similitude of a Palace; fit Materials to
build withal an House for the Lord, a Habitation for the Mighty God of Jacob.
Is the Church Edified? Are Sinners Converted? Are Saints built up in spiritual
Knowledge, Faith, Holiness and divine Comfort? This is all owing to the
Convincing, Enlightening, Humbling, Regenerating, Sanctifying Influences of the
Holy Spirit of Grace, Light and Truth. -- Which brings me to say,

(3) The Means and lnstruments made use of and improved in carrying on this
Work, are all under the Divine Management, Direction and Influence; are
actuated, guided, governed and rendered Efficacious and Successful by a Virtue
and Power derived from him.

[1] The Gospel and all the Sacred Institutions and Ordinances of it, are
rendered Effectual only in the Hand of the Blessed Spirit. Faith indeed comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. But yet, alas! how many that hear the
same, believe not the Report; to whom the Arm of the Lord is not Revealed. By
grace are we saved through faith, and that not of our selves, it is the gift of
God. We all (faith the Apostle) with open face, beholding as in a glass the
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as
by the Spirit of the Lord. The production of one thing out of another which
has no fitness or aptitude to receive such a form, require^ the Exertion of an
Almighty Power: As when God made the Light to shine out of Darkness. Now thus
much is done in Conversion. There Is as great a contrariety between Nature and
Grace, as there is between Darkness and Light. And hence Conversion (which is a
Moral and not a Physical Change wrought in the Soul) is called a turning of it
from darkness to light. Which is done by God's shining into our hearts, and
giving of us the light of the Knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ. If in Judgment to a person or people, the influences of the Spirit are
denied, the dews of divine Grace suspended and withheld, they prove like the
barren Earth which drinks in the Rain that falls ost upon it, and yet
brings forth nothing but Briars and Thorns, is nigh unto Cursing, whose End
is to be burned. The long continued Unfruitfulness of a People or particular
Person's under the Means of Grace, may provoke God to abandon and give them up
to their own hearts Lusts: The sad Consequence of which is, they walk in their
own Counsels, and go a whoring after their own Inventions; practicing those
things both in Common Conversation and Religious Worship, which are agreeable
not to the divine Commands or Counsels, but to their own Fancies and depraved
Inclinations, Psalm. 81.11, 12. So 2 These. 2.10, 11. Because they received not
the love of the Truth that they might be Saved, for this cause God shall send
them strong Delusions. -- And now they will not endure sound Doctrine, but
after their own Lusts heap to themselves Teachers, having itching Ears, they
now turn away their Ears from the Truth, and are turned unto Fables: Come not
to the Law and to the Testimony, and thence neither speak nor act according to
this Word: Whence it is Evident that (how much so ever New Light they may have)
they have no true Light in them And if the Light that is in them be Darkness,
alas! how great is that Darkness? Now they are easily led aside by the Ignis
Fatuns of their own heated Imagination and deluded giddy Fancies, or by the
cunning Craftiness of them that lie in wait to Deceive; and are hurried on by a
blind and furious Zeal, a Zeal falsely so called. Now they withdraw from and
forsake those burning and shining Lights, in whose Light they were willing to
Rejoice for a Season, and follow wandering Stars: Or if I may borrow a Simile
from a celebrated Author The Reverend Mr. Edwards of Northampton, in his Trial
of the Spirit. Page 00.
, They leave the Pole Star to follow Jack with a Lanthorn.

The pale Moon beams, the glimmering Twilight, the feeble, inconstant, unsteady
Resemblance or faint Appearance of Light in a variable Glowworm, does now more
dazzle their Eyes, and is thought to afford them more Light than the direct
Rays of the Sun shining in its meridian Luster and Brightness. The Spirit
speaks expressly, that in the latter times, some shall depart from the Faith,
giving heed to Seducing spirits, and Doctrines of Devils, speaking Lies in
Hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. An awful Judgment this! Ezekiel. 47.11. But the miry
places thereof, and the marshes thereof, shall not be healed, they shall be
given to Salt.

[2] When any prove able Ministers of the New Testament, and are Successful in
their Work, it is God who makes them so. Paul Planteth, and Apollo Waters, but
God gives the Increase. We have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels: So that
whatsoever powerful Effects are wrought by our Ministry, who knows not in all
these, thy the Hand of the Lord has wrought this? He that glories let him
glory in the Lord: For the excellency of the Power is of God and not of man,
Who then is Paul, and who is Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye believed, even
as the Lord gave to every man? So then, neither is he that Planteth any thing,
neither be that Waters: but God gives the Increase, 1 Cor. 3.5, 7. So that
if any poor, diseased Souls are cured of their spiritual Maladies; or if many
such are healed by the Waters of the Sanctuary, by the Preaching of the Gospel,
insomuch that the People are Wondering; and perhaps are in danger of having
those men's persons in too much Admiration by whom it is preached, like the men
of Lystra when they cried out, The Gods are come down to us in the likeness of
men: And were scarce Restrained that they had not done Sacrifice to Paul and
Barnabas, Act. 14.11, 18. It highly becomes such Ministers to go into the
Apostle's Language, Act. 3.12. Ye men of Israel, Why marvel ye at this? or why
look ye so earnestly on us, as though by own Power or Holiness, we had done
this? Ministers may all say as Jacob in another case, Am I in God's stead? Can
we say, Ephphatha unto them that were even born Blind, and open those Eyes that
Sin has shut? Or unstop the Ears of them who are like the deaf Adder that
stops her Ear and refuses to hearken to the voice of Charmers, Charming
never so wisely? Can we show wonders to the Dead? No! No! When we Prophecy
over dry Bones, when we call upon any Dead Lazarus to come forth out of the
grave of Sin, we must all say as the Prophet, Whether they shall Live, O Lord
God, thou know.

Thus then it appears that except the Lord build this House, they labor in
vain that build it. I have labored in vain, etc. says the faithful but
unsuccessful Prophet: And a greater than he ( One that spoke as never man
spoke) makes the same Complaint, in Isaiah his Type, Isa. 49.4.

And as true it is,

[3] That except the Lord keep this City, the Watchmen (the Civil Ruler I mean)
waketh but in vain. Civil Government is a choice and valuable Blessing, of very
high Importance to the Weal of a Republic. Good Rulers contribute much toward
the building up of Jerusalem. Hence they are styled, Gods, Nursingfathers,
Benefactors, Shields of the Earth, Strong Rods, Pillars, Corner-stones, etc.
This denotes and plainly intimates the necessity of them and their great
usefulness, -- Even as the whole Building depends upon the Pillars or
Cornerstones, which bear it up, -- They are in many respects their Peoples
Decus ac Tutamen, both their Glory and their Defense; their Instrumental
Savior's, their Tutelar and Guardian Angels, as the Breath of their Nostrils,
as the Light of the Morning when the Sun rises, even a Morning without Clouds:
They come down like Rain upon the mowen Grass, like Showers that water the
Earth; and are as needful and as useful in their place, as those comprehensive
and extensive Blessings, the Sun and the Rain. They are as an Hiding place from
the Wind, and a Covert from the Tempest; as Rivers of Waters in a Dry place, as
the Shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. See all this Exemplified in Job,
when he sat Chief, and dwelt as a King in the Army; as one that comfort the
Mourners: Job 29 11, -- 17. When the Ear heard me then it blessed me; and when
the Eye saw me, it gave witness to me. Because I delivered the Poor that Cried,
the Fatherless, and him that had none to help him. The blessing of him that was
ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the Widows heart to sing for joy. I
put on Righteousness, etc. I was eyes to the Blind, and feet was I to the Lame.
I was a Father to the Poor, and the Cause which I knew not I searched out, and
I brake the Jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth. But now
whence come these? Why all this comes from the Lord. Civil Government is of
divine Original. All Power and Authority is derivative. Those that have the
most could have none at all, except it were given them from above, by him who
Rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. The
government is on his Shoulder who is the Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God,
the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. I have said, Ye are gods. I who
stand in the Congregation of the mighty, and Judge among the gods, Psalm. 82.1,
6. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke (to the man who was raised
up on high; the Anointed of the God of Jacob, as well as sweet Psalmist of
Israel) He that Rules over men must be Just, Ruling in the fear of God.
Wherein its necessarily implied that Civil Rulers are a divine Ordinance. To
which agree those words of the Apostle, Romans 13.1, 2. Let every soul be subject
to the higher powers; for there is no Power but of God, the Powers that be are
ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the
Ordinance of God, etc. And likewise, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man. (So it is rendered in our Translation; but in the
Original it is, Hupotagete oun pase anthropine ktisei, which (as is clear and
evident from what follows) is as if the Apostle had said, Submit your selves to
every Magistrate or Civil Ruler.) Whether it be to the King as Supreme; or unto
Governors as unto them that are sent by him, etc. For so is the Will of God.
This do for the Lord's sake, who q. d. Commands this Obedience and Subjection;
who gave them their Authority, and is Represented by them, and Honored by that
Obedience which is Yielded to them in the Lord, considering them as God's
Vicegerents.

Moreover, God is to be seen in Raising up, Qualifying and Improving,
Counselling and Assisting, Prospering and Succeeding those whom he advances to
Place, Power and Dignity above others. Promotion comes neither from the East,
nor from the West, nor from the South; but God is the Judge, He puts down
one, and sets up another. The Lot is cast into the lap, but the whole
disposing thereof is of the Lord. He first Inspires them therewith, and then
makes use of their Wisdom, Piety, Justice, Magnanimity, Zeal, etc. in promoting
the public Weal and the Upbuilding of Jerusalem; Prove. 8.15, 16. By me Kings
Reign and Princes decree Justice: By me Princes Rule, and Nobles, even all the
Judges of the Earth.

So Moses (by the special ordering of Providence) had first a princely
Education in the Court of Pharaoh, and was learned in all the Wisdom of the
Egyptians, before he was constituted King in Jeshurun. He was first inspired
with the spirit of Wisdom, Courage, Meekness, etc. whereby he was Qualified
herefor, and then had the Government of Israel devolved upon him; was by the
divine Election and Appointment made their Commander in Chief and Captain
General: Which high Trust reposed in him he was also enabled to Discharge,
showing all good Fidelity therein, being as a Servant faithful in all his House.

So the Lord gave Saul another spirit, i. e. a Princely spirit: And Solomon
Largeness of heart, and Wisdom above all that had been before him in Jerusalem.

[4] The Lord may be said to Build up Jerusalem, in that he Protects, Defends
and Preserves the same: Restrains, Subdues and Conquers the Enemies of his
Church, who otherwise would Raze it even to the Foundation thereof. Psalm 89.18.
The Lord is our Defense. Psalm. 124.1 -- 7. If it had not been the Lord who was
on our side, now may Israel say, when men rose up against us, then they had
swallowed us up quick; when their wrath was kindled against us, then the Waters
had overwhelmed us, then the proud Waters had gone over our Soul. Blessed be
the Lord who has not given us a prey to their Teeth. Our Soul is escaped as a
Bird out of the snare of the Fowler; the snare is broken, and we are escaped.
How often have they been Confounded and turned back that hate Zion, and been as
the Grass upon the House tops, which withers before it grows up? How often
have the Church's Enemies like Ahithephel, died in Childbed, being unable to
give Life and Birth to their mischievous Conceptions? These have been as an
hidden untimely Birth, as Infants that never saw Light. God having given them a
miscarrying Womb and dry Breasts. He disappointeth the devices of the Crafty,
so that their hands cannot perform their Enterprise. He takes the wise in
their own Craftiness: and the counsel of the froward is carried Headlong, Job
5.12, 13, Arise, O God, and still plead thine own Cause: remember how the
foolish man reproacheth thee daily, Psalm. 74.22.

What now remains is a word or two by way of APPLICATION.

And from the Premises we may see,

I. To whom we Owe all Homage, Blessing, Thanksgiving and Praise, for the
Upbuilding this our Jerusalem. -- God (who has made of one Blood all Nations
to dwell upon the face of the Earth, and has determined the Times before
appointed and the Bounds of their Habitation) has caused the Lines to fall
unto us in pleasant places, and goodly is the heritage that appertains to our
share. We have heard with our Ears, and our Fathers have told us how God
inclined the hearts of our Ancestors to leave their Native Soil and come into
this Jeshimon.

Nos Patria fines and dulcia linquimus arva.

Now he led them through the Deep upon the rude Waves, swelling Surges and
foaming Billows of the wide Atlantic, and Landed them on this American
Continent; this then wast howling Wilderness, a Land that was not Sown: How he
planted them a Noble Vine, wholly a right Seed; and what special Care he took
of the same, how he Hedged it about, Watched and Watered is every Moment, and
kept it Night and Day. And how has he caused this Vine to take deep Root, to
grow and flourish till it has filled the Land: The Hills are now Covered with
the Shadow of it, and the Eoughs thereof are like the goodly Cedars. She has
sent out her Boughs unto the Sea, and her Branches unto the River. God has
turned this Wilderness into a Fruitful Land, and made it a Wealthy Place: Has
made this Wilderness to be glad for his People, and this Desert to bud and
blossom as a Rose, yea to Blossom abundantly, and Rejoice even with Joy and
Singing: The glory of Leb^^^^ he has given to it, the Excellency of Carnal and
Sharon. The Blessing of Joseph is come down upon us; Blessings of the Breasts
and of the Womb, the precious things of Heaven, the Dew and the Deep that
couchath beneath; the precious Fruits brought forth by the Sun, and the
precious things put forth by the Moon; the chief things of the ancient
Mountains, and the precious things of the lasting Hills, the precious things of
the Earth and the fullness thereof, and the good Will of him that dwelt in the
Bush. He has made our Zebulon to Rejoice in his going out, and our Islachar in
his Tents: Causing the former to suck of the abundance of the Seas and of the
Treasures bid in the Sand; and the latter to Eat the increase of the Fields,
Butter of Kine and Milk of Sheep with fat of Lambs, with the fat of Kidneys of
Wheat, and to drink the pure blood of the Grape.

O! fortunatos nimium sua sibona norint agricolas!

According to the good hand of our God upon us, we are settled in a place of
Rest and Liberty, and in the Possession of many Invaluable Blessings,
Privileges and Enjoyments, Civil and Sacred.

As to our Civil Constitution, if we consider the admirable Temper of our
Government, the Justice and Wisdom of our Laws, and the greatness of our
Liberties and Immunities (especially we of this Government) methinks, have no
reason to Envy the Condition of any People under Heaven. -- God has neither
suffered such as hate us to Rule over us ( our Governor has been of our
selves, and our Nobles have proceeded from the midst of us) nor has he given us
Children to be our Princes, nor Babes to Rule over us; but Men who have guided
us by the skilfulness of their Hands, as well as according to the Integrity of
their Hearts. We have sat under the pleasing, cooling and refreshing Shadow of
the cheering Vine and Olive Tree with great Delight, and know nothing what it
means to be seratch'd and torn by the Bramble, or devoured by the Fire that
comes out thence, Judge. 9.8, -- 15. We have sat under our own Vines and
Figtrees, and had none to make us afraid; but under those in Authority might
lead a quiet and peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty.

And as to our Religious Privileges and Enjoyments, this has been Eminently a
Land flowing with Milk and Honey. Here we have seen (and blessed be God still
see) the Brooks, the Rivers, the Floods of such Honey and Butter: Here we have
for many lustre's of Years had the free and full Enjoyment of Sanctuary
Privileges and Entertainments; had the blessed Ordinances and Institutions of
Religion dispensed in Plenty and Purity to us; had the true Worship of God set
up, established and maintained among us Our Eyes have seen our Teachers; the
beautiful Feet of those that bring glad Tidings of good, and publish Salvation,
and our Ears have heard the Joyful Sound. And these External Means of Grace
have been Accompanied with a Divine Blessing, and Crowned with Success in many
happy Instances: And it may be said of this, as of the ancient Zion, This and
that Man was born in her. Many have been here Born to God, have Experienced the
Powerful Energy of Divine Grace; the Strivings of the Holy Spirit with them,
and Heavenly Impressions upon their Souls; have had the Light of the Knowledge
of the glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ shining into their Hearts,
whereby they were sweetly drawn to Christ, changed into the same Image; made to
Rejoice in God their Savior, and even Triumph in the Praise of his rich, free
and Sovereign Grace abounding toward them. They have been brought to his
Banqueting House; have sat under his Shadow with great delight, and his Fruit
has been sweet to their taste. The great Lover of Souls has been Leading and
Feeding them, as a Shepherd gathering the Lambs with his Arm, and carrying them
in his Bosom, and gently leading those with Young; making them to lie down in
green Pastures, and leading them beside the still Waters of the Sanctuary: And
by his powerful and gracious Influences Cherishing, Nourishing, Maturing and
Ripening of them for glory Everlasting.

God has been Raising up of our Sons for Prophets, and our Young Men for
Nazarites: And in this way is yet speaking good concerning his House for a
great while to come.

And for our Public Seminaries of Learning, may the Generations to come and
the Children yet Unborn, Praise the Name of the Lord, as we do this day. Thus
God has been to us as a Place of broad Rivers, and we have seen our Sion and
our Jerusalem in many respects, a quiet Habitation, a Tabernacle not taken
down, neither the Stakes removed, nor Cords broken. And all this
notwithstanding our unanswerable Retruns, Ingratitude and unworthy Carriage
toward him.

Deus nobis haee oti^ f^cit.

O that men would Praise the Lord for his goodness and for his wonderful works
to the Children of men.

II. We may hence learn, On whom we are to Depend, and to whom we must Pray and
make Supplication, that he would go on to build us up and not pull us down. We
should hope in God, trust in the Lord at all times and pour out our hearts
before him; Repeating that Praver, Psalm. 51.18. Do good in thy good pleasure
unto Zion: Build thou the walls of Jerusalem. We should pray in Faith, That the
Spirit of the Lord may be plentifully poured out, and the Work of the Lord
powerfully carried on among us; and that whatsoever now Lets, may be taken
out of the way: That we may be kept from Error and Delusion in our Eternal
Concerns. That Satan may not be suffered to get an Advantage against us by
transforming himself into an Angel of Light. That God would continually keep up
the Wall and Hedge about this his Vineyard, and not suffer the Boar out of the
Wood to wast it, nor the wild Beast of the Field to devour it, That he would
take for us the Foxes, the little Foxes that spoil the Vines; for our Vines
have tender Grapes. That our Churches may have Rest, enjoy Peace, and be
Edified. That God would direct to all proper Means, quicken to the diligent Use
and Application of them, and follow regular Scriptural Methods and Endeavors
for promoting pure and undefiled Religion, with his Efficacious Blessing, and
Crown them with abundant Success That he would guide our Guides, and give our
Senators Wisdom. That he would be the Repairer of our Breaches, Settle our
shaking, and lengthen out our Tranquillity.

When he gives Quietness, who then can make Trouble? and when he hides his
(...) who then can behold him? whether it be done against a Nation, or against
a Man only, Job 34.29. He only can give power to him that fits on the red Horse
to take peace from the Earth, Rev. 6.4.

III. Our Subject suggest Divine Counsel to all Orders and Degrees of men in a
Public Station and Capacity, by which to Regulate their Conduct. Since the
Great and Wise Master Builder sees fit to carry on this (...) by the
Instrumentality of those whom he delights thus to Honor, it must needs be
their bounden Duty, as Coworkers together with God to Exert themselves in a
God-like manner, in furthering and pushing forward the same. This is a work of
such great Importance to the glory of God and the good of our Fellow-men, that
we ought every one in his place, to Employ all our Opportunities and Abilities
with Zeal and Vigor in prompting of it. We should by no means be diverted or
beaten off from prosecuting this great and noble Design, nor suffer our selves
to be flattered, flouted or frighted out of this, which is our Reasonable
Service.

Now then let this Counsel of God, in the

1. First Place, Be addressed with all dutiful Submission and Respect, to the
Honorable the GOVERNOR, the DEPUTY GOVERNOR, and the Worshipful ASSISTANTS
of this Colony. May it please Your Honors whom God has Seated and we hope may
this Day Settle and Re-establish in the highest Seats of Dignity, Power and
Rule over us, to suffer this word of Exhortation, which speaks unto You as
unto Fathers of our Common Wealth. And let this Divine Counsel be acceptable
unto You, though bro't you by the meanest of Christ's Messengers; Yea one who
is less than the least of all Saints.

Honored and Worshipful, We believe that you are men come to seek our Welfare,
and that it is because the Lord has loved this our Israel for ever, that he
has made You Rulers over us. And may your Wisdom and Justice, blended with
Mercy, ever be such as shall Endear You to God and to Your People. May that
ever be Your Motto, N^n Mihi sed Populo; which will render you Delictum humani
generis. You are betrusted with the Lives, Estates, Liberties and Religious
Interest and Enjoyments of this People: Many of whose Names (we trust) are
written in Heaven, and Recorded in the Lamb's Book of Life. An Interest this,
which must needs be dear to him, Your Mothers Children do make You the Keepers
of the Vineyard, and under God confide in You; trusting you will yet Rule with
God, and be Faithful with the Saints. And God has graciously promised that He
will be with the good; viz. the good Ruler. He will be with you, in all your
faithful, wise and just Administrations; and will not wipe out your good Deeds,
but remember you for good according to all that you have done, or may do, in
building up this his Jerusalem.

What Qualifications are requisite for, and what particular Duties are
incumbent on Civil Rulers, as such, have from time to time been suggested to
You by such as were much more Capable of it than I am: But of all that has or
indeed can be said, this is the comprehensive Sum, viz, That You Employ all
your Powers and Abilities, and make use of all your Wisdom and Authority and do
all you can toward Building up Jerusalem. This is the Epitome of all that God
requires or that we your People can reasonably expect from You. And as touching
what there is or may be for You to do in this great Affair, I hope I may say to
each one of You, as David to Solomon, 1 King. 2.9. Thou art a wise (...) and
know what thou ought to do.

I presume, I may in the Name of the most, if not all, the pious thinking and
well-affected among us (without flattery) go into the Language of Tertullus the
Orator and say, Seeing that by You we enjoy great Quietness; and that very
worthy Deeds are done to this People, by your Providence, we accept it always
and in all places (most noble Rulers) with all Thankfulness. So that when in
the Name of Your People I humbly address my self to You, and say as they to
Ezra, -- This matter belongs to You, arise and do it: I trust I may add, We
also will be with you. We the Lord's Ministers, and we the People of the Lord.
And, Oh! that more of the Spirit that came upon Amasai might rest upon us all,
1 Chronicles. 12.18. Thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse: Peace,
peace be unto thee, and Peace be unto thy Helpers; for thy God helps thee.

When it pleased the Supreme, Alwise and Sovereign Ruler of the World (in whose
right Hand are all our Changes) to call up our MOSES, our late Honorable
Governor in Chief The Honorable JOSEPH TALCOTT Esquire;
, when full of Days and full of the Holy Ghost; (as it were) to the Mountain of
Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, to die there; who after he had long faithfully
Served his Generation, by the Will of God fell on (...) and his Sepulcher is
here with us: Whose Death was generally Regretted, and deservedly Lamented,
whose Memory is still dear to us, and will be had in Everlasting Remembrance:
And when Providence so ordered and disposed. that by that time we had Mourned
for him our Moses, Thirty Days, and even before the days of Weeping and
Mourning for him were ended; our JOSHUA on whom Moses had laid his Hands; one
full of the Sprit of Wisdom, was Chosen to Succeed and fill up that Vacancy.
This was (as I take it) to the great Satisfaction of such as were well-affected
and well-wishers to our happy Establishment; was looked upon as clear shining
after Rain.

And now, SIR, methinks, You may hear the Lord speaking to You as he did to
Joshua, Moses my Servant is dead, now therefore arise thou, etc. As I was with
Moses so will be with thee all the days of thy life: Be strong and of a good
Courage; be strong and very Courageous, that thou may observe to do
according to all the Law of Moses, turn not from it to the right Hand nor to
the left: For then thou shall make thy way Prosperous, and then thou shall have
good Success.

So when David the chief Ruler in Israel (who had set his Affection to the
House of God, and in whose heart it was to Build an House to his Name) died in
a good old Age, full of Days, Riches and Honor, as a shock of Corn comes in
its season; when he was grown ripe for Heaven, was satisfied with long Life, i.
e. had lived as long, as we may suppose he desired to live; Solomon (on whom
the Eyes of all Israel were fixed, and in whom was the Wisdom of God to do
Judgment, which was the chief Ornament of Solomon even when he appeared in all
his glory) Succeeded him; of whom God had said, He shall Build an House for my
Name: Moreover, I will Establish his Kingdom for ever, if he be constant to do
my Commandments and my Judgments, as at this Day.

I am very sensible the work of Building Jerusalem at this Day under the
present Situation of Affairs, is not altogether unlike what it was in
Nehemiah's time. There is much Rubbish that needs to be cleared out of the way;
and some Sanballat's and Tobiah' s (not to say Adonijah's) that conspire to
discourage, obstruct, retard and hinder the Work: Insomuch that you may find
occasion while you are building on the Wall, and have one Hand Employed in the
Work, with the other to hold a Weapon. And God grant you may not bear the Sword
in Vain. There are but too many Cursing Shimei's and Sons of Bichri, that blow
the Horn; Men that despise Government, and are not afraid to speak Evil of
Dignities; to Curse the Gods, and speak Evil of the Rulers; Licentious Sons of
Belial ( absque Jugo) who lift up the Horn, and speak with a stiff Neck; who
fear not God neither regard Man. Civil Rulers frequently find themselves
obliged to tread Antipodes to some who lift up the Heel against them, and even
kick against the pricks: Thorns there are that must be thrust away, because
they cannot be taken with hands; But the man that shall touch them must be
fenced with Iron and the staff of a Spear.

So they that wear Crowns must expect to feel the Thorns. Moreover, it is with
Political Bodies, as with Bodies Natural in a Fever and Ague, that have their
up's and down's; if one day tolerably well, the next worse again.

But yet, methinks, I hear your grand Employer saying to You for your
Encouragement and Strengthening; as in Haggai, 2.4. Yet now be strong, O
Zerubbabel, says the Lord, and work; for I am with you, etc. Is not this the
Word of the Lord to You, our Zerubbabel's? Zech. 4 6, -- 9. -- Not by might,
nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts. Who are thou, O great
Mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a Plain, and he shall bring forth
the headstone thereof with shouting, crying, Grace, grace unto it. The hands of
Zerubbabel have laid the Foundation of this House, his hands shall finish it.
There is no Wisdom nor Counsel, nor Understanding against the Lord. Isa. 8.9,
10. Associate your selves, and ye shall be broken to pieces; take counsel
together, and it shall come to naught: for God is with us. Since this work and
counsel is of God, none can overthrow it. The LORD does Build up Jerusalem.

And now, Honored and Worshipful, since You (like the Sanhedrim of old, the
Supreme Court or Grand Council of the Jews,) are now waiting at the Tabernacle,
that God may put his Spirit upon you; We wish You a Blessing out of the House
of the Lord. May the Lord your God be with You as he was with JOSEPH, and make
all you do to Prosper is your Hand. May the Holy Spirit accompanying the Word
(which is Pure and more Enlightening to the Eyes than the Honey which Jonathan
tasted) make You of quick Understanding in the fear of the Lord, that you may
have understanding of the Times, and know what our Israel ought to do, how to
go out and come in before us, and may under God be both our Sun and our Shield.
And having been faithful over a few things, you will finally be made Rulers
over many things; and with a transporting Euge be admitted into the Joy of your
Lord. AMEN.

And that I may not be further tedious, what I say unto our Chief Rulers, I say
unto all that are in Subordinate Places of Public Trust of every Denomination;
and to the whole Representative Body of this People now Convened; viz. As you
are under manifold special Advantages for it, so it must needs greatly behove
and concern you vigorously to Exert your selves in helping forward the Building
up of Jerusalem. Perhaps, there never was more need than now of the Exercise of
your Wisdom, Prudence, Fidelity, Zeal, Vigilance, Resolution, Fortitude, etc.
for the common Safety and Welfare. You will therefore (we trust) keep back
nothing of these that may be profitable for us. -- For your Brethren and
Companions sake, and because of the House of the Lord our God you will seek our
good.

I am sorry it has fallen to my Lot to stand in this sacred Desk, especially at
such a Day and Time as this is; A day of Trouble and of treading down and of
Perplexity in this valley of Vision: But since his Honor has Commanded me
here, You will suffer me to deliver my own Soul, to plead the Cause of God, and
stand up for him against the Workers of Iniquity. And are there not many
growing Evils and prevailing Sins, for which the Land Mourns, and which have a
very awful tendency to Undermine our Foundations, to Sap our Walls, to Bury us
in a general Desolation, and lay our Jerusalem utterly Waste? At which my heart
trembles and is moved out of its place -- And, Oh! that my head were Waters,
and mine Eyes a fountain of Tears. And is there no Balm in Gilead? Can no
Remedy be found out and applied for the Cure of this Wound of the Daughter of
my People? Is there no way to stem the Stream and keep out the rising and
swelling Tide of Sin and Wickedness, which otherwise like a mighty Deluge
Inundation, or wide-breaking in of Water, threatens to Overwhelm and Destroy
us? Is there no possible way to bridle the Tongues of such Profane Persons, as
dare take in Vain that Sacred and Dreadful Name the Lord JEHOVAH, before whom
Angels bow and Devils tremble -- To give a check and put a stop to the shameful
Profanation of the Holy Sabbath; The growing neglect of God's Public Worship;
The forsaking the Assembling of themselves together, as the Manner of some is,
and setting up Schismatical Conventicles, setting up Altar against Altar, and
their Posts by God's Posts; and too much Symbolizing with the practice of those
Times, wherein they said, -- Let the men that Sacrifice kiss the Calves, Hos.
13.2.

I would humbly propose whether this be not an Iniquity to be Punished by the
Judges, and whether in these Times, not of Ignorance but of great Light, these
things should be connived and winked at by any? Can nothing be done to heal our
unhappy Divisions? To put a stop to, and prevent Unscriptural Separations and
Disorderly Practices of various kinds, which have a direct Tendency to, and by
a natural Causality necessarily do, disturb the Peace of this our Jerusalem,
and greatly weaken the Walls of it? Practices concerning which we may say as
the Prophet did in another case, Hear this ye Old men, and give Ear all ye
Inhabitants of the Land; has that been in your Days, or even in the Days of
your Fathers? Joel. 1.2.

I desire, with others, to Adore God for all the genuine fruitys of the spirit
visible among us; and for what of his Work he has been and is carrying on in
the Land: But yet think we have all reason to tremble for the Ark of God; if
some Irregularities and Extravagancies which are grown rise and barefaced and
but too notoriously known, be not timely Suppressed. Hear the Sentiments of a
late Venerable, Pious and Learned Divine of our own, Vide Mr. Will^^^^ Election
Sermon.
Men (s;ays he) of a Censorious, Dividing Spirit, how specious so ever their
pretenses of Zeal for Reformation may be, are no real Friends to this Cause;
but it most effectual Adversaries. Unpeaceable, Party Spirited Reformers, are
dangerous Coals fitted to kindle a destroying Fire in a Place. The Spirit of
holy Zeal is a Spirit of holy Love and of Meekness and of a sound Mind. Let me
tell you, that for the Divisions of R^uben there are great Searchings of heart.
Those evil Surmisings and uncharitable Jealousies one of another; those
Aspersions cast one upon another, and upon some of the best Friends of our
Zion: Those Strises and Contentions among us in Towns, Churcher, etc. are very
Provoking to God, and are like to be Ruinating to our selves, Hos. 10.2. Gal.
5.15. Jam. 3.15, 16. Our Safety is only in Unity; our Security, in being one
for God, one with Christ, and one among our selves, O let us consider how
little God's Work goes forward and how his Glory suffers, while men spend their
little Zeal in Oppositions and Invectives one against another? This picketh out
the Cement and crumbles away the Mortar which is the strength of the Building;
and when sgone, with what Ease may it by made to fall! Thus far he. To which
let me subjoyn the words of a far greater than he; Thus says the Amen, the
Faithful and True Witness, Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to
Desolation, and every City or House divided against it self shall not stand,
Mat. 12.25.

Surely, it must concern all that are Vested with Legislative or Executive
Power and Authority, to Remedy this as far as in them lies. Does not that
Exhortation speak to all such? Amos. 5.15. Hate the evil, and love the good,
and establish judgment in the gate: it may be the Lord will be gracious to the
remnant of Joseph. God forbid that we should help the Ungodly, and love them
that hate the Lord. We hope You will take due care that such be preferred to
places of Public Trust, as dare but the Laws of Men in Execution against them
that trample on the Laws of God. Whosoever breaks any of the wholesome Laws of
the Government himself, and (at least by his Example) teaches others so to do,
must needs be unfit to be a Judge of the Law, or a Justice of the Peace. Romans
2.1. -- Wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self: For thou that
Judge do the same thing. Honor is not seemly for a Fool: And the Wicked
will walk on every side, if such be Exalted, Psalm. 12.8. Should Fol^y be set in
great Dignity, or wicked Men be set over us, with Satan standing at their right
Hand; we should soon roar all like (...) and mourn sore like Doves; renewing
that Complaint. Isa. 59.11, 14. We look for Judgment, but there is none.
Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar off: Yea Truth
fails, and he that departs from Evil makes himself a Prey. For such a
Ruler is as a roaring Lion and a ranging Bear to the poor People; a
Magor-missabib, a Terror to all about him, Prove. 28 15.

2. Let this Divine Counsel be addressed (with all Humility and Deference) to
my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the MINISTRY. Venerable Fathers and Dear
Brethren, Suffer me (who am the least and meanest of your Order and most
unworthy to be your Monitor) to stir up your pure Minds by putting you in
Remembrance of those things which you know already. As the glorious Head and
Builder of his Church has done us the Honor to commit much of this Work into
our hands, so He and his People justly expects that we lay out our selves,
spend and be spent in it; that we Labor and take utmost Pains that his Church
may be Built up with lively Stones, a spiritual House which may resemble the
Temple of God above, into which nothing Enters that Defiles, that works
Abomination or makes a Lie -- That we fulfill the Ministry which we have
received in the Lord -- That we apply our selves to this Work with all that
Zeal, Activity and Diligence which are requisite in so important an Affair.

Let us then beware we don't do the Work of the Lord negligently. Oh! how great
and weighty, solemn and awful is the Trust reposed in us? The care and charge
of Souls! Immortal Souls! Precious Souls! The Price and Purchase of the
invaluable Blood of the Son of God. We watch for Souls as they that must give
Account, Heb. 13.17 Let us then take heed both to our selves, and to all the
Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made us Overseers, to Feed the church of
God which he has Purchased with his own Blood; lest the Blood, instead of the
Blessing of any Souls ready to Perish should come upon us: Lest the Soul of any
Brother for whom Christ died should be destroyed through our default. O let us
dread the Doom of the slothful and unprofitable Servart. Let us frequently
ponder those awful words of God to the Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 3. ver. 17, 18
Son of man, I have made thee a Watchman, etc, When I say unto the wicked. Thou
shall surely die, and thou give him not Warning, -- the same wicked man shall
die in his Inquity, but his blood will I require at thine hand. Let us not shun
to declare the whole Counsel of God, that we may be pure from the blood of all
men. Let us speak God's Word unto them, whether they will hear or whether they
will forbear. Let us Warn every man, and watch in all things. Let us do the
work of Evangelists, and make full proof of our Ministry. Let us not be afraid,
though briars and thorns be with us (as God said to the Prophet) and though we may
dwell among Scorpions. Let us not be afraid of their words, nor dismayed at
their looks, though they be a rebellions House. We that have God's Word, let us
speak his Word faithfully; for what is the Chass to the Wheat? says the Lord.

Let us not daub with untempered Mortar, nor prephesie smooth things, or say
Peace to the wicked, to whom God says, there is no peace. Let it grieve us to
the heart to see any of our People pining away in their iniquities; and from a
deep and tender Compassion to them, employ all our Tho'ts and contribute our
utmost Endeavors; try and try again to pluck them as brands out of the
burning. As we are made Watchmen, so let us stand continually upon the Watch
Tower, and not desert our Post. Let us not depart from the Temple day nor
night, left upon our departure grievous Wolves should enter in not sparing the
Flock. Let us study to be quiet and to do our own business, and not be busy
bodies in other men's matters. Let us be Laborers and not Loyterers in our
Lord's Vineyard. And then though all the winning, endearing Methods of Persuasion
should be disregarded and spurnd at by Sinners; and though they should deride and
laugh at the shaking of the glittering Spear of divine Comminations; should
account the most awful weapons of our Warfare but as stubbie, straw and rotten
wood. In a word, Though Israel should not be gathered, yet shall we (if we are
faithful) be glorious in the Eyes of the Lord. And blessed shall we be if when
our Lord comes he finds us so doing.

It Is true, it is a Difficult, but yet it is a good Work; a Sacred Function, an
Exalted Service, a Noble Employment, an honorable, pleasant, desirable and
delightful Work; the best we can be Employed in on this side glory. Angels and
Archangels, Cherubims and Seraphims do not d^sdain to be ministering spirits to
the heirs of Salvation. Nay, the incarnate JESUS tells us, He came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister. And what faith our text? Jehovah does build up
Jerusalem.

Be it so, that we are treated (by the licentious Sons of C^rah, or by any
whose throat is an open Sepulcher and their tongue an unruly Evil, full of
deadly Poison, and set on fire of Hell) as the Offscouring of all things, made
the Song of the Drunkard, or stigmatized as Carnal, Pharisees, Hypocrites, Dumb
Dogs, and what not? It Is enough that the Disciple be as his Master, and the
Servant as his Lord. The world hated Christ before it hated his Ministers. If
they call the Master of the house Beelzebub, no marvel if they call them of the
Household so. Which brings to my mind a Stanza or two in a Funeral Elegy made by
that sweet Singer of the British Israel, the very Pious and Excellent Dr.
Watts, to the Memory of the Reverend and Renowned Mr. Thomas Gouge; of whom the
Doctor says, Though he was so great and good a Man, he did not escape Censure.

Ye Seraphs that surround the Throne,
Tell how his Name was through the Palace known,
How warm his Zeal was and how like your own.
Speak it aloud, let half the Nation hear,
And bold Blasphemers shrink and fear.
Impudent Tongues to blast a Prophet's Name;
The Poison sure was fetched from Hell,
Where the old Blasphemers Dwell,
To taint the purest Dust and blot the whitest Fame.
Impudent Tongues! You should be darted through,
Nailed to your own black Mouths, and lie
Useless and dead till Slander die,
Till Slander die with you.
Be it so that any of us by means of devoting our selves to this Work, are
brought to a piece of Bread; Yet thanks be to our heavenly Father, In his House
there is Bread enough and to spare. And e're long (if we are good and faithful
Servants) we shall eat Bread with him in his Kingdom of glory. Lord, evermore
give us that Bread.

Let us be frequently looking up to that glittering and immortal Crown, that
Crown of life and glory which is promised to him that is faithful unto the
death. Which that we may all be, let us also be frequently lifting up our hands
to the holy Oracle for Light Counsel, Direction, Assistance and Success, in our
work; and especially now when it seems to be such a Day as the Prophet
describes, Zech. 14 6, 7. And it shall come to pass in that day that the light
shall not be clear nor dark; not day nor night. God grant that the Evening of
it may prove Light. Our work is Onus humeris angelicis for midandum. But yet we
know who has said, Lo, I am with you always to the End of the world

Let us be earnest and incessant in our Requests at the Throne of grace in
behalf of our dear Charge, resolving with the Prophet, Isa 62.1. For Zion's
sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest until
the righteousness thereof go sorth a brightness, and the salvation thereof as a
lamp that burns. We that make mention of the Lord should not keep silence,
should give him no rest till be establish and till he make Jerusalem a Praise
in the whole Earth. Let us then add to our faithful Endeavors our servent
Prayers for the Peace and Prosperity of Jerusalem. Let the priests, the
ministers of the Lord weep between the ^orch and the Altar, and let them say,
Spare thy People, O Lord; O God, thou have been displeased, thou have scattered
us; thou have made the Land to tremble, thou have broken it: heal the breaches,
for it shakes. Where is thy Zeal, O Lord, and thy Strength, the sounding of
thy Bowels and thy Mercies, are they Restrained?

To Conclude, Let all that now hear me be persuaded to unite your Strength and
do all You can in your respective Places and according to your several and
different Talents, Abilities and Oppurtunities, to further the Building up of
Jerusalem. As to the greater part of this Numerous Assembly, I never expect to
see Your faces more, till we hear the Sound of the last Trumpet, and all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ. I would therefore leave this with You as my
Dying Counsel. And, Oh! hearken to it; if you have any regard to God's Glory,
to the Honor and Interest of our Dear Redeemer; if you have any Love to your
Neighbors, or to the dear Offspring of your own Bowels; if you have any
Regard to your own Safety, seek the Peace and Prosperity of this City, and pray
to God for it; for in the Peace thereof ye shall have Peace.

And here let me enter a Caveat against some things which have an undoubted
tendency to pull down and destroy, instead of Building up Jerusalem. Beware of
that Luciferian Pride and Arrogance, which prompts some to invade the Divine
Prerogative, to anticipate the Work of the Day of Judgment, to take upon them
to Judge the Secrets of men's Hearts and determine their State Godward, to
Censure and Condemn even those as Unconverted and Hypocrites, of whom the world
is not worthy. What is this better than that? Isa. 14.13. For thou have said in
thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the Stars
of God; I will be like the Most High. Those that teach this for Doctrine,
understand neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm.

Further, I beseech you, Brethren, Mark them which cause Divisions and
Offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them: For
they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Belly; and by
good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. The fruit of the
Spirit is Love, Peace, etc. This is the Wisdom that is from above. The Kingdom
of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace; for he that in these
things serves Christ, is acceptable to God and approved of men. Where as
divisive, separating Principles and Practices are Condemned in Scripture as
Works of the Flesh, and an Argument of a Carnal Mind. See 1 Cor. 3 2 4 For
whereas there is among you Envying and Strife and Divisions, are ye not Carnal
and walk as men? For while one says, I am of Paul, and another I am of
Apollos, are ye not Carnal? See also Jam. 3 14, 16. A Church-rending,
Unpeaceable, Party Spirit, is certainly a bid Spirit. How can one Edify
another, without following after the things that make for Peace? It Is true, our
Savior says, He came not to send Peace, but a Sword. But what Sword? Why not
the Sword of Friends, but of Enemies to Christianity. For Christians to Hate,
Persecute and Wound one another, this is like plunging a Spear into Christ's
Sacred Side (whose Mystical Body the Churh is) it is Crucifying the Son of God
afresh and putting of him to an open shame Alas! that the Blessed JESUS, the
Prince of Peace, should be thus Wounded in the House of his Prosessed Friends!
That his Seamless Coat should be rent in twain, like the Vail of the Temple, by
those almost Unpresidented Schisms which have of late been made, and are still
subsisting in some of our Churches.

Further still, Take that Caution given by the Inspired Preacher Prove. 24. 21
My son, Fear thou the Lord, and the King; and meddle not with them that are
given to Change. As touching any Secret Plots, of Intreagues against the State;
and likewise as to those which are called Separate Meetings: Respecting the
former, methinks, we have all reason to say as the holy Patriarch, O my Soul,
come not thou into their Secret: And with respect to the latter, Unto their
Assembly mine Honor be not thou United. The Calling of such Assemblies, is (I
am persuaded) what God cannot away with: It is Iniquity, even their Solemn
Meetings; For who has required this at their hands? Those (God tells us) are a
Smoke in his Nose, a Fire that burns all the Day, who walk in a way that is
not good, after their own Thoughts, that Sacrifice in Gardens, etc. Which say,
Stand by thy self, come not near to me* for I am holier than thou, Isa. 65. 2
-- 5. To me it plainly appears (and therefore I am neither afraid nor ashamed
to declare it as my Opinion) that diverse things relating to, and transacted
in, these Separate Meetings, are a great Blemish to the Christian Name and
Profession, directly contrary to the Religion of the Bible: particularly to
that Apostolic Rule, 1 Cor. 14.40 Let all things be done Decently and in
Order. That they are subversive of Peace, Discipline and Government: Lay open
the Sluices and make a Gap to let in a Flood of Confusion and Disorder; and
very awfully portend the Ruin of these Churches, unless a Stop be put to them.
Should this spirit and practice generally obtain and be in Vogue, we should
soon find stretched out upon us, the Line of Confusion, and the Stones of
Emptiness. This would soon be an Habitation of Dragons, and a Court for Owls.
-- Wherefore let us beware less we throw the House out at the Windows, or pull
it down upon our Heads. Lest our Bethels be converted into Bethavens; Lest our
House of Prayer be haunted with Evil spirits, and trun'd into Dens of Disorder,
Confusion, Noise and Clamor; or into Dens of Thieves and Robbers: And lest (as
it has happened in some other parts of the world) our whole Land should become
an Aceldama, a Field of Blood and Slaughter on account of Religion. -- Let us
not be high minded but fear. And, Oh! let us befiege the Throne of grace, that
God would lead us into all Truth, and not scatter Darkness in our Paths, nor
suffer us to err from this ways.

And now, Brethren, I commend you to God and to the Word of his grace, which is
able to build you up; and shall now shut up all with those words of the Holy
Ghost in the Epistle of Jude,- Behold the Lord comes with Ten thousands of his
Saints, to excute Judgment upon all,and to convince all that are ungodly among
them of all their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and all
their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. These are
murmurers, complainers, walking after their own lusts, and their mouth speaking
great swelling words of vanity, having men's persons in admiration because of
advantage. But beloved, remember the words which were spoken before of the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, how that they told you that there should be
meckers in the last time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts: These
be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. But ye
beloved, builing up your selves on your most holy Faith, Praying in the Holy
Ghost, Keep your selves in the Love of God. Looking for the Mercy of our Lord
Jesus Christ unto Eternal Life. Now unto him that is able to keep you from
falling and to present you faultless before the Presence of his glory with
exceeding Joy. To the Only Wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion
and Power, both now and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

