A DEFENSE of the Dialogue, Intitl'd, A Display of GOD's special Grace.

Against The Reverend Mr. CROSSWELL's Exceptions.

A DEFENSE OF THE DIALOGUE

ENTITLED, A DISPLAY of GOD's special GRACE.

Against the Exceptions made to it by the Rev.

Mr. A. Crosswell.

In a LETTER to Him from the Author of that Book.

Gal. ii. 11. But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the Face,
because he was to be blamed.

BOSTON:

Printed by J. DRAPER, for S. ELIOT in Cornhil.

1743.

A DEFENSE of the DIALOGUE, ENTITLED, A Display of GOD's special GRACE. Against
the Exceptions of Mr. A. CROSSWELL. In a LETTER to him.
Rev. and dear Brother,
I Acknowledge, that it concerns me more than any Man, seriously to consider
the Exceptions you make against the Dialogue entitled, A DISPLAY of God's
special Grace. My Conscience bears me witness that it was my Aim and Endeavor
in writing that little Book, to promote the Glory of GOD, the Interest of my
Redeemer's Kingdom, and the Welfare of immortal Souls. It is sad indeed, if I
have so mistaken my Way, that the Discourse, is more adapted to destroy the
Power of Godliness, than the worst Arminian Performance that ever was written,
as you say it is, ( Page 23.) and, that it is impossible for the Pen of a Man,
or the Tongue of an Angel, to go too far, in setting forth the Danger of the
Doctrine therein contained; and that the Book has a plain and strong Tendency,
to^chase pure and undefiled Religion from the Earth, leaving nothing in the
room of it, but the Religion of Nature and Arminius; as you insinuate ( Page
15.) If these Accusations are just, it is high Time I should be convinced of my
dangerous Errors, that I might make my Retractation as public as the Doctrines
you complain of; and join with you, in lifting up my Voice as a Trumpet against
that Book, witnessing both to small and great, in season and out of season, the
everlasting Misery and Destruction that are in the Ways of it, as you express
yourself ( P. 17.) -- But if on the other hand, it should appear upon a Review
of the Case, that the Mistake is on your side of the Question, and that there
is no other Reason for that harsh Treatment you have given to so many of your
Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry (who were pleased to honor my Book with
their Recommendation) and for your bitter Reflections upon them, to the Injury
of their Characters, and the Prejudice of their ministerial Labors, but your
own wrong Apprehension of Things; it is then Time for you to reflect upon what
you have done, and to remember, that you cannot finally find your Account in
beating your Fellow Servants, and reproaching their faithful Endeavors to
bring perishing Souls to CHRIST. -- Let us then impartially consider this Case,
in the Fear of GOD. For it will stand neither of us in stead a little (...)
hence, to have handled the Word of GOD deceitfully; or to have appeared with
Applause, either for a Sect or Party, or in Defense of our own Schemes.

Your first Accusation respects the Character of Libertinus (my Adversary in
the Dialogue) concerning which you exclaim in the following Words. And who is
this Antinomian designed to personate? A great part of those who are Zealous
for the Work of GOD, without Controverly. And is it applicable to them? No,
(blessed be God) I believe the Author could not, to save his Life, find one
single Person in each of our Colonies, to whom the Character is adjusted. (P. 5)

To this I answer, that I ben't certain what you mean by those Words, (each of
our Colonies.) You may perhaps intend the Massachusetts Bay, and Connecticut.
If so, and if there be not any Person in both those Colonies, who has embraced
the Antinomian Errors, you have indeed Cause to bless GOD (...) he has hitherto
kept out the fatal Contagion. May the dark Appearances in the neighboring
Colonies, alarm you to be upon your Guard, not only against the more gross and
perilious Principles of that Sect; but also against their more p'ausible
Delusions, which directly (though not so apparently) lead Men into the same
destructiveSnare.

That you may not any longer be led by Jealousies and uncertain Surmises, about
the Reasons of my endeavoring to lay open the dangerous Tendency of those
licentious Principles of the Antinomians, I will give you this plain Account of
the Matter. I wrote it as an Antidote against the spreading of that dangerous
Disease, which I thought I had great Reason to be apprehensive of. For, It has
already appeared in its worst Form; and made considerable Progress in
Pensylvania, particularly in Philadelphia. And though the painful Endeavors of a
number of Ministers, may have given some Check to it, I am persuaded the Danger
is not yet over. -- The Moravians are coming among us in great Numbers, and
endeavoring to make Proselytes; and if we may judge of their Principles, by
Count Zinzendorff's printed Sermons, they embrace the worst of those Doctrines,
Libertinus is represented to patronize, in the Dialogue. I add to this,
Antinomianism for some Time past has been, and now is appearing with open Face,
in all its Colors, and gaining Ground too fast, in the several Parishes of
Southold on Long Island, notwithstanding all the Endeavors of the Ministers
there, to suppress it; as I have good Reason to be assured. And the same Thing
may be observed, with respect to considerable Numbers in New Jersey, who seem
to act from the same Principles, in following a scandalous, deposed and
excommunicated Minister, against all Admonitions to the contrary. I might have
mentioned some Informations, from both your Colonies in New England, of the
Danger of these Principles spreading there; had you not assured me, that I
could not, to save my Life, find one single Person in each of them, that
embrace them.

You must allow me, Sir, to know my own Views, in that Undertaking; and I do
assure you, it is your Mistake, to suppose, that I designed Libertinus should
personate any one of those that are zealous for the Work of GOD. I designed he
should personate those only, who are in direct Opposition to it. I designed he
should personate the Antinomians, whom you all low to be in a Soul ^ damning
Error. (P. 5.) That no Man is farther concerned in the Character of Libertinus,
than he embraces his Principles. And I take this Opportunity solemnly to
declare, that I was so far from entertaining the least Thought, of bringing a
Slur or Reproach upon the Work of GOD, which has been so conspicuous of late in
our Land, or upon any that are zealous for it, in any Part of that Dialogue,
that I was acted by directly contrary Views, in the whole Undertaking. Though I
must also declare, that I then did, and still do think, that some zealous and
godly Brethren, who are earnestly and sincerely engaged in that Cause, have run
into very great Irregularities; and have thereby been accidentally very
injurious to it, in their Endeavors to promote it; and that others (the
Antinomians in particular) may pretend the Cause of GOD, when they are in the
most direct and immediate Manner, subverting and undermining it. Upon these
Accounts, I could not but hope, it would be of some Service to the Interest of
CHRIST's Kingdom, to set that Cause in a proper Light; to show the Opposers of
that miraculous Work of divine Grace, the dreadful Danger of their Case; to
convince some of our godly Brethren, of the ill Effects of their mistaken
Conduct; and to detect, and if possible prevent the progress of those
mischievous Errors, which so openly appear among us, and would take Sanctuary
under a pretense of the Cause of GOD and Religion. This, Sir, is a plain and
faithful Account of my Motives to that Work; and I cannot but flatter my self,
from the Acceptance that little Book has met with, that GOD has graciously been
pleased to bless my poor Endeavors, with some Success. -- I now proceed to
consider your Exceptions, against the Doctrines you are so much displeased with.

The Dialogue represents Libertinus complaining of our Ministry, in the
following Terms. You show your legal Spirit, by teaching Sinners the Necessity
of Preparations for their coming to CHRIST; and not directing them to come
immediately, without Delay. Upon which you observe, that very great Honor was
certainly done him, by making him dispute, for Ministers calling Sinners to
come to CHRIST immediately; and for Assurance being at some Times the common
Privilege of all Believers. -- These two Things, which they make Libertinus
contend earnestly for, are by a nick Name called Antinomian Conceits, though
Anti-Arminian Tenets, is the proper Name for them.

And now, SIR, How unhappy will it prove, if you your self are teaching the
very same Doctrine, which you so warmly oppose; and if your Invectives against
it do fully and necessarily establish it? There were six Things proposed in the
Dialogue, as necessary Preparatives to a saving Faith in Christ. A Knowledge of
the Way of Salvation by Christ, a Sense of Sin and Misery, a Discovery of our
natural Impotency and Necessity of Christ, such a Desire of an Interest in
Christ as will make us willing to accept him, a Renunciation of other Hopes and
Confidences; and a Discovery of Safety in believing in him, and venturing our
eternal Interests in his Hands. And though I there declare, that we who hold the
Necessity of these previous Preparations, are as earnest with Sinners to
believe in Christ immediately; as the Antinomians can be; yet it is evident
from the very Nature of Things, that they will not comply with these
Exhortations, until they have these Preparations; or such Impressions upon
their Minds, as will dispose them to an Acceptance of the Gospel-Offer. This is
the Doctrine you oppose.

I shall now consider, whether you do not your self teach every one of these
Things, as necessary Preparatives to coming to Christ, the first, viz. A
Knowledge of the Way of Salvation, only excepted.

The Dialogue teaches, that a Sense of Sin and Misery, is previously necessary
to our coming to Christ. Mr. Croswell teaches, that instead of giving Sinners
long and particular Directions, how to close with Christ in the Way of Duty, it
would certainly be much better, to be almost continually sitting before them,
the Vengeance of the eternal GOD, who is their Enemy: and to teach and command
them in his Name, to come to Christ for Refuge. (P. 9.) And again, This
Imagination will lessen their Convictions, and lighten their Burden; and for
Ministers to lessen the Burden of Sinners, is in Truth, only to stop them from
coming to Christ, (P. 7.) And again, The plain and strong Tendency of which is,
to settle all strict Pharisees, upon the damnahu Foundation of their own Works,
to keep those who are but little, from being much concerned about their Souls,
to make those who are much concerned, to lose their Convictions; and to stop
short of Christ and the New Creature. (P.15) And (...) not this the very same
Doctrine, which you so zealously oppose? Is it not by your own Account of the
Matter, necessary, that Sinners should be sensible of their Sin and Misery; or
in your Words, that they should have the Vengeance of the eternal GOD set
before them, in order to their flying to Christ for Refuge; that they should
have Convictions that must not be lessened, a Burden that must not be lightened,
since to lighten their Burden stops them from coming to Christ? Don't you your
self make it necessary, that we should not keep those who are little from being
much concerned about their Souls; or make those who are much concerned to lose
their Convictions? And have I said any thing more than thin comes to, in the
Book you oppose? If Sinners must have the Vengeance of the eternal GOD set
before them, in order to their flying to Christ for Refuge: If they must have
Convictions, that must not be lessened; and a Burden that must not be lightened,
lest they are stopped from coming to Christ: If they must be much concerned about
their Souls; and not lose their Convictions, left they stop short of Christ and
the New Creature; then a Sinner must be sensible of his sinful and miserable
State, as was asserted in the Dialogue. Thus far then we teach the same Thing.

The Dialogue teaches, that a Sinner must have a Sense of his natural
Impotency; and of his Necessity of Christ, in order to his coming to him. Mr.
Crosswell teaches, that this is what Sinners need to be convinced of, that though
they must come to Christ, they are absolutely unable to come to him. -- The
awakened Sinner must have his Way hedged up. He must be left in a Wilderness,
before he is found of Christ. (P. 7.) Now, SIR, Where is the Difference between
your Doctrine and mine? I suppose, that Sinners should see their Necessity of
Christ; and you tell us, that they need to be convinced, that they MUST come to
Christ. I suppose, that they should have a sense of their natural Impotency;
and you tell us that they must be convinced, that they are utterly unable to
come to him, that their Way must be hedged up; and they must be lost in a
Wilderness, before they are found of Christ. I know no Difference in this
Matter, between what is said in the Dialogue, and what you say in Opposition to
it; but only, that you are pleased to express the same Thing in other Words.

The Dialogue teaches that Sinners, in order to a true Faith, must have such
Desires of an Interest in Christ, as makes 'em willing to accept him, upon his
own Terms. And Mr. Crosswell teaches, that Sinners being told, that they
deserve Damnation for every Refusal, puts them upon doing their utmost; and
convinces them, that really they can do nothing; and so is a Means of humbling
them to the Dust; and of causing them to come to Christ, to take the Burden off
from their sinking Souls. (P. 7.) Here then is such a Desire, previous to the
Sinners coming to Christ, as puts him upon utmost Endeavors to help himself,
that lades his sinking Soul with a dreadful Burden, when his Disappointment
from his false Refuges is discovered: and that finally CAUSES him to come to
Christ, as his last Refuge, that his Burden may be taken off. And why is not
this Doctrine as innocent in the Dialogue, as in your Reply?

The Dialogue teaches, that a Sinner must renounce all other Hopes and
Confidences, before he will come to CHRIST. And Mr. Croswell teaches, that
since there is such a violent propensity in Sinners when awakened, to rest in
their Duties, such Directions as these Ministers plead for; and are commonly
practiced, will be exceeding likely to keep them from CHRIST; and to marry them
to the Law their natural Spouse. (P. 8.) Well then, if resting in Duties keeps
Men from CHRIST, it is certainly necessary, that they renounce these false
Confidences, before they will come to Christ.

The Dialogue teaches, that the Sinner must, previous to his coming to Christ,
see such Safety in believing in him, as will encourage him to venture his
eternal Interests in his Hands. And Mr. Crosswell teaches, that Ministers
should beseech and command Sinners in his Name to come to Christ for Refuge;
and to venture Souls their upon him. (P. 9.) Very well then, they must be
taught, and must be sensible, that Christ is a Refuge for 'em to fly to, that
there is safety in believing in him; and that they may safely venture their
Souls upon him.

And now, my dear Brother, can you think, that you have done justly and
charitably, in making such tragical Exclamations against those Things, which
you yourself at the same Time in Effect declare to be true and right.

Have I not now the Advantage to retort upon you, and make a like stinging
Reflection upon your Performance, with that in the 10th Page of your Reply? I
cannot help remarking, that it is strange, that though Mr. Crosswell did not see,
that he was contradicting the Scriptures, he did not at least see, that he
contradicted himself. For he repeatedly insists upon it, that Sinners must be
invited to come immediately to Christ; nor will he allow, that Men must get the
Hindrances out of the Way, in order to come to Christ; nor that their Eyes and
Heart should be somewhat opened, before they behold him, and receive him into
their Hearts. (P. 1^.) They must get into the strong Hold immediately; BUT he
would first set before 'em the Vengeance of the eternal GOD, who is their
Enemy. He exhorts to look to Christ immediately; BUT they must needs be first
convinced, that though they must come to Christ, they are absolutely unable to
come to him. They must be put upon going to Christ immediately; BUT they must
be first put upon doing their utmost, and this must convince them, that really
they can do nothing; which is ameans of humbling them to the Dust, yea, and of
CAUSING them to come to Christ. He would have them give Christ immediate
Entertainment; BUT they must first be brought off from resting upon their
Duties, which else will keep them from coming to Christ. -- Now all these BUT'S
show that it is not immediately. It Is just as if a Man should bid his Servant
come to him immediately; but withal bid him stay a little while, and do
something else first. The plain English of what he says, is no better than
this, viz. I do invite Sinners to come Christ immediately; but yet I do not
invite them to come immediately. -- I must insist upon it, that there is full
as much Propriety, in fixing these Consequences upon your Reply, as there is in
fixing them upon the Dialogue. And the very same Reasoning (be it what it will)
that shall clear you from these Contradictions, will clear me also. -- And now
let us proceed to the Merits of the Cause.

I readily acknowledge the Truth of what you say, (P.6.) That the great GOD
calls, invites and commands poor perishing Sinners to come to Christ (or
believe on him) for Life and Happiness; and that he requires them to come
immediately. And it is therefore the Duty of Gospel Ministers, to press Sinners
by the most forceable Motives to a present Compliance with the Gospel Offer.
But then, It is our Duty also to let them know, that while they remain in a
State of Stupidity and Security, while insensible of their Danger and of their
Need of a Savior, or while depending upon their Self-righteous Seize,
they neither can nor will come to him; and that it is therefore necessary, to
use all proper Endeavors to awaken them out of their Security; and to show
them, that the Avenger of Blood is pursuing them, that so they may fly to the
City of Refuge. And herein I have the Satisfaction to find, that you
(notwithstanding all your seeming Opposition to me) are really of my
Sentiments; and that a greater than either you or I, took the same Method, in
exhorting Sinners, to awake out of their Sleep, and to arise from the dead,
that Christ might give them Light. Ephesians. 5. 14.

But then, Some of our modern Antinomians, the Moravians in particular, do
insist upon the direct contrary to all this; as appears from a variety of
Passages in Count Zinzendorff's Sermons; though, not having the Book now in my
Hands, I cannot here point out to you the particular Expressions. They insist
upon it, that without any previous preparatory and legal Work, firmly to
believe that Jesus Christ is our Savior in particular, puts us into a State of
Salvation; and that it is no uncommon Thing for Men to obtain Salvation merely
by this Belief, even in the last Moments of their Life. They therefore, avoid
all Methods of awakening Sinners out of their Security; and of giving them any
disquieting Apprehensions of their Misery and Danger, both in their public and
private Addresses. -- I would now appeal to your own Experience, whether this
Way and Manner of exhorting Sinners to believe in Christ immediately, be a
likely Mean to bring 'em to a saving Faith in him. Have you not constantly
observed, that in the late wonderful Effusion of GOD's holy Spirit among us,
Sinners have be'n first awakened, to see their Danger, Misery and Impotence;
and by that Discovery, driven and even constrained to fly to Christ for Refuge?
Has it not constantly appeared to be at least GOD's ordinary Method, in
bringing adult Sinners home to (...) to convince them first of Sin, and then of
Righteousness (...) Judgment? And don't you tell us, even in this your (...)
that this is the most successful Method of preaching, the Method that you your
self are in? What then, my dear Brother, has soured your Spirit to such a
Degree against the Dialogue, as to provoke you to such Asperity, toward so
many excellent Ministers of Christ, who saw fit to recommend it? Can you find
any Thing there, inconsistent with this Representation of the Matter? Nay, Are
not all the Arguments with Libertinus on this Subject, directly aimed at this
View of the Case? -- The best Apology I can make for your Conduct is, that you
were alarmed with a Jealousy of something designed, which never came into the
Author's Thoughts, or the Rev. Prefacers; and which has no Foundation at all in
the Book, you are pleased to make the Object of your Resentments.

I am the more confirmed in this Apprehension, by your repeated Invectives,
against Ministers giving their Hearers a long Train of Directions, (P. 7.)
keeping the Way to Christ (as they call it) always open and clear before them;
and therefore, instead of guiding them to Christ, they only lead them from
Christ to Ordinances, which they in Effect make a Christ of, (P.8.) and by your
insinuating, that such Directions are what these Ministers plead for. (Ibid.)
-- But what is there in the Dialogue, to give any Umbrage for all these
Insinuations? Nothing at all, that has the least Appearance of this kind.

When you are finding Fault with a long Train of Directions, (P. 7.) and
telling us, that you are not absolutely against all sorts of Directions, (P.
8.) it must be presumed, that the Directions you complain of, must be such as
are specified by you; -- Such Directions as naturally cause Sinners to imagine,
that if they observe them carefully, God will be thereby inclined to save them,
such as will lighten their Burden, and thereby stop them from coming to Christ.
(P. 7.) and such as will lead them from Christ to Ordinances, which they (in
effect) make a Christ of. (P. 8.) And therefore such Directions, as have a
quite contrary Tendency, to these dangerous Effects, are what you yourself must
approve of. From whence it follows, that if the whole of that Conference now
before us, were formed into Directions; and every one of those Directions
should prove exactly contrary to those evil Effects which you speak of, they
must be such as you approve; and consequently you have done unworthily by those
Ministers, by insinuating that they are pleading for such Directions as you
complain of.

If that whole Conference were turned into the Form of Directions, they must be
these that follow. Sinners must (first) be directed to get a knowledge of the
Gospel, and an Acquaintance with the Way and Terms of Salvation therein
proposed, left they hope for Salvation, they know not how or why. For, how can
they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? Romans x. 14. -- Secondly,
Sinners must be directed to consider and lay it to Heart, that they are in a
sinful, guilty and miserable State, and that because they believe not, they are
condemned already, and the Wrath of God abides on them, as expressed John iii.
18, ult. -- Thirdly, Sinners must be directed to consider themselves not only
sinful and miserable, but impotent and utterly unable to help themselves; and
therefore in the last Necessity of an Interest in Christ, without whom they can
do nothing, as John xv. 5. -- Fourthly, Sinners must be directed never of rest
till they feel such Desires after Christ, as bring them to a hearty Compliance
with the Gospel-Offer; and a Willingness to receive him upon his own Terms.
They must be directed, not to rest until they find that they are indeed made
willing in the Day of Christ's Power, as Psalm cx. 3. -- Fifthly, they must be
directed, to bring none of their own Righteousness to Christ, nor to except
Salvation from him for their own sake, for their Duties, good Purposes, or
Performances; but to renounce all other Hopes and Confidences, but Christ only,
that they may be found in him, not having their own Righteousness which is of
the Law; but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which
is of God by Faith, Phil. iii. 9. -- Sixthly, they must be directed, never to
satisfy themselves till they have such a discovery of Safety in believing in
Christ, as that they can readily venture their eternal Interests in his Hands,
and till they are bro't to that Language of Heart, To whom shall we go? For
thou have the Words of eternal Life, Joh. vi. 68. -- Seventhly, They must be
directed, to do all this immediately; for it is a Case of infinite Importance,
that admits of no Delay; and yet we must assure them, that they neither will
nor can comply with these Directions, as long as their Darkness, Stupidity,
carnal Security, Self-Sufficiency, and Self-Righteousness bolt and bar the
Doors of their Hearts against Christ. Therefore, -- Eighthly, They must be
directed, to go to GOD in the use of appointed Means, to remove these
Hindrences out of the Way, that is, to enlighten them, and to persuade and
enable them to believe, that they might be saved; and to awaken them out of
their Sleep, that they may arise from the Dead, and that Christ may give them
Light. -- Those are all the Particulars that can be found in that Conference,
if the whole of it were turned into formal Directions. And I appeal to the
World, whether every Word of this is not directly contrary to Sinner's
Imaginations, that GOD will be inclined to save them for attending Directions;
directly contrary to lightning their Burdens in a Christless State; and
directly contrary to leading them to Ordinances, that they may (in Effect) make
a Christ of them.

That this a true and just Representation of the Case, every Man may see, who
will take the Par^s to compare it with the Dialogue. And from this
Representation of the Case, it plainly appears, how little Reason you had to
exclaim as you do, (P. 11.) I must observe, that I never read any Thing more
legal and dangerous, than their supposing that Men must get the Hindrances out
of the Way, in order to their coming to Christ; and their Eyes and Hearts
somewhat opened, before they behold him, or receive him into their Hearts. -- I
acknowledge with you, that this and only this is pure Gospel, that Jesus Christ
is both Righteousness and Strength; and that poor Sinners must come to him for
all that they want. (ibid.)

But you must remember, that coming to Christ, was intended in the Dialogue to
signify, receiving him by Faith; and was accordingly so explained. Now the
Question is, Whether the Hindrances, such as Men's natural Blindness,
Stupidity, carnal Security, Self-Sufficiency, and Self-Righteousness, must not
be first removed out of the Way, by a Work of the Spirit in Conviction and
Humiliation, before Sinners either will or can receive Christ by Faith? Answer
this directly; and I am mistaken, if you don't teach Doctrines as legal and
dangerous, as this which you so warmly exclaim against -- There are but two
Ways, in which you can possibly give a direct Answer to this. You must either
assert, that Men's natural Blindness, Stupidity, carnal Security,
Self-Sufficiency, and Self-Righteousness, are no Hindrances to Sinners
receiving Christ by Faith, which need to be removed out of the Way, in order to
it; but that Sinners may receive Christ by Faith, while they remain in Such a
State: or else you must allow, that these Hindrances must be removed out of the
Way, before Sinners will or can come to Christ. -- I think, upon cool and calm
Reflection, you will hardly choose the former of these Answers; and therefore
you must acknowledge, that it is a proper Method, to imitate our blessed Lord,
in calling upon Sinners to pray to GOD, that He would remove all Hindrances,
and persuade and enable them to believe in Christ, -- and to open to him, that
he may come in, and sup with them, and they with him. -- Thus it is expressed
in the Dialogue; and not as you are pleased, in a ludicrous manner, to
represent it.

Certain it is, that Sinners must come to Christ as they are, if they come at
all; they must come as Sinners, as guilty, helpless Sinners, without any
Qualifications to recommend them to his Acceptance. And therefore it is
absolutely necessary, that they be sensible of this. For while they are
proudly, and with an unhumbled Spirit, endeavoring to recommend themselves to
Christ, by their good Qualifications and Performances, this proves a Bar in
the Way to their Acceptance with him. This Hindrance must therefore by removed
out of the Way; they must come as lost, unworthy Sinners: and receive Christ as
a free Gift, without bringing any Thing with them to purchase his Favor, or
make them meet for his Acceptance, if they would ever obtain an Interest in
him, and his saving Benefits. The whole need not the Physician; but they that
are Sick. Christ came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance. --
But so much for Answer to your Talk on the Head of Ministers Duty to call
Sinners to come to Christ immediately, without first getting the customary
Preparations, as you express it.

I now commend this Point to your serious and deliber^^^ Reflection; and leave
it to your own Conscience, whether there be no Justice due from you to those
excellent Men, whose Names you have cast out as evil; and whom you have so
unjustly traduced, on Account of this Article of your Complaint. And shall
proceed to take some Notice of what you have further to say.

Tho'I have deferred the Consideration of the PROTESTATION prefixed to your
Reply, till now, because of it is Affinity with what follows; yet I shall not
quite overlook it.

You and the other Gentlemen that join with you, express your (...) of what is
asserted toward the latter End (of the Dialogue) as contrary to the Experience
of the Generation of GOD's Children, who never find that GOD withdraws sensible
Joy and Comfort from them, while they live in a Course of vital and true (...),
as is there supposed; but only when there are great Breaches in that vital and
true Holiness, which once they maintained.

I have one Argument against this, which it certainly concerns you to get rid
of as well as you can. The Argument I take from Mr. Allen, Mr. Crosswell, Mr.
Symmes and Mr. Curtis. These Gentlemen in their Protestation prefixed to your
Reply, testify against those Ministers putting Persons upon (...) out their
Justification by (...) Sanctification, in such a Manner as they have done. Now
the Manner, in which this is done in the Dialogue, and in that very Page you
refer to, is to clear up their Interest in Christ, by an (...) Course of VITAL
and TRUE HOLINESS; and no otherwise. This is directly expressed in Terms; and
there is not the least Appearance, from any one Expression in that whole
Discourse, of any other Manner of putting Persons upon finding cut their
Justification by their Sanctification.

Whence I argue,

If an habitual Course of vital and true Holiness does always so engage GOD's
special Presence with those who maintain it, that he never withdraws sensible
Joy and Comfort from them while they maintain it; '^is then, while maintained,
a good Eveience of an Interest in Christ, and of our Justication. -- There is
but one of these two Ways, that you can possibly give a direct and consistent
Answer to this Argument.

You must either answer --

1. That some Persons may maintain an habitual Course of vital and true
Holiness, and never find GOD withdraw sensible Joy and Comfort from them; and
yet be in a Christless and (...) Though a (...) Life and sensible Communion are
(...) Foundation of Hope, as you tell us, (P. 19.) --

-- Or e^^,

2. You must answer, That though it be always true, that all Persons who maintain
an habitual Course of vital and true Holiness, do while they maintain that
Course, find Joy and Comfort from GOD, and are interested in Christ and
Justified ^ yet it don't follow, that the maintaining an habitual Course of
vital and true Holiness, is an Evidence of our Justification. -- It is
impossible to give any other direct and consistent Answer to this Argument,
than one of these Two; and the Alternative is at your Choice.

I think you must necessarily allow, that one or the other of these Complaints
in the Protestation are causeless, and without Foundation. On the one Hand,

You represent it as a false and dangerous Doctrine, to teach that a Person can
maintain a Course of vital and true Holiness, without sensible Communion;
because such as these always have Joy and Comfort from God, while they maintain
such a Life. Well, suppose it to be so, and suppose the Mistake to be as great
and dangerous as you please: Yet if so, the maintaining a Course of vital and
true Holiness, is then certainly a good Evidence of our Justification; for
while maintained, it is always accompanied with sensible Communion, which two
make up the only Foundation of Hope. This by your 'own Account of the Matter,
is found Speech that cannot be condemned. (P. 19.)

You on the other Hand, testify against it as a dangerous Doctrine, to put
Persons upon finding out their Justification by their Sanctification, that is,
by maintaining an habitual Course of vital and true Holiness, as it is
expressed in the Dialogue^ Well! suppose this to be so, then it follows, that
ALL who maintain an habitual Course of vital and true Holiness, have not always
while they do maintain it, sensible Communion, or sensible Joy and Comfort; for
if they had, it would be a good Evidence of their Justification. For you tell
us, both these together may give a Person strong Consolation, and evidence that
he has (...) for Refuge to the Hope set before him. (P 18.) These therefore,
upon this supposal, having both a good Life, and sensible Communion, would by
your own Verdict, build upon the only Foundation of Hope. (P. 19.) -- Here the
Matter must (...) till you determine which of these two you will choose.

I now proceed to represent to you some further Objections against this
Paragraph, in your Protestation, That GOD never withdraws sensible Joy and
Comfort from his Children while they live in a Course of vital and true
Holiness.

Can you (Sir) deliberately assert, that the Children of GOD while maintaining
a Life of vital Piety and true Holiness, are never exercised with such
Temptations of Satan, as deprive them of Joy and Comfort? Have not the Children
of GOD in all Ages, and even in the most watchful Periods of their Lives^ found
by Experience, that they must wrestle? not against Flesh and Blood, but against
Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this
World, against spiritual Wickedness in high Places. Ephesians. vi. 12. Don't they
experience the fiery Darts of the wicked one? which often fill them with
dreadful Confusion and Distress; and make them roar, by reason of the
disquietment of their Hearts. If you say, that this arises only from great
Breaches of vital and true Holiness, you have nothing at all to warrant your
Conclusion. Our blessed LORD himself was tempted of the Devil. The Apostle Paul
immediately after his Rapture into the third Heavens, had a Messenger of Satan
to buffet him, left he should be lifted up above measure: and these Temptations
are common to Men, to the best of Men, I Cor. x. 13. And I appeal to the
Experience of all Ministers, who have had most occasion to converse with
exercised, tempted Souls, whether they have not often found this to be the Case
of some of the most serious, heavenly, and devout Christians of their
Acquaintance.

I would again enquire, whether none of the Children of GOD, while maintaining
a Course of true vital Holiness, may full into a State of bodily Melancholy,
and so have every Thing look dark to 'em. Is there any Thing more common, than
to see the most serious, devout and spiritual Persons, when under such
Melancholy, to be under Doubts and Fears about their State? And I am sure, you
can being no Evidence to prove, that all those who maintain a Life of vital
Holiness, are exempted from this Disease.

And I must once more enquire^ Whether we have not Instances in Scripture, of
those who (while in the Exercise of vital (...)) were thus in the dark. I will
mention two, among other Instances, that might be assigned. The first Instance
is David, if he was (as it is probable he was) the Penman of the xlii. Psalm:
when his Soul was panting after GOD, as the Heart pants after the Water
Brooks; and he was thirsting for GOD, for the living GOD, his Tears were his
Meat Day and Night, his Soul was cast down and disquieted within him, and all
GOD's Billows had gone over him. -- The second Instance is Heman in Psalm
lxxxviii. He cried Day and Night before GOD, and yet he suffered GOD's Terrors,
till he was distracted. GOD's fierce Wrath went over him, and his Terrors cut
him off: And this was not a sudden and transient Distress, but he was thus
afflicted and ready to die from his Youth up. And yet, as Dr. Owen well
observes upon it, there can be no greater Expres^ions of Faith and Love, than
are mixed with his Complaints. -- We are accordingly shown in Isa. I. 10. that
be that fears the Lord, and obeys the Voice of his Servant, may walk in
Darkness, and see no Light. In a Word, GOD is as Sovereign in giving Joy and
Comfort to Believers, as he is in giving Grace; and knows how, when, and why,
either to hide his Face, or to shine into their Souls, with the Joys of his
Salvation. It is true, that he never leaves them without Matter of Support. For
he is the GOD of Israel their Savior, even when he is a GOD that hides
himself, Isal. xlv. 15.

But you tell us, that this is contrary to the Experience of the (...) of GOD's
Children. If you mean by this, that some of GOD's Children have for some
considerable Time together, constant Experience of Joy and Comfort, I
acknowledge it to be true; and if it be indeed your own Case, give GOD the
Glory. But this being supposed, there seems a twofold Caution necessary. The
one is, that you (...) minded, but fear; for you have not yet put off (...) The
other is, that you don't Judge the State of (...) seem your own Experiences. It
is no Argument, because (...) Christian has constant sensible Communion, (...)
every Christian has. GOD's Dispensations in this (...) are very different, and
there are very different Attainment (...) true Christians. There are Babes,
Men, and strong Men in Christ; Children, Young Men, and Fathers. The Experience
of particular Persons does not (...) determine, what is the Experience of the
Generation of GOD's Children. --

If we would know what is the Experience of the Generation of GOD's Children,
by the Declaration of all the most eminent Divines, particularly from the
Reformation to the present Time, they all (as far as I have yet observed) with
oneMouth declare against You in this Matter; some few Antinomians only
excepted. -- We cannot take a director Method to know the Minds of the whole
Reformation upon this Point, than to look into the Acts of the Synod of DORT; a
Synod convened from the Several Protestant Churches, on Purpose to suppress
Arminianism, in its first Rise. There you will find, all the Delegates from the
several Churches, by a joint Suffrage, declare their Sentiments of this Matter,
in the following Words; In the mean Time, the Scripture testifies, that the
Faithful in this Life conflict with various carnal Doubtings; and being
exercised with grievous Temptations, cannot always perceive the full and clear
Exercise of Faith and Certainty of their Perseverance. But GOD the Father of
Consolation does not suffer them to be tempted above what they are able: But
with the Temptation makes a Way to escape. I Cor.x.13. Acta. Syn^d (...) Sell.
136. P. 313.
-- If we would know the Minds of the Body of all those of our Profession, in
England, Scotland and Ireland, let us hear the Declaration of the Assembly of
Divines, in their Confession of Faith. True Believers may have the Assurance of
their Salvation diverse Ways shaken, diminished, and intermitted; as, by
Negligence in preserving of it, by falling into some special Sin, which
wounds the Conscience and grieveth the Spirit, by some sudden and vehement
Temptation, by GOD's withdrawing the Light of his Countenance; and suffering
such as fear him, to walk in Darkness and see no Light. Chap. 18. Sec. 4.
-- I had Thoughts of setting before you a Collection of Authorities, against
your new Doctrine, from Numbers of our most eminent Divines, from the Time of
the Reformation; but as that would swell this Letter to too great a Bulk, I
will content my self with Quotations from some of the most eminent Fathers of
this Country, who have been deservedly famous, beyond most others in the World,
for their Acquaintance with practical and experimental Godliness; and add to
them but one other Authority, from a Divine equally famous.

I begin with that excellent Divine and Father of New England, Mr. JOHN COTTON.
Comment. on I Epist. of John P. 328.
The Fear of the Godly, (says he) drives them to use the right Means, to run to
GOD, to keep closer to him: -- So that though GOD seem very angry, they will
throw themselves into his Arms, they run to the Horns of the Altar; and there,
if they must perish, they will die; and indeed the Heart is never more found in
Love, than when it runs to GOD most; and it argues the more Love, to cleave to
him, when we see least Cause. If you would see this Matter fully cleared, read
his Discourse upon 1 John V. 10. The Text you quote in your Favor.

Mr. NORTON sets this in a clear and proper Light. Orthodox. ^yang. P. 326.
All Believers (says he) have the same State of Peace, though many Believers have
not the full Persuasion and comfortab'e Sense of it. We must distinguish
between justifying Faith (properly so called) namely the direct Act of Faith,
receiving Christ and his Righteousness, and relying upon him for Pardon
according to the Promise, whereby we are justified and have Peace; and the
reflex Act of Faith, whereby we are fully persuaded, and do believe that we do
believe. -- This Distinction is of great Use to many Believers, who not
sufficiently attending to the Nature of justifying Faith, think they have no
Faith, because they want Assurance.

Mr. SHEPARD in that excellent Book of his, The Sound Believer (a Book which
has always been most deservedly famous for giving a clear and lively view of
the Methods of divine Grace in a Sinner's Conversion) does repeatedly
contradict this Doctrine of yours. Edit. Boston 1736. P. 147.
The Soul of a poor Sinner (faith he) wounded and humbled, sometimes knows not
Christ; and then cries out as those Acts ii. 37. What shall I do? Whither shall
I go? Sometimes dares not, sometimes cannot, it has no Heart to stir or come.
It therefore looks up, and longs and goes unto the Lord to draw it, like poor
Ephraim Jer. xxxi 18. Oh turn thou me, Lord, and then I shall be turned. Lam.
v.21. And this is the lowest and least Degree of Faith. But at some other Time,
the Soul mourning for want of the Lord, the Lord comes to it with great
Clearness, Glory, and Sweetness of Grace and Peace. -- Again, Page 192.
The Saints have many Fears, whereby they dare not come. They fear they may
presume, they see themselves vile and unworthy of the least Smile. The Benefits
are so exceeding great, to which they are called, that they think it is too
good for them. -- And again, This Testimony (of the Spirit) all the Sons of GOD
have, by Means of their Adoption. They may not indeed sometimes H^ar it; if
they do, they may object against it, through the Unbelief in Part remaining in
them. Or if it be sometimes suspended. what you want in the Witness and Comfort
of it, you have it in the Holiness of it; and therefore the Spirit sealing, is
called the holy Spirit, Ephesians. iv. 30. -- Christ having stood for us, just^ied us
before God, sends the immutable constant Assistance of the Spirit in Adoption,
which though it don't always quicken us nor comfort us, nor assure us; yet it is
every Moment guiding and leading of us, to our utmost End. Much more to the
same Purpose might be set before you out of that excellent Book.

I will add another Testimony, from a Book, which has had and will have a high
and deserved Repute, among those who know what experimental Godliness means.
The Book I refer to, is Mr. STODDARD'S Safety of Appearing in the Righteousness
of Christ. First Edit. from P. 313. to (...).
We have there represented the many Discouragements and dark Apprehensions,
which the Saints are liable to, with their Causes and Cures. He begins his
Discourse upon this Subject, by observing, That there are two Sorts of
Discouragements, that Christians have, with respect unto their Acceptance. One
Sort is, when they are discouraged as if they were not accepted, as if they
were not Saints and in a state of Salvation; their present State is dark unto
them. And this arises, either from God's Dispensations toward them; or from
their Carriages toward God. God lays Afflictions upon 'em, exercises them with
inward Temptations, don't give Assurance of his Love, don't answer their
Prayers, don't quicken their Hearts in his (...) etc. c

I will conclude with a Quotation from one of the greatest Divines our Nation
has ever had, Dr. OWEN I mean, who in his Exposition of Psalm. cxxx. has
frequent Occasion to treat on this Subject, and as frequently contradicts your
Assertion. When (says he P. 300.
) the Soul cannot find this Grace in himself, when he has not a spiritual
Sense and Experience of its in-being and Power, when it cannot evidently
distinguish it from that which is not right or genuine, it is filled with Fears
and Perplexities, and thinks it is yet in its Sin. He is so indeed, that has
no Grace in him; but not he always, who can find none in him. But these are
different Things. A Man may have Grace, and yet not have it at some Times much
acting: He may have Grace for Life, and not have it for Fruitfulness and
Comfort, though it be his Duty to have it. Rev. iii. 2. -- 2 Timothy i. 6. And a Man
have Grace actingin him, and yet not know, not be sensible, that he has acting
Grace. We see Persons frequently, under great Temptations, of Apprehension that
they have no Grace at all; and yet at the same Time, to the clearest Conviction
of all who are able to discern spiritual Things, sweetly and genuinely act
Faith, Love, Submission unto God; and that in an eminent Manner.

Thus I have done something more than strongly to assert, that your Doctrine is
contrary to the Experience of the Generation of GOD's Children. I have set some
opposite^ Testimonies before you; and I might have produced as many more, as I
could come at Authors of Note, who treat upon this Subject; by which you may
judge what Foundation this Exclamation of yours, and of your three Friends, is
built upon.

Though I believe, it is ordinarily the Case of the Children of GOD, that they
have at some times such Manifestations of the Love of GOD to their Souls, and
such Evidences of his Favor, as carry them above any disquieting Doubts and
Fears; and though I believe also, that a full Assurance of Faith is a more common
Attainment, than is ordinarily supposed: Yet I cannot but conclude with Dr.
OWEN, that if we look to have such an Evidence, Light into, and absolute
Conviction of this Matter, as shall admit of no Doubts, Fears, Questionings,
just Occasions and Causes of new Trials, Teachings, and Self Examinations, we
shall be greatly deceived.

But still I don't see how careless Sinners, carnal and secure Professors, or
strict Pharisees (as you express it) can reasonably take any Advantage from
this Doctrine. For it certainly is the Character of every Child of GOD, that he
either hat Assurance; or is earnestly reaching after it. No one that realizes
eternal Things to himself, can rest and be easy in a dreadful Uncertainty,
whether he is to be saved, or damned to all Eternity. They therefore who can be
easy in such an Uncertainty, have a black Mark of Unregeneracy upon their
Souls. However, if such as these will improve this Doctrine to their own Ruin,
We must nevertheless imitate our blessed Master, in not breaking the bruised
Reed, and in not quenching the smoking Flax.

I proceed to consider the Distinction, by which you endeavor to clear up the
Doctrine under Consideration. You say, that Manifestation, or a Persuasion of
our justified State, is essential to the Exercise of saving Faith; though
Manifestation is not necessary to the Being of it. (P. 11.) -- But I suspect,
that this will not bear the Trial. Let us consider the Case a little.

If this be so, then Manifestation or Persuasion of our Justified State, must
be essential to the first Exercise of saving Faith (which indeed was the very
View in which the Dialogue was considering this Matter) and by Consequence must
necessarily, in order of Nature, Precede our Justification: We must have
Manifestation or Persuasion of our justified State, even before we are actually
justified: And so consequently it is essential to the Exercise of a saving
Faith, that we have a Persuasion of that which is not true in Fact.

Certain it is, that we are justified and have Power to become the Children of
GOD, by receiving the Lord Jesus Christ, and are not justified till we have
received him. Joh. i. 12. Rom i. 17. Chap. iii. 30. and iv. 24. If therefore a
Persuasion that we are justified, is essential to our receiving Christ; then it
is essential to our receiving Christ, that we are persuaded of that which was
not previously true in Fact. For it is not true in Fact, that any Man is
justified before he receives Christ by Faith. -- There is no Way to get rid of
this Argument against your Doctrine; but by asserting, either, --

1. That receiving Christ, is not the Exercise of Faith. Or --

2. That receiving Christ by Faith, even in its first Act, does not (in order
of Nature) go before our Justification.

Or else --

3. That our more Persuasion makes that become a real Truth, which was
previously false in Fact. -- All which are palpable Absurdities.

It is true indeed, that our receiving Christ by Faith, and our obtaining an
Interest in him, are Things contemporary: That is, at the same Instant in which
we have actually received him, he is ours. But then, we have no special saving
Interest in him, before we have received him, nor until the Act of receiving
him (in first Exercise of Faith) is finished and perfected. And therefore, to
be persuaded that he is ours, before the Act of receiving him is accomplished,
is to be persuaded of what is false in Fact. Let the Case be illustrated by
this Similitude. Supposing a Present be made me on Condition of my accepting it
with my Hand, that Instant I receive it in my Hand, it becomes my Property: But
it is not so while I am stretching out my Hand to take it, nor till the Act of
receiving be finished. And therefore, if I am persuaded, that it is in my Hand,
and is my Property, before this, I am persuaded of a Falsehood; and if I rest
in that Persuasion, I lose the Present, and must go without it. The Application
is plain and familiar.

Another Objection against this Doctrine of yours is, that it opens a wide Door
to Licentiousness. For if it be true, that the Persuasion of our justified
State be essential to the Exercise of saving Faith: then all that have that
Persuasion, will readily conclude themselves to be in the Exercise of saving
Faith; whatever other Characters of a true Believer may be wanting. A Man will
hardly be persuaded, that he has the Essence of a Thing; and yet has not the
Thing itself.

Another Objection is, that this Doctrine is directly contrary to Scripture.
Thus, Ephesians. i. 13. AFTER that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit
of Promise. -- That to believe's to exercise Faith, is what I think no Man can
deny. For though a Man may be a Believer, yet he never does believe while the
Exercise of Faith is suspended; and the Text assures us, that the Sealings of
the Spirit are consequent to believing; and therefore not essential to it. -- I
might produce the like Evidence from ^ many other Places of Scripture; but I
shall be too voluminous. And if you would ice this Point more fully cleared, be
pleased to read Mr. SHEPARD'S Sound Believer.(Boston Edition, from P. 185,
forward.) And be pleased also to read the Dialogue over again; for all the
Arguments there stand good against you, notwithstanding this Distinction of
yours.

This appears, because it is by the Exercise of Faith (and not by the Habit of
it, while the Exercise is suspended) that we are justified. We are justified
(as was before observed) by receiving Christ by Faith, or by actual Believing
in him; and not by any Habit of Soul, that we either have or can have, which
leaves us to rest short of an actual Compliance with the Gospel-Call. Whence it
follows, that the boasted Demonstration (as you are pleased to call it) and the
other Arguments there used, stand good against you, For it is certain, that we
must have the Exercise of Faith, before we can know that we believe in Christ,
and so are justified by him; since there is no Habit of Faith, that does or can
justify us, without the Exercise of it; and we cannot know, that we have that,
which in Fact we have not. And consequently the Evidence or Persuasion of our
Justification, is no more essential to the Exercise of Faith, than to the Habit
of it: Your Distinction therefore don't at all help the Case. This Argument and
the other Arguments in the Dialogue, stand yet in their full Force against this
Opinion of yours; and you must pardon me, if I still suppose, that they are
really Unanswerable.

What you say in Confirmation of your Opinion, is true, but not to the Purpose;
as was particularly shown you in the Dialogue. It is certain, that when Men do
exercise true Faith, they are always sensible of it, as you observe (P. 12.)
That is, they are always sensible of that Exercise of their Minds, which is
true Faith. But it is not Fact, that they are always sensible that this
Exercise of the Mind must necessarily be true Faith. These are two very
different Things. To know what is the Exercise of the Mind, when we believe in
Christ (as well as in any other Case) is but one simple Act of the
Understanding. Such an Exercise of the Mind does (upon our Reflection) offer
itself to the Understanding, in an immediate and direct View, without any
Argumentation or comparing Things together to obtain the Knowledge of it: And
therefore must be known and observed by every one that attends to it. Every Man
that strictly attends to his own Thoughts, must know what they be, in an
intuitive way, without any Argumentation at all. --

But then to discover the Quality of this Exercise of the Mind, and to discover
whether it be saving Faith, or not, is a complex Act of the Understanding;
requires the comparing a Variety of Things together, and drawing a safe
Consequence from those Things when compared: And this is not such an easy
Matter, whatever may be pretended. How well so ever we are acquainted with the
Exercise of our own Minds in this Case, yet before we can have any Certainty
that this is saving Faith, we must know, upon what Terms Christ is offered to
us in the Gospel; and whether this Exercise of our Minds be a full Compliance
with all those Terms, without any Reserve: We must know, that this Faith of
ours, is Specifically distinct from the false Faith of Multitudes, who will
finally perish, notwithstanding a strong Persuasion of their safe State: We
must know, that we heartily receive Christ, in his whole Person and Character,
in all his Offices, with all the Inconveniences which may attend our cleaving
to him; and that we are heartily willing to be, to do, to bear any Thing, which
he calls and enables us to: We must know, that we are willing to forsake Father
and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters; yea, to hate even
our own Lives also, for his Sake; and to take up our Cross daily and follow
him. And is this such a plain and easy Discovery, that every one who exercises
Faith, must know it?

I acknowledge indeed, that the Spirit of GOD can, when he pleases, and very
often does, shine into the Soul of a Believer, with so full and clear a Light,
as to dispel all Darkness and Difficulty; and give a full View of the Exercise
of Faith, in all these Particulars; and thereby witnesses with our Spirits,
that we are the Children of GOD: But he has no where promised such a Discovery,
to every Act of Faith; and it is certain in Fact, that he does not always grant
it.

You next cite a Text of Scripture, to prove your Opinion. He that believes on
the Son of God, has the Witness in himself. I Joh. V. 10. But (to pass all
other Remarks) the Question is, What is that Truth, to which the Believer has
the Witness in himself; or what his Faith is a Witness of? It must either be
the Truth of Christianity, whereof Faith is a Witness in our selves; as the
Text is generally understood, and as is most agreeable to the Context: Or else,
the Truth of our personal Profession, and so the Safety of our ownState. -- If
we understand the former of these Sense to be intended, it will prove Nothing
to your Purpose. For we may have such a Faith in the Son of GOD, as will make
the Truth of Christianity evident and unquestionable to us; and yet have no
Evidence of our own Justification. -- If we understand the Text in the latter
Sense, it will, if duly considered, prove as little to your Purpose. For a Man
may have the Witness in himself; and yet not always hear that Witness speak,
nor certainly know the Truth of what it does speak. To exemplify this, we read
in the 7th and 8th Verses of this same Chapter; There are Three that bear
Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost; and there are Three
that bear Witness on Earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood. These
always bear Witness unto all Men under Gospel Light, of the Truth of
Christianity. For this is the Witness of God, which he bath testified of his
Son. (Verse 9th.) But do all Men receive this Witness; and feel the Force and
Truth of what is witnessed? Alas, it is quite otherwise. So in the present
Case: It is one Thing, to have a Witness of this Truth in our selves; and
another Thing, to have it witnessed and made evident to our selves, to our full
Conviction and Satisfaction.

I now proceed to the Consideration of your last Complaint; which is, that our
Author and his seven Witnesses are pleased to tell us, that Men may be good
Christians, though they never bad any clear Manifestations of the Love of GOD;
and that Persons must find out their Justification, by their Sanctification
(P.12.)

As to your first Article, the Words in the Dialogue are, (page.108.) How many
true Believers are there, who may have never experienced such clear, RAVISHING,
and UNQUESTIONABLE Manifestations of the Love of GOD to their Souls? -- But you
have be'n pleased to express it very differently, so as quite to hide the
genuine Purport of the Passage: Whether this was upon Design, that you might
make the more plausible Appearance in your Opposition to it, or not, you can
best tell. -- I have already spoken to this Subject; and shall therefore pass
it over now; and proceed to the last Part of your Complaint, That Persons are
put upon finding out their Justification, by their Sanctification. It must be
observed, that the Sanctification by which Believers are put upon evidencing
their Justification, in the Book you oppose is thus described; "The Fruits of
theSPIRIT in Heart and Life -- "An habitual Course of VITAL and true Heliness
-- "A Principle of Holiness in the Heart, and a Carefulness to be practically
holy in Life and Conversation. -- "Sorrow for and Hatred of all Sin, Love to
Holiness; and unfeigned Endeavors of Conformity to GOD in all Things --
"Finding the purifying Effects of FAITH -- "Having old Things past away, and
all Things become now. -- This, all this, and nothing but this, is proposed in
the Dialogue, as an Evidence of our Justification. -- And now, let us consider
what is your Representation of this Matter. You thus represent the Doctrines,
which you charge us with: -- That a good Life, i. e. good Works, are a
sufficient Evidence of a Man's Justification. (P. 13.) That we do so much
Honor to Morality, in such a Day as this, as to make it a good Evidence of a
Man's Title to the heavenly Inheritance, when be can find nothing else. (Ibid.)
That we say a Confederacy (with the Arminians) in this one Article of a good
Life's being a sufficient Evidence of a justified Sat. (P. 14.) That these
Ministers give it under their Hands, that Men may conclude, that they are good
Christians, from the Goodness of their Lives. (P. 17)

And now, my dear Brother, I appeal to the World, and even to your self,
whether this be a just and fair Representation of the Case. Look back, I pray,
and consider what Motive you could have to insinuate, that we hold such
Doctrines as you there represent; unless it were to blacken our Characters,
prejudice your Readers against us, and find a groundless Occasion of Triumph!
You tell us, that you ^ould gladly have let them (the Boston-Ministers, who
signed the Preface to my Book) alone, if your Conscience would have let you
alone. (P. 18.) But would not your Conscience let you alone, without treating
them with so much Injustice and Injury! Or indeed how could it let you alone,
while you were doing this!

These however are the Doctrines you oppose, which you calculate your Arguments
against, and which you cry out of, in such a warm and vehement Manner. But how
do all your Exclamations at all affect the Dialogue, where there are no such
Doctrines to be found? -- Will it satisfy you, if I now publicly declare, that
I do not think, that merely an external good Life, i. e. good Works, is a
sufficient Evidence to any Man, of his Justification; and that I do not do so
much Honor to Morality, as to make it a good Evidence of a Man's Tide to the
heavenly Inheritance, when he can find Nothing else. If this will satisfy, I
will make that Declaration as publicly, and as repeatedly as you can
reasonably desire; and I doubt not, those Boston-Ministers, to a Man, will join
with me. But yet I must have better Light, before I can renounce one Article of
what is said in the Dialogue upon this Subject; for the following Reasons.

1. Because no Manever had or will have the Fruits of the Spirit in his Heart
and Life, a Principle of Holiness in his Heart, and a constant Care to be
practically holy in his Conversation; No Man ever did or ever will maintain an
habitual Course of vital and true Holiness, etc. without a saving Interest in
and Union to Christ by Faith. And on the contrary, every Man who has an
Interest in Christ, and Union to Him by Faith, is, and will be holy, in the
Manner described: and therefore they who are thus holy, they who find in
themselves the purifying Effects of Faith, and none but they, have good
sufficient Evidence of a justified State.

That no Man ever was, or can be thus holy, without an Interest in Christ by
Faith, is asserted by our Lord himself, Job. xv. 4, 5. As the Branch cannot
bear Fruit of itself, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except ye
abide in me. -- For without me, or (as it might be rendered) separate from me,
ye can do Nothing. -- That every one is thus holy, who is interested in Christ
by Faith, is proved by the Scriptures following. Acts xv. 9^ Purifying their
Hearts by Faith^ 2 Cor. v. 17. If any Man be in Christ, be is a new Creature:
old Things are passed away; behold, all Things are become new. -- Now can it
possibly be true, that all those and none but those who have the Holiness
described, are interested in Christ; and yet, that such Holiness is not a good
Evidence of our Interest in him?

2. Another Reason, why the Holiness described ought to be considered as a good
Evidence of our Justification, is, because the Scripture does so consider it.
-- The first Epistle of John (Chap iii) does particularly propose to us the
Holiness which has be'n described, as an Evidence of our being the Children of
GOD; and assures us, that by this the Children of GOD are manifest, and the
Children of the Devil: -- This Argument was fully stated and prosecuted in the
Dialogue. You are there shown at large the Unreasonablness of your Pretense,
that we must not evidence our Justification by that, which GOD himself has told
us, is a sure Mark and Evidence of it; and without which he has assured us,
that we are not in a justified State: you are shown the Absurdity of
pretending, that we must not make it manifest to our selves, whose Children we
are, by that which GOD himself has told us, is a proper Manifestation of it. --
To all which you have not ^een Cause to make any Answer; and you must allow me
to suppose, that you never will, nor never can, make any pertinent or conf^^ent
Answer to it. For it will certainly be found true, at the great Trial, that not
every one that faith unto Christ, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven; but be that does the Will of his Father, which is in Heaven, Matthew.
vii. 21.

3. Another Reason, why we ought to consider the Holiness above described, as
an Evidence of our Justification, is, because many of the Children of GOD must
otherwise be (...) to walk in the Dark, without any Evidence in their Favor.
They may be able to rejoice in this Testimony of their Conscience, that in
Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with (...) Wisdom but by the Grace of GOD,
they have had their Conversation in the World; and they ought with the Apostle
(2 Cor. i. 12.) to rejoice in it accordingly: when yet they may doubt, whether
their Faith (abstractly considered) be sincere and genuine. -- Suppose, for
Example, that a doubting Christian should propose his Case to your self in the
following View: informing you, That after sharp Exercise by (...) Conviction of
his Sin and Guilt, a humbling Sense of his own Impotence, and a deep
Impression, that he could not help himself, but absolutely lay at Mercy, he had
(...) a Discovery of the suffciency of Christ, as caused him at that Time (as
he then supposed) heartily and joyfully to (...) with the (...) He likewise
informs you, That from that Time forward he has found a great Change in his
Thoughts and Affections, that he has kept a strict Watch over his Heart and
Life; and can truly lay, that he (...) all Sin without Reserve, and groans
after Deliverance from all the Remainders of his Corruptions and Imperfections;
that he delights in all the Ways and Ordinances of God, and in the Children of
God; that he is habitually disposed to be spiritually minded; and
conscienciously careful, to discharge the respective Duties of every Relation
he sustains. This he tells you, is the Sum of all the Evidence that he can now
find in his Favor. He has never had such CLEAR RAVISHING and UNQUESTIONABLE
Manifestations of the Love of God, as some others speak of: Or what Joys and
transporting Comforts he has at any Time experienced, are now fled from him,
and he cannot recover 'em. -- Faith is described, as the substance of Things
hoped for; and the Evidence of Things not seen. But he is afraid, whether he
has such a sensible and realizing View of unseen and eternal Things, as this
Description amounts to; and therefore afraid he has no true Faith. He that
truly believes in Christ, must ^ate Father and Mother, etc. and even his own
Life for his sake: but he is afraid, whether he has attained to this; and
therefore doubts of the Sincerity of his Faith. -- Now, what Answer would you
give him? Would you tell him, that if he be a deserted Believer, A Christ is
what be wants, a Christ is what be must have, a Christ is what be will have.
None but Christ, None but Christ, is the Language of his Soul! as you express
it (P. 19) -- Why, He tells you, that Christ is the continual Subject of his
Tho'ts and Desires; and if he had a thousand Worlds to dispose of, he would
freely give them all, for good Evidence of an Interest in Christ. -- Would you
now advise him to go on in his Doubting^, Darkness and Discouragements
(neglecting Self-Examination, and Endeavors to clear up his Interest inChrist,
by all proper Means) until God reveals his Son to him again? Or otherwise,
would you endeavor to remove his Doubts, and encourage him cheerfully to
depend upon Christ as his Savior; without giving Way to his Discouragements
about his Interest in him; and to strive to act Faith now, and resolve to
venture his eternal Interests, with Comfort and Courage, in the Hands of that
Savior, who has already done so much for his Soul, and indeed given him the
earnest of the blessed Hope. -- I have not here represented to you a mere
Creature of my Imagination, but a Case in Fact, which as to the Substance of it
often occurs.

4. Another Reason, why I must insist upon the Truth and Importance of this
Doctrine, is, because the contrary to this opens a wide Door to a false Hope
and Peace; and if once generally received, might be a Means to deceive
Multitudes of poor Souls, to their eternal Perdition. -- If poor Sinners can
once persuade themselves, under the Influence of a warm Imagination, that they
are the Favorites of Heaven, and that they are not to evidence their
Justification by their Sanctification, they may go on peaceably and securely,
even with Transports of Joy, in Expectation and imaginary Assurance of
Happiness, though they have never experienced that great and important Change of
Regeneration; and though they fall vastly snort of that spiritual Mind and
heavenly Conversation, which is the distinguishing Characteristick of a
Christian indeed. That this has be'n, and still is, the Case of Multitudes of
poor deluded Souls, is evident to the World. Great and numerous Sects and
Parties have taken their Rise and Progress from this dangerous Mistake. -- From
this delusive Dream sprang up the Familists, Muggletonians, Ranters, Seekers,
Quakers, Fifth-Monarchy-Men, etc. in the last Century. From hence likewise did
the French Prophets take their Rise, some Years ago. And the present
Moravianism, which so greatly threatens our Land, is the Offspring of the same
haughty and deluded Imagination. I must in faithfulness add, that I have never
known the Time, when the Ministers of Christ had a louder Call to stand up for
the Cause of Holiness, or vital and practical Christianity, than they now have.

You will Answer to this (as in P. 18) that though the Scripture makes Holiness
the Mark of a justified State; yet not separately from the Witness of the
Spirit, and the divine Sealings, which the Scripture makes the common
Privilege of all Believers. -- Not to take Notice of the Impertinency of this
Answer, Holiness undisguised, true and vital Holiness, I mean, which is the
necessary Evidence of saving Faith, and a good Estate, such Holiness as was
considered in the Dialogue,) being in itself a Witness of the Spirit, and a
divine Sealing to Believers; I must observe, that those under such warm
Imaginations, will readily answer in your Words, that when Men do exercise true
Faith, they are always sensible of it (P. 12.) They themselves are accordingly
sensible of it; and therefore know that they have true Faith. They may answer
to every thing of this Kind, that can be said to them, as you do, that the Way
to know that a Man is really justified, is to find that in himself, that aoth
justify; and not to find that which don't justify. (P. 19) (Your Language here
does not seem to Anti-arminian; but I spare Reflections of this Nature) Now,
they suppose they find this; and are therefore safe. -- They may add, that a
Man may as easily make a World, at maintain a Course of vital and true
Holiness, without Manifestation.(P. 20) They therefore, as they imagine, do
maintain a Course of vital and true Holiness (not withstanding their Sin and
Imperfection) for they have Manifestation, which (according to you and them) is
essential to such a Life, and therefore speaks the Being of it.

5. Another Reason, why I must yet hold fast this Doctrine, is; that it has
been constantly taught by all our eminent Divines, in all Ages of the Church,
And I have not such an Apprehension of my own Sufficiency, as to venture to
forsake the Footsteps of the Flock, without better Reason for it. -- There have
indeed numerous Sectaries risen in the Church, in the several Ages of it, who
have taught such Doctrine as that I am now opposing: But there have never been
wanting such eminent Servants of Christ, as have opposed and refuted the
dangerous Mistake. And it has ever remained (as far as I have been able to
observe) the received Doctrine of the true Church of Christ, from the Apostles
Times until now, that Sanctification (such Sanctification as I have described)
is a good Evidence of a justified State. Where there have been great
Differences about other Matters, this has still be'n agreed upon, as a sacred
Truth. And I believe, it will be hard for you to find one single Divine of
Eminency in the Church (the Antinomians and such Sectaries as are above
mentioned, only excepted) who will contradict this Truth. -- If any would see
this Matter set in a strong, full and clear Light, let 'em read that excellent
Book before mentioned, Mr. SHEPARD's Sound Believer. (Boston-Edition, from p.
236, to p. 247.) I cannot forbear upon this Occasion, to transcribe one solemn
and pathetick Passage from thence, which loudly demands our Attention.

Suppose (says he) thou were now lying upon thy Deathbed, comforting thy self
in thy elected and just fied State: Suppose the Spirit of God should now
grapple with thy Conscience, and tell thee, that if thou art justified, then
thou art cased and sanctified. (2 These. ii 3, 14)Is it thus with thee? What
(...) thou answer? If thou ^ayest, thou art not sanctified, the Word and Spirit
will bear Witness against thee, and say, Then thou art not elected and
justified. If thou say thou know not, thou look not to Sanctification,
or Fruits of the Spirit; They will then reply, How then can thou say, Thou
art elected and justified? For it is a Truth as clear as the Sun, and as
immovable as Heaven and Earth, None are elected and justified, but they are
also sanctified; and they that are not sanctified, are not justified. Romans
viii. 1, 13. And now tell me, how you can have Peace, unless you make your
Faces like Flint, before the Face of God's eternal Truth; or heal your
Conscience with such a Plaster, as will not stick!

But it is now Time to consider what you have to say against this Doctrine. You
desire (you say) to produce your Cause; and to bring forth your strong Reasons
against it. (p. 15.)

1. Your first Reason is, It Is adapted to settle all strict Pharisees, upon the
damnable Foundation of their own Works. Among the many (...) of strict
Pharisees, into whose Hands that little Book may come, is there one but may
think himself a good Christian, according to it? No, not one. (p. 15) -- This
requires but a short Answer. If a strict Pharisee may have the Fruit of the
Spirit in his Heart and Life; if he may maintain an habitual Course of vital
and true Holiness; if he may have a Principle of Holiness in his Heart, and be
careful to be practically holy in his Life and Conversation; if he may have a
Sorrow for, and Hatred of all Sin, a Love to Holiness, and an unseigned
Endeavor of Conformity to God in all Things; if he may find in himself the
purifying Effects of Faith; if he may have old Things past away, and all Things
become new in him; and yet remain but a strict Pharisee still. your Argument is
just. But if not, it is altogether impertinent; and an unjustisable Reproach to
those Reverend Ministers, who attested to the Dialogue, as well as to the
Author of that Book. For it is such Holiness, described in the very Words above
cited, that is proposed in the Dialogue, as an Evidence of our Justification.

2. Your second Reason is, that it tend, to keep those who are but little
concerned, from being much concerned, about the Things that belong to their
Peace. (p. 16) To which it is sufficient Answer, that they who have the
Sanctification described in the Dialogue, have no Cause of distressing Concern
about their State: But have Reason to adore and magnify the Riches of that
Grace, by which they have been translated out of the Kingdom of Darkness, into
the Kingdom of God's dear Son. -- And on the contrary, they who have not the
Sanctification there described, have Reason to be awakened by what is there
taught, since it is evident concerning them, that they are in a State of Death
and Perdition.

3. Your third Reason is, that it tends to make those who are in the Bitterness
of their s^uls enquiring what they shall do to be saved, lose their
Convictions, and so stop short of Christ and the new Creature. The same Answer
will serve to this, as was given to the last Argument. For it is certain, that
such who have the Holiness described in the Dialogue, are in Christ; and are
new Creatures already; (as I have fully proved) and therefore, cannot be in
danger of stopping short of Christ and the new Creature. And as for those, who
have not that Holiness there described, the Dialogue tends to awaken them, and
not to beat off their Convictions, since it expressly represents and proves
them to be the Children of the Devil.

4. Your fourth and last Reason is, that Fire does not more naturally ascend
upwards, than this Doctrine tends to fill the World with Opposers to the
glorious Work, which God is now carrying on in the Multitude of his tender
Mercies. (p. 16) -- To which I answer, I have proved the Doctrine which is
taught in the Dialogue, to be agreeable to the Word of God; and therefore it
cannot, unless by accident, any Way tend to fill the World with Opposers to the
glorious Work, which God has be'n carrying (...) in the Land. There can be no
real Repugnancy, between the Word and the Works of God. And I must needs say. (
So) that you do not give due Honor to that glorious Display of Divine Grace,
which has been so manifest among us, when you rank those who are pleading for
the Necessity of true Holiness, among the Opposers of it.

That there has been a most glorious Manifestation of the divine Power and
Grace, in the Conviction and hopeful Conversion of great Numbers in these
Provinces, is what ought to be acknowledged to the Praise of GOD, by all
sincere Christians. -- But, that there is a strong and violent Opposition to
this astonishing Progress of GOD's glorious Grace, is a sad and lamentable
Truth. O that such Opposers could duly consider, against whom they are
magnifying themselves; and what their Opposition is like to come to, in the
Conclusion!

I think, I have had pretty good Advantages, to observe the Springs and
Occasions of that violent Opposition to the Work of GOD; which appears to me to
be a Land-defiling Sin at this Day, and threatens us with the just Resentments
of a jealous GOD: And as far as I can discern, it principally takes it Rise
from the following Causes.

I look upon it to be firstly owing to Men's proud unbu^^ied Hearts, that cannot
bear to stoop to the Sovereignty of God. -- This whole work has been a Display
of sovereign Grace. One has been taken, and another le^t: Some gross scandalous
Sinners have been called, when others of more innocent and inoffensive Lives
have been le^t to go on in their former Security: Many young Persons have been
plucked out of the Arms of their youthful Vanity and Madness, into the Embraces
of redeeming Love; while many aged Professors of Religion have had no Part or
Lot in this Matter. Now, This awakens their latent Pride, Self-Righteousness,
and Enmity of Heart to the divine Sovereignty. They cannot bear the Supposal,
that GOD has not a good Esteem of those whom they think well of; that he does
not proportion his special Favors to Men's external Conduct; or that he has no
Motive to the Dispensation of his converting Grace, but his mere good Pleasure.
Alas, They who could bear these Doctrines will enough in Speculation, are now
embitter'd against them, when they appear in a practical View, and they see so
many Exemplifications of 'em, in this Work of special Grace among us.

A subordinate Cause of this Opposition is the Self-Esteem and Self Flattery,
which poor proud Sinners are w^ding to entertain. The visible Effects of this
gracious Visitation are what they have had no Experience of. If they allow this
to be the Work of GOD, they must conclude themselves to be in a dangerous and
miserable State; which they are not willing to suppose. And they have therefore
no way to escape awakening and distressing Apprehensions; but by rejecting this
whole Work. Hence They set themselves in Opposition to that and their eternal
Interests together.

I may add to this, That one principal Occasion of this violent Opposition is,
the great Irreguianties of some, that have appeared eminently zealous in this
Cause. Those Disorders and Confusions that have be'n brought into our solemn
Assembles; Those public lay-Exhortations, that have be'n countenanced and
encouraged by some of our Ministy; Those Pretenses which have been make to
extraordinary Imperations, or at least to such special Impulses, as are to be
esteemed a Rule of our Conduct; Those censorious (...) against Ministers and
others, of good Report for their P^e^y, which have b'en too commonly practiced,
from a pretended Capacity to judge their interior State; together with the
public Exclamations against some doctrinal Truths, that are plainly legible in
the Word of GOD, and have be'n the constant and received Principles of the
Reformation; whereof I have now a famous Instance before me: There Things have
done vastly more, than all the united Endeavors of the Enemies of that Cause
could possibly have done, to bring Obloquy and Reproach upon this Work of the
Lord among us. These Things have given Advantage, to such secret Enemies of
this Work, to appear openly against it, who were before silent, and could not
have opposed it, without bringing a Scandal and Infamy upon themselves. These
Things have administered Matter of Triumph, to (...) open Adversaries of special
Grace; and caused them to say, Ab, so would we have it! -- These Things have
pr^v'd Matter of stumbling, to Multitudes of others, who would otherwise have
been at least outwardly (...) to this Work; but they unreasonably judging the
whole Work by these manifest (...), are brought to desert their former
Principle^; and to run over in great Numbers to the Enemies Camp. Such sad
Confusions, Divisions, Desertions of our Profession and Principles, are the
Consequents of these Things, as greatly threaten the Interests of Religion
among us. -- What I have now observed to you, is not merely Matter of
Speculation; but notorious Fact, observed and known and owned by every Body,
but those who have been acted by this mistaken Zeal. -- This, my dear Brother,
is what demands your serious Attention. Has God honored you, to be an
Instrument of special Service in his Cause! What a Pity is it, that you, or any
of your zealous godly Brethren, that join in Sentiment with you, should prove
so much as a remote Occasion of undermining that Work, Which you have been
Instruments of building up!

If now you are offended with me, for this plain dealing and undisguised
Representation of the Case; if you are pleased to rank me among the Pharisees,
and to censure me for an Opposer of the Work of GOD; I shall have this
Advantage of you, I can cheerfully and patiently bear the Reproach, heartily
love you, and pray for you; and I hope, I shall find the Comfort of a forgiving
Spirit.

Let us in the next Place consider what is according to your Account of the
Matter, a good Evidince of our Justification. As joyful Discoveries of Christ
(you tell us) are a vain Hope, without Holiness; so is Holiness without these.
Neither will do alone; but both together may give a Person strong Consolation;
and Evidence that he has fled for Refuge to the Hope set before him. (P. 18.)
-- If this be dist^rctly considered, it will appear to be utterly inconsistent,
with the Rest of your Discourse, as well as inconsistent with the Truth.

1. It will appear utterly inconsistent with the rest of your Discourse. --
With respect to Holiness being in itself an Evidence of our Justification, you
say, There is Death in that Doctrine, it leads right down to the Regions of
Darkness and Habitations of Despair. (p. 14) And among the many Thousands of
strict Pharisees, into whose Hands that little Book may come, is there one but
may think himself a good Christian according to it! No, not one. (p. 15.)
Whence I argue, that if Holiness, in it self, be no Evidence at all of our
Justification, but what has Death in it, and what may be obtained by every
strict Pharisee; and (as you also express it) by every close Hypocrite under
Heaven; then it will be no Evidence at all of our Justification, when it is
accompanied with joyful Discoveries of Christ. Whatever Evidence our joyful
Discoveries may be, Holiness (according to you) can be none at all. This is
necessarily true: or else it must be true, that every strict Pharisee and every
close Hypocrite under Heaven, though they have before no Qualificacation, but
what leads right down to the Regions of Darkness, and Habitations of Despair;
yet when they have (or imagine they have) such Discoveries, they have good
Evidence in their Favor. That is, in plain Terms, Holiness is no Part of our
Evidence that we are in a justified State. For can that be any Part of our
Evidence of a justified State, which leads right down to Hell, and may be
obtained by every strict Pharisee and close Hypocrite under the Heavens. All
the Discoveries in the World will not alter the Nature of Holiness; it will please
GOD no better, and consequently be no other Evidence for us, when accompanied
with joyful Discoveries, than before. The Evidence therefore, must (according
to you) rest wholly upon joyful Discoveries of Christ. And will you stand to
this? No. For you observe --

These filthy Dreamers (who imagine this) are as far from the Truth, as He^^ is
from Heaven. (p. 18.) -- Where are we now! The Evidence from Holiness alone
leads right down to Hell; and may be obtained by every strict Pharisee, and
close Hypocrite under Heaven. It can therefore certainly have Nothing in it,
but what is bad: Nor there can Nothing else lead right down to Hell; there can
be Nothing else in the Character of a strict Pharisee and close Hypocrite. We
have no Evidence then remaining, but joyful Discoveries; and yet he that
receives these alone for Evidences in his Favor, you tell us, is as far from
the Truth, as Hell is from Heaven. That is, Both these Evidences separately
considered, have Nothing at all in 'em. But though they be, Each by it self,
Ciphers; yet Both being put together, they make up a substantial Sum. -- It is
your Part to clear yourself of this Inconsistency in your Discourse, as well as
you can^

2. I also charged this Doctrine of yours, with being contrary to Truth. Which
thus appears: If Joy and Comfort are never right and well grounded, but when
they flow from good Evidence of our justified State, then they ought not to be
considered as the Evidence it self, or any Part of the Evidence of our
Justification. But the former is true; as is fully made appear in the Dialogue
(p. 47.) to which I refer you; and therefore the latter is true also. Our Joy
must arise from and bear Proportion to the Evidence we have of our justified
State, or else we rejoice without Rule or Reason. And if our Evidence of our
Justification be previous to our Rejoicing, and must in Order of Nature go
before it; then our Rejoicing can be no Part of that Evidence. -- The Spirit of
GOD first witnesses with our Spirits, by showing us the Evidence of our
Justification; and thence arises the Joy and Comfort of Believers. When their
Interest in Christ becomes sensible and fully evident to 'em, Joy is then no
longer at their Command; they cannot help rejoicing with Joy unspeakable and
full of Glory. But when any Man rejoices in his good State, without previous
Evidences of it, his Joy is unreasonable and delusive. True it is, there may be
a very quick Transition from Darkness, to spiritual Joy and Comfort; because
the Spirit of GOD can very quickly give good and clear Evidences of
Justification, as was shown you in the Dialogue. -- In a Word, though Joys
Comforts are proposed in the Scripture, as the blessed Privilege of Believers;
yet they are no where considered as an Evidence of our Justification; nor do I
know of one Promise of Salvation, in the whole Bible, made to rejoicing in a
comfortable Persuasion of our Interest in the Favor of GOD. -- Don't forget
here to distinguish between this, which is a Privilege or Benefit, and that
delighting our selves in GOD, which is a Duty, of everlasting Obligation, and
of possible Performance (in some Degree) when those transporting Comforts are
not enjoyed.

The last Thing before me is, to consider that strange Assertion of yours, that
a Believer thus deserted (i.e. so as to want sensible Joy, and ravishing clear^
Manifestation; for that is the true State of the Case, as in the Dialogue) can
as soon create a World, as maintain a Course of vital and true Holiness. Your
Reasons are, that such a Believer's Obedience will be very slavish and selfish;
that it will be very unthankful, and full of spiritual Pride; and that such a
Believer cannot repent of one of his Sins. (P. 20, 21.) These Things you
strongly assert, without any Proof (or at least without any Thing that appears
to me, to carry the least Countenance of Proof in it) either from Scripture, or
the Nature of Things. You must pardon me, Sir, if I am constrained to tell you
upon this Occasion that it was for want of an Acquaintance with, or at least of
a due Attendance to, the Subject you write of, that you have ventured so
confidently to deliver such unaccountable Doctrine.

That I may effectually convince you (and others who embrace the like
Sentiments) of your Mistake in this Matter, I will answer you in the Words of
two very eminent Divines, both of much greater Learning, and of much greater
Experience in these Things, than either You or I.

Dr. COTTON MATHER, in his Case of a troubled Mind, (P 13, -- 15.) thus shows
his Opinion. -- It was well remarked by the great Voctius in his excellent
Asceticks [a Book highly worthy to be studied by all Candidates of the
Ministry] that such bright Luminaries as the Saints of GOD, are they who suffer
these Eclipses. Hypocrites are the wandering Stars, which will not complain of
this Calamity. There may be Reasons for such a Dispensation. -- The Sovereign
GOD will be sometimes Glorified; by having his People to follow Him in the
Dark. Our glorious GOD is never more Glorified, than in our waiting upon a Lord
that hides his Face; never so Glorified, as when we can say, Job XIII. 15. Though
he slay me, yet will I trust in Him. The Love of GOD never shines more brightly
than when we can follow Him in the Dark. When we are afraid, that GOD will cast
us off, and yet our Hearts are fixed, O GOD our Hearts are fixed; that we will
never cast thee off! When we have our Jealousy, whether GOD will own us for His
Children; but still we are determined, that we will forever own Him as our GOD:
When GOD seems to frown on our Devotions; but still our unalterable
Determination is, devoutly to cleave unto Him: When GOD permits a Devil to
molest us with blasphemous Injections from Day to Day; and these Molestations
do but produce more frequent and fervid Acknowledgements of GOD, in ourSouls,
(...) the vexatious Blasphemies: Yea, if GOD seems to treat us as Dog^, but
still we will keep at his Feet, waiting for the Crumbs of his Mercy: This
Glorifies Him wonderfully! To say, O my GOD, Though thou do not let me know,
that thou will save me, yet I will seek thee, I will serve thee, I will never
leave off to follow thee! This Glorifies GOD exceedingly. To follow GOD in the
Dark, it is a thing that requires more Obedience, and more Diligence, than to do
it, when we have the Light of GOD shining on our Paths. And so to do, O Soul
striving to enter the strait Gate, so to do, will mightily help to prepare thee
for that World, where thou shall behold the Face of GOD in Righteousness; that
World, where thou shall have the Face of GOD forever shining full upon thee. --

Dr. OWEN has' largely handled this Case; and obviated all your pretended
Reasons, in that excellent Book of his, upon the CXXX Psalm. P. 293.etc.
Though the Quotation will prove something long, it may be of special Service to
such doubting Christians as are in danger of being driven into Confusion by
this Discourse of yours; and therefore well worthy to be transcribed for their
Service.

Learn (says that excellent Divine) to distinguish between Unbelief and
Jealousy. There is a twofold Unbelief. (1.)That which is universal and
privative, such as is in all unregenerate Persons. They have no Faith at all,
that i^, they are deadMen; and have no Principles of Spiritual Life. This I
speak not of, it is easily distinguished from any Grace being the utter Enemy
and Privation as it were of them all. (2.) There is an Unbelief partial and
negative, consisting in a staggering at, and questioning of the Promises. This
is displeasing to GOD, a Sin which is attended with unknown Aggravations, though
Men usually indulge themselves in it. -- We are ready to suppose, that we have
all the Reasons in the World, every one supposes that he has those that are
more cogent than any other, to question the Promises of Grace, Pardon, and
Forgiveness; and therefore that the Questioning of them is not their Sin, but
their Duty. But pretend what he will, this is speaking against GOD; limiting of
him; and that which is our keeping off from Stedfastness and Comfort.

But now, there may be a Jealousy in a gracious Heart, concerning the Love of
Christ, which is acceptable to him, at least, which he is tender toward, that
may be mistaken for this Questioning of the Promises; and so help to keep the
Soul in Darkness and Disconsolation. This the Spouse expresses in herself,
Cant. viii. 6. Love is strong as Death, Jealously is bard as the Grave, the
Coals thereof are Coals of Fire, which bath a most vehement Flame. Love is the
Foundation. The Root (but yet it bears that Fruit which is bitter, though it be
wholesome) that which fills the Soul with great Perplexities; and makes it cry
out for a nearer, and more secure Admis^io^ into the Presence of Christ. Set me
(^aith the Spouse) as a Seal upon thy Heart, as a Seal upon thin Arm; for
Jealousy is cruel as the Grave. I cannot bear this Distance from thee, these
Fears of being disregarded by thee. Set me as a Seal on thy Heart.

Now this spiritual Jealousy is the Solicitousness of the Mind of a Believer,
who has a sincere Love for Christ, about the Heart, Affection, and good Will
of Christ toward it, arising from a Consciousness of its own Unworthiness to
be beloved by him; or accepted with him. All causeless Jealousy arises from a
secret Sense and Conviction of Unworthiness, in the Person in whom it is; and a
high Esteem of the Person, who is the Object of it; or concerning whose Love
and Affection any one is Jealous. So it is with this spiritual Jealousy, the
Root of it is Love, sincere Love that cannot be quenched with Waters, nor
drowned by Floods. (Verse 7.) which Nothing can utterly prevail against, nor
overcome. This gives the Soul high Thoughts of the glorious Excellencies of
Christ, fills it with Admiration of him. These are mixed with a due Sense of
its own Baseness, Vileness, and Unworthiness to be owned by him, or accepted
with him. Now if these Thoughts on the one Hand, or the other, be not directed,
guided, and managed aright by Faith, which alone can show the Soul, how the
Glory of Christ consists principally in this, that he being so excellent and
glorious, is pleased to love us, with Love inexpressible, who are vile and
sinful; Questionings about the Love of Christ, and those attended with much
Anxiety and Trouble of Mind, will arise. Now this Frame, may be sometimes taken
for a Questioning of the Promises of GOD; and that to be a Defect of Faith,
which is an Excess of Loves or at most, such an irregular acting of it, as the
Lord Christ will be very tender toward; and which is consistent with Peace,
and a due Sense of the Forgiveness of Sins. Mistake not then these, one for
another, left much causeless Unquietness ensue, in the Judgment which you are
to make of yourselves. But you will say, how shall we distinguish between these
two, so as not causelessly to be disquieted and perplexed? I answer briefly.

1. Unbelief, working in and by the questioning of the Promises of GOD, is a
weakening, disheartning, dispiriting Thing. It takes off the Edge of the Soul
from spiritual Duties; and weakens it both as to Delight and Strength.

But Jealousy, that is exercised about the Person and Love of Christ, is of
another Nature, and produces other Effects: It chears, enlivens and enlarges
the Soul, stirs up to Activity, Earnestness and Industry, in it is Enquiries
after Christ. Jealousy (^aith the Spouse) is hard as the Grave; therefore, Set
me as a Seal upon thy Heart, as a Seal upon thine Arm. It makes the Soul
restlesly Pant after more sensible and more assured Communion with Christ. It
stirs up vigorous and active Spirits in all Duties. Every Doubt and Fear, that
it ingenerates, concerning the Love of Christ, stirs up the Soul unto more
Earnestness after him, Delight in him; and sedulous Watching against every
Thing, that may keep it at a Distance from him; or occasion him to hide,
withdraw, or absent himself from it.

2. Unbelief, that questions the Promises, is universally Selfish. It begins
and ends in Self-Love. Desires after Freedom from Guilt, Danger and Punishment,
are the Life and Soul of it. May this End be attained, it has no Delight in
GOD; Nor does it care what Way it be attained, so it may be attained. --

But The Jealousy we speak of, has the Person of Christ and his Excellency,
for its constant Object. These it fills the Mind with, in many and various
Thoughts, still representing him more and more amiable; and more desirable unto
the Soul. So does the Spouse upon the like Occasion, as you may see at large.
Cant. V. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Being at some Loss for his Presence,
for he had withdrawn himself, not finding her wonted Communion and Intercourse
with him, fearing that upon her Provocation she might forfeit her Interest in
his Love; she falls upon the Consideration of all his Excellencies; and thereby
the more inflames her self unto Desires after his Company and Enjoyment. And
these diverse Things may be thus distinguished and discerned.

Thus, ( Sir) you have a full, clear and particular Reply to all your
Reasonings upon this Head; from one of the greatest and best of Divines.

I might easily have refuted your several Reasons particularly; and I might
confront them with Testimonies from the most able and experienced Divines under
each Head distinctly: but it would be a superfluous Labor. -- However, I shall
give you a short Passage out of Mr. SHEPARD's Sound Believer, in Opposition to
the third Reason you give, for this singular Opinion of yours.

Says that excellent Author, You will find this certain, that as the Lord
therefore humbles that he may exalt, so the Lord never refuses to exalt ( in
hiding his Face) but it is to humbls.

And I must beg your Patience, while I just observe how even Mr.CROSSWELL's
Reply has furnished me with a notable Testimony in the Case before us. You your
self ( Sir) have said enough, in a few Lines of your 19th Page, to supersede
the whole of your following strange Doctrine. Pray, turn to that Page where
speaking of the poor deserted Believer, that has (...) Joy, and is in dreadful
Darkness, you make these Concessions: -- None but CHRIST, None but CHRIST, is
the Language of his Soul. And when GOD has bumbled him to the Dust, and made
CHRIST precious to him by the Want of Him, he reveals his Son to him again,and
c. -- Here, by your own Acknowledgement, is the Believer deserted of his Joy
and in dreadful Darkness, yet HUMBLED as the Dust, even before GOD reveal his
Son to him again. Surely then, such an one has an evident Taken of Salvation,
which if he can but discern upon himself, he may fetch present Support and
Comfort from that Word, God gives Grace to the Humble; though it should not
please God to favor him with unquestionable, clear and ravishing
Manifestations of his Love. -- Again, by your own Concession, here is a deserted
Believer to (...) him CHRIST is PRECIOUS; the Language of his very Soul is,
NONE but CHRIST, None but Christ for me. Sure, this is a good Evidence which he
may and ought to take the Comfort of, so long as that Text stands in the Bible,
To you which believe, Christ is (...) -- In fine, by your own Confession, Here
is a deserted believer, to whom God makes Christ precious BY the WANT of Him;
-- which Lunderstand of God's sanctifying to the Believer his Want of the
sensible Comforts of Christ's Presence, and hereby exciting his Faith and Love
to the Lord Jesus, drawing out his Heart in holy Longings and Seekings after
Him and c. In which Case certainly the Believer has a good Evidence, and may
encourage himself from that Scripture, Blessed are ye that hunger now; though at
present he has no such clear unquestionable transporting Tastes and Sights of
the Love of God unto him, as some others enjoy^ -- Dear Sir, are these Things
so, or not? Will you stand to the Concessions you have made! If so, your
Discourse that follows, must stand for Nothing; and serves only to show your
SelfInconsistency -- Oh, Sir, after you had made the Concessions above-recited,
how could you speak with such Contempt of "your humble doubting Christians, as
mere Chimaera's in Religion and explode 'em as imaginary Monsters! How could
you so peremptorily pronounce, that "They who don't feel any JOY in the Holy
Ghost, don't exercise Humility "? How could you paint out such, as "always
proud, sullen, and obstinate in the sight of God; as hardened and unrelenting,
and incapable of any Repentance, but only Arminian or Legal; as those who cannot
be thankful for Jesus Christ; as very slavish and selfish in their Obedience,
like Doeg detained before the Lord; and though their Obedience be so bad, yet
depending upon that, for Want of a CHRIST to depend upon!" -- It Is surprising
to me, that you should not see, you were in all this Representation of their
Case, at least contradicting yourself, if not also the Scriptures! -- And how
was it, that a godly Fear didn't restrain your Pen in this Case, lest you
should incur the very Charge you have so liberally thrown out upon others, of
offending against the Generation of God's Children! -- Will you now accept a
Reproof from Mr. ERSKINE, one whom you have cited as a good Authority! In his
last Sermon on Gal. ii. 20. he has these Words under the 4th Use. -- Hence see
the Darkness that obscures many Gospel^Sermons, even among these who are
otherwise evangelical yet in this they are bemisted, that they cannot take up
(...) Assurance or (...) in the Matter of FAITH, distinct from that Assurance
of (...) which follows after Faith; nor take up the Assurance, Application, and
Appropriation of Faith,ground^^ upon the WORD of GOD, which is the Duty of all
that hear the Gospel, distinct from the (...) of Sense, ^ounded upon the WORK
of GOD, which is the Privilege of Believers (...) Times. How miserably do many
confound the Grounds of Faith with the Marks of Faith? and c. The whole is
worth transcribing; but I must for bear.

Thus, SIR, I have given you my Reasons, why I am not convinced by your Reply.
I can truly say, it is grievous to me to be called to a public Dispute with
one, who has the Character of a zer. Friend to vital Piety. -- But I must have
more Honor for the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and for his Truths, than for his frail
and imperfect Children, though I ought to love them also sincerely for his Sake.
-- Oh! ^ how much better would it be for you and I, to join Heart and Hand, in
united Endeavors to carry o^ the Cause of CHRIST, than to stumble poor Souls,
that are enquiring the Way to Zion, and to give the Adversary an Occasion of
Triumph, by these our Debates!

I resolve, by the help of Grace, that no Provocation you can give me, shall
prevent Brotherly Love from continuing^ or make me cease to pray for the
Success of your Labors. -- I hope to meet you in that blessed State, where you
and I shall never differ, in the Methods of glorifying GOD; but shall eternally
join in that Anthem of Praise, -- Unto him that has loved us, and washed us
from our Sins in his own Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God and
his Father ^ to him be Glory and Dominion, forever and ever. Amen.

I am, SIR, Your Brother, and Servant, Theophilus.
Jan. 29. 1742, 3.

ERRATA. Page14. lin. 33. read Justifica. -- P. 21. I. 15. ^. may have -- P.
23. l. 29. r. State is --


