The clearest and surest Marks of our being so led by the SPIRIT of GOD, as to
demonstrate that we are the Children of GOD. SET FORTH IN Several Discourses
FROM Romans VIII. XIV. Part of which was delivered AT THE Thursday-Lecture in
Boston, January 13. 1742, 3.

By Nathanael Appleton, M. A. Pastor of the first Church in Cambridge.

Ephesians. 4.4. There is one Body, and ONE SRIRIT. 1 John 3.24. -- And hereby we
know that he abides in us, BY THE SPIRIT which he has given us. BOSTON,
Printed by Green, Bushel, and Allen, for D. Henchman in Cornhill. 1743.

THE PREFACE.
AFTER I had delivered some Part of the following Discourses, at the public
Lecture in BOSTON; I was repeatedly desired to give a Copy of the several
Sermons which I had some Years ago preached to my own People upon this Subject.
Preached at Cambridge, 1739.
And when I called to Mind the general Acceptance they met with, when preached
at Home; as well as the Approbation that Part of them met with, which was
delivered Abroad, I yielded to the Request.

But the grand Inducement was this, that I apprehended it to be a very useful
Subject in itself, and a very seasonable one for the present Day.

For when there are so many Disputes among Christians; what will serve better
to compose, and calm their Spirits toward each other, than to be sensible of
this, that through the Weakness, Ignorance, and remaining Corruption in
Christians, it may so happen, that they may widely differ in some Points from
each other; and yet be the true Children of God? And what is there that has
such a happy Tendency to restore, and preserve Charity, Peace, and Union one
with another; as a full Persuasion that some who have different Sentiments from
us, may, in the general, be under the Influence of the same gracious Spirit
with us, Friends of CHRIST, united to him by Faith as well as we, as much
concerned for the Honor and Interest of CHRIST as we, and as much concerned to
get to Heaven as we, and may have as sure a Title to that glorious Inheritance
as we?

Moreover, as there are so many Disputes about the true Marks and Signs of
Adoption, and as to the Persons that may be reckoned the dear Children of GOD;
it cannot be unseasonable, when the glorious Privileges of GOD'S Children, and
the great Duty of seeking the clearest Evidences of being of that happy Number,
are set forth; at the same Time to point out the many false and uncertain Marks
that People are apt to fix upon, and rest satisfied with, that such
self-flattering and self-deceiving Souls, may be shaken off from their false
Foundations, and build their Hopes upon no other than what is laid in CHRIST,
and in his Gospel.

And although all who call themselves the Children of GOD, allow that the being
led and governed by the SPIRIT of GOD, is the surest Mark of Adoption; yet even
here Christians very often differ, and are in Danger of making Mistakes; making
some Things to be the Operation of GOD'S SPIRIT, that are not; or denying some
Things to be the Work of the SPIRIT of GOD, which do really come from him.

Accordingly, several of the ensuing Discourses are taken up in setting this
Matter in the truest and clearest Light I was capable of; giving the Scripture,
and only the Scripture Marks and Signs of being led by the SPIRIT of GOD. And
by these Rules I desire every Reader would carefully examine himself, and not
rest satisfied in any Tokens of Regeneration and Adoption, short hereof.

In reading this little Book, you will meet with very close Questions; I desire
you would read them distinctly, and after a serious Pause upon on them, put
them very closely to your selves, and let Conscience speak the Truth.

I entreat Christians of every Party, who look over these Discourses, to do it
with Candor, and let the unworthy Author have an Interest in your Prayers.

And may the blessed SPIRIT, who (I hope) assisted me in composing, assist you
in reading, and so accompany these Things into your Hearts, as that you may
know by happy Experience, what it is to be under his blessed and gracious
Influences. And may that SPIRIT of GOD, who searches all Things, even the deep
Things of GOD, assist you in the Trial of your selves by his own Rules, and may
he shine upon his own Work wherever it is wrought, and carry it on in your
Souls, from one Degree to another, 'till it shall be perfected in Glory.

N. Appleton.

ERRATA.
PAge 9. last Line but one, for even, read wherein. p. 11. l. 12. f. the, r.
their. p. 31. l. 2. dele that they are, r. and. l. 3. add of the same divine
Spirit. p. 34. l. 12, 13. f. those, r. these. p. 39. l. 8. f. Effects r.
Estates. p. 40. l. 18. f. is r. as. p. 44. 2d Line from the Bottom, f. thus r.
this. p. 64. l. 8. f. this r. the. l. 22. f. Titles r. Tokens. p. 69. l. 8. f.
that r. than. p. 83. l. 1. f. go r. goes. l. 6. from the Bottom f. Effects r.
Estates. p. 86. l. 8. f. they r. it. p. 89. l. 19. f. when r. whom. p. 100. l.
9. f. dictates r. deters. l. 15. f. they r. that. p. 108. l. 12. f. distant r.
different. p. 123. l. 9. f. Nature r. native. p. 133. l. 9. dele yet. p. 139.
l. 10. add will. p. 141. l. 15. f. your r. their. p. 156. l. 3. from the
Bottom, f. secretly r. sensibly. p. 176. l. 17. f. thoughtful r. thankful. l.
5. from the Bottom f. are r. is. p. 177. l. 5. f. them r. they.

There are several lesser Errors and false Pointings, which are left for the
Reader to Correct.

Every Child of GOD, led by one SPIRIT.
ROMANS viii. 14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons
of God.


THE whole World of Mankind is divided into two Sorts, Saints and Sinners; the
Children of God, and the Children of the wicked One. And that which
distinguishes Men, and truly fixes one or the other of these Characters upon
them, is the Spirit within, which leads and governs them. For every Man is a
Child of God, or a Child of the Devil, according to the Spirit he is governed
by. They who are under the tyrannical Power of carnal, worldly, and wicked
Principles are of their Father the Devil; whilst such as are governed by a
divine and gracious Principle are the Children of God. My Text leads to
consider only this latter Sort of Persons. For as many as are led by the Spirit
of God, they are the Sons of God. As many, how many soever, or what Nation or
People, of what Station, and Condition of Life soever, and what different
Persuasion soever as to some particular Points of Christianity, and whatever
Apprehension others may have of them, or they may have of others; yet if they
are led by the Spirit of God, that is, if they are under the gracious Guidance
and Government of the blessed Spirit, they are the Children of God.

And as so many who are thus led and governed are the Children of God, so there
are no more to be reckoned in that happy Number. For let Men be never so thoro'
in their Knowledge, never so orthodox in their Principles, let them make never
so high a Profession, and appear never so zealous about religious Matters, let
their Character run never so high among Men, even as the most eminent Saints;
yet if they be not led, if they be not inlivened and influenced by the Spirit
of God, he will not own them for his Sons, or his Daughters. For if any Man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, as in the 9th Verse of the
Context.

And now without any further Opening the Words, or taking up your Time, in
showing how the Words stand related to the preceding or following Part of the
Chapter, which might afford many profitable Thoughts to us, I shall proceed
immediately to consider the doctrinal Truth which lies very obvious in the
Words, viz.

DOCTRINE. The surest and clearest Mark of our being the Children of God, is
our being led and governed by the Spirit of God.
Here are two Propositions that lie very fairly to be spoken to, viz.

I. Prop. Every Child of God is led, and governed by one and the SAME SPIRIT;
even the Spirit of God.

II. Prop. The surest and clearest Mark of our being the Children of God, is
our being led and governed by HIS SPIRIT.

I. Prop. Every Child of God is led and governed by one and the SAME SPIRIT;
even the Spirit of God.

The same divine Spirit, the same gracious and heavenly Principle animates and
actuates every Saint. For as all those who are led by the Spirit of God are his
Children; so all his Children are led by his Spirit. There is not so much as
one real Saint upon Earth, but what is under the gracious and powerful
Influence of the divine Spirit, as the prevailing governing Principle in the
Soul. Every Saint and true Believer is united to God and Christ by the holy
Spirit. They dwell in him, and he in them by the holy Spirit, that is given to
them 1 John 4.13.
. There is one Body, and there is one Spirit Ephesians. 4.4.
. As one Soul or Spirit animates the humane Body, even all the Organs and
Members of it, so the Church, that is, the living Members thereof, which are
the Body of Christ, are animated and governed by one Spirit. They are all born
of the same Spirit, and so have the same divine Life breathed into them. They
have through Christ access by one Spirit unto the Father Ephesians. 2.18.
. And every true Believer is united one to another by the same Spirit that
dwells in them.

As the Son of God, the Seed of the Woman, was promised immediately after the
Fall, and in the Fullness of Time was sent into the World, to make Atonement
for Sin, and to make Way for God to pardon and save all that believe in him: So
the Spirit of God was sent into the World to begin and carry on the Work of
divine Grace in Men's Soul's. And this Spirit has been in the World operating
upon, and leading and governing the Saints in all Ages from the Beginning of
the World unto this Day.

Indeed we read in our Savior's Time (which was near four thousand Years after
the Fall of Adam) that the Holy Ghost was not YET given, because that Jesus was
not yet glorified John 7.39.
. And he tells his Disciples that it was expedient for them, that he should go
away, for if he did not depart, the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, would
not come unto them, but if he departed he would send him unto them John 16.7.
. Which Expressions may at first Glance look as if the Holy Ghost or the Spirit
of God, had not been in the World, nor operating upon the Hearts of Men, 'till
that Time.

But now that Coming of the Holy Ghost which Christ foretells and promises, is
not to be understood as if the Spirit of God had never been at all manifested
before that Time; but it doubtless intends the more glorious Manifestation of
him, in those extraordinary and miraculous Gifts which were bestowed upon the
Apostles, and other Disciples, after Christ's Ascension: And also the
extraordinary gracious Influences which he had on the Hearts of Multitudes at
that Time.

But it is by no means to be understood as if the Spirit of God had not been
operating upon the Hearts of Men before that Time. For it is certain that the
Spirit of God had been communicating both Gifts and Graces, through all the Ages
of the Church.

All the Prophets of Old were inspired with the Gift of Prophecy, from the same
Spirit; for it was when the Spirit of the Lord was upon them, that they
prophesied. For the Prophecy came not in old Time by the Will of Man, but holy
Men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost 2 Pet. 1.21.
.

Moreover, the same divine Spirit which has wrought powerfully and effectually
upon true Believers since the Coming of Christ, wrought in and upon every
gracious Saint from the Beginning of the World to that Time. The same Spirit
that opened the Heart of Lydia to receive the Word, opened the Eyes of the
Psalmist to behold the wondrous Things out of God's Law. The Holy Spirit which
the Psalmist prays might not be taken from him, and the free Spirit which he
prays God to uphold him with Psalm. 51.11, 12.
, was the same Spirit who has been with, and has upheld every Christian in the
Ways of God, and by whose mighty Power they have been preserved through Faith
unto Salvation. In short, there have been Strivings of the Spirit of God from
the Beginning: And every one that has been bro't into a State of Grace, and so
made a Child of God, from Adam to this Day, it has been by the gracious and
powerful Operations of this Spirit.

And as there is that Unity of the Spirit by which every real Member of Christ
is united to him and to one another; so there is a great Uniformity in the
Operations of this blessed Spirit, upon the Soul of every Saint; that is to
say, he in the General forms the same Temper and Disposition in them; puts them
under the Influence of the same good Principle, and leads them to the same
gracious Views and Designs in their Actions, so that it may be said that in the
General there is the same gracious Temper and Principle, the same gracious
Views and Designs in every Child of God. And therefore whatever Difference
there may be in their Sentiments upon some religious Points, and how hardly
soever they may judge and treat one another; yet say, that if they are the
Children of God they are in the General under the governing Influence of the
same blessed Spirit; and it may be said of all of them, that a Principle of
Grace wrought by the same Spirit, is the prevailing Principle in their Souls.

And because this is a very important Truth; and yet perhaps not so much
thought upon as it should be, and the due Consideration of which would serve
very much to direct Christians how to conduct themselves one toward another, I
will therefore spend a few Minutes in illustrating and confirming this Point,
and then proceed to the other Proposition which I have my Eye mainly upon.

Here then let me briefly say,

1. The Children of God often differ from one another in many Points, and
sometimes carry these Differences to a very great Length.

2. Notwithstanding this, they are really under the governing Influence of the
same divine Spirit, in the General.

3. I will then mention some uniform Operations of the Spirit upon their Souls
and show wherein they agree.

1. The Children of God often differ from one another in many Points, and
sometimes carry their Differences to a very great Length.

For although God has favored his Church with as clear and as full a Revelation
as is needful to instruct us in every Thing necessary to be known or done; yet
as to many other Things the Revelation is not so particular, but it leaves Room
and gives Occasion for a great Variety of Opinions among the Disciples of
Christ: Which is too evident to need a Proof, and the Instances too many to
pretend to mention them. The many Disputes that have been among Christians
about doctrinal, yea, and practical Points from the Apostles Times to this Day,
are a Demonstration hereof.

And these Differences in Opinion and in Practice, have arisen very much from
the different Education, and from the different Advantages Men have had for
gaining Light and Knowledge; yea, and from the different Powers and Capacities
of Men for seeing into Things, and judging upon them, some having a much
greater Reach and Extent of Thought than others. These Differences may also
arise from the different Humor and Temper of Men, for there is such a
Difference even in Men's Constitutions, as inclines some Men to one Way of
Thinking, and some to another Way.

But then Christians have not contented themselves with having different
Opinions, and different Methods of practicing in some particular Instances; but
have indulged themselves in hard Thoughts, and severe Censuring one another.
One has judged his Neighbor, and his Neighbor has despised him. Oh how have
the Children of God through Weakness and Ignorance in themselves been charging
these and worse Things upon their christian Brethren! How common is it for the
Children of God to place so much of their Religion in those particular Things
wherein they differ (or even they think they differ) from others, as to condemn
all that don't come exactly into the same Sentiments, and run the same Lengths
with them? -- Nay, it would be a Breach of christian Charity, not to suppose,
that even God's own Children have persecuted one another, according to the
Power that has been in their Hands: Casting them out of their Communion, and
loading them with Reproaches, and inflicting heavy Punishments upon them, nay,
I dare not say to the contrary, but that God's own Children have been so far
left to their own Weakness, Ignorance and Prejudice with the other remaining
Lusts, as to kill one another for their Differences in Religion, thinking
herein to do God good Service.

2. Notwithstanding this, all the Children of God are under the governing
Influence of the same divine Spirit in the General.

Though the Difference be sometimes so wide between true Christians as I have
mentioned, yet they are united by the Spirit of God, and are in the General
under the prevailing Influence of the same gracious Principle.

But here I would not be mistaken; I don't say that in the Things wherein they
differ, or wherein they uncharitably censure or persecute each other, that in
these they are under the governing Influence of the divine Spirit. No, the
judging and treating each other in such a severe and uncharitable Manner, is
frequently from their Weakness and Ignorance, and too, too often from the
Remains of Pride, Passion, and other Lusts, that are found in them. But what I
mean is, that some who have gone even to such extraordinary Lengths in
contending about religious Matters as I have mentioned, may notwithstanding be
under the governing Influence of the same good Spirit, and the same gracious
Principle in general, with those they contend with, and treat after such a
Manner.

For although all the Children of God are led by the Spirit of God, yet this
don't suppose the having a Spirit of Infallibility; so as to be led into every
Truth whether necessary or no, or to be kept from every Error: Nor does it
suppose every Saint to be so under the governing and restraining Influences of
the Spirit, as to be constantly kept from all out-breakings of Sin and
Corruption, or from the Power of every Temptation. This would be a State of
Perfection which the blessed Apostle Paul had not attained unto Phil. 3.12.
, nor is it to be expected in the present World.

The Spirit of God is not concerned to have every one that is born of the
Spirit, perfectly to agree in all their Thoughts, and in all their Methods of
acting, as to the Non-essentials of Christianity; but for wise and holy Ends
suffers it to be otherwise. He don't see Cause to save them from every Error,
that is not fatal, nor from every Degree of Corruption that is not inconsistent
with a Principle of Grace. And if we don't allow this to be the Truth, I know
not where to find any of the Sons of God. It is the Confession of one of
Christ's own Apostle's, That in many Things we offend all Jam. 3.2.
. And who can understand his Errors? Cleanse thou me from secret Faults, was
the humble Acknowledgment and Prayer of the Man after God's own Heart Psalm.
19.12.
.

So that Men may run into some Errors in Judgment, and may practice upon these
Errors so as widely to differ from one another, and hardly censure, and
severely persecute each other; and yet it is possible they may all of them have
the Spirit of God leading and governing them in their general Course.

Nay, I think I may venture to say, that even the gracious Principle that is
within them, through the Ignorance and Error that God suffers still to abide with
them, may be the Means of some of the Contentions of christian Brethren, and of
their zealous Persecutions of each other. That is, it is possible that the Aim
and the Principle may be good in both Parties, a Concern for the Honor of God
and Christ, and for preserving the supposed Truths, and maintaining the
supposed Duties of his holy Religion, may prompt both Parties to be severe upon
one another. And the Error may be only in the Understanding and Judgment, and
so in applying this Concern for the Honor of God, and of Religion, in a wrong
Case, or in an undue Measure, or in an improper Method.

My Meaning is, that Men who are apparently in great Opposition to each other,
may have the same honest good Principle at the Bottom. And their Ignorance,
Weakness and Mistake is the Cause of their opposing one another. And they are
really contending for the same Thing ultimately, but in a different Scheme.

And why should it be thought an extravagant Degree of Charity to suppose this?
Don't we see Men pursuing the Profits of this World in very different, yea, in
seemingly contrary Ways: And yet we have no doubt but that both of them have a
sufficient Love to the World, and real Desires to get what they can of it. One
Trader we shall see selling his Goods as dear as he can, thinking that to be
the likeliest Way to get an Estate. Another we shall see selling his
Commodities as cheap as possibly he can afford, thinking this to be the most
probable Way of increasing his Custom, and so that he shall find his Profit in
the Conclusion. Now these Men may think amiss of each other, and be offended at
each other, especially when their Business may interfere, but who will
question, but that they are both set upon gaining the World? And why may it not
sometimes be so among Men as to the Things of God and of Religion? Nay, it must
needs be so in many of those Cases wherein we see Christians contending with
one another. For we shall by an intimate Acquaintance with some of both
Parties, be obliged in a Judgment of Charity to rank them among the Children of
God.

Who ever doubted but that Paul and Barnabas were both good Men, eminently holy
and good Men; and yet they who had been such intimate Friends and Companions in
the Service of Christ and of his Gospel; differed at length and fell into such
a sharp Contention, that they departed asunder the one from the other Acts
15.39.
. And whoever reads the Occasion of it, will be led to fear that it was not
owing entirely to Ignorance and Mistake of Judgment, but that Passion and
Self-Will and such like Remnants of the old Man, had a Hand in the Quarrel,
which very likely they saw, and were humble for afterward.

But now you will be ready to say, that if such who are led by the same Spirit
even the Spirit of God, do oftentimes so widely differ, and have such fierce
Oppositions, wherein do they agree? Or what uniform Influences of the Spirit
may be found in them? And this leads me to the third Thing proposed under the
first Proposition.

3. I am to mention some Instances, wherein all true Christians agree, or some
of the uniform Operations of the blessed Spirit upon their Souls.

For whatever Difference or Opposition there is among Christians; yet the
divine Spirit is uniform in his Operations and Influences upon their Souls. And
consequently there must be in the general, the same Views, the same Principles
governing those to whom the Spirit of God comes in a saving effectual Manner.
For although there may appear some Diversity in the Operations of the Spirit; yet
this Appearance arises from the different Tempers, the different Education, the
different Capacities, the different Employments, Temptations and Circumstances
of the Persons who are wrought upon, and not from any real Difference in the
Operations of the Spirit himself.

1. With Respect to true Christians (for of such only am I speaking) there is
in all of them, the same Principle of FAITH in God, and in the Lord Jesus
Christ, wrought by the divine Spirit.

Every true Christian is led by the Spirit to believe not only that God is, and
that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him; but is also led by the
same Spirit to believe that Jesus Christ is; and that he is the only and the
almighty Savior. Accordingly every true Believer is led to have his Dependence
upon the Lord Jesus Christ for Salvation.

It is possible that true Believers may have some different Conceptions as to
some Circumstances relating to the Way of our Salvation by Christ, and may have
different Ways of explaining their Faith in, and Dependence upon him: But they
have all really the same Trust in Christ, and hearty Acceptance of him, wrought
in them by the Spirit. For this Faith according to the Gospel Covenant is
absolutely necessary to the Being of a true Christian, and to his finding
Acceptance with God, and obtaining Salvation.

2. In every Child of God there is the same real SORROW for SIN, and HATRED of
it, wrought by the Spirit of God.

Wherever the Spirit of God works effectually besure he convinces of Sin, and
begets real Grief and Shame for every Thing which Conscience accuses the Man of
as sinful, and there is a real Hatred begotten in all such, of every Thing that
appears to them as sinful, and there is a Resolution and Care wrought in every
such Soul, to depart from all Manner of Sin, even from their own Iniquity Psalm.
18.23.
, and such a Repentance is the only Repentance unto Salvation. Mark 16.16.


Indeed the Children of God may differ about some Things whether they be sinful
or no. For although as to moral Sins in general, especially the grosser Ones,
they are so plainly set down in the Bible, that nothing but gross Ignorance and
great Carelessness would lead Men into any Error as to them, yet there are some
Things wherein the Revelation is not so clear, but there may very easily
Disputes arise whether this or that be a Sin or no. But in all the Children of
God there is this Principle wrought, by his Spirit, heartily to mourn and
grieve for all that they are sensible they have done amiss, and to hate and
strive against every Thing that appears plainly to them to be contrary to the
Will of God.

3. There is in every Child of God the same Principle of SINCERE and SUPREME
LOVE to God and Christ, by the same Spirit.

This is absolutely necessary for every true Christian, and to his being such
an one. For to love the Lord our God with all our Heart, etc. is the first and
great Commandment Mat. 22.37, 38.
. And unless we love the Lord Jesus Christ above every Thing in this World;
yea, and above our very Lives, we cannot be his Disciples Luke 14.26.
. Accordingly every Child of God has the Love of God and of Christ, shed abroad
in his Heart by the Holy Ghost, whereby he has the highest Esteem of God, and
of the Redeemer, real Desires after him, and Delight in him, and an hearty
Concern for his Honor and Glory.

But now a Zeal for the Honor of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ, for Want of
Knowledge to direct it, is oftentimes the Cause of great Divisions, and sharp
Contentions among christian Brethren. For one thinks that by these Doctrines,
and by these Methods of Conduct, Christ is dishonored, and so he is zealous
against them. The other thinks they rather tend to the Honor of Christ, and so
is as zealous for them. In both which Cases they may possibly be governed by
the same Principle of Love, and have the Honor of Christ equally at Heart. And
it is the Ignorance or Mistake of one or both that causes the Difference.

Again,

4. There is in all of them the same Principle of SUBJECTION and OBEDIENCE to
God.

Every Child of God has a Sense of his divine Authority, and of his sovereign
Right to prescribe Laws to all his Creatures, and he looks upon the revealed
Will of God in his Word, as the Rule for him to walk by, and the Language of
every gracious Soul is, Whatsoever the Lord my God shall say unto me, that will
I do.

But now the Children of God may differ in their Opinion in some lesser, and
more obscure Points, so far as that one may think that a Duty, which the other
thinks rather a Sin than a Duty, and so from the same Principle one may refrain
from it, and the other comply with it.

Again,

5. There is in all the Children of God the same Spirit of LOVE and CHARITY
toward Mankind.

Every Child of God loves his Brother, and in some Degree comes up to the
Command, of loving his Neighbor as himself. And although a great Part of what
passes in the World for brotherly Love is mere Counterfeit, and is only in Word
and in Tongue; yet I have so much Charity as to believe that true real Love and
Charity is sometimes concealed under such Carriage and Behavior toward one
other as seems very opposite to it.

For we must understand that this Charity to our Neighbor, consists not only
in thinking as well as we can of him, but in wishing well to him, and in doing
those Things which we apprehend will be most useful and beneficial to him, both
to his Soul and Body. And now this gives a great Latitude in the Manner of
treating one another; and yet preserving a Principle of Love at the Bottom. And
the different Treatment may arise from the different Apprehensions Men may have
of manifesting their Love to one another. For Charity toward our Neighbor,
don't suppose, but that we may see his Faults, and apprehend him to be in
Errors, and if so then the Principle of Love may work very differently,
according to the different Apprehensions Men may have as to the Manner of
treating such a Neighbor, so as will be the greatest Kindness to him.

Thus one who looks upon his Neighbor to be in a Fault, or in an Error,
apprehends a mild and gentle Management will best Answer the End, for
convincing and reclaiming a faulty Brother, and in this Way manifests his Love
to him. Another thinks that such a gentle Way of treating him, would be hurtful
to the Man himself, and dangerous to others, and so from the same Principle of
Love, proceeds in a more severe and rigorous Manner with him. And now sometimes
one, and sometimes the other of these may be in the Wrong in the Application of
their different Means to recover their Brother that is in an Error or overtaken
with a Fault: And yet they may have an equal Love to him, and an equal Desire
to recover him out of the Snare that he is fallen into.

And thus we see how that all the Children of God are under the governing
Influence of the same Spirit, even the Spirit of God, and are animated and
actuated in the general from the same divine and gracious Principle. And the
many Differences and Oppositions that are among those, are no sufficient
Objection against this Doctrine. For the Differences and Dissentions that are
among them, are about lesser Matters and not the essential Points of
Christianity, and they arise from their Ignorance and Short-Sightedness, their
Prejudices of Education; or from the Remainders of Pride and Corruption, which
God for wise and holy Ends suffers to be among his Children in the present
State.

So that abating the Remains of Sin and Corruption in the Saints; and all that
is necessary to bring them to rights; that is to a regular uniform Way of
thinking and acting, according to the uniform Operations of the Spirit, is to
bring them to the same Knowledge and Understanding of Things. For they having
the same gracious Dispositions in their Hearts, if they knew as much, and though it
alike, they would manage alike. But because they are weak and ignorant, they
think as Children, and speak as Children, and they scuffle, and oftentimes
quarrel as Children. And they must come to riper Years, to more Knowledge; yea,
to Perfection in Grace, before they will entirely put away those childish
Things.

I shall conclude at present, and so finish this Proposition, by making two or
three practical Reflections.

I. Since every Child of God is under the governing Influence of the same
blessed Spirit in general; notwithstanding the Differences that are among them:
Surely we ought to be very cautious in judging and censuring those who in some
Points do differ from us.

Nothing is more common than for Christians to judge hardly of those who differ
from them, either in doctrinal or practical Points. For all are ready to think
that Truth and Right are so plainly on their Side, that they cannot think those
to be honest who dissent from them; but that they wilfully shut their Eyes
against the Light. This, I say, is commonly the Way of all Sides, and
consequently one Side, or both, must needs be in the Wrong. Surely then it
becomes all to be humble and modest wherein they differ, and not be rash in
condemning all by Wholesale, who don't come into the same Sentiments, and the
same Methods of Management with them. For some of those that you thus judge,
may, for ought you know, be under the Leadings of the same divine Spirit, and
be governed by the same gracious Principle, and be the precicious Sons of Zion,
as well as you.

And therefore before you judge hardly of any professing Christians, you must
observe, as far as you can, what Spirit they appear to be governed by. But
because this lies very much out of your Sight, you must take Care that you
don't assume the divine Prerogative.

Instead therefore of your being sudden, and free in your judging of others,
especially as to their State, consider whether they don't appear to act from as
good a Principle as you. And whether about those Things wherein you agree they
don't appear to be as much concerned for the Honor of God, and the Interest of
Christ as you. Whether they don't appear to hate Sin, and to love Holiness, as
much as you. And in short, Whether they don't appear as conscientiously careful
to do the Will of God as you; and if so, why then should you not think as
charitably of them as of your selves? Nay, and if they should be so
uncharitable as to censure and condemn you, and although this should be contrary
to the Word and Will of God, and so should arise from their Ignorance, or
remaining Corruption; yet you must take Heed of judging and condemning them.
For although rash judging be a Fault, yet the Case may be such as that there may
be so much Ignorance, Mistake and Prejudice in Men's Judgments, that their
censuring and condemning others may not be incompatible with a State of Grace.
Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not, and let not him which
eats not, judge him that eats, for God has received him Romans 4.3, 4, 10,
13.
.

There are many whom a proud, uncharitable World judge and condemn whom God
will receive; for he sees and knows they are governed by his Spirit: And many
others who are applauded for eminent Saints will be rejected, because Christ
sees they have nothing of the Spirit of God in them. Who art thou that judge
another Man's Servant; to his own Master he stands or falls. Why do thou
then judge they Brother? Or why do thou set at naught thy Brother? We shall
all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ. Let us not therefore judge one
another any more.

2. We must beware of abusing the Doctrine before us, by indulging our selves
in Ignorance, or giving way to our Corruptions, flattering our selves all the
while, that we are in the General under the governing Influence of the Spirit
of God.

Many People are apt to imagine that they are led by the Spirit of God when
they are not: And that although they differ from this, and the other, and although
they behave themselves very much amiss; yet they flatter themselves, that all
this is consistent with their being led by the Spirit of God in general. But
here Men must beware that they don't deceive themselves, as well as others in
this Way. For you must remember that Multitudes flatter themselves that they
are led by the Spirit of God, when they are really less by the Spirit of
Ignorance, and this very often wilful and allowed Ignorance: Or with a Spirit
of Error and Delusion: And this through Carelessness and Sloth, because they will
not take Pains to search out the Truth. Sometimes Men think they are inspired
with a flaming Zeal for the Glory of God, when perhaps it is all from a Spirit
of Pride and Passion, or of a particular Party. And Persons are oftentimes
thought to be Men of Steadiness and Constancy, when perhaps there has been only
a wilful and an obstinate Spirit all the while. I say, many will flatter
themselves that they have a good Spirit, and that they do Things from an honest
and gracious Principle, and out of Regard to God and Duty, when perhaps there
was only some carnal, corrupt and wicked Principle at the Bottom.

For as the Devil can, and does sometimes transform himself into an Angel of
Light, so by his subtle Devices Men's Lusts and irregular Passions will
oftentimes so transform themselves as to appear like Virtues and Graces of the
Spirit.

You must therefore beware of being deceived this Way. And you must consider
that although there may be different Opinions, and hard Judgings, among God's own
Children; yet that many, and I may say, most of the religious Controversies and
Differences, are among those that have the least of the Spirit of God; and very
commonly among those that have nothing at all of that good Spirit within them.

If therefore you would judge what Spirit you are of, and by what Spirit you
are led, you must see whether you can find those uniform Influences of the
Spirit, that are found in all good Men, and in which they all agree. You must
see whether there be that Sorrow for, and real Hatred of all Sin; whether there
be an hearty Faith in Christ, and Dependence upon him, and Subjection to him.
Whether there be that sincere and supreme Love to God and Christ, and that
fervent Love and Charity to our Neighbor, which the Spirit of God works in
every Soul where he dwells.

And if you don't find these Things, you may depend upon it, that you have not
the Spirit of God; how zealous soever you may be for some Things in Religion,
and how earnestly soever you may contend for them.

And let me tell you farther, that if these Operations of the Spirit which are
found in every Child of God are very prevalent, they will prevent a great many
of the unhappy Differences which are among Christians. For the sharp
Contentions that are among them are not from the Strength of their Graces, but
from their Ignorance, Weakness, and remaining Corruptions. And the more Grace
Men have, the less Difference in their Opinions, besure less Difference in
their Affection. So that when Christians, good Christians, are contending about
Matters of Religion, the more fierce and furious they are against one another,
the less of the Spirit of God; for this Spirit, though it will lead them to
contend earnestly for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, even for the
fundamental Doctrines of Christianity; yet in lesser and lower Points it will
teach them to be humble, meek and modest, and to exercise that Charity toward
their christian Neighbors that suffers long, and is kind, that is not
envious and vaunting, that is not puffed up, nor does it behave it self
unseemly, -- that is not easily provoked, -- bears all Things, believes all
Things, hops all Things, endures all Things 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 7.
. Now therefore when Differences are carried on among Christians without any of
this Charity, but instead thereof there is a despising, a judging, and defaming
one another, and dividing and separating Principles are freely indulged, they
only deceive themselves, if they think they are led by the Spirit of God.

3. How earnest should we be that the Spirit of God would UNITE Christians more
and more in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment, which might prevent many
of the sinful and unhappy Differences that are among those whom we have reason
to hope are led by the same gracious Spirit.

How earnest should we be that he would scatter the Darkness and the Ignorance
that is upon the Minds of some good Christians: And free them more from the
Remains of Corruption, from whence their Differences arise. And that he would
give them the same Understanding, and unite them in the same Judgment, as well
as in the same internal Principle of Grace. For you must know that although good
Men may think and act very differently in some Things; yet there is a true and
a false, a right and a wrong Way. You must therefore pray earnestly that the
Spirit of Truth would lead you into Truth, and conduct you in the Paths of
Righteousness for his Name's Sake.

And as ever you expect or desire this, you must be honest and upright. For the
Integrity of the Upright shall guide them Prove. 11.3.
. You must be meek and teachable, for the meek will he guide in Judgment, the
Meek will he teach his Way Psalm. 25.9.
. Moreover, you must be submissive and obedient to the Will of God, ready at
all Times to comply with whatever appears to be his Will. If any Man will do
his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God John 7.17.
.

In a Word, the Differences that are among good Men, (as I have told you) arise
from Ignorance, Weakness, Prejudices of Education, remains of Pride, Passion,
Self-Will, and other Corruptions: And therefore the Way to compose these
unhappy Differences, is to get more and more from under the unhappy Influence
of these Things. And because they will not be thoro'ly purged away till we get
to Heaven, so we must wait till we get to those happy Regions of Light and
Love, before we shall see a perfect and delightful Harmony among the Sons of
God. Oh! then, my dearly Beloved! how should the Thoughts of this recommend
Heaven unto us, and fill us with longing Desires after that blessed Place,
where every Error and Mistake among the Children of God will be rectified,
where all their Ignorance will be scattered, where all their little Prejudices
and Quarrels will be forever laid aside, and where they will think alike, and
speak alike, and instead of unhappy Separations and Divisions, will all unite
in perfect Love and Charity with one another, and most harmoniously agree in
shouting forth the Praises of God, and of the Lamb, who has redeemed them to
God by his Blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation.

AMEN.
DISCOURSE II.
THE first Proposition I have already spoken to, and showed that all the
Children of God are led and governed by one and the same Spirit.

Under which I have told you, that the Spirit of God has been striving with the
Children of Men from the earliest Days, even before as well as since the Coming
of Christ: And that there is no Child of God but what has experienced the
gracious Influences of the divine Spirit upon his Soul: And that they are all
in the General under the Influence of the same gracious Principle. That however
they may differ in their Sentiments as to some particular Points of Doctrine,
and whatever Difference there may be in their Forms of public Worship, or in
their Modes of Discipline and Government in the Church: And how hardly soever
they may judge, and how severely soever they may censure each other; yet if
they be the real Children of God, they have the same divine gracious Principle
that they are, in the general, under the governing Influence of They,
notwithstanding all their Differences, and their Separations, are united to
Christ, and united to one another, by one and the same Spirit. And I further
showed you, That although they did so widely differ in their Sentiments upon some
particular Points, and in their Opinions of one another, and in their Practice
relating to Modes of Discipline and Worship; yet there were many uniform
Operations of the Spirit upon their Souls, even the substantial Parts of
Religion wherein they agreed. Such as Faith in God, and in the Lord Jesus
Christ, sincere and supreme Love of the divine Being, a Principle of Holiness,
and Hatred of Sin, and of Subjection, and Obedience to God, and of sincere and
fervent Charity to their Fellow Creatures. For as all these Things are
necessary to our being true Christians, so they are wrought in all of them by
the Spirit of God. And all the unhappy Differences that are among them, arise
from Ignorance and Weakness, from Prejudices of Education, from Pride,
Self-will, and the Remains of other Lusts and Corruptions, which God for wise
and holy Ends suffers to be in his own Children. And I further observed to you,
That a serious Thought upon these Things would correct a great deal of that
uncharitable rash Judging that prevails in the World, and would prevent many of
the fierce Contentions, the Separations and Divisions, which have rent and torn
the Church of God to Pieces.

I now proceed to the second Proposition, viz.

Prop. II. The surest, and clearest Evidence of our being the Children of God,
is our being LED and GOVERNED by the SPIRIT of God.

For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. This is
the very Thing that determines a professing Christian to be a Child of God. If
he be under the Influence of a divine and gracious Principle, he is a Child of
God, and will be so owned and received by God, let the World think never so
hardly of him. On the other Hand, Let a Man make never such a fair Show in
Religion, let his Character run never so high, let him be canonized as a most
excellent Saint; yet if he has not been led by the Spirit of God, if he has not
been acted from a truly gracious Principle, God will never look upon him, or
own him, as one of his Children, but will treat him as a Bastard, rather than
as a Son.

I shall endeavor to illustrate this Proposition by speaking to these general
Heads: I. It is our highest Privilege and Happiness, to be numbered and found
among the Children of God. II. It affords unspeakable Comfort, to be well
satisfied in our own Minds, that we are the Children of God. III. There are
many Things which People are apt to look upon as Signs and Marks of their being
the Children of God, which are false; at least very uncertain, and by no Means
to be depended upon. IV. The surest and clearest Mark hereof, is our being led
by the Spirit of God.


I. It is our highest Privilege and Happiness, to be numbered and found among
the Sons of God.

Indeed it may be said in some Respects, that we are all the Children of God.
We are so by Creation, for we derived our Beings from him, and in him we live
and move. This the Heathen were sensible of. And one of their own Poets has
said, We are his Offspring. Acts 17.28.
And one of the Lord's Prophets says much the same: Have we not all one Father?
Has not one God created us? Mal. 2.10.
Moreover we may all be called the Children of God, upon Account of the Care
and Goodness of divine Providence, that is exercised over and toward us. He
takes Care of all Mankind as his Family, he protects and preserves them, he
nourishes and brings them up as Children, he feeds them and clothes them, and
supplys all their Wants for them.

But then there are some who are the Children of God by special Grace. God of
his mere Mercy and free Grace adopts some of the Children of Men for his Sons
and his Daughters; whom he takes particular Notice of, and confers special and
peculiar Favors upon them, beyond what he does upon the rest of Mankind.

Now they are such SONS, such CHILDREN of God as those which my Text speaks of.
And THOSE have most glorious Privileges belonging to them, and are truly in the
most happy State of any Men in the World. If the greatest Monarch upon Earth
should adopt you for his Son, and you should be the Heir, or the actual
Possessor of a Crown and Kingdom, or of all the Kingdoms of the World, the
Riches, the Glories, and the Splendors of them, they would by no Means come up
to the Honor, and Privilege, the Safety and Happiness of one whom God has
taken into his Family, and made one of his Children by Regeneration and
Adoption, even although he should be never so poor and low upon outward Accounts.

Here let me say,

1. It is a most distinguishing HONOR to be adopted, and received among the
Children of God.

Is it any Honor to be descended from, or related to the Kings and Potentates
of the World? How much greater Honor to be related to the King of Heaven? What
is the Honor of being born of earthly Princes, to what it is to be born of
God, to be born of the Spirit of God? Is it any Honor to be Partakers of the
divine Nature, to have the Image of God upon our Souls, which consists in
Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness; and to be resembling God in all his
moral Perfections? Is it any Honor to be restored to the primitive Rectitude,
Perfection, and Glory of the humane Nature, which was but little lower than the
Angels, crowned with Glory and Honor? Furthermore, Is it any Honor for God to
own us as his Sons, and to give us Leave to call him Father, and to have the
only begotten of the Father not ashamed to call us Brethren? Or to treat us
with Freedom and Friendship as such? Finally, Is it any Honor to be esteemed,
and loved, and honored by God, and Christ, and all the Angels in Heaven, as
the excellent Ones in all the Earth? Why! Such Honor have all the Saints, all
the adopted Children of God.

2. The Children of God enjoy many DISTINGUISHING PRIVILEGES AND ADVANTAGES in
this World.

God having of his free Grace adopted them into his Family, and numbered them
among his Children, he shows the Kindness, the Care, and Tenderness of a Father
to them. He exercise his Wisdom, his Power, and his Goodness, in contriving and
bringing about Things for their Good, and in preserving, protecting and
defending from the Evils of the World; or in supporting them under them, or in
sanctifying all unto them. As a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord
pitieth them that fear him, for he knows our Frame, and remembers that we
are Dust Psalm. 103.13, 14.
. The Children of God are pitied by their heavenly Father, under all their
Weaknesses and Infirmities, under all their Difficulties and Discouragements he
always stands ready to support, to relieve, and help them.

God indeed suffers them to meet with Troubles in the World, for many are the
Afflictions of the Righteous, but then it is if need be that they are in
Heaviness; God sees they need Afflictions, and in Love, and in Kindness to
their Souls, he afflicts them: But then it is in Measure, and in Mercy. The
outward Troubles they meet with are not the furious, and revengeful Strokes of
an Enemy who seeks to kill and to destroy; but the gentle Corrections of a wise
and tender Father, that does not afflict willingly, nor grieve his Children.

And such Corrections as these are looked upon by the Apostle as Tokens of
God's fatherly Love, and a Sign that we are the Children of God. For whom the
Lord loves he chastneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives. If ye
endure chastning, God deals with you as with Sons: For what Son is he whom
the Father chastneth not? But if ye be without Chastisement, whereof all are
Partakers, then are ye Bastards and not Sons Heb. 12.6, 7, 8.
.

But now here is the peculiar Privilege of the Children of God, that though he
visits their Transgression with the Rod, and their Iniquity with Stripes,
nevertheless his Loving Kindness he will not take from them, nor suffer his
Faithfulness to fail. But as it is their Profit that is aimed at by the Father
of Spirits when he corrects, so he takes Care to effect it, and turns all to
their Advantage. For when he chastens, he teaches out of his Law, and causes
the Rod and Reproof to give Wisdom. He sanctifies every Stroke of his Rod, and
causes it to purge away Iniquity, to wean them from the World, and to cure them
of their Sloth, and to quicken them in the Ways of God. And so although the
Affliction they meet with seems for the present not joyous but grievous, in
the End it will yield the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness. And every Child of
God will be obliged in the Conclusion to acknowledge with the Psalmist, I know,
O Lord, that thy Judgments are right, and that thou in Faithfulness have
afflicted me Psalm. 119.75.
.

But then as God is abundant in Goodness, and delights in Mercy, and does not
afflict willingly; so this is the Privilege of all God's Children, that he is
ready to smile upon them, to prosper and bless them upon outward Accounts so
far as he sees they can bear it, and that it will be for their Good. Godliness
has the Promise of the Life that now is, as well as of that which is to come 1 Timothy 5.8.
. And God accordingly blesses his Children with the good Things of this Life.
They acknowledge him in all Ways, and he directs their Paths for them. He
smiles upon them in their lawful Undertakings, and he gives them Power to get
Wealth, and surrounds them with the Bounties of his Providence. And some of
them that he sees can bear it, he causes Goodness and Mercy to follow them all
their Days Psalm. 23.6.
.

But as the good Things of this Life are not the Portion that God provides for
his Children, nor do they desire their Portion in the present World; so it is
not common for God's Children to abound with the Riches, and the great Things
of this World.

But then here is the distinguishing Privilege of the Children of God, that
they are content and satisfied with what their heavenly Father sees cause to
deal out to them; they are willing to be at his Dispose, having Food and
Raiment they are content, and Godliness with Contentment is great Gain 2 Timothy
5.6.
. And God so blesses what he gives them, that it affords more Peace, Comfort
and Satisfaction to them, than the overgrown Effects of the Wicked do to them.
Better is a little with the Fear of the Lord, than great Treasures and Trouble
therewith. Better is a little with Righteousness, than great Revenues without
Right Prove. 15.16. and 16.8.
.

Again, It is the distinguishing Privilege of God's Children that they have
free Liberty of access with Confidence to God in Prayer, even as Children to a
Father able and ready to help them.

The adopted Sons of God have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear,
but they have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry, Abba, Father
Romans 8.15.
. And so they may, and they will come with Freedom and holy Boldness to the
Throne of Grace, to obtain Mercy and find Grace to help in Time of Need Heb.
4.16.
. No Children can possibly be so Welcome to their earthly Parents, as the
Children of God are to their heavenly Father. And he is more ready to hear and
answer, than they can be to ask. And he is able and ready to do, and will
finally do for them exceeding abundantly above what they are able to ask, or
even to think. This is their happy Privilege that they may come freely and
spread their Case before him, and make known their Requests unto him, and God
will hear and answer all their Requests for Things agreeable to his Will, and
for their Good, and in as mud Mercy will deny them those Things that will be
hurtful unto them. And whatever they receive in answer to their Prayers they
are sure to receive his Blessing with it. So God blesses their Blessings, and
in such a qualified Sense causes whatsoever they do to prosper.

In a Word, These Children of God are the special Care and charge of divine
Providence, as well as the Subjects of his special Grace. He is a tender
careful Parent, watches over them by Night and by Day, to defend them from
innumerable Evils and Dangers that compass them about, unknown to them. And he
gives his Angels charge concerning them, to encamp round about them; for they
are all ministering Spirits sent forth to minister unto these Heirs of
Salvation. He will make every Thing in Nature and Providence instrumental of
their Good, all his Paths will be Mercy and Truth unto them. He will lead them
in the Truth, and teach them, he will have Compassion on those of them that are
Ignorant, and got out of the Way, he will reduce them from their Errors, he
will support them under their Troubles, he will comfort them under all their
Sorrows, he will enlighten them in all their Darknesses, he will strengthen
them against Temptations, he will guard them by his Power, will secure them by
his Grace, and uphold them with his free Spirit, and will guide them with his
Counsel till he receives them safe to his eternal Kingdom and Glory.

Which leads me to say,

3. These Sons or Children of God, are HEIRS to a most glorious Inheritance
reserved in Heaven for them, which they shall at length be received to the
everlasting Enjoyment of.

Thus we are told ver. 17. of the Context, And if Children then Heirs, Heirs of
God, and joint Heirs with Christ. So that every Child of God is an Heir. But
what is he an Heir to? Not to the little, fading, uncertain, and unsatisfying
Inheritances of this World, that perish in the enjoying: But to the Inheritance
that is incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for them. Dearly Beloved, It is an heavenly Inheritance that you are
Heirs to, it is a Treasure above the Skies that you have the Promise of. It is
in your heavenly Father's House, whither Christ is gone, and where he is
preparing Mansions of Glory for you.

Indeed the Children of God must pass through the dark Valley of the Shadow of
Death, before they can come to the Possession and Enjoyment of their
Inheritance among the Saints in Light: But the sure and certain Hope of what
they are designed for, will abundantly scatter the Fears of Death, and bring
the Child of God, that has the Evidence of his good Estate clear upon his Soul,
to be as the Apostle, willing, yea, desirous to depart, and to be with Christ.

And Oh how glorious is the Inheritance they shall enter upon the Possession
of, immediately after Death, and especially after the Resurrection, when Soul
and Body shall be reunited! How magnificent are the Descriptions hereof in
Scripture! Infinitely surpassing all the Riches, the Glories, and the Delights
of the present World.

These Children, as I hinted before, are Heirs, and they are Heirs of God,
Heirs of HIM, who is the great Creator and high Possessor of Heaven and Earth,
and joint Heirs with Christ, whom the Father has appointed Heir of all Things
Heb. 1.2.
. And agreeable to this we are taught in the Revelations of John, 21.7. He that
overcomes shall inherit ALL THINGS, and I will be his God, and he shall be my
Son. So that this is the happy Privilege of all the Children of God, that all
is yours 1 Cor. 3.21.
. There is nothing you can think of, that will afford real Happiness, but what
will be conferred upon all the Children of God in Heaven. Oh how great is that
Good which is laid up for the Sons of God!

They shall be admitted to the glorious Vision and full Fruition of God. They
shall see the Lord Jesus Christ Face to Face, and they shall be like him, for
they shall see him as he is. They shall inherit the Kingdom prepared for them
from the Foundation of the World, and shall receive a Crown of Glory that
fades not away. They shall dwell in his Presence, where there is Fullness of
Joys, and shall sit at his right Hand, where there are Rivers of Pleasures
forevermore.

And this is what crowns all, viz. that the Happiness is everlasting, and the
Pleasures uninterrupted, and without the least Alloy. Nay, it is not unlikely
but that the Happiness of Heaven will be in an everlasting Progression, some
new Discoveries to entertain the Mind, and some new Enjoyment to give fresh
Pleasures through out Eternity.

And thus I have briefly, and very imperfectly spoken of the Privileges of the
Sons of God, and the Happiness they are entitled to, and will at length be
brought to the Possession of. And a perfect Description hereof may not be
expected, for verily Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into
the Heart of Man, the Things which God has prepared for them that love him. 1
Cor. 2.9.


I now proceed to speak as briefly to the second general Head, viz.

II. It is Matter of unspeakable Comfort to have a well-grounded Evidence in
our selves, that we are the Sons of God.

For if there be such glorious Privileges belonging to the Sons of God, surely
it must be Matter of great Comfort to be well satisfied upon a good Foundation,
that we are among that happy Number. It is safe and happy, to be the Children
of God, whether we know it or no; but unspeakably more comfortable to our
selves, to be satisfied of it in our own Minds.

Many flatter themselves they are the Children of God, when they are not. And
this Apprehension of themselves quiets and comforts them, and sometimes gives
them considerable Joy; but now this is but a false Peace, and the Joy of the
Hypocrite, which is but for a Moment, and will issue in dreadful
Disappointment. For what is the Hope of the self-flattering and selfdeluding
Hypocrite, when God takes away his Soul? Moreover the Peace and Quietness that
such Hypocrites have, from a vain Conceit of their being the Children of God,
is exceeding dangerous, as it lulls them asleep in carnal Security, and thus
their Delusion and Danger may not be discerned till it is too late to help the
Matter. And therefore it concerns all to examine the Foundation of their Hopes,
least this should be their own unhappy Case.

Others again, who are the true Children of God; yet are very doubtful in their
own Minds about it, and very jealous that they are still in their carnal and
corrupt Estate. Nay, I believe I should offend against some of the Generation
of God's Children, if I did not allow that they were sometimes so in the Dark
as to their spiritual State, as to conclude that they are in their Sins, that
they are left out of the divine Favor, and fearful whether ever they shall
find Mercy with God, and almost ready to sink into Despair.

And now this must needs be a most uncomfortable and distressing State, which
not only takes off the Edge of all earthly Comforts; but deprives the Soul of
inward Peace, and prevents the Pleasure of sweet Communion with God, and fills
the Soul with such fearful Apprehensions of divine Wrath, as even distracts it.
While I suffer thy Terrors I am distracted, says the holy Psalmist, Psalm. 88.15.

But now to have clear satisfying Evidence, upon a good Foundation, that we are
the Children of God, and entitled to all their Privileges, Oh! what Peace, what
Support, what Comfort, what Joy must this needs afford unto the Soul!

And now the Christian's Evidences are upon a good Foundation, and his Hopes
well grounded, when they arise from his finding that he has heartily received
Christ, and that he has the Marks of the New Birth upon him, and that he has
received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby he cries Abba Father, and has the true
Temper of a Child, and behaves in some Measure with the Fear, the Honor, the
Love, the Trust, the Subjection, and Obedience which becomes him toward his
heavenly Father.

And these well-grounded Evidences arise in the Christian's Soul, by a frequent
and close Examination, a constant and critical Observation of himself; and the
inward Frame and Temper of his Mind, together with the general Tenor of his
Life. And these Evidences come to the Soul in the most clear, convincing, and
satisfying Manner, when the Spirit of God himself, is pleased to assist the
Saint in the Trial of himself, and to shine upon his own Work in the Soul, and
enables the Saint clearly to discern it, and so witnesses together with his
Spirit, that he is a Child of God, as in the 16th Verse of the Context.

Furthermore, it may be said, with Respect to these Evidences of Adoption, they
are very various as to their Degree in Christians: Some have much clearer and
stronger Evidences hereof than others. There is also a great Difference in the
same Christian at one Time and at another. Sometimes the Christian's Evidences
are so beclouded, by the Remains of Sin, and the Hidings of God's Face, that he
can hardly make out to himself that he is a Child of God, his Hopes do but just
preponderate his Doubts and Fears. At other Times the Christian has stronger
and fuller Evidences, and does more clearly see the Marks of a Child of God
upon him; so that his Doubts and Fears are very much scattered, and he has an
inward Peace and Quietness of Mind arising, and he walks up and down in the
Light of God's Countenance, and there are scarce any Clouds in the Way. At
other Times these Evidences are still further cleared up, so as not only to
give a satisfactory Proof to the Soul, that he is a Child of God, but to remove
all Doubts, to scatter every Cloud, and to give him the full Assurance of Faith
and of Hope Heb. 6.11, -- 22.
.

And now the well-grounded Evidence of our being the Children of God in the
lowest, but especially in the highest Degree, must needs afford great Comfort
and Satisfaction to the Soul. For as it is our highest Privilege, and our
greatest Happiness to be the Children of God; so every truly thoughtful and
considerate Mind will be concerned to be well satisfied that this is his own
happy Case, and the clear Evidence of it, will afford the greatest Comfort to
him, at all Times, in all Cases, and under every Circumstance, and Condition of
Life. As for the stupid and thoughtless Part of Mankind, who are immersed in
the Pleasures of Sense, and swallowed up with the Vanities of the World, some
earthly and sensual Enjoyment may please them better for the present, than the
clearest Evidences of their being the Sons of God would do. But with every one
that is a Child of God, it is not so. For while the many are enquiring who will
show us any worldly Good, the Language of the gracious Soul, is, Lord, lift
thou up the Light of thy Countenance upon me; and that gives him more Joy and
Gladness than when Corn, or Wine, or Oil are increased Psalm. 4.6, 7.
.

Here it may be said, that even in the Midst of outward Prosperity, there is
nothing affords such Comfort to the gracious Soul, as the Evidence that he is a
Child of God. For whilst the Christian is very jealous whether he be a Child of
God or no, and his Doubts and Fears prevail above his Hopes, he will be
naturally led to fear whether these outward good Things are the Fruit of God's
fatherly Love. He will be afraid least these earthly Goods should be all his
Portion, least they should be attended with a Curse, least they should prove a
Trap and a Snare to him, and be like the Prosperity of Fools which destroys
them Prove. 1.32.
. And although this may be very serviceable to the Christian, and make him
cautious how he meddles too much, or plunges himself too deep in worldly
Hurries, and Cares, or Pleasures; yet it deprives him of much of that Comfort
which otherwise he might enjoy in the good Things that God confers upon him.

But now the Man who has a satisfactory Evidence that he is a Child of God, in
what an agreeable Manner is he ready to receive the Fruits of divine Bounty? He
receives them as the Tokens of God's Favor, and as the Effects of his
Covenant-Love, and of his fatherly Care and Goodness; and as what he expects
God will bless unto him, and what he can confidently ask a Blessing upon; which
serves to enlarge his Heart toward his heavenly. Father, and causes him to
receive the divine Mercies thankfully, and quickens him to greater Cheerfulness
in God's Service, and puts him upon improving what he receives more faithfully,
to the Glory of the Giver.

But then, on the other Hand, when Persons are under Troubles and Afflictions,
Difficulties and Sorrows, what is there that can afford them such Support and
Comfort, as the good Evidence that they are the Children of God? --

For the clear Evidence hereof will at once suggest to them, that all their
Afflictions are only the wise and wholesome Corrections of their heavenly
Father, that are designed for, and will finally prove, very advantageous to
them, to purge away their Iniquity, and to take away their Sin, and to make
them Partakers of the divine Holiness. And how wonderfully will the realizing
Though It and Belief hereof reconcile Christians to every Affliction they meet
withal? This will help them to submit to them quietly, and bear them patiently,
being persuaded, that how grievous soever they are at present, yet that in the
End they will yield the peaceable Fruits of Righteousness. What Support must
the Children of God have from their being satisfied they are such, under all
their Trials; even under the forest of them, to think that their heavenly
Father sends them in Love, and in Mercy to their Souls, that he does not
afflict them willingly, but only because he sees they have Need of them, and
that he will sanctify every stroke of his Rod, and cause these light
Afflictions, which are but for a Moment, to work out for them a far more
exceeding and an eternal Weight of Glory?

Here for Instance, are any of the Children of God, poor and low in the World?
Why the satisfactory Evidence that they are his Children, must needs afford
great Support and Comfort to them under all their Poverty, and will enable them
to apply the Words of the Apostle to themselves, and draw Comfort from them,
Jam. 2.5. Hearhen, my beloved Brethren, has not God chosen the Poor of this
World, rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to them
that love him? Again,

Have you met with Losses and Crosses? Have you lost your Estate, or lest your
Friends, your Parents, your Children, your Husband, or your Wife, etc.? Why if
you are but well persuaded that you are the Children of God, and that he is
your Friend and Father, this must needs be great Comfort to you, for you may
comfort your selves with this, that though your earthly Parents forsake you, yet
your heavenly Father will take you up; and that though all your Friends die and
leave you, yet that your Redeemer lives, who can and will be infinitely more
to you, than Father, or Mother, or Brother, or Sister, or Wife, or Children, or
Houses, or Lands.

Again, Are you under bodily Sicknesses and and Pains? Why the Persuasion that
you are the Children of God, will comfort you, and quiet you under them; as it
will lead you to think, how much Pain and Sorrow Christ endured for your Sakes,
and that he will at length give you Ease and Rest from all your Troubles, and
bring you to that blessed State where there will be no more Sickness nor Pain,
and where all Tears will be wiped away from your Eyes for ever.

Again, Are you defamed? Are you uncharitably judged and censured as a great
Sinner, as a carnal unconverted Man, and are many Anathe mas denounced against
you? Why if you have but this Testimony that you have pleased God, and that you
belong to his Children, that is enough to support you under all the
uncharitable Tho'ts, the hard Speeches, and the ill Treatment you may meet
withal, for then you may comfort yourselves with what our Savior said to his
Disciples, Mat. 5.10, 11. Blessed are they which are persecuted for
Righteousness Sake, for their's is the Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye when
Men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all Manner of Evil
against you falsely for my sake.

Thus the secret Witness, or clear Evidence that we are the Children of God,
would be a supporting refreshing Cordial to us, under the heaviest Trials of
Life. But now what will the Man do when he is surrounded with Tribulations and
Trials of every Kind, and has no Evidence that God is his Friend and Father,
but fears and concludes the contrary? What Support can he have under his
Troubles, when he concludes they all come in a Way of Judgment, and because God
is angry with him; and these appear to be but the Beginning of Sorrows? Oh how
insupportable must such Tho'ts as these be! And no Wonder if he should sink
under the Weight of them into Impatience, Discontent, Murmurings, and even
Despair.

Finally, What is there which can afford such Support and Comfort in a dying
Hour, as the clear well-grounded Evidence that we are the Children of God?

As the Reality of this is the only Thing to take away the Sting of Death, so
the full Persuasion of this in our own Minds is the only Thing to take away the
Terrors of Death, and reconcile us to the Though It of Dying. For if we be not
satisfied that we are the Children of God, we cannot be satisfied of our good
Estate. And how awful, how terrible must it needs be, to see Death approaching
in good Earnest, and we just launching into the Ocean of Eternity, and be very
doubtful which Way we are going, whether into a happy or miserable Eternity! Oh
with what Reluctance shall we receive the Message of Death, and how shall we
shrink back when this King of Terrors begins to take hold of us, being utterly
uncertain how it will fare with us for ever after! And how much more dismal and
distressing still will the Case be, if our Fears should prevail much above our
Hopes, and especially if in that awful Hour, we should remain to us nothing but
a fearful looking for of Judgment and fiery Indignation to devour us?

Whereas if at such a Time, we have an inward Testimony that we are the
Children of God, and so the well-grounded Hopes that we are Heirs of God, and
joint Heirs with Christ, to the heavenly Inheritance; how would the Fears of
Death be scattered, and how would it reconcile us to a Dissolution? Nay, if the
Evidence of our Adoption be clear, and especially if it comes to the full
Assurance of Hope, it will enable us even to triumph over Death and the Grave,
saying with the Apostle, O Death, where is thy Sting! O Grave, where is thy
Victory! The Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the Law, but
Thanks be to God, which gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. 1
Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.
And we shall not only die in Peace, having the Peace of God to keep our Hearts
and Minds through Jesus Christ, but shall even rejoice in Hope of the Glory of
God.

Thus we see of what Importance it is, not only to be really the Sons of God,
but to have the satisfactory Evidence hereof in our own Souls.

The next general Head is this viz. There are many Things which People look
upon as Marks of their being the Children of God, which are false, at least
very uncertain, and by no Means to be depended upon. But I must leave this for
the next Discourse, and conclude at present with some

IMPROVEMENT.
Inf. 1. Is it such a high Privilege and Happiness to be the Sons of God (as
we have heard) hence how astonishing the Grace of God, that he should bring any
of the Children of Men into that happy Number?

Man had by his Sin and Rebellion, cast himself out of the Favor of God, and
deserved to be treated as a Rebel and a Traitor, instead of being admitted to
the Privileges of a Son. By Sin we disowned and rejected God from being our
God and Father, and he might have utterly disowned us from being his Children.
We lost the Reverence and Dutifulness of Children, and he might have utterly
withdrawn the tender Pity and Compassion of a Father from us, and so might have
rejected us and cast us off forever.

But now for God, instead of dealing with us after such a Manner, to show a
Father's Pity to us, and to find out, and to bring about, a Way whereby we
might be restored to all the Privileges of the Sons of God, it must needs be
wonderful Love and Grace in God.

But then the divine Love appears more conspicious, and more amazing, when we
consider the Method which God took, to bring us into such a near and happy
Relation to himself.

Thus in order to our becoming the Sons, the adopted Sons of God, he sent HIS
ONLY BEGOTTEN AND DEARLY BELOVED SON, even the Lord Jesus Christ, to suffer the
deepest Humiliations, the greatest Sorrows, and the most cursed Death, who
afterward arose from the Dead, ascended up into Heaven, where he ever lives at
the right Hand of the Father, to make Intercession for us. And by his
prevailing Intercession, he procured the sending down the HOLY GHOST to apply
the Redemption which Christ had purchased: To recover us out of our sinful
rebellious State, to work Repentance, and Faith, and Holiness, and to beget a
Childlike Temper and Disposition of Soul within us; making use of a great
Variety of Means to effect this gracious Change in our Souls, such as the Word,
Ordinances, and Providence; all which the Holy Ghost uses in converting the
Soul, in making us the Children of God, and in fitting us for the Inheritance
among the Saints in Light. And when he has, by his Grace fitted us for, he
receives us to that glorious Inheritance, to those blessed Mansions which
Christ is preparing for us.

And now when we consider how unworthy we were of the least Mercy, and what
Pity, Love, and Good Will God has shown to us, and and what great and glorious
Things Christ has purchased for us, by his Obedience and Death, and what
wonderful Things the Holy Ghost is doing for us, that we might be the Sons of
God, and enjoy all the Privileges of such, we may well cry out in Admiration
and Praise with the Apostle, 1 John 3.1. Behold what Manner of Love is this,
the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God! And
how should we pray with the Apostle, that we may be able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the Breadth, and Length, and Depth, and Height, and to know the
Love of Christ, which passes Knowledge. Ephesians. 3.18, 19.


Inf. 2. Is it so great a Privilege to be the Sons of God, hence how does it
concern us all to be doing what in us lies that we may be of that happy Number?

Since the greatest Privileges, the highest Honors, and the most consummate
Happiness, are the Portion of God's Children, who would not rejoice to be found
among them? Who would not be striving to the utmost of his Power, that he might
be numbered among them, and so be entitled to all their Privileges? If we are
really owned and accepted of God as his Sons and his Daughters, we are made, we
are in the Way of all true Comforts of this Life, and of all the Glory and
Happiness of that which is to come.

Q. But here perhaps the Soul will say, I should be glad to be owned and
accepted as a Child of God, but alas, what can I do toward it, God adopts and
takes into his Family and among his Children, such as he pleases, and if he
will please to take me among them I shall be glad, but alas, what can I do
toward it my self?

A. Now in answer to this, it may be said, That although it be of the rich and
free Grace of God that any are adopted into his Family, and made his Children;
yet it is upon some Qualifications that he sees in Persons, that he receives
them into the Number, and gives them a Right to all the Privileges of the Sons
of God. You must remember we are not speaking of electing Love, but of adopting
Love and Grace. And according to our Catechism, Adoption is a Benefit that
follows upon effectual Calling, and effectual Calling is that whereby we are
enabled, by the Help of the Spirit of God, to receive and embrace the Lord
Jesus Christ as he is offered to us in the Gospel. And this we are taught by
the Evangelist, is the Pre-requisite to our becoming the Sons of God, and
enjoying the Privileges of such. But as many as RECEIVED HIM, to them gave he
Power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his Name. John
1.12.
Here we see that receiving Christ, and believing on his Name, is the same
Thing; so that believing on Christ is the Heart's receiving him and relying
upon him as he is offered to us in the Gospel. And now to all such God gives
the Power or Privilege of becoming the Sons of God.

Well then, you see if you would be the Sons of God, and be entitled to all the
glorious Privileges of such, you must believe on the Name of his Son Jesus
Christ, and must receive him with all your Hearts as he is offered in the
Gospel, even in every Office that he sustains and executes as our Redeemer,
receiving him, relying upon him, and submitting to him as your Prince, as well
as Savior, endeavoring in all Things to conform your Hearts and lives unto
his Gospel. You must receive the only begotten Son of God with all your Heart,
if you would be received among his adopted Sons. So that in this you see upon
what Terms you are with God. Oh then of what infinite Importance is it that we
should believe in the Name of Jesus Christ as he gave us Commandment! If any of
you (and it is to be feared that many of you will) fail of becoming the Sons of
God, it is because of your Unbelief, it is because you wont heartily receive
the Lord Jesus Christ. Oh then how should you strive against Unbelief, how
should you beg of God, that he would deliver you from an evil Heart of
Unbelief, and that he would enable you to believe? for Faith is not of your
selves, it is the Gift of God, and you must ask it of him, and you must wait
upon him in all the Ways he has appointed for the obtaining of this precious
Faith. And as Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of God; Romans 10,
17.
so you must be diligent in reading, and in hearing the Word of God; and must
take heed how you hear, must endeavor to receive the Word with Faith and Love,
laying it up in your Hearts, and practifing agreeable to it in your Lives. And
in this Way you may hope that God will beget the precious Faith of his Elect in
you, and give you Power to become his Sons and Daughters, and entitle you to
all the Privileges of such, Gal. 3.26. For ye are all the Children of God by
Faith in Christ Jesus.

Inf. 3. Since it is such an unspeakable Comfort to be well satisfied of our
being the Sons of God; How should we all labor after as sure and as clear
Evidences hereof as we can?

We are directed and advised, to give Diligence to make our Calling and
Election sure. 2 Pet. I. 10.
And by the same Rule we should give Diligence to make our Adoption sure: For
if we do these Things we shall never fall; for so an Entrance shall be
ministered to us abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

As to complete perfect Assurance (whatever some may pretend to and talk of) I
am inclined to think it is not attainable in this Life. That great Divine, the
late Reverend Mr. WILLARD, treating of Assurance, says, Vide Mr. Willard on the
Catechism, p. 507.
That the highest Assurance in this Life is that which needs strengthening, a
Believer's Grace is imperfect, and his Corruptions potent, and Perfection of
Assurance is not consistent with imperfect Grace: Hence Believers are put upon
it, to be ever at the Work of Self- Trial. Which (says the excellent Mr.
FLAVEL) Mr. Flavel, Vol. I. p. 669.
If there be such absolute Assurance as to be no Doubt nor Danger, there is no
Place nor Room for Examination, or farther Endeavors to make it surer than it
is. And therefore such as talk of their being as sure of their Salvation as of
the Death of Christ; yea as sure of their Salvation as of their own Existence;
they show that they are carried away by a rapturous Passion or vain Conceit,
rather than governed by a solid Judgment.

But then although we cannot attain to Perfection of Assurance, any more than we
can attain to Perfection of Grace; yet we are to be striving after it, and
pressing toward it, as we are to be striving after the Perfection of Grace.
Although we cannot in this Life attain to Perfection of Grace; yet we must press
toward that Mark: So though we cannot attain to Perfection of Assurance, we must
press toward it, and make all as sure as we can. We should endeavor after as
clear and as full Evidences of our being the Sons of God as possible; and must
be giving all Diligence to be making it surer and surer to ourselves every Day,
and that by growing in Grace, which is the surest and best Mark of Adoption.

There is nothing so much worth our making sure as this: Nothing which will
afford such real Comfort and Satisfaction to the Soul, or that will help us to
conduct and behave properly under all the Changes of Life, as the satisfactory
Evidence that we are among the Sons of God. This will help us to receive
outward Comforts as the Tokens of God's fatherly Love and Goodness: This will
help us to receive Afflictions as the wise and wholesome Corrections of our
heavenly Father, designed for our Profit. And this is what will afford
spiritual Support and Comfort to us at the Approach of Death. Oh what a Cordial
in a dying Hour, to be satisfied in our own Minds that we are the Children of
God, and so Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Christ to the Inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, reserved in Heaven for us! This will scatter the
Fears of Death, and reconcile us to that which even Nature abhors; being
persuaded that to be absent from the Body will be to be present with the Lord.
What is it that we hear People wishing and longing for on a Deathbed, but that
they might have fuller Evidences that they are the Children of God? And their
Language is, if they were but clear in this, they should be willing to die
whenever God calls; and all their Uneasiness, their Fear and Distress of Mind,
arise from their Doubts and Uncertainties whether they are the Children of God
or no; and all the World would they give if they had it, to be assured of this
one Point. And now how sollicitous should we be to get all the Satisfaction
possible in this Point, and have it as plain and clear as possible that we are
the Children of God? Oh then let us not spare any Labor or Pains to get a
well-grounded Persuasion that we belong to God, and have an Interest in Jesus
Christ. For although an absolute perfect Assurance be not attainable; yet there
is such an Assurance of Faith and Hope attainable, as may not only afford
Support and Comfort; but what may and does sometimes fill the Soul with Joy
unspeakable. And we ought to be striving after the highest Degrees of Assurance
that we are capable of in this present State.

But here is a Caution necessary to be laid in, viz. That you don't work your
selves up into a vain Confidence and a Sort of Assurance in your own Minds,
when there is no real Foundation for it. This is the Way that many a poor Soul
has been imposed upon. Persons have been eagerly desirous of Assurance;
especially such as have been led to such a false and dangerous Doctrine, That
Assurance was of the Essence of saving Faith, and so instead of striving after
a Faith of Assent, a Faith of Consent, a Faith of Reliance, and a Faith of
Subjection to Christ; they leap over all these, to work themselves up into a
Faith of Assurance. And when they thus come to feel a Persuasion in their Minds
that Christ is theirs, then they imagine they have attained saving Faith, and
are assured of their Salvation. But Oh how often is such an Assurance as this
built upon the Sand, that will never endure the Trial! Indeed such an
Assurance, such a vain Confidence may hold out to Death with some Persons: But
what is the Hope of the Hypocrite, when God takes away his Soul Job 27.8.
? Wherefore, my Brethren, it is not the having an Assurance in your own Mind
barely; but it is this having Assurance upon a Scripture Bottom, that you must
be striving after.

Moreover, as there are many other Things that christian Professors are apt to
build their Hopes upon which are false and uncertain, and not to be trusted to,
(which I shall particularly consider in the next Discourse) so these we must
lay aside, and must be striving after those Things which the Gospel makes sure
and certain Marks of our Adoption, (and which may be hereafter considered when
I come to speak of the Leadings of the Spirit.) For it is by the Gospel that we
shall be tried and judged hereafter, and not by any Titles, Rules and Marks
that are framed out of Men's Fancies, the Word that I have spoken, the same
shall judge him another Day John 12.48.
.

In a Word, here we must strive after the Spirit of Adoption, the true Spirit
and Temper of God's Children, and if we take up with any Marks short of this,
we shall be disappointed: But the more we have of the child-like Temper in us,
the clearer and fuller Evidence we shall have within us that we are the
Children of God, O then be followers of God as dear Children.

Discourse III.
I am upon the second Proposition, viz.

II Prop. THE surest and clearest Mark of our being the Children of God is our
being led and governed by HIS SPIRIT.

For the illustrating this Proposition I have said,

I. That it is our highest Privilege, and greatest Happiness to be the Children
of God.

II. That it is an unspeakable Comfort to have a well-grounded Evidence in our
selves that we are the Sons of God.

And now for further Illustration I proceed to say,

III. That there are many Things which Men are apt to take up with as Signs and
Tokens of their being the Children of God, which are false, at least very
uncertain, and by no Means to be depended upon.

There are scarce any Persons so abandoned, but they are concerned at some
Times about their future State, and desirous to be numbered and found among the
Children of God; and there are few, but what hope this is their Case; but alas
nothing is more common than for Persons to build their Hopes upon the Sand, and
to take up with false, at least very uncertain Signs and Tokens of their being
the Children of God. Men who are careful enough in their secular Affairs, to be
upon a good Bottom in all their Concerns with Men, which are but Trifles: Will
be oftentimes satisfied with very slender, uncertain Marks of their Adoption,
which is of infinite Importance and Concern unto them.

And now Men's flattering themselves with false Hopes, and taking up with
uncertain Marks, is owing very much to their Ignorance, to their Pride, to
their Education, to some false Doctrines they have imbibed, and as much, if not
more than any Thing, to their not having their Hearts affected with those
Things, and so are very careless about the Matter.

Now what I propose at this Time is to mention several of those Marks and
Tokens of being the Children of God, that Persons are very apt to set down
satisfied and contented with, which are indeed false, or at least very
uncertain Marks of our being the Children of God.

And here I must beseech your diligent Attention and close Self-Application,
that you may see how far you have been depending upon those Marks, and whether
you have any better to build your Hopes upon.

1. Some flatter themselves that they are the Children of God, because they are
descended from them that were so.

That because their Parents were pious, and had an Interest in the special
Grace and Favor of God, they feed themselves with Hopes that God has a special
Love for them also.

It was a very common Thing for the Children of Israel to allot upon great
Privileges, because they were the Children of Abraham, the Friend of God. They
considered themselves as the Children of the Covenant that God made with
Abraham, and looked upon all the Blessings conferred on him to be entailed on
them, without taking Care to be Followers of him in Faith and Obedience. They
were ready to think that God would be their God and Father, because he was
their Father's God, whether they loved and served the God of their Fathers or
no.

And this is very much the Temper of some professing Christians, they flatter
themselves that because they have descended from godly Ancestors, they shall
fare the better for it: That they shall be beloved for their Father's Sake: And
that because God was their Father's or their Mother's God, he will be their God
and Father also.

And although Persons would not own it perhaps if the Matter was put to them; yet
I doubt not but that there are many, who depend upon finding Favor with God,
and have nothing better to ground their Hopes upon, than that they descended of
godly Ancestors.

But now this is a false and unsafe Ground to go upon; for Grace don't run in
the Blood. Happy indeed is it when God is pleased to cause his Grace to descend
from Father to Son, and so from Generation to Generation, which was the Case of
Timothy and his Ancestors, which the Apostle takes Notice of with Pleasure,
that the unfeigned Faith that was in his Grandmother Lois, and in his Mother
Eunice, was in him also 2 Timothy 1.5.
. But though there may be many such Instances among us; yet this is not to be
depended upon. God when he adopts a Person into his Family and among his
Children, don't oblige himself to adopt his Posterity with him. And if it
should be said, that God generally takes some of the Children of religious
Parents into his special Favor; yet it may also be said, that it is not common
for all to be adopted by him. Seldom as to a particular Family that the
Prophecy of Isaiah is accomplished, 54.13. And ALL thy Children shall be taught
of the Lord, that is spiritually and savingly taught. For what is more common
that to see profane and wicked Children in the Houses of godly Parents? Isaac
had a profane Esau Heb. 12.26.
, Eli was a good Man, but his Sons made themselves vile 1 Samuel ^.13.
. The good Prophet Samuel's Sons did not walk in his Ways 1 Samuel 8.3.
. David had a wicked incestuous Son Amnon 2 Samuel 13.14.
, and a rebellious Son Absalom 2 Samuel 15. chap.
.

So that there is no Dependence upon our being descended from godly Parents;
for although God has said, that his Mercy is from everlasting to everlasting upon
them that fear him, and his Righteousness unto Children's Children; yet it is
only to such as keep his Covenant, and that remember his Commandments to do
them Psalm. 103.17, 18.
. Wherefore my Advice to you is the same with what John the Baptist gave to the
Sadduces and Pharisees that came to be baptized of him, Bring forth Fruits meet
for Repentance, and think not to say within your selves, WE HAVE ABRAHAM TO OUR
FATHER Matthew. 3.9.
. O my Hearers don't think then to say, that you had a good Man for your
Father, and a good Woman to your Mother, and that your Grand-Parents were good
also; for if you do not follow them wherein they followed Christ, their Grace
and Goodness instead of being any Advantage to you, will rather aggravate your
Guilt and increase your Punishment, for not taking the Advantage of their
Prayers, their Counsels, and their Examples.

2. Some have great Dependence upon their Knowledge in religious Matters, and
upon the supposed Soundness of their Faith, and Orthodoxness of their
Principles.

Some Men have much greater Knowledge in spiritual Matters than others, they
have an Opportunity to read, an Inclination to Study, and a Capacity to
understand beyond others: And it is not an uncommon Thing for Persons to
mistake their thirst after the Knowledge of spiritual Points, for Desires after
true Grace, and their Seize in the Knowledge of spiritual Truths, for the
Attainment of saving Grace. Their Understandings are enlarged about divine and
spiritual Things, by Reading and Study; and because this affords some Pleasure
to their comtemplative and studious Minds they are apt to think they are truly
in love with Religion, and that there is a gracious Impression made upon their
Hearts; whereas the Pleasure they take therein is no other than they would take
in any other Science they should happen to get their Minds engaged in. And this
is a Danger that Ministers, Scholars, and other studious Men are exposed unto.
They are in danger of mistaking the speculative Understanding of the Doctrines
of the Gospel, for a spiritual saving Acquaintance with them. Some who have
been well instructed in the Doctrines concerning God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ; so that they can discourse learnedly, ingeniously and judiciously of
the Perfections of God, of the Person and Offices of Christ; they conclude they
have that Knowledge of God and Christ which will be Life eternal to them. If
they can discourse well upon the Nature of Regeneration and Conversion, they
are ready from thence to flatter themselves that they are converted. If they
can describe the Nature of Faith and Repentance, they fancy that they
themselves repent and believe. And such as are celebrated for their Knowledge
about these Things, and if they are greatly esteemed for their being sound in
their Principles, and free from the Errors that others are charged with, and
are resorted to for Counsel and Advice in Matters of a spiritual Nature, they
are in danger of thinking too highly of themselves with Respect to their
spiritual State.

Moreover, Persons of low Education if by any Means there be some new Discovery
made to them, of some speculative Point in Divinity, they are sometimes apt to
take it for a spiritual saving Illumination; yea when a Doctrine that they have
known very well before; yet by in being set forth after a different Manner, and
in a new Light, they have been ready to conclude that then has been the Time
that God has opened their Eyes in a saving Manner.

Finally, Here it is no uncommon Thing for Persons upon their changing their
Thoughts and Notions in some Points of Divinity, to mistake it for a Change of
their Hearts. They are convinced that they were in an Error in some particular
Point and now embrace the other Side for the Truth, and from hence will date
their Conversion.

But now these Things are by no Means certain Signs or Tokens of our being the
Children of God. For although Knowledge in spiritual Matters, and right Notions
in Points of Religion are very desirable, and in some Sort necessary Helps to
our being truly religious; yet they are not true Religion it self, nor are they
certain Signs of it.

A Man may have great Seize in Knowledge, and be able to discourse
excellently well upon all Points of Divinity, and be very instructive to
others; and yet have no experimental Knowledge of those Things himself. He may
speak very justly of Regeneration, and yet be an utter Stranger to the new
Birth. He may be able to describe justifying saving Faith much better than some
true Believers; and yet never put forth one Act of such a saving Faith in his
Life. Nay, a Man may be much more sound and orthodox as to the Doctrines of the
Gospel, than some of the true Children of God; and yet not be of that Number.
And a Man may be recovered out of Errors and Delusions; and yet not be renewed
in the Spirit of his Mind. He may put off his former Thoughts as to some
Things, and not put off the old Man which is corrupt according to deceitful
Lusts. -- For Knowledge and Grace are very different Things. The Gifts and
Graces of the Spirit don't always go together. A Man may have great Gifts, and
no Grace, nay Men have had the extraordinary Gifts of the Spirit, and none of
the special Grace of the Spirit. A Man may have all Knowledge, and understand
all Mysteries, and may be able to speak even with the Tongue of Angels; and yet
be but as sounding Brass, and a tinkling Cymbal 1 Cor. 13.1, 2.
, hollow within, void and empty of all true Grace.

3. Some depend upon their making a public Profession, their belonging to the
Church, and their constant Attendance upon divine Ordinances.

Most who live under the Gospel do make some Profession of Religion. Many make
a public open Profession, they give themselves up to God in Covenant, they
come into the Church, and attend upon all the Ordinances of the Gospel. They
remember the Sabbath Day, and keep it externally holy; they go to the House of
God, and to the Table of the Lord, and are constant in those external public
Duties; and besides these keep up the Religion of the Family, and of the
Closet, observing their Morning and Evening Sacrifices with the Household, and
by themselves apart; and many Persons have great Dependence upon these Things.

But alas, these are very uncertain Things for Persons to depend upon: For Men
may go this Length, and be very exemplary upon these Accounts, and yet all may
be nothing, no Evidence of their being the Children of God. For although a
public Profession of Christ is a great Duty, and such as live in the careless
Neglect hereof have no Reason to think they are the Children of God, and little
Ground to depend on the divine Favor while they go on in such Neglect; yet
this is no sure Sign that we are in Favor with God, and among his Children. We
must confess him before Men, for says Christ, He that confesses me before Men,
him will I confess before my Father which is in Heaven; but whosoever shall be
ashamed of me, and of my Words, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he
comes in the Glory of his Father, with his holy Angels Mark 8.38.
But these external Professions, and outward Attendances, are no sure Signs; a
Man may do all these Things, and yet have no Grace in him. We read of Men's
having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof 2 Timothy 3.5.
. Which is when they make an outward Profession, and attend the outward Form of
Religion. And Men may sometimes abound in these, and there be nothing of the
Power of Godliness. We also read of some who have a Name to live, while they
are dead Rev. 3.1.
. Which is when they attend the Externals of Religion, and make great
Pretensions to Religion; but have nothing of it in their Hearts. And if the
pretending to Religion, the attending religious Duties, and the being Religious
in Word and Tongue, and the being Religious in Word and Tongue, and the getting
the Name of being Religious among Men would answer the End, it would be no such
difficult Thing to be truly Religious. But now what says our Savior in this
Matter. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven
Matthew. 7.21.
Many will say to me in that Day of Judgment, Lord, have we not eaten and drank
in thy Presence, and thou have taught in our Streets, to whom he will say,
Depart from me, I know you not, all ye that work Iniquity Luke 13.26.
Nay further than this, some will plead in that Day, and say, We have
prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name cast out Devils, and in thy Name done
many wonderful Works, but Christ will profess unto them, and say, I never knew
you, depart from me all ye that work Iniquity Matthew. 7.22.23.
.

4. Some depend upon their being much affected and much enlarged at some
particular Times in Duty, as a sure Sign that they are the Children of God.

It is no uncommon Thing for those who are Strangers to true Grace in their
Hearts, to find themselves in very different Frames while they are attending
religious Duties. Sometimes they are much more affected and enlarged, than at
others. Sometimes the Word of God it self, or some devout Writings have stirred
up the Affections of Persons in reading or hearing them. And nothing is more
common than for unregenerate Persons to be considerably affected with a zealous
Preacher, who has sought out some of the most awakening and terrifying
Expressions, and delivers them in a moving affectionate Manner. How common is
it for Persons to be pleasingly affected herewith, they hear with Delight, and
the Sermon delivered in such a moving Manner, makes some considerable
Impressions on them, and puts them upon a greater Seriousness and
Thoughtfulness; And they may be brought hereby to weep, and even to cry out;
and put upon forming some good Purposes and good Resolutions about their future
Conduct.

But now all this is no certain Sign of Men's being regenerated, and so the
Sons of God; for such as are Strangers to a gracious Change may, and without
Doubt have sometimes experienced something of this Kind. -- The Prophet Ezekiel
was to the People as a very lovely Song, of one that has a pleasant Voice; for
they heard his Words, and were pleased with them, but did them not Ezekiel. 33.32.
We also read of Herod's hearing John gladly Mark 6.20.
And we read of some who hear the Word, and anon with Joy receive it; but yet
have no Root in themselves, and so dure but for a while, for when Tribulation,
and Persecution arises, because of the Word, by and by they are offended
Matthew. 13.20, 21.
And there is great Uncertainty, and as much Danger for Persons to depend
merely upon their own Enlargements in religious Duties. Some Persons find a
great Freedom and Fluency in Prayer at particular Times; they sometimes find a
Liveliness, and feel some Kind of Fervor in the Duty of Prayer; and upon it
their Tho'ts are enlarged, and they perceive suitable pertinent Expressions to
flow in upon them: And now such Persons apt to lay great Weight upon these
Things, and look upon them as sure Tokens of their Conversion, and that the
Spirit of Grace and Supplication is poured out upon them. But it is no sure
Sign at all of true Grace in the Heart, for there is a Difference between the
Gift of Prayer, and the Grace of Prayer: Men may have the Gift of pouring out
their Words, when they have not the Grace to pour out their Hearts before God
in Prayer. A Man may have a Flow of Words, and no Flow of Grace at all in
Prayer. In short, a Man may, according to what the Apostle says, speak with the
Tongues of Men, and Angels, and yet be nothing. 1 Cor. 13.11.


5. Some have great Dependence upon the Awakenings, and Convictions, that have
been stirred up in them.

There are but few who have been favored with the free Use of the Gospel, and
with a relight Education; but what have been awakened into some Concern of
Soul, and have had some Convictions stirred up in them, either by the Workings
of natural Conscience, or by the common Motions of the Spirit of God, stirred
up in them, upon some particular Occasions. Thus Times of Sickness, and of sore
Affliction; and Times of imminent Hazard and Danger, frequently are the
Occasion of such Convictions. Moreover the falling into gross and scandalous
Sins, will oftentimes stir up Conscience so as to lash the Man very severely,
and give him most dreadful Twinges, not only for the Sin he has just fallen
into, but for other Sins also, which by this Means are bro't to his Remembrance.

And there are also other Times that Persons may be under Convictions, when
there can be no external Cause offered for it; and these Convictions may
sometimes run to a very high Degree, so that their Sins will stare them in the
Face, and the Wrath of God they will see hanging over them, and they are in
great Perplexity and Concern about their eternal State, and in great Distress
lest they should suddenly drop into the devouring Lake of Hell. And they may,
at such Times, be full of their Confessions and Acknowledgments, both to God
and Man; acknowledging they are some of the Chief of Sinners, and will freely
speak of their Pride, their Hypocrify, their Covetousness, and their Carnality;
and will be asking Forgiveness where they have offended, and will have many
Purposes, and be making many Promises of Amendment, and will take some Steps,
and go a considerable Way toward a Reformation.

Now these Things Men are apt to depend upon, and to date their Conversion from
some such Times as these; and when they think or are questioned about their
Conversion, they will look back to some such Season of Conviction, and quiet
themselves with it.

But now this is no certain Sign of Regeneration and Conversion, and Persons
may go thus far without any thoro' saving Change: For though there be no
Conversion without Conviction, yet there may be Conviction without Conversion.
Convictions may be merely from the Accusations of Conscience, from the Fear of
Death, from the Apprehensions of divine Wrath, and the Terrors of Hell, without
any real Love to God, or Faith in Christ; and they may be only sudden Pangs,
raised by the Apprehension of a present Danger, that go off with the Fright.
Thus Pharaoh King of Egypt, when the Judgments of God fell heavy upon him, he
had some Conviction, and acknowledged that he had sinned, and entreated Moses
to pray for him; but the particular Judgment was no sooner removed, but his
Heart was hardened again. Exodus 9.27, 28.
So the Children of Israel were greatly affected at the Terrors and Glories of
Mount Sinai, when the Law was delivered by the Ministry of Angels, in Thunders,
and Lightnings, and the noise of the Trumpet, and the Mountain covered with
Smoke, and burning with Fire. These awful Appearances so affected them, that
they promised, that all that the Lord should say unto them, by the Mouth of his
Servant Moses, they would do: But alas, their good Frame went off, and their
good Purposes and Promises were forgotten in less than six Weeks after. Exodus
20.18, 19. Deuteronomy. 5.28. Exodus 32. Chap.
And how common is it for Persons at some particular Times, to be under some
Convictions, and to be full of Confessions and Promises of Amendment; and yet
in a little Time return to their wonted Carelessness, and to their former
Courses: And it happens to them according to the true Proverb, the Dog is
turned to his own Vomit again, and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in
the Mire.

6. Some are taken with, and have great Dependence upon some sudden Pangs of
Joy which they experience; but these are no sure Mark of our being the Sons of
God.

As it is not an uncommon Thing for Persons who have no true Grace, to have
some Sorrow and Remorse for Sin; so neither is it for them to have a
considerable deal of Joy. Persons may pass out of deep Sorrow, into high
Degrees of Joy; and from being in Despair, to a Sort of full Assurance. Persons
may not only talk of the Love of Christ, and of their Interest in him; but they
may be persuaded in their own Minds that they are among the Number of his
redeemed chosen Ones, and they may sometimes be raised up even into such a
Transport of Joy as to overcome their Natures, and yet it may be a false Joy,
and the Foundation of it may be very defective. For as there may be a Sorrow
about Sin that is not a godly Sorrow, so there may be a Joy that is not a true
spiritual Joy. Which may be stirred up mechanically, and by some Influence upon
the animal O Economy, or from Ignorance and Mistake about themselves, and
Things of a spiritual Nature. We read of a Generation pure in their own Eyes;
and yet are not washed from their Filthiness Prove. 30.12.
. And no wonder if they should cry Peace, Peace; though there be no Peace
belonging to them. And we read of the Hope of unjust Persons Prove. 12.7.
, and of the Joy of the Hypocrite which is short and but for a Moment Job. 20.5.
. For what becomes of the Hope and Joy of the Hypocrite, though he has gained,
when God takes away his Soul Job. 27.8.
? Surely the Laughter, and so the Joy of such, is like the Crackling of Thorns
under a Pot Prove. 30.12.
, which makes a Noise and Blaze, but presently go out, which contributes but
little toward the Boiling of the Pot, because that requires a more steady Fire.

7. Some have great Dependence upon their Reformation as to some particular
Vices.

A partial Reformation is no uncommon Thing among those who are yet in their
State of Unregeneracy. There are some Vices that some Sinners more easily
reform and refrain from. Thus those Sins and Follies that youthful Age is
subject to, are frequently reformed, when Persons come to riper Years. Other
Sins there are that Persons refrain from, merely for Want of the same
Opportunities and Temptations which they had before; and this they take for
real Reformation, whereas their Hearts are much the same. Some again refrain
from this and the other Vice, from prudent, political, worldly Considerations.
They find that they impair their Health, bring on Pain and Sickness, and hinder
them from other worldly Enjoyments, and tend to shorten Life; and from these
Considerations they refrain. Others again abstain from this and the other Vice,
because it wastes their Effects, and their Circumstances will not allow it. And
others because it hurts their Character, and will bring on Disgrace, or hinder
their Promotion. But now you may easily see how little these are to be depended
upon. For if Men only reform as to some Sins, and yet live in others; it is a
Sign there is no true Grace in the Heart, and that such a Soul has not passed
through a regenerating Change: For where there is true Grace, there will be the
breaking with every Sin. The Language of a truly gracious Soul is that of the
Psalmist, 119.128. I esteem ALL thy Precepts concerning ALL Things to be right,
and I hate EVERY false Way. Yea, there must be a departing from our own
Iniquity, if we would give a sure Sign of our Uprightness before God Psalm.
18.23.
. We must lay aside every Weight, and the Sin that most easily besets us, if we
would run the christian Race Heb. 12.1.
.

8. Others again have great Dependence upon their being just, and true, and
honest in their Dealings, as a certain Mark of their being in a State of Grace.

There are many Persons in the World, whom if you should ask them, what Reason
they had to think they were the Children of God, or what they grounded their
Hopes of Heaven and Happiness upon? Would answer, That they have never wronged
any Man (as they know of) in their Lives, that they have dealt fairly and
justly with all Men, that they have been careful to pay their Dues both public
and private.

And now this, if it be true, is an excellent Thing, and it is what the Gospel
teaches and requires, and wherever the Spirit of God comes it always works such
a just and honest Principle in the Soul, which will put the Man that is under
the Influence of it, upon dealing justly with all Men, and speaking the Truth
to his Neighbor; and without this it is in vain for a Man to pretend to be a
Christian.

But now a Man's being fair and honest in his Dealings is of it self, by no
Means to be depended upon. For this may be owing, partly to a Sort of native
Simplicity that some Men have; or it may be partly from the Manner of their
Education, where they have never seen the Way of the World, and the hidden
Things of Dishonesty, that are practiced in it; or it may be from a political
Consideration, governing themselves by that common and good Maxim, viz. that
Honesty is the best Policy. Persons may be very fair and honest in their
Dealings, merely for the Sake of gaining Credit and Custom, and so of enlarging
their Business and their Income, without any Regard to God, or their Duty
therein; but only as the most likely Means of promoting their worldly Interest.
And so it may be said, that some People are fair in their Dealings, from the
same Views that others are unfair and dishonest, merely to get more of the
World, either of the Praise or of the Profit of the World. And here, although I
do by no Means put the honest and the dishonest Man upon a Level; yet it is
possible they may both be acted from the same carnal and worldly Principle;
even a Desire to get the World. One takes this Way, the other takes that Way,
to increase his worldly Goods; and as for any Regard to God and their Duty,
they don't come into Consideration by either of them.

9. Some have great Dependence upon their generous and charitable Practices, as
Marks of their being the Children of God; but they are, by themselves, very
uncertain ones.

Some Men appear to have a great deal of Generosity in their Tempers; they seem
to be of a loving friendly Disposition. They will say that they owe no Man any
ill Will, and it don't appear that they do: We shall find them very
neighbourly, and ready to any Acts of Kindness that any about them stand in
need of. They appear tender hearted, and compassionate to those in Distress,
and will often go a great Way in giving Relief unto them; lending, or giving,
assisting, and defending them, as their Cases call for, and as they have
Ability. And we may see they do many generous Actions, encouraging Acts of
Charity, not only by their Words, but by their Example; and will show very much
of a public Spirit, promoting Things that tend to the public Good, and will
scorn to do any Thing that appears mean, and little, and stingy.

And now this is a very lovely Temper, and recommends Persons to the Esteem and
Delight of all that know them. And this is a Temper and Practice which the
Gospel requires, and which Christ himself recommends by his own Example, whose
whole Life was a continued Act of Goodness and Kindness to Man; and such a
Temper is always to be sound where the Spirit of God is at work in good
Earnest; for the Fruit of the Spirit is in all Goodness. Ephesians. 5.9.


But yet there may be a great deal of this Temper operating, without any true
Grace; and in such as are the Children of the wicked One, rather than the
Children of God. For there is such a Thing as Goodnature: That is, some Men in
their very Make and Constitution, are more inclined to peaceable, loving, kind,
and generous Actions, than others. Some Men are more mild and gentle in their
Tempers, and have less of Anger and Resentment than others. And some have a
more tender and compassionate Temper, and are more sensibly affected with the
Difficulties and Distresses of their Friends and Neighbors, than others. And
some are naturally more open hearted, and more free to give, than others.

Moreover the Manner of Men's Education may have a great Hand in this; they are
bro't up in an open, free, generous Way of living, and under an Apprehension of
it is being mean and base to appear close and covetous: And some are bro't up in
such a Way, as that nothing appears more disgraceful to them, than to be
penurious and close; nor is there any Thing they are more afraid of, than not
to be though it generous and open hearted, and many Times will go beyound their
Abilities in their Entertainments and Ways of living, for fear they should be
though it Niggards and Misers. And now this springs from Pride rather than any true
Generosity, and from an unreasonable Fear and Concern about their own
Character, rather than from any true Regard to God and his Honor.

Moreover, there is the same Pharisaical Spirit in the World that was in our
Savior's Time, when they did their Alms to be seen of Men, and to have Glory
of Men Matthew. 6.2.
.

Furthermore, it is no uncommon Thing for Men to treat each other with great
outward Civility and Respect; yea, and to heap many Kindnesses upon them, when
there is Envy and Malice in their Hearts.

Finally here, the Apostle supposes a Man may go so far as to give all his
Goods to feed the Poor, and not have the Grace of Charity, and consequently to
be nothing 1 Cor. 13.2.
.

10. Some have great Dependence upon the good Opinion that others have of them.

If their Reputation runs high for serious and religious Persons, and they
understand that this is their Character among Men; it is very apt to raise
their Opinion of themselves, and it is exceeding natural for Persons to fall in
with the good Opinion that others have of them. But now what is more precarious
or uncertain than this? How many are there that bear a good Name and Character,
that are very unworthy of it, while others that are much more deserving, are
defamed and condemned? But then if any Person who is in great Esteem for his
own Experiences, and for his Skill in examining and trying Men's spiritual
State, shall pronounce upon some such, when they have examined, that they are
converted, and shall upon it call them the dear Children of God, they are very
apt to conclude at once that it is so, and to look upon themselves as God's
Children. But now this is a very uncertain and unsafe Way of determining the
Matter as to our spiritual State. For alas, what is more fallable than the
Judgment of Man, especially when he undertakes to judge about the Hearts of
others? It is exceeding difficult for Men to find out their own Hearts so as to
judge fully upon them, how much more difficult to judge the Hearts of others.
If Men are apt to deceive themselves, Oh how easy is it then to deceive others!
Nay, some of these that undertake to judge the State of others, may be
dreadfully deceived and deluded as to themselves, and then no wonder if they
should be deceived as to others, and be the Means of deceiving them. Moreover,
some real Christians may have an Excess of Charity, that is they may sometimes
judge too favorably of others, and think they are the Children of God when
they are not. So that although it may be very proper for Persons to lay their
Case before experienced Divines, and converse with experienced Christians about
their spiritual State? yet there must not be too great Stress laid upon their
Judgment; but you must remember that Man looks at the outward Appearance, and
that it is God alone that looks to the Heart, and that sees to the Bottom of
it. And you must be sensible, that many and many a one who has been numbered
among the Saints of God on Earth; yea, and had in high Reputation for their
Piety and Goodness, will be ranked with Sinners in the Day of Judgment. Who
were in greater Reputation for Piety and Sanctity than the Pharisees of old?
and yet Christ pronounces them gross Hypocrites, and such as should receive the
greater Damnation Matthew. 23.14.
And Philip himself was mistaken with Respect to Simon the Sorcerer, when he
baptized him, and received him among the Faithful Acts 8.13, 23.
. Which shows how unsafe it is to depend upon the good Opinion or Judgment of
others with Respect to the State of our Souls.

II. There is a Sort of Love to God and Christ which some Persons have, and
depend very much upon it, as a Mark of their being the true Children of God;
and yet it is a very uncertain one.

The true Love of God and Christ, is one of the best Evidences that we are the
Children of God, for God is Love, and every one that loves is born of God 1
John 4.7, 8.
. But yet there is a Sort of Love, and an Appearance of Love, which People are
apt to be deceived with, which is no Sign of our being the Children of God.

Thus there is a loving in Word and in Tongue, which some at length come to
persuade themselves is a real hearty Love, that is, some People take delight in
discoursing about Christ, and about Matters of Religion, and especially about
their own supposed Experiences, and particularly of the goings forth of their
Souls as they imagine in Love to God and Christ, and they by frequent speaking
of these Things without a careful Examination, they are at length persuaded
that they do truly love him, when perhaps there may be no real Love in their
Hearts, nor any manifest Token of it in their Lives, none of that which Christ
makes the standing Mark and sure Sign of true Love to him, even the keeping his
Commandments John 14.21.
.

Again, there are some that think they love God and Christ, and so are the
Children of God; because they love to attend upon some religious Duties, they
love to read, they love to hear, they love to meet together for religious
Worship, and for Conversation about religious Matters, and sometimes they are
in such an earnest Frame about these Things, that they know not how to let slip
any Opportunity for meeting together that occurs. And now there is a great Show
of Love to God in these Things; and it must be said, that where there is true
Love to God there will be a Love to his House, a Love to his Worship, and to
his Ordinances. But yet there is a Sort of Love to these Things, that is no
certain Sign of Love to God, or of our being his Children. A Man may love
religious Assemblies and religious Exercises upon some Accounts; and yet not
truly love God. When there was but very little of the Love of God or of
Obedience to him among the Children of Israel, they abounded in Sacrifices, so
that God was full of them and weary of them Isai. 1.11, 12.
. And speaks of it to the Reproach of that People that they seemed to love and
delight in religious Services, when they had no real Regard for him. Yet they
seek me daily, and delight to know my Ways, as a Nation that did Righteousness,
and for sook not the Ordinances of their God, they ask of me the Ordinances of
Justice, they take Delight in approaching to God Isai. 58.2.
. Herod heard John gladly Mark 6.20.
, but was very far from loving him, or Christ whose Messenger he was. Stony
ground Hearers receive the Word with Joy, but are not rooted and grounded in
Love.

Again, Some mistake and think they love Christ so as is a good Sign of their
being the Children of God, because they find themselves much affected with a
lively Description of the Sufferings and Death of Christ, when perhaps the same
Affections might be raised by reading or hearing any other affecting Tragedy,
at least if they saw one acted upon the Stage. Christ's Sufferings may be
described in such a lively Manner as to work very powerfully upon the
Imagination and Affections, even so as to draw forth Tears, yea, to cause
Schreetches and Screamings out, and yet there may be no true Love to him.

Again, Persons may mistake as to their Love to Christ, and so their being the
Children of God, this Way, viz. they are filled with Distress and Terror
because of the Wrath of God and the eternal Torments of Hellfire they are
exposed unto, and the Apprehensions that Christ will deliver them from Death,
and Hell, and eternal Misery, excite some Love and Affections in them to Jesus
Christ; but it is perhaps merely upon this Though It of his being their Deliverer
from Misery, without any Consideration of those amiable Excellencies and
Perfections in him, which demand their highest Esteem, Love, and Delight. They
love him only as a Man would love another that should go into the Water and
pull him out when he was just sinking and drowning, he will in the Time of it
have some grateful Sense of his Kindness, and will find some considerable Love
going toward him, and yet perhaps may have no inward Esteem for him; may have
no Regard for him, but only for this one Act of Kindness.

Thus Persons may be pleased with the Though It of having Christ for their Savior,
to save them from Hell and Misery; and yet have no proper Esteem of him for his
own real amiable Excellencies, so as to love him upon the Account of them; they
may love him for his Goodness and Kindness to them, but not for his Wisdom, his
Justice, his Truth, and Holiness: They may love him for a Savior, but not for
a Sovereign, they may love him for purchasing a Pardon, but not for his
Precepts and Rules of living: But this is not a true Love. For where there is
the true Love of God's Children, there will be a loving Christ for his own
Sake, and for what he is in himself, as well as for what he is to them. They
will be pleased with him as well for being a Prince, as a Savior; and will be
as much pleased with the Thought of being delivered from the Power, as from the
Punishment of Sin.

12. Many have great Dependence upon their acting Conscienciously, and being
fearful of doing any Thing that will stir up their Consciences against them.
But now, in some Respects, this is an uncertain Mark of being the Children of
God.

Many there are, who conclude they are the Children of God, and draw great
Comfort to themselves from this Consideration, that they make Conscience of
their Ways, and that they don't allow themselves in offending against their
Consciences, or in doing any Thing that their Consciences would accuse them of.
And besure this bids fair for a certain Mark of a true Christian and Child of
God. The Apostle's Advice to others was to have and keep a good Conscience 1
Pet. 3.16.
. And they exercised themselves to have a Conscience void of Offense toward
God, and toward Men Acts 24.16.
. And their rejoicing was this, the Testimony of their Consciences, that in
Simplicity, and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of
God, they had their Conversation in the World 2 Cor. 1.12.
. And Baptism is said to save us, not the putting away the Filth of the Flesh,
but the Answer of a good Conscience toward God 1 Pet. 3.21.
And yet after all we must carefully distinguish here about Conscience, or we
may be mistaken.

Thus we must distinguish,

1. Between Conscience in the full Extent and Latitude of its Dictates, and in
the restrained limited Sense in which it is frequently taken.

Thus considering Conscience in the full Extent of it, and it teaches us that
we ought to aim at the Glory of God in all we do, and that we should keep his
Commandments out of Love to God, and from a Principle of Obedience, and with
sincere Desires of pleasing, and glorifying him thereby.

Moreover, Conscience enlightened by divine Revelation teaches us to do all we
do in the Name of Christ and in Dependence upon his Grace to help us, trusting
to find Acceptance only through him. Now taking Conscience in such a large Sense
and it dictates the whole of Christianity to us, and consequently to comply
with the Dictates thereof, is to come up to the Precepts and Principles of
Christianity. And such as go this Length in complying with the Dictates of
Conscience, may upon good Grounds conclude they are the Children of God.

But taking Conscience as it is more frequently and commonly understood, and it
intends no more than its dictating to us that this and the other is to be done
by us, as our Duty; that this and the other is a Sin, and must be avoided,
without considering so much how and after what Manner it is to be done either
with Respect to God or Christ. Conscience, according to the common vulgar
Understanding of it, don't so much respect the Principle, the Views, and the
Aims respecting God and Christ, as the bare doing or not doing the Thing. And
now I say taking Conscience in this restrained Sense, and a Man may be
conscientious, that is careful to do this and the other Duty, and to avoid this
and the other Sin; and yet it may be no certain Sign of his being a Child of
God.

2. We must distinguish between our Regards extending ultimately to God, and
their terminating in Conscience.

Although we are to have a constant Regard to Conscience, and must govern our
selves by the Dictates thereof in all we do: yet our Tho'ts and Views, our
Subjection and Obedience must not terminate in Conscience. But we must look
beyond Conscience unto God, whose Will and Command is our only Rule, and
Conscience is not to be regarded, only upon the Supposition of its dictating
the Will of God to us. Conscience is to be consulted upon all Occasions; but
yet it must not be considered as our Sovereign and supreme Lord, but only as
God's Deputy and Vicegerent in the Soul. We must obey Conscience not merely
because it is the Voice of Conscience, but because we look upon it as the Voice
of God, and as dictating the Mind and Will of God unto us. And so our
hearkening to the Dictates of Conscience must be in Obedience to God, and
because we look upon the Dictates thereof as the Will of God made known unto
us. For unless we thus carry our Thoughts and Principles of Obedience beyond
Conscience unto God, we shall make Conscience to be our God and Sovereign, to
the Neglect of the great God himself, who is the Lord of Conscience. And even
an Atheist might go so far as this, he might hearken to his own Conscience
according as it judged Things to be right or wrong, and God not be in all his
Thoughts. Consequently, if we may suppose a Man to govern himself by
Conscience, without any ultimate Regard to God, and he would be mistaken if he
should look upon himself a Child of God.

3. We must distinguish between a free and voluntary Obedience to Conscience,
and a servile slavish Subjection to it.

Men may follow the Dictates of Conscience, but not out of any love to, or
delight in what they do: They may be even compelled and forced to it, for fear
of the Lashes of Conscience afterward. And so to prevent the Trouble and
Distress of Mind they know they shall be in, if they don't hearken to
Conscience; they submit to this and that which Conscience tells them they must
do.

And this is the Case with many Persons, they refrain from many known Sins, not
because they really hate them, and they comply with many known Duties, not
because they love and Delight in them; but merely out of Fear of their
Consciences, least they should rise up against them, should accuse them, and
should give great Trouble and Distress of Mind to them.

And now the Virtue and Goodness of such refraining from Sin, and complying
with Duty, seems to be no more than when a Man refrains from such and such a
Sin, merely for fear of some bodily Pain and Punishment.

For what is the real Difference in the Principle, when a Man refrains from a
sinful Action for fear of a whipped Back, or some bodily Pain that it may
naturally cause; and when it is merely to escape the Pain of the Mind, the
Girds and Lashes of a guilty Conscience? You must remember that I say, when it
is wholly and merely for sear of this. For that the Fear of Conscience, and its
severe Lashes, is, and may be, an Argument with us to restrain us from Sin is
undoubted, and so may the Fear of bodily Pain or Punishment. But when it is
only this Fear of the Lash of Conscience that dictates and hinders us, it is a
servile Fear of Conscience, rather than a gracious child-like Fear of God; and
so is by no Means a Proof of our being the Children of God.

And thus we see how that Consciousness considered in some Respects is a very
different Thing from true Godliness: And thus a Man may in some Sense be a
conscientious Man, and yet no true Child of God.

I have insisted the longer upon this Head, and been more particular in making
the Distinctions, because it is shocking at the first Though It to many, to say,
that making Conscience of their Ways is not a certain Sign of their being the
Children of God; and that Persons might see what I mean by it, and that they
might not commit a Mistake in this Point, and so miscarry at last: For this is
a very dangerous Rock upon which many are lost, and the peculiar Dangerousness
of it lies in this, that it is not so easily discerned as some others.

And thus I have mentioned some of the many false and uncertain Marks of being
the Children of God, by which Multitudes have been, and are deceived. I say
some of the false uncertain Marks, for there are a Multitude more from which
Persons take occasion to flatter themselves into vain Hopes of their good
Estate, to their eternal Ruin. But what I have said is abundantly sufficient to
ground this one practical Reflection upon, with which I shall conclude the
present Discourse, viz.

Since there are so many Things which we are apt to depend upon as Signs of our
being the Children of God, that are false, and at best but uncertain Marks
hereof; Oh! with what a godly Jealousy should we be jealous over ourselves, and
with what holy Fear and Trembling should we be working out our own Salvation!

Here we see that there are a Multitude of Ways for Men to deceive and delude
themselves, even in Matters of the highest Importance, and of infinite
Concernment to them. Innumerable Ways of raising our Hopes and Expectations of
Safety and Happiness in the future eternal World, and all upon a sandy
Foundation that will fail us in the Conclusion. And the Wretchedness of it is,
that we willingly deceive our selves, and suffer our selves to be deluded. And
Oh! what Multitudes have flattered themselves with false Hopes, and for want of
due Care, have never found their Mistake, till it was past all Remedy! How
jealous then should we be of our selves! and how fearful lest this should be
our own dreadful Case! When I consider the many false and uncertain Marks there
are of our being the Sons of God, and the innumerable Ways that a subtle Devil
and our own deceitful Hearts have to deceive us, I am shocked extremely to hear
People talk with so much Confidence, as some have done, about their good
Estate. When People will say they are as fully assured of their future
Wellbeing as they are of their present Existence, and that they know as
certainly that they are born of God, and are converted, as that they are born
of their earthly Parents: I say when Persons talk with such Confidence as this,
and yet at the same Time acknowledge that they are but newly converted, and so
have had but little Experience; it looks as if they had not thoroughly
considered of the many Ways in which Persons are liable to be deceived, and I
doubt not but that Length of Time, and a fuller Experience, will abate their
Positiveness, and lead them into a more modest Way of expressing themselves
about these Things. Surely if Persons did but duly consider the Deceitfulness
of Men's Hearts, and the Subtilty of Satan, and the innumerable Ways in which
Men have been deluded, they would humbly enquire whether a deceived Heart has
not turned them aside; and instead of talking with such an Air of Confidence as
some have done, they would say, Search me, O God, and know my Heart, try me,
and know my Tho'ts; and see if there be any wicked Way in me, and lead me in
the Way everlasting. Psalm. 139.23, 24.


Dearly beloved, let every one of you that pretend to any Hopes of your good
Estate, consider whether you have not been feeding upon Ashes, whether you have
not had your Dependence upon some of these false and uncertain Marks? Whether
you have any better Foundation for your Hopes, or supposed Assurances, than
some of those Marks which Hypocrites may have? Whether your Confidences are not
vain, and your Refuge of Lies, that will quickly be swept away.

Oh that you were sensible of the vast Extent of Christianity, and how
difficult it is to be a thoro' Christian, and how exceeding apt Persons are to
think they are something, when indeed they are nothing, and so deceive them
selves. Wherefore to prevent any fatal Mistakes in this Matter, you must
diligently study the Nature of true Christianity in the full Extent and
Latitude of it, and not take up with only some particular Part or Instance of
it. But seek to God for such a Principle of Grace as may prompt you to every
Part of the Christian Life. Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have Respect to
all thy Commandments. I shall conclude with those awakening Words of our
blessed Savior, Matthew. 7.14, 15. Enter ye in at the strait Gate, for wide is
the Gate and broad is the Way that leads to Destruction, and many there be
which go in thereat; because strait is the Gate and narrow is the Way which
leads unto Life, and few there be that find it.

Discourse IV.
I am upon the second Proposition, vizt.

Prop. II. THE surest and clearest Mark of our being the Children of God, is
our being LED and GOVERNED by HIS SPIRIT.

Under which I have said,

1. It is our highest Privilege and Happiness to be numbered and found among the
Children of God.

2. It is Matter of unspeakable Comfort, to have a well grounded Evidence in
our selves, that we are the Children of God.

3. That there are many Things, which Persons are apt to take for Marks and
Tokens of their being the Children of God, which are false, at least very
uncertain, and by no Means to be depended upon.

I now proceed to say,

4. That the surest and clearest Mark of our being the Children of God, is our
being LED and GOVERNED by HIS SPIRIT.

Doubtless you would all be glad to know that you are the Sons of God, and many
of you I believe are inquisitive about it, and looking out for Signs and Marks
of your Regeneration, and so of your being among his Children; well let me tell
you from God himself, that this is the most sure, yea the only certain Mark of
it; even your being led and governed by his Spirit. For as many as are led by
the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. So many as are led by his Spirit,
are his Children, and no more. Let their Profession and their Pretensions be
what they will; if they be not led by his Spirit, and are not under the
Government of a gracious Principle, they are not his Children; whereas, every
Person that is led by this blessed Spirit, let them be never so much despised,
let them be never so hardly censured and condemned and hated by the World, yet
God will own and love them, and treat them as his Children.

But then this Question naturally arises, How shall I know whether I am led by
the Spirit of God or no? You will be ready to say, I doubt not but that all who
are led by the Spirit of God are his Children; but the great Difficulty is to
know whether I am led by his Spirit or no? Many have thought that they have
been led by this good Spirit of God, and have been very confident about it,
when really they have been governed only by their own Spirits, or deluded by
the Devil that wicked Spirit; and there are (as has been said) a Multitude of
Ways wherein Persons are deceived about their being led by the Spirit of God;
how then shall I know whether I am so governed by him as to be a sure and
certain Mark of my being a Child of God? Well then, this is what I propose by
the Help of God to show you at this Time, namely, When Persons are so led by
the Spirit of God, as to be a sure and clear Mark of their being the Children
of God.

And now this, my Hearers, demands your diligent Attention, and careful
Observation; for you must be sensible there are some Things that look like the
Leadings and Workings of God's Spirit, which indeed are but the natural
Workings of our own, and it is very difficult to distinguish some of the
Workings of refined Nature from true Grace, and Men are exceeding apt to be
mistaken herein, and have many Times taken this and that to be the Workings of
the Spirit of Grace, when really they are one Workings of their own
Imaginations or Passions.

What I propose therefore is to give you some of the clearest and best Marks I
can, of our being led by the Spirit of God, and of our being under a divine and
gracious Influence in what we do; by which, if we do not mistake in the
Application of these Marks, we may in some good Measure judge what Manner of
Persons we are.

And here I shall not consider any of the extraordinary Gifts, or miraculous
Operations of the Spirit of God, in which the Holy Ghost fell upon the
Apostles, in the Day of Pentecost; for these extraordinary and miraculous
Gifts, are distant from the Graces of the Spirit, and are in their Nature
separable from them, and so are no certain Signs of our being the Children of
God. Men may have those Gifts of the Spirit, and not be the Sons of God; for
Gifts and Graces don't always go together, no not those extraordinary Gifts.
Many will say in the Day of Judgment, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name,
and in thy Name cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful Works, to
whom Christ will say, Depart from me ye that work Iniquity Matthew. 7.22, 23.
. So that even these extraordinary Leadings or miraculous Operations of the
Spirit, are no infallible Sign of Grace, and so not of our Adoption, therefore
I shall say nothing of them.

Neither in the second Place shall I take Notice of such Things, as the
Workings of God's Spirit may be only the accidental Causes of, and which Things
may be, and oftentimes are, produced by some other Causes. That is, I shall not
speak of any extraordinary Commotions of Spirit or Body, nor any Outcries for
Sorrow, or Screamings for Joy, or falling down, or Swoonings, and Faintings,
etc. at the Preaching of the Word, or other religious Exercises; for although the
Spirit of God no doubt may come so powerfully in Convictions, and Comforts, and
Joys, upon weak Spirits as even to overcome them, and so be the accidental
Cause of such Appearances sometimes; yet as it is possible, and no Ways
improbable, but that such uncommon Appearances, may oftentimes arise from quite
different Causes; and the Spirit of God have no Hand in them, but in a
providential Way, so these can be no certain Marks or Tokens of a Man's being
under the special Operations of the Spirit of God; therefore there is no Stress
at all to be laid upon such Things considered in themselves.

But the Tokens and Marks that I shall give you, of your being so led by the
Spirit of God, as to be a certain Sign of your being the Children of God, shall
be such as arise from the very Nature of the divine Spirit himself, as it is
revealed, to us in the Names, Titles, and Characters that are given of him in
the holy Scriptures, and these these, my Brethren, you may depend upon.

So then,

1. I shall begin with that Character or Title given of this Spirit in our
Text, where he is called the SPIRIT OF GOD.

So that this Spirit which leads and governs every Child of God is the Spirit
of God, the third Person in the adorable Trinity, and so is indeed God. And he
is frequently styled the Spirit of God.

And now if it be the Spirit of God that leads them, we may conclude that he
will lead them unto God. For whether should the Spirit of God lead us, but unto
God himself?

The Spirit of God must needs lead us to the Belief of his Being and
Perfections, and to the Knowledge of him, and Acquaintance with him in some
Measure, and to have a special Regard to him in all our Actions. If the Spirit
of God leads us he must needs lead us to believe that God is, and to see and
apprehend something of his Glory and Majesty, and of those glorious
Excellencies and Perfections that make up the divine Essence. Moreover, The
Spirit of God will lead us to see and consider him in the Relation he stands in
to us, and to all the World, as our Creator, our Preserver, and our sovereign
Lord and Ruler; and so will lead us to esteem and admire him, to worship and
adore him, to love and fear him, to trust in him, and obey him, to be above all
concerned for his Glory, and to place all our Happiness in him. Now I say, that
that Spirit which is the Spirit of God, whenever he leads any of us, must needs
thus lead us to God.

Well then, if you would know whether you are led by the Spirit of God, you
must see whether you are thus led to God, or no. Are you led to such
Apprehensions of God, and to such Dispositions and Affections of Soul toward
him, as are due to him from us? Have you a firm Belief of his Being, and have
you the highest Apprehensions of his infinite Majesty, and of all his glorious
Excellencies and Perfections? Do you stand in an holy Awe of him, so as to
worship him with Reverence and godly Fear, and are you afraid of sinning
against him? Moreover, do you love him with all your Heart and Soul, have you
the highest Esteem of him, have you the most ardent Desires after him, and do
you take the greatest Delight in drawing nigh to him, and in having Communion
with him? Are you really concerned for his Honor and Glory, and have you a
Care, and is it your Desire and Endeavor to please, honor and glorify him in
all Things? And do you find your selves grieved and troubled whenever you see
God dishonored, or displeased? Does Sin trouble you because it dishonours God,
and offends him? And can you say that you are so concerned for the Glory of
God, that there is a general and a governing Aim at it in all you do, even in
the daily Concerns and common Affairs of Life? Do you in any Measure come up to
the Apostle's Rule, that whether you eat or drink or whatever you do, you do
all to the Glory of God. 1 Cor. 10.31.
Furthermore, Do you find yourselves devoted to the Service of God, and are you
submissive to his Will? Do you find and feel your selves under the Influence of
his divine Power and Authority, and do you find a ready Subjection to his
Preceptive Will, and a quiet Submission to his providential Will? Can you
heartily say as in the Lord's Prayer, Thy Will be done? And do you really
desire to know, obey and submit to his Will in all Things? Again, Do you
plainly see that he is the only satisfying Portion of the Soul? And can you
truly say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.57. Thou art my Portion, O Lord? And do
you plainly perceive that all your real Happiness lies in the Enjoyment of God?
And do you find the Streams of Goodness that flow from him to you, enlarge your
Heart toward him, and lead you nearer and nearer to the Fountain of all Good?

Now if it be thus with you, you may conclude that you are led by the Spirit of
God, and consequently are the Children of God. For who or what would lead us to
God in such a Manner as this, but the Spirit of God himself?

Again,

2. This Spirit is called the SPIRIT OF CHRIST, consequently he will lead us to
CHRIST, and to GOD through CHRIST.

Thus he is called in the 9th Verse of the Context, If any Man have not the
SPIRIT OF CHRIST, he is none of his. So 1 Pet. 1.11. he is called the Spirit of
Christ. And now this divine eternal Spirit was the Spirit of Christ,
considering Christ in his mediatorial Office, for Christ as Mediator, received
the Spirit not by Measure, John 3.34.
and he dwelt in him. And it was by the holy Ghost that he chose his Disciples,
and gave Commandments unto them. Acts 1.2.
Moreover he may be called the Spirit of Christ, as he procured of the Father
his being sent to testify of him; to endow his Apostles, those chosen Witnesses
of his, with those extraordinary and miraculous Gifts, which fitted them for
preaching Christ, and publishing the Gospel to the World: And to work
powerfully, graciously, and savingly upon the Souls of Men. For thus says
Christ, But when the Comforter, that is the holy Ghost is come, whom I will
send unto you from the Father; he shall testify of me. John 15.26.
And we read of God's sending forth the Spirit of his Son into the Hearts of
his Children. Gal. 4.6.


And now if it be the Spirit of Christ, and the Spirit which testifies
concerning Christ, that leads and governs every Child of God, we may certainly
conclude that this Spirit will lead them unto Christ; to the Knowledge, the
saving Knowledge of Christ, to a sincere Belief on him, and to a hearty
Acceptance of him as he is revealed and offered in the Gospel.

And this Spirit leads the Soul to Christ by convincing him of Sin, of the Evil
of Sin in general, and of his own Sinfulness in particular. He opens the Man's
Eyes to see what a vile Creature he is by reason of Sin. He gives him to see
how that his corrupt Nature, and his sinful Life has rendered him very odious
and offensive to the infinitely holy God, that he is obnoxious to divine
Justice; and that he deserves nothing less than Death, Hell, and eternal
Misery. He gives him to see that all the Curses of God's Law are out against
him, and that he is liable every Day to be seized by divine Vengeance, and that
it is of the Lord's Mercies that he is not consumed in the Flames of Hell.

Moreover, This blessed Spirit in leading the Soul to Christ, leads him to see
that he has no Way to help and deliver himself out of this wretched State. He
gives the Soul to see that he has not wherewith to atone for his Sin, or make
Satisfaction to divine Justice: For the Soul that is thereby convinced of Sin,
sees such an infinite Evil in Sin, and that it reflects such an infinite
Dishonor upon God, that nothing he has to offer to God can be sufficient to
atone therefore. He sees that Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the Beasts
thereof sufficient for a Burnt-offering Isai. 40.16.
. Nay, he is by the Spirit made to see, that if God would accept of his sincere
Repentance for his past Sins, and Amendment of Life for the future; yet that he
has no Heart herefor, but that if he be left to himself, he shall, instead of
repenting and reforming, be adding continually to the Score of Guilt, and
treasuring up Wrath against the Day of Wrath* So that he by the Spirit is led
to see, that if left to himself, he has no Hope no Help; but must inevitably
perish.

Moreover, The Spirit leads him to see that there is no Way to Salvation but in
and through Jesus Christ, that there is no Salvation in any other, nor any other
Name given under Heaven among Men, whereby we can be saved, but only the Name
of Jesus Acts 5.12.
And here the Spirit opens the Eyes of the poor convinced Soul to see Jesus
whom God has exalted at his own right Hand to be a Prince and Savior, to give
Repentance and Remission of Sins Acts 5.31.
. And he sees him as one able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God
by him Heb. 7.25.
. Accordingly this blessed Spirit persuades and enables the Soul to come to
Christ, and to come to God through him, and to commit the whole Affair of his
Salvation into his Hands, heartily accepting of him in all the Offices that he
sustains and executes as our Redeemer.

Now then if you would know whether you are led by the Spirit; you must see
whether he thus leads you unto the Lord Jesus Christ. Has this Spirit thoro'ly
convinced you of Sin? Have you been led to see your sinful, lost and perishing
State, and the absolute Need you stand in of a Savior? And have you seen the
Fullness and all sufficiency of Christ, and the Fitness there is in him to be a
complete Savior to you? Have you ever seen the amiable Excellencies there are
in Christ, and his amazing Love to poor perishing Sinners, in purchasing and
procuring eternal Redemption for them, at the Price of his own most precious
Blood and Life? Do you also see how that in this Affair of our Salvation by a
Redeemer God has abounded toward us in all Wisdom and Prudence, and do you
highly approve of this Method of Salvation, which humbles Man, and exalts free
Grace; and do you heartily come into it? Do you receive him heartily and
unreservedly as the Prophet, Priest and King of your Salvation? Do you subject
your self to him, as freely as you rely upon him for Salvation, nay do you see
that your Salvation does very much consist in a Subjection to him? Do you shake
off all Dependence upon your selves, or upon any Righteousness or Worthiness of
your own, and do you look to him both for Righteousness and Strength? Do you
depend entirely upon the Merits of Christ's Obedience and Death, and the
Prevalency of his Intercession for Pardon and Acceptance with God? And are you
willing, heartily willing, to be saved in the Way that Christ offers to be your
Savior?

Furthermore, Are you so led to Christ as to be in love with him? Do you see a
Comeliness, a Beauty, and a Glory in him, so as to esteem him the Chief among
ten Thousands, altogether lovely? And do you love him above Father, and Mother,
and Brother, and Sister, and Wife, and Children, and Houses, and Lands; yea,
and above your very Lives? Thus you must love him, or you are not worthy of him
Matthew. 10.37, 38.
; and thus you will love him, if you are led by his Spirit.

Finally here, are you so led to him, as to be in some Measure conformed to
him? Have you something of the same Mind in you as was in Christ Jesus? Has
this blessed Spirit of Christ assimilated you, and made you like to him in the
Temper of your Minds? And does it lead you to tread in his Steps, and walk as
he walked in the World? Have you learned of him who was humble, and meek, and
lowly in Heart? Are you diligent, and devout, are you patient, and forgiving,
are you harmless and heavenly as he was? And have you any Thing of that
Submissiveness to your heavenly Father's Will, and such a Concern for his Glory
as there was in Christ? And is there any Thing of that Care and diligent
Endeavor to finish the Work which God has given you to do, as there was in him?

And now if you can find such a Temper, and such a Behavior toward the Lord
Jesus Christ, you may conclude that the Spirit of Christ has so far the Leading
of you, as to be a good Evidence that you are the Children of God.

Again,

3. The Spirit by which the Children of God are led, is A SPIRIT OF TRUTH, by
whose Inspiration the holy Scriptures were given: Consequently such as are led
by THIS SPIRIT, will have a high Regard for them, and will make them the Rule
of their Faith and Practice.

All Scripture was given by Inspiration of God, that is of the Spirit of God:
For holy Men of God spoke these Things as they were moved by the holy Ghost 2
Pet. 1.21.
. Thus it was with the Scriptures of the old Testament, and it is the same with
the Scriptures of the new Testament, for the Authors thereof had the Spirit of
God with them, even the Spirit of Truth to lead them into all, that is into all
necessary Truths John 16.13.
. And the Apostle Paul tells us that they spoke not in Words which Men's Wisdom
teaches, but which the HOLY GHOST teaches 1 Cor. 2.13.
. So that the Spirit which leads every Child of God is the self same Spirit
which inspired the Prophets and Apostles of old, and enabled them to deliver
those sacred Oracles of Truth contained in the Bible.

And now we may be sure that all those whom this blessed Spirit leads and
governs, he will lead them not only into the Belief of the Scriptures which
came from himself; but into the Love of them, and into a Conformity to them.

So that if this Spirit has the Leading of any, it may be depended upon that he
will lead them to receive the Word with Faith and Love, and to lay it up in
their Hearts, and practice it in their Lives.

Now then if you would know whether you are led by this Spirit, you must
enquire how you receive and entertain the written Word of God. Do the
Scriptures appear to you to be the Oracles of God, and so the Oracles of Truth?
And do the Truths thereof come with convincing Evidence? Do they come upon you
in Demonstration of the Spirit, and with Power? Are you brought to yield a full
Assent to Gospel Truths? Do you believe the History, the Doctrines, the
Promises, the Threatenings, and the Prophesies of the old and new Testament? And
do the sublime mysterious Doctrines, which are plainly revealed in the Gospel,
come with such Demonstration upon your Souls, as that you yield a full Assent
to the Truth of them; even though they are above your Reason to comprehend?

Moreover, Are your Eyes so opened, as to behold the wondrous Things contained
in God's Law and Gospel, and do you inwardly and heartily approve of the Gospel
Scheme, and Way of Salvation? And do you desire to be saved in that Way?

Furthermore, You must enquire how the Precepts and Rules of Living laid down
in the Word of God affect you. Do they strike you as the Laws of the King of
Heaven, and as the Commandments of God our Savior? Do you see the divine
Authority that is instamped upon all of them? And have you a Sense of the
Obligation you are under in Point of Duty, as well as Interest, to hear and
observe all that God has commanded, and can you find a Heart as well as a
Tongue, to say, All that the Lord our God has said unto us, that will we do?
And besides a Sense of the divine Authority, do you see any Excellency in the
Precepts themselves? Do you see into the Reasonableness and Necessity of the
divine Commandment in his Word? Can you say, that you esteem all God's Precepts
concerning all Things to be right? Does the Law appear to be holy, and the
Commandment holy, and just, and good? And do you adhere closely to the Word of
God, as the only sure Rule of your Faith and Practice? And do you reject every
Thing in Religion that is not according to this Word? And do you hide this Word
in your Heart that you may not sin against God?

Furthermore, Is the Word of God your Delight, as well as your Counselor? Do
you Delight in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law do you meditate Day and
Night? Are you able to say that the Law of God's Mouth is better to you than
Thousands of Gold and Silver, and are his Statutes your Songs in the House of
your Pilgrimage, and is his Word sweeter to you than Honey, or the Honey Comb?

But then can you also say with the Psalmist, 119.140. Thy Word is VERY PURE,
therefore thy Servant loves it? Here consider I beseech you very particularly,
whether it be the Purity of God's Word that in an especial Manner recommends it
to your Choice, your Love, and Delight. Do you love the Word of God because its
Doctrines are pure, and its Precepts holy, and because they tend to instruct
you in the Nature of Holiness, and also to make you holy.

And now if it be thus with you, you may conclude that you are led by this
blessed Spirit, and are the Children of God; for the Spirit of God is uniform
in his Operations. And since he indicted the holy Scriptures, giving us the
Doctrines and Precepts thereof; we may conclude, that such as he takes the
Leading of, he will lead them into the Faith, the Love, and Practice of the
Things contained therein.

4. Again the Spirit by which the Children of God are led, is a SPIRIT OF
HOLINESS; consequently, such as are so led by the holy Spirit, as to
demonstrate them the Children of God, they will be led to HOLINESS.

He is called the Spirit of Holiness. Romans 1.4.
And in a Multitude of Places he is called the Holy Spirit, or the HOLY GHOST.
And now we may conclude, that all the Operations of this Spirit will be HOLY,
and that if ever he leads us, he will lead us from Sin to Holiness: That if
ever he gives a Turn to us, and works a Change in us, it must needs be from a
Life of Sin to a Life of Holiness. And that if ever this Spirit work powerfully
and effectually upon the Soul, it will thoro'ly convince of Sin, and beget a
real Grief and Sorrow for Sin, and an Hatred of every Thing that appears
sinful, and a Love to, and a Delight in, and the Practice of every Thing that
appears truly good and holy.

Here then if you would know whether you are under the Influence of such an
holy Spirit, you must consider what Operation this Spirit has had upon you with
Respect to Sin and Holiness. You must enquire whether this Spirit has ever so
opened your Eyes as to discover to you the Deformity, the Baseness, and the
Vileness of Sin, considered as it is in itself a Transgression of the holy and
righteous Law of God; and has he at the same Time given you to see the Nature,
Charms, and Beauty of Holiness? Do you find your Tho'ts and Apprehensions, your
Inclinations and Dispositions as to those Things changed? Do those Things that
appear sinful, appear odious and hateful to you? And can you say that those
Sins which you have been in Love with, and have hugged them in your Bosom, and
have rolled them as a sweet Morsel under your Tongue, that now you hate and
abhor them, and that you loath yourselves upon the Account of them? And do you
renounce and abandon them, saying with Ephraim, What have I to do any more with
Idols? Hosea 14.8.
And have you been so under the Influence of this holy Spirit, as actually to
part with your beloved Sins? Are those Sins which have been as dear as a right
Eye, plucked out? and those that have been as near as a right Hand, cut off?

And as you thus hate Sin, so on the other Hand, you must inquire what Love
there is to Holiness.

And here, you must enquire upon what Account you love Holiness; and must see
whether you love it upon God's Account, because it is the Nature of God to be
holy, and because he wills Holiness and delights in Holiness; and surely if the
Spirit of God leads you to any Love of Holiness, it will be upon this Account,
that God is holy, and requires it of you. But then you must further enquire
whether you see the real Beauty and Excellency of Holiness, and whether you
esteem and love it also for its own sake. You must examine whether Things
appear amiable and lovely to you according to the Degree of Holiness that is in
them: Do you love God above all, because he is glorious in Holiness? Do you
esteem him, and love him, and delight in him for his Holiness, as you do for
his Goodness? Is Heaven peculiarly desirable, because it is a holy Place, and
the Habitation of God's Holiness and Glory? Nay does the Happiness of Heaven
appear to you to consist in its Holiness? Furthermore, do you delight in holy
Meditations, in holy Company, and in holy Conversation? Lastly, Is it the great
Desire of your Soul to be made holy, and do you earnestly endeavor to lead an
holy Life, and are you in the Way of Watchfulness and Prayer, and in the
diligent Use of Means, cleansing your selves from all Filthiness of Flesh and
Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God?

Now unless you can, upon a critical and impartial Examination of your selves,
find that it is thus with you in some good Measure, you have no Reason to
conclude that you are led by such an holy Spirit, and have not this Mark of
being the Children of God, nor any Ground to hope for the Inheritance of
Children whilst in such a State; for without Holiness no Man shall see the
Lord. Heb. 12.14.
Whereas, if the holy Spirit has but so much the leading and governing of us,
as to renew and sanctify us; and if we are enabled clearly and certainly to see
this, we may depend upon it that we are the Children of God, and shall partake
of the Inheritance of all such. Ye have your Fruit unto Holiness, and the End
everlasting Life. Romans 6.22.


5. This Spirit is a Spirit of GRACE and SUPPLICATION, consequently such as are
led by this Spirit will be put upon the great Duty of Prayer, and will take
Delight in it.

God promised by the Prophet Zechary, 12.10. that he would pour out upon the
House of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of Grace and
Supplication. And now the holy Spirit of God is such a Spirit; for it is worthy
our Observation, that whenever the holy Ghost is called the Comforter, as he is
in many Places of Scripture, John 14.16. and 26.16, 17.
he may as well be called the Advocate or Paraclete, as the Word is, even one
that espouses and undertakes our Cause, that pleads with us and for us, and
puts us upon pleading for ourselves.

As for the Lord Jesus Christ, he is our Advocate with the Father; If any Man
sin we have an Advocate, or Paraclete, with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous. 1 John 2.1.
The same Word is used as when the holy Ghost is called the Comforter. (...)
So that every true Child of God has not only an Advocate in heaven with the
Father, but has an Advocate, or Paraclete, with, or within himself, even the
holy Ghost, which God the Father (through the Merits and Intercession of his Son)
has sent to perform the Office of an Advocate, to plead and strive with us, to
stir up Convictions in our Souls, of our Sin and Danger; and to persuade and
enable us to an hearty Acceptance of Jesus Christ, and of Salvation by him: And
to put us upon desiring, seeking, and praying to God for our selves and others,
for all needed Mercy and Grace.

So that one great Office of the holy Ghost is, to plead with Men, and to put
them upon pleading with God for themselves and others, and to assist them in
the great Duty of Prayer, stirring up sincere Desires and devout Affections,
and enabling us to pour out our Souls to God in Prayer; and this we are taught
in the 26th Verse of the Context, where the Apostle says, Likewise the Spirit
also helps our Infirmities: For we know not what we should pray for as we
ought, but the Spirit it self makes Intercession for us with Groanings that
cannot be uttered.

And now from hence we may certainly gather, that whenever a Man is led by the
Spirit of God, so as to be a Mark that he is a Child of God, he will be put
upon the Exercise of Prayer, he will see the Reasonableness, the Agreeableness,
the Usefulness, and the Necessity of Prayer, and will be led not only into the
diligent and constant Practice of Prayer, praying always with all Prayer and
Supplication, and continuing therein; but this Spirit will excite an
Earnestness and Fervency of Devotion, and will cause a Pleasure in drawing near
to God in this holy Duty.

For how can it be supposed that this Paraclete, this Advocate, should have the
leading and governing of any Persons without putting them upon being Advocates
and Intercessors with God for themselves and others?

Now then, if any of you would know whether you are led by the Spirit of God,
you must see whether he has led and brought you to your Prayers, to frequent,
constant, humble, fervent Prayer. Do you see your absolute Dependence upon God
for every Thing? Do you see the Reasonableness of Prayer? Do you see the great
Privilege of Prayer, and the infinite Condescension and Grace of God, that he
permits and allows us to draw near to him, and that we may come with Boldness
to the Throne of Grace, to obtain Mercy and find Grace to help in Time of Need?
And do you thankfully improve this Privilege, this Liberty of Access, so as in
every Thing by Prayer and Supplication with Thanksgiving to make known your
Requests to God?

And do you come humbly before God, sensible of your Wants, and at the same
Time sensible of your Unworthiness of the least Mercy?

Moreover, If you would judge whether you are led by the Spirit of Prayer, you
must consider, whether you content yourselves with a dull, lifeless Form of
Prayer Morning and Evening; or whether there be some hearty Desires, and
whether your Soul is poured out in Prayer, which is indeed what God looks upon
as Prayer?

Enquire here further still, and see whether you love Prayer, whether you
delight in drawing near to God, and take Pleasure in spreading your Cases
before God, and pleading with him for Mercy and Grace. Are you thankful for
this Liberty of Access to God, and do you go to him with your Prayers and your
Praises as your Delight and Pleasure, rather than as your Task and Burden? And
enquire particularly here, whether it is sufficient for you that you have Leave
and Liberty to go to God by Prayer in your Closets and in your Families,
without insisting upon a direct and positive Command for it? For he that has
the true Spirit of Prayer wants nothing but Liberty to go to God with all his
Wants, and to be frequent at the Throne of Grace.

And therefore such as cast off Fear and restrain Prayer before God, or take no
Pleasure in Prayer, and are rather glad of an Excuse to omit the Duty, rather
than of an Opportunity to renew their Addresses to God, how dwells the Spirit
of Prayer in such a Man? After the Apostle Paul was converted it is said,
Behold he prays Acts 9.11.
And therefore such as don't give themselves unto Prayer, and take no Delight
in that Duty; it is a sad Sign that they are not the Children of God. A
prayerless Person is doubtless a graceless one.

6. This Spirit by which the Sons of God are led is A SPIRIT OF ADOPTION, and
consequently every one that it led by this Spirit, has a child-like Temper and
Disposition of Soul toward God wrought in him.

Thus we read in the Verse immediately following my Text. But ye have not
received the Spirit of Bondage again to Fear, but the Spirit of ADOPTION,
whereby we cry, Abba Father.

Now he is called the Spirit of Adoption, because he works in us the Temper and
Disposition of Children toward our heavenly Father; enabling us to call him
Father, and putting us upon going to him with the Reverence and Confidence of
Children to a Father, able and ready to help us; for so says the Apostle, Gal.
4.6, 7. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into
your Hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Wherefore thou art no more a Servant, but a
Son.

Now then if you would know whether you are led by this Spirit, you must
examine and see, whether there be any of this child-like Temper wrought in you.
Do you look upon God as your Friend and Father? And can you find any Thing of
the Honor, the Fear, the Love, the Reverence for him that is infinitely due to
such a Father? Do you go to him with the Freedom, with the Delight, and with
the Confidence of Children to a Father? Do you depend upon him for your daily
Bread, both for your Souls and Bodies, as Children do upon their Parents? Are
you concerned for the Honor of your heavenly Father, as loving, dutiful
Children are for the Honor of their earthly Parents? Does it grieve you to see
him dishonored and offended, and his Name profaned and blasphemed; and do you
inwardly resent it, as much as a dutiful Child would when he should hear his
Father slandered and abused? Do you look upon his Interest and Honor your own,
as a Child does that of his Father?

Furthermore, Do you find any Thing of a dutiful and submissive Temper toward
your heavenly Father? Can you with Sincerity and from your Heart say what our
Lord has taught you to pray, Our Father, thy Will be done on Earth as it is
done in Heaven? Have you such a Regard to him as standing in the Relation of a
Father, as puts you upon keeping all his Commandments, and can you say that
none of his Commands are grievous to you, but that you delight to do his Will?
And do you as quietly submit to his wise and fatherly Corrections? And can you
say in any Measure with the Lord Jesus Christ at the Approach of Trouble and
Sorrow, Father, not as I will; but as thou will Mark 14.36.
.

Again, Do you trust in, and can you so depend upon your heavenly Father's
Wisdom and Care and covenant Love and Faithfulness, as to rest satisfied with
all his Dispensations, and do you actually find the happy Fruit of all his
dealings with you? Do they work for your Good, your spiritual Good, as they do
to all them that love God?

Finally, Do you see any Likeness or Resemblance of your heavenly Father in
you, as there is commonly between earthly Parents and their Children? Do you
find any Likeness to God in the moral Perfections of his Nature? Is the Image
of God which was lost by the Fall of our first Parents, in any Measure
restored? Have you learned to be righteous as God is righteous, to be holy as
God is holy, to be merciful as God is merciful, and perfect as your heavenly
Father is perfect? Now if it be thus with you, it will be certain that God has
indeed sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts.

7. The Spirit of God is a powerful and active Spirit, and productive of all
good Fruits; consequently when any are led by the Spirit of God, THERE WILL BE
THE FRUITS OF THE SPIRIT.

But I have no Time to enter upon the particular Consideration of these, at
present, but shall leave them to be considered hereafter, when God shall give
the Opportunity.

And all I shall add at present is my Advice, that when you go home you would
examine your selves closely and critically, by these Marks, to see whether you
have been and are thus led, guided and governed by this blessed Spirit. Put the
several Questions as you can remember them, close to your own Hearts, and see
what Answer you can make to them. And here you had need to be very careful that
you don't give false and flattering Answers to your selves, and so deceive your
own Souls. By what you have already heard you find, that there is a great deal
contained in being led by the Spirit of God; and there is a great deal more to
be said yet. It is not such an easy Thing to judge whether we are led by the
Spirit of God, as some think for. Because although in some Things they may seem
to be led by the Spirit of God, but in others there are sad Demonstrations yet
that they are not. Now you must by no Means sit down satisfied in such a State
as this. You must never think you are led truly to God, unless you are led to
Christ, and to God through Christ; and you must never think you are led to
Christ, unless you are led in the Way of Truth as revealed in the Word of God,
and unless you are led to Holiness of Heart, and Holiness of Life, and unless
you are brought into a truly prayerful and thankful Frame of Soul, and have the
true Spirit of Adoption, whereby you can with Faith and Affection call God
Father, and go to him as Children to a Father, and besides all this unless
there be the Fruits of the Spirit in all social Graces and Virtues relating to
our fellow Creatures, you cannot with safety determine that you are the
Children of God: And this teaches us not to be hasty and sudden in drawing up
Conclusions in our own Favor. The Leadings of the Spirit comprehend a great
deal in them. And there requires a large and comprehensive View of our selves,
to judge rightly of our State. Well then, be much in the Examination and
Observation of your selves, as ever you would find out what Spirit you are of,
or what Spirit has the Leading and Government of you. And even in this
Examination and Trial of your selves, you need this blessed Spirit to lead and
guide you. And for want of this Spirit of Truth to guide them, many have been
so dismally deluded that they have thought they have been in an extraordinary
Manner led by the Spirit of God, when they have been actually ruled by the
Spirit that works in the Children of Disobedience.

Discourse V.
7. The Spirit of God is a powerful and active Spirit, productive of all good
Fruits; consequently when any are led by the Spirit of God, there will be THE
FRUITS OF THE SPIRIT.

THE Spirit of God is an almighty Spirit, and wherever he comes to Purpose, he
produces most powerful and happy Effects. He gives a universal Change to Men's
Tempers and Principles, and gives them a new Turn of Though It, of Disposition, and
Conduct, both toward GOD, their Neighbor, and themselves.

And there will be not only some, but all the Fruits of the Spirit bro't forth
by them; although some will be more manifest and conspicuous than others. Now all
christian Virtues and Graces are truly the Fruits of the Spirit; whether they
relate to God or Man, because they are all produced by the Agency and Influence
of the blessed Spirit. Now we read, Ephesians. 5.9. That the Fruit of the Spirit is
in all Goodness, Righteousness, and Truth. But we have a larger Catalogue of
these blessed Fruits of the Spirit, in Gal. 5.22.23. Where we are told, that
the Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance. Now some of these Fruits of the Spirit
here reckoned up, considered in the largest and most comprehensive Sense, will
take in many Duties to God, as well as to our Neighbor. And it is most
certain, that the Spirit of God produces all those gracious Habits in the Soul
toward God, as well as those toward one another. And they are as truly and
properly the Fruits of the Spirit.

But as those Tokens and Marks of our being led by the Spirit of God, which I
have mentioned in the former Discourse, had a more immediate Reference to God
and Christ; so I shall consider those Fruits of the Spirit here reckoned up by
the Apostle, more especially with Respect to ourselves, and one another.

And these Fruits of the Spirit are as certain Tokens of our being led by the
Spirit of God as the other, and where these social Graces and Virtues are
wanting, it is as certain a Sign that we are without the Spirit of God, as when
those Graces are wanting, that do more immediately refer to God himself. And
indeed we may lay this down as a Rule, that if we have not these Graces that
relate to Men, we may be sure that we have none of those which relate to God.
The first and great Commandment is indeed to love the Lord our God with all our
Heart, and with all our Soul, etc. but the second, which is like unto it, is to
love our Neighbor as our selves; and on these two Commandments hang all the
Law and the Prophets. Matthew. 22.37, -- 40.
And God has so joined these two Commandments together, that no Man may put
them asunder. This is the Commandment we have from him, that he who loves God,
love his Brother also. 1 John 4.21.
And therefore such only deceive themselves, who think they love God, and yet
don't love their Brother, and are not ready with their Acts of Love and Kindness
toward him. If a Man say I love God, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar; for
he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he
has not seen? 1 John 4.^0.


Here then I will distinctly consider those several Fruits of the Spirit, which
the Apostle reckons up, as Marks and Signs that we must find in us, before we
may upon good Grounds conclude that we are led by the Spirit of God, so as to
demonstrate that we are the Children of God. And I shall take them in Order.

1. The first Fruit of the Spirit here mentioned, is LOVE. So whenever any are
led by the Spirit of God, there will be not only a supreme Love to God; but a
sincere, undissembled, true Love to one another.

The Fruit of the Spirit is Love: And here I shall not speak of the Love of
God, and the Love of Christ, (which are indeed Fruits of the Spirit) because I
have spoken to these in the foregoing Discourse: But more especially of the
Love of our Neighbor. This Spirit of God is a Spirit of Love, as well as of
Truth, and he begets Love in every Soul wherever he comes to any saving
Purpose. This Spirit subdues, and in a great Measure removes that Envy, Hatred,
and Malice which is natural to us since the Fall, and excites a sincere and
fervent Charity, a free generous Love toward all Mankind, enabling such as are
under the gracious powerful Influences hereof, to love their Neighbor as
themselves. The Apostle speaking of himself and others, says, That in Times
past, they lived in Malice and Envy, were hateful, and hating one another.
Titus 3.3.
But now wherever the Spirit of God comes, so as to lead and govern the Soul,
he subdues those wicked and unreasonable Lusts: For so the Apostle goes on, But
after that the Kindness and Love of God our Savior toward Men appeared, not
by Works of Righteousness which we have done, but according to his Mercy he
saved us, by the Washing of Regeneration, and Renewing of the holy Ghost. So
that whenever Persons are regenerated, or renewed by the holy Ghost, their
Malice and Hatred will be subdued, and a universal Benevolence and Good Will
arise in their Souls. You may remember I told you in the last Discourse, that
the Spirit of God would certainly lead us to God, not only to the Love of him,
but a Likeness to him, and consequently must needs beget brotherly Love in the
Soul. Beloved, let us love one another, for Love is of God, and every one that
loves is born of God and knows God. He that loves not, knows not God; for
GOD IS LOVE. 1 John 4.7, 8.


Well then, if you would know whether you are led by the Spirit of God, you
must see whether there be this blessed Fruit of the Spirit in you, even a true
and undissembled Love to Mankind. Have you seen that there is in you naturally,
Malice and Hatred to your Fellow Creatures? And do you find that it is in any
Measure subdued and removed? Can you say that you heartily wish well to the
whole humane Race? And do you with Sincerity pray for them, and from your Heart
desire their Salvation and Happiness? Or when you pray for them, are you very
indifferent about the Matter, and unconcerned how it fares with them? Now this
it is to be feared is the Case of many, they pray for all Men, but alas, they
are only Words of Form, without any real Desire about the Matter.

But then as Love to all Mankind is a Fruit of the the Spirit, so a special and
peculiar Love to the Children of God, and the Household of Faith, is wro't in
the Soul by this Spirit; for the Spirit of God will lead every one that is
under his Influence, to love the Children of God in an especial Manner.

Here then you should examine your selves, whether you find a special and
peculiar Love going forth toward all that you apprehend to be the true
Children of God: If you have had no Acquaintance with them, and received no
Benefit from them, nay if you have never seen them; yet does the Repute of
their being the Children of God, and Servants of Jesus Christ, draw forth your
Heart in Esteem of them, and Love to them? And can you say that you love such
better than you do your Friends and Relatives, and such as are very kind and
generous to you, whom you have Reason to fear are not the Children of God? But
here you must enquire what you love those for, above others. Can you find that
your special and peculiar Love to them is, because they love God, and because
they are the Friends of the Lord Jesus Christ, and because they appear with the
Image and Likeness of God upon them? Now if these Things be the real Incentives
of your Love, it is a Sign that you are quickened and governed by the divine
Spirit. We know that we are passed from Death to Life, because we love the
Brethren. 1 John 3.14.


But then again, where this Spirit of Love rules and reigns, he will lead us
not only to love the Friends of God, and to love our own Friends and
Benefactors; but he will put us also upon loving our very Enemies. You must
remember it is the Spirit of God, and the Spirit of Christ who manifested
infinite Love to your very Enemies. Herein is Love, not that we loved God, but
that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our Sins I John
4.10.
And thus God commended his Love toward us, in that while we were yet SINNERS,
Christ died for us Romans 5.8.
. In this Case then, which is indeed a trying Point, let us carefully examine
our selves. Are you brought to this, to lay aside all malicious Tho'ts, all
revengeful Desires, toward those that have injured or abused you, in your
Name, in your Estate, or in your Family? And instead thereof, are you ready to
reward Good for Evil? Can you, and do you, from your Hearts bless them that
curse you, and do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
despitefully use you, and persecute you? I ask you whether you do these Things
from your Hearts. For if ye from your Hearts forgive not every one his Brother
their Trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you Matthew. 6.14.
and Chap. 18. Verse 35.
. It is to be feared that many who say they forgive their offending Brother,
yet have their Hearts full of Malice and Revenge, and their Mouths full of
Curses and Ill-Wishes against him, and in some secret underhand Way, doing
many a Mischief to him. But now if we are led by the Spirit of God and Christ,
and there is the true genuine Fruit of this Spirit, we shall from our Hearts
forgive them, and from our Hearts pray God to forgive them, and shall be ready,
as Opportunity presents, to do good unto them. And this will be to show our
selves to be the Children of our Father which is in Heaven, who causes his Sun
to shine on the Evil and on the Good; and sends Rain on the Just, and on the
Unjust Matthew. 5.45.
. And who daily loadeth us with Mercies, even while we are loading him with our
Iniquities.

2. Another Fruit of the Spirit here mentioned is JOY.

And now, although Joy in the Lord, is the Fruit of the Spirit, and what we
should particularly examine our selves about, to see whether we do really joy
in the Lord, and rejoice greatly in the God of our Salvation, whether we
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and at the Advancement of his Cause and Interest, and
whether the Meditation upon God, and Christ, and spiritual Things be sweet unto
us, and whether there be a greater Delight in God's Service, and in enjoying
Communion with him than in any worldly Service, or carnal Enjoyment whatsoever,
and whether we find the Joy of the Lord to be our Strength; I say, although we
should examine our selves in these Things; yet I would consider this Joy with
Respect to our fellow Creatures in a particular Manner, even our rejoicing
heartily at the Good and Welfare of others, and our doing with Delight and
Pleasure what will promote their Happiness and Comfort. This Joy is a Branch of
that grand comprehensive Command of loving our Neighbor as our selves, and
flows from such a Principle of Love reigning in the Soul. So that where there
is that Joy which is the Fruit of the Spirit, there will be not only an
external, but an inward hearty Rejoicing at the Good of others, at their
spiritual Good in an especial Manner.

This Joy which is the Fruit of the Spirit is the direct Contrary to that
Envying and Grieving at the Good of our Neighbors, which is so natural to us
in our corrupt Estate. It is that Part of Charity which rejoiceth not in
Iniquity, but rejoiceth in the Truth. 1 Cor. 13.6.


Moreover this Joy intends our doing Acts of Kindness with Joyfulness, that if
we give to the Relief of any, we do it cheerfully, and not grudgingly or of
Necessity, remembering that God gives freely, and loves the cheerful Giver. It
intends that we do so truly and heartily love Mankind, that it is a Joy and
Pleasure to us to be doing that which will afford Comfort and Joy to others.

And now this Joy which is the Fruit of the Spirit, is not confined to
particular Friends and Neighbors, and dear Relations, but it must reach to all
that we are concerned with, and that come within the Reach of our Kindness;
even although they have injured and abused us.

So then, would you know whether you are led by the Spirit of God, you must
enquire after this Fruit of the Spirit. Do you find any Thing of an habitual
Joy at the Good of others? Do you find any Thing of a secret but real Pleasure
at the Prosperity of others? Or do you rather find a Spirit which lusts to
Envy working in you? Can you rejoice with them that rejoice, even although you
yourselves are in Trouble? Can you be truly thankful for other Persons Mercies
as well as for your own? And can you be thankful for Mercies which they receive
when you are denied those particular Mercies your selves? Are you thankful that
your Neighbor is in Health, although you are in Sickness? Are you pleased with
every Thing good and excellent which you see in others? Can you rejoice in the
Gifts and Graces of others, even when they excel you, and bear away a great
Share of Honor and Esteem from you? And do you rejoice at the Repentance and
Conversion of a Sinner in any Measure as the Angels do in Heaven; and when they
bring forth Fruit meet for Repentance, and abound in the Fruits of
Righteousness and Holiness, is this the Rejoicing of your Heart? And do you
delight in doing Good to others, both to their Souls and to their Bodies? When
you give, do you give with open Hand and Heart? And when you do Acts of
Kindness, do you do them not only as a Duty you must do, but as a reasonable
and pleasant Duty, and what you delight to do? This would be the genuine Fruit
of the Spirit.

3. Another Fruit of the Spirit is PEACE.

And if we should consider this, with Respect to Peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ, and Peace with Conscience, and undoubtedly it is the Fruit of the
Spirit.

But I will consider it at present only as Peace among Men. And therefore such
as are led by this Spirit, will be led into a peaceable Temper and Behavior.

The Spirit of God, wherever it leads and governs, will suppress a contentious
and quarrelsome Spirit: For it will subdue Pride, and those other Lusts from
whence come Wars and Fightings, James 4.1.
and lesser Contentions. And it puts Men upon studying the Things that make for
Peace; yea and upon following Peace with all Men, as well as Holiness, without
which no Man shall see the Lord. Heb. 12.14.


So then, would you know whether you are led by the Spirit of God, you must see
whether there be a peaceable Spirit within you, leading and governing you in
all your Concerns one with another. Do you dread Contentions and Divisions? Do
you carefully watch against every Thing that stirs up Strife? Are you careful
to avoid those Things that are provoking to others? And are you ready to pass
by Affronts and Provocations which are offered to yourselves, rather than
prosecute them into a Quarrel? Do you watch and guard against the Beginnings of
Strife, do you as the wise Man advises unto, leave off Contention before it be
meddled with. Prove. 17.14.
And when any unhappy Differences are begun, are you desirous to put a speedy
issue to them? Are you ready to accommodate Differences that you have fallen
into? And is there a yielding, condescending, complying Temper in you, ready to
forgive Injuries, and ready to acknowledge your Faults, and ask Forgiveness
wherein you have offended and injured others?

Furthermore, with Respect to others that are in Contention, are you
Peacemakers among them, such as our Savior pronounced blessed, and whom he
says shall be called the Children of God? Matthew. 5.9.
Are you Counselors of Peace? And are you careful to do what in you lies to
extinguish every Fire of Contention so soon as you perceive it begins to burn?
And are you careful to avoid every Thing that has a Tendency to break the Peace
of others, or that will carry on a Contention when begun among them? And here
in particular, are you careful to avoid all Tale-bearing in such Cases,
remembering what the wise Man says, Where no Wood is the Fire goes out; so
where there is no TALEBEARER the Strife cease. The Words of a TALEBEARER
are as Wounds, and they go down into the innermost Parts of the Belly Prove.
26.20, 22.
. Now this is a good Rule among others to judge whether we have the Spirit of
God to lead and govern us, for God is a God of Love and Peace: And Christ is
the Prince of Peace, and came on purpose to make Peace through the Blood of his
Cross: And therefore when Men are litigious and quarrelsome, and live in
Contentions, they may justly fear whether they are led by the Spirit of God.
And would to God that Brethren and Neighbors who live at Variance, and in
Contention and Strife all their Days, would seriously consider of this.

4. Another Fruit of the Spirit is LONG-SUFFERING.

By which we may understand a restraining our Anger under Provocations; our
bearing patiently any Injuries and Affronts that are offered unto us, instead
of hastily proceeding to resent or revenge them. Now Patience, or
Long-suffering, is a Perfection of God, for so his Name is proclaimed, The
Lord, The Lord God, merciful and gracious, LONG-SUFFERING Exodus 34.6.
. And so it must needs be a Perfection in the Spirit of God, what belongs to
his Nature, and which he will work in every one that is brought under his
divine Guidance and Influence. He will so work upon, and in, all whom he leads
that they shall be Long-suffering, and patient in Spirit: They shall bear
Injuries and Affronts, so as to defer their Anger, and not break out into rash
Wishes or revengeful Actions.

Indeed it must be allowed that there is a great Difference in Men's natural
Tempers, even among those that we look upon to be the Children of God: Some Men
are naturally much more hasty in Spirit than others, and it is with much more
Difficulty that they restrain their Anger, than some others. Their Spirits are
naturally so volatile, and so easily put into Agitation, that they break forth
oftentimes into angry Actions or Expressions, even before the Man has Time to
think of it, so as to restrain his Passion: But yet if Men subject to such
sudden and violent Passions are under the governing and restraining Influences
of the divine Spirit, they will have their Passions under better Command, so as
to keep in from such sudden, violent Out-breakings of rash Anger, which others
that are under no Restraint do fall into. Whenever the holy Spirit comes to
purpose he sanctifies Men's particular Tempers, and even their angry Passions,
making use of them to very good Purposes, turning them into a flaming Zeal for
the Cause of God, and the Interest of Religion, as he did the warm Temper of
Elijah. So he causes the hasty Spirit and angry Passions of Men to praise him,
and the Remainder thereof he will restrain.

So then if you would judge whether you are led by the Spirit of God, you must
see what Government you have of your selves, and of your Spirits. If you would
know whether the Spirit of God rules in your Hearts, you must know whether he
has given you the Rule of your own Spirit, which is a glorious Attainment; for
he that rules his own Spirit is greater than he that takes a City Prove. 16.32.
. Here then let me ask you, Are you enabled in any Measure to keep under your
Passions? Do you avoid rash Anger, and the being angry without a Cause? Have
you learned to bear Provocations patiently, so as not to have your Spirits
ruffled, nor your Passions breaking out in an indecent unchristian Manner? Have
you learnt of your blessed Lord to endure the Contradiction of Sinners? Can you
bear their Reproaches and their Insults, and do you imitate that perfect
Pattern, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, but committed himself to
him that judges righteously 1 Pet. 2.23.
? And can you say with the Apostles, being reviled, we bless: Being persecuted,
we suffer it: Being defamed, we entreat 1 Cor. 4.12, 13.
? Can it be said of you, that you are slow to Wrath, and that instead of
repelling Anger with Anger, you endeavor with soft Answers to turn away Wrath?

In a Word here, Are you jealous over your Spirits, and watchful over them, and
whenever you find your Passions to rise, do you with all your Might endeavor
to suppress them? Do you at such a Time keep your Tongue as with a Bridle, that
you might not offend therewith?

Furthermore, Do you find that you gain upon your Passions, and that you get
more and more the Mastery of them? Are they less turbulent, and not so unruly
as they have been? For wherever the Spirit of God comes and prevails, the Soul
is restored, the usurping Passions are turned off the Throne, and Reason and
Conscience restored to their Dominion and Government. And therefore such Men as
give Way to an angry Spirit, and suffer themselves to be carried away with
their Passions, and are continually in a Ruffle of Mind, venting their Wrath
upon one and another, whether they have any just Provocation or no; how
dwells the Love of God, and the Spirit of God in such?

5. Another Fruit of the Spirit here mentioned by the Apostle, is GENTLENESS.

Now by Gentleness we may understand that Sweetness and Kindness of Temper, by
which we are disposed to deal gently and kindly with all that we have any
Concern with, and a Disposition to accommodate our selves to each other (so far
as we may) and to make Things easy and comfortable for others, as well as to be
easy and quiet our selves.

This Gentleness may be considered as opposite to every Thing that is rigorous
and severe, unmerciful or cruel; yea, and opposite to a stiff, perverse, and
obstinate Temper.

This Gentleness, which is the Fruit of the Spirit, is a sweet, soft, pleasant,
obliging Temper, sanctified by the Spirit, whereby the Man has an inward
Inclination, and a gracious Propension to treat every Man in a gentle, kind,
and tender Manner.

This Gentleness contains in it a Disposition to think favorably of others,
and to put as candid and as charitable Constructions upon their Sayings and
Doings as they will possibly bear; and also a Disposition to speak to and of
Persons in a kind and gentle Manner, avoiding every Thing in Conversation that
is harsh, that is rude, that is morose or uncivil.

This Gentleness don't consist in soothing and flattering Persons, commending
them beyond their Deserts; nor does it hinder from administering faithful and
sharp Reproofs where they are needed. But yet the Gentleman will treat every
Man with due Respect, and will be so friendly, so yielding, and condescending,
so obliging, and ready to do a Kindness, as softens and wins the Hearts of
others.

And now this Gentleness, the Fruit of the Spirit, flows from a holy Generosity
of Soul, full of Love, and Good Will to Men, and full of Gratitude to God.

Now then if you would know whether you are led by the Spirit of God, you must
inquire whether you have such a kind, gentle and good Spirit within you. Do you
lay aside or check every Thing that is morose, churlish, cross and fretful in
your Tempers? Do you endeavor to make your selves easy and comfortable to all
that you are concerned with, whether in private or public Stations, whether at
Home or Abroad? Are you as becomes the Servants of the Lord, gentle in your
Carriage toward all, instead of striving with any? Have you obtained any of
that Wisdom from above, that is pure, peaceable, GENTLE, and easy to be
entreated, and full of Mercy James 3.17.
? Do you find your selves kindly affectionate one to another in brotherly Love?
Do you delight in pleasing others, rather than to be thwarting and vexing them,
and do you endeavor to please them in all Things for their Good? And are you
careful to consider the various Tempers of Men, and are you ready to yield and
condescend to them, and comply with them, so far as may be done with a good
Conscience, and consistent with their real Good? Now if there be such a
Sweetness, Gentleness, and Agreeableness of Temper, excited by the Spirit of
God, it will not only render you the Delight of humane Kind, but give you a
good Token that God delights in you as his Children.

6. Another Fruit of the Spirit, is GOODNESS.

And now if we understand this, as distinct from the foregoing Fruit of the
Spirit, I would consider it as intending not only the Principle of Love,
Kindness, and Good Will to Men, but the Practice of it. By this Goodness I
would understand not only our being good, but our doing good. It intends not
only a Disposition and Desire, but our actual Care and Endeavor to be as
useful and as serviceable in the World as we can; and to have our Time, our
Strength, our Powers, and Faculties, our Estate, our Authority, and our
Influence, all employed after such a Manner as may be not only for our own
Good, but for the Good and Benefit of others. Where the Spirit of God works
this Goodness, the Man will desire and endeavor to do all the Good he can,
according to the Capacity that God has given him, and the Station that God has
placed him in. I say according to his Capacity and Station, because he will be
sensible, that if he attempts above his Capacity, and out of his Rank and
Station, he will be in Danger of doing more Hurt than Good. I say therefore
that within his own Sphere he will endeavor to do all the Good he can.
Accordingly such a Man as is endowed with this Spirit of true Goodness, will
consider what Abilities God has given him, and will take Heed that he don't
boast of any false Gift, or imagine himself fit for what he is not; nor on the
other Hand, will he deny any of God's Gifts, or excuse himself from any Service
that would be for the Good of others, from a false Pretense that he has not
Ability for it. But he will think soberly of his Abilities and Capacities of
doing Good, and will consider the Station that God in his Providence has placed
him in; and so what Opportunities he has in his Hand for getting and doing
Good, and will readily and cheerfully embrace the same. Is he a civil Ruler,
and in any Place of Power and Trust, if he has this Spirit of Goodness, he will
rule in the Fear of God, and endeavor according to the Design of his Office,
to be the Minister of God for Good to the People. Is he a Minister of the
Gospel; he will endeavor to do all the Good he can in this Station, and that
he may do this Good especially, which is the greatest of all, even to convert
Sinners from the Error of their Ways, and save their Souls from Death: Or if he
be only in private Station, he will be content with that, to be concerned to do
all the Good he can therein, by his Estate, by his Counsels, by his Example,
and by his Prayers.

And now if you would know whether you are led by this Spirit of Goodness, you
must enquire whether you are thus inclined to all Acts of Goodness, and whether
you live in the daily Practice of it, in Conformity to God himself, who is not
only Good, but does Good. Do you look upon your selves as made to do all the
Good you can, and that all which you have and are, is given and continued to
you to do Good withal? And are you pleased with the Thoughts of having such and
such Abilities and Opportunities for doing Good? Here let me ask you, whether
your being in any superior public Station pleases you, chiefly upon this
Account, namely, that it gives you an Opportunity of being more extensively
good to others; or is the Honor of it, and the Opportunity of serving your
selves, that which most secretly affects you? So again, if God gives Wealth,
and Plenty of this World's Goods to you, what Thought is it pleases you most?
Is it that now you shall have the Name of a rich Man, and that now you have
wherewith to gratify your Coveteousness, and inordinate Love of the World, and
that you have Plenty wherewith to gratify your Pride, your Luxury, and Vanity?
Or does this please you most, to think that now you are enabled to do Good to
others, that now you have wherewith to relieve such as are in Straits, to
supply the Wants of the Needy, to support the Gospel at home, and to spread it
abroad? This I know is oftentimes the Language of Persons before they arrive to
any plentiful Estate. And Oh what fine generous Projections are made by Persons
provided they had but an Estate in their Hands! Now therefore if Persons would
know whether they are sincere in this, they must enquire whether they are now
actually doing Good according to their present Ability: Do you now actually lay
by, as God prospers you, for pious and charitable Uses? And are you doing Good
according to your Ability as you go along? You that are rich, are you rich in
good Works? And are the rest of you, according to your Ability, ready to
distribute, and willing to communicate for the public Good? Let me ask you,
whether you choose rather to give to others that are in Wants, than to lay up
for a Hoard, or lay out for Superfluities for your selves? And are you
concerned to deny your selves some Conveniences, that you might relieve
others, under their Necessities? And is it more Pleasure to you to do that
whereby others might have necessary Food, than to fare sumptuously your selves?
And had you rather cloth the Naked, than dress fine your selves?

Moreover, you would do well to enquire, whether you are careful in your
private Stations and Relations to be as good, and to do all the Good you can.
If you are Husbands, or Wives, do you endeavor to be as good as you can in
that Relation, whereby you may be meet Helps, mutual Comforts and Blessings? If
you are Parents, do you endeavor to do all the Good you can to your Children,
by providing for them, by instructing them, and bringing them up in the Fear of
God, and in the Ways of Religion, whereby they may be capable of doing Good,
and of being Blessings in their Day? And if you are Masters or Mistresses, do
you give unto your Servants that which is just and equal, and are you careful
to teach and instruct them, and to be of all the Benefit to them, both to their
Souls and to their Bodies, that is justly expected from you? In a Word, are you
concerned to be as useful and beneficial to others as you can, and that every
one might be the better by you, that has any Concern with you? Have you an Eye
not merely at your own Interest, but at the Good of others? And is there a
public generous Principle that runs through all your Actions, and that
influences you in them? These, my Brethren, would be happy Tokens that you are
led by the Spirit of God, who is Goodness itself, and is good to all, and by
the Spirit of Christ, who was so good as to leave Heaven it self to come upon
this Earth, to redeem and save such sinful Worms as we are. For ye know the
Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your Sakes he
became poor, that ye through his Poverty might be rich. 2 Cor. 8.9.


7. Another Fruit of the Spirit is FAITH.

By which is generally understood in this Place Truth, Sincerity, and Fidelity
toward Men. It is our being true and sincere in our Words and Promises, and
faithful in every Business we undertake, and in every Station and Relation of
Life, and to every Trust reposed in us. By Faith here we must understand a
Person's being so true to his Word, so faithful, and honest in all his
Concerns, as to gain Faith and Credit among others, so as to be himself
believed, trusted to, and depended upon.

So that wherever this Spirit of God, this Spirit of Truth, works powerfully
and effectually, it will produce this desirable but rare Fruit among Men. He
will make Men true to their Words, sincere in their Professions, and punctual
to their Promises, honest in all their Dealings, and faithful in all their
Trusts, discharging every Duty, and performing every Business, faithfully,
honestly, and according to Expectation and Agreement.

Now then, if you would know whether you are led by the Spirit of God, you must
enquire for this Fruit of the Spirit, this Faith, this Truth, this Honesty,
Uprightness and Fidelity.

Here then let me enquire of you, whether you hate the Way of Lying, and the
Way of deceiving others by your Words? Are you careful to speak the Truth one
to another, or have you a Tongue that frames Deceit? Are you careful in
relating of Facts, not to exceed the Truth? Do you endeavor to make just and
true Representations of Things, so as to lead Persons into a just and right
Apprehension of them? Are you more concerned to relate Stories as you receive
them, than to embellish them with Additions of your own? Are you more concerned
to relate Matters of Fact as they really and truly are, than to set them off
with some aggravating Circumstances beyond the Truth?

Again, Are you careful to avoid all Flattery, which is but Deceit and
Falsehood, and do you endeavor to deal plainly, faithfully, and truly one with
another? And on the other Hand, Are you careful not to defame, not to raise nor
spread false Reports against any, by which you would not only wrong the Truth,
but greatly injure your Neighbor's Credit and Character?

Again, Are you sincere in your Professions of Love and Friendship, or is your
Love more in Word and in Tongue, than in Deed and in Truth?

But then again, you would do well to enquire how it is with Respect to
Promises. Are you cautious in making Promises; but when you have given your
Word and Promise are you careful to fulfill it? Do you make Conscience of being
as good as your Word, and do you endeavor that your Word may be as good as
your Bond?

Again, let me enquire, whether you are true, faithful and honest in your Work
as well as in your Words? Whatever Work you undertake, do you endeavor to do
it faithfully according to your Skill and Power, so that there shall be no
Deceit in the Work; do you in your several Occupations see to it that every
Piece of Workmanship that goes out of your Hands be done as it ought to be,
that it is not slighted over, nor its Defects covered, whereby others are
deceived and imposed upon?

Furthermore, Do you endeavor to be faithful in every Relation? Are you
according to your Marriage-Covenant, loving and faithful Husbands, loving,
faithful and obedient Wives? Are you faithful Parents, and do you, according to
your Covenant-Promises and Engagements, bring up your Children in the Nurture
and Admonition of the Lord? And are you faithful Children, paying that Honor,
that Love, that Obedience and Subjection to your Parents that is due to them
from you? Are you faithful Masters to your bought or hired Servants, and to
your Apprentices, giving them that Instruction and Knowledge in Religion, and
in the particular Arts or Trades they come to be instructed in? And you that
are Servants are you faithful to your Masters, serving them not with
Eye-Service, as Men-pleasers, but in Singleness of Heart, fearing God? Are you
careful not to purloin, or wrong your Masters in any Thing, but by Diligence
and Care about his Interest show all good Fidelity?

But to go on, if any of you are advanced to Places of Power and Trust, either
in the State or in the Church, are you concerned to be faithful herein? Are you
faithful to your King and Country, faithful to the Church and Town, are you
faithful to the College, and to every Society you are concerned with and for?

In a Word, Can you upon a thoro' and impartial Reflection upon your own
Conduct in your Places, find your Consciences testifying for you, that in
Simplicity and godly Sincerity, not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of
God you have had your Conversation in the World? 2 Cor. 1.12.
If your Consciences can but give such a Testimony as this for you, it will be
Matter of rejoicing to you, because it will be an Evidence of your being under
the Influence of a gracious Principle.

8. Another Fruit of the Spirit, is MEEKNESS.

Now by Meekness, we may understand an humble quiet Spirit, the meek Man is he
who is in a great Measure delivered from the Power of Pride and Passion. He is
the very Reverse of the proud and haughty Scorner, and of him who deals in
proud Wrath, of whom we read, Prove. 21.24. The meek Man is he that has a humble
Sense of himself, of his Sins, of his Infirmities, and Imperfections, and of
his constant Liableness to err, and fall as others do: And he is disposed to
think and speak of others, and to behave toward others, with that Humility and
Condescension, with that Candor and Moderation, as becomes him under such a
Sense of himself. The meek spirited Man, is not a Man of a mean little Spirit;
though he be poor in Spirit, yet he is not poor spirited. The meek Man is not of
a cowardly dastardly Spirit. But that Meekness which is the Fruit of the
Spirit, supposes an enlarged, a generous, and a truly courageous Soul. A Soul
raised up above the little Things which disturb the Pride and Passions of
others. The meek Man is not blind so as not to see Faults, nor is he stupid so
as not to be affacted with them; nor is he so weak spirited as to be afraid to
resent or reprove a Fault. No, if the meek Man sees his Brother offend, he will
be ready to tell him of his Fault, and be as faithful in administering a Reproof
as any; but then he wont do it in a haughty and imperious Manner, but with a
Spirit of Meekness, Love, and Tenderness: Not in a Way that tends to irritate
but to convince his offending Brother, not to upbraid and reproach him for his
Falls, and to vent his Pride and Passion, as is too commonly the Case, but in a
friendly and yet faithful Manner, so as to melt and humble, and bring to
Repentance, and thereby gain his Brother.

For this Meekness which is so great an Ornament of the Christian, don't
suppose that we are without Passions, but the right Government of them by
Reason and Religion, so as to restrain all that is proud and haughty, all that
is rash and hasty, either in Heart, Speech or Behavior. And an excellent
Spirit this is. This was the distinguishing Character of the Man Moses, that he
was MEEK above all the Men upon the Face of the Earth. Numb. 12.3.
And we are told that an Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit is in the Sight of
God of great Price. 1 Pet. 3.4.
And many Things are spoken in Favor of the Meek. Blessed are the Meek, for
they shall inherit the Earth. Matthew. 5.5.
The Meek will he guide in Judgment, the Meek will he teach his Way. Psalm. 25.9.
The Meek will he beautify with Salvation. Psalm. 149.4.


Now then, if you would know whether you are led by the Spirit of God, you must
see whether you have this blessed Fruit of the Spirit. Are you so led by the
Spirit of Christ as that you have learned of him who was meek and lowly in
Heart? Matthew. 11.29.
Have you something of that Meekness and Gentleness that was in him? Have you a
just, that is a mean Opinion of yourselves? Do you see that you are ignorant
and weak, that you are corrupt and wicked, and that you have given great
Provocation to God, and that you deserve the heaviest Judgments at his Hands;
and when his Hand is heavy upon you, are you humble, silent, and submissive,
acknowledging that God punishes you far less than your Iniquities deserve? And
so are you patient in Spirit, rather than proud and fretful in Spirit, under
the afflictive Dispensations of divine Providence? Moreover, do you see so much
of your own Sinfulness and Weakness, as to esteem others better than your
selves? And are you kindly affectioned one to another, in Honor preferring one
another, instead of striving to be preferred above others? And instead of
haughty Airs, and an imperious Carriage, do you behave with Meekness, and
Kindness, and Condescension to your Inferiors and Equals, as well as with
Respect and Honor to your Superiors? If you are ever engaged in
Controversies, do you manage with Meekness of Wisdom, so as to show not only
that your own Spirit is calm, but so as shall also tend to soften, and calm,
and quiet the Spirits of others? And if you receive Injuries, and meet with
great Provocations, do you in Patience possess your Souls, looking upon all you
meet with to be no more, nor so much as you deserve? And although it should be
very unjust from Men, can you bear it patiently, considering how very just it
is from God? In a Word, are you meek and lowly in Heart, and are you so
clothed with Humility, as that it appears upon all Occasions, even in Days of
Temptation, in Days of Provocation? And if Pride and Passion do sometimes break
out, instead of justifying yourselves, and saying you do well to be angry, and
that it is but a just Resentment, are you humble for it, and do you watch and
pray against it? And are you upon the gaining Hand in this Respect? If it be
thus with you, it is a good Evidence for you. But here I would say, to prevent
your being deceived, that they are not the most meek and humble Christians that
think themselves so, or that talk a great deal of their Humility; nay the
humble Soul is oftentimes the least sensible of it, and sees and complains most
of his Pride and Passion, not but that even here also there may be a Delusion,
for Persons may take a Pride in speaking of their Pride, and in representing
themselves to be exceeding proud and wicked.

9. The last Fruit of the Spirit here mentioned, is TEMPERANCE.

Now by Temperance we are to understand, the due Regulations and Restraints of
our natural sensative Appetites and Desires of any sensative Enjoyment
whatsoever. The foregoing Fruits of the Spirit, referred more especially to the
Government of our Passions or Affections; this concerns the Government of our
Appetites or sensative Desires more especially, and such as are led by the
Spirit of God, the whole Man, the Appetites, as well as the Passions, will be
governed by him; for when he comes to any Purpose, he sanctifies throughout, in
Spirit, Soul, and Body.

This Temperance intends the being sober in the Use of any of the good Things
that God has given us to enjoy; and that we do not indulge our sensative
Desires any farther than is consistent with the Rules of Sobriety and Chastity,
as they are laid down for us in the Word of God. It intends, that we consider
the wise Designs of God in giving those sensative Appetites and Desires to us.
The one for the propagating our Kind, and for preserving and promoting that
intimate Love and Union between Husband and Wife, which is so necessary for the
Comfort and Happiness of the connubial State. The other Appetites for the
Support, Comfort, and Refreshment of our Natures. But as these Appetites since
the Fall are all of them grown inordinate, and exceeding apt to carry us beyond
due Bounds; so it is necessary for us to have them under such Restraints as to
answer the good Ends proposed by them. And the keeping our Appetites within
these Bounds, is what is called Temperance. It is a preserving a Chastity in
Heart, Speech, and Behavior: It is a refraining from all Gluttony in Eating,
and from all Drinking wherein is Excess. And such Regulations and Restraints,
when they arise from true christian Principles, are by the Influence of the
divine Spirit. And although some may be regular on these Accounts that have not
the Spirit of God; yet there are none that are under the leading governing
Influence of the Spirit, but what will be under these Regulations.

So then, would you know whether you are led by the Spirit of God, you must
enquire after this Temperance, which is the Fruit of the Spirit. Are you, as
the Word of God requires you to be, sober, and chaste, and temperate in all
Things? Do you flee Fornication and all Uncleanness, and instead of having
Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness, do you rather reprove them?
Do you carefully avoid all lascivious and wanton Carriage, and do you lay aside
all Filthiness and foolish Talking and Jesting, which is not convenient, and do
you endeavor to banish all carnal Imaginations, and not suffer impure Tho'ts
to lodge within you? And instead of these Things, do you exhibit to the World a
chaste Conversation coupled with Fear, both in the married and unmarried State?

But then again, how do you regulate your other Appetites? Are you watchful
against all Excess in Meat and Drink? If you find a strong Appetite inclining
you to eat more than is for your Health, do you watch and guard against Excess
herein, when you are at Feasts where there is Plenty, Variety, and Dainties, do
you consider diligently what is before you, and put a Knife to your Throat?
Prove. 23.1, 2, 3.
And how is it with you as to your drinking strong Drink? Do you restrain and
govern your Appetites in this Respect, so as not to be intoxicated with it, and
so as not to raise your Spirits and your Passions beyond due Bounds? You must
remember what the Preacher says, that Wine is a Mocker, and strong Drink is
raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise. Prove. 20.1.
But Oh how many are deceived hereby! Not only those that are gross Drunkards;
but many others, who although they don't drink themselves drunk, yet drink to
such Excess as to hurt their Health, to break their Constitution, to weaken
their Judgment, to raise their Passions, to make them contentious and
quarrelsome at Home and Abroad: And by tarrying long at their Cups, waste their
Time, spend their Money, and impoverish their Families. And now in these Ways
Men are as truly guilty of a sinful Excess as when they are actually
intoxicated with Drink; and whatever some such Persons may think of themselves,
it is a sad Sign that they are not under the governing Influences of the
blessed Spirit. Persons therefore should carefully examine themselves in this
Matter, and remember that all Eating and Drinking, beyond what is for
Nourishment and Refreshment, and that discomposes the Mind, or indisposes the
Body, and unfits for the Service that God calls unto, and that evidently tends
to hurt our Healths, is Excess. Moreover, there is a high luxurious Way of
living, in which Persons sinfully gratify their Ambition as well as their
Apetites. For although such as have a Plenty of this World's Goods may lawfully
live in a more sumptuous Manner than others; yet for Persons of plentiful
Incomes to live so up to the Extent of their Means, as to disable themselves
from those Acts of Piety and Charity, which are just and reasonable from their
Incomes, and especially when any live so beyond their Means, as to spend upon
the Estates of others, and disable themselves from paying their just Dues, it
is a sinful Excess. In this therefore People would do well to examine
themselves; for I apprehend that Persons living above their Circumstances is
sinful, and contrary to what the Word and Spirit of God teaches, which is to be
content with such Things as we have. Heb. 13.5.
Furthermore, you must examine whether you keep in due Bounds as to your
Diversions and Recreations, so as to spend no more of your precious Time in
Pleasure than may serve to unbend your Spirits, to promote your Health, and
enable you the more cheerfully to go on in your Business, or whether your Love
of Ease and Pleasure so grows upon you, as that you fall into an idle,
slothful, careless Way of living, to the Neglect of God, and of yourselves and
Families?

Now we must examine ourselves in these Matters, and know what Government we
have over our Appetites: For unless these be under due Regulations and
Restraints, we have no Reason to think we are led by the Spirit of God. The
Fornicator, the Adulterer, the Effeminate, and the Abusers of themselves with
Mankind, the Glutton, the Drunkard, the Idle, the Voluptuous, and the
Extravagant, cannot be though it to be led by the Spirit of God, and so have not
this Mark of their being the Children of God. For although every sober,
temperate, prudent, diligent Man may not be led by the Spirit of God, but may
be induced to such a Carriage from other Motives than those of the Gospel; yet
this we may lay down as a Rule, that no Man is led by the Spirit of God, but
what is sober, and chaste, and temperate. And consequently although every sober
Man may not conclude himself a Child of God; yet every one who allows himself
in Luxury and sinful Excesses, may conclude that he is not a Child of God. Be
not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Abusers
of themselves with Mankind, nor Drunkards, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. 1
Cor. 6.9, 10.


And thus I have gone through the several Signs and Tokens which I proposed to
give you, of Persons being so led by the Spirit of God, as to demonstrate that
they are the Children of God. And here I have put a great many close Questions
to you, and it will take you some Time to answer them. And they are not so
easily answered as some may imagine; and a rash sudden answering them will be
very dangerous and hurtful to you. Put these Questions distinctly, and closely,
and impartially to your own Souls, and seek for such an Answer as is really and
truly the Case: And don't go to flatter and deceive your selves with false
Answers. I don't doubt but that some of you will find it difficult to answer in
some Points, and especially as to the Principle, the End, and Motive of your
Actions. You had need therefore deal much with your own Hearts, and observe
them and the Workings of them upon all Occasions. And Oh that this divine
eternal Spirit would so lead you as to assist you in the Trial of your selves!
and that such as are not led and governed by him, that he would convince them
of it, give you to see the carnal wretched State you are in, and come so
powerfully upon you as to convert and save you. And that such as are truly led
by him, that he would so shine upon his own Work in your Souls as to give you
to see it, and to reap the Comfort of it; having the blessed Spirit witnessing
in that Way with your Spirits that ye are the Children of God.

All that remains further for the finishing the Subject is, some Application
and Improvement, for although most that has been said is practical; yet there are
some useful Inferences, and some practical Remarks, Counsels, and Exhortations,
that may not be unseasonable; but I must leave them 'till God gives another
Opportunity.

Discourse VI.
The Proposition I have insisted upon is this, Viz.

Prop. II. The surest and the best Evidence of our being the Children of GOD,
is our being led by the SPIRIT of GOD.

For the Illustration of which I have said:

1. IT is an infinite Privilege to be the Children of GOD.

2. It is Matter of unspeakable Comfort to be well satisfied in our own Minds,
that we are the Children of GOD.

3. There are many Marks and Signs of our being the Sons of GOD, which Men are
apt to take up with, that are false, at least uncertain, and by no Means to be
depended upon.

4. The surest and clearest Mark, and which we may depend upon, is our being
led by the SPIRIT of GOD.

And as the two last Discourses have been taken up in showing when Persons may
be said to be so led by the Spirit of God, as to be a sure and clear Mark of
their being the Children of God; I shall now proceed to make some practical
Remarks upon what has been said on this Point, by Way of

APPLICATION.
Inf. 1. What we have heard about being led by the SPIRIT of GOD, teaches us,
that the Leading of this SPIRIT contains more in it than most People imagine.

Men are exceeding apt to have but a partial, and so imperfect Notion of the
Leadings of the divine Spirit, and of that gracious Principle, which influences
and governs every good Christian. Men don't consider what a universal Principle
this is; nor what a universal Change it works in Men's Hearts; nor what a
universal Influence it has upon Men's Lives. If Men were duly sensible of this,
they would not be so quick in judging themselves to be the regenerated Children
of God, as now they are.

By what you have heard, you may presently understand, that wherever the Spirit
of God comes powerfully and effectually, he sanctifies through out in Spirit, in
Soul, and in Body. He inlightens the Understanding, he renews the Will, he
regulates the Passions, he corrects the Appetites, and the particular Genius
and Temper is sanctified: So that the Man is made a new Creature, old Things
are passed away, behold all Things are become new. 2 Cor. 5.17.
This blessed Spirit wherever he leads, he leads the Soul to God, and to
Christ, and to Holiness; he leads to the Belief of the holy Scriptures as the
only sure Rule of Faith and Manners, leads to a devout, prayerful and tho'tful
Frame of Soul, and into a child-like Temper and Disposition. Moreover he leads
the Soul to bring forth all those social Graces that are the Fruit of the
Spirit, such as Love to our Neighbor, Joy in his Prosperity, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, and Temperance. And in
short, every Grace and Virtue that relates either to God, our Neighbor, or our
selves, are wrought in the Soul by the blessed Spirit, where he leads and
governs. Although all those Graces may not be so conspicuous in some; yet it must
be said that there is the Principle, the Root and Foundation of every Grace
laid in every Soul where the Spirit of God comes with Power.

But now this is not what People are generally aware of, they will indeed say
that they believe it to be so; but then don't consider how exceeding broad the
divine Commandment is, nor how extensive that Principle must be, that will
cause them to have Respect to all God's Commandments. Persons sometimes find
themselves altered as to some particular Points, and they are ready to conclude
that there is a thoro' and saving Conversion to God, when there is really no
such Thing. Some Convictions and Terrors, and then some sudden Flashes of Joy,
and some Restraints or Refrainings from some particular Sins, and the running
into the Practice of some particular Duties, have been too often mistaken for
the whole of Conversion and Regeneration. And they mistake because they don't
know any better; they have never experienced a thoro' and saving Change, and so
don't know by Experience what it is, nor how extensive it is; and no Wonder if
they mistake and frame very contracted Notions of Conversion.

Inf. 2. Are only such the Children of GOD who are led by his SPIRIT, as has
been described, hence we may fear that the Number of such are comparatively
small.

When we consider what it is to be led by the Spirit of God, and what a mighty
Change is wrought thereby in Men's Hearts, and what a Turn is given to Men's
Temper and Behavior, and when we consider all the Fruits and Effects of the
Blessed Spirit, wherever he works powerfully and effectually, and alas where do
we find such Men! Indeed we are not to expect to find any who have attained to
such a Degree, as to be already perfect, and that have entirely gotten from
under the Power of their Lusts, so as to have no Out-breakings of Corruption! I
say we are not to expect to find such: For the blessed Apostle Paul had not,
nor had any of the Rest of the Apostles, attained to a sinless Perfection. And
therefore if we should look for absolutely perfect Men, we should find none,
for there is not a just Man upon Earth, that does Good, and sins not. Eccl.
7.20.
But even as to such as are so under the gracious Influence of the blessed
Spirit as that the Principle of Grace prevails above their Lusts, and
Corruptions, which is the Case of every true Christian; I say, the Number of
these is but small, compared with those who are under the Power of their Lusts,
and so in their carnal unregenerate State. For let us but observe the general
Temper which Men discover, and let us observe the general Course of Men's
Lives, and we shall have abundant Reason to fear that the greater Part are led
away of their own Lusts, rather than by the Spirit of God. How many are carried
away with Pride, how many with Covetousness, or an inordinate Love of the
present World? And how many with Malice and Hatred, Discontent and Envy? Others
we shall see to be Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of God, given up to
Rioting and Drunkenness, Chambering and Wantonness, to Luxury, Idleness, and
Sloth. And if we take away all such as are apparently and evidently under the
prevailing Power of some Lust or other, and add to them a great, though uncertain
Number of close Hypocrites, who make a good Appearance, but are really under
the Power of their Lusts; and there will be found but a small Number of those
that are really and truly under the governing Influence of a divine and
gracious Principle. There are great Numbers that are apparently and evidently
in their Sins; and many more, who if they have a good Outside; yet are rotten
at the Heart. And now when all the openly Wicked, and all the refined
Hypocrites are taken out, we shall find but a small Number comparatively left:
Oh how few, that love God with all their Heart and with all their Soul. How few
that love their Neighbor as themselves! What little Faith would Christ find
upon the Earth, if he should now come? And how rare are the true Fruits of the
Spirit, even among professing Christians, who pretend to be, and many of them
think they are governed by his Spirit! Alas, Do not their Corruptions break out
much more frequently than their Graces; nay don't their Corruptions break forth
so frequently and so grossly, as to give Reason to fear that there is no true
Grace in them? If we judge Men by their Fruits, (and if we judge them at all it
must be by their Fruits) we shall have a melancholy View of Mankind, and shall
see the greatest Part of Mankind under the Dominion of their Lusts, and but few
comparatively under the gracious Influence of the Spirit. Christ called his
Flock, a little Flock. Luke 12.32.
And we are told that many are called, that is with the external Call of the
Gospel, but few are chosen. Mat. 20.16.
Wide is the Gate and broad is the Way that leads to Destruction, and many
there be that go in thereat; because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way
that leads unto Life, and few there be that find it. Mat. 7.13, 14.


Inf. 3. Are the Children of God so led by his Spirit, and governed by this
gracious Principle as has been described? Hence then, how amiable and truly
excellent are the Children of God!

For wherever the Spirit of God takes Possession, he begets the most amiable
and excellent Qualities pleasing to God, lovely in the Eyes of Angels, and of
all the Saints, and which indeed beget the Veneration and Esteem of all;
Qualities which render them happy to themselves, and comfortable to all that
they have any Concern withal.

When we consider the Temper that is wro't by the Spirit of God in all his
Children, and their Carriage and Behavior consequent hereupon, both toward
God and toward Man, we may say with the Preacher, that the Righteous is more
excellent than his Neighbor. * Yea that the Saints are the only excellent ones
in all the Earth.

When we behold the Children of Men under the Ruins of the Fall, they appear
vile deformed Creatures indeed, more vile than the Beasts that perish: And we
can hardly conceive how beautiful and excellent a Creature he was, when he
first came out of his Creator's Hands, with the Image of God bright upon him.

But now when the Spirit of God restores the divine Image or gracious Principle
to the Soul in any Measure; then the Beauty and Glory of Man begins again to
appear. And Oh the unspeakable Difference between the Sinner and the Saint!
Prove. 12.26.
One that is evidently under the Power of his Lusts, his fleshly Lusts that
make him a Brute, and more vile than the Beasts; and his spiritual Lusts that
make him like the Devil himself: I say the Difference between such a Man, and a
Man renewed and sanctified with the Spirit of God, and under the governing
Influence of a divine and gracious Principle!

Indeed this Difference at present is not so conspicuous as is to be desired,
because of the Sin and Corruption that still remain in God's Children, and too
too often break forth in the very best of them.

But now let us consider the distinguishing Marks of God's Children, and draw
the Picture of a Saint, with only these general Characters that I have given as
Signs of our being led by the Spirit of God, and are the very Lines which the
divine Spirit draws upon every true Christian, and he will appear in a most
beautiful and amiable Light, he will appear glorious and excellent.

Thus let us behold the Christian convinced of Sin by the Spirit of God, truly
humble and sorry for all his past Sins, and hating every evil and false Way,
and reforming those Things that are amiss, and departing even from his own
Iniquity.

Let us view him also in his hearty Return to God, from whom he has revolted,
and in his close Attachment to him, loving him with all his Heart and Soul,
careful above every Thing to please him, and fearful of offending him, aiming
at his Honor and Glory in all he does, and placing all his Happiness in the
Enjoyment of him; going to him as his Father, acknowledging him in all his
Ways, seeking to him, and trusting in him for all he wants, and giving him the
Praise of all that he receives.

Again, Let us view him in his Union to the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith,
believing in him with all his Heart, as his only and all-sufficient Savior,
renouncing all Confidence in himself, and in any Righteousness of his own,
depending upon being pardoned, assisted, and accepted, only in and through this
dearly beloved Son of God: And at the same Time his Heart showing forth the
highest Love to the Lord Jesus, loving him above Father, and Mother, and
Brethren, and Sisters, and Houses, and Lands; yea and above his very Life, for
the infinite Love he has shown to him.

Let us also view the Christian in his earnest Desires and Endeavors to be as
like to the Lord Jesus Christ as possible; striving after the same Mind, and
Spirit, and endeavoring to tread in the same Steps.

Let us view him in his constant and devout Attendance upon Christ in all his
Institutions, strictly observing his Directions, and walking in all the
Ordinances and Commandments of the Lord blameless.

Let us view him acquiescing in all the Dispensations of divine Providence,
receiving Mercies thankfully, bearing Afflictions patiently, and whatever State
and Condition he is in, therewith content.

Again, Let us view him in his sincere and undissembled Love to Mankind, loving
his Neighbor as himself, dealing justly with all Men, speaking the Truth to
his Neighbor, and doing such Acts of Piety and Kindness as he has Ability and
Opportunity for. Let us view him feeding the Hungry, clothing the Naked,
relieving the Distressed, instructing the Ignorant, setting them to rights that
are out of the Way, sympathizing with all according to their Circumstances,
weeping with them that weep, and rejoicing with them that rejoice, and studying
the Things that make for Peace, patiently bearing any Injuries and Abuses,
rather than revenge them, and laying aside all Malice, and Guile, and
Hypocrisies, and Envyings, and Evil-speakings; being reviled he blesses, being
persecuted he suffers it, being defamed he entreats, and is gentle, and good,
and kind, and faithful, and honest, and all clothed and adorned with Meekness,
Modesty and Humility.

But then finally, let us view the Christian or Child of God in his Conduct and
Management toward himself.

Let us view him in the Rule of his own Spirit, and in preserving the just
Government of his Passions, keeping them within due Bounds and under the
Regulation of Reason and Religion. Let us view him in his just Contempt of the
World, and of all Things in it; and yet managing all his worldly Affairs with
Diligence, with Care, and with Discretion. Let us view him in his moderate Use
of all Things which God has given; in his being sober, chaste, and temperate in
all Things.

And now I have recollected a few Hints from the foregoing Discourses, which
may go for a rough Draught of a Child of God, and are some of the general Lines
which are drawn by the Spirit of God, upon the Soul and upon the Life of every
gracious Saint.

And now, my beloved Brethren, what a Beauty, what a Brightness is there in
every one of these Lines? And how amiable, lovely, and beautiful, must the Man
be that has these Characters bright upon him? -- Indeed the Unhappiness is,
that we hardly ever did see such an one, where all these Lines were strong and
clear; for the Case with the best of Christians among us is this, that although
some of these Lines or Characters may be very conspicuous, yet others are weak
and much obscured. The Sins and Corruptions that still remain do so blot and
blur and stain them, that some of them in some Christians can hardly be
perceived.

But now let us by what we have seen in some Christians that have been eminent
for some Graces, imagine a Saint with ALL these Characters clear and strong
upon him; that is, let us imagine a Man as not only having all these Virtues
and Graces of the Spirit, but as having them in a strong, lively, and vigorious
Exercise, and oh how glorious would he appear! Surely he would attract the
Love, Delight and Complacence of God himself; for he cannot but delight in
these moral Virtues and Graces wherever he beholds them. And every Angel in
Heaven, as well as every Saint on Earth, must needs be in Love with such an
one; nay, the very Devils, and wicked Men, would be forced to acknowledge him
to be truly excellent and glorious.

Well then, although we may not expect to see such a perfect Man in Christ Jesus,
as this, nor to attain to it our selves, in the present State of Imperfection;
yet let us aspire after it, and desire and endeavor to come as near to it as
possible. O let us strive after those divine Virtues, those heavenly Graces
which will render us so like to God, and so lovely in his Eyes, and in the Eyes
of Angels and Saints, and which will be such an everlasting Spring of Peace,
Happiness and Joy to ourselves.

Now therefore suffer the Word of EXHORTATION. And the Exhortation which
speaks to you at this Time is, That you would earnestly seek and strive to
obtain this blessed Spirit of God, to lead, and guide you, to beget those
divine Virtues and Graces in your Souls, and draw them forth in a vigorous
Exercise in your Lives.

I scarce think there is one of you all, so abandoned, but that you would be
glad to be numbered among the Children of God, and to be secured of all the
glorious Privileges of such: But then in order to this, you must be under the
leading governing Influence of the Spirit of God, you must have him working
powerfully and effectually upon your Souls, producing this gracious Change, and
impressing such gracious Principles, and drawing forth every Grace into
Exercise. And therefore this is the first and the grand Thing to be desired and
sought after by us; namely to be led by the blessed Spirit of God, to be
impressed with this divine and heavenly Principle. The great Thing we need, and
which we should be most of all desirous of is, that the Spirit of God might
move upon our Hearts, with his almighty Energy, as he did upon the Face of the
Waters at first; removing that Corruption and Confusion that is upon them,
rectifying the Disorders that are within, and restoring our Souls; that is,
restoring the divine Image, and all those gracious Dispositions and Habits
which were lost by Sin: Which is the only sure and certain Sign of our being
the Children of God.

And now that you may be quickened carefully to seek and strive for this blessed
Spirit, and for those blessed and gracious Influences thereof; I will offer a
few Things to your Consideration, which if they be accompanied with the blessed
Spirit into your Hearts, will excite Desires and stir up Endeavors, in the Way
of the Gospel, for the obtaining the same to purpose.

1. Do but consider, it is the BLESSED SPIRIT OF GOD, that you are advised and
exhorted to seek after, and to whose guiding and governing Influences you are
recommended.

It is no less than the divine eternal Spirit, and no less than God himself,
that you are advised to put your self under. And therefore you may be sure that
there can be no Danger in being led by this Spirit. It is impossible for this
Spirit of God, who is a Spirit of Grace, of Truth, of Holiness, and Goodness,
to lead us to any Thing but what is true, and good, and holy. This Spirit can
lead us to nothing, but what will tend to make us good and happy. So that you
may be sure it is a Privilege to be led by this Spirit; that he leads in none
but safe and right Paths; that he leads in the Truth, and teaches; that he
leads in the Paths of Righteousness, for his Name's Sake. So that if you desire
to be led in the right Way, in the Way of Holiness, and in the Way of Peace and
Happiness forever; you must desire to be led by this Spirit, and put your
selves under the governing Influences thereof.

2. Consider, none but this Spirit can or will lead you in the right and safe
Way.

There are many false and lying Spirits gone forth into the World. The Devil,
and all his accursed Legions, are lying Spirits, and they lie in wait to
deceive. And the good Angels, although they are for nothing but the Truth; yet
they, although they excel in Strength, yet are not able of themselves to work
savingly and effectually upon Men's Souls; though they have a good Will to it;
yet they have no Power to restore our Souls, and create us anew in Christ
Jesus. They are ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister unto them who shall
be Heirs of Salvation. * But they cannot work saving Grace in the Soul. This
must be done, whenever it is done, by the Spirit of God. And unless we are
brought under the powerful gracious Operations of the Spirit, we shall abide in
our carnal natural State. So that if ever you would be delivered from the
dreadful Ruins of the Fall, if ever you would be delivered from the dreadful
Slavery you are in to your Lusts and Corruptions, and brought into the glorious
Liberties of the Sons of God; you must seek and endeavor to be led by this
blessed Spirit; for without this, all Means that can be used will prove
ineffectual.

3. Consider, none are the true Children of God, but such as are born of this
Spirit.

Such as are born of this Spirit are born of God, and so are the Children of
God; but as for such as have not had this regenerating and renewing of the holy
Ghost, let them call themselves the Children of God, and let others think them
so; yet God will never own them for his, nor treat them as his Children. And
therefore as ever you desire the glorious Privileges of the Sons of God, as
ever you would be able with Confidence to call him Father, and would have the
Liberty to go to him as Children to a Father, as ever you would have him pity
you, and love you, as a Father does a Child, and as ever you would be entitled
to the Inheritance of God's Children; you must come under the regenerating and
sanctifying Operations of this blessed Spirit.

4. Consider, that the gracious Operation of God's Spirit upon the Soul, is the
Seal of the living God, and is also the Earnest of our Inheritance.

We read several Times, of being sealed with the Spirit; and of God's sealing
with his Spirit, 2 Cor. 1.22. Who has also SEALED us, and given the EARNEST of
the Spirit in our Hearts. And we are warned against grieving the holy Spirit by
which we are SEALED unto the Day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. So that it is the
holy Spirit that seals Men, and seals them unto the Day of Redemption, and this
blessed Spirit that seals them, does it by making gracious Impressions upon
them, by instamping the divine Image upon their Souls, which is God's Seal, his
Mark by which he knows all his Children. And wherever this Seal is, there is
the Pledge or Earnest of the future Inheritance: There is Part given in Token
of what is to come; for the gracious Impressions made upon the Soul by the
blessed Spirit are the Beginnings of Heaven. That new Life which is breathed
into the Soul by the Spirit of God, it is the Beginning of eternal Life. Now
then if you would be sealed with God's Seal; if you would be found at last with
the Mark of the living God upon you, so as to be owned and received among his
Children; and if you would have the Pledge and Earnest of eternal Glory within
you; yea if you would have the Beginnings of eternal Life in your Souls; you
must seek 'till you obtain this blessed Spirit.

5. Consider, it is only by being under the blessed Influences of this Spirit,
that we can have the Favor of God, the Light of his Countenance, and any true
Peace and Comfort in the World.

God can take no Delight in any, but such as have his Spirit. It is the
Comeliness which God himself puts upon us by his Spirit, that renders us the
Objects of divine Delight and Complacence. And none but such as have this
Spirit can expect to enjoy God, or any Communion with him, or any Token of his
Favor, nor indeed any true Peace and Comfort in the World. This Sanctifier is
also the Comforter. And we must have him as a Sanctifier, or we shall never
have him as a Comforter. Indeed some may be filled with carnal Mirth, and spend
many Days in Pleasure, but what Kind of Mirth is it? Why even in Laughter the
Heart is sorrowful, having a misgiving, accusing Conscience within, and the End
of that Mirth is Heaviness. Prove. 14.13.
Others also without the Spirit, may pretend to much spiritual Comfort; but
alas! it is only the Light of their own Fire, and Sparks of their own kindling.
Isai. 50.11.
But now where the Spirit of God comes and begets Comfort in the Soul, it is a
true and solid Comfort, it is a Peace upon a good Foundation, that will bear to
be examined and tried, and the End of it will be Joy.

Well then, would you enjoy God's Favor which is Life, and his Loving Kindness
which is better than Life? Would you have the Peace of God that passes all
Understanding to keep your Heart and Mind through Jesus Christ, which may support
you under all the Troubles of Life, and may dispel all the Terrors of Death?
Why then you must seek to obtain this blessed Spirit in the renewing and
sanctifying Influences thereof. You must seek to obtain the Graces, before you
can have the Comforts and Joys of the Holy Ghost.

6. Consider, that it is by this blessed Spirit alone that we can be fitted for
Heaven, and for the glorious Inheritance which God has there laid up for his
Children.

There is no getting to Heaven; nor would it signify any Thing to get thither,
unless we are in some Measure fitted for that blessed Place; and all whom God
ever receives to Heaven, he fits them for it. The Apostle speaking of Mortality
being swallowed up in Life, that is in eternal Life and Happiness, says, that
he who had wrought them for the self-same Thing is God, who had given unto them
the Earnest of the Spirit. 2 Cor. 5.5.
He who has wrought us for the self-same Thing, or prepared, or fitted, for
that blessed Immortality, as it might as well be rendered. So that God prepares
and fits every one for Heaven that he receives to it. Giving Thanks to the
Father, who has made us meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints
in Light. Col. 1.12.
And now the Father does this by his Holy Spirit, in sanctifying, purging and
cleansing from those Things that would render us unfit for such a holy Place,
and that would hinder us from the Enjoyment of it. In our natural State we are
utterly unfit for Heaven. O! ye carnal, corrupt, impure Souls, what would you
do in Heaven if you could be received thither, which is indeed impossible! For
nothing enters there that defiles. But if you could get thither, what would
you do there? You could neither bear a Part in the Exercises, nor could you
taste the Delights and Pleasures of that glorious Place.

And therefore, as ever you would have an Entrance ministered to you into the
everlasting Kingdom, and as ever you would be fit for the Presence of the holy
God, as ever you would be fit for the Society of Angels, and of the Spirits of
just Men made perfect, and as ever you would be fit for the Exercises, and
capable of relishing the Delights and Joys of the heavenly World; you must seek
to obtain this blessed Spirit to sanctify and cleanse you: For as to every one
that shall be saved, it may be said, that they are chosen unto Salvation through
Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth. 2 These. 2.13.


And thus you see something of the Importance and Necessity of our being under
the leading governing Influences of this blessed Spirit. Of as much Importance
as it is for us to be delivered from being the Children of Wrath, and Heirs of
Hell, and to be the Children of God, Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs with Christ,
to the heavenly and eternal Inheritance, and to be made meet for it; of so much
Importance is it for us to have this divine and blessed Spirit to lead and
guide us, and to work all divine Virtues and Graces in our Souls.

And now perhaps some of you are ready to put this Question to me, viz. How
shall we obtain these blessed Influences of this divine Spirit? What Course
must we take that we may be led by the Spirit of God, and have those divine
Virtues and Graces wrought in our Souls?

And now to this important Question, I will answer in a few Particulars, by Way
of Direction, and so conclude.

DIRECTION 1. You must believe and be sensible of the Need you stand in of this
blessed Spirit, to lead and govern you, and to work every Grace in you.

Some Men have been so ignorant of their own Weakness and Corruption, as to
imagine that with the common Helps afforded them in the outward Means of Grace;
they had Power enough of heir own to effect a gracious Change: That they could
in the Use of these Means convert and change themselves, and put every Grace
into Exercise as there should be Occasion.

But now as such are grossly mistaken, so God oftentimes leaves such
self-sufficient, such self-confident Persons to themselves, whereby they may be
effectually convinced at length, (and oftentimes when it is too late) that they
had not Power of their own to stand; much less to do this and other Duties. And
therefore such as are so confident in their own Strength, are not likely to
seek for Help as they should, and so not in a likely Way to have the Help of
the Spirit afforded unto them.

Our Savior told his Disciples that without him they could do nothing. John
15.5.
We must be sensible that without the Help of his Spirit we can do nothing
effectually in the Affair of our Souls. And the more sensible you are of your
Weakness, your Corruption, and Wickedness, and the absolute Need you stand in
of the special Help of the divine Spirit; the nearer you are to have the Help
of this blessed Spirit afforded unto you. Let Persons be but sensible that in
their natural State they are weak and impotent, wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked; and then they are more ready to look to God for
Help, more ready to receive it, and God more ready to bestow it. The whole need
not a Physician, but they that are sick; I am not come to call the Righteous,
but Sinners to Repentance. Matthew. 9.12, 13.


DIREC. II. On the other Hand, you must beware of looking upon your Impotency
in such a View, and presuming so much upon the Help of the Spirit; as to sit
down in Sloth and Negligence.

As some Men are vain in their Imaginations with Respect to the natural Powers
of Men, and cannot bear to think they are so debased and debilitated by the
Fall, as really they are; but think they can do this, and the other by their
own Power, without any special Help of the Spirit; so others are apt to run
into the other Extreme, and from the Representation that is made in Scripture
of humane Weakness and Corruption since the Fall; but more especially from some
false Glosses that some have put upon certain metaphorical Expressions in
Scripture; and from the strong, indiscreet, and indistinct Expressions of some
Teachers, concerning the Impotency of Men; I say, that from these Things, some
have been ready to think that nothing at all can be done by them, nor so much
as to be attempted by them; but will sit still, waiting till the Spirit of God
moves them; pleading that it is in vain to attempt to do any Thing before the
Spirit helps them; yea, and that it would be a sinful presuming in their own
Strength, to attempt any Thing before they find the Spirit helping them. And
how common a Plea is this with some Persons, when they are called upon to this
and the other Duty, to say, I can do nothing of my self, I have no Power of my
own, I am not sufficient as of my self for a good Though It; and how quietly and
contentedly will some such Persons sit down in Sloth, and in the Neglect of
Duty, with such a Plea as this, from Year to Year, pretending that they wait
only for the Spirit of God to help them: When in Fact the Spirit of God has all
the While been ready to help them, if they would but improve the Help that he
stood ready to afford them. And however some People may quiet themselves in
their Sloth and Negligence, from a Pretense of their Impotency, and how much
soever they may flatter themselves that they give Glory to God, by pleading
such a Weakness and Insufficiency in themselves; yet it will be very offensive
to God, and a Means of provoking him to withold his Spirit from them, when they
make use of this as an Argument to encourage themselves in Sloth and Negligence.

For although I am fully persuaded that there is a moral Impotency in Men to that
which is spiritually good, and that we indeed are not sufficient of ourselves
for a good Though It; yet there is a natural Power still left in Man to do many
Things that are materially and externally good; such as to read, to hear, to
attend the Worship of God, etc.

Now therefore for any to neglect these external Duties, under a Pretense that
they can do nothing of themselves, would be as much an Abuse of the Doctrine of
humane Impotency, as it would be for a Man, because we are taught that in God
we live, and move, and have our Being, Acts 17.28.
to ly a Bed, and not stir Hand or Foot, pleading that he moves in God, and
that he cannot move without him.

So that every one who makes use of Man's Impotency as a Plea for Idleness,
Sloth and Negligence, it is most certainly an Abuse of the Doctrine: But it
rather affords an Argument for striving. I don't mean in our own Strength, but
in the Strength of the Lord; and we must try and see whether God don't afford
Help and Strength to us. For God is oftentimes striving with Sinners under the
Gospel by his Spirit: And who can say, if they should attempt in any Duty, but
that God will set in with his holy Spirit and help them? What one Soul can say
but that the Spirit of God stands ready to help him, if he will but engage in
any Duty. Therefore Men must see what they can do, and go so far as they find
they have any Power, instead of sitting down in Sloth and Laziness. The Man
with the withered Hand, when Christ bid him stretch it forth, did not pretend
to plead that he had not Power to stretch it out, but believing that he who bid
him stretch it out; was able to strengthen him to it, he attempted to stretch
it out, and found Power at the very Time to do it. Matthew. 12.13.
Let me tell you, my Brethren, Men must strive and exert themselves with as
much Vigor and Earnestness as if they were to do the Whole themselves; but
they must at the same Time look to God as performing all Things for them. We
must be working out our own Salvation with Fear and Trembling, at the same Time
we must look to God to work in us both to will and to do of his own good
Pleasure. Phil. 2.12.
You must run the christian Race, all the while looking unto Jesus, the Author
and Finisher of your Faith. Heb. 12.1, 2.
Let us but set out and do what we can, by the common Help of God's Spirit, and
we have abundant Reason to hope that God will at length afford the special
Influences of his Spirit. For to him that has, that is, that improves what he
has, shall be given; whereas, from him that has not, that is, that don't
improve what he has, that acts as if he had not, shall be taken away, even
that which he seems to have. Matthew. 25.29.


DIREC. III. You must be sensible that GOD acts in a sovereign Manner in giving
his holy Spirit. That he gives it to whom, and in what Measure he pleases.

We must consider the Gift of the holy Ghost to be as free a Gift as that of
the Lord Jesus Christ. We are not to look upon God as under Obligations to give
his Spirit to us, but that it is according to his mere good Pleasure: For he
will have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy, and will have Compassion on whom he
will have Compassion. Romans 9.15.
Although in the Counsels of God in the Covenant of Redemption, we may suppose
that it was agreed upon that the eternal Spirit should apply the Redemption
purchased by Christ; yet this Spirit is given to apply this Redemption, by
working Faith in the Soul, and uniting it to Christ in effectual Calling,
according to the sovereign Pleasure of God. Who has saved us, and called us
with an holy Calling; not according to our Works; but according to his OWN
PURPOSE AND GRACE. 2 Timothy 1.9.
So that you must not pretend to claim the Holy Spirit; you must not think that
by any Thing you can do, you can challenge the holy Spirit as what you have a
Right unto; the divine eternal Spirit is perfectly free in his Operations, as
free as the Wind: The Wind blows where it lists; so is every one that is
born of the Spirit. John 3.8.
So whenever any of you receive the gracious Influences of this Spirit, you
must acknowledge it as a free Gift, and according to the sovereign Pleasure of
God, and not for any Thing that you have done. Not by Works of Righteousness
which we have done; but according to his Mercy he saved us, by the Washing of
Regeneration, and Renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly,
through Jesus Christ our Savior. Tit. 3.5, 6.
And such as think they may claim the holy Spirit, by any Thing they can do
merely of themselves, are not in a Way to obtain this blessed Spirit. God will
have us to know that we have no Claim, no Demand of that Kind upon him; and
that all the blessed Influences of his Spirit, are of rich and free Grace. And
in this Way God prepares for his Spirit. When the Soul is brought plainly to
see that Man is saved by Grace, through Faith, and this not of himself, but it is
the Gift of God. Ephesians. 2.8.
He is in a likely Way to obtain this Grace, yea it is a Sign that the Spirit
of Grace has begun to work upon that Soul.

DIREC. IV. You must be much in Prayer to God, for his blessed Spirit to lead
and govern you.

Although the Spirit of God in the gracious Influences thereof be the free Gift
of God, and he gives it according to his own sovereign Pleasure; yet he allows
and encourages us to ask it of him. And although we cannot challenge or demand
the holy Spirit, because we have asked it of God; yet we have great
Encouragement to pray, and to hope for obtaining upon our Prayers, provided we
have sincere Desires in our Prayers. Indeed if we have any sincere Desires they
are stirred up by this very Spirit. Accordingly so far as you are enabled you
must desire this blessed Spirit to be your Guide, Sanctifier, and Comforter,
and must manifest those Desires in Prayer to God: And if you don't desire so
much as you ought, you must pray that you may desire it more. Prayer is a Duty
that we can perform in some Sort; and if we cannot of ourselves pray so well as
we should; let us pray as well as we can, and pray that God would enable us to
pray better, and that is the likeliest Way for us to pray better, and one of
the best Methods we can take to obtain the holy Spirit in his gracious
Influences. For as our blessed Savior represents the Matter unto us, we may as
certainly, yea much more certainly depend upon our heavenly Father to give the
holy Spirit to them that ask, than upon our obtaining of our earthly Parents,
any good Thing that we ask of them. If ye being evil, know how to give good
Gifts unto your Children; how much more shall your heavenly Father give the
holy Spirit to them that ask him. Luke 11.13.
So then we must ask this Spirit of God, and we cannot expect this Gift without
asking.

Indeed some have suggested, as if it was a dangerous Thing to set unconverted
People, to praying for the holy Spirit: And others have spoken of it as a
Matter of great Doubt with them, whether unconverted Persons ought to pray; by
Reason of which some weak Minds that have been under Doubts as to their
Regeneration, have been under Discouragements as to the great Duty of Prayer.
But he that observes the Current of Scripture, will find that every Man is
obliged to pray, and especially to ask for the holy Spirit, and for renewing
Grace. As it is God's Prerogative to give a new Heart, and a new Spirit, and as
he has promised to give it unto his People, so he expects that we should ask it
of him. A new Heart also will I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within
you, -- and I will put my Spirit within you, etc Thus says the Lord God, I
will yet for this be enquired of by the House of Israel to do it for them.
Ezekiel. 36.26, 27, 37.
Surely then they were to ask and pray for these spiritual Blessings before
they should obtain them. And this plainly supposes, that Persons must pray,
must seek to God in order to obtain this great Blessing of the Spirit.
Moreover, if we may pray that God would create a clean Heart, and renew a right
Spirit within us; we may pray before there is such a clean Heart and right
Spirit created or renewed within us.

But then if we pray for the Spirit of God, we must labor to be earnest and
importunate in our Prayers. If we find ourselves cold, dull and lifeless in
praying for the Spirit of Grace; we must pray that God would make us more
earnest in our Prayers. We must also set ourselves to consider the infinite
Importance, and the absolute Necessity of our obtaining the blessed Spirit, and
so must pray that whatever God denies us, he would not deny us his holy Spirit.
You should endeavor that the Language of your Souls might be to this Purpose,
Lord, as to outward and temporal Blessings, I ask them with Submission to thy
wise and holy Will, whether to grant or to deny: But as to thy holy Spirit, I
entreat thee by no Means to deny it unto me, for without thy Spirit I shall
remain in a carnal corrupt Estate, and can never see thy Face, nor enjoy thy
Favor, but I must be excluded thy Presence for ever. And so far as there is
any Earnestness and Importunity in your Prayers, so far it is a Token for Good.
For when God is about to give his holy Spirit in the gracious Influences
thereof; he will stir up some Earnestness of Desire, and will quicken us to
call upon his Name.

DIREC. V. You must readily acknowledge the Help and Influence of the Spirit,
which you receive your selves, and perceive in others; and give GOD the Glory
of it.

As we are to ask for the Spirit, so he is to be acknowledged in all his
gracious Influences and Operations upon Men's Hearts, and if we experience any
Thing hereof in our selves, in any lively Actings of Faith, and Love, or other
Graces, or in any gracious Restraints from Sin, or Assistances to Duty, or in
any true spiritual Joy: We must not ascribe those Things to our selves, but
acknowledge them all to the Glory of God. We must acknowledge with the Apostle,
and say, By the Grace of God, I am what I am. -- Not I, but the Grace of God
which was with me. 1 Cor. 15.12.
He which has wrought us for the self same Thing, is God, who has also given
unto us the Earnest of the Spirit. 2 Cor. 5.5.
I live; nevertheless not I; but Christ lives in me. Gal. 2.20.
So when we see others evidently under the Influences of this blessed Spirit,
we ought, with them, to acknowledge it to the Praise of God. The Apostle
observed and declares concerning the converted Corinthians, that they were
washed, that they were justified, that they were sanctified, in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and with the Spirit of our God. 1 Cor. 6.11.
And whenever we perceive the Grace of God in any, we should magnify the Lord
with them, and exalt his Name together.

And by a thankful acknowledging of the Grace of God we receive our selves, and
perceive in others, we are in the Way not only to secure what we have, of the
divine and gracious Influences; but also to obtain farther Degrees of divine
Grace. For to him that has, that thankfully acknowledges what he has, and
carefully improves what he has, shall be given, and he shall have more
Abundance. Matthew. 13.12.


But here we must beware of Errors on the right Hand and on the left. As we
must be careful to give God the Glory of all his Grace, and must take heed that
we don't ascribe any Thing to our selves which is really the Work of the divine
Spirit; so we must avoid the other Extreme, which is the ascribing this and
that to the divine Impulse, and the gracious Influences of God's Spirit, which
are really the Effect only of an enlivened Fancy, and warm Imagination; for
this in the Conclusion may be as dangerous and fatal as the other. But Wisdom
is profitable, is necessary to direct us in those Things, and the holy
Scriptures must be our Guide.

And by this Rule we must judge the Spirits, as well as our selves; and judge
of them by their Fruits, for by their Fruits it is that we can know and judge
of them.

And here we may, from the Nature of the divine Spirit, as revealed in his
Word, lay down this general Rule in the Matter, viz. That those Things are to
be attributed to the Spirit of God, that plainly, clearly, and fully lead us to
God, and Christ, and Holiness, to Justice, Truth, and Charity, to Sobriety,
Chastity, and Humility. And that whatever Influence there is upon us, that
don't plainly and fully lead us to these Things, whatever specious Appearance
it may make at present, it is from some other Spirit than the Spirit of God,
and may not be ascribed to him.

DIREC. VI. You must diligently attend upon all the instituted Means of Grace,
wherein you may hope to meet with the Spirit of God in the gracious Influences
thereof.

It is in Concurrence with some outward Means of Grace that God for the most
Part works upon the Souls of Men, and makes use of them as the Instruments of
our saving Conversion to him. Thus the Word of God is very much made use of in
the Hand of the Spirit, for the convincing and converting Sinners. The Law of
the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul. Psalm. 19.7.
That is, instrumentally by the Hand of the Spirit. For it is with the Word
that he converts and regenerates the Soul. Of his own Will begat he us, with
the Word of Truth. James 1.18.
Surely then we ought to converse very much with the Word of God. We should
read it, and hear it, with diligent Attention and close Application, and should
meditate therein both Day and Night.

And as the Goings of our God and King, are to be seen in his Sanctuary, and
there he commands the Blessing, even Life for evermore; so we should be careful
to go into his Tabernacle, and worship at his Footstool. We must attend the
public Worship, and upon all the Ordinances of God's House, and in all those
Ways that he has appointed for us to meet with him. I say, all the Ways that he
has appointed, for it is in the Ways of divine Appointment and Institution that
we may hope to meet with him, and with his Grace. And we must be steady and
constant in attending upon religious Duties and Ordinances, and must not suffer
our selves to be easily diverted from them. We may not forsake the public
Worship, and stated Ordinances, or separate from christian Assemblies where we
have been will not to attend, without being able to give a good Reason therefore.

But then we must not content our selves with a bare external Attendance,
(which I fear is the Case of many) and the Reason why they have not met with
the gracious Influences of the Spirit in Ordinances. But we must give a close
and diligent Attention, with Desires, Prayers, and Endeavors, that the End and
Design of every Ordinance may be answered upon us.

In a Word, Let us remember and realize it, that the Spirit of God is always
ready to accompany all the instituted Means of Grace; and if we attend on them
in a right Manner, they will be as so many Channels or Conduit Pipes to convey
the blessed Spirit, with all its Graces and Comforts into the Soul. With Joy
may we draw Water out of these Wells of Salvation. Isaiah 12.3.
Surely then none of these Ordinances may be neglected, nor may they be
attended in a careless customary Manner least you miss of the Holy Spirit after
all.

DIREC. VII. You must take Heed of quenching the Spirit, and must carefully
comply with the Strivings thereof.

This is the cautionary Advice of the Apostle, QUENCH NOT THE SPIRIT. 1 These.
5.19.
And a very necessary Caution it is: For by suppressing the first Motions of
the Spirit, and by quenching the Sparks that began to kindle in the Soul, many
a one has utterly lost the Spirit of God. He has been so provoked hereat, as to
withdraw, and has ceased to strive with them any more. And if God in righteous
Judgment sometimes deals thus with those that quench the Spirit, that don't
carefully observe the Dictates thereof, nor comply with its blessed Motions;
how much more will he be provoked to leave such as do even resist the Holy
Ghost, and do despite unto the Spirit of Grace? Oh then as ever you would
obtain the blessed Spirit, you must take Heed of grieving or provoking him, by
resisting him, or refusing to comply with him. You don't know what Hazard you
run every Time you quench or resist the Spirit of God. And let me tell you,
that if any of you finally miss of the Spirit of God, and die in your Sins, God
will know it, and charge upon every one of you that you quenched his Spirit,
that you grieved his Spirit, that you resisted his Spirit, which will stop
every Mouth, so that you will not have a Word to say for your selves in the Day of
Judgment; but will condemn your selves for refusing and resisting the Spirit of
God when he was offered to you. Well then as ever you would obtain the Spirit
of God, so as to be a sure Token of your being the Children of God, you must
not resist, but readily yield to the Strivings of the Spirit. You must hearken
to his Suggestions, and fall in with his blessed Motions. Whatever the Spirit
of God suggests from the Word of God, as your Duty, and is prompting you unto,
you must comply therewith, without conferring with Flesh and Blood, without
consulting your carnal Ease or worldly Interest in the Matter. And by thus
harkening to the blessed Spirit, and complying with the Motions thereof, you
will have the Spirit come more and more powerfully upon your Souls, that at
length you will be so led and governed by this Spirit of God, as will be an
Evidence that you are the Sons of God.

And now to conclude the whole Subject.

Let us all admire and adore the Riches of divine Grace, that God is pleased to
take any of the rebellious Race of Adam, and admit them to all the glorious
Privileges of his Children; that he has been pleased to send his only begotten
and dearly beloved Son to purchase such infinite Benefits for us; and that he
has been pleased also to send his holy Spirit, to make us the fit Objects of
divine Love and Complacency, and to make us the fit Subjects of sublime
Felicity, and of immortal Happiness. And now since this infinitely blessed
Spirit, in all his enlightening, convincing, renewing, sanctifying, saving and
comforting Influences is revealed and offered in the Gospel, and since the
outward Means of Grace are so freely enjoyed, and the common Strivings of this
Spirit, so frequently experienced by us; Oh! let us take Care that we may not
be of that unhappy Number who receive this Grace of God in vain. Look, look
diligently, least any of you should finally fail of the Grace of God.

And here you may receive this as a Truth, and rely upon it, that although God be
the sovereign Dispenser of his Grace; yet that if you fail of the Grace of God,
fail of obtaining his Spirit to lead and guide you, as he does the Children of
God, it will be your own Fault; and because you have not done what you might
have done, and ought to have done, for the obtaining this blessed Spirit.

For if you are found without the Spirit of God and destitute of saving Grace
at last, it will be because of your Pride and Self-Conceit, that you presumed
in your own Strength, and did not suitably acknowledge the Need you stood in of
the Help of the Spirit, or you presumed so much upon the Help of the Spirit, as
to lay aside all Endeavors of your own, or you have been so careless about the
Matter, as to restrain Prayer before God, and did not seek to him for his
Spirit, as you might have done. Or you have denied to the Spirit the Glory of
his divine and gracious Influences, attributing those Things which have really
been wrought by the Spirit, to some other Causes. Or you have ascribed that to
the holy Spirit, which would have been derogatory to his Glory, rather than for
his Honor. Or you have neglected some of the Ordinances and Means of Grace
which Christ has appointed. Or you have quenched the Spirit, and grieved him,
and provoked his Departure. And now if these, and such like, be the real
Reasons why any of you go without the Spirit of God, surely you will have a
Consciousness of your own Guilt, and will judge and condemn your selves, and be
obliged to acknowledge the Justice of God in condemning you: And all the World
will acknowledge the Justice of the divine Procedure, and say, as in Rev. 16.5.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, because thou have judged thus.

Well then, you must alter your Tho'ts, and alter your Course as to those
Things, as ever you would have this Spirit of God to guide and govern you, and
even in this you need the Help of the Spirit. Oh! then let us be sensible that
we need the Spirit of God in every Thing, and that without him we can do
nothing. Let us cry to God for his Spirit, and that whatever he denies, he
would not deny us his Spirit, and that whatever he takes from us, he would not
take away his holy Spirit from us. Plead with God as the Psalmist did, Cast me
not away from thy Presence, take not thy Spirit from me. Psalm. 51.11.
Oh let us beware of resisting, grieving, or quenching this blessed Spirit; for
we don't know how soon he may be provoked to depart: And woe unto us, if he
depart from us. Let us then be thankful for every Striving of the Spirit, let
us cherish every Motion, and comply with every Thing that this divine Spirit
prompts us unto; endeavoring always to distinguish between the Spirit of God
and our own Spirits, between the Spirit of Truth and the Spirit of Error. Let
us wait upon God in all the Ways we have Ground to hope that we shall meet with
his Spirit and Grace. And don't let us neglect one Ordinance wherein God is
ever wont to communicate his Grace. Let us never flatter our selves that we
have the Spirit of God dwelling in us, when he (...) nor let us vainly imagine
we have more of the Spirit than we have. But whatever we do really find of the
Spirit of God in us, let us acknowledge it as the Fruit of free Mercy, and
sovereign Grace in God, and give him the Glory of it. In these Ways we may hope
to have the Spirit of God come into us, and to carry on his Grace in our Souls,
from one Degree thereof unto another, until all the Virtues and Graces of the
Spirit, shall be completed in us, and we appear in all the Beauty and Glory,
and partake of all the Happiness and Joy of perfect Men in Christ Jesus.

Now unto him whose Prerogative it is to sanctify you, and can sanctify you
wholly, and make you meet to partake of all the Privileges of his Children,
even of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light, and unto him that is able to
keep you from falling, (...) ^^esent you faultless before the Presence of his
(...) with exceeding Joy; to the only wise God (...) Savior, be Glory and
Majesty, Dominion (...) Power, now and ever,

AMEN.
Just Published, And to be SOLD by Daniel Henchman, in Cornhil.
GRACE defended, in a modest Plea for an important Truth; namely, That the
Offer of Salvation made to Sinners in the Gospel, comprises in it an Offer of
the Grace given in Regeneration. And, Showing the Consistency of this Truth
with the free and sovereign Grace of GOD, in the whole Work of Man's Salvation.
In which the Doctrine of Original Sin and humane Impotence, the Object and
Extent of Redemption, the Nature of Regeneration, the Difference between common
and special Grace the Nature of justifying Faith, and other important Points,
are considered and cleared.

By Experience Mayhew


