Dr. Sewall's SERMON ON Love to our Neighbor.

The second Commandment like to the first; Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy
self.

A SERMON Preached at the Thursday Lecture in BOSTON, May 6. 1742.

By Joseph Sewall, D. D. Pastor to a Church of CHRIST in BOSTON.

Romans 13. 8, 9. Owe no Man any thing, but (...)one another: For he that loves
another, has (...) the Law. For this, Thou shall not commit (...), Thou shall
not kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou (...) not bear false Witness, Thou shall
not covet; and if there be any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in
this saying, namely, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. BOSTON: Printed
by THO. FLEET, for D. HENCHMAN in Cornhill, 1742.

The second Commandment, to love our Neighbor.
Matthew. XXII. 39. And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor
as thy self.
WE have considered the first and great Commandment, which summarily
comprehends in it our Duty toward God; Thou shall love the LORD thy GOD with
all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. We proceed now to
consider the second, which comprehends our Duty toward Men in these Words;
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. And our Savior declares that this
Commandment is like unto the first. I shall endeavor to explain the Text under
the following Doctrine.

Doct. To love our Neighbor as our selves, is the second Commandment of the
Moral Law; and it is like unto the first.

Under this Doctrine we may consider I. The Duty required, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self.

II. Prove that this is the second Commandment, and is like unto the first.

I. We may consider the Duty here required; Thou shall love thy Neighbor as
thy self.

Under this Head I would speak briefly to the following Particulars. 1. Who is
our Neighbor? 2. What is implied in loving our Neighbor? 3. In loving him as
our selves?

1. Who is our Neighbor?

Answ. (1.) Every Man without Distinction of Nation, or outward Condition.

Our Love is not to be confined to our Friends and Benefactors, or those of our
own Nation, as the Pharisees taught. The carnal Jews were ready to imagine that
the Gentiles were not included in this Precept. But our great Lord and
Lawgiver, in Answer to this Question, Who is my Neighbor? plainly shows us
that every one is our Neighbor, and that we must extend our Charity to all, of
what Nation soever, as we have Opportunity. Luke 10.29, -- 36, 37. Which now of
these three, think thou, was Neighbor unto him that fell among Thieves? And
he said, He that showed Mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou
likewise. It has pleased GOD of one Blood to make all Nations that dwell upon
the Earth. We were all one in Adam, who was our first Father, and our Head and
Representative in the first Covenant: He was created in the Image of GOD, and
although by his first Transgression we forfeited and lost that moral Rectitude in
which the Image of GOD principally consists, yet still Man retains something of
that Image, as he is a Spirit, though in Flesh. And agreeably one Reason why
Murder is punished with Death by the divine Law, we have given, Genesis 9.6.
Whose sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood he shed; For in the Image of
God made he Man. And then, we were, in the Loins of our Progenitors, preserved
in the Ark, when other Families of Renown in the Earth, sunk under the Weight
of GOD's Wrath in the Deluge, and have their Names blotted out from under
Heaven: And that in a particular Manner for their Violation of this Command.
Genesis 6.11. The Earth also was corrupt before GOD; and the Earth was filled with
Violence. And to rise higher still, the Son of GOD became Man, and has bought a
People with his Blood out of every Tongue and Tribe and Nation. We must
therefore love, and do good to all Men. And one Way wherein we are to express
our good Will to them that are unknown, and far from us; is by praying for them
to that GOD who fills Heaven and Earth. 1 Timothy 2.1. I exhort therefore, that
first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be
made for all Men. Thus we should express our Charity for the Jews and
Heathen-Gentile Nations, by looking up to GOD for them, that He would be
pleased to send forth his Light and Truth, and so give them the Knowledge of
himself, as manifested in the Face of JESUS CHRIST. Thus the Psalmist prays to
GOD, Psalm, 67.2, 3. That thy Way may be known upon Earth, and thy saving Health
among all Nations. Let the People Praise thee, O GOD; let all the People praise
thee. And we must take heed we do not attend this Duty whether in public or
private, after a formal customary Manner; but that with holy Fervency we thus
express our earnest Desires of the Advancement of GOD's Glory, and of the
Salvation of our Fellow Creatures. There is a general Philanthropy, or Love of
Men, which is a Duty that extends to all. We must treat Men, though ever so mean
in their outward Condition and Circumstances, with Humanity; and not like
Beasts. Certainly then, it must be a dreadful Violation of this Law for Men to
take more Care of their Horses, and other Brute Creatures, than of the Souls
and Bodies of their Servants, though in ever so low a Degree of Servitude. And
then I may here observe that this Law of Love reaches even to our personal
Enemies. Mat. 5. 43, 44. Ye have heard that it bath been said, Thou shall love
thy Neighbor, and hate thine Enemy: But I say unto you, Love your Enemies,
bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them
which despitefully use you and persecute you. The Roman Orator and Moralist
Tully, has this Observation, "It is the first Duty of Justice to hurt no Man,
unless provoked by Injury. Justitiae primum munus est, ut ne cui quis noceat,
nisi Cacessitus injuria. Tullius de Officiis. P. 10
How divinely excellent are the Laws of Christ, and how far do they excel the
most refined Heathen Morality! Christians are required to do good even to them
from whom they suffer Evil. Romans 12. 21. Be not overcome of Evil, but overcome
Evil with Good. Indeed this does not require us to love such evil ones with a
Love of Complacency, but with a Love of Benevolence. Though we are justly
offended, yet we must maintain good Will and a charitable Disposition toward
such, wishing well to them, and being ready to do them good as we have
Opportunity. Lord write this Law upon our Hearts!

(2.) Such are our Neighbors in an especial Manner, as stand in any peculiar
Relation to us, whether natural, civil or religious.

Our Neighbor is one that is nigh to us. Agreeably, as some Persons are in a
peculiar Sense near to us, so they may in an especial Manner be called our
Neighbors in the Sense of my Text; and there is a peculiar Love which by God's
Law we are obliged to exercise toward them. Thus Parents ought to love their
Children, and seek the Well-being of their Offspring, with a tender Affection.
And Children must with a dutiful Affection consult the best good of their
Parents, and labor by their kind and respectful Behavior to be Blessings to
them. Brethren and Sisters must labor to be of one Heart, and to dwell
together in Unity. It is named as an abominable Iniquity, to be without natural
Affection, Romans 1. 31. Such as are united by the Bonds of Nature are then under
peculiar Obligations to love one another. The like may be said respecting such
as are nigh to each other in a civil Relation. There ought to be a singular
Love and Endearment between Husbands and Wives, who are one Flesh in the
nearest Union by God's Ordinance. How divine is the Example set before Husbands
to this Purpose in the pure and ardent Love of Christ to his mystical Body, the
Church! Ephesians. 5. 25. Husbands, love your Wives, even as CHRIST also loved the
Church. Thus Masters ought in the Exercise of Love to give unto their Servants
that which is just and equal. They ought to perform their Covenant Agreements
with Equity and a kind Disposition to do them all the Good they can. And
Servants must be obedient to their Masters, not with Eye-Service as Men
pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ, doing the Will of God from the Heart;
with good Will doing Service. Ephesians. 6.5, -- 7. Their Service must not be merely
of Constraint, but from good Will and a Principle of Love to their Masters.
They must regard their Masters Interests something as their own, and so promote
them by their honest diligent Labor. Thus there ought to be mutual Affection
between Civil Rulers, and the People under their Government. Rulers ought to
lay out themselves in promoting the public Weal. They must be the Ministers of
God for good to their People, and use their best Endeavors that they may be
extensive Blessings, as the Light and Rain of Heaven. And the People should
cheerfully return that Honor and Obedience, Tribute and Recompense which are
their Due; and do their Part by their hearty Respect and dutiful Deportment to
make the Burden Of Government as easy to their Rulers as may be. I might go on,
and say that there is also a peculiar Love to be exercised toward such as are
related to us upon a religious Account, and by the Bonds of Grace. Pastors
should feed their Flocks with tender Care and Affection, being willing to spend
and be spent for them, though the more abundantly they love them, the less they
be loved. And their People should highly esteem them in Love for their Work's
sake. Such as are united in Church Fellowship should watch over one another in
Love, not for their halting, but spiritual Edification; rejoicing in the
Prosperity of each other's Souls. Such as are Brethren in Christ should love
each other from a pure Heart, fervently. The Saints should in our Esteem be the
excellent ones of the Earth, and we should place our Affection in an especial
Manner upon those in whom the Image of God shines with the brightest Luster.
Psalm. 16. 3. To the Saints that are in the Earth, and to the excellent in whom
is all my delight. Our Love must be extensive, and as we have Opportunity, we
must do good to all Men; but then here it must be more intense, and we must
accordingly do good especially to them who are of the Household of Faith, Gal.
6. 10. And thus I have briefly answered the first Inquiry; who is our Neighbor?

2. What is implied in loving our Neighbor? Or, What is this Love?

Answ This Love is a gracious Affection, by which we truly desire, seek and
rejoice in the Welfare of our Neighbor, and that in Obedience to GOD's Command.

(1.) This Love to our Neighbor is a gracious Affection.

It is not merely a natural Passion. No, this Affection must be sanctified by
the Holy Spirit of God. The Fruit of the Spirit is Love, Gal. 5. 22. Not only
Love to God, but also to our Neighbor. We must be made Partakers of the divine
Teaching, that we may obey this Command. 1 These. 4. 9. Ye your selves are
taught of GOD to love one another. God writes this Law of Love upon the Heart
when his People are born again, born of the Spirit. Thus says the beloved
Disciple John, 1 Ep. 4. 7. Beloved, let us love one another: For Love is of
GOD; and every one that loves, is born of GOD. Alas! by our Fall this
Affection is dreadfully depraved, so that Men inordinately love themselves, and
are full of Malice and Envy toward their Neighbor. We have that Description
of the natural Man destitute of the Grace of the Gospel, Tit. 3. 3. Living in
Malice and Envy, hateful, and hating one another. So it was till the Kindness
and Love of God our Savior toward Man appeared, and they were saved by the
washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. 4th and 5th Verses.

(2.) This Love is exercised in Obedience to GOD's Command.

God's Commandment is, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. The Command
of our Redeemer, God-Man Mediator is that, Love one another. Now he that loves
his Neighbor, has a sincere Respect to the Divine Command, as the Cause, Rule
and Measure of his Love to his Neighbor. He loves his Brother because the
great Lawgiver requires it, for the Lord's sake, who is the chief Good; and
with an upright Aim at his Glory, who is the last and highest End. He loves the
Disciples of Christ upon the Account of their Relation to him, and because he
requires them to love one another. In a Word, such as truly love their
Neighbor, endeavor to regulate their Love, the inward Affection and outward
Expressions of it, by the Rule of GOD'S Word. Whereas, though wicked Men may have
a strong Affection toward their Children and Friends; yet they have not a
sincere Respect to GOD's Law as the Reason and Measure of their Love: But
indeed they forget GOD, while they make an Idol of the Creature.

(3) In the Exercise of this Love we sincerely desire the Good and Welfare of
our Neighbor.

When we considered the Love of GOD, we mentioned our desiring him above all;
for He is infinitely glorious, and altogether lovely; and there is no Room for
us so much as to wish him more excellent and happy than He is in himself. But
our Neighbor is like our selves, a needy imperfect dependent Creature: And
therefore we may not desire him above all, or place our Happiness in him; but
then we must desire his Good: There must be a Love of Benevolence, of good Will
exercised toward him. We must be well affected toward him, and heartily wish
that his outward Man, and more especially that his Soul may prosper. And we
must be ready as there may be Occasion to express our Desires and good Wishes
in hearty Prayer to GOD for him, especially for the Salvation of his Soul. 3 John 2. Beloved, I wish above all Things that thou may prosper and be in
Health, even as thy Soul prospers. This is a genuine Fruit of Love, and will
be accepted of GOD, even when we are able, to do but little for our Neighbor.
Prove. 19. 22. The Desire of a Man is his Kindness: and a poor Man is better
than a Liar. A Man may express real Kindness in good Desires: And such as
breath out their good Wishes for GOD's People in frequent and fervent Prayers,
are indeed public Blessings, though ever so mean and obscure in the World. But
then we must take heed we be not as the Liar in the Text but now mentioned, who
pretends Love, but will be at no Pains and Cost to show it by his good Works,
when he is well able.

(4) In the Exercise of this Love, we seek our Neighbor's Good, and avoid
whatever would hurt him.

1 John 3. 18. Let us not love in Word, neither in Tongue, but in Deed and in
Truth. As true Love desires the Good of others, so it will incline us to
endeavor it, and as we have Ability and Opportunity, to promote it. In the 1
Cor. 13. among other excellent Characters of Charity or Love, we have that, 5th
ver. Charity seeks not her own. Not what is for our own Good only; but also
the Profit and Advantage of others. And therefore he that has this Grace in
due Exercise, will obey that Command, 1 Cor. 10. 24. Let no Man seek his own:
but every Man another's Wealth. We must seek the Wealth of our Neighbor in
Trade and Commerce, as well as our Own; and take heed we do not overreach and
defraud him. That must be a vicious Self-love indeed which would engross all
Advantage and Profit to itself. Love will incline Persons to seek the Good of
their Neighbors on spiritual and temporal Accounts. He that duly exercises
this Grace will regard the Soul of his Brother, his better part. He will as he
has Opportunity seek his Conversion to GOD, knowing that he which converteth a
Sinner from the Error of his Way, shall save a Soul from Death. He will also
seek his Edification in Holiness by his Instructions, Exhortations, Counsels,
and the like, as he is able, and his Neighbor's Circumstances call for them.
If he beholds his Brother fallen into Sin, he will mourn for it. Charity
rejoiceth not in Iniquity. And instead of going about to expose him, he will
rather seek to restore him with a Spirit of Meekness, by brotherly Admonition
and Reproof. Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine Heart: Thou
shall in any wise rebuke thy Neighbor, and not suffer Sin upon him. And then
the Fruit of Love will be a sincere Endeavor to promote the outward Good of
our Neighbor: Love would incline us to pity him under his Distresses, and to
do what we can to relieve and succor him. Job 6. 14. To him that is afflicted
Pity should be showed from his Friend. If our Neighbor be poor, Love will open
our Hearts and Hands to relieve him: In the Exercise of this Grace we shall
draw out our Soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted Soul. True Love is
beneficent and communicative. And then, where there is this lovely Grace in any
due Exercise, we shall carefully avoid whatever would hurt and injure our
Neighbor, respecting his Life, his Chastity, his Estate, good Name, and the
like. Charity thinks no Evil. Such will not be forward to entertain evil
Surmises and hard Tho'ts of their Neighbor; but will rather be ready to put
the most favorable Construction on their Words and Actions which the Matter
will bear. To be sure then they will not go about as Tale-bearers and
Backbiters to sow Discord between Brethren, and privily to wound their
Neighbor. Romans 13. 10. Love works no ill to his Neighbor. This excellent
Grace is pure and peaceable, and will incline us to follow Peace, such as is
consistent with Truth and Holiness. Romans 12. 18. If it be possible, as much as
lies in you, live peaceably with all Men. Again, as Charity is not easily
provoked; so it is early in seeking Reconciliation, and does not meditate
Revenge. They obey that Word, Ephesians. 4. 31, 32. Let all Bitterness, and Wrath,
and Anger, and Clamor, and evil speaking be put far away from you, with all
Malice. And be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another,
even as GOD for CHRIST's sake has forgiven you. In a Word, where this Grace
rules in the Heart, we shall avoid every thing whereby our Brother is offended,
or is made weak; and shall endeavor so to behave in our several Places and
Relations, that such as are near to us may be the better for us, and none have
Reason to mourn because we are nigh to them in this or the other Relation.

(5.) In the Exercise of Love we rejoice in the Good and Welfare of our
Neighbor.

There is a Delight in his Person so far as he is truly lovely, and according
to the Relation we stand in toward him; which is a Duty: But I now mention
that which is more general. True Love will incline us to be well affected to
our Neighbor, and not allow us to have an evil Eye toward him, because GOD is
good to him. 1 Cor. 13. 4. Charity envieth not. It is true, there are the
Remains of Corruption in the best, which incline them to lust unto Envy; but
then so far as this Grace prevails, it will suppress these evil Motions, and
cause us to rejoice in the Good of our Neighbor. He that sincerely loves his
Brother, will obey that Command, Romans 12. 15. Rejoice with them that do
rejoice. Such will feel an holy Joy, especially in the spiritual Welfare and
Prosperity of others. 3 John 4. I have no greater Joy than to hear that my
Children walk in the Truth. A kind and charitable Spirit takes Pleasure in the
Good of others, and rejoiceth in the Eminency of their Gifts and Graces, in
their Usefulness, their Reputation, etc. O that GOD would give, and then
increase this excellent Spirit in us! Thus the good Things our Neighbor
enjoys, will in a Sense be made our own. Having briefly considered some Things
in loving our Neighbor; we may further explain this comprehensive Duty under
the next Enquiry, which I now proceed to.

3. What is implied in loving our Neighbor as our selves?

Before I speak directly to this, I would say, This supposes that a regular
Self-Love is our Duty. For this is here brought in as the Rule of our Love to
others. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. There is a vicious Self-love
which is the Root of almost all Evil, and Plague of human Society. 2 Timothy 3. 1,
2. This know also, that in the Last Days perilous Times shall come. For Men
shall be lovers of their own selves. And therefore we must endeavor by all
Means to subdue this powerful Lust. We must look to JESUS, and lay aside this
Sin which so easily besets us; and by his Spirit mortify it: Without this, we
shall never attend the Duty before us in a right Manner. But then, there is
also a regular Self-love, which must be sought after, and cherished in us;
without which we shall neither seek our own Good, nor the Good of our Neighbor
as GOD requires us. There is a Love and Reverence due to our selves, as GOD
has made us capable of glorifying and enjoying him for ever; and set us at the
Head of this lower Creation. We must be clothed with Humility. We must think
soberly of our selves, and not more highly than is meet; but then we may not
set light by our selves, and despise our precious Souls, as if but little
worth. "We must, as an Explositor well observes, have a due Regard to the
Dignity of our own Natures, and a due Concern for the Welfare of our own Souls
and Bodies." In the Exercise of this Love we must fly from Sin the worst of
Evils, and take heed we do not destroy our own Souls by rejecting the only
Savior, our LORD JESUS CHRIST. Prove. 8. 36. He that sins against me,
wrongeth his own Soul; all they that hate me, love Death. We must observe that
Word, Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and trembling. For
it is GOD which works in you, both to will and to do of his good Pleasure. We
must live soberly, keeping our sensitive Appetites and Passions under a due
Regulation according to the Rules of GOD's Word; and thus possess our Vessels
in Sanctification and Honor. We must take heed to our selves, and fly from the
heinous Sins of Intemperance, Uncleanness and the like; lest we become viler
than the Beasts that perish. GOD has given us our Lives, our Endowments of
Body and Mind, our Names and Interest in the World, our Callings, our Estates,
etc. to be improved for his Glory, and our Own everlasting Good: And woe to us
if we cast them away by sacrificing them to our Lusts. Self-murder is one of
the most abominable Crimes. The Prodigal that lavisheth away his Estate by
riotous living, Excess in Apparel, Gaming, etc. will find himself deeply in
Debt to revenging Justice, when GOD shall demand an Account of his Stewardship.
We must study and seek our own true Interest by thinking on and pursuing the
Things which are honest, and pure, lovely and of good Report. We must by a
patient Continuance in Well-doing, seek for Glory, and Honor, and Immortality,
that we may obtain eternal Life. If we neglect CHRIST, and his great Salvation,
and go on to defile and wound our own Souls till the Day of Grace is finished;
we must receive the Wages of our Sin, Eternal Death. And while GOD's Wrath is
poured out upon us as Fire which cannot be quenched, our own Consciences will in
their stinging Reflections be to us as the Worm that never dies. We must then
have a tender Regard to our selves, take heed to our selves, and watch over our
own Souls in Love. Charity must begin at home, (...) not end there. And indeed
if we do not love our selves aright, we cannot love our Neighbor as we ought to
do. For we must love our Neighbor as our selves. However, when it is said as
our se1ves. we are not to understand it of a strict Equality in Degree; but of
Love alike for kind. As this Particle is also used to denote Likeness, not
absolute Equality. Having premised these Things, I would say in Answer to the
Enquiry.

1. Loving our Neighbor as our selves may intend that we must love him in
Truth and Sincerity, as we do our selves.

Our Love to our Neighbor must be inward and hearty, and not in Show and
Pretense only. Self love is deeply rooted in our Natures, and as it were
inwrought into them. Agreeably, this Law of Love must be written on our Hearts
by the Spirit, and our outward Expressions of Love must proceed from this
inward vital Principle of Grace. It is true, the Penitent is said to abhor
himself, Job 42. 6. i. e. as he is sinful, in which Respect he is worse than
nothing: But then he shows a sincere Regard, first to the Glory of GOD, and
then to his own Well-being, by repenting in Dust and Ashes. In like manner our
Regard to our Brother's best Interest must be sincere and hearty. Romans 12. 9.
Let Love be without Dissimulation. We may not profess Love merely to serve our
selves of our Neighbor: such base Flattery is abominable to the true and
faithful GOD. We must not act herein as Men pleasers; but approve our Hearts to
GOD in Sincerity. 1 Pet 1. 22. Seeing ye have purified your Souls in obeying
the Truth through the Spirit, unto unfeigned Love of the Brethren; see that ye
love one another with a true Heart servently. Which brings me to the second
Thing.

2. We must love our Neighbor with a strong Affection, as we do our selves.

We must love our Neighbor from a pure Heart, and fervently, as in the Words
but now named. Indeed this Love must be subordinate to the Love of GOD, which
ought to be with all the Heart; above our selves, and all other Creatures: But
then we should not content our selves with the lowest Degree of Love to our
Neighbor. We must take heed and beware of Lukewarmness in this great Matter of
GOD's Law, which we are naturally very prone to. We had need take heed to our
selves lest that Evil should prevail, of which our Lord has forewarned us,
Mat. 24. 12. The Love of many shall wax cold. This may refer both to the Love
of GOD, and our Neighbor; for indeed they increase, or decay together. Our
Love to our selves is strong; here the Danger is of exceeding: In like manner,
our Love to our Neighbor should be in us a lively and active Affection,
inclining us to seek and promote his Good. We may not so engross this to our
selves, as that we should have none, or what is very weak for our Neighbor. Do
we earnestly desire and seek after Happiness our selves? We should not be
indifferent, but like-minded respecting our Neighbor's Welfare, and
accordingly endeavor to promote it. In a Word, such should be our Love to our
Brother, as that it may incline us to deny our selves in some lesser Matters,
when his greater Good requires it. 1 Cor. 10. 33. Even as I please all Men in
all Things, not seeking mine own Profit, but the Profit of many, that they may
be saved. We should prefer the spiritual Welfare of the Church and People of
GOD, before our own temporal Lives. 1 Job. 3. 16. Hereby perceive we the Love
of GOD, because (...) down his Life for us: and we ought to lay down our Lives
for the Brethren. How strong is that Expression of the Love of GOD's People to
Jerusalem! Psalm 137. 5, 6. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right Hand
forged her cunning. If I do not remember thee, let my Tongue cleave to the Roof
of my Mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief Joy.

3. We should love our Neighbor so as to do to him like as we would be should
do to us.

Matthew. 7. 12. Therefore all Things whatsoever ye would that Men should do to
you, do ye even so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets. We should as
it were put our selves in our Neighbor's stead, and consider how we could
reasonably desire to be treated by him respecting our Lives, Names, Estates,
etc. and do to him accordingly. We cannot deny that we would have others deal
justly and fairly with us; we must then behave in like manner toward them. We
cannot deny that we would have others be merciful to us under our Distresses;
let us then show Mercy to them as the Matter shall require. We cannot deny that
we would have others show us the Respect which our Age, or the Places and
Relations we sustain, demand of them; we must then show the like to them. We
cannot deny that we desire others should make suitable Allowances to us under
our Infirmities, and not be severe to censure us: Let us then do the like to
them. This is to love our Neighbor as our selves.

II. This is the second Commandment, and it is like unto the first.

The second is like unto it. -- These Words refer to that which went before.
JESUS had said, that to love the LORD our GOD -- is the first and great
Commandment: And then adds, And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self. Here then we may consider, 1. That this is GOD'S
Commandment. 2. It is the second Commandment, and like unto the first.

1. This is GOD's Commandment.

The Love of our Neighbor is a great Duty required in the Moral Law, and it is
enforced under the Gospel. Agreeably in different Respects it is called both an
old, and a new Commandment. 1 John, 2. 7, 8. Brethren, I write no new
Commandment unto you, but an old Commandment which ye had from the beginning:
The old Commandment is the Word which ye have beard from the beginning. Again,
a new Commandment I write unto you, which Thing is true in him and in you. This
Commandment was from he beginning; it was given to GOD'S ancient People, Lev.
19. 18. Thou shall not avenge, nor bear any Grudge against the Children of thy
People, but thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self: I am the LORD. And it
may also be called a new Commandment. Joh. 13. 34. A new Commandment I give
unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one
another. We have a new and fair Edition of this Law under the Gospel
Dispensation, delivered from the corrupt Glosses of the Scribes and Pharisees:
It is explained under the NewTestament, and enforced by a new and divine
Example of our great Lord, who loved us, and gave himself for us, and has made
this one peculiar Badge and Character of his true Disciples, that they love one
another. Joh. 13. 35. By this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if
ye have Love one to another. But it would be to transcribe a considerable Part
of the New Testament to name all the Texts that relate to this Duty. 1 John 3.
23. And this is his commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son
JESUS CHRIST, and love one another, as he gave us Commandment. I proceed to say,

2. This is the second Commandment, and ii is like unto the first.

It is the second in Order, and also in Dignity; as it comprehends the Duties
which respect our Neighbor. GOD must be loved in the first and chief Place,
and for himself: Our Neighbor must be loved for His sake, and in Subordination
to him who requires this of us. Accordingly the Duties which nextly respect
GOD, are to be set before those which nextly respect our Neighbor. We must
prefer the religious Worship of GOD to the civil Respect due to Men. However,
there are Instances in which by GOD's own Appointment, some lesser Duties of
the first Table must give Place to some principal Duties of the second Table.
Hos. 6. 6. I desired Mercy, and not Sacrifice. And such is the condescending
Goodness of God to us, that He will have some Acts of religious Worship omitted
for this or that Time, when our Neighbor's Necessity requires our present
Help; rather than that he should suffer. e. g. If our Neighbor's House take
Fire on the Lord's Day, God will have us show Mercy to him by affording him our
needed Help under the present Difficulty, rather than to attend his public
Worship for that Time. Behold the tender Mercy of our great Lord and Lawgiver!
Surely his Commands are not grievous. But to return. Though there be Inequality,
yet the second Command is like unto the first.

1. As it is a divine Command.

Both alike bear the Stamp of the Divine Authority. If we neglect the Duties of
the second Table, we not only injure Men; but we also affront and offend the
glorious God by breaking His Law. And herein does the great Evil of Sin
consist. Agreeably, when David had greatly wronged Uriah by his Adultery and
Murder, he makes that Consession before God, Psalm. 51. 4. Against thee, thee
only have I sinned, and done this Evil in thy Sight.

2. This Command is very comprehensive like the first. It contains the Sum and
Substance of the six Commandments which respect our Duty toward our Neighbor.
Romans 13. 8, 9. Owe no Man any thing, but to love one another: For he that
loves another has fulfilled the Law. For this, Thou shall not commit
Adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false
Witness, Thou shall not covet; and if there be any other Commandment, it is
briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as
thy self.

3. This Command is in a Sense founded on the first; so that neither can be
kept in a due Manner, if either be neglected.

There is such a close Connection between them, that if one be violated, the
other cannot be duly observed. He that does not obey the first Command, by
loving God in Sincerity; will not keep the second, by loving his Neighbor. 1 John 4. 21. And this Commandment have we from him, that he who loves GOD, love
his Brother also.

4. The Love of our Neighbor shall never fail; but be for ever perfected in
Heaven.

Love to our Neighbor will never fail, no more than Love to God. Indeed every
Grace shall be perfect in Heaven. But then, when Faith and Hope which are so
eminently useful in this State of Trial, shall cease as to some principal
Exercise and Operation; the People of God being brought to the open Vision, and
full Enjoyment of Him for ever: I say when it is thus, then Love to our
Neighbor, like our Love to God, shall be perfected for ever as to its highest
Exercise and fullest Operation.

In a Word, In both these Commands Love is required, and that in Perfection; so
as to comprehend the whole of Duty which we owe first to God, and then to our
Neighbor according to His Will. Indeed our Love to God must vastly exceed, as
the Object is infinitely great and good; but then our Love to our Neighbor
here required is commensurate to all the Duty we owe him. And when this Grace
is perfected in Heaven, there will not be the least Complaint of any Defect in
relative Duties. All the glorified Inhabitants of the heavenly Jerusalem will
be united for ever in perfect Love, without Jar or Discord. O blessed Society!
Who would not desire to make one of that most happy Communion? And thus we have
in some imperfect Manner considered this comprehensive Command. I proceed to the

APPLICATION.
Use 1. What has been said should recommend the Law of GOD to us as most
excellent, and constrain us to adore the Wisdom and Goodness of the great
Lawgiver.

GOD's Wisdom and Goodness appear in contriving and publishing to us such a
Compendium and Summary of his Law, in which the whole is in some Sense
comprehended in one Word, Love. Love is the fulfilling of the Law. And how
gracious is God in making that to be the Sum of his Law which is so excellent
in it self, and so very useful unto us? The Law of God is the Law of Love, and
therefore an easy Yoke and most pleasant. How delightful is it to love, and be
beloved! It is true, this Law of Love is grievous to corrupt Nature; but when
Sin the Plague of the Heart is perfectly taken away, and the original Rectitude
in which Man was at first made, restored; then it will be found that our
Happiness consists very much in the Exercise of Love. When Love is perfected in
Heaven, our Enjoyment will be full. GOD is Love; and he that dwells in Love,
dwells in GOD, and GOD in him, 1 John 4. 16. Let us then delight in the Law
of the Lord after the inner Man, and bow our Necks to this easy Yoke. The more
we live in Love, the more do we live the Life of Heaven upon Earth. And thus
have we considered the first Use which relates to both these comprehensive
Commands, the Love of God and our Neighbor.

2. Hence learn how to make a right Judgment whether we discharge our Duty
toward our Neighbor, yea or no.

Does the outward Performance of our Duty toward our Neighbor flow from an
inward Principle of Love? 1 Cor. 13. 3. Though I bestow all my Goods to feed
the Poor, and though I give my Body to be burned, and have not Charity, it
prositeth me nothing. If we give Alms or the like, to be seen of Men, and not
from a true Regard to God's Command, and hearty Love to our Neighbor; our good
Deeds may make a Noise, but then they will vanish into Air, and be empty of all
spiritual Profit respecting our own Souls. Whereas the least Service done to
our Neighbor from the Exercise of true Love, shall be graciously accepted and
rewarded. Even the giving a Cup of cold Water shall not lose its Reward. Heb.
6. 10. GOD is not unrighteous, to forget your Work and Labor of Love, which ye
have showed toward his Name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and do
minister. Let it be the Labor of Love, and God will remember it according to
his rich Grace and Mercy in Christ Jesus.

3. Learn that it must be a great Sin to hate our Neighbor.

If to love our Neighbor as our selves, be the second comprehensive Command,
and like to the first; then to hate him must be a great Sin and comprehensive
Evil, which virtually Contains in it the Violation of the second Table of the
Law. And this the Word of God declares. 1 John 2. 10, 11. He that loves his
Brother, abides in the Light, and there is none Occasion of Stumbling in him.
But he that hates his Brother, is in Darkness, and walks in Darkness, and
knows not whither he goes, because that Darkness has blinded his Eyes. How
strong is the Comparison! He that loves his Brother has that Light in him
which will direct him in his Duty toward him; but he that hates him, is under
the Plague of spiritual Darkness, and will wander from the Way of Duty till he
is for ever miserable in the World of outer Darkness. And we read, 1 John 3. 14,
15. He that loves not his Brother, abides in Death. Whosoever hates his
Brother, is a Murderer. And ye know that no Murderer has eternal Life abiding
in him. He is a Murderer in the Temper of his Mind, and therefore is destitute
of the beginning and first Principle of this divine Life. Let us then be
sensible of the heinous Nature, and great Evil of this Sin; and be excited to
fly from it, and cry tO God to subdue it in us.

4. Learn the Folly of (...) imagine they keep the One, while they live in
Disob^^^^ce to the Other of these great Commandments.

God has joined them together, and therefore it must be presumptuous Folly in
Men to attempt to separate them. If we love God we shall love our Neighbor;
for this God requires of us. This is the Love of GOD, that we keep his
Commandments, 1 John 5. 3. And if we truly love our Neighbor, we do also love
God; for it is in Obedience to his Law, and with an Eye to his Glory. In vain
then will Men pretend to be devout and zealous toward God, while they allow
themselves in doing Wrong to their Neighbor in his good Name, Estate, or the
like. Thus did the Scribes and Pharisees, and our Lord denounces his Judgment
against them, Matthew. 23. 14. Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites;
for ye devour Widows Houses, and for a Pretense make long Prayers; therefore ye
shall receive the greater Damnation.

5. Let what has been said deeply humble us, and show us Necessity of
depending on JESUS CHRIST, the End of the Law for Righteousness.

We have Reason to be ashamed when we consider how far we fall short of our
Duty toward our Neighbor, and may well conclude that we cannot be justified
by the Deeds of the Law. We read, Gal. 3.24, The Law was our School Master to
bring us unto CHRIST, that we might be justified by Faith. GOD's Commandment to
us is, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. But whoever kept this Law in
sinless Perfection since the Fall? Surely none but the Man CHRIST JESUS, who is
the LORD our Righteousness. Let us then go out to CHRIST, and depend entirely
upon him for Justification before GOD. And let it greatly abase us to consider
of our many and great Defects respecting our Duty toward our Neighbor.

6. Let us seriously enquire whether we obey this Command, yea or no.

If we are born of GOD, we do sincerely love our Neighbor, though not in sinless
Perfection. 1 John 3.14. We know that we have passed from Death unto Life,
because we love the Brethren. Let us then ask our selves such Que^^^ons as
these. Do we heartily desire the Welfare of our Neighbor? Do we express these
Desires by a studious Care and Endeavor to do good to our Neighbor in our
sveral Places, as we have Ability and Opportunity? And do we sincerely rejoice
in the Good which others receive from GOD, and in the Good which they do to
their Fellow Creatures? Is it our Burden when we find our Corruptions inclining
us to lust unto Envy; and do we by the Grace of GOD seek the Destruction of
this accursed Disposition in us? Let us take heed lest we think our selves
something upon this Account, when indeed we are nothing, deceiving our own
selves.

7. Let us be exhorted to live in the Exercise of brotherly Love.

Let such as are destitute of this excellent Grace, living in Malice and Envy,
awfully consider whose Image (...) bear; and be excited to seek earnestly to
the GOD of Love, that he would destroy the Image of (...) which is upon them,
and enstamp his own blessings (...) on their Souls, by his Spirit. The Works of
(...) Flesh are Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, (...), Envyings, Murders.
But the Fruit of the Spirit (...) Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance: against such there is no Law, Gal.
5.19,-22. O seek of GOD then his Holy Spirit, and cherish his Motions! And then
let (...) as are taught of GOD to love one another, live in the Exercise of
this Grace, and labor in the Use of all suitable Means to grow in it. Giving
all Diligence, Aid to Godliness, Brotherly kindness; and to Brotherly Kindness,
Charity. For if thse Things be in you, and (...), they make you that ye shall
neither be barren, nor unfruitful in the Knowledge of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, 2
Pet. 1.7, 8. O that in this remarkable Div. of Grace we might bear the Fruits
of Love in (...) Abundance! O that we could lift up pure (...) to the LORD
without Wrath and Doubting, (...) plentiful Effusion of His Spirit upon us! And
then let us use our best Endeavors, to keep the (...) Spirit in the Bond of
Peace. Behold, how (...) how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell to(...) in
Unity! It is like the precious Ointment on the Head of (...) as the Dew of
Hermon, and as the heavenly Dews which descended upon the Mountain of (...)
where GOD commanded his Blessing on his Word and Ordinances. O blessed Union
and Communion of Saints, when the GOD of Peace and Love is thus present with
them! When the Hearts of GOD's People are thus knit together in Love, the
mystical Body of CHRIST increases with the Increase of GOD. See Col. 2.2, --
19. Let us then observe that Word, 3d Chap. 14th ver. And above all these
Things, put on Charity, which is the Bond of Perfectness. Love is a perfect
Bond of Union, so far as the Spirit of Christianity prevails, It is true, a
strict Adherence to the Gospel may be an innocent Occasion of Strife, by Reason
of the Lusts of Men, and Temptations of the Evil one. Matthew. 10.34. Think not
that I am come to send Peace on Earth: I came not to send Peace, but a Sword.
And in following Peace with Men, we must always have a strict Regard to Truth
and Holiness. We must be ready when there is Need of it, even earnestly to
contend for the Faith. However, we must also walk according to that Rule, Romans
12.18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all Men.
And take heed we provoke no Man, unless it be unto Love, and to good Works. Let
then the same Mind be in us which was also in CHRIST JESUS, who went about
doing Good, without giving the least Offense to any one; who suffered the
greatest Injuries with invincible Meekness and Patience, returning Good for
Evil. O Divine Example! May we behold, admire and imitate it! Hear His Word
which I repeat unto you, Job. 13.34, 35. A new Commandment I give unto you,
That ye love one another, as I have loved you, that ye also love one another.
By this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have Love one to
another. May we thus adorn the Doctrine of GOD our Savior, and bear his Image
before Men! How happy would it be for Families, for Churches and the
Commonwealth, did the Love of GOD and our Neighbor generally prevail among
us! I am not able to conceive a better Idea of the Happiness of Heaven than
this, the perfect Exercise and Enjoyment of Love, first and principally with
Respect to God; and then with Respect to our Neighbor in Subordination to Him.
When the glorified Inhabitants of that better Country, Angels and Men, are thus
perfectly united, they will dwell in GOD, while they dwell in Love; and in His
Presence have Fullness of Joy, and Pleasures for evermore.

FINIS.
ERRATUM. Page 8. Margin, read Lacessitus, P. 14.1.18. for their read his.


