Mr. Barnard's Ordination Sermon.

TYRANNY and SLAVERY in Matters of RELIGION, cautioned against; and true
HUMILITY recommended to MINISTERS and PEOPLE.

A SERMON Preached at the ORDINATION OF Mr. Edward Barnard, To the PASTORAL
CARE of the first Church in HAVERHILL. April 27. 1743.

BY THOMAS BARNARD, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Newbury.

2 Cor. iv. 5. We preach not our Selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and our
Selves your Servants for Jesus Sake.

BOSTON, Printed by GREEN, B^SHELL, and A^^^^, for SAMUEL ELIOT in Cornhil.
1743.

AN Ordination Sermon.
Matt. xxiii. 8, 9, 10, 11. -- Be ye not called, Rabbi: For one is your Master,
even Christ; and all ye are Brethren. And call no Man your Father upon the
Earth: For me is your Father which is in Heaven. Neither be ye called Masters:
For one is your Master, even Christ. But he that is greatest among you shall be
your Servant.


AS I am come into this Desk at the Desire of my Brother, whom the Bonds of
Nature, and the Blindness of Affection, may somewhat excuse in introducing me;
so I hope that if I treat the Subject mentioned, with any good Measure of Truth
and Justice, and address this great Congregation, and the various Orders in it,
with that Modestly that becomes my Age, and apparent Reverence of that God in
whose Presence we all are, my Confidence will find an easy Pardon. Wherefore
asking this, of my Fathers in the Ministry especially* I apply my self to the
Truths of God we are called to meditate on.

We all at least profess, that Jesus Christ is the Author and Finisher of our
Faith, and our Master which is in Heaven, and therefore profess to have the
highest Reverence for his Advices. And his Directions to his Disciples and the
Multitude, when on Earth, must needs demand a Place in the Hearts of his
Ministers and other Disciples in all Ages. Very important Exhortations and
Cautions we have, in the Words I have chosen for the Subject of our present
Meditations: Which if they touch not every Branch of Duty, in Ministers and
People, yet will many and very weighty Parts.

All that is necessary before we consider the Words, is to note: That the
Scribes and Pharisees, the Imitation of whose Conduct our Lord is here warning
his Disciples against, were at that Time the Teachers and Rulers of the Jewish
Church, and their chief Men on civil Accounts; and were a Generation of Men,
who instead of teaching others the right Way of the Lord, made void his Laws
through their Traditions; who bound heavy Burdens on the Neck of others, through
their Tyranny over Conscience, which they themselves would not touch with one
of their Fingers; at the same Time that they burdened them in some Points,
freeing their Consciences in others from the Duties of Morality; suffering
Children to give the Support they owed to their ancient Parents to the
sumptuous Expenses of the Temple; adding to divine Institutions, and making new
Modes of them, and setting up various Worships which God never required. And
while they thus ruled the religious Affairs of that People, they were
immoderately ambitious in their common Conduct, see^^ing after worldly
Grandeur, chief Places in Synagogues, Title of Honor and slavish Submissions.
On the contrary, our Lord who was himself meek and lowly of Heart, and always
did what pleased the Father, here enjoins on his Disciples and the Multitude, a
Submission to God and him their Master, and a meek, equal and humble Carriage
and Behavior.

We may just farther observe, that our Lord's Discourses were often more
peculiarly addressed to his Disciples, whom (...) afterward designed to make
his Apostles and Ministers, and those who constantly followed ^^m and believed
on him, and more remotely the Multitudes. Ver 1. Then spoke Jesus to the
Multitude, and to his Disciples. And seeing the Scribes and Pharisees, and
their Faults as Teachers especially, are through out this Chapter rebuked; no
Doubt but Christ intended special Instruction to his peculiar Disciples, at the
same Time designing the Instruction and Advantage of the Multitude in general.
Accordingly in what I shall by God's Help offer from these Words, I shall
understand them in both Views; as spoke to his Disciples, whom the Ministers of
Christ in this Day are the Successors of, and to the Multitude here present who
have also their Part in them.

I propose, I. To consider the Phrases of the Text, Rabbi, Father, Master, as
opposed to your Master Christ, and your Father in Heaven. II. The Caution of
Jesus Christ, who is the Way and the Truth, to his Disciples and the Multitude;
to his Ministers and the Multitude of his professing People. Be ye not called
Rabbi -- Neither be ye called Masters -- Call no Man your Father on the Earth.
III. The Reason of his Caution; why we should not so do. For one is your Father
which is Heaven -- For one is your Master which is Christ -- All ye are
Brethren. IV. His gracious Advice and Exhortation, But he that is greatest
among you shall be your Servant.


I. Let us consider the Intent of the Phrases in our Text, Rabbi, Master,
Father, opposed to your Master in Heaven, your Father in Heaven. The Titles of
Rabbi and Master were then in Use, and frequently given to one and another. And
here it is evident that Christ does not intend to destroy natural or civil
Titles of Respect, or the Authority of the various Relations of Life. Because
these Distinctions both Name and Thing he has confirmed; when he has commanded
Children to honor their Parents: when he has commanded us all to give Honor
to whom Honor is due, Tribute to whom Tribute. These Titles and what is
contained under them, do not contradict the Title of supreme Father which we
owe to God, nor of supreme Master which we owe to Christ. But the acknowledging
these Relations, and the Titles of Distinction which become them and indicate
them, is Part of the Duty we owe to God. For the Powers that be are ordained of
God. But as Christ makes an Opposition here, he intimates; the giving Men such
Titles, or paying them such Submissions, as are due to our Father in Heaven, or
to him, such as detract from the Dignity of their Relation to us, or the Duty
we owe them; and the taking such Titles, or claiming such Power our selves. --
Further, it is not to be supposed, that Christ here cautions only against the
trifling Ambition of gaudy Names and pompous Titles. These are only what very
light Minds are taken with. The Scribes and Pharisees were Men of deeper Aims
than these. As he levels against these, he warns against the Vices they were
guilty of, and against all such Actions and Endeavors as Entrenche on the
Authority of God or him, or the State and Equality of human Nature. We may then
well understand, than the Disciples of Christ, whatever their Station be, are
not to aim at too high Titles, nor at too great Power; not at that which
belongs to God or Christ, or is beyond the Capacity of weak Men. By our Father
in Heaven, I think Christ always means, God the Father, his Father and our's.
And by this Term Father, is intended, his Right and Authority over us. By his
being our Master, is intended his spiritual Power over us, in every Branch of
it.

But we come,

II. To meditate on the Caution given by him who is the Way and the Truth, to
his Disciples and the Multitude, to his Ministers and the Multitude of his
professing People. Be ye not called Rabbi. -- Neither be ye called Masters. --
Call no Man Father upon Earth.

This Caution is naturally divided into two Parts, viz. Be ye not called Rabbi;
Neither be ye called Masters. And Call no Man Master upon the Earth.

Here then,

1. No Christian is to aim at being called Rabbi or Master, not at too high
Power, or too great Submission from his Fellow Christians.

And here again, as Christ first addressed his Disciples and then the
Multitude, so it comes to his Ministers and all his People.

(1.) No christian Minister is to aim at being a Rabbi or Master, at Power too
high for his Station, entrenching on the Authority of Christ, or bringing our
Fellow Christians under undue Subjection.

This Ministers may do, by abusing their peculiar Offices of Teachers,
Advisers, Overseers, and Guides of Souls, or in their common Conduct and Walk.
The Scribes and Pharisees offended in this Kind, both as Teachers and as Men in
common with their Neighbors.

Now Ministers transgress this Direction, when they proudly take too much upon
them in the Matters of Faith or Conscience, the Constitution of the christian
Church, or warp their spiritual Office to the intermeddling with temporal
Matters, or in their ordinary Walk among their People.

First, Our Lord here forbids Ministers pretending to be Masters of Men's
Faith. This it appears the Pharisees strenously aimed at. When the Officers
sent by the Pharisees to apprehend Christ, returned saying, Never Man spoke
like this Man, the Pharisees answered, Have any of the Rulers or Pharisees
believed on him. John 7.48.
Our Lord in the Context says of them, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites; for ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men: For ye neither go
in your Selves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in Math. 23.13.
. Which he elsewhere explains, Woe unto you Lawyers or Scribes: For ye have
taken away the Key of Knowledge: Ye entered not in your selves, and them that
were entering in ye hindered Luke 11.52.
. And all aim at the same Power who walk in the same Steps, who endeavor to
enslave others to their Opinions, to be Lords of Men's Faith, or to have
Dominion over it. There is a vast Pride in the Hearts of Men, which discovers
it self many Ways. Sometimes by tyrannizing over Men's Bodies, but very often
over their Souls and Understandings, in Matters of Religion. As christian
Ministers have the promoting that for their peculiar Province; they have here
often shown their Ambition.

The Church of Rome is a flagrant Instance of this. She bereaves the common
People of the Bible the only Rule of Faith, and thereby puts in the Power of
the Priesthood, to dictate to them what Principles of Religion they please. --
The Church of England would have arrogated something of the same Power, when
she says in her 21st Article, "That the Church (by which I suppose is meant
Assemblies of the Clergy in Convocation) has Authority in Controversies of
Faith;" had she not happily explained it to mean, no decreeing any Thing
contrary to holy Writ, nor Power to misinterpret any Part of it.

All Assemblies of the Clergy, do by their Actions show their Desire of this
Power, who meet to decree or determine any Thing to be necessary to be believed
on their own Authority; or to make their Interpretations of God's Word to be
infallibly true; or to publish their Results as undoubted Comments upon holy
Scripture; so as to deny any christian Privileges to those who will not submit
to them; or to anathematize and declare Heretics all whose Understandings will
not cringe to theirs, but will search the Scriptures for themselves, and
believe for themselves.

All Ministers arrogate to themselves the Authority of Rabbi's, who in their
public and private Teaching, whether as to general Articles of Faith, or
particular Applications to Souls, preach themselves, their own Notions, either
philosophical or metaphysical, however they may think them agreeable to
Scripture, if they are not to be proved by it: Who preach abstruse Speculations
and supposed Consequences of dark Texts of Scripture above common Conceptions
As this is the being wise above what is written, they who are hereby bro't into
these distinguishing Peculiarities, must be first learnt to depend on the
Wisdom of Men, above the Wisdom of God. -- All Ministers who teach People to
build their Hopes of Salvation, on Doctrines founded on the Experience of
themselves or others; when at the same Time every necessary Point of the
Doctrine of Conversion, as well as all other necessary ones, is plainly laid
down in Scripture, take leading Steps to such a Power. -- All Ministers account
themselves Rabbis and Masters, who expect christian People should believe or
disbelieve Propositions, because they affirm or deny them. -- They aim at this
Power in a Way beneath the Dignity of common Sense, but often with great
Success, who would beat their Sentiments into their Fellow Christians, by Dint
of a loud Voice and boisterous Delivery, instead of Reason and Argument upon
the holy Scripture. -- In a gross Manner do all Ministers usurp the Place of
God and Christ, who when they publish their Opinions, instead of proving them
by the Word of God, make free with the Terrors of the Almighty, and placing
themselves on his Throne, boldly denounce Hell and Damnation of those who will
not swallow all they say: When at the same Time the Persons they threaten must
believe for themselves, must obey God rather than Man, and understand his Words
as they can, not as they will. -- In an insulting Manner do they assume the
Mastership, who Diotrephes like ^iming at the Pre-eminence enter upon the
Labors Christ has committed to their Brethren, because their Brethren will not
make them the Standard of their religious Principles or Practices. Especially
when the Principles they contend for are not said to be contained directly in
the Word of God, but to be true by Consequence only, in which C^se humane,
fallible, reasoning Powers take Place. These are some Instances wherein (I
think) they who follow the Steps described, may be said to affect to be Masters
and Rabbi's.

And hence we see in this Point what was our Lord's Intent. That his ministers
neither in Assembly nor singly, take upon them to publish of themselves,
Articles of Faith necessary to be believed by all christian People. But that
they preach up constantly, that the Word of God is the only Rule of Faith, and
that nothing in Religion is to be proved but by it; except such first and
almost self evident Principles, as even the Truth and divine Authority of the
holy Scripture is built upon. That we maintain, that every Man is for himself
to search it for his own Faith; and though he use Ministers and others as Helps,
yet not as Authorities. That we lay no Claim to Infallibility, nor make our
Interpretations of Scripture equal to the Authority of God; nor breath out the
same Threatenings against those who differ from us, and perhaps mistakenly from
Truth, which God has against those who profanely and contemptuously deny his
Authority and cast his Words behind their Backs.

Again, Secondly, When Christ says, Be ye not called Rabbi; Be ye not called
Master, he may intend that his Ministers should not aim at being Lords of
Conscience.

This was a Power the Pharisees did assume. This Christ taxed them with, as we
may see, Matthew. 15.2. Why do you transgress the Commandment of God by your
Tradition. For God commanded saying, Honor thy Father and Mother, and he that
curses Father or Mother, let him die the Death. But ye say, Whosoever shall
say to his Father or Mother, It is a Gift by whatsoever th^^ might be
profited by me, and honor not his Father or his Mother he shall be free. Thus
^^ve ye made the Commandments of God of none Effect, through (...) Traditions.

And all Ministers follow these Jewish Teachers, who pretend of their own
Authority to determine the Nature of Good and Evil. All do so who pretend
absolutely to forgive Sins or hold Persons under the Guilt of them. All
Ministers assume the Mastership, who absolutely declare Persons converted or
unconverted. All Ministers exercise this, who advance Things as absolute Truths
and Terms of Salvation, tending either to make the Consciences of Sinners easy
or to grieve and perplex the Generation of God's Children. All Ministers do so
who put People upon judging of the Nature and Tendency of their Actions,
otherwise than by the Nature of Good and Evil as laid down in God's Word: And
leaving that to suppose that their State toward God depends on certain bodily
Sensations and Emotions of Passion, of which these Ministers are Judges whether
they are good or not; or on a particular narrow Set of religious Principles,
which are always their own. In a Word, Whoever abuses the ministerial Power, in
an arbitrary Manner to make Terms of Salvation, distinct or different from
those of God's Word, aim at being Rabbi's; reach after Mastership.

Here then Christ teaches his Ministers, not to be Lords, but Guides under him
and in Obedience to him. That they take every Direction they give to Souls,
from his unerring Word, not tampering with them like Quacks, and dealing out to
them their own Nostrums; but the Rules of their Master, whose Laws, Directions
and Advices touch every Case which the human Soul can possibly be in.

Thirdly, This may be included in Christ's Advice to Ministers, Be ye not
called Rabbi, be ye not called Masters, presume not to model the external State
of Religion, the Ordinances and Institutions of it, by your own Power or after
your own Fancy. Thus when Christ said, That not that which goes into the Mouth
defiles a Man, but that which comes out. The Pharisees were offended. Matthew.
15. passion.
When the Pharisees asked him, Why do thy Disciples transgress the Tradition of
the Elders, for they wash not their Hands when they eat Bread. -- Christ says
in his Answer, In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrine the
Commandments of Men. When our Lord made his public Appearance on Earth, it was
the indispensible Duty of every one among whom he lived, to believe in him as
the Messiah; and yet the Pharisees had a great Hand, in casting one out of the
Synagogue, excommunicating him, for believing in Christ on the most powerful
Evidence. John 9.


And this Power has been often assumed since Christ was on Earth. Christ Jesus
our Lord, left his Church plain and simple, like a clean and modest Virgin; but
Men presumed to dress and paint her up, till at Length what is called Christ's
Church in many Places, is the Mother of Whoredoms. But our Lord desires to have
her as he left her. His Work needs not Man's mending.

There are indeed some outward Circumstances of religious Worship and
Assemblies, (as in all other Matters) which Societies must agree upon; but I
speak of such Things as are esteemed the Parts of christian Worship, and
wherein we are limited by God's Word. The Church of Christ is his professing
People throughout the World; but in a more confined Sense, those particular
Societies, to whom he has given special Rules and Injunctions, Officers and
Ordinances.

All Ministers encroach on his Authority who pretend to make any humane Mode of
a divine Ordinance, and essential Part of it, as much as the Parts divinely
appointed; and on the other Hand who leave any Part of a divine Ordinance. All
those Ministers especially make themselves Rabbi's and Masters in a very
extraordinary Degree, who being station'd according to Scripture Plan, to the
Execution of their Offices in any particular Part of Christ's Church; leaving
their Charge, neglect their Labors; and in an arbitrary Manner enter upon
Men's Labors; tread under Foot the Li^erties of other Churches; invade Flocks
committed to the Charge of others, by the same Authority that fixed them in
their Places; endeavoring to alienate People's Affections from Pastors to
whose Care they are committed, and in an unwearied Way stirring up needless
Strife and perpetual Confusion, in the Kingdom of the Prince of Peace. Lastly
here, All those Ministers aim at too great Degrees of Mastership, who knowingly
make the Terms of Communion or Admission to the special Ordinances, more strait
or lax than our Lord himself has made them.

Again,

Fourthly, Christ's Ministers are not to be called Rabbis or Masters, not to
aim at too great Degrees of Submission from others, in the common Conduct of
Life.

This the jewish Teachers, the Pharisees, were notoriously guilty of. They made
broad their Phylacteries, and enlarged the Borders of their Garments, and loved
the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and the chief Seats in the Synagogues, and
Greetings in the Markets, and to be called of Men, Rabbi, Rabbi, Math. 23.5,
etc. We cannot suppose our Savior here forbids all civil Terms of Respect and
Distinction, because he and his Disciples used them, But hereby in general is
doubtless forbidden, a lordly overbearing Behavior; Expressions of Pride and
Self-conceit; the aspiring after high Titles; Places of Superiority in public
Concourses of People. Especially hereby is condemned the arrogant Air of a
Minister among his own People. -- The maintaining himself much above them --
The keeping at an awful Distance from them -- The observing a great Reserve --
The dealing in a haughty Manner, especially with such as ask his Advices and
Instructions, in a becoming modest Manner. Such a Behavior is very unfit for
the Disciples of Jesus, such as declare they will spend and be spent for Souls.

The contrary Character to this, which certainly Christ expects, is a meek and
lowly Behavior; a Condescension to Inferiors; a free Conversation; an affable
courteous Disposition; the not taking State, but putting on Humbleness of Mind
but especially, the treating all humble Souls in their spiritual Concerns, with
the greatest: Tenderness and Kindness; giving them the best Advice, and by no
Means driving from them the fearful Sheep and Lambs Christ has given them to
feed.

But,

(2.) This Advice and Caution comes also to all christian People. Be ye not
called Rabbi: Be ye not called Masters. As the Scribes and Pharisees were Men
who set themselves in the most conspicuous Light; as they were greatly revered,
so they were much imitated. Hence our Savior takes Occasion to warn the
Multitude against their Example.

No Christian then is to aim at being called Rabbi. -- No Christian is to be a
Dictator of his own Faith, much less of that of others. No Christian is to
prescribe to his own Conscience, much less to the Consciences of others; or to
form Distinctions of Good or Evil according to his own Fancy. No Christian is
to go out of his Sphere, but to keep within the Limits of his Calling, and
therein abide with God. No Christian or Society of Christians is to make any
new Terms of Communion, which Christ has not made; nor refuse any Admission to
Christ's Ordinances among them, who are not destitute of and Qualification he
has made necessary to the Being of a Christian. No Christian is to take on
himself Pride and Haughtiness, but to be humble and meek in every Station.

But I hasten to the

Second Branch of the Caution. Call no Man your Father upon the Earth. This
Advice of our ascended Lord comes to us all both Ministers and People. We are
forbid to pay too great Submission to, or have too great Dependence on, any
Man. If we are not to arrogate the Power of Fathers, because it belongs to none
but God, then we are to suffer none to use it over us. We are not to suffer any
one in an arbitrary Manner, to prescribe to us what we shall believe concerning
God, or the Duty we owe him; but courageously to assert Freedom of Enquiry into
religious Matters, Liberty of thinking and judging for themselves, to be the
unalienable Right of all Christians, and to hold it fast ourselves. We are to
believe no Man as to any important Truth of Religion upon his bare Word, but
upon satisfactory Evidence, or the plain Authority of holy Scripture. We are
not to rely on any Man, though ever so famous for Learning or Piety, any farther
than we can see the Truth of their Assertions. It is Part of the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free, to be in Subjection to none but him.

Much less should we call any Man Father upon Earth, in respect to his Power
over Conscience. This neither is nor can be subject to any but God. We ought to
obey God rather than Man, Acts 5.29. We are to lay no Stress on any Man's
Decisions of the Nature of Good and Evil, of Duty and Sin, any farther than he
agrees with the revealed Will of God. Any Man's confident Declarations of our
good Estate, or his threatening out Hell and Damnation against us; the one is
not to be depended on, nor need the other the valued of a Rush, any farther
than they are agreeable to the Directions of the only Lord of Conscience.

No Christian ought to give himself up to the Directions of another, as to the
Ordinances of Christ, the Method and Parts of his Worship, so far as he has
limited them in his Word. But to stick by the Simplicity of them, let Men say
on dispute what they will; yea, though they should in a great Zeal for Piety,
pretend that there are some Methods different from Christ's Ordinances, which
God is pleased to bless, and which abundantly more promote Religion than they,
and bring some plausible Evidences thereof.

No Christian ought to give flattering Titles to Men, or pay them slavish
Submissions, in religious Matters; (as the Papists do when they give the Titles
of God to the Man of Sin) but to assert the Dignity of humane Nature. And though
we give Honor to whom Honor is due, yet not to humor unlawful Pride or any
Encroachments upon the Rights of God our only Father, and Jesus Christ whom he
has exalted.

But on the other Hand, We are to receive the Doctrines and Rules of Religion,
from none but God and him whom he has sent and made our only Prophet, Lawgiver
and Lord. Not but that common Reason will inform us, and God's Word confirms
it: That we should pay a becoming Deference to the Opinions of the Wife, the
Learned, and the Pious, so as to hear their Advices, to give due Attendance to
them, to weigh and deliberate upon them, and follow them as far as they appear
to us true, and agreeable to the sacred Oracles. But then this Agreement with
Truth and God's Word, is to be the Measure of our following them and the Ground
of it, and not the mere Sayings or Practices of any Man. We must give to Men
Honor and Respect, but not idolatrous Homage.

But I now proceed to consider the Reason our Lord gives for this Conduct, viz.

III. For one is your Father which is in Heaven. -- For one is your Master
which is Christ. -- All ye are Brethren. These I shall consider as our Savior
has been pleased to lay them down. Although they are interchangeably true.
Christ's being our Master is an Argument, sufficient to prove, that we are to
call no Man our Father upon the Earth. And God's being our Father is a strong
Argument why we should not be called Rabbi. But because our Savior has thus
varied the Phrases let us so consider them.

And,

1. We are to call no Man our Father upon the Earth, because one is our Father
which is in Heaven. This is a Reason common to Ministers and People. One God,
may Brethren, has created us. We have all one Father. The great God, is the
Father of the Spirits of all Flesh. He at first gave us our rational Powers,
our Capacity of knowing Truth and embracing it. He is the Author of all Truths,
and the Revealer of all such as concern our Souls. In every Age, and in every
Place, true Wisdom comes down from the Father of Lights, who is the Giver of
every good and perfect Gift. James 1.17.
Now surely he who gave us our Souls, may rightly demand our Improvement of
every Faculty of them in the Search of Truth and Care of them. He who is the
Author of Truth rightly demands that we embrace all Truths he reveals. Our
Father in Heaven, who is all-perfect, all-knowing, all-wise, is the only
suitable Object of Dependence as to Truth and Falsehood. He who is the Author of
Conscience and original Lord of it, has alone a Right to direct it, to lay down
the Rules of Good and Evil, and to prescribe Limits to our Conduct. He who is
the only Object of religious Worship, has a Right and none else, to lay down
Rules for the devout Obedience and Worship we shall pay him the one God and
Father of all, whom through Jesus Christ we are to worship in Spirit and in Truth.

Now are not these the strongest Reasons why we should call no Man our Father
upon the Earth. Is not that to give the Authority of God to Men? Can we receive
any Man's Opinion as Truth upon his own Authority, without renouncing the
Authority of the Father of Spirits? Can we submit our Consciences to the
Jurisdiction of any Man upon Earth, without revolting from him who is greater
than our Consciences and than all Men, and knows all Things? Can we receive
Laws and Constitutions for the Worship of God, from any Man without placing him
in God's Stead, and being guilty of Idolatry? Is not this the making the
Commandments of God void, by worshipping him according to the Commands of Men?
We are then to renounce all absolute Submissions to Men, in Matters that
concern the Soul, because we have a Father in Heaven. And every Christian ought
constantly to say, to any one who would endeavor to bring his Understanding or
Conscience or outward religious Conduct under Subjection, I have a Father in
Heaven, to whom I owe all Duty and Submission. Whatever you say agreeable to
his Will I believe and conform to; not on your Authority, but out of Obedience
to him. Whatever you say disagreeable to him, I have nothing to do with. Such
an Answer ought to be given to every Man and every Assembly of Men, though ever
so numerous, grave, and pious. I cannot submit my Understanding or religious
Conduct to you, for one is my Father which is in Heaven. Nevertheless here
also, great Caution is to be used; that we go not into a faulty Extreme, and
cast off all Counsel, Advice, and Means of Light and Knowledge, from the Wise
and Judicious. Which Fault the Consideration of the Frailty of our Nature, and
a due Humility will well arm us against.

2. As we are to call no Man our Father upon the Earth, because one is our
Father which is in Heaven; so we are not to he called Rabbi or Master, because
one is our Master, which is Christ.

When all Mankind lay in the Ruins of the first Apost^^^, sunk in deplorable
Ignorance, God was pleased in the Fullness of Time to send his Son from Heaven
clothed in Flesh, to reveal to us all necessary Truths that concern the humane
Soul. And after Christ had personally done this, and (...) out eternal
Redemption by his precious Blood, it pleased the Father to exalt him, God Man,
to great Dignity and royal Power, that he might still carry on this glorious
Work, and enjoin as a King, the Faith and Practice of those Things which he as
a Prophet revealed. This ascended Jesus is our common Master, and this is the
strongest Reason against our aiming at Mastership. However this admits of a
somewhat different Consideration, when applied to Ministers and People.

1. Ministers are not to be called Rabbi's or Master's, for one is our Master
even Christ. Ministers are not their own Men, but under Government. And the
Business of Teachers and Rulers in the House of God, instead of giving them a
License this Way, affords peculiar Arguments against it. Ministers have
received their Commission from their Master in Heaven, who has a just Right to
lay out all his Servants Business, and it is a revolting from him and setting
up for our selves, to go a Step beside his Orders to the right Hand or to the
left. Is it not so? Christ our Master is a wise Master, able to order the
Affairs of his own Family infinitely better than the wisest Minister. What
Folly then is it for any to exceed the Limits he has set them. The Foolishness
of God is wiser than Men, and the Weakness of God is stronger than Men, 1 Cor.
5.25. Christ our Master is jealous of his own Honor and the Rights of his
Government. Shall we then presume to eject him his Throne, and lord it over the
Understandings or Consciences of his Subjects. Would a like Insult be born by
an earthly Master? Christ is a Master who will one Day call all his Servants to
account, for the Fulfillment of their peculiar Business; and will any one ran
the Risque of then telling his Master, that he has been acting as though he were
his own Lord.

Now if the Lord Jesus Christ has laid down the Doctrines he will have his
Ministers preach, and the Manner in which they must be preached; if he has laid
down the Limits of Good and Evil, of what pleases and what displeases him; if
he has constituted the Form and Ordinances of his Church; and if he be at the
same Time such a Master as has been described; Is not that Minister proud and
presumptuous beyond compare, who shall disregard these Limits, and preach
himself Lord* or follow his own Reason and Imagination to the Neglect of Christ.

Once more; Christ though our exalted Master, yet is humble himself. He came not
to be ministered to, but to minister, and to give his Life a Ransom for many,
Mark 10.45. And a little before he left the World, washed his Disciples Feet,
saying, If I your Lord and Master, have washed your Feet, ye ought to wash one
another Feet; for I have given you an Example that ye should do as I have done
to you, John 13.14. Surely then his Ministers should be humble, meek and lowly;
ready to do any good Offices to their Fellow Christians. What? Did our Master
so and shall we refuse? I might under this Head bring many Texts to prove that
Jesus Christ is the Author of all religious Truths, and has bound his Ministers
both in public and private to deliver only his Truths; that he is the only
Lawgiver and the only Head of his Body the Church.

But I must pass on

2. No Christian or Societies of Christians are to be called Rabbi or Master,
because one is their Master even Christ. All Christians profess him to be their
Lord, and if so must surely submit to him. No Christian therefore may pretend
to draw up a Scheme of religious Principles for himself, but with an absolute
constant Regard to the Revelation of Christ in his Gospel. Every Christian is
to remember, that his Brother has a Master even Christ, as well as he, to whom
he must be subject; and therefore is not to try by any other Way than Argument
and Scripture to bring his Brother's Reason or Conscience to a Conformity to
his. For we must remember, my Fellow Christians, that for all this we are to be
bro't into Judgment. Our all-wise Master will one Day see how his Subjects have
behaved, and what will be the Event, if he find we have trampled on his
Authority and cast his Laws behind our Backs, if he find us forgetting whose
Disciples we are, and filled with Pride and Anger, and every evil Work. Here
particularly let me briefly say, Christ's being the Master of all Christians,
is a strong Reason why we should make the Terms of Persons Communion with us in
his Ordinances no narrower than he has done, no narrower than he has made the
Term, of Salvation; but receive all whom he has received to the Glory of God.
For the Master of the Family certainly knows best who should be admitted into
it, and it is an Affectation of Mastership for us to enclose the Privileges of
his Church in Limits of our prescribing. Again, One Thing more deserves
Consideration here; If Christ be the only Master, and Ministers are his
Servants employed by him on his Business; then Christians singly or
collectively ought never to treat with Severity or to eject or leave the
Ministry of any of Christ's Servants, sent in his Way, till they find that
these Servants, do grossly exceed their Limits, or in no Measure faithfully
fulfill their Mission; which they must determine by their continual neglecting
the plain Duties of their Office, or preaching publicly or privately contrary
(not to any particular humane System of Religion but) to the Tenor of the plain
and indubitable Parts of the Gospel of Christ. But while they go on in public
and private, saying nothing contrary thereto, but delivering the whole Counsel
of God, certainly they are fulfilling their Mission, they are doing the Buness
of Jesus Christ their Master; and if their Hearers, those committed to their
Charge, neglect them, refuse to hear them, or ask Advice of them, it is an
Affront to our only Master.

3. Let us consider the other Reason our Lord gives, why none of his Disciples
are to be called Rabbi or Master, to indulge Pride or aim at too great
Authority; which is this, Ye are all Brethren.

This also duly considered is a Reason of great Weight. For it implies these
two Things. That God and his Son have not given us any unlimited Power, in
Matters of Religion; and that we are very unfit for it. Jesus Christ has given
to none of his Disciples a Superiority over others in Matters of Faith, Life or
Worship. We are all Brethren.

Ministers are peculiarly called to concern themselves immediately in the
propagating the Truths of Religion, but then they may only do it by fair
Argument and the Word of God; and after they have done their best, leave the
Event to God. The pastoral Office raises none above the Level of Brethren to
their Fellow Christians; gives them no Power to tyrannize over their Bodies for
the Sake of their Souls, nor to give up to Satan any who differ from their
Sentiments, nor to treat People in common Conduct as though they were Slaves. But
if all Christians are Brethren, Ministers are freely and in an equal Manner to
converse with private Christians, to be ready to receive Light from them as
well as to give it to them; in Meekness reclaiming such as they think mistaken,
and leaving such as continue so, to the one Master. All Christians are to
esteem each other as Brethren, and therefore as they take it to be their Right
to think and act for themselves in the Things of Religion, they are to allow it
to every one else. Not therefore by mere Power to deny any christian Privileges
who own their absolute Subjection to the common Master, and give no Evidence to
the contrary. Much less should they use bodily Terrors to bring them to the
Truth. Ministers and People are under a common Obligation, and he who
encroaches upon it robs his Brother of a right Christ has invested him with.

But farther,

As we are all Brethren, we are not fit or accomplished for the Office of
Rabbis or Masters. Brethren have the same common Nature, and all the Disciples
of Christ are Men. We are all fallible; our Master in Heaven is infallible. No
Man, be his natural or acquired Parts ever so great, is to be acknowledged our
Master, because he is our Brother; of the same Nature, and therefore liable to
Mistakes. All Assemblies of Men are but Assemblies of our Brethren, and
therefore cannot have the Place of Masters without unwarrantable Usurpation.

Thus you see, My Brethren, what strong Reasons our Lord here gives why we
should not take the Authority which belongs to him, or submit our selves to it
in any other.

IV. And lastly, We are to attend to our Savior's gracious Advice and
Encouragement, He that is greatest among you shall be your Servant. These Words
should make a deep Impression on us all. They may be taken either as a
Direction and Advice, or Encouragement to True Humility, and a Concern for
Souls.

1. They may be taken as an Advice, what true Greatness is. He that is the
Servant of Souls, is in a religious Sense, a greater Man than any other, let
his Grandeur be what it will. He is so who in a just and rational Way, in his
proper Sphere, takes most Pains to promote the Interest of Truth and of Souls.
Hence says Solomon, He that wins Souls is wise, Prove. 11.30. To promote
Men's everlasting Good, is the most exalted Degree of public Spiritedness. It
was an indefatigable and dauntless Zeal in this Regard, which gave Renown to
the Apostles and primitive Martyrs and Confessors, and herein must every
Christian, especially every Gospel Minister be conversant.

For further, We may thus understand the Words. Whoever is placed in any
advantageous Station among you, let him honor himself and magnify his Office,
by Diligence in his peculiar Station, and doing all the Good he can. Hence then
the gaping after temporal Honors and Preferments, the aiming at great Names or
unlimited Authority, are not Characters of true Greatness; but the steadfast
Continuance in every good Office, whereby the real Welfare of Souls is
forwarded.

2. This Verse may be also taken as an Encouragement. He that is greatest, etc.
i. e. He that is a Servant shall be greatest in the Esteem of others. A Concern
for the Interests of Religion, constant Endeavors, by Instruction, Advice,
Reproof, to forward the everlasting Welfare of others, is so far from being
beneath the Dignity of any one, be he ever so great even in civil Authority,
that it raises every Part of his Character, how much more in a Gospel Minister?
It is therefore the true Way to Reputation, Honor, and Esteem, to labor for
Souls.

But above all, it is to be remembered that whosoever is a Servant is great in
the Esteem of God. For he resists the Proud, but gives Grace to the Humble,
Jam. 4.6. Especially does he hate Pride in them who pretend to be Followers of
his Son, and Ambassadors carrying on his Work, which cannot be well done by an
ambitious Soul. But where the greatest Minister is ambitious only of spending,
and being spent for Souls, there God looks on with Approbation, and his
Approbation is always a Crown of Glory.

Thus I have endeavored to enumerate some Particulars contained in this
cautionary Speech of our blessed Savior; that all Ministers especially may by
having it renewedly bro't to Remembrance be more steadfastly engaged in
practicing agreeable to it.

Let us make some IMPROVEMENT.

1. How happy had it been for the christian World, if this Caution of our
Savior had been constantly observed. Pride and Ambition have been the Bane of
the Church. Christ ordained the Office of the Ministry, for the Service of
immortal Souls, and it was for some Ages a Business of great Burden and Labor,
and little Reward, except the Pleasure of doing Good, and a Conscience of
Approbation with God. But in Process of Time, when the Ministers of Religion
came to much civil Respect and temporal Profits, then ambitious Men of corrupt
Lusts, counting that Gain is Godliness, crept into the sacred Office, them they
shaped the Doctrines and Constitutions of Christ's Church as they pleased. And
to hinder Truth's ever emerging, used secular Terrors to prevent Liberty of
Though It, the only Way of gaining and preserving it. So that in many Lands which
call themselves Christian, a Profession of Christ's Truth is attended with
Pains, Penalties, and Death. Very unhappy also are those Lands where
Christianity and the Freedom of professing it is confined to particular Sects,
and all negative Discouragements used to prevent Dissent from established
Opinions. These are Methods which serve Falsehood as well as Truth; they are
most arrogant Pretenses of any Men; Christ's Religion needs them not, nor is he
well pleased with them. His Truths recommend themselves sufficiently, when they
come in their native Simplicity, unattended by temporal Threats; and Religion
will always flourish most, where Men humbly leave their Neighbors to direct
their own Consciences; where Magistrates are Protectors of the Quiet in the
Land in all their religious Privileges, from Persecution and spiritual Tyranny.
How thankful then are we to be that we in this Land enjoy Liberty of
Conscience, of believing and worshipping for our Selves, and are protected
therein; and that the Ministry of this Land makes not Use of Fines and
Imprisonment to establish truth, but of Reason, Argument and the Word of God.
These Blessings may God always preserve to us, may his Mercy be upon us to all
Generations.

2. It may be proper to say something by Way of Caution against the Abuse of
the Doctrine of our Text.

Though our Lord here forbids us to be called Rabbi or Master, yet he by no Means
forbids his Ministers to act becoming the Dignity of their Office, to insist,
when the Interests of Religion require it, on the Rights and Privileges of the
Gospel Ministry, or to expect that Deference, Attention and Consideration from
People, which they owe to the Ambassadors of God. Nor does he forbid either
Ministers or People, to covet earnestly the best Gifts, to gain all Degrees of
Knowledge they can, to be ready to communicate what they have, to be strenuous
for the Truths of Christ when attacked; but only if we strive we must strive
lawfully. We never fall under this Censure for being firm in the Faith of
Things, in Proportion to the Evidence and Importance of them; or for being
steadfast in promoting what we think Truth, by lawful Means, Scripture and
Argument.

Tho's we are to call no Man Father upon the Earth, yet as I have before
hinted, we must maintain a humble Temper, and think that some may know more
than we, and not that we are the Men, and Wisdom shall die with us. We should
always have the Disposition of Learners, remembering that the Truths of God may
be a continued Employment, that we can never reach the End of them. The Saying
and Opinions of Men of Piety ought to have great Weight and be solidly though it
on. And that Method of Worship, under which genuine Religion flourishes most,
demands our most serious Examination whether it be not the truest. Men of
Understanding we should hearken to. In a Multitude of Counselors there is
safety, and Brethren may and ought to be helpful to each other.

3. I shall take the Freedom to address my self to the reverend Ministers
present. To you my Fathers (whom in Respect of your Age, Learning, Stations and
Piety I may yet so call) this Caution and Advice peculiarly comes. But I count
my self happy in that I am now speaking to those, to whom I need not use a
Style unbecoming my Age, and in it self ungrateful, I mean of Taxing and
Reproof. For I really believe that God is Witness and your People are
Witnesses, that as you call no Man Father upon the Earth, so you seek not the
unwarrantable Power your selves, which you yield not to others.

You preach not your selves but Jesus Christ Lord. From him you gain every
Principle of the Faith you instruct your People in, every Rule of Life you
advise them to, and every Foundation of Hope you encourage them to rely on. --
You teach Men the Way to Virtue and Happiness, not after your own Imaginations
or any humane Scheme, but by the Laws and Directions of him, who opens and no
Man shuts, and shuts and no Man opens -- You preach up the Necessity of
the new Birth, because Christ has, but no other Scheme of Conversion than that
of holy Scripture; because the Author of that glorious Work can alone describe
the Method of it. -- You dare direct Men in no other Way than that he has
marked out, because in so doing you know you would daub with untempered Mortar,
heal the Wound of the Daughter of God's People slightly, and Jesus Christ would
be no longer King in his own Kingdom. -- You know that no false Terrors nor
ungrounded Joys, can forward any Souls in the Way to Heaven. -- You presume not
to shape Christ's Ordinances according to any supposed advantageous Scheme nor
popular Opinion, but so far as you are concerned in them, you endeavor to keep
them pure and simple as he left them. -- You with a steadfast View to the
Example and Authority of our great Master, behave your selves with all Humility
toward all; not in an assuming Manner bearing down and usurping the Rights of
your Brethren in the Ministry; nor domineering and lording it over your
Brethren of the Laity; Seeking not your Selves, your Honors and Profits, but
their Souls Good, you give them your best and most solemn Advices, you
patiently hear them, resolve their Doubts, support the Disconsolate, and lead
them by the Hand in the Ways of Christ and Holiness, and those that must give
Account.

At the same Time, this very Humility leads you to call no Man your Father upon
the Earth, because you know that true Humility is to be first exercised in a
Submission to God, and that the neglecting him and receiving the Dictates of
any Man is hateful Pride. -- It is therefore that you use the Summaries of
christian Faith drawn up by any Man or Number of Men, but as Helps; and choose
rather to take your Religion from your Master, than any of his Disciples, from
the Fountain than any Streams. -- It is therefore that you bind not your selves
to the Opinions of each other, any farther than our Master leads the Way. --
And therefore however the Opinion or even Silence of Men of Wisdom and Piety,
of great Learning and Leisure for Study, who live as it were at the Fountain
Head of Knowledge, may influence you in any Cause, yet you enslave not your
selves to their Sentiments. For who are Paul and Apollos but Ministers. Our
Master dwells not at Rome or Constantinople, but in Heaven. We are all
Brethren. -- You truckle not to all popular Opinions and spreading Novelties,
because you know we are not to be many Masters, lest we Receive the greater
Condemnation, Jam. 3.1.

Nor do you account that in thus following your Father and Master, and
courageously asserting his Doctrines and standing firmly by his Constitutions,
you act the Part of Rabbi's, though the Out^ry of Pride and Obstinacy be raised
upon you; though many of your Hearers be displeased; because you are persuaded
that so long as he honors you with this Office, you are to be faithful to your
Master; that so under all outward Discouragements, you may yet have your
Consciences clear, and be able to look up to him with Comfort and Joy; trusting
that as you have been faithful and unfainting in serving Souls, you shall be
infinitely better received by him, than if you swam with the Stream, and were
loaded with the fawning Caresses of an unstable Multitude.

If there be any Minister in this Assembly of another Conduct, may God
enlighten him in his Duty in this Matter. But I trust that all who thus do,
will go on and prosper for a Blessing to this Land, for the continuing the
Interests of Truth and Righteousness. Religion can never be in more Danger than
when the Ministers of it are the Slaves of a Party; spending that Time and
Study, which should be spent about the great and important Doctrines and Laws
of Christ, in beating into themselves and others the little Peculiarities of a
Sect; Things which gender to Strife, and not to that Charity which is the End
of the Commandment, nor to the promoting the wholesome Words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, (1 Timothy 6.3.) But I
hope there is none of such a Character here, I believe we could all speak with
the late Rev. Mr. Pierce of Exeter in England, (who whatever his Opinions might
otherwise be, herein spoke as became a Man, a Christian, and a Champion for the
religious Liberties of the Protestant Dissenters in England) As the holy
Scriptures (says he) are the only Rule in Matters of Religion, so Men should
not pretend to impose their Notions upon other. -- And this Liberty let others
tamely give up as they please, I do and will insist upon it for my self, as a
reasonable Creature, a Christian, a Protestant, and a Dissenter. As I pretend
not to impose on others, so nor will I in this Case be imposed on by others. No
King, no Parliament, no Church, no Council, no Synod, no Minister, or Bodies of
Ministers, no Man or Body of Men, shall be acknowledged by me to have any such
Power or rightful Authority over me. They may deprive me of my civil Liberty,
of my Estate, or of my Life, but this Liberty by the Grace of God they shall
never deprive me of; to think and speak of the Matters of God and Religion only
in that Manner in which I apprehend they are spoken of in the holy Scriptures
by God himself. Tell me not what Athanasius or Arius, what the Council of Nice
or Remini have said, but what Christ, and Peter, and Paul, and James, and John,
and Jude have said. I call no Man Master on Earth. After these Authorities let
us all persuade Men to be reconciled to God.

4. Let me beg your Patience while I bring Home the Doctrine of the Text to all
the christian People here present. To you our Lord speaks, Be ye not called
Rabbi. Wherefore be Christians. Own by your Actions as well as Words that
Christ is your Master. Bow your own Understandings and Consciences to him. And
give your Brethren the same Liberty of understanding God's Word, and
worshipping him that you claim for your selves. Let their Consciences determine
their Duty, to their Father and Lord. Never run into that schismatical Sort of
Pride, of cursing all Men but yourselves, or treating with a surly Superiority
those who cannot come to your Measure in all Things. Where you think any
mistaken, in Meekness instruct them. Debate without Anger. Be ready to receive
as well as give Light. Deny your Communion in christian Privileges to none to
whom you have not Reason to think Christ will deny the Glory of God. And always
seek your own Faith and Practice from our only Master. After all Helps and
Advantages let him have the casting Vote. This is the Duty of all as we have
but one Father and one Master; but especially becoming the Posterity of those
who first broke off from the Church of Rome, and afterward dissented from the
Church of England, the highest humane Authorities, that they (as they
professed) might be subject to none but Christ.

And surely every Protestant here is of the Opinion of the famous Mr.
Chillingworth, (who was, I think, himself converted from a popish Priest) By
the Religion of Protestants (says he) I do not understand the Doctrine of
Luther, or Calvin, or Melancthon, nor the Confession or Augusta, or Geneva, nor
the Catechism of Heidelberg, nor the Articles of the Church of England, no nor
the Harmony of protestant Confessions; but that wherein they all agree, and
which they all subscribe with greater Harmony, as a prefect Rule of their Faith
and Actions, that is, the Bible. The Bible, I say, the Bible only is the
Religion of Protestants; whatsoever else they believe besides it and the plain
irrefragable indubitable Consequences of it, well may they hold it as Matter of
Opinion, but as Matter of Faith and Religion, neither can they with Coherence
to their own Grounds believe it themselves, nor require the Belief of it of
others, without most high and schismatical Presumption. I, for my Part, after a
long (and as I verily believe and hope) impartial Search of the true Way to
eternal Happiness, do profess plainly, That I cannot find any Rest for the Sole
of my Foot, but upon this Rock only. I see plainly, and with my own Eyes, that
there are Popes against Popes, Councils against Councils, some Fathers against
others, the same Fathers against themselves, a Consent of Fathers of one Age
against the Consent of Fathers of another Age, the Church of one Age against
the Church of another Age. Traditive Interpretations of Scripture are
pretended, but few or none are found. No Tradition but only of Scripture can
derive itself from the Fountain, but may be plainly proved to be bro't in in
such an Age after Christ, or that such an Age it was not in. In a Word, There
is no sufficient Certainty but of Scripture, for any considering Man to build
upon. This therefore and this only I have Reason to believe. This I will
profess, according to this I will live, and for this, if there be Occasion, I
will not only willingly but even gladly loose my Life, though I should be sorry
Christians should take it away from me. Propose me any Thing out of this Book,
and require whether I believe it or no; and seem it never so incomprehensible
to humane Reason, I will subscribe it with Hand and Heart, as knowing no
Demonstration can be stronger than this; God has said so, therefore it is
true. In other Things I will take no Man's Liberty of judging from him, neither
shall any Man take mine from me. I will think no Man the worse Man, nor the
worse Christian; I will love no Man the less for differing in Opinion from me.
And what Measure I mete to others, I expect from them again. I am fully assured
that God does not, and therefore Men ought not, to require any more of any Man
than this, to believe the Scriptures to be God's Word, to endeavor to find the
true Sense of it, and to live according to it. And this noble Foundation,
Brethren, let us be ever united on.

But I must not leave this Subject without a more particular Application, to
the Church and Congregation at whose Desire we are now assembled.

Brethren, We in Charity believe, that it is with sincere Hearts you attend the
Solemnity of this Day. That you really think, that one of the Gifts which our
lord, when he ascended on high, gave to Men, was that of Pastors; for the
convincing of Sinners, the perfecting the Saints, and edifying his Body.
Wherefore remember that he, for whose solemn Separation to the Ministry we are
now met, is a Gift of our ascended Lord, and a Servant of him our heavenly
Master. Therefore as you are to call no Man Father on the Earth, you are to
regard him no longer than he does his Master's Work, but to compare what he
says and does with his Master's Orders.

But then, Be ye not called Rabbis. Set not your selves up in Christ's Place.
So long as he is faithful in Christ's Service, remember our Lord's own Words,
He that despises you, despises me. Luke 10.16.
You must remember that our common Master has sent him, and your due Regard to
him in the Administration of his Office, is but Part of your Obedience to
Christ. Wherefore whatever he declares agreeable to his Master's Will, receive
it as though Christ spoke to you. Acquaint him with the Difficulties of your
Souls, and meekly receive his Advices, when agreeable to the Gospel; they are
the Advices of his Master by him. Don't give him Occasion for that sad Report
to his Master, Lord, who has believed our Report. Romans 10.16.
Treat him not with Pride and Contempt; he is the Ambassador of the King of
Kings. Never fault his Administrations, 'till you find your Ground in the
Revelations and Laws of our common Master. As he is not your Master, so neither
are you his. One is our Master ever Christ, and all we are Brethren. Show him
that Meekness and Love which our Master did to his Disciples, and do it for our
Master's sake. Pray for him without ceasing to the Master of the House, that he
may be a wise Steward of the Mysteries of God. That he may come in and out
before you, in the Fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel of Peace, and always
have with him the Presence of him who has all Power in Heaven and Earth, and
who has said to his faithful Servants, Lo I am with you always to the End of
the World. This is the Way wherein you may expect that our Master in Heaven
will bless you, and in a good Measure make up to you the heavy Loss you
underwent, when he took your late Pastor from your Head, to receive the Reward
of his faithful Services; and that he will receive him who is now to be your
Pastor, to eternal Happiness in his own Time, with a Multitude of you for his
Glory and Joy.

And now Lastly, Dear Brother, Let me exhort you to lay up these divine
Instructions. We hope you have seriously and prayerfully reflected on the high
and holy Nature of the Business you are engaging in, that it is the Service of
the one only Master of Christians; that therefore you do not vainly and
profanely imagine, it an Office wherein you are only to enjoy some temporal
Revenues, be caressed by the People, and indulge your self in Sloth and
Idleness, or tyrannize over their Consciences; nor yet an Office wherein you
are to become a Slave to every one's Humor and Notions. The Though It of this
Subject will, by God's Grace, have a good Influence upon you, in both these
Regards. Realize that the Father of Spirits has a Right to direct you in the
Use of your Understanding, that Christ your Master has a just Title to all your
Service. Wherefore be subject to the Father of Spirits only. Believe nothing
but what you have rational Evidence of. Teach nothing but what you think Truth,
and the Truth of Christ, though you should have all Mankind affirming it. Your
Soul being impressed with a Sense of the Authority of your heavenly Father,
this will engage you to Diligence in improving every Power thereof, in
searching his Will; it will prevent your subscribing to the Authority of any
mere Man; it will engage you to deliver to your People, his Doctrine, and his
alone; it will engage you to be always getting Knowledge, and therefore readily
hearkening to Advice, receiving Light, and under God, gaining by the
Conversations and Writings of the Wise, Learned, and Pious. But farther,
Brother, At all Times by a firm Faith, view our ascended Master on a Throne of
Glory, from thence giving to all his Servants their respective Business:
Realize it that it is he sends you here, and he does it that you may in his
Stead persuade Men to be reconciled to God, and edify his Children in their
most holy Faith. Realize what a Master you have.

This well considered will influence you, to Humility and Faithfulness, to
Diligence and Zeal, it will strengthen you against Discouragements, and extend
your Views beyond the Vanities of Time and Sense. It will move you to preach
his Doctrines, Laws, and Motives at all Times, and his only. -- To give such
Advices to his People at all Times and in all Cases, as his Word directs to --
To stand up for the Order and Ordinances of the Gospel (according to your
Station) against all Invasions. -- To treat your People as Brethren in Christ
-- To Humility of Conduct. Especially in all concerns of Souls, the
Consideration that the Office of an Adviser and Guide is committed to you by a
Master in Heaven, to whom you are to give Account; will make you tender and
compassionate, bearing them on your Heart at all Times at the Throne of Grace;
giving them Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept. For what a Master is it you
serve? A Master who takes exact Cognizance of your Behavior, and will call you
to Account therefore. A Master from whose gracious Mouth those Words proceeded,
If any Man serve me let him follow me, and where I am there shall also my
Servant be; If any Man serve me, him will my Father honor, Joh. 12.26. You
have a Master in Heaven whom you are to serve; and if you are to serve, you are
to follow him. Wherefore always bear in mind the Example of your Master, which
ought to have the Force of a Law with you, O how amiable is it, how engaging
ought it to be to all his Ministers! He came not to be ministered to but to
minister, and to give his Life a Ransom for many, Mark 10.45. He brake not the
bruised Reed, nor quenched the smoking Flax. If you regard him you will be far
from desiring to be a Rabbi or Master. You will esteem it your highest Glory,
to be doing Good; you will be (as I may say) in your Element, when you are
impressing upon Men the Doctrines and Motives of the Christian Life, to their
Progress in every Grace. This will as it were force you to be his Servant. To
submit to any Service when the Good of Souls requires it. Hereby also you gain
divine Approbation, For he that is greatest among you shall be your Servant.
Wherefore Brother, Pray to God continually, that all these Arguments may be
lastingly set home upon your Soul. Let the Authority of your Father in Heaven
and exalted Lord, the Honor of your great Master, his perfect Example, an
awful Sense of the last Account to be given to him, and the Glories of his
Presence which you hope for, persuade you to be the faithful Servant of Christ.
To him look up for promised Help; to his Honor let all your Labors be
dedicated; to him keep your Eye for the Reward of a steadfast Adherence to his
Gospel. For remember, and let his Example constrain you, that Jesus himself,
the Author and Finisher of our Faith, for the Joy that was set before him,
endured the Cross despising the Shame, and is set down at the right Hand of the
Throne of God, Heb. 12.2. There if you continue faithful to him, under all the
Labors, the Discouragements and Reproaches of this Office, you may expect one
Day to see him, for I will again repeat our Saviors Words, If any Man serve me
let him follow me, and where I am there shall my Servant be. If you are
faithful to him and the Interests of immortal Souls, you may with a humble
Confidence expect that blessed Sentence, Well done good and faithful Servant,
enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord, Math. 25.21.

Thus, Men, Brethren, and Fathers, I have delivered what I think contained in
the cautioning Words of our Savior. It had doubtless more moved our
Affections, to have meditated on the Duties of the pastoral Office which more
intimately concern Souls, such as their Love and Care of them, but then we must
remember that every Advice of Christ should be weighed by us and practiced
upon, and if we view the State of Religion among us on every Side, perhaps the
Subject we have been upon is very useful to direct at this Day.

I conclude all with the Exhortation of the Apostle Jude, Ye Beloved, building
up your Selves in your most holy Faith, praying in the Holy Ghost, keep your
selves in the Love of God, looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal Life. -- Now unto him that is able to keep you from Falling, and to
present you faultless before the Presence of his Glory with exceeding Joy; to
the only wise God our Savior, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both
now and ever, AMEN.

FINIS.

