Dr. Sewall's SERMON ON The Love of GOD.

The first and great Commandment, To love the LORD our GOD. A SERMON Preached
at the Thursday-Lecture in BOSTON January 28. 1741, 2.

By Joseph Sewall, D. D. Pastor to a Church of CHRIST in BOSTON.

Deuteronomy 6.4, 5. Hear, O Israel, The LORD our GOD is one LORD. And thou shall love
the LORD thy GOD with all thine Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy
Might.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for D. Henchman, and Sold at his Shop in
Cornhill, 1742.

Matthew. XXII. 37, 38. Jesus says unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. This is the
first and great Commandment.
THESE Words contain part of our Savior's Answer to a Question asked by one
who is called a Lawyer, i. e. "A Student in, and Teacher of the Law of Moses.
HENRY.
The Question we have v. 36. Master, which is the great Commandment in the Law?
To which our Lord replieth, 37, -- 40 v. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love
the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy
Mind. This is the first and great Commandment. And the second is like unto it,
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. On these two Commandments hang all
the Law and the Prophets. Here then we have the Sum of the Ten Commandments.
Love is the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. But it is the first of these
comprehensive Commands that I shall consider at this Time.

DOCTRINE.
To love the LORD our GOD with all the Heart, and with all the Soul, and with
all the Mind; is the first and great Commandment. I shall speak to this
Doctrine under the following Particulars: I. What is this Love of God? II. We
may further explain the Command by showing what is intended by loving God with
all the Heart, etc. III. I shall show that this is the first and great
Commandment.

I. What is this Love of GOD?

Answ. Love to GOD is a Grace of the Spirit, whereby we esteem and desire him
above all, and cleave to him as to our chief Good with holy Delight, from a
spiritual Sight of his most amiable Perfections, as manifested in his Word and
Works, and in the Person of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Under this general
Description I may say more particularly,

1. LOVE to GOD is a Grace of the Holy Spirit.

LOVE, consider it as an Affection or Passion whereby the Soul uniteth with
that which appears amiable, is natural to us, and in its own Nature good, being
from GOD: The Object of this uniting Affection is whatever is apprehended to be
good for us. And as this Passion was in our first Parents while they retained
their Integrity, it had not only a physical, but moral Goodness, being placed
on GOD as the supreme Good, and Fountain of all Happiness; and upon the
Creature in due Measure, and in a regular Subordination. But when Sin entered,
Adam lost that divine Impression which was on this Affection: He became an
idolatrous Lover of himself, and of those carnal Pleasures whereby sinful Self
is gratified. And now since the Fall, the Character of Men is that, Lovers of
their own selves. Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of GOD, 2 Timothy 3.2, --
4. And because they can find no true Satisfaction, they dote on many Lovers.
And as their Inclination is turned toward Creatures which gratify their Lusts;
so they have a dreadful Aversion to GOD and his holy Law, which stand in
Opposition to them. They delight not themselves in the Almighty. The Character
of Men left to the Darkness and Corruption of their own Minds is that, Romans
1.30. Haters of GOD. Yea, when JESUS the Light of the World appeared, many even
of his own People loved Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds were
evil. Now have they both seen, and hated both me and my Father, Joh. 15.24.
Accursed Malignity. Is it possible? Yes, the carnal Mind is Enmity against GOD,
Romans 8.7. The Holiness and Justice of GOD appearing in the Commands and
Sanction of his Law, are very disagreeable to the Sinner: The Presence of GOD
is offensive to him, he does not like to retain GOD in his Knowledge; yea, he
says to GOD, Depart from me, I desire not the Knowledge of thy Ways, Job 21.14.
This is the vile and wretched State of Men until GOD renew them in the Spirit
of their Minds, and so write this Law of Love upon their Hearts by his holy
Spirit. Gal. 5.22. The Fruit of the Spirit is Love. This is Part of the divine
Image drawn on the Hearts of Men when the GOD of Love comes to dwell in them
by his Spirit: They love the Lord, and hate Evil. And when this holy Impression
is made on the Will and Affections, the Sinner who was going away from the
blessed GOD, returns to him as his Rest and Happiness. Which leads me to say,

2. HE that loves GOD, esteems and desires him above all.

Now the Language of the Soul is that, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and
there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee, Psalm. 73.25. GOD is
infinite Gdodness, and there is nothing good but as it deriveth from him. There
is none good but one, that is GOD, Matthew. 19.17. And therefore must we esteem
him above all other Beings, or we do not truly love him; for his Name alone is
excellent, his Glory is above the Earth and Heaven. GOD alone is the Object of
our religious Devotion in this Respect, and the Desires of our Souls must be to
his Name above every Name. Desire and Joy may be called different Modifications
of Love, as the Object is considered to be absent or present. Agreeably, when a
Child of GOD, who is born from above, is made sensible of the infinite
Amiableness of GOD, and of the great Distance at which Sin has set him from
this glorious Object; he reaches after GOD in fervent Desires and Longings of
Soul. The inward Breathings of GOD's People after him, are well expressed by
the Psalmist when driven from GOD's House and Ordinances into the Wilderness of
Judah, O GOD, thou art my GOD, early will I seek thee: my Soul thirsts for
thee, my Flesh longs for thee, Psalm. 63.1. Such are the Desires of them that
truly love GOD, and have this Love in a lively Exercise; and these Desires give
Wings to the Soul as it were, they mount up as Eagles toward Heaven. They
aspire after the perfect Enjoyment of the blessed GOD, and cannot be fully
satisfied till they are present with the LORD in Heaven, where is Fullness of
Joys. The Apostle Paul, when in the lively Exercise of this Love, had a Desire
to depart, and be with CHRIST. And the longing Desires of GOD's People after
the glorious Appearing of their GOD and Savior, we have expressed at the Close
of the Revelation, Even so, come, LORD JESUS.

3. IN the Exercise of this Love, GOD's People take Complacency in him as their
chief Good, and cleave to him in holy Delight.

THE Language of such as truly love GOD is that, Return unto thy Rest, O my
Soul, for the LORD has dealt bountifully with thee, Psalm. 116.7. They rest in
GOD as the only satisfying Portion of their Souls, saying as the Psalmist, Thou
art my Portion, O LORD. Love is a uniting Affection, and it takes Pleasure in
the Enjoyment of the Object beloved, and rejoiceth when in the nearest Union
with it. Agreeably, he that truly loves GOD, obeys that Command, Delight thy
self in the LORD, Psalm. 37.4. He delights in drawing nigh to GOD, and holding
Communion with him. From his Heart he says, It is good for me to draw near to
GOD; the nearer the better in his Account. He goes to GOD as to his exceeding
great Joy, and when it pleases GOD to give him the evident Tokens of his
gracious Presence and Favor, this is better to him than all Earthly Joy, than
the Joy of Harvest. There be many that say, Who will show us any good? LORD,
lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance upon us. Thou have put Gladness in my
Heart, more than in the Time that their Corn and their Wine increased, Psalm.
4.6, 7. Such delight in all GOD's Attributes, in his Holiness and Justice, as
well as in his Grace and Mercy; which appears in their earnest Desires and
Endeavors to perfect Holiness in the Fear of the LORD. They also delight in
GOD's Law after the inner Man, because it is the Will of GOD declared to them.
They likewise rejoice in the Day which the LORD has made, and call the Sabbath
their Delight; because this Day is holy to the Lord, and the blessed Season for
Communion with him. They love the Habitation of GOD's House, the Place where
his Honor dwells. How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O LORD of Hosts! Psalm.
84.1. However, they are not satisfied with a bodily Attendance on Ordinances,
when they do not find and enjoy GOD in them; but when GOD draws nigh to their
Souls in the Ways of his Appointment, they are satisfied with the good things
of his House as with Marrow and Fatness, and praise him with joyful Lips. In a
Word, where there is this Love shed abroad in the Heart by the Spirit, we
choose GOD as our chief Good and highest End, and cleave to him with holy
Satisfaction. Indeed, our Love in this Life will at best fall short of sinless
Perfection, and the Exercise of it must be more or less obstructed by remaining
Corruption. Alas! the best of GOD's Children here find sad Occasion to complain
of the Coldness and Deadness of their Affections, while engaged in religious
Duties. However when this Love is in a lively Exercise, there is holy Joy in the
LORD: Now they can say, My Heart is fixed, O GOD, my Heart is fixed, I will
sing and give Praise: Unless when it pleases a wife and sovereign GOD to hide
his Face, then they are troubled for want of the sensible Manifestations of his
gracious Presence. And when this is the sorrowful Case, their Love expresses
it self in an holy mourning after God, Mine Eye runs down with Water,
because the Comforter that should relieve my Soul, is far from me, Lam. 1.16.

4. THIS Love to GOD is drawn forth by a believing View of GOD, his most
amiable Perfections and Attributes, as these are manifested in his Works, his
Word, and the Person of our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

THERE is no Desire of, or Love to that which is unknown. We must therefore be
renewed after the Image of GOD in Knowledge, Righteousness and Holiness: And as
there must be a Likeness to GOD in his imitable Perfections inwrought into the
Soul as a Principle of Union, without this the most excellent and glorious
Being cannot be agreeable and pleasing to us; so there must be a spiritual
Sight of this glorious Object to draw forth the actings of Love. Faith, which
is the Evidence of Things not seen, works by Love, Gal. 5.6. When the Eyes of
the Understanding are enlightened, and we can say, Mine Eye sees thee; we shall
not only abhor our selves for our most unnatural Rebellion against our heavenly
Father, but also return to our Duty in filial Love. Moses by Faith saw him who
is invisible, and then refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter;
Esteeming the Reproach of CHRIST greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt.
Agreeably the Apostle prays for the Christian Philippians, as Chap. 1.9, 10.
And this I pray, that your Love may abound yet more and more in Knowledge, and
in all Judgment; that ye may approve Things that are excellent. He that truly
loves GOD has a saving Discovery of his infinite Excellency, a believing
Sight of his Glory as revealed in his Word and Works, and in the Person of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST. The Heathen had some general Notions of GOD's Perfections,
those of them which are made known in the Works of Creation and common
Providence; and accordingly they styled their Jupiter the best and the
greatest. But alas! notwithstanding this, when they knew GOD, they glorified
him not as GOD, neither were thankful, but became vain in their Imaginations,
and their foolish Heart was darkened. And changed the Glory of the uncorruptible
GOD, into an Image made like to corruptible Man, and to Birds, and four-footed
Beasts, and creeping Things, Romans 1.21, -- 23. The Light of Nature is not
sufficient to direct our Hearts into the Love of GOD. We must by Faith receive
the Witness which GOD's Works together with his Word give concerning him, or
our Hearts will never be drawn forth toward him in this holy Love. Through
Faith we understand that the Worlds were framed by the Word of GOD, so that
Things which are seen were not made of Things which do appear, Heb. 11.3. There
was no pre-existent Matter when GOD began to create the World; but all Things
were made of Nothing by the Word of GOD's Power. Accordingly, when the Believer
lifts up his Eyes to the Heavens which declare the Glory of GOD, or looks to
the Earth which is full of his Goodness; he admiring says, How excellent is thy
Name in all the Earth! Thy Glory is above the Heavens. But GOD has magnified
his Word above all his Name upon the Account of the Discoveries which he has
been pleased herein to make of himself, and the only Way of Salvation by a
Redeemer. The Way of the Sinner's Recovery by CHRIST could not be known 'till
it pleased GOD to reveal it. In this Revelation GOD passes before us, and
proclaims, The LORD, The LORD GOD, merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and
abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping Mercy for Thousands, forgiving
Iniquity, and Transgression, and Sin, Exodus 34.6, 7. Herein GOD gives the Light
of the Knowledge of himself in the Person of CHRIST, who is the Brightness of
the Father's Glory. Here the Perfections of GOD, which are infinitely
excellent, appear most amiable unto us, when we behold them in CHRIST God-Man
Mediator, conspiring to promote the Salvation of lost, miserable Man. And now
the Believer, adoring says, How great is his Goodness! How great is his Beauty!
It was the Saying of One, I would not have an absolute GOD, that is, a GOD out
of CHRIST. Out of CHRIST GOD is a consuming Fire to Sinners; and if we thus
consider him, we may well fly from him with that despairing Cry, Who among us
shall dwell with the devouring Fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting
Burnings? Accordingly, our first Parents, when they had lost GOD's Image, and
exposed themselves to his Wrath and Curse by their Transgression, hid
themselves from the Presence of the LORD, afraid to see his Face as a righteous
Judge and Avenger of Sin. But now in CHRIST we behold GOD reconciling Sinners
to himself, and may say with the Apostle John, GOD is Love. What higher
Testimony could be given than this, the Father's so loving us as to give his
Son to take our Nature, and die for us? The Believer feels the Power of it
constraining him to love GOD with mutual Affection. And still the Love of GOD
is further shed abroad in his Heart, when he can with the Assurance of Faith
say concerning his GOD and Savior, He has loved me, and given himself for me.
Propriety in any desirable Object, much more in One infinitely worthy our
highest Love, is very endearing. How transporting must it be to say, He is
altogether lovely; This is my Beloved, and this is my Friend? Surely such an
one must be constrained to say with Peter, Lord, thou know all Things, Thou
know that I love thee.

II. I shall endeavor further to explain this Duty, by considering what is
intended in loving GOD with all the Heart, with all the Soul, and with all the
Mind.

BEFORE I speak particularly to this Head, I would observe to you, that this
Duty of Love is here so fully expressed, that our Love to GOD must be
completed in sinless Perfection, before we can keep this great Command
according to the full Extent of these Words. While we are in this imperfect
State, there will be some sinful Defect in our Love to GOD, and some criminal
Excess in our Love to the Creature. However in a qualified Sense, as Sincerity
is called Perfection, every one that loves GOD truly, may be said to love him
with all the Heart, -- By Heart as here used, some understand the Will: We must
choose GOD with our whole Heart. By Soul, some understand the Affection. By
Mind, the Understanding, which is the leading Faculty. In Mark we read, with
all the Understanding, as the Command is repeated, chapter 12. v. 33. In
Deuteronomy, where this Command is mentioned, Mind is omitted, and Might is
added. In Mark, with all thy Strength is added, chapter 12. v. 30. But we need not
be critical in examining the particular Sense of each Expression; take them
together, they may imply such Things as these following.

1. WE must love GOD with Sincerity, in Opposition to hypocritical Pretenses.
My little Children, let us not love in Word, neither in Tongue, but in Deed and
in Truth, 1 John ^ 18.

OUR Love to GOD must be hearty, and in this Respect we must worship him in
Spirit and in Truth. Behold, thou desire Truth in the inward Parts, Psalm. 5^
The inward Motions and Affections of the Heart must agree with our outward
Expressions of Love. We must take heed we be not like them, Ezekiel. 33.31. They
come unto thee as the People comes, and they sit before thee as my People, and
they bear thy Words, but they will not do them: For with their Mouth they show
much Love, but their Heart goes after their Covetousness. GOD searches, and
requires the Heart. My Son, give me thine Heart, Prove. 23.26. And we highly
dishonor and provoke him, if we lie to the Lord in our outward Profession; and
we may depend upon it the holy GOD will reject us with Abhorrence, and give us
our Portion with Hypocrites, except we repent. The End of the Commandment is
Charity, out of a pure Heart, and of a good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned,
1 Timothy 1.5.

2. THERE must be Integrity, in Opposition to a divided Heart.

WE must take Care we be not of double Heart. There must not be an Heart for
GOD, and an Heart for the World too; for our Savior assures us, No Man can
serve two Masters: For either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else
he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve GOD and Mammon,
Matthew. 6.24. We must choose and love GOD with a perfect Heart; we must cleave
to him wholly, and have our Hearts united in his Love, as well as in his Fear.
We must give the LORD our whole Souls, and not willingly withhold any Thing
from him. Every Power must be devoted to GOD's Service, and the Dominion of
every Lust taken away. We must have Respect to all GOD's Commandments from Love
to him, and hate every false Way. If there be any Idol retained, the Love of
GOD does not reign in us. Their Heart is divided; now shall they be found
faulty, Hos. 10.2. The infinitely glorious Jehovah will bear no Rival.

3. OUR Love to GOD must exceed all our other Love.

WE must esteem him most excellent, and our Love to him must be superlative. If
any Man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own Life also, he cannot be
my Disciple, Luke 14.26. Not as if Christians might be without natural
Affection. By no means; but then so far as our nearest and dearest Enjoyments
would tempt us to turn from the blessed GOD; so far must we treat them as evil,
and not count our very Lives dear when they stand in Competition with the Glory
and Enjoyment of GOD. Unless we love GOD above the Creature, and are in some
true Measure willing to forsake all for him; our Love is not genuine. All the
Goodness of the Creature compared with the Goodness of GOD, is not so much as a
Spark to the Sun, or a Drop to the Ocean. Finite bears no Proportion to
Infinite. Accordingly our Love to GOD must excel. We ought to love nothing but
in Subordination to GOD; for his sake, and according to the Rule and Measure of
his Will declared in his Word. The Apostle Paul suffered the Loss of all
Things, and counted them but Dung that he might win CHRIST. However, this does
not suppose that every true Christian is in a next Preparation to suffer
Martyrdom for JESUS CHRIST. There may be a willing Mind, and some true Measure
of Love, where there is not present Courage and Resolution thus to suffer for
CHRIST. The Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak, Matthew. 26.41. But
then, GOD's People may not satisfy themselves with the lowest Degree of that
Love which is true for kind. No! They must labor to grow in this Grace, and so
to be going on toward Perfection.

4. WE must love GOD with the Strength of our Hearts; with a strong and ardent
Love, in Opposition to that which is languid and weak.

WE must labor after that Love which is stronger than Death, and burns like
the Fire which has a most vehement Flame. Our Love to GOD should be intense
and active. In this Respect we should endeavor to resemble the holy Angels,
who are as Flames of Fire for the Fervor and Activity of their Love; and are
accordingly called Seraphim, burners Isa. 6.2. We must burn in Love to GOD, and
holy Zeal against Sin; so as to be not slothful in his Business, fervent in
Spirit serving the LORD; doing, his Will on Earth in some Measure as the Angels
do it in Heaven.

5. OUR Love to GOD must be intelligent.

WE must have right Thoughts and spiritual Apprehensions of GOD leading and
directing the other Faculties. It must be with the Understanding. We must
frequently think of GOD, and our Meditation of him should be sweet unto us. One
Character of the Wicked is that, GOD is not in all their Thoughts, Psalm. 10.4.
We should then muse till the Fire burn, and often warm our Hearts with serious
Tho'ts of the blessed GOD, his glorious Perfections, and wonderful Works. When
the Psalmist had been meditating of the Goodness of the LORD in his wonderful
Works to the Children of Men, he closes the Psalm with these Words, Whosoever is
wise, and will observe those Things, even they shall understand the loving
kindness of the LORD, Psalm. 107.43. The more we see of the Creature, the more
we see its Vanity and Emptiness; but the more we follow on to know the LORD,
the more shall we see of his divine Excellency and Glory to increase our Esteem
and Love. But I forbear, and shall only further say in a Word: We should with
all the Powers of Soul and Body express our Love to GOD, devoting our selves
wholly to him, employing all our Abilities in his Service, and doing his
Commandments with all our Might. I cannot dismiss this second Head without this
Reflection, How far short do we fall of our Duty! Surely this Commandment is
exceeding broad. Which brings me to the third and last Head.

III. WHICH is to show, that This is the first and great Commandment.

THAT this is GOD's Command, is plain from the Old and New Testament. Hear, O
lsrael, The LORD our GOD is one LORD. And thou shall love the LORD thy GOD with
all thine Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Might, Deuteronomy. 6.5, 6.
But it would be to light a Candle in the Sun, to go about to prove that this is
GOD's Commandment. We therefore proceed to show that it deserves the Character
here given; the first and great Commandment.

THE Love of GOD is the first Commandment in Order and Dignity. In Order of
Nature, says a worthy Divine, because the Love of our Neighbor flows from our
Love of GOD: And also in Dignity, says another, because it commands us Things
concerning GOD. And the great Command. That is, says BEZA, "The greatest of
All; for otherwise, as he also observes, there is nothing small which GOD
commands." Here to confirm and illustrate this last Head, I would say more
particularly.

1. THE Love of GOD may fitly be called the first and great Command with
respect to the Object of it, the infinitely great and good GOD, the first
Cause, and last End of all Things.

BEHOLD, GOD is great. Behold, the Nations are as Drop of a Bucket, and are
counted as the small Dust of the Balance: Behold, he takes up the Isles as a
very little thing. All Nations before him are as Nothing, and they are counted
to him less than Nothing, and Vanity, Isa. 40.15, -- 17. A few Years past, so
may we speak when meditating on the Eternal GOD, there was no Creature
existing; only this self-existent, self-sufficient Being, whose Name is
JEHOVAH, from Everlasting to Everlasting. And now let the Universe stand in
Comparison with Him, and it shrinks into Nothing before Him, the infinite GOD.
But we are Babes: Let the Angels then declare how great and good the LORD is.
Behold, They also stand amazed in awful Silence before him, covering their
Faces. The Tongues of Angels fail, and our most enlarged Thoughts are swallowed
up. How great then is this Command objectively considered. Surely it
challenges the first and chief Place.

2. THIS will further appear if we consider the Relations which GOD bears to
his People.

THAT GOD, who is the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; is the Creator,
Redeemer and Sanctifier of his People. He is the Father of our Spirits, and
Former of our Bodies. We were nothing 'till GOD gave us our Being, and that
this excellent Being; and when we were worse than Nothing by our Apostasy from
GOD, it pleased the Father of Glory to fond his Son to redeem us. When GOD
delivered the Ten Commandments to his ancient People, we have that Preface to
them, I am the LORD thy GOD, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt,
out of the House of Bondage, Exodus 20.2. This was indeed a strong Obligation
upon them to love GOD, and keep his Commandments; but it is as nothing if
compared with GOD's sending his Son to take our Nature, and give his Life a
Ransom for us; and then with his sending the Holy Spirit to apply the Benefit
of this Eternal Redemption to us. What are our natural Parents, or spiritual
Fathers in CHRIST, but Instruments of conveying to us the Goodness of GOD?
Surely then the Love of GOD must stand as the first and chief Commandment.

3. THE Love of GOD is the first and great Commandment, as it comprehends the
Sum of the four first Commandments.

WE commonly call these the first Table; though we do not certainly know how many
Commandments were written on the first, and how many on the second of the two
Tables delivered to Moses by GOD. However, it is plain these stand foremost as
they concern our Duty to GOD. And these great Matters of GOD's Law are all
sum'd up in this comprehensive Command, Thou shall love the LORD thy GOD with
all thy Heart. Does GOD require us to serve him only; with religious Worship,
and that in the Ways of his own Appointment? Does he require us to worship him
with Reverence and godly Fear, and to beware of taking his Name in vain? Does
he require us to sanctify his Day by separating our selves from worldly Cares
and Business, and Pleasures; and by devoting that holy Time to religious
Exercises? In these Commands GOD has written to us the great Things of his Law,
and all is comprehended in this of Love. Well then may it be called the first
and great Commandment.

4. THIS is in a Sense, the End and Perfection of other Commandments. This may
be said of Love in general, and in an especial Manner of this Love of GOD. The
End of the Commandment is Charity, 1 Timothy 1.5. This is what GOD designs in the
Duties he requires of us, even to perfect his Love in us. And this is what we
ought very much to aim at in our Attendance on religious Duties, the Exercise
and increase of Love. This is one great End of the Institution of the
Gospel Ministry, that the Body of CHRIST, his Church may be edified in Love.
The most excellent Gifts without this, are as nothing in GOD's Account, and the
most costly Performances, the giving our Goods to feed the Poor, and our Bodies
to be burned, profit not without this Love, which is very much the animating
Life and Soul of true Obedience, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2. But where there is true Love
to GOD in Exercise, a willing Mind is accepted according to what a Man has,
and the giving a Cup of cold Water shall not lose its Reward.

5. This Love shall never fail. 1 Cor. 13.8. And upon this Account especially
Love is said to be greater than Faith and Hope. 13 v. And now abides Faith,
Hope, Charity, these three; but the greatest of these is Charity. Not as if
Faith and Hope would absolutely fail, and cease as to their Existence. We are
required to trust in the LORD for ever. But then Faith and Hope, those
excellent Graces, may be said to fail respecting some principal Office or
Exercise in which they are of eminent Usefulness in the present Life; Faith, as
it is the Evidence of Things not seen, will cease, when we shall walk by Sight.
Faith, as it is a Shield to defend us from the fiery Darts of the Wicked, shall
not be used, when our Warfare is accomplished. We are now commanded, above all
to take the Shield of Faith. But there will be no further Need of it or Use for
it under this Character, when the Believer shall triumph for ever in Heaven;
for the old Serpent cannot enter the heavenly Paradise to tempt GOD's People.
But now when Faith shall as it were be swallowed up in the open Vision of GOD,
and Hope in the full Enjoyment of him; then shall Love, be perfected for ever
respecting its highest Office. Then there will be the highest Exercise of Love
in Delight and Joy. The Mansions of Glory are the happy Places in which
Knowledge and Love are for ever completed; and yet, the Object being infinite,
I cannot see why they may not continue to grow and increase to all Eternity. O
divine Life! To have the highest Actings of Love on an infinitely glorious
Object most intimately present, and most fully manifesting his Love to us. O
Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory! Surely our perfect Conformity to GOD's Will
in this great Matter of his Law, is our highest Perfection and Blessedness. In
keeping this Commandment there is a great Reward. When the glorified Saint
loves the LORD with all his Heart, and Mind, and Strength; he reaches the
Center of all true Desire and Perfection, and finds Rest in the full Enjoyment
of GOD to all Eternity.

AND thus have I considered a few Things to show the greatness of this Command;
I now proceed to the

APPLICATION.
Use 1. We may learn from what has been said, that the Law of the LORD is
perfect, and most excellent.

THUS we read, The Law of the LORD is perfect, Psalm. 19.7. It extends to the
Heart and Conscience, and requires the Obedience both of the inward and
outward Man. Well might the Psalmist say, I have seen an End of all Perfection;
but thy Commandment is exceeding broad, Psalm. 119.96. Divine and most excellent
are its Commands, and it is the whole of Man to be obedient to them. It is also
the Law of Love. Let us then say, O how love I thy Law! it is my Meditation all
the Day. We should highly esteem the Law as a perfect Rule of Duty; but not
presume to depend upon it for Justification. No, it is weak through the Flesh,
by Reason of our Sin; and cannot give Life. It is indeed perfect in itself, and
Salvation had been by the Law, if we had kept it; but as it is now a Law broken
by us, it cannot give us Life; for it is written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all Things which are written in the Book of the Law to do
them, Gal. 3.10. We may conclude then, that by the Deeds of the Law shall no
Flesh living be justified in the Sight of GOD. Dare any presume to stand a
Trial according to the Law as a Covenant of Works? Vain Man! Thou daily
breakest GOD's Law in Thought, Word and Deed. Let us then humbly plead, Enter
not into Judgment with thy Servants, for in thy Sight shall no Flesh living be
justified. And let the Law be as a Schoolmaster to lead us to CHRIST, and
teach us our Need of Him, who is the End of the Law for Righteousness. His Love
and Obedience were every Way perfect, and equal to this great Command. But
alas! our's are very imperfect at best. How much are our Affections
distempered? How often do we feel a feverish Heat of carnal Concupiscence
working in us so that when we go to offer GOD our Hearts, we are lame and
defective. Surely we cannot be accepted but in the Beloved. The Sins cleaving to
our very best Duties need Pardon, and cleansing in the Blood of JESUS. Let each
one of us then say; I count all Things but Loss, for the Excellency of the
Knowledge of CHRIST JESUS my LORD: for whom I have suffered the Loss of all
Things, and do count them but Dung that I may win CHRIST, and be found in him,
not having mine own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the Faith of CHRIST, the Righteousness which is of GOD by Faith, Phil.
3.8, 9.

2. Here we see how to judge of our Duties, and religious Performances.

WE come before GOD as his People; hear his Word, and do many Things. But can
we say, that true Love to GOD is the inward Spring and active Principle from
which these religious Actions proceed? Do we attend on GOD's Worship from an
hearty Desire of Communion with him? Do we as new born Babes desire the sincere
Milk of the Word, that we may grow thereby? And do we receive the Truth in the
Love of it, as those that are desirous to prove what is that good, and perfect,
and acceptable Will of GOD? And then, Do we in Prayer offer up our sincere
Desires to GOD, as the true Seed of Jacob, who cannot bear to go away without
his Blessing? Is this our great Petition, Lord, lift thou up the Light of thy
Countenance upon us? When we sit at the Lord's Table, Do we renumber CHRIST's
Love more than Wine, and yield our selves to him according to the new Covenant,
as those who are not our own, being bought with the Price of his most precious
Blood? In a Word, Is the remaining Deadness and Coldness of Affection in Duty
our heavy Burden? This true Godliness is profitable to all Things; but bodily
Exercise without it will profit little. And unless this holy Fire of Love be
enkindled in our Hearts, we shall not offer to GOD spiritual Sacrifices
acceptable through CHRIST; but may expect that GOD will reject us and our
Services, though we should often appear before him as his People.

3. Learn the great Sin, and Evil of living in Enmity against GOD.

To love the LORD our GOD with all the Heart, we have heard, is the first and
great Command. Certainly then such are great Transgressors, who under the clear
Revelation of GOD's Word, are Lovers of Pleasures more than Lovers of GOD; who
love the World, and the Things of the World above GOD. This must be an heinous
Violation of GOD's Law, and highly provoking to him who is a jealous GOD,
visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children of them that hate him.
How often have such appeared to be the abhorred of the LORD, and their
Posterity following their Steps? Psalm. 49.11, -- 13. But it may be some imagine
they love GOD, and the World too. But O Self-deceiver! Hear the Word of the
LORD, Love not the World, neither the Things that are in the World. If any Man
love the World, the Love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15. The
idolatrous Love we are now speaking of, is utterly inconsistent with the true
Love of GOD; and where it governs, the Heart is full of Enmity against GOD. The
Friendship of the World is Enmity with GOD: Whosoever therefore will be a
Friend of the World, is the Enemy of GOD, Jam. 4.4. Now how great a Sin must
this be to continue in Enmity against the infinitely good GOD, our Maker,
Preserver and great Benefactor; against this GOD, who has manifested his Love
beyond our highest Conceptions, in sending his Son to save a perishing World;
and sends his Ministers to beseech us in his Name to be reconciled to him. O
the vile Nature and great Aggravation of this Sin, which virtually contains
Disobedience to the whole Law and Gospel too, and by both stands condemned as
exceeding sinful. Surely it is an Evil full of deadly Poison, no less
destructive to us than it is offensive to GOD. They that are far from GOD must
perish. My Soul lothed them, and their Soul also abhorred me, Zech. 11.8. If
you continue in this Distance and Alienation from GOD, you must depart accursed
from him for ever into everlasting Fire. Nothing remains for you, but that
fiery Indignation which shall devour the Adversaries. GOD was manifest in the
Flesh, and revealed in Flames of Love to save Sinners, of Love stronger than
Death. What Malignity then must there be in the Hearts of them that despise
him, and neglect so great Salvation? And how shall they escape, when he shall
be revealed in flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them that obey not his Gospel.
You may read your Doom, If any Man love not the Lord JESUS CHRIST, let him be
Anathema, Maran-atha, 1 Cor. 16.22. When our LORD comes again, you will fall
under his most dreadful Curse, and his Wrath shall abide upon you for ever.

4. Let us examine our selves whether we truly love GOD.

THIS is the first and great Commandment, and therefore it must be a Matter of
the greatest Importance that we yield Obedience to it. Let us then seriously
enquire; Is our Love to GOD hearty? Is it superlative? Do we choose him as our
Portion, and desire none in Heaven or Earth, in Comparison with him? Do we
truly give him our Hearts, mourning because we do it no better? Do we sincerely
reach after the nearest Union, and greatest Conformity to GOD? Do we make it
our Study and Care to please GOD by keeping his Commandments? Joh. 14.15. If ye
love me, keep my Commandments. Are we afraid of GOD's Displeasure; and do we
hate Sin with an irreconcilable Hatred? Psalm. 97.10. Ye that love the LORD,
hate Evil. Again, Are we much concerned for GOD's Glory in the World? Do we
rejoice when his Name is hallowed, and mourn when it is profaned? Do the
Interests of CHRIST's Kingdom lie near our Hearts, and are we glad when these
prosper and flourish? This is a genuine Fruit of Love, to regard the Interests
of the Person beloved something as if they were our own. In a Word, Do we
sincerely love the Children of GOD, and that because they bear his Image? 1 John 4.20. If a Man say, I love GOD, and hates his Brother, he is a Liar: For
he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love GOD whom he
has not seen?

5. Let us all be exhorted to love GOD, and that with all our Hearts.

THE Goodness of GOD was in a distinguishing Manner manifested to Man in his
first Creation, in that the Father of Spirits formed him with a reasonable
Soul, capable of knowing and enjoying him for ever; and made him in his Image,
and after his Likeness. It is our Sin and Misery, that by the Fall we are
alienated from GOD, and Enemies in our Minds. Certainly then it must be our
great Duty and Interest to return to the LORD our GOD who has made us, and who
alone can make us happy. Let us then cry to GOD for his holy Spirit, to destroy
this accursed Enmity; and to reconcile us to GOD by the Blood of CHRIST's
Cross. Joh. 3.16. GOD so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life.
GOD the Son was manifest in the Flesh, and has recommended his Love toward
us, in that when we were Sinners, he died for us. Let this Love then constrain
us to give up our selves to GOD by JESUS CHRIST; to love, obey, and serve him
for ever according to the new Covenant. Kiss the Son, believe in him, and
embrace him as the only Savior; then he will clothe you with his
Righteousness, and make you beautiful with his Comeliness put upon you: And
being espoused to him in Righteousness, and Judgment, and Loving kindness; GOD
the Father will be well pleased with you; he will rest in his Love, and rejoice
over you with Singing. The Father of Glory will own and bless you as his
Children. What need I say more to gain your Affections? But I know not how to
leave you, now that I am upon a Subject on which your All depends. You will be
happy or miserable for ever, according as you place your Love. O hearken then,
and consider further: It must be a blessed Thing to love the best and greatest
of Beings, and to be for ever beloved of him. All Things shall work together
for good, to them, that love GOD: And they shall be more than Conquerors over
all Evil, through him that has loved them. Romans 8.38, 39. For I am persuaded,
that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor
Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other
Creature, shall be able to separate us from the Love of GOD which is in CHRIST
JESUS our LORD. And as to the Life to come, you may take the strong Consolation
of those Words, 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have
entered into the Heart of Man, the Things which GOD has prepared for them that
love him. In a Word, Let the Children of GOD abound more and more in their Love
to him. There is no Danger of exceeding where the Object is infinitely
excellent and glorious. And here to make the Fire burn, O remember, GOD has
loved you with an everlasting Love, and with Loving kindness has he drawn you
to himself. He is beforehand with you in this Matter. 1. Joh. 4.19. We love
him; because he first loved us. Nothing less than the divine Power and Love of
God, was able to overcome your Evil. LORD, direct our Hearts into the Love of
thy self, and prepare us for that perfect State in which we shall for ever love
thee with all our Heart, and Soul, and Mind, and Strength! Jude 20, 21. But ye,
Beloved, building up your selves on your most holy Faith, praying in the holy
Ghost, keep your selves in the Love of GOD, looking for the Mercy of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST unto eternal Life.


