Dr. Colman's SERMON On the Glory of GOD In the Firmament.

The GLORY of GOD IN THE FIRMAMENT of his POWER. A SERMON Preached in Boston to
the Congregation in Brattle-Street, On the Lord's Day, October 31st. 1742.

By Benjamin Colman, D.D. A Pastor of said CHURCH.

"Caeli enarrant Gloriam DEI et Opera Manuum annunciat Expansio.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by S. Kneeland T. Green Queen Street, 1743.

TO JAMES BOWDOIN, Esquire Merchant in Boston.
Honored SIR,
AT your Desire the following Sermon is sent to the Press; to YOU therefore I
in Form present it. You have also gratified the Desires of others, who wished
to read it after they had heard it. I pray GOD it may be of spiritual Profit to
you and them.

GOD has made his wonderful Works to be remembered: His Work is honorable and
glorious, sought out by all them that have Pleasure therein; which all ought to
have. At Times therefore we ought to preach on this Subject, but always in an
evangelical, scriptural and spiritual Manner. A Christian Audience should ever
be so treated, edified and gratified. I please my self with thinking, it was
this that gave the Discourse it is Force and Acceptance with so many. If now in
reading it, they or others may find a like Pleasure and Benefit, they will
thank you, Sir, under GOD, as the Hand that conveys it to them.

GOD has set You near the Head of our Province for worldly Estate and Riches;
but the true Honor which we wish You, and to all our Brethren of like superior
worldly Circumstances, comes from above the Firmament; even the Riches of
Grace, the enduring Substance, a Treasure in Heaven which fails not. We are
therefore commanded by our LORD and SAVIOR, to charge them that are rich in
this World, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain Riches, but in
the LIVING GOD, who gives us richly all Things to enjoy: That they do Good, be
rich in good Works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate; laying up in
Store for themselves a good Foundation against the Time to come, that they may
lay hold of eternal Life.

The weekly SABBATH is the special, reverend and perpetual Memorial to us of
the Wisdom, Power and Goodness of GOD in his Work of CREATION; and a more
gracious and solemn Memorial thereof could not be given us, for the Honor of
GOD from us, or for spiritual Good to us from GOD.

How necessary is it for us in our fallen State, to be called off every Week
from our worldly Works, to a calm deliberate and raised Contemplation of GOD
our MARKER, PRESERVER, REDEEMER and SANCTIFIER; in his whole Work of Nature,
Providence and Grace! That every seventh Thought (as it were) through all our
Time might be on GOD, and sacred to his Praise.

Before there could be a Sabbath to Man on Earth, while the LORD was but laying
the Foundation of it upon nothing, the Angels of GOD gave Praise and Glory; The
Morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of GOD shouted for Joy. And this
is our happy joyous Exercise, if GOD give a Heart for it, as our Sabbaths
Return; as the PSALM for the Sabbath Day would inspire us; Psalm. xcii. For thou
LORD have made me glad through thy Work, and I will triumph in the Work of thy
Hands.

If we are ever in the SPIRIT on our LORD's-DAYS, and favored with any Visions
of the SON OF MAN in the midst of his Golden Candlesticks, our thankful Praises
will ascend to HIM at the FATHER's right Hand, as entered into his Rest upon
his finishing the Work of our REDEMPTION, as GOD ceased from his when the
Heavens and the Earth were finished. But we must wait for the perfect Sabbath,
and the perfect Praise, among the crowned Elders and adoring Angels before the
THRONE, Rev. iv. Where they rest not Day and Night from giving Glory and Honor
and Thanks to HIM that is upon the Throne, and lives for ever and ever;
saying, -- For THOU have CREATED all Things, and for thy Pleasure they are and
were CREATED.

Sir, My Heart's Desire and Prayer to GOD is, that the SABBATH OF THE LORD may
be ever thus holy to HIM in your Dwelling, and in all the Families of the
Flock! That the Rich among us in particular may ever give a bright Example in
this Respect; testifying hereby their Gratitude to GOD who gives 'em all Things
richly to enjoy, pertaining both to Life and Godliness! That when the LORD
comes to Judgment, and fills our Firmament with his dazzling tremendous Glory;
and the Rich and Poor stand together before HIM, and the Books are opened; it
may be then read and said -- I know thy Works of Righteousness and Charity!
Come ye blessed of my FATHER, inherit the KINGDOM, prepared for you from the
Foundation of the World; for I was hungry and ye gave me Meat, etc. For verily
I say unto you, in as much as ye did it unto One of the least of these my
Brethren, ye did it unto ME.

That many, many of the High and Low together, from every worshipping Assembly
in this great Town; may then meet and share in this BENEDICTION, and be unto
each other, and to their faithful Ministers for a Crown of Rejoicing, is the
Prayer of him who is with great and sincere Esteem,

SIR, Your very humble Servant, Benjamin Colman.
Boston, January 10th, 1742, 3.
The GLORY of GOD In the FIRMAMENT of his Power.
PSALM CL. 1. Praise ye the LORD! Praise GOD in his Sanctuary, PRAISE HIM IN
THE FIRMAMENT OF HIS POWER.

SO the Book of Psalms ends; so the last of the great Hallelujah The five last
Psalms are so called.
begins. The Call to praise GOD is here loud and trebled; as Isaiah and
afterward John the beloved Disciple, saw and heard the Seraphims cry before
the Throne three Times, -- Holy, holy, holy -- Isa. vi. Rev. (...).


The Reason of my bringing you these Words this Morning is, because we have
again finished the reading the Book of Psalms to you in our Lord's Day Morning
Exercise: And another Reason is, because the Providence of GOD order us this
Afternoon to read to you the Order of the GOVERNMENT for a Day of PRAISE TO
GOD, our yearly Thanksgiving-Day. -- O might our Days and Years and Life (...)
and Eternity go on in Acts of Adoration, Thanksgivings and Praises in the
highest.

We should be daily praising GOD in our Houses, with our Families and in our
Closets; but Praises to GOD must yet be more solemn, public and reverend in the
Assemblies of Sion, in the In Caelo, procul dubio; says Calvin, in the
Celestial Sanctuary, Bp. Patrick.
SANCTUARIES of GOD.

And because it is in and by the FIRMAMENT which GOD has spread over and around
us, that we behold his eternal Power in his Works and read it in his Word, and
live, move and have our Being in GOD; and because we could neither see or hear
any Thing of GOD without this Firmament surrounding us; nor could Day and
Night, Heat and Cold, Summer or Winter, Seed-Time and Harvest be known to us
without it; nor the LORD GOD in his Judgments of Blasting and Mildew, Famine
and Pestilences, Lightning and Thunder, Earthquake and Inundation; therefore we
are well directed and required in my Text more especially to praise him for
this, without which there could be neither Speech, Voice nor Hearing: "Praise
Him in the Firmament of his Power.

The Firmament in made for Motion, Sight and Sound, Life and Breathing: " Let
every Thing that has Breath praise GOD in it and for it; as is said after my
Text. And how could a Book of Psalms for Man on Earth end more properly and
comprehensively? Let the Firment ring and resound with Praises to our GOD and
KING! This Universe is his, which our Eyes look through; Sing ye Praises with
Understanding: Praise him for his mighty Acts, praise him according to his
excellent Greatness; praise him on the high sounding Cymbals.

You see, my dear Brethren and Children, whither I am about to lead you! Into
what immense Spaces and Circles whither the Eagles Wing or Eye can never reach!
-- But how shall a feeble Mind, in a Body broken with Age, bear you away into
the Heights above? And down into the Depths below? through Systems ten thousand
Million Times wider than the Earth, and broader than the Sea! that I may not
therefore, lose my self and you in this unsearchable and impassable Tract of
Ether, wherein our Sun and Planets, Earth and Moon roll Day and Night, Summer
and Winter; and through which the fixed Stars twinkle and close our Sight; I will
keep to the sure WORD OF GOD, the BIBLE in my Hand, and from that form my
Discourse of the DIVINE POWER in the FIRMAMENT of Heaven, and of the PRAISES
due from us to the ALMIGHTY in the Contemplation hereof.

Give me therefore your patient and raised Attention while I, 1. Consider the
Firmament as the Work of GOD: 2. The Power of GOD it it: And 3. The Praises we
should render him on this Account.

I. I am to show that the Firmament is GOD'S, his Work; his Creation, his
Creature; for he made it; it did not expand it self; GOD stretched it out, and
holds it in its wondrous Being; with all the mighty Worlds within the vast
Circumference. Some of these Globes our Eyes can reach, and Art can measure in
an imperfect Manner; and what more and greater are beyond our Sight, we may
imagine, but can never know in these mortal Bodies. -- But whatever this Space
be; which we call Firmament, or whatever Worlds like this Earth of ou be
contained in it; Moses has let us know from GOD, that the LORD himself and
alone made it, on the second Day, by the Word of his Power; as he did the Light
before it, and the Seas and dry Land after it; For so we read, Genesis 1.6. And
GOD said, "let there be a Firmament, and GOD called the Firmament Heaven.

The Word which we translate Firmament signifies Extension; and a vast
Extension truly is the visible Heaven; that Region of Air which appears to our
Eyes as a Covering or Curtain stretched over us; which is the Psalmists humble
Representation, in the 104. Psalm. -- It is properly divided by us into the
lower and upper Region. The lower is out Atmosphere, a Body of grosser Air
cleaving to our Earth as a Garment, and moving with it; in which we breathe and
move, the Birds fly and sing, the Vapors rise and fall, the Clouds roll, the
Dews and Rains descend, the Lightning and Thunder terrify us: And in the higher
Regions of this Atmosphere there are much more terrible Metcors (as the Learned
Probably that extraordinary Phaenominon, or Stream and Explosion of Fire, seen
and heard by so many Towns lately in Connecticut for near a hundred Miles
Length, on the 24th of November; was one of these Meteors of the upper Region,
whereof Mr. Whiston I remember says, -- "That if they should descend into our
Atmosphere they would destory whole Provinces together.
tells us) which it is happy for the Inhabitants of the Earth, that they are at
such Distance from them.

The Firmament of Ether rises from the Bound of this our Atmosphere unto the
Sun and fixed Stars; Ether is that subtle Matter or Medium, much finer and
rarer than Air, which commencing from the Limits of our Atmosphere, possesses
the whole heavenly Space. -- The Learned cannot conceive the largest Part of
the Creation should be perfectly void and therefore fill it with a Species of
Matter under this Denomination of Ether, or Ethereal.
an unknown and inconceivable Space; of which David (inspired from on High) has
taught us to sing, Psalm viii. ^, 4. When I consider thy Heavens, the Work of
thy Fingers, the Moon and Stars which thou have ordained; what is Man that thou
art mindful of him? And the Son of Man that thou visitest him? And again Psalm
xix. 1, -- 4. The Heavens declare the Glory of GOD, the Firmament shows his
handy Work: Day unto Day utters Speech, Night unto Night shows Knowledge;
there is no Speech nor Language where their Voice is not heard; their Line is
gone out through all the Earth, and their Words to the End of the World.

The Height of these Heavens (says a devout Expositor) may mind us of GOD'S
Supremacy; the Purity and Brightness of them of his Holiness and Glory; the
Vastness of them of his Immensity, and their Influence of his universal
Providence, and infinite Communications to us.

But it is the POWER of GOD more especially that I am to consider in this
Expansion of Ether and Air around us. Wherefore,

II. This POWER of GOD in his FIRMAMENT (which who can understand?) commands
now our reverend Attention: -- But how little a Portion have we heard of it.
Job xxvi. 14.

And First, The immeasurable Extent and Comprehension of the Firmament, the
Height and Depth, Length and Breadth of it, speaks the infinite Power of GOD:
Who with a Word's speaking could spread abroad such an Expanse around so many
Spheres and Worlds, which are themselves of vast Dimensions, and yet are all
incircled and contained therein. Great is our LORD, and of great POWER, his
Understanding is infinite, Psalm. cxlvii. 5.

When Moses wrote of GOD'S Power in the Sea, he says -- "And GOD created great
Whales; they being in Bulk the greatest of any moving Creature that has Life:
How much more may we admire the great Power of GOD in the Compass of the Sea it
self? And in that of the Firmament, in Comparison whereof the Sea is but as a
Hand-Breadth. Psalm. civ. 1, 2. O LORD my GOD thou art very great; who
stretchest out the Heavens as a Curtain, who coverest thy self with Light as
with a Garment! Job xxvi. 7. He stretches out the North over the empty Space;
and hangs the Earth upon nothing. And thus are the Sun, Moon, Planets and
every Star hung in their various Distances: heavy Bodies, as they all are, yet
they float in Air, and keep their Circles.

Very grand and noble are the Words of Elihu to Job; but according to the The
ancient Philosophers fancied the Heavens to be a solid Body and that the Stars
were fastened therein; and this was perhaps the Notion that Elihu had thereof;
the seventy Interpreters accordingly translate the Hebrew Word, the Firm or
Solid. Mons. Saurin p. 3. -- "Yet many of the Ancients allowed with the Moderns
that the Firmament is a fluid Body; though they that gave it the Denomination of
Firmament, must doubtless have taken it for a solid One. Chambers Cycloped.
old Philosophy of his Day and of many later Ages; Job xxxvii. 18. Have thou
with him spread out the Sky, which is STRONG and as a Molten Looking-glass.
This Simile brings to Mind a fine Thought of the Philosopher Plato; That GOD
made every Part of the Universe with the same Ease and Swiftness, as the Images
of the Things are represented by a Looking-glass. -- " He spoke and it was
done, he commanded and it stood firm.

Secondly, The Power of GOD is glorious in the Consistency and Strength of this
Fluid, which is so much rarer than Water, and yet bears about mighty Clouds
with vast Burdens of Water in them; which they distill abundantly in the great
and small Rai^ of his Strength: And although the Fires of GOD break through the
midst of these Rains with mighty Force and ^^^ar, yet neither is the Atmosphere
nor the Cloud it self rent; there being an The Elasticity of the Air is the
Force wherewith it dilates it self, upon the Removal of that which Compresses
it, returning to its former Degree of Expansion: Whence it follows that it is
equal to the Weight of the whole incumbent Atmosphere. Chambers.
Elasticity or Spring in the Air which insensibly yields to Bodies in their
Motion, and yet strongly closes round them and holds them in their Motion;
which is the wondrous Power of GOD exerted in it through all Spaces; but to us
most sensibly (and yet insensibly) in our own Atmosphere, which cleaves to our
Earth and moves with it, even as our Skin or Clothes with our Bodies; by which
Means we are insensible of the diurnal and annual Motion of our Earth;
notwithstanding the Velocity and Force thereof. -- The Pillars of it seem to
tremble in the furious stormy Season, and the Atmosphere appears at Times to be
rending asunder; but GOD has fastened the Foundations of both alike in his own
Power, and they are preserved. The fair Weather returns out of the North, and
with GOD is terrible Majesty. Job xxxvii. 22. All is calm, and bright, and soft
and easy again, though but just now the Deep boiled, the Trees rent, and the very
Houses seemed to reel before the great Wind, of God's Strength. Amos v. 8. Seek
him that makes the Stars and Orion, and turns the Shadow of Death into the
Morning, and makes the Day dark with Night! Who calls for the Waters of the Sea
(calls 'em up into the Air by the gentle Beams of the Sun) and then pours 'em
out on the Face of the Earth; the LORD is is his Name: He builds his Stories
in the Heavens (or in the FIRMAMENT) and calls for the Waters of the Sea; the
LORD is his Name. Amos ix. 6.

Thirdly, The Power of GOD is seen in this Firmament of Air about us, in that
our Life and the Life of all Animals; "Beasts and all Cattle, creeping Things
and flying Fowl," is sustained and upheld by this Provision for their common
Breath. We and all the Creatures round about us live by Breathing; we breathe
in and out the Air, which is therefore truly called the Breath of Life;
breathed by GOD (as Moses tells us) into the Nostril of Man in the Day wherein
he was created. Genesis ii. 7. And the more easily Life is continued by this
constant Respiration, so much the more wonderful is the Power of GOD therein;
who does the greatest and most beneficial Things to and for his Creatures with
the greatest Ease. -- We breathe without the least Pains or Labor, with
perfect Ease and Pleasure from Day to Day in a State of Health; without
thinking of the Breath we draw. The soft Air is sweet and cool to us, The
Breath of the ALMIGHTY which gives us Life, Job xxxiii. 4. i. e. The Power of
the ALMIGHTY is in it, together with his Goodness; and when HE gathers to
himself the Spirit and the Breath, all Flesh expire.

O the Power and Goodness of GOD to us in that Air we breathe in! It is the
Firmament of his Power about us, which holds our Souls in Life; for Breath and
Spirit stay and go together; Psalm. civ. 29. Thou take away their Breath, they
die and return to their Dust. cxlvi. 4. His Breath goes forth, he returns to
his Earth.

Fourthly, The Firmament is the great Power of GOD, in respect of the easy and
mighty Motion that Bodies have therein; the greater and the less, higher or
heavier, animate or inanimate.

1. MAN moves upon the Ground with Ease and Safety, and so the Creatures put
under his Feet, by reason of the Equilibrium or Balance in the Air, without
which he and they would fall and be crushed to Pieces every Step they take. --
So it is that GOD girds us with Strength and makes our Way perfect, as we read
in the xviii. Psalm: He makes our Feel like Hinds Feet, and hold us in our high
Places: The Sailors climb the tall Masts and run upon the Ropes; the Builders
on the Tops of Houses and on the naked Rafters, and are safe; Also he teaches
our Hands to War, and a Bow of Steel is broken by our Arms; his Gentleness
makes us great and his right Hand holds us up; he enlarges our Steps under us,
and our Feet do not slip. It is all owing to the Force and Compression of the
Elastic Air aroung us, which is the Power of GOD in his Firmament. -- The slow
Ox treads firm by Reason of this, while it draws the Plough or Cart; the swift
Race-Horse treads strong and sure as he seems to fly through the Air: The Deer,
Hare and Hound alike owe their Speed to this; and so do the Birds on their
Wing, even all the Fowl of Heaven; and none more than the strong Hawk and the
Eagle.

2. In this Firmament of God's Power the Vapors and Clouds have their Motions;
the Dews also and the Rains; "The small and great Rains of GOD's Strength"; his
Treasures of Snow and Hail, his Lightnings and Thunders; his Tempest and
Whirlwind which takes us as Stubble; the LORD has his Way in it.

The Thunder of his Power who can understand? And who is not at Times struck
into a sacred Astonishment at it? When the Fire of his Lightning sometimes
strikes and melts a Cannon in a Moment of Time! At this (as Elihu speaks) Our
Hearts may well tremble and be moved out of their Place! hear attentively the
Noise of his Voice, and the Sound that goes out of his Mouth! He directs it
under the whole Heaven, and his Lightning to the Ends of the Earth! He thunders
marvelously, with the Voice of his Excellency. Job xxxvii.

Thus was the Power of GOD seen and felt in the Fire and Brimstone which he
rained from Heaven on Sodom; and so in the Fire and Hail that poured down and
ran along the Ground in the Day of Egypt.

3. Again, How terrible does the Firmament of GOD's Power appear to us in
Storms at Sea, which toss up the Waters to the Sky! Or in Storms at Land, which
blow down our Houses! As in the Day of the Sons and Daughters of Job, when met
to rejoice together in the Bounties of their GOD. -- How dreadful looks the
Power of GOD in our Air in those Descriptions which He himself has given us of
it! Psalm xviii. 8, -- 16. There went up a Smoke out of his Nostrils, and Fire
out of his Mouth devoured; Coals were kindled -- it! He bowed the Heavens also
and came down and Darkness was under his Feet! He rode upon a Cherub and did
fly, yea he flow upon the Wings of the Wind! He made Darkness his secret Place,
his Pavilion round about him were dark Waters and thick Clouds of the Sky! At
the Brightness that was before him his thick Clouds passed; Hailstones and
Coals of Fire! Then the Channels of the Waters were seen, and the Foundations
of the World were discovered! At thy Rebuke O LORD, at the Blast of the Breath
of thy Nostrils! And Psalm xcvii. 4, 5, 6. His Lightnings enlighten the World,
the Earth sees and trembles! the Hills melt like Wax at the Presence of the
LORD! the Heavens declare his Righteousness, and all the People see his Glory!

4. In this Firmament of Power there are other Fires, which GOD kindles and
consumes us by: pestilential Vapors float in our Air, which we breathe in, and
they kindle Flames within us, which burn us to Death: -- Drought, Blasting and
Mildew also come from too much Heat or Cold, Dryness or Moisture in the Air, to
famish us and the Creatures about us, as it pleases GOD to order it: These are
the Power of GOD in judging a People for their Sins.

5. Out of this WOMB also comes the Frost and Ice, which seals up the Hand of
every Man: The Waters are as it were changed into Stone, and who can stand
before GOD's Cold? Job. xxxviii. 33. Can thou loose these Bands of Orion?
Can thou set the Dominion of them in the Earth? Read the Power of GOD in his
Firmament in the Vial of his Wrath; Rev. xvi. 17, -- 21. And the seventh Angel
poured out his Vial into the Air, -- and there were Voices and Thunders and
Lightnings, and a great Earthquake! And great Babylon came into Remembrance
before GOD, to give her the Cup of the Wine of the Fierceness of his Wrath! And
every Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found; and there fell upon
Men a great Hail out of Heaven, every Stone about the Weight of a Talent; and
Men blasphemed GOD because of the Plague of the Hail; for the Plague thereof
was exceeding great. -- What a terrifying Power is this Vengeance of GOD in
these lower Regions of our (...)? from the Commotion and Rage of Winds and
Vapors! -- And yet I must ascend

6. Into the higher Regions of the Firmament, to and above the Moon and Planets
in their regular and certain Courses, fulfilling their Years about the Sun in
Circles proper to themselves, as our Earth observes its own! And to the Comets
if we could, every now and then showing themselves unto us with their Blaze, in
Courses which we know little or nothing of! -- What mighty Bodies are these,
and how mighty Motions! for Swiftness, Constancy, Order and Use! And how
powerful the Gravitation, Attraction, The Attraction of Gravity, found in all
Bodies, in Proportion to the Quantities of Matter, and the Squares of their
Distances, is the Power whereby the Planets, primary and secondary, as well as
the Comets, we suppose, are retained in their Orbits: Thus with utmost Ease, by
the Wisdom and Power of GOD, each heavenly Body performs all its great Motion:
And without such a Principle (given by GOD) our new Philosophy teaches us that
Motion had never been, and would soon perish.
Magnetism, or what shall we call their unknown mutual Influence on each other!
which we have abundant Reason to believe, but can never explain. -- These
Motions of the Celestial Orbs, and of our Earth in Harmony and Union with them,
are the proper Music of the Spheres, (no Doubt the very Meaning of these Words
in ancient Poets or Philosophers) and it is the great Power of GOD.

So I have lost my self in leading you through the Firmament of GOD's Power, --
and now that it may be wholly to the Glory of his GREAT NAME, and to the
spiritual eternal Good of our Souls; I pass on in the third and last Place, to
say

III. How GOD is to be PRAISED BY US in and for this his Power and Glory in the
Firmament.

And if it were not such as it is, and there were not such an Excellency of
Power in it; we could not move our Tongue, nor open a Lip to praise Him! We
could not form the least Word we speak or Note we sing in his Sanctuary! It is
because we have such an Air to breathe in, that we can lift our Voice on high,
and make one Sound together, in the Praises of our GOD. -- The Air is made for
Sound; and to be sure therefore first of all to make the high PRAISES of GOD to
be heard among us and from us.

1. The Work it self praises GOD; speaks his Eternal Power and GODHEAD, and
shows his excellent Greatness. Without it, none of the Works of GOD could be
beheld by us; for it is made for a Medium of Vision, for the Passage of Light
to our Eyes; and so Day after Day utters this Speech, calling on us to awake up
our Glory and not be silent. The Firmament shows his Handiwork, (the daily
Operations of his Hand) and new Matter of Praise breaks in upon us every
Morning and passes before us every Moment. -- We call in the Assistance of our
Glasses, the wondrous Teliescope, and through mighty Distances espy new Worlds,
which give us new Calls to adore and lift up our Voices in new Songs; Psalm.
cxlviii. 3, 4, 5. Praise ye Him Sun and Moon, praise him all ye Stars of Light!
Praise Him ye Heaven of Heavens, and ye Waters that be above the Heavers! For
he commanded and they were created; he has also established them for ever and
ever, by a Decree which shall not pass.

2. The dumb Creatures praise GOD in their Manner, for the Firmament which they
breathe and feed in. "The wild Ass snuffeth up the hind at large! Who has sent
him out free? Who has loosed his Bonds, and made the Wilderness his House, the
barren Land his chosen Dwelling? Job xxxix. GOD takes the Praise of it to
Himself! A Praise which stupid Man would scarce have thought of. He scorneth
the Multitude of the City, nor regards the Crying of the Driver: The Range of
the Mountains is his Pasture, and he searches after every green Thing. He
feeds upon a thousand pleasant Hills and rich Meadows; while in his Eyes the
curious Botanist is poring dully, though in ours wisely and diligently, into the
Root and Stalk, Leaf and Flower of every Vegetable and all their Virtues; that
he may render to his GOD the Praises of them all.

But leaving the wild Ass to range on, let us look at home, on the generous
Horse at our Door. It is the Firmament of GOD's POWER that has given the Horse
his Strength, and clothed his Neck with Thunder: The Glory of his Nostrils is
terrible! He paws in the Valley, and mocks at Fear, nor turns back from the
Sword: He swallows the Ground with Fierceness and Rage, smells the Battle afar
off, and answers to the shouting and Thunder of the Captains. Job. xxxix. 24,
25.

So the " Hawk flies by the Wisdom of GOD, who has prepared the Air for its
strong Wings, which she stretches to the North and South; as if the whole
Firmament were her own. The Eagle also mounts up, and makes her Nest on high.
GOD displays the Power of his Firmament in these Instances, ver. 26, 27. -- And
in the two next Chapters the LORD magnifies to Man, for his Abasement before
Him, his Behemoth on the Land, and his Leviathan in the Sea; which are among
the chief of his Ways; for the one trusts that he can drink up the Rivers, and
the other spouts up the Seas against the Skies. -- Nor is there a strong Beast
on Land, or Fish in Water, that could stretch a Synew or a Fin, if the Element
of Air did not cleave around and compress our Terraqueous Globe. "The
Compression of the Air, by its own Weight, is exceeding great* As 1. is to
13000 (says our new Philosophy) so is the common Air we breathe and move in
compressed by the Weight of the super-incumbent Atmosphere; which is computed
to be 17 French Leagues in Height.


So has GOD spoken to Man once out of the Whirlwind, and demanded the Praises
of his inferior Creatures; and he has it: Psalm cxlviii. 7, 8, 9. Praise the
LORD from the Earth, ye Dragons and all Deeps, Mountains and all Hills,
fruitful Trees and all Cedars, Beasts and all Cattle, creeping Things and
flying Fowl.

3. But MAN, MAN -- he is the Creature here below, formed for giving Praise to
GOD. Man's Mind and Eye and Ear, his Mouth and Breath, his Tongue and Lips, his
Hand and Knee, are made for Worship and Adoration, Praise and Thanksgiving. --
His Eye fees through the Universe, his Mind should contemplate every Divine
Perfection in all he sees Mind and he should awake up his Glory, his Tongue, to
give Praise and not be silent. His Hands also (says my Context) are made to
praise upon the Psaltery and Harp, the stringed Instruments and Organs: His
Feet also in the Dance of old, as the King of Israel before the Ark of the
LORD. -- Man's Body is made to stand and bow, kneel and lie prostrate before
the THRONE. We have Eyes and Hands and Voice to lift up, with our Hearts, unto
GOD in the Heavens. -- And for our Sakes, Angels too are represented as having
Tongues and Voices, and have been heard giving Glory to GOD on High. They pass
swiftly also from World to World when GOD sends them, as he did Gabriel down to
Daniel. The Dream of Jacob was a true Vision, the Ladder which he saw from
Earth to Heaven, and the Angels of GOD upon it, descending and ascending. Yea
they run and return through the Firmament as a Flash of Light, and are all the
while praising GOD: They rest not Day or Night from giving Glory and Honor and
Thanks unto Him that sits on the Throne, and lives for ever and ever.

To shut up all, the THRONE OF THE MOST HIGH is represented to us as above the
Firmament. There is his holy Habitation, his holy Dewlling Place; from whence
he looks down on us, " his Eyes behold the Children of Men. And thither we lift
up our Hearts, Eyes, Hands and Voice, to praise, extol and honor the King of
Heaven. -- There too is the high Throne of the ONE MEDIATOR between GOD and
Man, JESUS CHRIST; in the Glory of the ONLY-BEGOTTEN OF THE FATHER. Read the
Vision, Ezekiel. i. 26, 27, 28. And above the Firmament was the likeness of a
Throne of Sapphire-Stone, and the Appearance of the likeness of a MAN upon it;
with a Brightness round about, as the Appearance of the Bow that is in the
Cloud in the Day of Rain. -- The Vision which Ezekiel had, and relates through
that Chapter, is I think best explained by the FIRMAMENT in its sensible and
literal Glory: He saw the many mighty Wheels (or rather Orbs and Globes)
therein rolling on their four Sides; and rolling on, without returning (or any
retrograde Motion) under the POWER of the Ever-living ETERNAL SPIRIT! Their
Rings are high and dreadful and full of Eyes; the Perfection of Wisdom and
Knowledge gives 'em their Course and Force; and away they go whithersoever the
living SPIRIT commands them; for the Spirit of Life is in the Wheels; i. e.
directs and sustains the Globes of the Universe in all their Circles.

Would you then, my Hearers, before your bodily Eyes are closed in Death, look
up for a Vision of the Glory of CHRIST your Redeemer, to see all POWER in
Heaven and Earth committed to Him! Would you wish to see his Imperial Seat
already, before he comes in the Glory of the FATHER, in the Clouds of Heaven at
the last Day? Look up then, with an Eye of Faith, into the open Firmament, and
see your SAVIOR in every shining Orb on high! HE it is that lives and was
dead, and is alive for evermore; and has all these Systems in his Hand and
under his Feet! HE who in the Beginning was the WORD, was with GOD, and was
GOD, and without Him was not any Thing made; nor is there any Thing yet upheld
and guided in the perpetual Motions which we every where behold, without Him:
In HIM Life was and is, and the Life is the Light of Men; and the Light shines
in Darkness, and the Darkness comprehends it not; save by Divine Revelation
to us, and Illumination in us. John. i. 1, -- 5.

You would not have forgiven me, my Christian Brethren, if I had preached to
you from any of the Works of GOD, and not led you to JESUS. Glory was given Him
in the highest, when He came down from Heaven to Earth, GOD MANIFEST IN FLESH!
And when he ascended on high, far above all Heavens, GOD went up with a Shout;
the LORD with the Sound of the Trumpet! sing Praises to GOD, sing Praises. --
And the Day is coming, (the dreadful Day to the wicked, unbelieving,
disobedient and impenitent; but the glad and triumphant Day to the Saints of
the MOST HIGH) when our Firmament shall be in a Blaze of Glory, on the second
Coming of the LORD! When behold He comes in Clouds, and every Eye shall see
Him, and they also that pierced Him, and shall wail because of Him! The LORD
Himself shall then descend with a Shout, with the Voice of the Archangel and
the Trump of GOD; and those that remain alive shall be caught up to meet the
LORD in the Air; the Dead shall hear the Voice of the SON OF GOD and live. -- O
with what a Blaze of Glory (I say again) will our Firmament then be filled,
when all that have lived or shall yet live on our Earth shall see the great
white THRONE, and HIM that sits on it, from whose Face the Earth and Heaven
will appear to flee away; and the dead, small and great, shall stand before
Him, and the Books be opened, and all be judged by the Book of Conscience and
of Scripture! -- O what a new Scene will it be, both to the Godly and to the
Wicked, awaking from their long Sleep in the Dust with their restored Eyes of
Flesh, in spiritual Bodies, to see their SAVIOR and JUDGE enthroned, and ten
thousand Times ten thousand shining Angels filling the Firmament! What a
Firmament of POWER will it then appear! And they that are wise shall shine as
the Brightness of it, and they that turn others to Righteousness as the Stars
for ever and ever. -- But at these Words Daniel was bid to finish, and seal the
Book till the Time come. The Day will reveal it self, but no Words can
represent what it will be.

Yet if your Patience can admit of it, I will add three or four Words of
further devout Address to the pure Minds of the religious, and to the evil
Consciences of Sinners, from Things seen and felt already by us.

And first, you see (my Brethren) that the Firmament is a sacred open Book of
GOD, wherein we should be daily reading the Glories and Perfections of the
eternal GODHEAD; that we may in a Measure become Christian Philosophers, and
the more devout Worshippers.

SPACE is so mysterious and inexplicable a Thing in Nature, that Men of Genius
and Philosophy have been ready to deify it and say it is GOD himself See the
first of Dr. WATTS's Philosophical Essays; a fair Enquiry concerning SPACE,
whether it be something or nothing, GOD or a Creature.
, because immense and never to be searched out. But for the same Reason every
Thing about us might be deify'd; as many of the least and lowest have been, as
well as the Hosts of Heaven, by the brutish Sons of Men. The most simple Idea
of SPACE seems the true and most intelligible, that it is the open Volume of
Nature, in which we should early begin to read the Name of GOD, and read on in
it as long as we live, and more and more adore Him in his INCOMPREHENSIBLENESS.

After all the Revelation that GOD had made of HIMSELF unto Job and his pious
Friends; after all the Work of GOD wrought in them, and their Life of Communion
with Him; yet at last he led them together into his Firmament, as the high
School for their further Improvement. GOD spoke to them out of the Whirlwind,
concerning his POWER and sovereign Dominion, and they fell adoring in Silence
and Self-abhorrence; Now my Eye sees THEE, wherefore I abhor my self, and
repent in Dust and Ashes.

Your Bibles, my dear Hearers; and the SPIRIT OF GOD within you, you Children
of the MOST HIGH; direct and teach you to be daily reading through the vast
Roll of Nature, written within and without, the Glories of the DIVINE MAJESTY.

Never think therefore that your Ministers wander from the WORD and SPIRIT of
GOD in their preaching to you, nor from the Work of Grace within you, but are
wisely serving it, while they show you the Praises of GOD, which his visible
Works demand from you.

HE who spoke on Earth, so as never Man did, spoke also of HIMSELF and of the
FATHER by the Pen of Solomon, to the Church of his Firstborn in all Times to
come, Prove. viii. 27. When he prepared the Heavens I was there; when he set a
Compass on the Face of the Deep! When he established the Clouds above, and gave
to the Sea his Decree.

You see here, that the Firmament is the Book and School of JESUS CHRIST, and
he sends us to it to learn respecting himself; and to Him, who is ascended
above all Heavens, we must be looking through it.

Secondly, While GOD continues us in these animal dying Bodies, we must
devoutly consider GOD's Firmament as the great MEDIUM and Instrument of his
conveying to our World (and to what other Worlds we know not, but have Reason
to think the same respecting many others) his immense Benefits and Bounties of
a temporal and earthly Kind, for the Preservation of our Lives, and for our
daily and yearly Supplies with all the Necessaries and Comforts of them. For in
vain had Land and Sea been made without a Firmament; for there could have been
neither ploughing or sailing without it; nor Business, Food, Health, Strength
and Pleasure; no Seed-time or Harvest, Day or Night, Summer or Winter; no Grass
for the Cattle nor Herb for Man; no Smell or Taste or Appetite for Corn, Wine
and Oil: in as much as the whole Sustenance of every sensitive Creature depends
upon this potent and beneficent Firmament; by which GOD holds our Soul in Life;
by which also he judges the People: For (as has been said before) neither could
there be sultry Heat or chilling Cold, stagnating Calms or furious Storms,
Pestilence and Famine, Whirlwinds or Earthquakes; no present Good or Evil come
to us, without a Firmament surrounding us. Let Elihu first, and then David
teach us how to adore and give Glory to GOD for this perpetual Profusion of
Beneficence to so many Worlds besides ours. Job xxxvi. 24, -- 33. " Remember
that thou magnify his Work which Men behold! Every Man may see it, Men may
behold it afar off! Behold GOD is great and we know him not; neither can the
Number of his Years be searched out! For he makes small the Drops of Water,
they pour down Rain according to the Vapor thereof; which the Clouds do drop
and distill upon Man abundantly! Also who can understand the Spreadings of the
Clouds, or the Noise of his Tabernacle? Behold he spreads his Light upon it,
it covers (reaches down to) the Bottom of the Sea! By the Clouds also he
judges the People, and by them he gives Meat in Abundance; etc. Psalm. lxviii.
ulz. " Sing unto GOD, ye Kingdoms of the Earth, O sing Praises to the LORD,
Selah! To HIM that rides upon the Heavens of Heavens which were of old! Lo he
does send forth his Voice, and that a mighty Voice! Ascribe ye STRENGTH unto
GOD; his Excellency is over Israel, and his Strength is in the Clouds! O GOD,
thou art terrible out of thy holy Places; the GOD of Israel is he who gives
Strength and Power to his People! blessed be GOD.

Thirdly, Let what has been said of the visible Firmament lead us into the
Contemplation of GOD's spiritual Kingdom, both of Grace and Judgment, visible
and invisible, present and future.

The Word and SPIRIT of GOD will justify us in this Transition; For 1. The
visible spiritual Kingdom of Grace, in the Church of GOD on Earth, is
represented to us by a glorious Firmament of Power and Mercy. And 2. As to the
invisible World, if Hell be without a Firmament, a Firmament of Glory will be
found in Heaven.

First then, the visible Kingdom of Grace, in the Church of GOD on Earth, is
represented to us by a glorious Firmament of Power and Mercy. This has been in
part shown before, but I have yet to add.

CHRIST in his Person, Offices and Benefits is in the holy Scriptures declared
to be the Light of the World, the Sun of Righteousness, arising over Souls with
Healing under the Rays.

Then if we go on to contemplate the Church of the Sanctified, she is
represented by a Woman clothed with the Sun, with the Moon and Stars under her
Feet, and on her Head a Crown of twelve Stars. Revel. xii. 1.

And if we go on to consider them that minister to the Heirs of Salvation,
Angels or Men; there is a Ladder for the one from Heaven to Earth, whereon they
descend unto and return from the Sons of Men; or they have Wings to fly down
swiftly: -- And as for the other, Men whom GOD has set in his Church from the
Beginning, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers,
-- these are STARS in the right Hand of CHRIST: Revel. i.

Or if we go on to speak of the WORD they preach, it is as a Light that shines
in a dark Place: or if we speak of the Gifts and Graces of the SPIRIT in 'em,
or exercised in their Ministry, these render 'em so many burning and shining
Lights to and in the Churches to whom they minister: And finally, the Work of
Grace begun and increasing in the Soul of every private Christian, and
exhibited in their holy Life and Conversation, makes them LIGHT IN THE LORD;
holding forth the Power and Efficacy of the Word of Life, and making them shine
as Lights in the World; in Family-Order, in Church Order, in
Sabbath-Sanctification which belongs to both; and this " Path of the Just
shines on unto the perfect Day.

On these Accounts it is that the SPIRIT says unto the Churches, "Arise, shine,
for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the LORD is risen upon thee! and the
Nations shall come to thy Light, and Kings to the Brightness of thy Rising. --
And this is the Firmament of Glory in the visible Church on Earth; "wherein
with open Face beholding as in a Glass the Glory of the LORD, Souls are changed
from Glory to Glory by the SPIRIT OF THE LORD.

Secondly, Let us now look into the future ETERNAL WORLD, and see what we find
in Scripture, or in the Nature of the Things revealed, of a FIRMAMENT therein.

O what will Heaven and what Hell be hereafter, to saved or damned Souls! in
what Ether of Light or Cavern of Smoke and Gloom shall we be, when we must
breathe in this Air no longer! -- As the contemplative, learned, philosophical
Mr. NORRIS, a Master among us of the Ideal World, while with us here below,
Norris his Miscellanies. p. 24. 3. Edit.
sang to himself of dying and departing hence, -- It must be done my Soul, but
it is a strange,
A dismal and mysterious Change,
When thou shall leave this Tenement of Clay,
And to an unknown Somewhere wing away;
When Time shall be Eternity, and thou
Shall be thou know not what, and live thou know not how!
Amazing State, no Wonder that we dread
To think of Death, or view the Dead.


1. The Power, Wrath and Vengeance of GOD will cast and drive away the Ungodly,
the Impenitently Wicked into some Void or Chaos, some dark and dismal desolate
Space, "never more to see Light! Some Cave of Horror, and Blackness of
Darkness, some bottomless Pit! as in the Bowels of this Earth of ours, no more
to see the Sun Moon or Stars; which the contemplative Mind has here it may be
viewed with a raised Pleasure and some transient Elevations of Devotion! but
now no more to return to one Gleam of the desired Light, nor to see Man any
more with the INHABITANTS of the World Isai. xxxviii. 15. Iterumque ad tarda
reverti Corpora; quae Lucis miseris tam dira Cupido!
! and least of all in worshipping Assemblies.

O the dire Remembrance then of a past Day of Grace, and past Means of
Salvation, and despised Sabbaths! O dire abiding Sense of a lost Heaven of
Light and Glory, and returning Thoughts of Others in the Bosom of Abraham! A
Dives in this Torment may well be represented ( Luke xvi. 24.) as raising a
Shriek loud enough to pierce through many of our Firmaments; even to reach the
Ears of the Blessed in their caelestial Rest: But not one Drop of Mercy from
those Heavens of Love for Souls in the Gulf below.

O Sinner think in Time, what Kind of Firmament the Lake of Fire, the second
Death can admit of! where the Smoke of the Torment ascends for ever! -- We
know that if a City or Town be on Fire here, and the Flames prevail but through
a few Streets together, the very Firmament over us disappears! The Sun it self
is darkened, and the Moon turns into Blood; the Stars seem to go out or fall,
and the Powers of Heaven to shake! the Skies seem to dissolve, and the Elements
to melt with fervent Heat Matthew. xxiv. 29. 2 Pet. iii. 10, 12.
. Much less can the Oven or Pit of Flames below afford a Firmament to the
Spirits there shut up! Tophet is ordained of old for King and Subject it is
prepared: GOD has made it deep and large! the Pile thereof is Fire and much
Wood; the Breath of the LORD like a Stream of Brimstone kindles it. Isai. xxx.
ult. -- But on the contrary,

2. GOD has revealed to us a Celestial and everlasting FIRMAMENT of Glory and
Blessedness for the Righteous; for renewed, penitent, believing and obedient
Sinners; purified by his Grace to see his Face in Light unapprochable: Matthew.
v. 8.

The new Heavens and the new Earth, which we read of Revel. xxi. give us a new
Idea of a World without Sea; and consequently without a Cloud or Vapor to
obscure and darken it, or any turbulent Air or Wind to agitate it; for, whence
should there a Vapor, Cloud or Wind arise where there is no Sea? -- And if
this be good Philosophy, no Wonder that the next Emblem of the caelestial State
is, " a holy City, New-Jerusalem, descending from GOD, with his Glory on it;
its Walls of Jasper, its Gates Pearls, its Streets Gold, all transparent! What
Firmament now can this City of GOD admit of? There can be no Need of any Sun or
Moon to shine on it; for the Glory of GOD does lighten it, and the LAMB is the
Light thereof! and the Saved of all Nations walk in his Light! The LORD GOD
gives them LIGHT, and they reign for ever and ever.

The Sun of Righteousness is fixed there in a perpetual Meridian. No Rainbow is
there about the THRONE, for that would suppose an Hour of Cloud and Rain. So
GOD is Light, and with Him is no Darkness at all. All is Light unapprochable
and full of Glory; which Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor can it enter into
Man's Heart to conceive of.

We may however by Faith, in Contemplation, enter within the Vail, whither
JESUS is for us entered by his own Blood, if we believe in Him, and see HIM that
is Invisible, as Moses did; and then pray on with him the more earnestly, the
more we see and know, " I beseech Thee to show me thy Glory Exodus xxxiii. 18. 2
Pet. 1. 19.
. -- His Back-parts are shown us already in the FIRMAMENT that now is; and yet
far more in the written and preached WORD; unto which we do well to take Heed,
as unto a Light that shines in a dark Place, 'till the Day dawn, and the
Day Star arise in our Hearts; the Forerunner of perfect Day.

FINIS.
ERRATA. P. 3. l. 5. r. Track. l. ult. r. our. p. 4. l. 34. for into, r. low
in. p. 7. l. ult. ^^lighter. p. 8. l. 15. r. around.


